THE PREROGATIVE OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. A Political Discourse in two Books.
The former Containing the first Praeliminary of Oceana, enlarged, interpreted,
and vindicated from all such mistakes or slanders as have been alleged against
it under the Notion of Objections. The Second Concerning Ordination, against
Dr. H. Hamond, Dr. L. Seaman, And the Authors they follow.


In which two Books is contained the whole Commonwealth of the Hebrews, or of
Israel, Senate, People, and Magistracy, both as it stood in the Institution by
Moses, and as it came to be formed after the Captivity.

As also the different Policies introduced into the Church of Christ, during
the time of the Apostles.

By JAMES HARRINGTON.

Without counsel purposes are disappointed, but in the multitude of
Counselors they are established. Solomon. La multitudine e piu Savia e piu
costante ch'vn Principe. Machiavil. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Brewster at the
three Bibles at the West end of Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
I Dedicate my Book to the Mirth and Discourse of the University Wits or good
Companies, upon condition that they laugh not always in the wrong place; for
if a Man who can tell what he would have be ridiculous, what are such as would
have they know not what?

Policy is an Art, Art is the Observation or Imitation of Nature, Nature is the
Providence of God in the Government of the world, whence he that proceeds
according unto Principles acknowledges Government unto God, and he that
proceeds in defiance of Principles, attributes Government unto Chance, which
denying the true God, or introducing a false One, is the highest point of
Atheism or Superstition.

Nullum numen abest, si sit Prudentia; sed te
Nos facimus, Fortuna, Deam, Coeloque locamus.
I neither do nor ever did refuse Obedience unto any Government, I never was
nor am of any party, I go not about as some that would impose their own
impertinence or absurdities upon me, endeavor to insinuate to settle a
Commonwealth an't please you, which belongs not to me, but I undertake, as any
man may do, to vindicate the reason of Popular government. In which
Controversy let him that will buckle with me, I will give him a fall or he
shall give me one, nor care I whether, because who ever get the fall, the good
Companies and the good people too of this Nation will get arise in that
knowledge, which if we be not like them that dwell upon the Cataracts of Nylus,
among all this noice we have bad and are like to have of Axes and Hammers, is
the most seasonable and necessary. But the University Wits or good Companies,
are good at two Things, at diminishing a Commonwealth and at Multiplying a
Louse.

An Answer to three Objections against Popular government, that were given me
after these two Books were Printed.
Object. 1.
MOnarchical government is more Natural, because we see even in Commonwealths
that they have recourse unto this, as Lacedemon in her Kings; Rome both in her
Consuls and Dictators, and Venice in her Dukes.

Answer. Government whether Popular or Monarchical is equally artificial;
wherefore to know which is the more natural, we must consider what piece of Art
comes nearest unto Nature; as for example, whether a Ship or an House be the
more natural, and then it will be easy to resolve that a Ship is the more
natural at Sea, and an House at Land. In like manner where one man or a few men
are the Landlords, Monarchy must doubtlesly be the more natural, and where the
whole people are the Landlords, a Commonwealth; for how can we understand that
it should be natural unto a people that can live of themselves, to give away
the means of their livelihood to one or a few men that they may serve or obey?
Each government is equally artificial in effect or in it self, and equally
natural in the cause, or the matter upon which it is founded.

A Commonwealth consists of the Senate proposing, the People resolving, and the
Magistracy executing; so the power of the Magistrates (whether, Kings as in
Lacedemon, Consuls as in Rome, or Dukes as in Venice) is but barely executive,
but to a Monarch belongs both the Result and Execution too; wherefore that
there have been Dukes, Consuls, or Kings in Common wealths, which were quite of
another nature, is no Argument that Monarchical government is for this cause
the more natural.

And if a man shall instance in a mixed government, as King and Parliament, to
say, that the King in this was more natural then the Parliament, must be a
strange Affirmation.

To argue from the Roman Dictator, an imperfection which ruined that
Commonwealth and was not to be found in any other, that all Commonwealths have
had the like recourse in exigences unto the like remedy, is quite contrary to
the universal testimony of Prudence or Story.

A man who considers that the Commonwealth of Venice has stood one thousand
years, which never any Monarchy did, and yet shall affirm that Monarchical
government is more natural then Popular, must affirm that a thing which is less
natural may be more durable and permanent then a thing that is more natural.

Whether is a government of Laws less natural then a government of Men? or is
it more natural unto a Prince to govern by Laws or by Will? Compare the
violences and bloody rapes perpetually made upon the Crown, or Royal dignity in
the Monarchies of the Hebrews and the Romans, with the State of the government
under either Commonwealth, and tell me which was less violent or whether that
which is more violent must therefore be more natural.

Object. 2.
The government of Heaven is a Monarchy, so is the government of Hell.

Answer. In this (says Machiavel) Princes lose themselvesand their Empire that
they neither know how to be perfectly good nor entirely wicked. He might as
well have said, that a Prince is always subject to error and misgovernment,
because he is a Man, and not a God nor a Devil. A shepherd unto his flock, a
plough-man to his team is a better Nature, and so not only an absolute Prince
but as it were a God. The government of a better or of a superior Nature, is to
a worse or inferior as the government of God. The Creator is another and a
better nature then the creature, the government in Heaven is of the Creator
over his creatures that have their whole dependence upon him and subsistence in
him. Where the Prince or the Few have the whole Lands, there is some what of
dependence resembling this; so the government there, must of necessity be
Monarchical or Aristocratical; But where the people have no such dependence,
the causes of that Government which is in Heaven are not in Earth; for neither
is the Prince a distinct or better Nature then the people, nor have they their
subsistence by him; and therefore there can be no such effect. If a man were
good as God, there is no question but he would be not only a Prince but a God,
would govern by love and be not only obeyed but worshipped: or if he were ill
as the Devil, and had as much power to do mischief, he would be dreaded as much
and so govern by fear. To which later the nature of man has so much nearer
approaches, that albeit we never saw upon Earth a Monarchy like that of Heaven,
yet it is certain the perfection of the Turkish Policy lies in this, that it
comes nearest to that of Hell.

Object. 3.
God instituted a Monarchy, namely in Melchizedec, before he instituted a
Commonwealth.

Answer. If Melchizedec were a King so was Abraham too,though one that paid him
tithes, or was his subject; for Abraham made War or had the power of the Sword,
as the rest of the Fathers of Families he fought against; So if Canaan were a
Monarchy in those days, it was such an one as Germany is in these, where the
Princes also have as much the right of the Sword as the Emperor, which comes
rather (as has been shown already) to a Commonwealth; but whether it were a
Monarchy or a Commonwealth we may see by the present state of Germany, that it
was of no great good Example, nor was Melchizedec otherwise made a King by God
then the Emperor; that is as an Ordinance of Man.

FINIS.
Epistle to the Reader.
WHo so sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed; for in the Image
of God made He Man. If this Rule hold as well in shedding the blood of a Turk
as of a Christian, then that wherein Man is the Image of God is Reason. Of all
Controversies, those of the Pen are the most Honorable; for in those of Force,
there is more of the Image of the Beast; but in those of the Pen, there is more
of the Image of God. In the Controversies of the Sword, there is but too often
no other reason then Force; but the Controversy of the Pen has never any
Force but Reason. Of all Controversies of the Pen next those of Religion, those
of Government are the most honorable, and the most useful, the true end of
each, though in a different way, being that the will of God may be done in
Earth as it is in Heaven. Of all Controversies of Government, those in the
vindication of Popular Government are the most Noble, as that from whence all
we have that is good is descended to us, and which if it had not been, Mankind
at this day had been but a Herd of Beasts. The Prerogative of Popular
government must be in an ill hand, or is a Game against which there is not a
Card in the whole Pack, for we have the Books of Moses, those of the Greeks and
of the Romans, not to omit Machiavel, all for it: what have they; what can they
have against us? A Sword; but that rusts, or must have a Scabbard, and the
Scabbard of this kind of Sword is a good frame of Government.

A Man may be possessed of a Piece of ground by force, but to make use or
profit of it, he must Build upon it, and Till it, by reason; whatever is not
founded upon Reason cannot be permanent. In reason there be two parts.
Invention and Judgment. As to the later; in a Multitude of Counselors (say
both Solomon and Machiavel) there is strength. For Judgment there is not that
Order in Art or Nature that can compare with a Popular Assembly. The voice of
the People is the voice of God. Hence it is, that in all well Ordered Policies
the people have the ultimate result: but unless there be some other to invent,
a Popular Assembly can be of no effect at all, but confusion. Invention is a
solitary thing. All the Physicians in the world put together invented not the
circulation of the blood, nor can invent any such thing, though in their own
Art; yet this was invented by One alone, and being invented is unanimously
voted and embraced by the generality of Physicians. The Plough and Wheels were
at first (you must think) the invention of some rare Artists, but who or what
shall ever be able to tear the use of them from the people? Hence, where
Government is at a loss, a sole Legislater is of absolute Necessity; nay where
it is not at a loss, if it be well modelled, as in Venice, the Proposers though
frequently changeable, as in that case is Necessary, are very few, as the
Counselors, the Savi the Provosts. Where ever a Commonwealth is thus proposed
to* the balance or Popular Assembly will do her duty to admiration, but till
then never. Yet so it has been with us of late years, that albeit in Royal
Authority there was no more then the right of proposing, and the King himself
was to stand ( legibus and consuetudinibus quas vulgus elegerit) to the result
of the People, the popular Council has been put upon Invention, and they that
have been the prevailing party have used means to keep the Result unto
themselves, quite contrary unto the nature of popular Administration. Let one
speak and the rest judge. Of what ever any one Man can say or do, Mankind is
the Natural and competent Judge, in which is contained the very reason of
Parliaments: through the want of this Understanding came in Confusion. Man that
is in Honor and has no understanding is like the Beasts that perish. Nor can
we possibly return unto Order but by mending the hedge where it was broken. A
prudent entire and fit proposition made unto a free Parliament recovers all. To
them who are of the greatest Eminency or Authority in a Commonwealth belongs
Naturally that part of Reason which is invention, and using this, they are to
propose: but what did our Grandees ever invent or propose, that might show so
much as that themselves knew what they would be at? and yet how confidently do
they lay the fault upon the people and their unfitness (forsooth) for
Government: in which they are wondrous wise. For this I will boldly say where
there was an Aristocracy that performed their duty, there never was nor ever
can be a people unfit for Government; but to the contrary, where the
Aristocracy have failed, the people (being once under Orders) have held very
often. But while they are not under Orders if they fail it is not their fault,
but the fault of the Aristocracy; for who else should model a government but
Men of Experience? There is not in England (I speak it to their shame) one
GRANDEE that has any perfect knowledge of the Orders of any one Commonwealth
that ever was in the World. A way with this same grave complexion, this huff
of wisdom maintained by making faces. The people cannot do their duty
consisting in judgment but by virtue of such Orders as may bring them together
and direct them; but the duty of the Aristocracy consisting in invention may be
done by any one man and in his study; and where is there that one man among all
the Grandees that studies? They are so far from knowing their own duty, that a
Man for proposing that in which no man can find a flaw has done enough to be
ridiculous unto them, who are ridiculous unto the whole world in that they
could never yet propose any thing that would hold.

But if this amount unto a demonstration it amounts unto a clear detection of
your profound Grandees, and a full proof that they are Phanatical persons,
State-Jesuits, such as have reduced the Politics to Mental reservation, and
implicit faith in their nods or night-caps.

God to propose his Commandments to the people of Israel, wrote them in two
Tables; the Decemviri to propose their Commandments unto the people of Rome,
wrote them in twelve Tables. The Athenians proposed in writing signed with the
name of the particular Inventor, After this pattern do the Venetians (as was
said) the same at this day. But no Goose-quil, no scribbling, your Grandees are
above this.

Moses who was the first Writer in this kind shall be pardoned, but Machiavel
the first in later times that has revived his principles, or trodden in his
steps, is deservedly pelted for it by Sermons. They are not for the Scripture
but the Cabala.

I will tell you a Story out of Bocalini. Apollo having spied the Philosopher
and great Master of silence Harpocrates in the Court of Parnassus, used such
importunity with him, that for once he was persuaded to speak, upon which such
apparent discovery was made of the Hypocrite, and the plump ignorance which he
had so long harber'd under a deceitful silence, that he was forth with banished
the Court. Were there cause I could be modest, but this virtue to the
diminution of sound and wholesome principles would be none: wherefore let a
Grandee write and I will show you Harpocrates.

Thus having sufficiently defied Sir Guy, I may with the less impeachment of
reputation descend unto Tom Thumb. Not that I hold my self a fit person to be
exercised with Boys-play, but that some, who should have more wit, have so
little as to think this something. A good Rat-catcher is not so great a
blessing unto any City, as a good Juggler-catcher would be unto this Nation.
Now because I want an Office, I shall show my Parts unto my Country, and how
fit I am for the white Staff or long Poll of so worshipful a Preferment.

Ridiculus ne sis, esto.
THE FIRST BOOK, CONTAINING The first Praeliminary of Oceana, enlarged,
interpreted, and vindicated from all such mistakes or slanders as have been
alleged against it under the notion of Objections:

(...)
(...)
A full Answer to all such Objections as have hitherto been made against OCEANA.
NEither the Author or Authors of the Considerations upon Oceana, nor any other
have yet so much as once pretended one Contradiction or one Inequality to be in
the whole Commonwealth. Now this is certain, That Frame of Government which is
void of any contradiction or any inequality is void of all internal causes of
disolution, and must for so much as it embraces have attained unto full
perfection: This by wholesayl is a full Answer unto the Considerations, with
all other objections hitherto and will be (with any Man that Comprehends the
nature of Government) unto Thousands of such Books or Meriads of such tittle
tattle. Nevertheless because every man is not provided with a sum* in the
following discourse I shall comply with them that must have things by retayl, or
somewhat for their Farthing.

Preface.
IT is commonly said (and not without encouragement by some who think they have
Parnassus by the horns) that the University has lashed me: so it seems I have
to do with the University, and lashing is lawful; with both which I am
contented. In Moor-fields while the People are busy at their sports, they
often and ridiculously lose their Buttons, their Ribbands, and their Purses;
where, if they light, as sometimes they do, upon the Masters of that Art, they
fall on kicking them awhile, (which one may call a rude Charge) and then to
their work again. I know not whether I invite you to Moor-fields, but
(difficile est Satyram non scribere) all the favor I desire at your hands is
but this, that you would not so condemn one Man for kicking, as in the same Act
to pardon another for cutting of purses. A Gentleman that commits a fallacious
argument to writing, or goes about to satisfy others with such reasons as he
is not satisfied with all himself, is no more a Gentleman but a pick pocket;
with this in my mind, I betake my self unto my work, or rather to draw open the
Curtain, and begin the Play.

One that has written Considerations upon Oceana, speaks the Prologue in this
manner, I beseech you Gentlemen, are not we the Writers of Politiques somewhat
a ridiculous sort of People? Is it not a Epist.
fine piece of folly for private men sitting in their Cabinets to Rack their
brains about Models of Government? Certainly our Labors make a very pleasant
recreation for those great Personages who sitting at the Helm of Affairs have
by their large experience not only acquired the perfect Art of Ruling, but
have attained also unto the comprehension of the Nature and Foundation of
Government. In which egregious Complement the Considerer has doft his
considering Cap.

It was in the time of Alexander the greatest Prince and Commander of his age,
that Aristotle with scarce inferior Applause and equal fame, being a private
Man, wrote that excellent piece of Prudence in his Cabinet, which is called his
Politics, going upon far other Principles then those of Alexander's
government, which it has long outlived: the like did Titus Livius in the time
of Augustus, Sir Thomas Moore in the time of Henry the Eighth, and Machiavil
when Italy was under Princes that afforded him not the ear. These works
nevertheless are all of the most esteemed and applauded in this kind; nor have
I found any Man, whose like endeavors have been persecuted since Plato by
Dionysius. I study not without great examples, nor out of my calling; either
Arms or this Art being the proper Trade of a Gentleman. A man may be entrusted
with a Ship and a good Pilot too, yet not understand how to make Sea-cards. To
say that a Man may not write of Government, except he be a Magistrate, is as
absurd as to say that a man may not make a Sea-card unless he be a Pilot. It is
known that Christopher Columbus made a Card in his Cabinet that found out the
Indies. The Magistrate that was good at his Steerage never took it ill of him,
that brought him a Card, seeing whether he would use it or no was at his own
choice; And if flatterers (being the worst sort of Crows) did not pick out the
eyes of the living, the ship of Government at this day throughout Christendom
had not struck so often as she has done. To treat of affairs Art della Guer.
Proem.
(says Machiavil) which as to the conduct of them appertain to others, may be
thought a great boldness; but if I commit errors in writing, these may be
known without danger, whereas if they commit errors in acting, such come not
otherwise to be known, then in the ruin of the Commonwealth. For which cause I
presume to open the Scene of my Discourse, which is to change according unto
the variety of these following Questions.

Whether Prudence be well distinguished into Ancient I.
and Modern? Whether a Commonwealth be rightly defined II.
to be a Government of Laws, and not of Men: and Monarchy to be a Government of
some Man, or few Men, and not of Laws? Whether the balance of Dominion in Land
be III.
the Natural cause of Empire? Whether the balance of Empire be well divided
IIII.
into National and Provincial; and whether these two, or Nations that are of
distinct balance, coming to depend upon one and the same head, such a mixture
create a new balance? Whether there be any common Right or Interest V.
of Mankind, distinct from the parts taken severally; and how by the Orders of
a Commonwealth this may best be distinguished from private Interest? Whether the
Senatusconsulta or decrees of the VI.
Roman Senate had the power of Laws? Whether the Ten Commandments proposed VII.
by God or Moses, were voted by the people of Israel? Whether a Commonwealth
coming up to the VIII.
perfection of the kind, come not up to the perfection of Government, and have
no flaw in it? Whether Monarchy coming up to the perfection IX.
of the kind, come not short of the perfection of Government and have some flaw
in it? in which is also treated of the balance of France, of the Original of a
landed Clergy, of Arms and their kinds. Whether a Commonwealth that was not
first X.
broken by her self, were ever conquered by any Monarch? Whether there be not
an Agrarian, or some Law XI.
or Laws of that Nature to supply the defect of it in every commonwealth; and
whether the Agrarian as it is stated in Oceana be not equal and satisfactory to
all Interests or Parties? Whether courses or Rotation be necessary unto XII.
a well Ordered Commonwealth? In which is contained the Parembole or courses of
Israel before the captivity, together with an Epitome of the whole commonwealth
of Athens, as also another of the commonwealth of Venice.
Ancient and Modern Prudence. CHAP. I. Whether Prudence be well distinguished
into Ancient and Modern.
THe Considerer, where by Ancient Prudence I understand the Policy of a
Commonwealth, and by Modern Prudence that of King, Lords and Commons, which
introduced by the Goths and Vandals upon the ruin of the Roman Empire, has
since reigned in these Western Countries, till by the predominating of some one
of the three parts, it be now almost universally extinguished; thinks it enough
for the confutation of this distinction, to show out of Thucidides that of
Monarchy to be a more Ancient policy than that of a Commonwealth. Upon which
occasion, I must begin here to discover that which the farther I go will be the
more manifest; Namely that there is difference between quoting Authors, and
saying some part of them without book: this may be done by their words, but the
former no otherwise then by keeping unto their sense. Now the sense of
Thucidides as he is translated by Mr. Hobbs, in the place alleged is thus: The
manner (says he) of living in the most Ancient times of Greece was Thieving,
the stronger going abroad under the Thu. B. 1. P. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
conduct of their most puissant Men, both to enrich themselves, and fetch home
maintenance for the weak; for there was neither traffic, propriety of Lands,
nor constant Abode, till Minos built a Navy, and expelling the Malefactors out
of the Islands, planted Colonies of his own, by which means they who inhabited
the Sea coasts, becoming more addicted to riches, grew more constant to their
dwellings; of whom some grown now rich, compassed their Towns about with walls.
For out of desire of gain the meaner sort underwent servitude with the Mighty;
and the Mighty (thus overballancing at home) with their wealth, brought the
lesser Cities (abroad) into subjection. Thus Pelops, though he were a stranger,
obtained such power in Peloponesus that the Country was called after his Name;
Thus Atreus obtained the Kingdom of Mycenae, and thus Kingdoms with honors
limited came to be hereditary; and rising to power proceeded afterward to the
war against Troy. After the war with Troy, though with much ado, and in a long
time Greece had constant rest (and land without doubt came to propriety) for
shifting their seats no longer, at length they sent Colonies abroad; The
Athenians into Ionia with the Islands, the Peloponesians into Italy, Sicily,
and other parts. The power of Greece thus improved, and the desire of money
with all, their Revenues (in what? not in money, if yet there were no usury:
therefore except a Man can show that there was usury in Land) being enlarged,
in most of the Cities there more erected Tyrannies. Let us lay this place unto
the former, when out of desire of gain the meaner sort underwent servitude with
the Mighty, it caused hereditary Kingdoms with honors limited, as happened
also with us since the time of the Goths and Vandals. But when the people came
to Propriety in Land, and their Revenues were enlarged, such as assumed power
over them, not according unto the Nature of their Propriety or Balance, were
Tyrants; well, and what remedy? why, then it was (says the Considerer) that
the Grecians out of an extreme aversion to that which was the cause of their
present sufferings slipped into Popular Government, not that upon calm Consid. p.
4.
and mature debates they found it best, but that they might put themselves at
the greatest distance (which spirit usually accompanies all Reformations) from
that with which they were grown into dislike. Whereby he agrees exactly with
his Author in making out the true force and Nature of the balance, working
even without deliberation, and whether Men will or no. For the Government that
is Natural and easy being in no other direction than that of the respective
balance, is not of choice but of necessity. The Policy of King, Lords and
Commons was not so much from the prudence of our Ancestors, as from their
Necessity. If Three hundred Men held at this day the like overballance unto the
whole People, it were not in the power of Prudence to institute any other then
the same kind of Government, through the same Necessity. Thus the meaner sort
with Thucidides submitting unto the Mighty, it came to Kingdoms with
hereditary honors; but the People coming to be wealthy, called their Kings
though they knew not why, Tyrants, nay and using them accordingly found out
means with as little deliberation it may be as a Bull takes to toss a Dog, or
a Hern to split an Hawk; that is, rather (as at the long run they will ever do
in the like case) by instinct than prudence or debate, to throw down that,
which by the mere information of sense they could no longer bear, and which
being thrown down they found themselves eased. But the question yet remains,
and that is (forsooth) whether of these is to be called Ancient Prudence. To
this end, never Man made a more unlucky choice then the Considerer has done
for himself of this Author, who in the very beginning of his book speaking of
the Pelopenesian war, or that between the Commonwealths of Athens and
Lacedemon, says, that the Actions which preceded this, and those again that
were more ancient, though the truth of them through length of time cannot by
any means be clearly discovered, yet for any argument that (looking into times
far past) he had yet light on to persuade him, he does not think they have been
very great either for matter of war, or otherwise; that is for matter of Peace
or Government; And lest this should not be plain enough, he calls the Prudence
of the Mr. Hobbs in the Magire.
three Periods (observed by Mr. Hobbs) that from the beginning of the Grecian
memory to the Trojan war, That of the Trojan war it self, and that from thence
to the present Thu. B. 1. p. 3.
Commonwealths and Wars, whereof he treats, The Imbecility of ancient times.
Wherefore certainly this Prevaricator (to give him his own fees) has less
discretion then a Common Attorney, who will be sure to examine only those
Cousid. p. 34.
witnesses that seem to make for the cause in which he is entertained. Seeing
that which he affirms to be Ancient Prudence is deposed by his own witness to
have been the imbecility of ancient times, for which I could have so many more
then I have leisure to examine, that (to take only of the most Authentic) as
you have heard one Greek, I shall add no more then one Roman, and that is
Florus in his Prologue where computing the ages of the Romans, (in the same
manner Thucidides did those of the Greeks) he affirms the time while they
lived under their Kings, to have been their infancy, that from the Consuls
until they conquered Italy, their youth; that from hence unto their Emperors,
their Manly age, and the rest (with a Complement or Salvo unto Trajan his
present Lord) their dotage.

These things, though originally all Government among the Greeks and the Romans
were Regal; are no more then they who have not yet passed their Novitiate in
story might have known. Yet says the Considerer, It seems to be a defect
Consid. p. 2. 3.
of experience to think that the Greek and the Roman actions are only
considerable in antiquity. But is it such a defect of experience to think them
only considerable, as not to think them chiefly considerable in antiquity, or
that the name of ancient Prudence does not belong unto that prudence which was
chief in Antiquity? True says he, it is very frequent with such as have been
conversant with Greek and Roman Authors to be led by them into a belief that
the rest of the world was a rude inconsiderable people, and which is a term
they very much delight in, altogether Barbarous. This should be some fine
Gentleman that would have Universities pulld down; for the Office of an
University is no more then to preserve so much of Antiquity as may keep a
Nation from stinking or being barbarous, which falt grew not in Monarchies but
in Commonwealths; or whence has the Christian world that Religion and those
Laws which are now common, but from the Hebrews and Romans, or from whence have
we Arts but from these or the Greeks? That we have a Doctor of Divinity or a
Master of Art we may thank Popular government, or with what languages with what
things are Scholars conversant that are otherwise descended? will they so
plead their own cause as to tell us it is possible there should be a Nation at
this day in the world without Universities, or Universities without Hebrew,
Greek and Latin, and not be barbarous, that is to say, rude, unlearned, and
inconsiderable? Yes, this humor even among the Greeks and Romans themselves
was a servile addiction unto narrow Principles, and a piece of very pedantical
pride. What man! the Greeks and the Romans that of all other would not serve,
servile! their Principles, their Learning, with whose scraps we set up for
Bachelours, Masters and Doctors of fine things, narrow! their inimitable
eloquence a piece of very Pedantical pride! The world can never make sense of
this any otherwise then that since Heads and Fellows of Colleges became the
only Greeks and Romans; the Greeks and Romans are become servily addicted, of
narrow Principles, very Pedants, and prouder of those things they do not
understand, then the other were of those they did; For say they, in this
question, the examples of the Babylonians, Persians, and Egyptians (not to omit
the ancient and like modern discoveries of the Queen of the Amazons, and of the
King of China) cannot without gross partiality be neglected. This is pretty;
they who say nothing at all to the policy of these governments, accuse me, who
have fully opened it, of negligence. The Babylonian, Persian, and (for ought
appears to the contrary) the Chinesse Policy, is summed up, and far excelled by
that at this day of Turkey; and in opening this, I have opn'd them all, so far
from neglect, that I everywhere give the Turk his due, whose policy I assert to
be the best of this kind, though not of the best kind. But they will bear me
down and but with one Argument (which I beseech you mark) that it is absolutely
of the best kind; for say they, it is of a more absolute form (has more of the
Man and less of the Law in it) then is to be met with in any Kingdom of Europe.

I am amazed! This is that kind of government which to hold Barbarous, was in
the Greeks and Romans Pedantical pride, but would be in us who have not the
same temptation of Interest, downright folly. The Interest of a people is not
their guide but their temptation! we that hold our land divided among us, have
not the same temptation of interest that had the servile Hebrews, Greeks and
Romans, but the same that had the free people of Babylon, Persia and Egypt,
where not the people but the Prince was sole Landlord! O the Arts in which
these men are Masters! To follow the Pedantical pride of Moses, Lycurgus,
Solon, Romulus, were with us downright folly; but to follow humble and learned
Mahomet or Ottonian, in whose only Model the perfection of the Babylonian,
Persian, Egyptian policy is consummated, is ancient Prudence! Exquisite
Politicians! egregious Divines for the leading of a people into Egypt or
Babylon! These things considered, whether ancient prudence as I have stated it
be downright folly, or as they have stated it, be not downright knavery, I
appeal unto any Court of Claims in the world, where the Judges (I mean) have
not more in their Caps then in their heads, and in their Sleeves then the
scarlet. And whereas men love compendious works, if I gain my cause, the
Reader, for an answer unto the Oxford book need look no farther then this
Chapter. For if Riches and Freedom be the end of Government; and these men
propose nothing but slavery, beggary and Turcisme, what need more words?

CHAP. II. Whether a Commonwealth be rightly defined to be a Government of Laws
and not of Men, and a Monarchy to be the Government of some Man or few Men, and
not of Laws.
THat part of the Preliminaries, which the Praevaricator (as is usual with him)
recites in this place fasly and fraudulently, is thus. Relation had unto these
two times (that of Ancient, and that of Modern Prudence) the One as is computed
by Janotti ending with the Liberty of Rome, the other beginning with the Arms
of Caesar (which extinguishing liberty became the translation of Ancient into
Modern Prudence, introduced in the ruin of the Roman Empire by the Goths and
Vandals) Government to define it (de jure) or according unto Ancient prudence,
is an Art whereby a civil Society of Men, is instituted and preserved upon the
foundation of Common right or interest, or (to follow Aristotle and Livy) it is
an Empire of Laws, and not of Men.

And Government to define it (de facto) or according unto Modern prudence, is
an Art whereby some Man, or some few Men subject a City or a Nation, and rule
it according unto his or their private interest, which because the Laws in such
cases are made according to the interest of a Man, or some few Families, may be
said to be an Empire of Men, and not of Laws.

Hereby it is plain, whether in an Empire of Laws, and not of Men, as a
Commonwealth; or in an Empire of Men, and not of Laws, as Monarchy;

First, That Law must equally proceed from will, that is either from the Will
of the whole People, as in a Commonwealth; from the will of one Man, as in
Absolute, or from the will of a few Men, as in regulated Monarchy.

Secondly, That will whether of one, or more, or all, is not presumed to be,
much less to Act without a Mover.

Thirdly, That the Mover of Will is Interest.

Fourthly, That Interests also being of one, of more, or of all; those of one
Man, or of a few Men, where Laws are made accordingly, being more private, then
comes duly up unto Law (the Nature whereof lies not in partiality but in
Justice) may be called the Empire of Men, and not of Laws: And that of the
whole People coming up to the Public Interest (which is none* other then
Common right and Justice, excluding all partiality or private Interest) may be
truly called the Empire of Laws, and not of Men. By all which put together,
whereas it is demonstrable, that in this division of Government, I do not stay
at the Will, which must have some Motive or Mover, but go unto the first and
remotest Notion of Government in the Foundation and Origination of it, In which
lies the credit of this Division, and the Definition of the several members;
that is to say, of interest whether private or public: The Praevaricator
tells me, That this Division of Government Consid. p. 6*
having (he knows not how) lost her Credit, the definitions of the several
Members of it need not be considered farther then that they come not at all up
to the first and remotest notion of Government in the Foundation and
Origination of it, in which lies all the difficulty, and being here neglected,
there is little hope the subsequent discourse can have in it the light of
probable satisfaction, much less of force of infallible demonstration.

Very good, Interest it should seem then is not the first and remotest Notion
of Government, but that which he will out-throw, and at this cast, by saying
that the Declaration of the will of the Sovereign power is called Law, which if
Consid. p. 8.
it outlive the person whose will it was, it is only because the persons who
succeed in power are presumed to have the same will, unless they manifest the
contrary, and that is the abrogation of the Law; so that still the Government
is not in the Law, but in the person whose will gave a being unto that Law. I
might as well say, The Declaration unto all men by these presents that a man
owes money is called a Bond, which if it outlive the person that entered into
that bond, it is only because the persons that succeed him in his estate, are
presumed to have the same will, unless they manifest the contrary, and that is
the abrogation or cancelling of the bond; so that still the debt is not in the
bond, but in his will who gave a being unto that Bond. If it be alleged
against this example that it is a private one, the Case may be put between
several Princes, States, or Governments, or between several States of the same
Principality or Government, whether it be a regulated Monarchy or a
Commonwealth; for in like Obligation of the States, (as of the King, the Lords
and Commons) or parties agreeing, Authoritate Patrum and jussu Populi, till the
Parties that so agreed to the Obligation, shall agree to repeal or cancel it,
lies all law, that is not merely in the will of one Man, or of one State, or
Party as the Oligarchy. But not to dispute these things farther in this place,
let the Government be what it will, for the Prevaricator to fetch the
Origination of Law no farther then the will, while he knows very well that I
fetched it from interest, the Antecedent of will; and yet to boast that he has
out-thrown me, I say he is neither an honest man, nor a good Bowler. No matter,
he will be a better Gunner; For where I said that the Magistrate upon the Bench
is that unto the Law, which a Gunner upon his Platform is to his Cannon; he
goes about to take better Aim, and says, if the proportion of things be
accurately considered, it will appear that the Laden Cannon answers not to the
Laws, but to the power of the person whose will created those Laws: which if
some of them, that the power of the person whose will created them, intended
should be of as good stuff or Carriage as the rest, do nevertheless according
unto the Nature of their matter or of their charge, come short or over, and
others break or recoyl: sure this Report of the Prevaricator is not according
unto the bore of my gun, but according unto the bore of such a Gunner. Yet
again, if he be not so good a Gunner, he will be a better Anatomist; For
whereas I affirm, that to say, Aristotle and Cicero wrote not the rights or
rules of their Politics, from the Principles of Nature, but transcribed them
into their books out of the practice of their own Commonwealths, is as if a man
should say of famous* Hervey, that he transcribed his Circulation of the blood,
not out of the principles of Nature, but out of the Anatomy of this or that
body: he answers, that the whole force of this objection amounts but to this,
that because Hervey in his Circulation, has followed the Principles of Nature;
therefore Aristotle and Cicero have done so in their Discourses of Government.

Pretty! It is said in Scripture, thy Word is sweet as honey; Amounts that but
to this, because honey is sweet, therefore the Word of God is sweet? To say
that my Lord Protector has not conquered many Nations, were as if one should
say that Caesar had not conquered many Nations; Amounts that but to this, that
because Caesar conquered many Nations; therefore my Lord Protector has
conquered many Nations; what I produce as a similitude, he calls an objection,
where I say as he says because; what ingenuous man does not detest such a
cheat! A similitude is brought to show how a thing is or may be; not to prove
that it is so; it is used for illustration, not as an argument; the Candle I
held did not set up the post, but show where the post was set, and yet this
blind Bayard has run his head against it. Nor has he yet enough; if he be not
the better Naturalist, he will be the better Divine, though he make the worse
Sermon. My Doctrine and Use upon that of Solomon, I have seen servants upon
horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the Earth, discovers the true
means whereby the Principles of Power and of Authority, the goods of the mind
and of the fortune may so meet and twine in the wreath or Crown of Empire, that
the Government standing upon Earth, like an Holy Altar, and breathing perpetual
Incense unto Heaven, in Justice and Piety, may be something as it were between
Heaven and Earth, while that only which is proposed by the best, and resolved
by the most becomes Law; and so the whole Government an Empire of Laws, and not
of Men. This he says, is a goodly Sermon; it is honest and sense. But let any
man make sense, or honesty of this Doctrine, which is his own; To say that Laws
do or can govern is to amuse Consid. p. 7.
our selves with a form of speech, as when we say Time, or Age, or Death does
such a thing, to which indeed the fancy of Poets or superstition of Women may
adapt a person, and give a power of Action; but wise Men know they are only
expressions of such Actions or qualifications as belong to things and persons.

Speak out, is it the word of God, or the knavery and nonsense of such
Preachers that ought to Govern? Are we to hearken unto that of the Talmud,
There is more in the word of a Scribe then in the words of the Law, or that
which Christ thereupon says unto the Pharisees; You have made Mat. 15. 6.
the word of God of none effect by your traditions? Say, is a Commonwealth to
be governed in the word of a Priest or a Pharisee, or by the Vote of the
People, and the Interest of Mankind?

CHAP. III. Whether the Balance of Dominion in Land be the Natural Cause of
Empire.
THe Doctrine of the Balance is that, though he strain at it, which choaks the
Prevaricator: for this of all other is that Principle, which makes the
Politiques (not so before the Invention of the same) to be undeniable
throughout; and (not to meddle with the Mathematics an Art I understand as
little as Mathematicians do this) the most demonstrable of any whatsoever.

For this cause I shall rather take pleasure then pains to look back or tread
the same path with other and perhaps plainer steps; As thus; If a man having
one hundred pounds a year, may keep one servant, or have one man at his
Command, then having one hundred times so much, he may keep one hundred
servants; and this multiplied by a thousand, he may have one hundred thousand
men at his Command. Now that the single person, or Nobility in any Country of
Europe, that had but half so many men at Command, would be King or Prince, is
that which I think no Man will doubt. But ( Point d'argent Point de Suisse) if
the Money be flown, so are the Men also. Though riches in general have wings,
and be apt to bate; yet those in Land are the most hooded and tied unto the
Perch, whereas those in money have the least hold, and are the swiftest of
flight. A Bank where the money takes not wing, but to come home seized, or like
a Coy Duck, may well be great; but the Treasure of the Indies going out, and
not upon returns makes no Bank; Whence a Bank never paid an Army, or paying an
Army, soon became no Bank. But where a Prince or a Nobility has an estate in
Land, the Revenue whereof will defray this Charge; there their men are planted,
have toes that are roots, and Arms that bring forth what fruit you please.

Thus a single person is made, or a Nobility makes a King not with difficulty
or any great prudence, but with ease, the rest coming home, as the Ox that
not only knows his masters Crib, but must starve or repair to it. Nor for the
same reason is government acquired with more ease then it is preserved; that
is, if the Foundation of Propriety be in Land; but if in money, lightly come,
lightly go. The reason why a single person or the Nobility that has One
hundred Thousand men, or half so many at Command, will have the Government, is
that the Estate in Land whereby they are able to maintain so many, in any
Europaean Territory, must overballance the rest that remains unto the People,
at least, three parts in four, by which means they are no more able to dispute
the Government with him or them, then your servant is with you. Now for the
same reason, if the People hold three parts in four of the Territory, it is
plain there can neither be any single person nor Nobility able to dispute the
Government with them; in this case therefore (except force be interposed) they
govern themselves. So by this computation of the balance of propriety or
dominion in Land, you have according unto the Threefold Foundation of
Propriety, the root or generation of the Threefold kind of Government or Empire.

If one man be sole Landlord of a Territory, or overballance Oceana, p. 4.
the whole People, three parts in four, or thereabouts, he is grand Seignior;
for so the Turk not from his Empire, but his Propriety is called, and the
Empire in this case is absolute Monarchy.

If the few, or a Nobility, or a Nobility with a Clergy be Landlords unto such
a proportion as over ballanceth the People in like manner; they may make whom
they please King, or if they be not pleased with their King, down with him, and
set up whom they like better, an Henry the fourth, or the seventh, a Guise, a
Montforth, a Nevil, or a Porter, should they find that best for their own ends
and purposes: For as not the balance of the King, but that of the Nobility in
this case is the cause of the Government, so not the Estate or riches of the
Prince or Captain, but his virtue or ability, or fitness for the ends of the
Nobility, acquires that Command or Office. This for Aristocracy, or mixed
Monarchy. But if the whole People be Landlords, or hold the Land so divided
among them, that no one Man, or Number of Men within the Compass of the Few or
Aristocracy overballance them, it is a Commonwealth. Such is the branch in the
Root, or the balance of Propriety naturally producing Empire, which not
confuted, no Man shall be able to batter my superstructures, and which
confuted, I lay down my Arms. Till then, if the Cause necessarily praecede the
effect, Propriety must have a being before Empire, or beginning with it, must
be still first in order.

Propriety comes to have a being before Empire or Government two ways, either
by Natural or violent revolution. Natural revolution happens from within, or
by Commerce, as when a Government erected upon one ^^^lance, that for example
of a Nobility or a Clergy, through the decay of their Estates comes to alter
unto another balance; which alteration in the Root of Propriety leaves all
unto Confusion, or produces a New branch or Government according to the kind
or nature of the root. Violent revolution happens from without, or by Arms,
as when upon Conquest there follows confiscation. Confiscation again is of
three kinds, when the Captain taking all unto himself, plants his Army by way
of Military Colonies, Benefices, or Timars, which was the policy of Mahomet; or
when the Captain has some sharers, or a Nobility that divides with him, which
was the policy introduced by the Goths and Vandals; or when the Captain divides
the Inheritance by lots, or otherwise, unto the whole People; which Policy was
instituted by God or Moses in the Commonwealth of Israel. This triple
distribution whether from natural or violent revolution, returns as to the
generation of Empire, unto the same thing that is unto the nature of the
balance already stated and demonstrated; Now let us see what the Praevaricator
will say, which first is this.

The Assertion that Propriety producing Empire consists only in Land, appears
too positive. A Pig of my own Sow; Consid. p. 14.
this is no more then I told him, only there is more implied in what I told
him, then he will see; which therefore I shall now farther explain. The
balance in money may be as good or better then that of Land in three cases.
First, where there is no propriety of Land yet introduced, as in Greece during
the time of her Ancient imbecility, whence (as is noted by Thucidides) the
meaner sort through desire of gain, underwent the servitude of the Mighty.
Secondly, in Cities of small Territory and great Trade, as Holland and Genoa,
the Land not being able to feed the People, who must live upon Traffic, is
overballanced by the means of that Traffic; which is money. Thirdly, in a
narrow Country, where the lots are at a low scantling, as among the
Israelites, if Care be not had of money in the regulation of the same, it will
eat out the balance of Land. For which cause though an Israelite might both
have money, and put it forth unto usury; ( Faenerabis multis gentibus, Thou
shall lend (upon usury) unto many nations) yet might he not lend it upon usury
unto a Citizen Deuteronomy. 15. 6. 23. 19.
or brother ( Non Faenerabis fratri tuo) whence two things are manifest. First,
that Usury in it self is not unlawful. And next that Usury in Israel was no
otherwise forbidden, then as it might come to overthrow the balance or
foundation of the Government, for where a Lot as to the General amounted not
perhaps to four acres: a Man that should have had a Thousand pounds in his
Purse, would not have regarded such a lot in comparirison of his money, and he
that should have been half so much in debt, would have been quite eaten out.
Usury is of such a Nature as not forbidden in like cases, must devour the
Government. The Roman People while their Territory was no bigger, and their
lots (which exceeded not two Acres a Man) were yet scanter, were flead alive
with it; and if they had not helped themselves by their tumults and the
institution of their Tribunes, it had totally ruined both them and their
Government. In a Commonwealth whose Territory is very small, the balance of
the Government being laid upon the Land, as in Lacedemon, it will not be
sufficient to forbid usury; but money it self must be forbidden; Whence
Lycurgns allowed of none, or of such only as being of Old, or otherwise useless
Iron, was little better, or (if you will) little worse than none. The Prudence
of which Law appeared in the neglect of it, as when Lysander General for the
Lacedaemonians in the Peloponesian war, having taken Athens, and brought home
the spoil of it, occasioned the ruin of that Commonwealth in her Victory. The
Land of Canaan compared with Spain or England, was at the most but a
Yorkshire, and Laconia was less then Canaan. Now if we imagine Yorkshire
divided as was Canaan, into six hundred thousand lots, or as was Laconia into
thirty Thousand; a Yorkshire Man having one Thousand pounds in his purse,
would, I believe, have a better estate in Money then in Land; wherefore in this
Case to make the Land hold the balance, there is no way but either that of
Israel, by forbidding usury, or that of Lacedemon, by forbidding money. Where a
small sum may come to overballance a Man's estate in Land, there I say Usury
or money for the preservation of the balance in Land, must of Necessity be
forbidden, or the Government will rather rest upon the balance of money, then
upon that of Land, as in Holland and Genoa. But in a Territory of such extent
as Spain, or England, the Land being not to be overballanced by money, there
needs no forbidding of money or usury. In Lacedemon Merchandise was
forbidden, in Israel and Rome it was not exercised; wherefore unto these Usury
must have been the more destructive; but in a Country where Merchandise is
exercised, it is so far from being destructive, that it is necessary; else that
which might be of profit to the Commonwealth would rust unprofitably in private
purses, there being no Man that will venture his money but through hope of some
gain; which if it be so regulated that the Borrower may gain more by it then
the Lender (as at four in the Hundred, or thereabouts) Usury becomes a Mighty
profit unto the Public, and Charity unto private Men; in which sense we may
not be persuaded by them that do not observe the different causes that it is
against Scripture. Had usury to a brother been permitted in Israel that
government had been overthrown: but that such a Territory as England or Spain
cannot be overballanced by money, whether it be a scarce or a plentiful
Commodity, whether it be accumulated by Parsimony, as in the purse of Henry the
7th, or presented by Fortune, as in the Revenue of the Indies, is sufficiently
demonstrated, or shall be.

First, by an Argument ( ad hominem one) good enough Consid. p. 12.
for the Praevaricator, who argues thus; The wisdom or the riches of another
Man can never give him a Title to my Obedience, nor oblige Mr. Harrington to
give his Clothes or Money to the next Man he meets, wiser or richer then
himself.

If he had said stronger, he had spoiled all; for the parting with a man's
Clothes or Money in that case cannot be helped; now the richer as to the case
in debate, is the stronger; that is, the advantage of strength remains unto the
balance. But well; he presumes me to have Clothes and Money of mine own, Let
him put the same case in the People or the similitude does not hold: But if the
people have Clothes and Money of their own, these must either rise (for the
bulk) out of Propriety in Land, or at the least out of cultivation of the Land,
or the revenue of Industry, which if it be dependent, they must give such part
of their Clothes and Money to preserve that dependence out of which the rest
arises, to him or them upon whom they depend, as he or they shall think fit,
or parting with nothing unto this end must lose all; that is, if they be
Tenants, they must pay their Rent or be turned out. So if they have Clothes and
Money dependently, the balance of Land is in the Landlord or Landlords of the
People: but if they have clothes and money independently, then the balance of
Land must of Necessity be in the People themselves, in which case they neither
would if there were any such, nor can because there be none such, give their
money or clothes to such as are wiser, or richer, or stronger then themselves.
So it is not a man's clothes and money, or riches, that obliges him to
acknowledge the title of his obedience unto him that is wiser or richer, but a
man's no clothes, nor money, or his poverty, with which if the Praevaricator
should come to want, he could not so finely praevaricate but he must serve
somebody, so he were rich, no matter if less wise then himself; Wherefore
seeing the People cannot be said to have clothes and money of their own without
the balance in Land, and having the balance in Land, will never give their
clothes, or money, or obedience unto a single person or a Nobility, though
these should be the richer in money, the Praevaricator by his own Argument has
evinced that in such a Territory as England or Spain, Money can never come to
overballance Land.

For a second Demonstration of this Truth, Henry the Seventh (albeit he mist of
the Indies, in which for my part I think he hit) was the richest in money of
English Princes. Nevertheless this accession of Revenue did not at all
praeponderate on the Kings part, nor change the balance. But while making
Farms of a Standard, he increased the Yeomanry; and cutting off Retainers, he
abased the Nobility, began that breach in the balance of Land, which
proceeding has ruined the Nobility, and in them that Government.

For a Third, the Monarchy of Spain, since the silver of Potosi sailed up the
Guadalquivir, which in English is, since that King had the Indies, stands upon
the same balance in the Lands of the Nobility on which it always stood.

And so the Learned Conclusion of the Praevaricator, Consid. p. 16.
That it is not to be doubted but a Revenue sufficient to maintain a force,
able (to cry ware horns) or beat down all opposition, does equally conduce to
Empire, whether it arise from Rents, Lands, Profits of ready Money, Duties,
Customs. etc. asks you no more then where you saw her premises: For unless
they ascended his Monti, and his Banks, it is not to be imagined which way they
went, and with these because he is a professed Zealot for Monarchy; I would wish
him by no means to be Montebanking or meddling; for the Purse of a Prince never
yet made a Bank; nor till Spending and Trading money be all one, ever shall.
The Genoese (which the King of Spain could never do with the Indies) can make
you a Bank out of Letters of Exchange, and the Hollander with Herrings. Let him
come no more here; Where there is a bank, ten to one, there is a Commonwealth.
A King is a Soldier, or a Lover; neither of which makes a good Merchant; and
without Merchandise, you will have a lean bank. It is true, the Family of the
Medice's were both Merchants, and made a Bank into a Throne: but it was in a
Commonwealth of Merchants, in a small Territory, by great purchases in Land,
and rather in a mere confusion then under any settled government; which causes
if he can give them all such another meeting, may do as much for another Man;
otherwise let it be agreed and resolved, that in a Territory of any extent, the
balance of Empire consists in Land and not in money, always provided that in
case a Prince have Occasion to run away (as Henry the third of France out of
Poland) his balance in ready money is absolutely the most proper for the
carrying on of so great, and sudden an Enterprise.

It is an excellent way of disputing, when a man has alleged no experience,
no example, no reason to conclude with no doubt. Certainly upon such occasions
it is not unlawful nor unreasonable to be merry. Reasons (says one Commedian)
are not so common as Blackberrys. For all that (says another Commedian) no
doubt but a revenue in taxes is as good as a revenue in fee-simple, for this,
in brief, is the sense of his former particular, or that part of it, which the
Monti and the Banks being already discharged, remains to be answered. Yet that
the Rents and Profits of a man's land in Fee-simple or Propriety, come in
naturally and easily, by common consent or concernment; that is, by virtue of
the Law founded upon the public interest, and therefore voluntarily
established by the whole people, is an apparent thing. So a man that will
receive the Rents and Profits of other men's Lands, must either take them by
mere force, or bring the people to make a Law devesting themselves of so much
of their Propriety; which upon the matter is all one, because a people possessed
of the balance, can no otherwise be brought to make such a Law farther then
they see necessary for their common defense, but by force, nor to keep it any
longer then that force continues. It is true, there is not only such a thing in
nature as health, but as sickness: nor do I deny that there is such a thing as
a government against the balance. But look about, seek, find where it stood,
how it was ycleeped, how liked, or how long it lasted. Otherwise the comical
Proposition comes to this, It is not to be doubted but that violence may be
permanent or durable, and the Blackberry for it is because nature is permanent
or durable! What other construction can be made of these words? It is not to be
doubted but a revenue sufficient to maintain a force able to beat down all
opposition (that is a force able to raise such a revenue) does equally (on
which word grows the Blackberry) conduce to Empire: that is as much as could
any natural balance of the same! He may stain mouths, as he has done some,
but he shall never make a Politician. The Earth yields her natural increase
without losing her heart; but if you come once to force her, look your force
continue, or she yields you nothing: and the balance of Empire consisting of
Earth, is of the nature of her Element.

Divines are given to speak much of things which the Considerer baulks in this
place that would check them, to Consid. p. 23.
the end he may fly out with them in others, whereunto they do not belong, as
where he says, that Government is founded either upon Paternity, and the
natural advantage the first Father had over all the rest of Mankind, who were
his sons, or else from the increase of strength and power in some Man or Men,
to whose will the rest submit, that by their submission they may avoid such
mischief, as otherwise would be brought upon them. Which two Vagaries are to be
fetched home unto this place.

For the former; if Adam had lived till now, he could have seen no other then
his own Children, and so that he must have been King by the right of Nature,
was his peculiar Prerogative. But whether the eldest son of his house, if the
Praevaricator can find him, at this time of the day. have the same right, is
somewhat disputable; because it was early when Abraham and Lot dividing
Territories, became several Kings: and not long after when the sons of Jacob
being all Patriarchs, by the appointment of God (whose right sure was not
inferior unto that of Adam though he had lived) came under Popular Government.
Wherefore the advantage of the first Father is for grave Men a pleasant fancy,
nevertheless if he had lived till now, I hope they understand that the whole
Earth would have been his demeans, and so the balance of his propriety must
have answered unto his Empire: as did that also of Abraham and Lot unto theirs.
Wherefore this way of deduction comes directly home again unto the balance. (
Pater familias Latifundia possidens, and neminem alia lege in suas terras
recipiens quam ut ditioni suae, qui recipiuntur, G. De jure belli, l. 1. c. 3.
se subjiciant est Rex) Fathers of families are of three sorts, either a sole
Landlord, as Adam, and then he is an absolute Monarch; or a few Landlords as
Lot and Abraham with the Patriarchs of those days, who if they joined not
together, were so many Princes, or if they joined, made a mixed Monarchy, or as
Grotius believes a kind of Commonwealth administered in the Land of Canaan by
Melchisedec, unto whom as King and Priest Abraham paid tithes of all that he
had. Such a Magistracy was that also of Jethro King and Priest in the
Commonwealth of Midian. Fathers of families for the Third sort, as when the
Multitude are Landlords (which happened in the division of the Land of Canaan)
make a Commonwealth; and thus much how ever it was out of the Praevaricators
head in the place now reduced, he excepting no farther against the balance,
then that it might consist as well in money, as in land, had confessed before.

His second Vagary is in his deduction of Empire from increase of strength, for
which we must once more round about our Coal fire. The strength whereof this
effect can be expected, consists not in a pair of fists, but in an Army, and an
Army is a beast with a great belly, which subsisteth not without very large
pastures; so if one man have sufficient pasture, he may feed such a beast, if a
few have the pasture they must feed the beast, and the Beast is theirs that
feed it. But if the People be the sheep of their own pastures, they are not
only a flock of sheep, but an Army of Lions, though by some accidents, as I
confessed before, they be for a season confinable unto their Dens. So the
advantage or increase of strength depends also upon the balance. There is
nothing in the world to swear this Principle out of countenance, but the fame
of Phalaris, Gelon, Dionysius, Agathocles, Nabis, etc. with which much good do
them that like it. It is proper unto a Government upon the balance to take
root at home and spread outward; and to a Government against the balance to
seek a root abroad, and to spread inwards; The former is sure, but the later
never successeful. Agathocles for having conquered Africa, took not the better
root in Syracusa. (Parvi sunt arma for as nisi sit consilium domi.)

To conclude this Chapter, the Praevaricator gives me this thank for finding
out the balance of dominion (being as ancient in Nature as her self, and yet
as new in Art as my writings) that I have given the world cause to complain of
a great disappointment, who while at my hand that satisfaction in the
Principles of Government was expected, which several great wits had in vain
studied, have in diversifying riches in words only as Propriety, Dominion,
Agrarian, Balance, made up no more then a new Lexicon expressing the same
thing that was known before, seeing the opinion that riches are power is (as
ancient as the first book of Thucydides or the Politics of Aristotle, and) not
omitted by M. Hobbs, or any other Politician. Which is as if he had told Dr.
Harvey, that whereas the blood is the life, was an Opinion as ancient as Moses,
and no girl ever pricked her finger, but knew it must have a course; he had
given the world cause to complain of a great disappointment in not showing a
man to be made of Gingerbread, and his Veins to run Malmesey.

CHAP. IIII. Whether the Balance of Empire be well divided into National and
Provincial; and whether these two, or Nations that are of distinct balance,
coming to depend upon one and the same head, such a mixture create a new
balance?
THe Balance of Empire that is National as it is stated in the former Chapter,
stands in regulated or mixed Monarchy upon the Propriety or Native interest of
the Nobility, in a Commonwealth, upon the Propriety or Native interest of the
People; so these are very natural. But the balance of absolute Monarchy
partaking of force, as well as Nature, is a mixed thing and not much different
from the balance of Provincial Empire, or the manner of holding a Province or
conquered Country. In a Province, if the Native that is rich be admitted unto
power, the power grows up Native, and overtops the Foreign; therefore you must
either* not plant your Citizens in your Provinces, where in time they will
become native, or so planting them neither trust them with Power nor with
Arms. Thus the Provincial balance comes to be contrary to the National. And
as where Empire is Native or national the administration of it can be no
otherwise then according to the National balance; so where Empire is foreign
or provincial the administration of it can be no otherwise then contrary unto
the national balance. That this may be admitted without Opposition, Consid. p.
16. 17.
the Considerer is inclining to allow, Always provided that he be satisfied in
this demand, whether distinct balances under the same Head or Governor, as
those of Castile and Aragon, the power of the King (I presume he means by the
balance of a Nobility) being greater in the One, and that of the People in the
other, may not so poise one the other, as to produce a new balance. To which I
answer, that no One government whatsoever has any more then one of two
balances; that (except in the Cases excepted) of Land which is National, or
that of Arms which is Provincial. Wherefore if the King of Spain by his war
against the Commons altered the Balance of Aragon, it must have been one of
two ways, either by strengthening the balance of the Nobility, and governing
the Aragonian People by them, in which case their balance though altered,
remained yet National; or by holding both Nobility and People by a Provincial
Governor and an Army, in which Case his Empire in that Kingdom is Provincial.
There is no Third way, nor putting the Case that the balance of Castile be
National, and that of Aragon Provincial; does this any more create in the
Monarchy of Spain a Third balance of Empire, then did the Multiplication of
Associations and Provinces diverse for their balances in the Commonwealth of
Rome. England and Scotland being united in one Prince, made (if it had been
rightly used) an increase of strength, but not a Third balance; nor do the
Kingdoms in Spain. Whether a Sovereignty have many Territories and Provinces in
subjection, or in League, it is all one as to this point; the stronger Union or
League will give the stronger balance, and the Case of the present
Soveraignties in Europe being no other; the more nice then wise Speculation of
the Considerer, who has not been able to discern the balance of a League from
that of Empire, is a Mares nest.

CHAP. V. Whether there be any Common right or interest of Mankind distinct
from the parts taken severally; and how by the Orders of a Commonwealth it may
best be distinguished from private interest.
IN the next place the Prevaricator does not go about to play the man, but the
unlucky boy. Where I say that Consid. p. 19. 20
the soul of man is Mistress of two potent rivals, Reason and Passion; he does
not stand to weigh the truth of the thing, or the fitness of the comparison,
either of which had been fair; but tumbles Dick upon Sis, the Logic upon the
Rhetoric, the sense upon the figure, and scuds away in this manner. If I could
be persuaded Mr. Harrington were so far in earnest, as to expect any man should
be convinced by the metaphorical use of two or three words some farther
consideration might be proposed. This is to use his Readers, as the Fox does
the Dogs, when having pissed upon his tail, and flapped it in their eyes, he
gets away. Does not his Book deserve to be gilded and carried in Statesmens
pockets? Alas, mine are nothing ( Quis leget haec? vel duo vel nemo) they
break the Stationer. And yet let me comfort my self, Whose are better? the
prevaricator seems to set every whit as light by those of Hooker and Grotius,
at least where they favor me. The opinions of Grotius (says he) cannot oblige
us beyond the reasons whereon they are founded; and what are those? he will
dispute against that which he dares not repeat: that his Comment may take you
by the Nose he has left out the Text. The words of Grotius are of this sense.
Though it In preleg. De jure B. ac. P.
be truly said that the creatures are naturally carried forth, unto their
proper utility: this ought not to be taken in too general a sense, seeing
diverse of them abstain from their own profit, either in regard of those of the
same kind, or at least of their young. Which words, says the Prevaricator,
carry a great restriction in them, and the way of producing actions in beasts
is so different from the emanation of humane reason (mark the Impostor! the
Author is speaking of natural affection, and he wipes out that, and puts in
humane reason) that the inferences from (the natural affection of) the one, to
the (degree of reason which is in the) other, must needs be very weak.
Excellent! does it therefore follow that the eminent degree of reason,
wherewith all God has endued man, must in him deface that natural affection,
and desertion in some cases of private for common good, which is apparent even
in beasts? What do reverend Divines mean to cry up this Infidel? Nay, is not he
worse then an infidel that provideth not for his own family? A Commonwealth is
but a great family; and a family is a little Commonwealth. Even Beasts in
sparing out of their own mouths, and exposing themselves unto danger for their
young, provide for their families; and in providing for their families, provide
for their whole Commonwealth; that is, forsake in some things their private
good and safety, for the good of the public or of the kind. In this case it is
that even stones or heavy things (says Hooker) forsake Book 1.
their ordinary wont or center and fly upwards, to relieve the distress of
nature in common. Wretch that he is, shall a stone upon this occasion fly
upwards, and will he have a man to go downwards! Yes, Mr. Hooker' s expression
(says he) is altogether figurative, and it is easier to prove from thence that
things wanting sense make discourses, and act by election, then that there is
such a thing as a common interest of mankind. This is like the rest, Hooker
speaks of the necessity that is in nature, and this Gentleman translateth
that sense into the word election. So because a stone is necessitated to comply
with the common interest of nature, without Discourse or Election; therefore it
rather follows from hence that things wanting sense make discourses and act by
election then that there is such a thing as a common interest of mankind. His
old trick. I do not say that because it is so with the creatures, therefore it
must be so with man: but as we see it is with the creatures in this part, so we
find it to be with man. And that so, and more then so, we find it to be with
man (who though he le evil gives good things unto his children, will work hard,
lay up, deny himself, venture his life for his little Commonwealth) is thus
farther demonstrated. All civil Laws acknowledge that there is a common
interest of mankind, and all civil laws proceed from the nature of man;
therefore it is in the nature of man to acknowledge that there is a common
interest of mankind. Upon this acknowledgement of mankind, a man that steals is
put to death, which certainly is none of his private interest; nor is a man put
to death for any other man's private interest; therefore there is a common
interest of mankind distinct from the parts taken severally. But this though
acknowledged in part by all Governments, yet through their natural frailty is
nothing so well provided for in some as in others: for if the power be in one
or a few men; one or a few men (we know) may be thieves, and the rather because
applying money that is public, without a consideration that is public, unto
uses that are private, is thieving. But such thieves will not be hanged; in
this case therefore the Government goes not upon public but private interest.
In the frame of such a Government as can go upon no other then the public
interest, consists that whole Philosophy of the Soul which concerns Policy:
and this whole Philosophy of the Soul being throughout the Commonwealth of
Oceana demonstrated; For the Prevaricator to insinuate that I have omitted it,
is to show what it is that he loves more then truth. The main of this
Philosophy consists in deposing passion and advancing reason unto the Throne
of Empire. I expected news in this place, that this were to promise more for
the Magistrate or the people, then has been performed by Stoics, but two
Girls (meaning no body any harm) have provoked his wrath (forsooth) to such
extravagancy by the way, that though in all modesty it were forbidden (as he
confesses) by their cheeks, which discovering the green sickness, showed that
they were past the rod, he has taken them up! ( Tantaene animis coelestibus
ire!) what he may have in school Divinity for so rude a charge, I do not know;
but he shall never be able to show any Maxim for this kind of Discipline or
Philosophy of the soul either in Chevalry or the Politics. The offense of the
Girls was no more, then that having a Cake (by gift of an Uucle or an Aunt, or
by purchase, or such an one perhaps as was of their own making) in common, or
between them, the one had most accurately divided, and the other was about to
choose; when in comes me this rude fellow. How now Gentlewomen, says he, what
dividing and choosing! Consid. p. 22. 23.
will no less serve your turn then the whole mystery of a well ordered
Commonwealth? who has taught you to cast away passion (an't please you) like
the Bran, and work up Reason as pure as the Flower of your Cake? Are you
acquainted with the Author of Oceana, that has seen foreign Countries,
conversed with the Speculativi, learnt of the most serene Lady Venetia to work
with bobbins, makes you a Magistracy like a Pippin pie, and sells Butterprints
with S. P. Q. R.? Have done as you dread Ballads, fusty Pamphlets, or the
Ostracisme of Billingsgate. Have done I say; will you vy that green in your
cheeks with the purple of the State? must your mother, who was never there her
self, seek you in the Oven? Come, when I live to see Machiavil in puff-paste, a
Commonwealth come out of a Bakehouse, where smocks were the boulters, let me be
a Millhorse. -- But now you must know comes the best jest of all, and I need
not say that it comes from Oxford; he tells them that their Cake is dough, (let
it not be lost I beseech you) and so snatching it away, eats it* for all the
world as Jack pudding eats the Custard. Did you ever see such a Bestia?

But whereas either Office, that of dividing or choosing, was Communicable unto
either of the Girls, it is not indifferent in the distribution of a
Commonwealth, because dividing is separating one thing, one reason, one
interest, or consideration from another, which they that can so discern in
private affairs are called discreet, but they that can do it in Public are
prudent, and the way of this kind of dividing in the language of a
Commonwealth, is debating. But they that are capable of this kind of dividing
or debating are few among many, that when things are thus divided and debated,
are able enough to choose, which in the language of a Commonwealth is to
resolve. Hence it is that the debate of the few because there be but few that
can debate, is the wisest debate, and the result of the many (because every man
has an interest what to choose, and that choice which suteth with every man's
interest, excludes the distinct or private interest or passion of any man, and
so comes up unto the Common and Public interest or reason) is the wisest
result. Unto this end, God who does nothing in vain, has so divided Mankind
into the Few, or the Natural Aristrocacy, and the Many, or the Natural
Democracy, that there can hardly be upon any Occasion, a meeting of Twenty men,
wherein it will not be apparent; or in which you may not see all those lines
which are requisite unto the face of a beautiful Commonwealth. For example
among any Twenty men, occasionally met, there will be some few (perhaps six)
excelling the fourteen in greatness of parts. These six falling into discourse
of business, or giving their judgment upon persons, or things, though but by
way of mere conversation, will discover their abilities; whereupon they shall
be listened unto and regarded by the Fourteen; that is, the six will acquire an
Authority with, and imprint a Reverence upon the Fourteen, which Action and
Passion in the Roman Commonwealth were called Authoritas Patrum, and verecundia
Plebis; Nevertheless if the six endeavor to extend the authority which they
find thus acquired to Power, that is, to bring the Fourteen to Terms or
Conditions of obedience, or such as would be advantageous unto the few, but
prejudicial to the many; The Fourteen will soon find that consenting they hurt
not only themselves by endammaging their own interests, but hurt the Six also
who by this means come to lose their virtue, and so spoil their debate, which
while such advantages are procurable unto themselves, will go no farther upon
the Common good, but their private benefit. Wherefore in this Case they will
not consent, and not consenting they preserve not only their own liberty but
the integrity of the Six also, who perceiving that they cannot impair the
Common interest have no other interest left but to improve it; And neither any
conversation nor any people, how dull soever and subject by fits to be deluded,
but will soon see thus much, which is enough, because what is thus proposed by
the Authority of the Six or of the Senate, and resolved by the Fourteen or by
the People, is enacted by the whole, and becomes that Law, then which (though
mankind be not infallible) there can be nothing less fallible in Mankind. Art
is the imitation of Nature, by observation of such lines as these in the face
of Nature, a Politician limbs his Commonwealth. But says the Praevaricator,
the Parologisme lies in this, that the Twenty men are first supposed to be a
Consid. p. 26.
Commonwealth, and then it is considered how they would dispose of the
Government: What is this? Art is the imitation of nature; therefore Art
presumes Nature to be Art. A Picture is the representation of a face; therefore
the Picture-drawer presumed the face to be a picture; and in this same, there
is lying, being or squatting, a thing called a Parologisme. Did you ever hear
such a Parakeetisme; for to speak a word without understanding, the sense of it
is like a Parrat. And yet I wrong the Parrat in this comparison; for she though
she do not understand her self, is understood by others, whereas neither can
this Prevaricator tell what he means, nor any man else; Or riddle me, riddle me
what is this? The sense of want among men that are in equality of power may
beget a desire of Exchange, as Consid. p. 27.
Let me have your Horse, and you shall have my Cow, which is the fountain of
private Contracts; but it is not to be with reason imagined, that this should
be enough to make a man part with a natural freedom, and put himself into the
hands of a Power from which he can afterward have no shield, though it should
be used to his own destruction.

Most Victorious nonsense! for he that says nothing, cannot be answered. It
should seem if the Twenty men were indeed a Commonwealth, or in equality of
power, (for so he puts the case) they might truck Horses and Cows, but not by
any means consider or once let it enter into their heads, how by Art to make
good their Natural freedom: That (unless they set up a Prince, as you shall
see anon) were to part with their Natural freedom, and put themselves into the
hands of a Power from which (there being no other Power but themselves) they
can afterward have no shield. To read it thoroughly for the understanding, as
is intimated in his Epistle, will be more (I doubt) then his Book will obtain
of any reader. Yet is he, in his own conceit, as sure footed as any Mule, and
knows the road. But Mr. Harrington has not lost his way without company, (his
brother) Grotius complains, that they who treat of Jus Gentium do commonly
mistake some part of the Roman Jus civil for it* and even so he laments (an't
please you) that while Men profess to consider the Principles of Government
they fall upon notions which are the mere effects of Government. But as an Ape
is the more ugly for being like a Man; so this Praevaricator for making faces
like Grotius. I, who am complained of, deriving Government from the true
principle of the same, in the balance or foundation, set the Superstructures
accordingly, and he who complains (forsooth) never so much as proposes any
thing like a Principle or Superstructure, but runs altogether upon mere
Notions; As where he asks me, what security will you give, that the Six in
their Consultations shall not rather aim at their own advantage then that of
the Fourteen, and so make Consid. p. 28.
use of the eminence of their parts to circumvent the rest? In another place he
can answer himself and say, that the Fourteen or the People in this
Constitution have the Vote and the Sword too. How then should the Six
circumvent them? what security has a Prince that his people will not pull him
out of his Throne? why a Nobility or an Army; and are not the people in a
Commonwealth their own Army? Is this to mind principles! On the other side, How
(says he) shall we be satisfied that the Fourteen will not soon begin to think
themselves wise enough to consult too, and making use of their excess in power
pull the Six off their Cushions? as if there were any experience public or
private, any sense, or reason, that men having the whole power in their own
hands, would deprive themselves of Counselors, or that ever a Commonwealth
deposed the Senate, or can depose the Senate, and remain a Commonwealth. The
People of Capua being enraged to the full height, resolved and assembled
together, (the Senate, if the People will, being always in their power,) on
purpose to cut the Throats of the Senators, when Pacuvius Calavius exhorted
them that ere they went upon the design, they would first make election among
themselves of a new Senate, which (the Throats of the Old being cut) might for
the safety of the Commonwealth immediately take their places; for said he,
(Senatum omnino non habere non vultis. Quippe aut Rex, quod abominandum, aut
quod unum liberae civitatis Concilium est, Senatus habendus est) You Livy.
must either have a King, which I do not find by you that you intend, or what
ever become of this, you must have some other Senate; for the Senate is a
Council of such nature* as without it, no free City can subsist. By which
speech of Pacuvius, the People (who thought themselves as the Considerer has
it, wise enough to consult,) being convinced, fell to work for the Election of
a succeeding Senate out of themselves (the Praevaricator should not tell me of
Notions, but learn that in a Commonwealth, there must be a Senate is a
Principle) While the People of Cupua were intent upon choosing this new Senate,
the parties proposed seemed unto them to be so ridiculously unfit for such an
Office, that by this means coming to a nearer sight of themselves, they were
secretly so filled with the shame of their Enterprise, that slinking away they
would never after be known so much as to have thought upon such a Thing. Nor
ever went any other people so far, not the Florentines themselves though
addicted to Innovation or changing of the Senate beyond all other examples.
Sons of the University, Brothers of the College: Heads and Points; you love
fine words; whether tends to bring all things into servitude, my Hypothesis,
or his arochet.
Hypothytes? For says he, I am willing to gratify Mr Harrington with his
partition of the Twenty men into Six and Fourteen; but if I had been in an
humor of contradiction, it had been as free for me to have said that some one
of the twenty would have excelled all the rest in judgment, experience,
courage, and height of Genius, and then told him, that this had been a natural
Monarchy established by God himself over Mankind. As if the Twenty would give
their clothes or money to the next man they meet wiser or richer then
themselves, which before he denied (Oportet esse memorem) God established Kings
no otherwise then by election of the people; and the Twenty will neither give
their clothes nor money, How then? why in comes a Gallant with a file of
Musketeers, what says he, are you dividing and choosing here? Go to, I will
have no dividing, give me all. Down go the pots, and up go their heels: what is
this? why a King! what more? by divine Right! As he took the Cake from the
Girls!

CHAP. VI. Whether the Senatusconsulta or Decrees of the Roman Senate had the
power of Laws?
AMong diverse and weighty reasons why I would have that Prince look well to
his file of Musketeers, this is no small one, that he being upon no balance
will never be able to give Law without them. For to think that he succeeds unto
the Senate, or that the power of the Senate may serve his Turn, is a
presumption will fail him. The Senate, as such, has no power at all, but mere
Authority of proposing unto the people, who are the Makers of their own Laws,
whence the Decrees of the Senate of Rome are never Laws nor so called, but
Senatusconsulta. It is true that a King coming in, the Senate as there it did,
to his aid and advantage may remain, so they propose not as formerly unto the
People, but now unto him who comes not in upon the right of the Senate, but
upon that of the People (whence says Justinian. Quod principi placuit legis
habet vigorem, quum lege Regia quae de ejus imperio lata est, Populus ei, and
in eum omnes imperium Consid. p. 30. 31.
suum and potestatem concedat) Thus the Senatusconsultum, Macedonicum, with the
rest that had place allowed by Justinian in the compilement of the Roman laws,
were not Laws in that they were Senatusconsulta, or proposed by the Senate, but
in that they were allowed by Justiman or the Prince, in whom was now the right
of the People. Wherefore the Zelot for Monarchy has made a ( pas de clerc or)
foul step in his procession where he argues thus out of Cujacius. It was soon
agreed that the distinct decrees of the Senate and People should be extended to
the nature of laws; therefore the distinct decrees of the Senate are laws
whether it be so a greed by the people, or by the Prince, or no. For thus he
has no sooner made his Prince, then he kicks him heels over head; Seeing where
the Decrees of the Senate are Laws without the King, that same is as much a
King, as the Praevaricator a Politician. A law is that which was passed by the
power of the people, or of the King. But out of the Light; In this place he
takes a Welsh bait, and looking back makes a Muster of his Victories like the
busling Consid. p. 32.
Guascon, who to show what he had thrown out of the Windows in his debauchery,
made a formal repetition of the whole Inventary of the House.

CHAP. VII. Whether the Ten Commandments were proposed by God or Moses, and
voted by the People of Israel.
ONe would think the Guascon had done well, Is he satisfied? No, he will now
throw the House out of the Windows. The principal stones being already taken
Consid. p. 33. 35.
from the Foundation, He has a bag of certain winds wherewithal to reverse
the super structures. The first wind he lets go is but a Puff, where he tells
me that I bring Switz and Holland into the enumeration of the Heathen
Commonwealths, which if I had done, their Liberties in many parts and places
being more Ancient then the Christian Religion in those Countries (as is plain
by Tacitus where he speaks of Civilis and of the Customs of the Germans) I had
neither wronged them nor my self: but I do no such matter, for having
enumerated the Heathen Commonwealths, I add that the proceedings of Holland and
Switz (though after a more obscure manner) are of the like Oceana p. 19.
nature. The next is a Storm, while reproaching me of rudeness, he brings in
Doctor Fern and the Clergy by the head and the shoulders, who till they
undertake the quarrel of Monarchy, to the confusion of the Commonwealth of
Israel, at least so far forth that there be no weight or obligation in such an
Example, are posted. As if Consid. p. 35. 40.
for a Christian Commonwealth to make so much use of Israel, as the Roman did
of Athens, whose Laws she transcribed, were against the Interest of the Clergy,
which it seems, is so hostile unto Popular power, that to say the Laws of
Nature though they be the fountains of all Civil Law, are not the Civil Law,
till they be the Civil Law; Or thus, that thou shall not kill, thou shall not
steal; though they be in natural Equity, yet were not the Laws of Israel or of
England, till voted by the People of Israel, or the Parliament of England, is
to assert the People into the Mighty liberty of being free from the whole Moral
Law; and inasmuch as to be the adviser or perswader of a thing is less then to
be the Author or Commander of it; to put an indignity upon God himself. In
which fopperies, the Praevaricator, boasting of principles, but minding none;
first confounds Authority, and Command, or Power: and nextforgets that the
dignity of the Legislator, or (which is all one,) of the Senate succeeding unto
his Office, as the Sanhedrim unto Moses, is the greatest dignity in a
Commonwealth; and yet that the Laws or Orders of a Commonwealth derive no
otherwise, whether from the Legislator (as Moses, Lycurgus, Solon, etc.) or the
Senate (as those of Israel, Lacedemon, or Athens) then from their Authority
received and confirmed by the Vote or Command of the People. It is true, that
with Almighty God it is otherwise then with a Mortal Legislator, but through
another Nature which unto him is peculiar, from whom as he is the cause of
being, or the Creator of Mankind, Omnipotent power is inseparable; yet so equal
is the goodness of this Nature unto the greatness thereof, that as he is the
Cause of welbeing by way of Election for Example in his chosen people Israel,
or of Redemption, as in the Christian Church, Himself has preferred before his
Empire, his Authority or Proposition. What else is the meaning of these words,
or of this proceeding of his? Now therefore if ye will obey my voice indeed,
and keep my Covenant, Exodus 19 5.
ye shall be unto me a Kingdom, or I will be your King; which Proposition being
Voted by the People in the Affirmative, God proceeds to propose unto them the
Ten Commandments in so dreadful a manner, that the People being exceedingly
affrighted, say unto Moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear thee; that is,
be thou henceforth our Exodus 20. 19.
Legislator or Proposer, and we will resolve accordingly; but let not God speak
with us, lest we die. From whenceforth God proposes unto the People no
otherwise then by Moses, whom he instructs in this manner, These are the
judgments which thou shall propose or set before them. Deuteronomy. 29. 1.
Wherefore it is said of the book of Deuteronomy containing the Covenant which
the Lord commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the Land of
Moab, beside the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb (Haec est lex quam
Moses proposuit) this is the law which Moses set before Deuteronomy. 4. 44.
the children of Israel. Neither did God in this case make use of his
Omnipotent power, nor Christ in the like, who also is King after the same
manner in his Church, and would have been in Israel, where when to this end he
might have mustered up Legions of Angels, and been victorious with such Armies,
or Argyraspides, as never Prince could show the like, says no more then O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee and thy Children, as
an Hen gathers Math. 23. 37.
her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? where it is plain that the
Jews rejecting Christ that he should not reign over them, the Law of the Gospel
came not to be the Law of the Jews; and so if the Ten Commandments came to be
the Law of Israel, it was not only because God proposed them, seeing Christ
also proposed his Law, which neverthelese came not to be the Law of the Jews,
but because the people received the One, and rejected the Other. It is not in
the Nature of Religion, that it should be thought a profane saying, that if the
Bible be in England, or in any other Government, the Law or Religion of the
Land, it is not only because God has proposed it, but also because the People
or Magistrate has received it, or resolved upon it; Otherwise we must set
lighter by a Nation or Government, then by a private person who can have no
part nor portion in this Law, unless he Vote it unto himself, in his own
Conscience, without which, he remains in the Condition he was before, and as
the Heathen who are a Law unto themselves. Thus whereas in a Covenant there
must be two parties, the Old and New Testament being in sum the Old and New
Covenant, These are that Authority and Proposition of God and Christ, to which
they that refuse their Vote or result may be under the Empire of a Clergy, but
are none of his Commonwealth. Nor seeing I am gone so far, does this at all
imply free will, but (as is admirably observed by Mr. Hobbs) the freedom of
that which naturally precedes will, namely, Deliberation or Debate, in which as
the Scale by the weight of Reason or Passion comes to be turned one way or
other, the Will is caused, and being caused, necessitated. When God comes
thus in upon the Soul of Man, he gives both the Will and the Deed; from which
like Office of the Senate in a Commonwealth that is from the Excellency of
their Deliberation and Debate which prudently and faithfully unfolded unto the
People, does also frequently cause and necessitate both the Will and the Deed,
God himself has said of the Senate, that they are Gods: an expression though
divine yet not unknown to the Heathens ( Homo homini Deus) one Man for the
Excellency of his aid, may be a God unto another; but let the praevaricator
look to it; for he that leads the blind out of his way, is his Devil.

For the things I have of this kind, as also for what I have said upon the
words Chirotonia and Ecclesia, the Praevaricator is delighted to make me
beholding underhand unto Mr. Hobbs, Notwithstanding the open enmity which he
says I profess to his Politics. As if Josephus upon that of Samuel 1 Samuel 8.
7 ^.
they have not rejected Thee, but they have rejected me that I should not reign
over them, had not said of the People (...) that they unchirotonized or unvoted
God of the Kingdom. Now if they unchirotonized or unvoted God of the Kingdom,
then they had chirotonized or voted him to the Kingdom, and so not only the
Doctrine that God was King in Israel by Compact or Covenant, but the use of the
word Chirotonia also in the sense I understand it, is more Ancient then Mr.
Hobbs. I might add that of Capellus (Deus Populi Judaici Rex erat veluti In
Diatriba de* vota Iephts*
Politicus, and Civilis Legislator) God was as Political King and Civil
Legislator of the Jews. And for the use I have made of the word Ecclesia, as no
Man can read such as have written of the Grecian Commonwealths, and miss it,
so I do not remember that Mr. Hobbs has spoken of it: To these things fuller
satisfaction will be given in the second Book which nevertheless I do not speak
to the end I might wave Obligation to so excellent an Author in his way. It is
true, I have opposed the Politics of Mr. Hobbs to show him what he taught me,
with as much disdain as he opposed those of the greatest Authors, in whose
wholesome Fame and Doctrine the good of Mankind being concerned; my Conscience
bears me witness, that I have done my duty: Nevertheless in most other things
I firmly believe that Mr. Hobbs is, and will in future Ages be accounted the
best Writer, at this day, in the World: And for his Treatises of Humane Nature,
and of Liberty and Necessity, they are the greatest of New Lights, and those
which I have followed and shall follow.

CHAP. VIII. Whether a Commonwealth coming up to the perfection of the kind,
come not up unto the perfection of Government, and have no flaw in it.
WHat a Comonwealth coming up to the perfection of the kind is, I have shown
both by the definition of an equal Commonwealth, and the Exemplification in all
the parts.

The Definition is contained in the first of my Preliminaries, which because it
is short I shall repeat.

An equal Commonwealth is a Government established upon an equal Agrarian
arising into the super structures or three Orders, The Senate debating and
proposing, the People resolving, and the Magistracy executing, by an equal
Rotation, or interchangeable election, through the suffrage of the People given
by the Ballot The Exemplification is the whole Commonwealth of Oceana. Each of
which by him, who, if his doctrine of pure and absolute Monarchy be observed
can be no English man, is called an Irish bog; as in some sense it is, seeing
the Praevaricator has set never a foot in it, that will stand, nor has more
to say, then that Consid. p. 43.
where there is one ambitious poor man, or one vicious rich man, it is
impossible there should be any such Government as can be secure from sedition.

Which first is rather to make all Governments alike, then to object against
any, seeing that there should not be one ambitious Poor man, or one vicious
Rich man, is equally if not more improbable in a Monarchy then in a
Commonwealth.

Secondly, That one Man alone, whether he be rich or poor should without a
party be able to disturb a Commonwealth with sedition, is an absurdity; nor is
such a party as may be able in some sort to disturb the Peace by robbing upon
the Highway, or some such disorder always able to disturb a Government with
sedition: Wherefore this feat goes not so much upon the ability of any one man
Rich or Poor, as the puissance of the Party he is able to make, and this
puissance of the party goes upon the Nature of the Government and the content
or discontents thence deriving to the Few, or the Many. The discontents whether
of the Few or the Many derive from that which is, or by them is thought to be
some bar unto their Interest, and those Interests which are the causes of
sedition are three; the desire of Liberty, the desire of Power, and the desire
of Riches, nor be there any more* for where the People through the want of
bread, through violence offered unto their Women, or Oppression, rise up
against their Governors, it relates unto the desire of Liberty, those also
under the name of Religion make not a fourth but come unto One of the Three.

Now to speak in the first place of the Many, and anon of the Few, the people
in an equal Commonwealth, have none of these three Interests. Not the desire of
Liberty, because the whole Frame of an equal Commonwealth is nothing else but
such a Method whereby the liberty of the People is secured unto them. Not of
power, because the power which otherwise they could not exercise, is thus
estated in them. Nor of riches, because where the rich are so bounded by an
Agrarian that they cannot overballence; and therefore neither Oppress the
People nor Exclude their industry or merit from attaining to the like estate,
power, or honor, the whole People have the whole riches of the Nation already
equally divided among them, for that the riches of a Commonwealth should not go
according unto the difference of men's industry, but be distributed by the Pole
were unequal; Wherefore the people in an equal Commonwealth having none of
those interests which are the causes of sedition, can be subject unto no such
effect.

To affirm then with the Considerer, that the whole of this Libration, is
reduced to the want of power to disturb the Commonwealth, must needs be
mistaken, seeing in the Commonwealth proposed the people have the power, but
can have no such interest, and the people having no such interest, no party can
have any such power, it being impossible that a party should come to
overballance the People, having their Arms in their own hands. The whole matter
being thus reduced unto the want of power to disturb the Government; this
according to his own Argument will appear to be the Libration in which the
power whereof the Governor is possessed so vastly exceeds the power remaining
with those, who are to obey (which in case of contest must be so small a party)
that it would be desperately unreasonable for them to hope to maintain their
Cause. If the true Method then of attaining to perfection in Government be to
make the Governor absolute, and the people in an equal Commonwealth be
absolute, then there can be none in this Government, that upon probable terms
can dispute the power with the Governor, and so this State by his own Argument
must be free from Sedition. Thus far upon occasion of the ambitious poor Man
Objected. I have spoken of the Many, and in speaking of the Many, implicitly
of the Few; for as in an unequal Commonwealth, for Example, England during the
Peerage or Aristocracy, the Many depended upon or were included in the Few; So
in an Equal Commonwealth the Few depend upon or are included in the Many, as
the Senate of Venice depends upon, or is included in Great Council, by which it
is annually elected in the whole or in some part. So what was said in an equal
Commonwealth of the Many or the Poorer sort, is also said of the Few or of the
Richer; who through the virtue of the Agrarian, as in Oceana, or of other
Orders supplying the defect of an Agrarian, as in Venice, not able to
overballance the people can never have any power to disturb the Commonwealth
in case they had such an interest, nor can have any such interest in case they
had such power. For Example in Oceana putting the case, that the Few were as
powerful as it is possible they should be; that is, that the whole Land were
fallen into five thousand hands. The Five Thousand excluding, the People could
get no more Riches by it, because they have the whole Land already, no more
Liberty by it, because they were in perfect Liberty before; nor any more power
by it, because through the equality of the balance or of their Estates, they
can be no more by themselves, then an equal Commonwealth, and that they were
with the people; but would be much less, the power or Commonwealth, in which
there be Five thousand Equals, being not greater but much less then the power
or Commonwealth wherein the whole people are Equal: because the power or
effect of a greater People is proportionably greater then the power or effect
of a lesser people, and the Few by this means would get no more then to be the
lesser people. So the people being no bar unto the riches, Liberty, nor power
of the Five Thousand and the desire of Liberty, Riches, and Power being the
only causes of Sedition, There could arise no Sedition in this Commonwealth by
reason of the Nobility, who have no such interest, if they had the power, nor
have any such power if they had the interest, the people being equally
possessed of the Government, of the Arms, and far superior in Number. In sum,
an equal Commonwealth consists but of one hereditary Order, as the people,
which is by election divided into two Orders as the Senate and the Congregation
in Lacedemon, or the Senate and the Great Council in Venice; for the Gentlemen
of Venice, as has been often said, are the people of Venice, the rest are
Subjects. And an unequal Commonwealth consists of two Hereditary Orders, as
the Patritians and Plebeians in Rome, whereof the former only had an hereditary
capacity of the Senate; whence it comes to pass that the Senate and the people
in an equal Commonmealth having but one and the same interest, never were, nor
can be at variance; and that the Senate and the people in an unequal
Commonwealth having two distinct interests, never did nor can agree. So an
equal Commonwealth cannot be seditious, and an unequal Commonwealth can be no
other then Seditious.

If a Man be resolved as the Considerer is, to huddle these things together,
there is no making any thing of this kind of Policy; of which therefore it will
be a folly to talk. For example, Lacedemon is either to be considered as not
taking in the Helotes, and then in her self she was an equal Commonwealth void
of any sedition, or cause of it, how much soever she were troubled with the
Helotes. So the Objection made by him, of her troubles by the Helotes is
impertinently urged, to show that she was a Seditious Commonwealth. Or if he
will needs have it, that she took in the Helots, it is undeniable that she took
them in unequally, and so was unequal, whence the troubles by the Helots must
needs be impertinently urged against an equal Commonwealth.

Again, when I allege Venice from Piero Gradenigo, that is for the space of
about four hundred years from the present date, at which time the Reformation
yet in force began, as an Example of an equal Commonwealth, for him to
instance in the times before, when though the Commonwealth according to the
intention, were as Equal as now, yet being not bound by sufficient Orders to
give her self security of her Native Liberty, her Dukes on the one side, did
what they pleased, and the enraged People on the other side banished, condemned
to death, or murdered them, who sees not the Imposture? Indeed he blushes at
it himself. Wherefore my Assertion being not yet knocked on the head, he
promises to kill it better, first by the Example of Lacedemon leaving out the
Helots, and next by that of Venice since the time of Piero Gradenigo.

For the first you must know that once upon a time Consid. p. 60. Pausan. Lacon.
there was a quarrel between Cleomenes and Demaratus Kings of Lacedemon about
succession which was determined by the Ephori, that is, by a Court of Justice
and not by the Sword; the like happened in Leotychides the known bastard of
Alcibiades or so confessed to be by his Mother Plut. Alc.
unto diverse of her Maids. Now this is a Maxim in the Politics where the
differences of Kings can go no farther, then a Court of Justice, there the
Government is seditious. Most ridiculous! Is there a stronger Argument that
such a Government is not Seditious? No matter give him room, Much more fatal
was the contest between Cleonymus and his brother Areus the son of Acrotatus by
whose war Zarax was ruined and Pyrrhus came into the game, who besieged the
Capital City: the reign of Agis and Cleomenes was so full of turbulency as
would put a man out of breath to relate. Fair, and softly was not all this
after Lysander, and the Spoils of Athens and so ruined Lacedemon? I affirm
there can be no sedition in an Equal Cmmonwealth, and he to oppose me, shows
that there was Sedition in an unequal One; whether does this Affirm his
Assertion or mine?

But for better luck in Venice. This City by Mr. Harrington' s own confession,
is possessed of several advantages. Yes, I say that the Commonwealth of Venice,
thus Seated is like a Man in a Citadel who thereby may be the safer from his
Enemies, but nere a whit the safer from diseases. What conclusion would you
expect he should infer from hence? why among these therefore there is good
cause to reckon her Immunity from seditions; Does not our Logician repeat
faithfully and dispute honestly? Again, Sir, she is like a Ship ready to be
boarded by Pirates, has the Turk on this Frontier, the Pope on that, the King
of Spain on another. As if this were an Argument every Government must not be
void of Sedition, seeing there is none except they be Islands, whose frontiers
are not bounded by the Territories of other Princes. Well, but since the last
Reiglement (in English Reformation) in the time of Gradenigo; you have had
three seditions in Venice, that of Marino Boccone, that of Baiamonte Tiepolo,
and that of Marino Falerio.

Bodin has been long since beaten for this like Stockfish, and yet our Author
will be serving it up for a Courtly dish. Bocconi would have killed the Duke,
but was hanged before he could do it. Felton killed a Duke, that had greater
power here then the other in Venice, and was hanged afterward, therefore
England was a seditions Government; for this must either be undeniable for
Felton's sake, or why must the other be so for Bocconi's? Again, Falerio and
his Accomplices would have destroyed the great Council, but were hanged before
they could do it. Vaux and his Accomplices would have blown up the Parliament,
but were hanged before they could do it; therefore England was in this
relation a seditious Government, else why was Venice? There passes not a
Month but there die Rogues at Tiburn, is the Government therefore seditious?
or is this one regard in which it is not? where all that so invade the
Government are by virtue of the same brought unto that end, there the
Commonwealth, or the Orders of it are not the Cause but the Cure of Sedition,
and so these are undeniable Arguments that Venice is not seditious, where since
the Reformation there has not been a cut Finger upon this score, save only
through the conspiracy of Baiamonte, which indeed came to blows. Nor for this
yet, can Venice be called a seditious Commonwealth. You find no man accusing
Rome of sedition in that she had a Manlius or a Melius that dangerously
affected Monarchy, because unto these her Orders, by which they suffered death
as soon applied the remedy. But Rome was a seditious Commonwealth because the
perpetual fewd that was between the Senate and the People sprung out of her
Orders, and was that to which there was no Remedy to apply. England was not a
seditious Government because it had a Vaux or a Felton, but because the power
anciently of the Nobility, and late of the People was such by the Orders of the
same as might at any time occasion Civil war. Put the case a slave or some
desperate fellow have killed a Great Turk, the Government for that cannot be
said seditious, but in this that through the very nature of the Policy, the
Janissaries at any time may do as much, it is undeniable seditious. Baiamonte's
conspiracy he will not say was of this nature. It was not a disease in the
bones of the Commonwealth, but a thing that no sooner appeared, or broke out
(though it be true, there happened a little scratching first) then it fell off
like a scab; such an accident may befall the best constitution, and Venice
never had the like but once: if he could say as much of a Monarchy, he gains no
advantage; yet let him say it, and prove it, I give him all. I omit many
falsehoods and absurdities in the proceeding of the Prevaricator, as where he
intimates the power of the Dukes to have been that whereby Venice gained I know
not what, and yet to have been that also by which Falerio had like to have
spoiled all: Each of which (the Duke of Venice having no power at all) is known
to be false. Why should* I stay to put you in mind that having affirmed Venice
to derive her Immunity from intestine discord no otherwise then a Ship, that is
ready to be boarded by Pirates, he instanceth in such examples to the contrary,
as took Occasion by the hair of a Foreign scalpe, while in those of Boccone
and Tiepolo the Commonwealth by her Wars with the Genoeses and Ferrara, was put
to her plunges, and in that of Falerio reduced unto the last extremity. I shall
only Note that if such sudden Flashes as these may come under the name of
Sedition, he has done a fine Office for Monarchy, seeing no Senate is so much
exposed to like blows, as any Prince.

Well; but for all this it is confessed that there may be such a thing as a
seditious Commonwealth, in that the fewd between the Senate and the People of
Rome could not be cured; what security says he will you give us, that Consid.
p. 48.
the like may not happen in Oceana, or that the whole body of the People being
intrvsted with giving a Vote and keeping a Sword, may not by way of Counsel or
Arms, fall to such work as Levelling the Five Thousand, or bringing the
Agrarian from two to one Thousand pounds a year, or less, as they fancy.

To which I answer by a like question, What security will he give me that the
People of any Commonwealth shall not cast themselves into the Sea? A Prince may
be mad and do so, but the people is naturally incapable of such madness: If
men will boast of their knowledge in principles and yet talk of nothing but
effects; why may not a Man fly as well as a Bird? but if causes may be
regarded, let him once show how the Will seeing it is not free, nor moved
without some Object, should move the people in such a manner; or for what, they
having all the Liberty and all the Power that can be had, should strive? Well,
that is soon done, for the Land may come into the hands of Five thousand, and
so the Booty may be great and the resistance small. Good. The Romans being the
wisest of all people went no farther toward the Remedy of their grievances
then to strive for the introduction of an Agrarian, in which they fainted too,
even to the Destruction of that Government. Except these, none have been so
wise, and if there be any such thing familiar with the Nature of the people,
why appeared it but once, and then vanished without effect? why did not the
people for Example under the late Monarchy (when the Dominion or Freehold of
the Nation, by greater shares, was in a smaller party, and they had not only
Riches, but Liverty, and Power too, to whet them on) ever so much as think of
levelling Three hundred Men for the Nobility and Clergy in whom was the
balance, were no more. If it be replied that the people were not armed; by
whom did the Barons make War with the Kings? If that they were not trusted with
a Vote; what was that of the House of Commons? Let Dominion or Freehold stand
upon what balance you will, unequal or equal, from the beginning of the world
you shall never find a people turning Levellers: And as Reason is Experience in
the root, so Experience is Reason in the branch, which might therefore be
sufficient in the Case. Nevertheless for clearer satisfaction in a point of
such Concernment, I shall endeaver to dig up and discover the Root of this
branch, or the reason of this Experience. That which in Beasts is instinct,
whereof they can give no Account, is in it self that wisdom of God whereby he
provideth for them; so is it with the People, they are not Levellers, nor know
they why, and yet it is, because to be levellers, were to destroy themselves.
For seeing I must repeat, to repeat briefly. There is no Territory of any
Extent and Populousness where the Revenue of Industry is not twice as much as
the dry Rent. (This has been demonstrated in Oceana.) The revenue of industry
is in those that work, that is, the People: Wherefore the Revenne of the
People, where their industry is not obstructed, is twofold unto that of the
Nobility, holding the whole Territory in Freehold. But where their Industry is
obstructed, their Revenue is nothing. Civil war being of all other the greatest
obstruction of Industry, the People in taking Arms must venture all they have,
for that, which if they obtain, they lose two for one; and if they obtain not,
all for nothing. Wherefore a People never will, nor ever can; never did, or
ever shall take Arms for Levelling. But they are instructed with a Vote; and
therefore taking away the Lands of the five Thousand, or diminishing the
Agrarian by way of Counsel, they need not obstruct their industry, but
preserving the Revenue of that, may bring themselves into the possession of the
Land too. This will they, this can they less do, because being in Counsel they
must propose something for the advantage of the Commonwealth, or of themselves,
as their End in such an Action. But the Land coming to be in the possession of
five Thousand, falls not into a Number that is within the compass of the few,
or such an One as can be Princes, either in regard of their number, or of their
estates, but unto such an One as cannot consent to abolish the Agrarian,
because that were to consent to rob one another, nor can have any Party among
them, or against their Common interest, strong enough to force them, or to
break it, which remaining, the five thousand neither be nor can be any more
then a Popular State, and the balance remains every whit as equal, as if the
Land were in never so many more hands. Wherefore the Commonwealth being not to
be bettered by this means, the People by Counsel can never go about to level
nor diminish the Agrarian for the good of the Commonwealth. Nor can they
undertake it for the enrichment of themselves, because the Land of Oceana, as
has been demonstrated, being levelled or divided equally among the Fathers of
Families only, comes not to above Ten pounds a year unto each of them, whereas
every Footman costeth his Master Twenty pounds a year; and there is not a
Cottager having a Cow upon the Common, but with his own labor, at one shilling
a day, gets Twenty pounds a years; which the Land being levelled, were
impossible, because there would be no body able to set a Labourer on work, or
to keep a Servant; wherefore neither would, nor could the People by Counsel go
about any such business. So there being no possible cause of disagreement
between the Few and the Many, the Senate and the People, there can be no such
effect; whence this is the government, which being perfectly equal, has such
a Libration in the frame of it, that no man in or under it, can contract such
Interest or Power, as should be able to disturb the Commonwealth with Sedition.
Yet after all this, the Praevaricator will only tell Mr. Harrington (for to
deny the Conclusion, is a fair way of disputing) that this Libration Consid. p.
67.
is of the same Nature with a perpetual motion in the Mechannicks. But let me
tell him, that in the Politics there is nothing Mechannick, or like it. This
is but an Ideotism of some Mathematician resembling his who imagined the Stream
of a River to be like that of his Spiggot,

(Rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis, at ille
labitur and labetur in omne volubilia aevum.)
The silly Swain upon a river stood,
In hope the Rolling bottom of the flood
Would once unwind it self, whose liquid clue
The silver thread for ever shall renew.
The Mathematician must not take God to be such an One as he is. Is that of the
Sun, of the Stars, of a River, a perpetual Motion? even so One generation
goes, and Galen de usu partium. l. 4.
another comes. Nature (says Gallen) has a tendency to make her Creature
immortal, if it were in the Capacity of the Matter on which she has to work,
but the People never dies; This Motion of theirs is from the hand of a
perpetual Mover, even God himself, in whom we live and move, and have our
being; and to this Current the Politician adds nothing but the banks, to
which end, or none, the same God has halso created humane Prudence. Wherefore
there is not any thing that raises it self against God or right reason, if I
say that it is in humane prudence so to apply these banks, that they may stand
as long as the River runs; or let this Considerer consider again, and tell
me out of Scripture or Reason, why not. Mathematicians, it is true, pretend to
be the Monopolists of demonstration; but speak ingenuously, have they, as to
the Politics, hitherto given any other demonstration, then that there is
difference between seeing, and making of Spectacles? Much more is that
comparison of the Politics, going upon certain and demonstrable Principles,
unto Astrologers and Fortune Tellers, who have none at all vain and Injurious:
For as in relation to what David has said, and Experience confirmed, of the
Age of Man, that it is Threescore years and Ten; I may say, that if a Man lie
bedridden, or die before Threescore years and Ten, of any Natural infirmity, or
disease, it was not through any imperfection of Mankind, but of his particular
Constitution. So in relation unto the Principles and definition of an Equal
Commonwealth yet unshaken, nay untouched by this Praevaricator, I may safely
affirm, that a Commonwealth is a Government, which if it have been seditious,
it has not been from any imperfection in the kind, but in the particular
Constitution, which where the like has happened must have been unequal. My
retrait unto these Principles is called running into a bogg; as if such as have
no Principles were not boggs, Informis limus, Stygiaeque Paludes.

CHAP. IX. Whether Monarchy coming up to the perfection of the kind, come not
short of the perfection of Government, and have some flaw in it? In which is
also treated of the balance of France, of the Original of a landed Clergy; of
Arms and their kinds.
OF Monarchy I have said, that whereas it is of two kinds, the One by Arms, the
Other by a Nobility; for that by Arms, as (to take the most perfect model) in
Turkey, it is not in Art, or Nature to cure it of this dangerous flaw, that the
Janissaries have frequent interest, and perpetual power to raise Sedition, or
tear the Magistrate in Pieces. For that by a Nobility, as (to take the most
perfect Model) of late in Oceana, it was not in Art or Nature to cure it of
that dangerous flaw that the Nobility had frequent interest and perpetual power
by their Retainers and Tenants to Raise sedition and Levy war; whence I
conclude that Monarchy reaching the perfection of the kind, reaches not the
perfection of Government, but must still have some dangerous flaw in it.

This place (though I did not intend by it to make work for a Tinker) could not
be of less concernment then it proves to the Prevaricator, who as if he were
obliged to Mend all; falls first to patching with a Monarchy by Arms, then with
Monarchy by a Nobility; at length dispairing, throws away each, and betakes
himself with egregious confidence, to make out of both a New Monarchy, which is
neither. By observation of these three Flourishes, the present Chapter may be
brought into some Method: The first blow of his Hammer, or that whereby he
intends the flaw or hole in Monarchy by Arms, shall henceforth be mended and
Tite, is this. That the Guards of the Kings person be Consid. p. 16.
not increased beyond Necessity of security, that they be not suffered to
stagnate at Court, but be by a perpetual circulation drawn out upon service,
and chiefly that they consist not of one entire body, united under the same
head, but be divided into distinct parties and Commands; as we may see in
France, where though (in proportion to the: extent of their Dominions) the
Kings guards be more Numerous then those of the Roman or Turkish Emperors, yet
being divided into distinct bodies of French, Scots and Switz under their
several Colonels and Captains, they have never been the Authors of any the
least sedition: And in Turkey of late years they begin to learn the Art of
poizing the Janissaries by the Spahy's, and so have frequently evaded the danger
of their mutinies. Which fine work at the first view goes upon this false
ground, that the Foundation of Monarchy by Arms is laid upon the Princes Guards
or the Court Militia, whereas Monarchy by Arms consists in no other balance,
then the Princes being sole Landlord, which where imperfect as it was in that
of the Roman Emperors, the Empire is the most troubled, and where perfect as in
Turkey, the Empire is less seditions: For that which he says of France, it
relates to Monarchy by a Nobility; and therefore is not to be confounded
(according to his method) with this, but referred unto the next branch.

As to Monarchy by Arms, though it be true that the balance of Dominion in any
of the three kinds may be said to be Natural, in regard of the Effect; yet
seeing God has given the Earth unto the Sons of Men, that of a sole Landlord,
as Turkey, is not so Natural in the cause or foundation, as the Timars, and
therefore requires the Application of some kind of force, as the Janissaries,
who are not the root of the Government, that being planted in the Earth of the
Timars or military Farms and Colonies (for that the Janissaries are not the
Foundation of this Empire, which was founded long before, is plain in that this
Order was not introduced, till by Amurath the second) but the Dragon that lies
at that root, and without which the fruit would fall into the Mouths of the
Timariots by way of propriety (as when the Knights fees granted first for life,
became afterward hereditary in Oceana) which would cause such a fall from
Monarchy that it would become (as we have seen) the rise of Popular power (the
Lots in case this should happen, of the Timariots, little differing from those
divided by Joshua unto the Children of Israel) wherefore when this happens in
the Turkish Monarchy, it is at an end: And that this does not happen, though
there be diverse other concurrent Policies, I would have any Man show me, how
it could be but for the Janissaries: Otherwise it is plain that the Janissaries
being a flying Army, on wing at all games, and upon all occasions, are not so
much the guard of the Prince, as of the Empire; which ruined, the Prey falls
unto the Timariots, as those that are in possession, except these be ruined
too, who being all Horse, and far greater in Number then the Janissaries, that
are Foot, would in case the awe of the Prince, and the policy of the Government
which holds them divided, were broken, be invincible by the Janissaries, who
nevertheless by these aids can easily contain them. Whence the sedition of the
Janissaries, like that of a Nobility, may be dangerous to the Prince, but never
threatens the Throne; whereas the sedition of the Timariots like that of a
people would be more against the Throne then the Prince. These things
considered, and in them the Nature, Constitution, or Disease of Monarchy by
Arms, we may consult the more rationally with the Considerer upon the
Applications or remedies by him offered, which are three.

First, that the Guards of the Kings person be not increased beyond the
necessity of security. But of what security, that of his Person, or of his
Empire, or of both? for speaking of a Monarchy by Arms, in this later sense
only it is true; and if so, then this singular Maxim of State (Frustra fit per
plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora) might have been spared (Celais'en va
sans le dire come les heures de nostre cure.)

Secondly, that they be not suffered to stagnate at Court, but be by a
perpetual circulation, drawn out upon service; for if there be not perpetual
service (it should seem) Men might be apt to think that Government was
instituted for peace as well as War. I add no more then is implied in his
words, which as to this of Turkey have chanced well; where not the Stagnation
of the Janissaries only but of the Court it self (which by the institution
should always be in exercise of Arms) is the cause of that present decay, so
perceivable in this Empire. But the Prince sitting still or stagnating, to what
the Circulation of the Janissaries (whose alienation from the Government, or
intelligence with the Timariots, must needs be of dangerous consequence) could
tend, should have been thought on; otherwise to expose the Empire to danger,
for the safety of the Prince, is no cure of the Government.

But his chief remedy remains, this Court Militia must not consist of one
entire body united under the same head, but be divided under several Colonels,
Captains, Parties, Brigades, and distributed unto several Quarters. As if this
were a Cure, there were any Army that could be mutinous; but where he says not
united under the same head, he intimates perhaps diverse Generals, and diverse
Armies; Now such are the Turkish Beglerbegs and the Provinces under their
Governments. That these therefore be kept divided, so that not any two of them
can lay their heads together, without having them cut off; nor any Son succeed
the Father in Government, requires that there be always a sufficient force
(distinct from the interest of the Timariots and Beglerbegs) united, and still
ready upon occasion of this service, and the Janissaries with the Spahi's or
Court horse, being united, are no more then sufficient for this service:
wherefore if these also were so divided as thereby to be weakened, they could
not be sufficient for this service; and their division except such as might
weaken them would be of no security to the Prince. That the Provinces, under
this awe, are less apt to Rebel, then the Court guards to Mutiny, is no
wonder; but the Courtguards being cured by the prescription of this Physician,
of possibility of Mutiny (which without weakening them is impossible) the
Provinces (if Liberty, or Riches, or Power, be desirable) would never endure
the yoke of this Government. Wherefore it being inavoidable in the Turkish
Empire, that either the Janissaries, or the Timariots may do what they list (in
regard that whether of them be able to give law unto the other, must at the
same time be able to give law unto the Prince, and to bring them unto an equal
balance, were to make a Civil war, or at least to sow the seed of it) the
Native wound of Monarchy by Arms remains uncured and uncurable. What more may
be done for Monarchy, founded upon a Nobility, comes next to be tried. In this
the Considerer gives his word, that there never rises any danger unto the
Crown, but when either a great part of the Sovereign power is put into the
hands of the Nobility, as in Germany and Poland, (where it should Consid. p. 47.
seem by him, that the Electors, and the Gentry, do not put power into the
hands of the Emperor, or King, but the Emperor, or King, puts power into the
hands of the Electors, or Gentry) or when some Person or Family is suffered to
overtop the rest in Riches, Commands, and Dependence, as the Princes of the
blood, and Lorrain, not long since, in France; and of old the Montforts and
Nevi^s in England. The first of these he declares to be a vicious government,
and a Monarchy only in Name; the second he undertakes shall easily admit of
this remedy. That the great ones be reduced (decimo sexto) to a lesser volume,
and levelled into an Equality with the rest of their Order.

His put-pin is pretty, the Emperor puts power into the hand of the Electors;
and the King of Poland puts power into the hands of the Gentlemen; which
Governments therefore (and all such like, as when the King of England put power
into the hands of the Barons, at such time as he was no longer able to keep it
out of their fingers, by which means the Ancient and late Government of King,
Lords, and Commons was restored) are vicious Constitutions, and Monarchies only
in Name; such as he will not meddle with, and therefore let them go. Well; but
where is the Patient then? if these be not Monarchies by Nobility, what do we
mean by that thing? or what Government is it that we are to Cure? why such an
One, where some Person or Family is suffered to overtop the rest in Riches,
Commands, and Dependence, as the Princes of the blood, and Lorrain, not long
since, in France; and of old the Montfords and the Nevils in England. So then
the same again (for these are no other) upon recollection, are those that admit
of this Easy cure. Let the great Ones be reduced to a lesser volume, and
levelled with the rest of their Order. But how? if they be the weaker party,
they are not the great ones, and if they be the stronger party, how will he
reduce them? Put the case a Man have the Gout, his Physician does not bid him
reduce his overtopping toes unto the volume of the other foot, nor to level
them unto Equality with the rest of their Order, but prescribes his remedies,
and institutes the Method that should do this feat. What is the Method of our
Aesculapius? (Point de Novelle,) or where are we to find it? even where you
please. The Princes of the blood, and of Lorrain in France; the Montforts, and
the Nevils in England, overtopped not their Order, by their own riches or
power, but by that of the party, which for their fidelity, courage, or conduct,
entrusted them with the managing of their Arms, or affairs. So the Prince that
would have levelled them, must have levelled their party; which in case the
controversy be upon the right, or pretended right of the Nobility in the
Government (which commonly makes them hang together) may come to the whole
Order: what then? Why then, Consid. p. 49.
says he, the Prince must preserve his Nobility weighty enough to keep the
People under, and yet not tall enough in any particular person to measure with
himself: which abating, the figure is the same again; and so I have nothing to
answer but the figure. Now for this, the Prince himself is no otherwise tall,
then by being set upon the shoulders of the Nobility; and so if they set
another upon the same shoulders, (as in Henry the 4th. or the 7th. who had no
Titles unto the Crown, nor could otherwise have measured with the Prince) be he
never so low, he comes to be tall enough in his particular person to measure
with the Prince, and to be taller too, not only by those Old Examples, but
others that are younger than our selves, though such (the Nobility having not
of late, been weighty enough to keep the People under) as derive from another
Principle, that of Popular balance. A Prince therefore preserving his Nobility
weighty enough to keep under the people, must preserve in them the balance of
that kind of Empire; and the balance containing the riches, which are the
power, and so the Arms of the Nation; this being in the Nobility, the Nobility,
when willing, must be able to dispose of the King, or of the Government. Nor
under a less weight is a Nobility qualified to keep down the people, as by an
Argument from the contrary; Henry the 7th. having found the strength of his
Nobility, that set him in a Throne to which he had no right, and fearing that
the tide of their favor turning, they might do as much for another, abated the
dependence of their Tenants, and cut off their Train of Retainers, which
deminution of their weight, releasing by degrees the People, has caused that
Plain, or Level, into which we live to see the Mountain of that Monarchy now
sunck and swallowed; wherefore the balance of the Nobility being such as
failing that kind of Monarchy comes to ruin, and not failing, the Nobility, if
they join may give Law unto the King, the inherent disease of Monarchy by a
Nobility, remains also uncured, and uncurable.

These are points to which I had spoken before; but The balance of France.
something concerning France, and Foreign Guards, was mumbled by the
Praevaricator in a wrong place, while he was speaking of Turkey, where there is
no such thing. This least I be thought to have courted Opposition for nothing,
shall open a New Scene; while I take the occasion in this place to speak first
of the Balance of the French Monarchy, and next of the Nature and use of
Foreign Guards.

The whole Territory of France, except the Crown Lands, which on this account
are not considerable, consists of three shares, or parts, whereof the Church
holds one, the Nobility another, and the Presidents, Advocates, other
Officers of the Parliaments, Courts of Justice, the Citizens, Merchants,
Tradesmen, the Treasurers, receivers of the Customs, aids, taxes, impositions,
Gabells, all which together make a vast body, hold a Third; by how equal
portions I am sorry that I do not know, nor where to learn, but this is the
balance of the French Monarchy, unto which the Paisant holding nothing, but
living (though in one of the best Countries of the world) in the meanest and
most miserable Condition of a Labourer, or Hiend, is of no account at all.

The parties that hold the balance in a Territory are those of whom the
Government does naturally consist, wherefore these are called Estates; so the
Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons, are the three Estates of France. Though
the Third because the Paisant partaking not of the balance can (in relation to
Government) be of no account, is not called the Commons, but only the Third
Estate: whereas the Yeomanry and Gentry in England, having weighed as well in
the balance, as the Church, and the Nobility, the three Estates of England,
while the Monarchy was in vigor, were the Clergy, the Nobility, and the
Commons. The Consent of Nations evinceth that the Function of the Clergy, or
Priest, except where otherwise Grotius de Imp. Sum. Pot. circa sacra. C. 2. S.
4.
determined of by Law, appertains unto the Magistrate. By this right Noah,
Abraham, Job, with the rest of the Patriarchs, instructed their Families or
sacrisiced, There seems to have been a kind of Commonwealth in Canaan, while
Melchisedec was both King and Priest; Such also was Moses till he consecrated
Aaron, and conferred the Priesthood upon the Levites, who are expressly said to
succeed unto the first born, that is unto the Patriarchs, who till then
exercised that Function. Nor was it otherwise with the Gentiles, where they who
had the Sovereign power or were in eminent Magistracy, did also the Priestly
Office (omnino apud veteres qui rerum potiebantur, iidem Auguria tenebant: ut
enim sapere, sic divinare, regale ducebant, says Cicero and Virgil Rex Anius,
Rex idem hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos) You find the Heroes, that is, Princes in
Poets sacrificing; The Ethiopian, Egyptian, Lacedemonian Kings did the like; in
Athens constantly and in Rome, when they had no Kings, occasionally they
elected a Rex sacrorum, or King-Priest. Original of a Sauded Cleryg.
So that a free People had thus far power of electing their Priests, is not
denied by any Man. This came it should seem, to be otherwise Established by the
Law in Egypt, where the Priests ( whose Lands Joseph when he bought those of
the People did not buy) being great Landlords Genesis 47. 22.
(it may be unto the Third of the whole Territory) were one of the three
Estates of the Realm. And it is clear in Scripture that the People, till they
Sold their Lands, became not Servants unto Pharaoh. While Agesilaus was in
Xenop. in Oatr. de Agel.
Egypt they deposed their King, which implies the recovery of their balance;
but so seeing they set up another, as withal shows the balance of the
Nobility to have been predominant. These particulars seem to come near unto the
account of Diodorus Siculus, by whom the balance of Egypt should have stood
thus. The whole Revenue was divided into three parts, whereof the Priests had
the first, the King L. 1.
had the second, and the Nobility had the Third. It seems to me that the
Priests had theirs by their Ancient right and title, untouched by Joseph, that
the Kings had all the rest by the Purchase of Joseph, and that in time (as is
usual in like cases) a Nobility came through the bounty of succeeding Kings to
share with them in one half. But however it came about, Egypt by this means is
the first Example of a Monarchy upon a Nobility, at least distributed into
three Estates, by means of a Landed Clergy, which by consequence came to be the
greatest Counselors of State, and fitting Religion unto their uses, to bring
the people to be the most superstitious in the whole World.

Where it not for this Example, I should have said, that the Indowment of a
Clergy or Religious Order with Lands* and the erecting of them into an Estate
of the Realm or Government, were no Antienter then the Goths and Vandals, who
introducing a like Policy, which unto this day takes place throughout the
Christian world, have been the cause;

First, why the Clergy have been generally great Counselors unto Kings, while
the People are led into superstition.

Secondly, by planting a Religious Order in the Earth, why Religion has been
brought to serve worldly ends;

And thirdly, by rendering the Mitre able to make War; why of later Ages we have
had such a thing as War for Religion, which till the Clergy came to be a Third
State or Landlords, was never known in the World: For that some Cities of
Greece, taking Arms upon the usurpation or violation of some Temple, have
called it the Holy war; Thucyd. l. 1,
such disputes having been but upon matter of fact, and not of faith* (in which
every Man was free) came not to this Account. Moses was learned in all the
learning of the Egyptians, but a landed Clergy introduced he not in Israel: nor
went the Apostles about to lay any such foundation of a Church. Abating this
one Example of Egypt, till the Goths and Vandals who brought in the Third
Estate, a Government, if it were unequal, consisted but of two Estates, as that
of Rome, whether under the Kings or the Commonwealth consisted of the
Patritians and Plebeians, or of the Nobility and the people. And an equal
Commonwealth consists but of One, which is the people; for Example of this,
you have Lacedemon and Venice, where the people being few, and having many
Subjects or Servants, might also be called Nobility, as in regard of their
Subjects, they are in Venice, and in regard of their Helots or Servants, they
might have been in Lacedemon. That I say which introducing two Estates, causes
division, or makes a Commonwealth unequal, is not that she has a Nobility
(without which she is deprived of her most especial Ornament, and weakened in
her conduct) but when only the Nobility is capable of Magistracy or of the
Senate, and where this is so ordered, she is unequal as Rome: But where the
Nobility is no otherwise capable of Magistracy nor of the Senate, then by
Election of the People, the Commonwealth consists but of one Order, and is
Equal as Lacedemon or Venice.

But for a Politician commend me to the Considerer, He will have Rome to have
been an equal Commonwealth, and Venice to be an unequal one, which must be
evinced by Wyre-drawing. For having elsewhere as has been shown, admitted
without-opposition that the balance of Empire is Consid. p. 16. 69. 70.
well divided into national and provincial, the humor now takes him to spin
that wedge into such a thread as by intangling of these two, may make them both
easy to be broken. Hereunto he betaketh himself in this manner. As Mr.
Harrington has well observed (p. 5.) where there are two parties in a
Republique with equal power, (as in that of Rome the people had one half and
the Nobility had the other half) confusion and misery are there intayled. For
remedy whereof, or to avoid this, there can be no way but to make the
Commonwealth very unequal.

In answer to this, there will need no more then to repeat the same things
honestly. Mr. Harrington speaks of the National balance of Empire ( p. 5.)
unto this sense, where the Nobility holds half the propriety or about that
proportion, and the people the other half, (the shares of the Land may be
equal; but in regard that the Nobility have much among Few, and the People
little among Many; the Few will not be contented to have authority, which is
all their proper share in a Commonwealth; but will be bringing the People under
power, which is not their proper share in a Commonwealth; wherefore this
Commonwealth must needs be unequal; and except by altering the balance, as the
Athenians did by the Sisacthia, or recision of debts; or as the Romans went
about to do by an Agrarian, it be brought to such equality that the whole power
be in the People, and there remain no more then Authority unto the Nobility)
where is no remedy but the one (with perpetual fewd) will eat out the other, as
the People did the Nobility in Athens, and the Nobility the People in Rome.
Where the Carcass is, there will be the Eagles also; where the Riches are,
there will be the Power: So if a few be as rich as all the rest, a few will
have as much power as all the rest; in which case the Commonwealth is unequal,
and there can be no end of staving and tayling, till it be brought unto
equality. This for the National balance; for the provincial, there power does
not follow propriety, but to the contrary. This the Praevaricator having
acknowledged, lets slip, to the end that he may take a grip of Venice; which
because the three or four thousand of which originally consisted, and now
consists that whole government, having acquired Provinces, and increase of
their City by later comers, do not admit these unto participation of power, he
says is an unequal Commonwealth. He will be a Mill-Horse, whether the Cake be
dough or not; for this is to draw in a circle; and Rome, which by his former
arguments should have been equal, by this again must be unequal, seeing Rome as
little admitted her Provinces into the body of the Commonwealth as does Venice.
This clash is but by way of Parenthesis, to return therefore unto the business
in present Agitation.

The estates, be they one, or two, or three, are such (as was said) by virtue
of the balance, upon which the Government must naturally depend. Wherefore
constitutively the Government of France (and all other Monarchies of like
balance) was administered by an Assembly of the three Estates, and thus
continued, until that Nation being vanquished by the English, Charles the 7th.
was put to such shifts, as for the recovery of himself in the greatest
distress, he could make, unto which recovery while the Estates could not be
legally called, he happening to attain without them, so ordered his affairs,
that his Successors by adding unto his Inventions, came to rule without this
Assembly; a way not suiting with the nature of their balance, which therefore
required some Assistance by force, and other concurring Policies of like
nature, whereof the foreign Guards of that Monarchy are one; The great baits
alluring the Nobility another; and the Emergent interest of the Church a Third.

To begin with the last of those, the Church, except it be in a War for
Religion, as when they joined with the Princes of Lorrain; and what party of
the French Nobility were made, or they could make, against the King of Navarre,
are not of themselves so hot at hand, or prompt unto Arms, but the King being
(to use their word) no Heretic, through their great apprehension of the third
Estate, as that which is most addicted unto the Protestant Religion, may be
confident, they will never side with the People: So by this Emergent interest,
or accident, he has the Church sure enough.

For the Nobility, which is exceeding gallant, this Change has the greatest
baits; for whereas the Church being not spared, the Third Estate is laden, and
the Paisant overladen with taxes, the Nobility is not only at better ease in
this regard, but for the greater, or more considerable part, receives
advantage by it; the King having always, whether in peace, or war, a great
Cavalry, then which there is no better in the world for the Exercise,
Entertainment, and profit of the Nobility; Governments of Cities, Castles,
Provinces in abundance, which he rarely distributes unto any other. The greater
Nobility are Mareschals, Generals; the less Officers in the Armies, especially
of the Horse, the Emoluments whereof they receive also in time of peace; and
many of this Order being Pensioners, taste of the Kings liberality, without
taking pains, or having any Employment at all. By which both that France is a
Monarchy by a Nobility, and how she holds her Nobility is apparent.

Now the Church and the Nobility standing thus engaged unto the King, by which
means he has two parts of the balance to one, it is demonstrable that the
Government must be quiet. Nor seeing the Church for the reason shown is sure
enough, comes the Government (since the Protestant Cities and Holds were
demolished) to be otherwise disquieted then by the flying out of the Nobility,
which whenever it happens in any party considerable, either for the Number, or
the Interest, causes the Crown to shake; for it seldom comes to pass upon
this occasion, but the Third Estate, or some part of it takes Arms
immediately. In which place it is worthy to be observed, that Wealth, according
unto the distribution of the balance, has contrary motions. The Third Estate
in France having riches, and those laden with Taxes, come to have something to
lose, and something to save, which keeps them in continual fear or hope. The
Nobility holding unto the King, the Third Estate has something to lose, which
withholdeth them from Arms, through fear; but the Nobility flying out, the
Third Estate has something to save, which precipitateth them into Arms through
hope; whereas the Paisant having nothing to save, or to lose, to hope, or to
fear, never stirs. The Case standing thus, the sufficiency of the French
Politician (since the Masterpiece of Cardinal Richelieu, in demolishing those
walls of the Protestants, which had otherwise by this time been a refuge for
the Third Estate, and perhaps overturned the Monarchy) lies altogether in
finding for the Nobility work abroad, or ballancing them in such sort at home,
that if a party fly out, there may be a stronger within to reduce it, or at
least to be opposed unto it. In this case, lest the Native interest of the
Nobility, since the Assemblies of the three Estates were abolished, might cool
the remaining party, or make them slower in the redress of such disorders, or
discontents, then were requisite, the King is wisely provided of Foreign
Guards; which being always in readiness, and not obnoxious unto the Native
interest, may upon like occasions be of more Expedition and trust. Being come
thus unto Foreign Arms, which is the point I more especially proposed unto my
self in the present discourse, One objection in relation to what has been
already said seems to interpose it self. Seeing France, while it is not
governed by the Assembly of States, is yet of the same balance it was, when
governed by the Assembly of States; it may be said that a government of the
same balance may admit of diverse Administrations.

To which I need make no other answer, then to put you in mind that while this
Government was Natural, or administered by the Assembly of States, it is
celebrated by Machiavel, to have been the best ordered of any Monarchy in the
world; and that what it is, or has been of later times, you may believe your
own eyes or ears.

There be yet, before I can come unto Foreign Guards, Of Arms, and their kind.
some praevious considerations; All government as is implied by what has been
already shown, is of these three kinds. A government of Servants. A government
of Subjects; Or a government of Citizens. The first is absolute Monarchy, as
that of Turkey: The second Aristocratical Monarchy, as that of France: The
third a Commonwealth, as those of Israel, of Rome, of Holland. Now (to follow
Machiavel in part) of these, The Government of Servants is the harder to be
conquered, and the Easier to be held. The Government of Subjects is the easier
to be conquered, and the harder to be held. To which I shall presume to add,
That the Government of Citizens is both the hardest to be conquered, and the
hardest to be held.

My Authors reasons why a Government of Servants is the hardest to be conquered,
come to this, that they are under perpetual discipline and command, void of
such interests and factions, as have hands or power to lay hold upon advantages
or innovation, whence he that invades the Turk must trust unto his own
strength, and not rely upon disorders in the Government, or forces which he
shall be sure enough to find united.

His reason why this Government, being once broken, is easily held, are, That
the Armies once past hope of rallying, there being no such thing as Families
hanging together, or Nobility to stir up their Dependants, unto farther
reluctance for the present, or to preserve themselves by complacence with the
Conquerors, for future discontents or advantages, he that has won the Garland,
has no more to do but to extinguish the Royal line, and were it ever after in
security. For the People having been always slaves, are such whose Condition he
may better, in which case they are gainers by their Conqueror, but can never
make worse, and therefore they loose nothing by him. Hence Alexander having
conquered the Persian Empire, he and his Captains after him could hold it
without the least dispute, except it arose among themselves. Hence Mahomet the
second having taken Constantinople, and put Paleologus the Greek Emperor (whose
Government was of like Nature with the Persian) together with his whole Family
unto the Sword, the Turk has held that Empire without reluctance.

On the other side, reasons why a Government of Subjects is easilier conquered,
are these. That it is supported by a Nobility so Ancient, so powerful, and of
such hold and influence upon the People, that the King without danger, if not
ruin to himself or the Throne (an Example whereof was given in Hen. 7th of
England) can neither invade their Privileges, nor level their Estates, which
remaining, they have power upon every discontent to call in an Enemy, as Robert
Count of Artois did the English, and the Duke of Guise the Spaniard into France.

The Reasons why a Government of Subjects being so easily conquered, is
nevertheless the harder to be held, are these. That the Nobility being soon
out of countenance in such a case, and repenting themselves of such a bargain,
have the same means in their hands whereby they brought in the Enemy, to drive
him out, as those of France did both the English and the Spaniard.

For the Government of Citizens, as it is of two kinds, an Equal or an unequal
Commonwealth, the Reasons why it is the hardest to be conquered, are also of
two kinds; As first the Reasons why a Government of Citizens where the
Commonwealth is equal, is hardest to be conquered, are, that the Invader of
such a Society must not only trust unto his own strength, in as much as the
Commonwealth being equal, he must needs find them united, but in regard that
such Citizens, being all Soldiers or trained up unto their Arms, which they
use not for the defense of Slavery but of Liberty (a Condition not in this
world to be bettered) they have more especially upon this occasion the highest
Soul of Courage, and (if their Territory be of any Extent,) the vastest Body of
a well disciplined Militia, that is possible in Nature; wherefore an Example of
such an One overcome by the Arms of a Monarch, is not to be found in the World:
And if some small City of this Frame have happened to be vanquished by a potent
Commonwealth, this is her Prerogative, her Towers are her Funeral Pile, and she
expireth in her own Flame, leaving nothing unto Conquest but her Ashes, as
Sag^ntum overwhelmed by Carthage, and Numantia by Rome.

The Reasons why a Government of Citizens, where the Commonwealth is unequal,
is next the former, the hardest to be conquered are the same, with this
difference, that albeit her Peace be not perfect within, her Condition is not
to be bettered by any thing that is without; Wherefore Rome in all her strife
never called in an Enemy; and if an Enemy upon occasion of her strife, and
hopes of advantage by it, came without calling, he presented her with her most
Sovereign Cure, who had no leisure to destroy her self, till having no Enemy to
find her work, she became her own.

-- Nondum tibi defuit hostis
In te verte manus --
Nor is there any Example that a Government of this kind was ever subdued by
the Arms of a Monarch; though some indeed may be found that have called or
suffered Foreign Princes or Force to come in, as Holland by Marriages of their
Princes, and Genoa through her Factions, as those of the Fiesci and Adorni.

To conclude this part for the Reasons why a Government Cuic. l. 11.
of Citizens so acquired or possessed as through Marriage, or faction is the
hardest to be held, there needs no more then that Men accustomed unto their
Arms and their Libertys will never endure the yoke; Wherefore the Spaniard,
though a mighty King, no sooner began in Holland, a small Commonwealth, to
innovate or break her Orders, then she threw him off with such Courage and
Disdain, as is Admirable unto the World. And somewhat of the like kind did
Genoa by the help of her Doria in the vindication of her liberty from France.

To come by this farthest way about as I think the nearest way home. Arms are
of two sorts, Proper or Improper; Proper and improper Arms.
that is, Native or Foreign.

Proper and Native Arms, are according unto the triple nature of Government, of
three kinds; Servants in Arms, as the Helots in Lacedemon, the Timariots and
Janissaries in Turkey: Subjects in Arms, as the Horse in France, and the
Sea-guards or Forces in Venice: or Citizens in Arms, as those upon the
Lexiarcha in Athens, of the Morae in Lacedemon, and the Legions in Rome.

Improper or Foreign Arms are of two Sorts. Auxiliaries or Mercenaries.
Auxiliaries are such as are supplied by virtue of some League, as were those of
the Latins and Italians unto the Romans; and those of the Cantons of Suisse
(except Zurick) unto the King of France; or they may be such as are
occasionally lent freely, or let forth for money by one State unto another, the
later whereof differ not much from Mercenaries.

Mercenaries are Soldiers of Fortune that have no other Trade then their Arms,
and let out themselves for money; of such consisted the greatest part of the
Carthaginian strength, such is the land Force of Venice, and notwithstanding
the Ancient League of France with those Nations, such at this day are the
Suisse and Scottish Guards (and sometimes a good part of the Foot) in France.

Machiavil discourses upon these particulars in his Art of War, unto
Admiration: by whom I shall therefore steer.

Where the Arms in bulk are proper, and consisting of Citizens, they have other
Trades; and therefore are no Soldiers of Fortune; and yet because the
Commonwealth has Arms for her* Trade (in regard she is a Magistrate given for
the good of Mankind, and bears not her Sword in vain) they are all educated
as well in Military as Civil discipline, taking their turns in service of
either Nature according unto the Occasion, and the Orders of the Commonwealth,
as in Israel, Athens, Lacedemon and Rome, which had if their Territories
permitted, and sometimes (as I may say) whether their Territories permitted or
no, as in Israel, the vastest the highest tempered and the best disciplined
Militia, that is to be found in the whole compass of Story. Some Armies of
Israel have consisted of three or four hundred thousand Men: Rome upon the
rumor of a Gallick tumult, armed in Italy only, without Foreign aid, Pliny L.
Aemilio Papo. C. A. tilio Regulo Cos.
seventy thousand Horse and seven hundred thousand Foot; things in our days
(when the Turk can hardly Arm half so many) not to be credited.

Hence that a Commonwealth, which had not first broken her self, or been broken
by some other Commonwealth, should not be found to have been conquered by the
Arms of any Monarch, is not miraculous but a natural effect of an apparent
Cause. In this place, or upon this text, Divines whom I would desire not to be
Enemies of Popular power, but to give Machiavil his due, shall, if they please,
hear him make a goodly Sermon, in these words. If Ancient Commonwealths and
Governments used diligence Art della guerra Proem.
in any other Order to make their people Lovers of peace, faithfully unto their
Country, and having the fear of God before their eyes, they doubled it in this
of their Militia: for of whom should your Country expect greater faith, then
of such as have offered themselves to die for her? whom should she endeavor to
make greater Lovers of peace, then them who only can enslave her by force? In
whom should there be greater Fear of God, then in such as carry their lives in
their hands? This when Lawgivers and Captains rightly considered, was the Cause
why Soldiers were esteemed honored, followed and imitated above all men in
the world, whereas since such Orders are broken, and Custom is altogether
deviated from the course of Ancient prudence; men are come to detest the
iniquity of the Camp, and fly the conversation of such as are in Arms, as the
Pestilence. Where the Arms in bulk are proper, but consist of Subjects, they
are the best next; and but the best next as appears by all Examples, Ancient,
or Modern. The Arms with which Pyrrhus Prince of Epyrus invaded the Romans were
of Subjects, yet that Prince though he were not vanquished by the Romans,
confessed their advantage, and gave them over. The Spaniard, being a far more
potent King then was Pyrrhus, has acknowledged as much unto the Hollanders,
though a far less Commonwealth then Rome: So have the Princes of Austria, and
of Burgundy, unto the Switz. That the Arms of Subjects are nevertheless as much
superior to the Arms of Servants, as inferior to the Arms of Citizens, is as
plain; Seeing as Alexander, with Thirty thousand Subjects, vanquished Darius
having innumerable slaves; so Thirty thousand Christians are at this day a
Match for any Army of Turks; and we see Venice, whose force by Sea consists of
Subjects, to have made him quit that Element near as fully unto her Dominion or
Empire, as did the Persian to Athens.

To Arms, that are proper, but consist of Servants, all the pre-eminence that
can be given, is that they are better then foreign Arms; a proof whereof we
have in those of Selimus, whereby he conquered the Mamalucks; who being but a
foreign Force that held Egypt in subjection, the Country was irrecoverably
lost, and (for the reasons already shown) as easily kept.

Improper Arms, whether Auxiliary or Mercenary, where the Force of a Prince or
of a Commonwealth consists, for the bulk or greater part, of no other, are
the least effectual, and the most dangerous of all. For Auxiliaries, or what
effect has been found of them by Princes or Commonwealths, it was seen in
France, during the League by the Spaniard; and in Holland during the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, by the English; but especially in the Goths and Vandals, who
having been Auxiliaries or Mercenaries relied upon by the later Emperors, came
thereby to ruin the Roman Empire.

Mercenaries, who make their Arms their Trade, must of all other be the most
pernicious; for what can we expect less of such whose Art is not otherwise so
profitable, then that they should (as Machiavil shows) be breakers of their
faith, given up unto rapine, Enemies of peace and Government?

To instance in some Commonwealths, that of Carthage after her first war with
the Romans, fell through the Rebellion of Spendius, and Matho, Ringleaders of
her Mercenaries, into another that was far more dangerous. Of such a Dilemma
were the Arms of this State, that if Hannibal had conquered Rome, he must have
been King of Carthage; and not conquering Rome, Carthage was ruined. The
Commonwealth of Milan, trusting her self unto F. Sforza, and his mercenaries,
became the Subject of her Servant, and he her Duke. Nor is Venice, whose Land
forces are of the same kind, otherwise in safety, as to these, then by her
situation. To give some instances of the same nature in Princes. The father of
F. Sforza, being Captain of a like Mercenary Army, forced Joan Queen of Naples,
whom he left disarmed in the midst of her enemies, to lay her self at the feet
of the King of Aragon; and Braccio by such another treachery had plainly
possessed himself of the Kingdom of Naples, had he not been broken at Aquila,
where death intercepted his design. From what has been said, first of
Government and then of Arms; if a Government of servants be harder to be
conquered, and easier to be held, then in this Foreign Arms must needs be
least necessary, and most dangerous.

If a Government of Subjects be easier to be conquered, and harder to be held,
then in this Foreign Arms may be more necessary, but must be less dangerous.

But though a Government of Citizens be both hardest to be conquered, and
hardest to be held, yet as it is, again in this regard, of two kinds, this
cannot be said of each kind alike, wherefore I must distinguish.

In a Government of Citizens, if the Commonwealth be not for increase, but
preservation only, as Lacedemon, Carthage, Venice, Foreign Arms are both
necessary and dangerous; but in a Government of Citizens, where the
Commonwealth is both for increase and preservation, as Rome, Foreign Arms are
neither necessary, nor dangerous.

To Repeat the parts of this Conclusion, which being brief, is obscure, more
fully and particularly.

The Empire of Turkey is of the harder kind to be conquered, wherefore the Turk
needs not foreign guards, to defend him, but it is of the easier to be held,
wherefore let him take heed of intrusting his person with Foreign Guards, who
having a foreign interest, may have a foreign Nation to assist them; and so
the person of the Prince being in their hands, they have no more to do then to
Extinguish the Royal Line, and the Empire, being easily held, is their own
thenceforth with security. Thus the Mamalucks which were at first Foreign
Guards, extinguishing the Royal line of the Kings of Egypt, came to possess,
and hold that Realm without opposition. Who well considers this point, will
never enough admire the policy of the Turk, in the creation (as it were) of his
Janissaries, free from any National interest that might make them dream of, or
desire liberty, and yet soevoid of all foreign interest, or knowledge, that
they know not what, or who were their Country or Parents. Hence though they
have interest to murder the Turk, and sometimes do accordingly, they have no
farther interest in the world, but what depends upon the Government; and so the
Empire is safe, though the Prince be in danger; whereas if they were Foreign
Guards, or had any Native interest, not only the Prince, but the Empire too
would be in danger, the rest being servants, and such whose condition might be
bettered by a Change, but could be no worse. Wherefore a Government of Servants
must by no means admit of Foreign Guards, or Mamalucks.

But the Empire of France, where the Nobility are not only subject to fly out,
but to call in strangers, may have use of Foreign Guards, which not obnoxious
to Native interest, and factions, as those of the Nobility, are the readiest
and best help at this lift, yet not dangerous, though having the Prince in
their power, because by him they are safe from the Nobility, who, were it not
for the Prince, would be so far from bearing or brooking Foreign Guards, that
in case a Forraigner came in upon their call, having the same means to help
themselves, whereby they brought him in, they would shake the yoke, and the
Ends why they called him in being satisfied or repented of, drive him out
again, as they did the Spaniard, and the English; but if this Government being
invaded or conquered, be so hard to be kept, how much harder being surprised?
Wherefore in a Government by Subjects Foreign Arms may be more necessary, but
must be less dangerous.

In a Commonwealth for preservation, as Lacedemon, Carthage, Venice, Foreign
Arms are necessary: So Lacemon, though able to defend her self by her proper
forces against any one City; yet the wars in Greece going much upon leagues and
Confederates, was forced also to make use of her Confederates, and sometimes of
her Helots.

But as anciently to Carthage, so now to Venice, Foreign or Mercenary Forces
are essential, because for Land-service such a Constitution can have no other:
Yet is this course extremely dangerous, as appeared by Lacedemon, who (being
ever in fear of her Helots) when she had acquired upon the matter the whole
Empire of Greece, came by the rebellion of her Confederates, not only to lose
all, but to ruin. For Carthage upon the Mutiny of Spendius and Matho, she
escaped as at other times upon like occasions, very narowly. That such an
accident neither has befallen Venice nor can befall her, is to be attributed
unto her situation, by which, in this regard, she is secure: Nevertheless, her
progress, or increase, which by this means either cannot be great, or being
great, must render her but the more infirm, is full bard.

To a Commonwealth for increase, which always takes in the whole body of the
People, Foreign Arms (seeing she abounds above all other kinds of policy,
with such as are proper) must needs be the least necessary; and they are the
most safe, because never admitting them, but for her mere convenience, and
frugality in expense of Native blood, she receives no such charge of them as
can recoyl, but must carry point blank, and as vigorously at her proper
interest, very near as her proper Arms. Thus did the Latin and Italian
Auxiliaries, of which joined with the Roman Legions, consisted a Consular Army.

By thus much it seems that an inference from the success of Arms unto the
perfection of Government, and from the perfection of Government, to the
success of Arms, should be no fallacious way of disputing.

But this has been sweaty work with* the Considerer; (who loves his ease) it
is enough to argue thus. The Switz, Scottish, and French guards, have never
been the Authors of any sedition, therefore the seditiousnesse of a Nobility
may be mended by Foreign Guards; which is, as if one should say, such a
Physician has never been the cause of the Gout; therefore the Gout may be
cured by such a Physician. That Foreign Arms may be well enough applied in the
case of a seditious Nobility, and have some good effects, is not denied, but is
France therefore cured of her sedition, or remains she notwithstanding her
Foreign Guards, the most sedious example in the world? If thus she have not
been, nor be, what has he read of the Princes of the blood in former times, or
heard of late from them? But if thus she have been, and be, is it not a fine
way of cure to give us an example of the disease for the remedy? Nor are her
Guards so void of sedition neither; but the Switz, if he want his pay, dares
threaten Paris; the Scot (at least of late years) has not been so bold; but if
a Prince fly out, the Ensigns of the French Guards will one way or other be
Captains, while Soldier and Officer too follows his affections or interests,
which way soever they frame. I should be glad to know when a Dragon fell from
that Court, that did not bear down stars with his train. But the Prevaricator
is set upon it, whereas of late years, the Janissaries are known to have been
far more imbrued in the blood of their Princes then ever: he gives us his
honest word, that of late years in Turkey, they begin to learn the art of
poising the Janissaries (who are the foot of the Princes Guard) by the Spahyes,
(who are the horse of the same) and so have frequently evaded the danger of
their mutinies. At which rate, seeing every Army consists of Horse and Foot,
no Army could be mutinous. If these had not been mere slights, and so intended,
he might have done well to have shown us One Mutiny of the Janissaries appeased
by the Spahyes. But all the parts of his Politics (as was said of those in
Rhetoric) consist of Pronunciation.

Thus the wounds of Monarchy, notwithstanding the former, or this last remedy
of Foreign Guards, are still bleeding, or festering.

But his courage is undaunted, ( aut viam inveniat aut faciat) he will either
mend a Government, or make one, by asserting without any example, but with
egregious Consid. p. 48. 49.
confidence, That the perfection of Monarchy is free from those flaws, which
are charged upon it, and that it consists in governing by a Nobility, weighty
enough to keep the People under, yet not tall enough in any particular person
to measure with the Prince; and by a Moderate Army kept under the Notion of
Guards, and Garrisons, which may be sufficient to strangle all sedition in the
Cradle, from which mixture, or Counterpoise of a Nobility and an Army, arises
the most excellent form of Monarchical Government.

There Is for your learning now, A Model which is a short horse, and a
Legislator that has soon curried him. To the parts of it, consisting of a
Nobility, and in force, I have already spoken severally. I shall now speak unto
the whole together; that is, unto the imagined mixture or Counterpoise of a
Nobility and an Army; and because there is nothing in Nature, that has not had
a natural effect by some example.

The scale of Arms, or of Iron, continued in the Line of William the Conqueror,
and the scale of Propiety, or gold, continued in the Barons of England, and
their Successors. But in this, before the Barons wars consisted not the
perfection of the Monarchy, because it preponderated too much on the side of
Arms; nor after the Barons wars, because the King, putting power (which he
could not keep out of their fingers) into the hands of the Nobility, it became
a vicious constitution, and a Monarchy only in Name, (so says the Considerer)
therefore the balance being then only even, when neither the King could
overbalance, or get the better of the Barons, nor the Barons overbalance,
or get the better of the King; the perfection of Monarchy consisted in the
Barons wars! Lycurgus the Second!

Mark; the King by all means must have a Nobility weighty enough to keep down
the people; and then he must have an Army to hold gold weight with his
Nobility; as if the Nobility in that case would keep down the People, and not
fetch them up (as did the Barons) into their scale, that so together they might
weigh down the Army; which sooner or later is the infallible consequence of
this fantasy; or let it be shown where it was ever otherwise; to instance in
France is quite contrary, where all the considerable offices, and commands
being in the Nobility, or the richer sort of that Nation, the balance of Arms,
and of propriety are not two, but one and the same. There is no way for
Monarchy, but to have no Army, or no other then the Nobility, which makes the
regulated Monarchy, as in France, Spain, etc. or to have an Army that may weigh
down Nobility and People too; that is, destroy them both, which makes the
absolute way of Monarchy, as in Turkey; the wit of man never found, nor shall
find a third, there being no such thing in Nature.

This Chapter is already with the longest, and yet I must give you a (corollary
pouce de roy, or) Piece above measure; upon a question which the greenest
Politician that ever brought his Verjuce to the Press, has spurred me.

Where he desires to know my opinion of the way of governing by Councils, which
he confesses he has always thought admirable; he does not mean such as are
coordinate with the Prince (which have been seen in the world) but such
Consid. p. 49. 50.
as those of Spain, purely of advice and dispatch, with power only to inform
and persuade, not limit the Princes will. For almost all the weaknesses which
have been thought incident to Monarchy, are by this course prevented, and if
there be any steadiness and maturity in the Senate of a Commonwealth, this
takes it all in.

To give my Counsel without a fee, and deal sincerely with a Prevaricator: Let
the Prince (that is, such an one as his) hold himself contented with his Divan,
or Cabinet. If this be that he means, we are agreed; but if he would have more,
I can make no less of his words, then an hankering after such Councils as I
have proposed, and that these are such as he always thought admirable, such as
prevent almost all the weaknesses incident to Monarchy, and take in the
steadiness and maturity of a Commonwealth.

How may we make this agree with that other place? where he says that there is
no frame of laws, or constitution of government, which will not decay and come
to ruin, unless repaired by the prudence and dexterity of them that govern.
Now that this may not be expected from a Monarch, as well as Consid. p. 68.
from a Senate, or assembly of men, he has not yet met with any conviction,
but rather finds it reasonable to think that where debates are cleerest, the
result of them most secret, and the execution sudden, (which are the
advantages of Monarchy) there the disorders of a State will soonest be
discovered, and the necessary remedies best applied. In that former place he
bethought himself, that the debates of Rome were as clear as those of
Antiochus, that her results were as secret as those of Philip, or Perseus, and
of more sudden execution then either of theirs. He doubted it might be true,
which is affirmed by good Authors, and commonly enough known, that for the
clearness of debate, and secrecy of result, the world never saw any thing like
the Senate of Venice, and that in all appearance they are for execution, as
quick with the Divan, as the Divan can be with them. Now when all this is done,
to banish so generous thoughts without showing us for what cause, and knock
under the table, is sad news. But he shall find me, in any thing that is
reasonable, most ready to serve him. To the question then, how such Councils as
I have proposed would do with a Prince? I answer, truly the best of them, I
doubt, but untowardly. One, that is the Popular Assembly, has no mean, but is
either the wisest in Nature, or has no brains at all. When affairs go upon no
other then the Public interest, this having no other interest to follow, nor
eyes to see withal, is the wisest Council: but such ways are destructive to a
Prince, and they will have no nay: The Congregation of Israel, when Rehoboam
would not hearken to their advice, deposed him: and we know what Popular
Councils, so soon as they came to sufficient power, did in England. If a Prince
put a Popular Council from this ward, He does a great matter, and to little
purpose, for they understand nothing else but themselves. Wherefore the Kings
of France and of Spain, have dissolved all such Assemblies. It is true, where a
Prince is not strong enough to get money out of them, but by their cocsent,
they are necessary, but then they are not purely of advice and dispatch, but
share in the Government, and he cannot be meddling with their Purses, but they
will be meddling with his Laws. The Senate is of fitter use for a Prince, and
yet except he have the way of Tiberius, but a ticklish piece, as appears by
Maximinus, who was destroyed by Pupienus and Balbinus, Captains set up against
him by this Order. To go unto the Root. These things are not otherwise in
prudence or choice then by direction of the balance; where this is Popular no
remedy, the Prince must be advised by the People, which if the late King would
have endured, the Monarchy might have subsisted somewhat longer, but while the
balance was Aristocratical, as during the great Estates of the Nobility and
the Clergy, we find not the People to have been great or wise Counselors. In
sum, if a King govern by a Popular Council, or an house of Commons, the Throne
will not stand long. If he governs by a Senate, or an house of Lords, let him
never fear the Throne, but have a care of himself: there is no third as I have
said often enough but the Divan.

CHAP. X. Whether a Commonwealth that was not first broken by her self, were
ever conquered by the Arms of any Monarch?
I Come in this Chapter to resume the discourse, where I broke off in the
former, making good my assertion that a Commonwealth is the Government, which
from the beginning of the world unto this day was never conquered by any
Monarch; For if the Commonwealths of Greece came under the yoke of the Kings of
Macedon, they were first broken by themselves.

When I speak of a Commonwealth, in relation to this point, I am no more to be
argued against out of the Little Cities in Asia, or those of Ragusa, and San
Marino, which cannot be shown to have had the Command of any considerable Army,
then I argue against the Praevaricator, where he asserts Monarchy to consist of
a mixture of Arms and of a Nobility, from the King of Yuetot who had neither.

This assertion in the judgment of any rational Man ought not to be
encountered, but where there was a Natural possbility of defense, in regard
that a City which has no Army at all, as Geneva (which yet being invaded by
the Duke of Savoy found means to defend her self) or such an one as is not
considerable, should be subdued by some potent Monarch (if we could find the
Example) concerns the Government no more, then if it had been overwhelmed by
some inundation, or swallowed up by some Earthquake. And yet all that is
Opposed by the Considerer, amounts not unto thus much. The testimony he brings
out of Pausanias comes far short; for it is recorded (says the Author speaking
of the Lucedemonians) that being corrupted by the bounty of Craesus, they were
the first that Consid p. 53. Paus. Messen.
contracted Amity with the Barbarians at the time when that King added the
Territories inhabited by the Dorians upon the border of Caria, with other
Commonwealths in Asia unto his Empire. So that Craesus corrupted the
Lacedaemonians with gifts, Pausanias is express, but whether he obtained the
Asiatick Cities (likely in this case to have been easilier corrupted then the
Lacedaemonians) by Arms or by Purchase, he is not express; and the presumption
of the later, as in other regards, so in this is the stronger; that Craesus by
the testimony of Solon, was more potent in Gold then in Iron. Now if it were
so, (and if otherwise let the Considerer show) that these Commonwealths,
inveagled by the Treasure of Craesus, came first under the Lydian, and fell
with that under the Persian Empire, when Craesus was subdued by Cyrus; All I
can learn by this example is no more than that Craesus, for ought that is
perceivable, might have bought those Commonwealths as Cosimo of Medices did
Florence; of whom it is affirmed by Machiavel that there was not a considerable
Man in the whole City that had not received some considerable sum. So this
Example presumes; but in the next (which is of Sicily) there is not so much as
a Presumption in favor of the Assertor, The State of Sicily before that which
the Romans call the first Carthaginian war being clear in Story against his
design. For that Africa for the generation of Monsters is not more famous
Fazello Hist. de Sicil Polyb. l. 1.
then Sicily for that of Tyrants, they who have passed their Novitiat in Story
are not ignorant; nor how when Timoleon had freed her of this Vermin, and with
Liberty she had recovered some strength and virtue, she relapsed under
Agathocles and his horrid violation of faith, while he was trusted with the
Arms of her Citizens: how after him Pyrrhus was called in from Epirus, after
Pyrrhus Hiero usurped; all, by the same Arts, getting first into Trust or
Charge, and then recoyling upon them that would take no warning: by which it is
apparent that the Commonwealths of Sicily, like those of Greece, were ruined by
themselves, and their own disorders; and no more subdued upon these changes by
foreign Arms, then was Israel by the Canaanites, or Rome by the Gauls or
Decemvirs.

Israel (having broken her orders) was indeed sometimes oppressed by the
Canaanites; Rome was sacked by the Gauls, and usurped by the Decemvirs, but as
the Man that having gotten a fall in a Duel throws off his Adversary, recovers
himself, and his sword, is not conquered, so neither the Commonwealth;
wherefore neither Holland nor Genoa, though Decree of the States of Holland
apud Grot. Hist. 4.
they have been under, being yet standing, can be said to be conquered by the
Arms of Spain or of France, but rather to the contrary, seeing the Liberty of
Holland (in many Cities more Ancient then any Records or other Monuments there
can witness, and in it self then that of Tacitus, whereby Civilis born of
Princely blood, is affirmed to have vindicated the Batavian freedom) is still
the same; And Genoa though happy in her Doria, remains as she was before he
was born. Nor did the Family of the Medices banished out of Florence where by
virtue of their prodigious wealth, and the inevitable consequence of the
balance their Ancestors had been Princes many years before Charles the fifth
was a Soldier, any more by the help of his Arms, those of the Pope (at that
time of the same family) and their party at home, then get into their known
saddle. To insist a little more at large upon the Stories of Genoa and Florence
(because upon these the Prevanicator sets up his rest that Mr, Harrington must
needs be afflicted) Genoa was and is an Oligarchy consisting of Twenty eight
Families making the Great Council or Aggregation as they call it, none but
these being capable of the Senate or of Magistracy and if ever it could be said
of a Commonwealth that she had broken her self, it might be said at the time
related to, of Genoa where not only the faction of the Guelphs and Gybelins,
which had destroyed many Cities in Italy then reigned, but the few'd between
the People included, and the Subject excluded, was as great as ever had been
between the Nobility and the People in Rome, besides that of the Fieschi and
the Adorni two families, like Caesar and Pompey, which having many years
together, as it were ingrost the Magistracy of Duke, were nevertheless
perpetually striving each with other, which should have it, and if one of these
(as it did) brought in the King of France, there is nothing plainer then that
this Commonwealth, was subdued by her own sedition, nor is there a man knowing
any thing of her affairs, that makes any doubt of it. That of Florence in
deed if the Praevaricator could show it had been ever up, I should grant were
down, but to relate the Story of this City, I must relate that of the House of
Medices. From Cosimo, a Comines. P. Jovius. Machiavill.
Citizen famous throughout Europe both for his wisdom and his riches, this
family for the space of sixty years, exercised, under the praetext of some
Magistracy, very great power in Florence. To Cosimo succeeded Peter, to Peter
Laurence a Man in Prudence and Liberality resembling his Grandfather, save that
he used more absolute power in menaging the Commonwealth, yet with
gentleness, and not altogether unto the suppression of Liberty. Nevertheless
he obtained of the Siginory (which did for the most part as he would have them)
some small guard for his person, he was a Man renowned through Italy, and
looked upon by foreigne Princes with much respect. To him succeeded his Son
another Peter who through youth and rashness conceiving the power exercised by
his Predecessors to be no more than his due, took upon him the Government as
absolute Lord of All, and standing most formidably upon his Guard grew
sottishly profuse of the Public money, committed many absurdities and
violences; By which means having incurred the hatred of the Citizens, he was
banished by the Signiory, with Cardinal John and Julian his brothers. This John
coming after to be Pope Leo the Tenth, required the revocation of his brothers
banishment, and the restitution of the House of Medices, to which finding the
prevailing party of the Florentines to be refractory, He stirred up the Arms
of the Emperor Charles the fifth against them, by whose Joint Aid the City,
after a long siedge, was reduced unto her Old Ward, and Alexander of Medices,
Nephew unto the Pope and son in Law unto the Emperor, set in the known Saddle
of his Ancestors. This is the Action for which the Praevaricator will have a
Commonwealth to have been conquered by the Arms of a Monarch, though who
reads the story may very safely affirm, First that Florence never attained
unto any such Orders as could deserve the Name of a Commonwealth; and next
that the purse of Cosimo had done that long before, which is here attributed
unto the Arms of the Pope and the Emperor. Reason and Experience (as I said)
are like the roots and the branches of Plants and trees: as of branches fruits
and flowers being open and obvious unto the eye, the smell, the touch, and taste
every gyrle can skill; so examples unto vulgar capacity are the best Arguments.
Let him that says a Commonwealth has been at any time conquered by a
Monarch, to it gain, and show us the Example. But though fruits and flowers be
easily known each from other; their Roots are latent, and not only so, but of
such resemblance that to distinguish of these a man must be a Gardener or an
Herbalist. In this manner, the reason why a Commonwealth, has not been
overcome by a Monarch, has been shown in the distribution of Arms, those of a
Prince consisting of Subjects or servants, and those of a Commonwealth rightly
Ordered, of Citizens, which difference relates plainly unto the perfection or
imperfection of the Government.

But, says the Prevaricator this seems intended for a Trial Consid. p, 51.
of our Noses whether they will serve us to discover the fallacy of an
inference from the prosperous success of Arms to the perfection of
Government. If she who should have some care of the Vineyard of Truth, shall
lie pigging of wide bores, to grunt in this manner and fear with the tush, and
I happen to ring some of them (as I have done this Marcassin for rooring) there
is nothing in my faith, why such trial of their Noses should be sin; but for
fallacions inferrences such I leave unto them whose Capps are squarer then
their play.

For all that, Great and well policyd Empires (says he) have been subverted by
People so eloigned from the perfection of government, that we scarce know of
any thing to tie them together, but the desire of booty. Where, or how came he
to know this? what reason or experience does he allege for the proof of it?
May we not say of this, it is for the trial of our Noses, whether they will
serve us to discover that a Conclusion should have some Premises? He gives us
leave to go look, and all the premises that I can find are quite contrary.

The Arms of Israel were always victorious, till the Judges chapter 1. and 2.
death of Josua, whereupon, the orders of that Commonwealth being neglected,
they came afterward to be seldom prosperous. Isocrates in his Oration to the
Areopagites, speaks thus of Athens, The Lacedaemonians, who when we were under
Oligarchy, every day commanded us something; now while we are under popular
Administration, are our Petitioners that we would not see them utterly ruined
by the Thebans. Nor did Lacedemon ruin till her Agrarian, the foundation of
her Government was first broken. The Arms of Rome (ever noted by Historians,
and clearly evinced Art della guerra*
by Machiavil to have been the result of her policy) during the popular
government were at such a pitch, as if Victory had known no other wings then
those of her Eagles: nor seeing the Goths and Vandalls are the Legislators
from whom we derive the government of King, Lords, and Commons, were these when
they overcame the Roman Empire, a people so eloigned from the perfection of
Government, but their Policy was then far better than that of the Emperors,
which having been at first founded upon a broken Senate, and a few Military
Colonies, was now come unto a Cabinet, and a Mercenary Army. The Judgment of
all ages and writers upon the Policy of the Roman Emperors, is in this place
worthy, and through the pains already taken by Erasmus and Sleiden, easy to be
inserted. O miserable and deplorable State (says Erasmus) the In his Preface*
to Suelonius.
Authority of the Senate, the power of the Law, the Liberty of the People being
trodden under-foot; to a Prince, that got up in this manner, the whole World was
a servant, while he himself was a servant unto such, as no honest man would
have endured the like servants in his house! the Senate dreaded the Senate
dreaded the Emperor, the Emperor dreaded his execrable Militia: the Emperor
gave Laws unto Kings, and received them from his Mercenaries. To this is added
by Sleiden, That the condition De qual. Imp.
of these Princes was so desperate, it was a wonderful thing, Ambition her self
could have the courage to run such a hazard; seeing from Cajus Caesar slain in
the Senate to Charles the Great, there had been above thirty of them murdered,
and four that had laid violent hands upon themselves; For there was always
something in them that offended the Soldiery which whether they were good or
bad was equally subject to pick quarrels, upon the least occasion raised
tumults, and dispatched even such of them as they had forced to accept of that
dignity, for example* Aelius Pertinax. But, if this be true, that of the Goths
and Vandalls, when they subdued this Empire, must have been the better
Government; for so ill as this never was there any, except that only of the
Kings of Israel, which certainly was much worse. Those of the Britains and the
Gauls, were but the dregs of this of Rome, when they were overcome by the
Saxons and Franks, who brought in the Policy of the Goths and Vandalls.

When Tamerlan overcame Bajazet, the Turkish Policy had not attained unto that
extent of Territory, which is plainly necessary unto the nature of it, nor was
the Order of the Janissaries yet instituted. The Hollander, who under a potent
Prince, was but a Fisherman, with the restitution of the popular government, is
become the better Soldier; nor has been matched but by a rising Commonwealth,
whose Policy you will say was yet worse: but then her balance (being that
especially which produces men) was far better. For vastness, for
fruitfulness of territory, for bodies of men, for number, for courage, nature
never made a Country more potent then Germany: yet this Nation anciently the
Seminary of Nations, has of late years, merely through the defect of her
policy (which in tending one Common wealth has made an hundred Monarchies in
her bowels, whose cross interests twist her gutts) been the theater of the
saddest Tragedies under the Sun; nor is she curable unless some Prince alling
to work with the Hammer of War, be able totally to destroy the old, and forge
her a Government entirely new. But, if this come to be, neither shall it be
said, that a well polycy'd Empire was subverted, nor by a people so eloigned
from perfection of government, but theirs must be much better then the other.
Let me be as ridiculous as you will, the World is ( in faece Romuli) ripe for
great changes which must come. And look to it, whether it be Germany, Spain,
France, Italy, or England, that comes first to fix her self upon a firm
foundation of policy, she shall give law unto, and be obeyed by the rest There
was never so much fighting as of late days to so little purpose; Arms, except
they have a root in policy, are altogether fruitless. In the War between the
King and the Parliament, not the Nation only, but the policy of it was divided,
and which part of it was upon the better foundation?

But says he, Ragusa and San Marino are commended for Consid. p. 51.
their upright and equal frame of Government, and yet have hardly extended
their Dominion, beyond the size of an handsome Manor.

Have Ragusa, or San Marino been conquered by the Arms of any Monarch? For this
(I take it) is the Question; though, if they had, these being Common wealths
unarmed, it were nothing to the purpose. The question of increase is another
point. Lacedemon could not increase (because her frame was of another nature)
without ruin; yet was she not conquered by any Monarch.

Come, come says he for all this. It is not the perfection of Consid. p. 52.
Government, but the populousness of a Nation, the natural valor of the
Inhabitants, the abundance of Horses, Arms, and other things necessary for
equipping of an Army, assisted with a good Military Discipline, that qualify a
People for Conquest; and where these concur, Victory is intayled upon them,
Very fine*

As if these could concur any otherwise then by virtue of the policy. For
example, there is no Nation under Heaven more populous then France. Yet says
Sir Francis Bacon, If the Gentlemen be too many, the Commons will be base,
Essay 29.
and not the hundredth Pole fit for an Helmet, as may be seen by comparison of
England with France, whereof the former, though far less in Territory and
Populousness; has been nevertheless the over-match; in regard the middle
People in England make good Soldiers which the Paisants in France do not. This
therefore was from the Policy, by which the one has been the freest, and the
other the most inslaved Subject in the World, and not from populousness, in
which case, France must have been the Over match.

The like is observable in the natural valor of the people, there being no
greater courage of an Infantry, then that of the middle people in England,
whereas the Paisant having none at all, is never used in Arms. Again, France
has one of the best Cavalries in the World, which the English never had, yet
it availed her not. Victory is more especially intayl'd upon courage, and
courage upon liberty, which grows not without a root planted in the policy or
foundation of the Government.

Alexander with an handful of freermen, overcame the greatest abundance of
Horses, Arms, and other things necessary for the equipping of an Army, the
hugest Armies, the most vast and populous Empire in the World; and when he had
done, could not by all these subdue that handful of freer men (though he killed
Clytus with his own hand in the quarrel) unto the servile customs of that
Empire. And that the best Military Discipline derived from the policy of the
Romans, I intimated before, and have shown at large in other places.

But the Praevaricator neither minds what is said, nor cares what he says; to
affirm that a Common wealth was never conquered by any Monarch, and that a
Commonwealth has conquered many Monarchs, or frequently led mighty Kings in
triumph, is to run upon the foil, the second proposition being, with him, no
more then, only the conversion of the first. As if that, Rome was not
conquered Consid. p. 55.
by the World; and that the World was conquered by Rome, were but a simple
conversion. So the World having not conquered Venice, it must follow, that
Venice has conquered the World. Do we take, or are we taken? Nor is he thus
satisfied to burn his fingers, but he will blister his tongue.

Where I said that the COMMONWEALTH OF VENICE, consisting of all them that
first fled from the main Land, unto those* Islands where the City is now
planted, at the institution took in the WHOLE PEOPLE, he would make you believe
I had said that the SENATE OF VENICE at the first institution, TOOK IN THE
WHOLE PEOPLE. It is matter of fact, and that in Consid. p. 70. Oceana p. 9.
which his integrity will be apparent unto every man's judgment. I pray you see
the places. And yet when he has put this -- upon me, he tells me, perhaps it
is not true, and this only I grant him, past peradventure is false, whether
that I said it, or that the thing is possible. For how is it possible, that the
Senate, which is no otherwise such* then as it consists of the Aristocracy,
or select part of the People should take in the whole People? It is true, that
good Authors, both ancient and modern, when they speak of the Senate of Rome,
or of Venice historically, imply the People. Machiavil, speaks of the
Magistracy of Publilius Philo as prolonged by the Senate of Rome, without
making any mention of the people, by whom nevertheless it was granted: the like
is usual with other Authors. Thuanus seldom mentions the Common wealth of
Venice, but by the name of the Senate; which not understood by the learned
Considerer, where Contarini speaks in the same manner, of the courses taken by
the Commonwealth of Venice, for withholding the Subject in the City from
sedition, he takes him to be speaking of the means, whereby the Senate (an't
please you) keeps the People under: and so having put one trick upon me, and
another upon Contarini, these two are his premises, whence he draws this
conclusion, That Venice is as much as any in the World, an unequal Common
wealth. Now the conclusion, you know no body can deny.

Chap. XI. whether there be not an Agrarian, or some Law, or Laws of that
Nature, to supply the defect of it in every Common wealth: and whether the
Agrarian, as it is stated in Oceana, be not equal and satisfactory unto all
Interests.
IN this Chapter the Praevaricator's devices, are the most well favored; for
whereas the Agrarian of Oceana, does no more than pin the Basket, which is
already filled, he gets up into the Tree, where the Birds have long since,
eaten all the Cherries, and with what Clouts he can rake up, makes a most
ridiculous scar-crow. This pains he needed not to have taken, if he had not
slighted over much, the Lexicon of which, he allows me to be the Author, yet
will have it, that he understood the words before; some of which nevertheless,
his ill understanding requires, should be farther interpreted in this place,
as Propriety, Balance, Agrarian, and Levelling.

Propriety is that which is every Man's own by the Law of the Land, and of this
there is nothing stirred, but all entirely left as it was found by the Agrarian
of Oceana.

Propriety in money (except as has been shown in Cities that have little or
no Territory) comes not unto the present Account: But Propriety in Land,
according to the distribution that happens to be of the same, causes the
Political balance producing Empire of the like Nature: that is, if the
Propriety in Lands be so diffused through the whole People, that neither one
Landlord, nor a few Landlords overbalance them, the Empire is popular. If the
propriety in Lands be so engrossed by the Few, that they overbalance the
whole people, the Empire is Aristocraticall, or mixed Monarchy; But if
Propriety in Lands be in one Landlord* to such a proportion as over-ballanceth
the whole People, the Empire is absolute Monarchy. So the political balance is
threefold, Democratical, Aristocratical, and Monarchical.

Each of these Balances may be introduced either by the Legislator, at the
institution of the Government; or by civil Vicissitude, alienation, or
alteration of propriety under Government.

Examples of the balance introduced at the institution, and by the Legislator*
are first those in Israel and Lacedemon, introduced by God or Moses; and
Lycurgus, which were Democratical or Popular. Secondly, Those in England,
France and Spain* introduced by the Goths, Vandals, Saxons, and Franks, which
were Aristocratical, or such as produced the Government of King, Lords and
Commons. Thirdly, those in the East and Turkey, introduced by Nimrod and
Mahomet, or Ottoman, which were purely Monarchial.

Examples of the Balance introduced by civil Vicissitude, alienation* or
alteration of Propriety under Government are in Florence, where the Medices
attaining to excessive wealth, the balance altered from Popular, to
Monarchial: In Greece, where the Argives being Lovers of equality Pausan:
Corith.
and liberty* reduced the power of their Kings to so small a matter, that there
remained unto the Children and Successors of Cisus, little more than the Title,
where the balance altered from Monarchical to Popular. In Rome, about the time
of Crassus, the Nobility having eaten the People out of their Lands, the
balance altered from Popular, first unto Aristocratical, as in the Triumvirs,
Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus; and then to Monarchical, as when Crassus being
dead, and Pompey conquered, the whole came to Caesar. In Arist. Pol. L. 5. C. 3.
Tarentum, not long after the War with the Medes, the Nobility being wasted,
and overcome by Iapy^es, the balance* and with that the Common wealth changed
from Aristocratical, to Popular: the like of late has discovered it self in
Oceana. When a balance comes so through civil Vicissitude to be changed,
that the change cannot be attributed unto humane Providence, it is more
peculiarly to be ascribed unto the hand of God; and so when there happens to
be an irresistible change of the balance, not the old Government which God
has repealed, but the new Government, which he dictateth as present
Legislator, is of Divine right.

This volubility of the balance being apparent, it belongs unto Legislators to
have eyes, and to occur with some prudential or legal remedy or prevention; and
the Laws that are made in this Case are called Agrarian. So an Agrarian is a
Law fixing the balance of a Government, in such manner that it cannot alter.

This may be done diverse ways, as by entailing the Lands upon certain
Families, without power of Alienation in any case, as in Israel and Lacedemon,
or except with leave of the Magistrate, as in Spain; but this by making some
Families too secure, as those in possession, and others too despairing, as
those not in possession, may make the whole People less industrious.

Wherefore the other way, which by the regulation of purchases, ordains only,
that a Man's Land shall not exceed some certain proportion; for example, two
thousand pounds a year, or exceeding such a proportion, shall divide in
descending unto the Children, so soon as being more than one, they shall be
capable of such division, or sub-division, till the greater share exceed not
two thousand pounds a year in Land, lying and being within the Native
Territory, is that which is received and established by the Common wealth of
Oceana.

By Levelling, they who use the word, seem to understand, when a People rising
invades the Lands and Estates of the richer sort, and divides them equally
among themselves; as for example, -- No where in the World; this being that
both in the way, and in the end, which I have already demonstrated to be
impossible. Now the words of this Lexicon being thus interpreted; Let us
hearken what the Praevaricator will say, and out it comes in this manner.

To him that makes propriety, and that in Lands the foundation Consid. p. 73.
of Empire, the establishing of an Agrarian is of absolute necessity, that by
it the power may be fixed in those hands to whom it was at first committed.

What need we then proceed any farther, while he having no where disproved the
balance in these words, gives the whole cause? For as to that which he faith
of money seeing neither the vast treasure of Henry the 7th, altered the
balance of England, nor the Revenue of the Indies alters that of Spain, this
retrait (except in the cases excepted) is long since barricadoed. But he is on
and off, and, any thing to the contrary notwithstanding, gives you this for
certain.

The Examples of an Agrarian are so infrequent; that Mr. Harrington is
constrained to wave all, but two Commonwealths, and can find in the whole
extent of History only Israel, and Lacedemon to fasten upon.

A man that has read my Writings, or is skilled in History, cannot choose but
see, how he slurs his Dice, nevertheless, to make this a little more apparent,
It has seemed to some, (says Aristotle) the main point of institution in
Government, Pol. L. 2. C. 5.
to order riches right: whence otherwise derives all Civil discord? Upon this
ground, Phaleas the Calcedonian Legislator made it his first work to introduce
equality of goods, and Plato in his Laws, allows not increase unto a
possession beyond certain bounds. The Argives, and the Messenians had each
their Agrarian, after the manner of Lacedemon, If a Plut. Lycur.
man shall translate the words ((...), virtus and facultas civilis) Political
virtue or faculty, where he finds them in Aristotle's Politics, (as I make
bold, and appeal unto the Reader, whether too bold to do) by the words
Political balance, understood as I have stated the thing, it will give such a
light unto the Author, as will go nearer than any thing alleged (as before
by this Praevaricator) to deprive me of the honor of that Pol. L. 3. C. 9.
invention. For Example, where Aristotle says, If one man, or such a number of
men, as to the capacity of Government come within the compass of the Few,
excel, all the rest ((...)) in balance, or in such manner, that the ((...))
Political faculties or Estates of all the rest, be not able to hold weight with
him or them; they will never condescend to share equally with the rest in
power; whom they excel in balance; nor is it to any purpose to give them
Laws, who will be as the Gods, their own Laws: and answer the People as the
Lions are said, by Antisthenes, to have answered the hares, when they had
concluded, that every one ought to have an equal portion. For this cause (he
adds) Cities that live under popular power, have instituted the Ostracism, for
the* preservation of equality; by which, if a man increase in riches, retinue,
or popularity above what is safe, they can remove him (without loss of honor
or estate) for a time.

If the Considerer think that I have strained courtesy with Aristotle (who
indeed is not always of one mind) further then is warrantable, in relation to
the balance, be it, as he pleases, I who must either have the more of
Authority, or the less of Competition in the point, shall lose neither way.
However, it is in this place enough, that the Ostracism being of like nature,
was that which supplyde the defect in the Grecian Cities of an Agrarian. To
proceed then unto Rome, that the People there, by striving for an Agrarian,
strove to save their Liberty, is apparent, in that through the want of such a
Law, or the non-observance of it, the Common wealth came plainly unto ruin. If
a Venetian should keep a Table, or have his House furnished with retainers, he
would be obnoxious unto the Council of Ten: and if the best of them appear with
other state or equipage, then is allowed unto the meanest, he is obnoxious unto
the Officers of the Pomp, which two Orders in a Commonwealth, where the Gentry
have but small Estates in Land, are as much as need be in lieu of an Agrarian.
But the German Republics have no more to supply the place of this Law, then
that Estates descending, are divided among the Children, which sure no man but
will say, must needs be both just and pious, And we ask you no more in Oceana;
where grant this, and you grant the whole Agrarian. Thus had I set him all the
Common wealths in the World before; and so it is no fault of mine, that he will
throw but at three of them, These are Israel, Lacedemon, and Oceana.

First at Israel. Mr. Harrington (says he) thinks not upon the promise of God
unto Abraham (whence the Israelites Consid. p. 77.
derived their right unto the Land of Canaan) but considers the division of the
Lands as a Politic Constitution upon which the Government was founded, though
in the whole History of the Bible, there be not the least foot-step of such a
design.

What means the man! The right of an Israelite unto his Land, derived from the
promise of God unto Abraham* therefore the right of an Oceaner unto his Land,
must derive from the promise of God unto Abraham? Or, why else should I in
speaking of Oceana (where Propriety is taken as it was found, and not stirred
an hair) think on the promise to Abraham? Nor matters it for the manner of
division, seeing that was made, and this was found made, each according unto
the Law of the Government. But in the whole Bible (says he) there is not the
least foot-step that the end of the Israelitish Agrarian was Political, or
that it was intended to be the foundation of the Government.

The footsteps of God by the Testimony of David, may be seen in the deep
waters, much more by the consent of the whole Bible, in Land, or in the
foundation of Empire, unless we make the footsteps of God to be one thing, and
his ways another, which as to Government are these.

God by the Ballot of Israel (more fully described in Grot. ad Numb. 26. 53.
the next Book) divided the Land (some respect had unto the Princes and
Patriarchs, for the rest) to every one his inheritance, according unto the
number of names, which were drawn out of the one Urne first, and the Lots of
Land, (the measure with the goodness of the same considered) drawn afterward
out of the other Urn unto those Names. Wherefore God ordaining the Cause, and
the Cause of Necessity producing the effect, God, in ordaining this Balance,
intended popular Government. But when the People admitting of no Nay, would
have a King. God thereupon commanding Samuel to show them the manner of the
King, Samuel declared unto the People, concerning the manner or 1 Samuel 8.
policy of the King, saying, He will take your Fields and your Vineyards, and
your Olive-yards, even the best of them, and give unto his servants (which kind
of proceeding must needs create the balance of a Nobility). Over and above
this, he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your Vineyards, and of your
sheep (by way of tax, for the maintenance of his Armies) and thus your
Daughters shall come to be his Cooks and Confectioners, and your Sons to run
before his Chariot. There is not from the balance to the superstructures, a
more perfect description of a Monarchy, by a Nobility. For the third branch,
the People of Egypt in time of the Famine, Genesis 47. 19. 20.
which was very sore, come unto Joseph, saying, Buy us and our Land for bread,
and we and our Land will be servants unto Pharaoh. And Joseph bought all the
Land of Egypt (except that of the Priests) for Pharaoh. So the Land became
Pharaohs: who lest the remembrance of their former Propriety by lively marks,
and continual remembrancers Grot. ad Genesis 47.
should stir them up (as the Vandalls in Africa, exuted in like manner of their
Propriety, and yet remaining in their ancient dwellings, were stirred up by
their Women) unto sedition, removed the People thus sold, or drove them like
Cattle even from one End of the borders of Egypt unto the other end thereof.
In which you have the balance of a sole Landlord or absolute Prince, with the
miserable, and yet necessary consequence of an inslaved people. Now the
balance of Governments throughout the Scriptures, being of these kinds, and
no other, the Balance of Oceana is exactly calculated unto the most approved
way, and the clearest footsteps of God in the whole History of the Bible: and
whereas the Jubilee was a Law instituted for preservation of the Popular
balance from alteration; so is the Agrarian, in Oceana.

But says the Praevaricator, Hocus Pocus, or in the name of wonder, how can
this Agrarian be the foundation of that Government, which had subsisted more
than forty five years without it? For they were so long after the giving of
this Law for the division of the Land, before they had the Land to divide.

Which is as if one should say upon that other law of the like date. Judges and
Officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates; Hocus Pocus, or in the name of
wonder, how should the Children of Israel make them Judges and Officers in in
their gates, before they had any gates to make them in? fine sport to be played
by an Attorney for the Clergy with Scripture, where it is plain enough that the
Laws of a Commonwealth were given by Moses unto an Army to be put in
Execution, when that Army should become a Commonwealth, as happened under Joshua.

But no saying will serve his turn. If this Agrarian were meant as fundamental
to the Government, the Provision (he will have it) was weak and not proper for
attaining the end proposed, there being nothing in the Nature of the Agrarian
to hinder, but that the whole Country might for the space of near fifty years,
that is, the time between the two Jubilees, have come into the hands of One
Man, and so have destroyed Balance, Agrarian, Government, and all.

This they that boast of their Mathematics might have taken the pains (before
they had been so confident) to have demonstrated possible; as how or by what
means one Lot could come in fifty years to be multiplied six hundred thousand
times, and that without usury, which bar (the Israelites being no Merchants)
was thought sufficient to be given; or thus to call the prudence of God by
their impracticable Phansyes, in question, is abominable.

I would have Divines (as this Praevaricator persuades) and, it should seem,
has persuaded some of them, to overthrow the Commonwealth of Israel; for
otherwise I will give them my word they shall never be able to touch that of
Oceana, which expect in the hereditary succession and dignity of the Princes of
the Tribes, and the Patriarchs, and that the Senate was for life, differs not
from the former: for as to the diverse working up of the superstructures in
diverse Commonwealths according unto the diversity of occasions, it comes unto
no Accomptable difference; and much (I conceive) of this carving or finishing
in Israel, (which had it been extant would perhaps have shown a greater
resemblance) is lost. For the Senates, as to their Numbers, that of the 300 in
Oceana, considering the Bulk of the People, exceeds not that of the Seaventy
in Israel; the succession and dignity of the Princes of the Tribes and of the
Patriarchs, was Ordained for the preservation of the Pedegrees, which (Christ
being born) are not any more to be of like consequence; And that the Senators
were for life, derived from a former Custom of such a Number of Elders
exercising some Authority in Egypt (though not that of the Senate till it was
instituted by God) from the descent of the Patriarchs into that Land, who being
at their descent se^venty persons, and governing their families by the right of
Paternity; as the people increased, and they came to dye had their Successors
appointed in such manner that the number of Seaventy in remembrance of those
Patriarchs was diligently preserved. And forasmuch as the Patriarchs governing
their own Familied (which at first were all) in their own right were
consequently for life, this also pleased in the substitution of others. These
things rightly considered, I have not varyed from the Authority of Israel in a
tittle, there being neither any such necessaty use of Pedigrees, nor
uninterrupted succession of Elders for life in Oceana; and unless a Man will
say, That we ought to have the like Effect, where there is not the like Cause
(which were absurd) the Authority of a Common wealth, holds no otherwise then
from the cause to the effect.

Oceana, I say, cannot be wounded but by peircing the Authority of Israel, with
which she is armed Cap, a pie. Consid. p. 36.
It is true (as the Praevaricator says in another place) that Law can oblige
only those to whom it was given, and that the Laws of Israel were given as to
the power or Obligation of them only to the Children of Israel. But the power
(as has been shown) of a Commonwealth and her Authority are different things,
her power extends no farther than her own people, but her Authority may govern
others, as that of Athens did Rome; when the later writ her twelve Tables by
the Copy of the former. In this manner, though a Man or a Commonwealth,
writing out of Ancient governments have liberty to choose that which suits best
with the occasion, out of any; yet, whether we consider the wisdom and
Justice of the Legislator supremely good, or the excellency of the Laws; the
Prerogative of Authority, where the nature of the thing admitts, must needs
belong unto Israel. That this opinion should go sore with Divines, is strange;
and yet if there be any feeling of their pulse by this their Advocate or
Attorney, as true.

For while he finds me writing out of Venice, he tells In his Epist.
me I have wisely put my self under her Protection or Authority, against whom
he dares not make war, lest he should take part with the Turk.

But when he finds me writing out of Israel, he tells me Consid. p. 39.
that he is not aware of any Prerogative of Authority belonging to the
Israelitish more then any other Republic: which is to take part with the
Devil.

So much for Israel: Now for Lacedemon, but you will permit me to shake a
friend or two by the hand, as I go.

The first is Aristotle, in these words.
Inequality is the source of all Sedition, as when the riches of Pol. L. 5. C.
3.
one or the few come to cause such an overballance as draws the Commonwealth
into Monarchy or Oligarchy; for prevention whereof the Ostracism has been of
use in diverse places, as at Argos and Athens. But it were better to provide in
the beginning, that there be no such Disease in the Common wealth, then to come
afterward unto her Cure.

The second is Plutarch, in these words.
Lycurgus judging that there ought to be no other inequality Plut. Lycur.
among Citizens of the same Common wealth than what derives from their virtues,
divided the Land so equally among the Lacedaemonians, that on a day beholding
the Harvest of their lots lying by Cocks or Ricks in the field, he laughing
said, that it seemed unto him they were all Brothers.

The third should have been the Considerer, but he is at fewd with us all.
The design of Lycurgus (he professes) was not so much to Consid. p. 78.
attain an equality in the frame of his Government, as to drive into Exile
riches, and the effects of them, Luxury and Debauchery.

Gentlemen, What do you say? you have the Judgment of three great
Philosophers, and may make your own choice; Only except he that has but one
hundred pounds a year, can have Wine and Women at as full Command, and
Retainers in as great plenty, as he that has ten thousand, I should think
these advantages accrued from inequality, and that Lycurgus had skill enough in
a Commonwealth to see as much. No, says the Praevaricator, it appears far
otherwise, in that he admitted of no money, but old Iron, a Cart-load of which
was worth little. Well, but in Israel, where Silver and Gold was worth enough,
my Gentleman would have it, that One man in the Compass of fifty years might
purchase the whole Land, though that Country was much larger then this: and
yet where, if the People had used money, they would have used Trade, and using
both, such a thing, through the straightness of the Territory, might have
happened, he will not conceive the like to have been possible. No, though he
have an example of it in Lysander, who by the spoil of Athens ruined the
Agrarian, first by the overbalance that a man's money came to hold unto his
lot, then by eating out the lots themselves, and in those the equality of the
Common wealth. But these things he interprets pleasantly, as if the vow of
voluntary poverty (so he calls it) being broken, the Commonwealth, like a
forsworn wretch, had gone and hanged her self: a Fancy too rank (I doubt) of
the Cloister, to be good at this woyk.

But whereas Plutarch, upon the narrowness of these lots (which had they been
larger, must have made the Citizens fewer then thirty thousand, and so unable
to defend the Common wealth,) and upon the use of this same old and rusty Iron
instead of money, observes it came by this means to pass, that there was
neither fine Orator, Fortuneteller, Bawd* nor Goldsmith to be found in
Lacedemon; Our Plur. Lycur.
Considerer professes,

That it is to him as strange as any thing in History, that Lycurgus should
find credit enough to settle a Government, which carried along with it so much
want and hardship unto particular men, that the total absence of Government
could scarce have put them into a worse Condition, the Laws that he made,
prohibiting the use of those things, which to enjoy with security, is that only
to other men, that makes the yoke of Laws supportable.

Here he is no Monk again; I would ask him no more, than that he would hold to
some thing, be it any thing. It is true, we, who have been used to our
Plum-pottage, are like enough to make faces (as did the King of Pontus) at the
Lacedemonian black broth: But who has opened his mouth against Plum-pottage,
gilded Coaches, Pages, Lacques, fair Manor, Houses, good Tables, rich
furniture, full purses, Universities, good Benefices, Scarlet Robes, s^u re
Caps, rich Jewels, or said any thing that would not multip'y all this? Why
(says he) you are so far right, that the voice of Lycurgusses Agrarian, was,
Every man shall be thus poor, and that of yours is, that No man shall be more
than thus rich. This is an Argument (an't please you) by which he thinks he
has proved, that there is no difference between the Agrarian that was in
Lacedemon, and that which is in Oceana: for, Sir, whatsoever is thus and thus,
is like. But the Agrarian of Lacedemon was thus, A man could have no money, or
none that deserved that Name; and the Agrarian of Oceana is thus, A man's money
is not confin'de: therefore the Agrarian of the one, and of the other are like.
Was it not a great grievance in Lacedemon, tro, that they had no such Logic
nor Logician? Be this as it will, It had been impossible (says he) for
Lyeurgus to have settled his Government, had he not wisely obtained response
from the Oracle at Delphos, magnifying and recommending it; After which, all
resistance would have been downright impiety and disobedience, which concerns
Mr. Harrington very little. The Bible then is not so good an Oracle, as was
that at Delphos. But this reflection has a tang with it, that makes me think
it relates to that where he says, I know not how; Consid. p. 18.
but Mr. Harrington has taken up a very great unkindness for the Clergy: He
will know nothing, neither that the Oracle of the Scripture is, of all other,
the clearest for a Common wealth; nor that the Clergy being genera'ly against a
Common wealth, is, in this, below the Priests of Delphos; who were more for
Lycurgus, then these are for Moses. But hav' at the Agrarian of Oceana, with
the whole bail of dice, and at five throws.

The first throw is, That it is unjust; for, If it be truly assorted (in the
fourth page of Oceana) that Government is founded on Propriety, then Propriety
consists in Consid. p. 81.
Nature before Government, and Government is to be fitted to Propriety, not
Propriety to Government. How great a sin then would it be against the first and
purest notion of Justice, to bring in a Government* not only different from,
but directly destructive unto the settled Propriety of Oceana, where (in the the
Hundredth Page) there are confessed to be three hundred persons, whose Estates in
Land exceed the Standard of two thousand pounds a year. Let me not be choked
with the Example of Lacedemon, till Mr. Harrington has shown us the power of
his persuasion with the Nobility of Oceana, as Lyeurgus with them of Lacedemon,
to throw up their Lands to be parcell'd by his Agrarian (as Page the hundredth
and Thirteenth) and when that is done, I shall cease to complain of the
Injustice of it. Nor need any one of these three hundred be put to own a shame,
for preferring his own interest before that of an whole Nation; for though when
Government is once fixed, it may be fit to submit private to Public Utility,
when the question is of choosing a Government, every particular man is left unto
his own native right, which cannot be prescribed against, by the Interest of
all the rest of Mankind.

How many false Dice there are in this throw, (because you see I have little to
do) will be worth Counting.

Whereas I nowhere deny Propriety to derive her being from Law; He insinuates
that I presume, propriety to be in nature. One.

Whereas in natural and domestic vicissitude, I assert, That Empire is to
follow the Legal State of Propriety; he imposes, as if I had asserted, that
Empire must follow the Natural state of propriety. Two.

Whereas in violent or foreign vicissitude (as when the Israelites possessed
themselves of the Land of Canaan the Goths and Vandals of Italy, the Frankes
of France, the Saxons of England) Propriety, in order unto the Government to be
introduced, is alterable; he insinuates as if I had said, that, Empire must
always follow the state of Propriety, not as it may be altered in that
relation, but as it is found. Three.

Whereas the government of Oceana is exactly fitted unto propriety, as it was
settled before; he insinuates it to be destructive unto the settled propriety.
Four.

Whereas I say, that to put it with the most, they that are Proprietors of Land
in Oceana, exceeding two thousand pounds a year, do not exceed* three hundred
persons: he says, that I have confessed they be three hundred. Five.

Whereas I show that the Nobility of Lacedemon, upon persuasion of Lycurgus,
threw up their Estates to be parcell'd by his Agrarian; but that, in Oceana, it
is not needful or required that any man should part with a farthing, or throw
up one shovelfull of his Earth: he imposes, as if I went about to persuade the
Nobility to throw up their Lands. Six.

Whereas I have shown that no One of those within the three hundred, can have
any interest against the Agrarian; He, without showing what such an interest
can be, insinuates that they have an interest against it. Seven.

Whereas the Government of Oceana goes altogether upon consent, and happens
not only to fit private unto public, but even public unto private Utility,
by which means it is void of all objection; he insinuates, that it is against
private utility. Eight.

Where he says, that in choosing a Government, every Man is left, to his own
Native right. He insinuates that the Agrarian, (which does no more than fix
propriety, as she found it) is against Native Right. Nine.

Whereas God has given the Earth unto the Sons of Men, which Native right
(as in case a Man for hunger take so much as will feed him, and no more of any
other Man's meat or Herd) prescribes against legal Propriety, and is the cause
why the Law esteems not such an Action to be theft; He insinuates that there
is a Native right in Legal Propriety, which cannot be prescribed against by
the interest of all the rest of Mankind. T^n.

While he pleaded the case of Monarchy, Levelling was concluded lawful; In the
case of a Commonwealth, (which asks no such favor) Levelling is concluded
unlawful. Eleven.

In the Reformation, or Level as to Monarchy, though Propriety subsisted
before that Level, yet Propiety was to be fitted unto the Government, and not
the Government unto propriety; but in the case of a Commonwealth the
Government is to be fitted unto Propriety, and not Propriety unto the
Government. Twelve.

In that, any man was bound to relinquish his Native right, else how could a
Prince level his Nobility; In this, no man is bound to relinquish his Native
right. Thirteen.

In that, this same Native right might be prescribed against by the Prince; In
this, it cannot be prescribed against by the interest of mankind. Fourteen.

In that, no Noble man but ought to own a shame if he preferred his interest
before that of the Prince; In this, no Noble man ought to own a shame for
preferring his own Interest before that of an whole Nation. Fifteen.

Would you have any more? these fifteen Majors and Minors, or false dice, are
soopt up again, and put all into this Conclusion, or Box, like themselves.

Thus the Interest of the Three hundred is not Balanced with that of a whole
Nation, but that of some few extravagant spirits: who by making dams in the
Current of other Men's Estates, hope to derive some water to their own parched
fortunes.

Calumniare fortiter, nihil adhaerebit. If a river have but one natural bed or
channel, what dam is made in it by this Agrarian? but if a river have had many
natural beds or channels, to which she has forgotten to reach her breast, and
whose mouths are dried up or obstructed; these are Dams which the Agrarian
does not make, but remove: and what parched fortunes can hereby hope to be
watered but theirs only whose veins having drunk of the same blood, have a
right in nature to drink of the same milk? The Law of Moses allowed* the
firstborn but a double portion: was his an extravagant spirit?

His second Throw, is, that The nature of the Agrarian is such as cannot be
fixed, in regard that the People being entrusted with a Vote and a Sword, may
alter it for the less, or come to drown-right Levelling. But as to this, in
the Eighth Chapter I have barred his dice that being the place in which I
thought most proper to give a full Answer to this Objection.

At the third Throw, he is extrerm awkward. For whereas the Israelites
(notwithstanding the voyages of Solomon, and what is said of the Ships of
Tharsis) during their Agrarian, or while they had Land, were a Commonwealth of
Husbandmen, and not of Merchants, nor came to the Exercise of this Trade, till
they had no Land; or after their dispersion by the Emperor Adrian: he screws
it in, after this manner* As the Jews who have no Lands are every where great
Traders; so the possession of Lands being Confid. p. 85.
limited by this Agrarian, men who are either covetous or ambitious (as if
Estates were not gotten by industry, but by covetousness and ambition) will
employ themselves and their Estates in foreign Traffic, which being in a
manner wholly engrossed by the Capital City of Oceana, that City, already too
great, will immediately grow into an excess of power and riches very dangerous
to the Common wealth; Amsterdam being come by such means to exercise of late a
Tyranny in disposal of some public affairs, much to the prejudice both of
the Liberty and Interest of the rest of the Union. An equal, if not greater
incommodity to Oceana, would be created by the Agrarian, which making Emporium
a City of Princes; would render the Country a Common wealth of Cottagers, able
to dispute precedence with the Beggars-Bush.

News, not from Tripoli, nor any other corner of the whole World but one. Bate
me this, and show me in what other City increase of Houses, or new foundations
was ever held a Nuysance. This sure is a Fancy that regards not the old Folks
or ancient Prudence.

One of the blessings that God promised unto Abraham, was, that his seed should
be multiplied as the Stars of Heaven: And the Common wealth of Rome, by
multiplying her seed, came to bound her Territory with the Ocean and her fame
with the Stars of Heaven. That such populousness is that without which there
can be no great Commonwealth, both Reason and good Authors are clear; but
whether it ought to begin in the Country, or in the City, is a scruple I have
not known them make. That of Israel, began in the Country; That of Rome, in
the City. Except there be obstruction or impediment by the Law, as in Turkey
where the Country; and in England* where the City is forbidden to increase.
Wherever there be a populous Country, for Example, France: it makes a
populous City as Paris; And wherever there be a populous City as Rome, after
the ruin of Alba, and Amsterdam after the ruin (as to Trade) of Antwerp; it
makes a populous Territory, as was that of the Rustic Tribes, and is that of
Holland.

But the ways how a populous City comes to make a populous Country, and how
apopulous Country comes to make a populous City are contrary; the one fiapning
through sucking, as that of the City, and the other through weining, as that of
the Country.

For proof of the former, the more mouths there be in a City, the more meat of
necessity must be vented by the Country, and so there will be more Corn, more
Cattle, and better Markets, which breeding more Laborers, more Husbandmen, and
richer Farmers, bring the Country so far from a Common wealth of Cottagers,
that where the blessings of God through the fruitfulness of late years with us,
rendered the Husbandman unable to dispute precedence with the Beggars-bush, his
Trade thus uninterrupted, in that his Markets are certain, goes on with
increase of Children, of Servants, of Corn, and of Cattle; for there is no
reason why the fields adjoining unto Emporium, being but of an hard soil,
should annually produce two Crops, but the populousness of the City.

The Country then growing more populous, and better stocked with Cattle, which
also increases manure for the Land, must proportionably increase in
fruitfulness. Hence it is, that (as the Romans also were good at such works) in
Holland, there is scarce a puddle undrained, nor a bank of Sand cast up by the
Sea, that is not covered with Earth, and made fruitful by the People; these
being so strangely, with the growth of Amsterdam, increased, as comes perhaps
to two parts in three: nor, the Agrarian taking place in Oceana, would it be
longer disputed, whether she might not destroy Fishes to plant Men. Thus a
populous City makes a Country milch, or populous by sucking; and whereas some
may say, that such a City may suck from foreign parts, it is true enough, and
no where more apparent than in Amsterdam. But a City that has recourse unto a
foreign dug, ere she had first sucked that of her proper Nurse or Territory
dry, you shall hardly find; or finding, (as in some Plantation not yet weyned)
will hardly be able to make that Objection hold, seeing it will not lie so much
against the populousness of the place, as the contrary.

But a populous Country, makes a populous City by weining; for when the People
increase so much, that the dug of Earth can no more, the overplus must seek
some other way of Livelihood: which is either Arms, such were those of the
Goths and Vandalls; or Merchandise and Manufacture, for which ends it being
necessary, that they lay their heads and their Stock together, this makes
populous Cities. Thus Holland being a small Territory, and sucked dry, has upon
the matter weined the whole People, and is thereby become, as it were one City
that sucks all the World.

But by this means (says the Considerer) Emporium being already too great
(while indeed Amsterdam considering the narrowness of her Territory, or the
smallness of Holland, is much more populous) would immediately grow into an
excess of power and riches, very dangerous unto Liberty, an Example whereof was
seen in the late Tyranny of that City; As if it were not sufficiently known
that Amsterdam contributes, and has contributed more unto the defense of the
Common wealth, or united Provinces, than all the rest of the League, and had in
those late Actions which have been scandalized, resisted not the interest of
Liberty, but of a Lord. That the increase of Rome, which was always studied by
her best Citizens, should make her head too great for her body, or her power
dangerous unto the Tribes, was never so much as imagined; and though she were a
City of Princes, her Rustic Tribes were ever had in greatest esteem and
honor; insomuch, that a Patrician would be of no other.

But the Authority of ancient Common wealths is needless, the Praevaricator by
his own Argumentation or might, lays himself neck and heels.

For, says he, Were this Agrarian once settled, Emporium would be a City of
Princes, and the Nobility so thoroughly plumed, Consid. p. 93.
that they would be just as strong of wing, as wild Foul, in moulting time.
There would be a City of Princes, and yet no Nobility. He is so fast that I
have pity on him, if I knew but which way to let him loose. He means perhaps,
that the Merchants growing rich, would be the Nobility; and the Nobility
growing poor, would be Grasiers.

But so for ought I know, it was always, or worse, that is, men attained unto
riches and honors by such or worse arts, and in poverty made not always so
honest retreats. Unto all which infirmities of the State, I am deceived, if
this Agrarian do not apply the proper remedies. For such an Agrarian makes a
Common wealth for increase: the Trade of a Common wealth for increase, is Arms,
Arms are not born by Merchants, but by Noblemen, and Gentlemen. The Nobility
therefore having these Arms in their hands, by which Provinces are to be
acquired, new Provinces yield new estates; so whereas the Merchant has his
returns in Silk or Canvas, the Soldier will have his return in Land. He that
represents me as an Enemy to the Nobility, is the man he speaks of; For if
ever the Commonwealth attain unto five new Provinces, (and such a Common wealth
will have Provinces enough) it is certain, that (besides honors, Magistracies,
and the Revenues annexed) there will be more estates in the Nobility of Oceana,
of fourteen thousand pound Land a year, then ever were, or can otherwise be of
four; and that without any the least danger unto the Common wealth: for if Rome
had but looked so far to it, as to have made good her Agrarian in Italy,
though she had neglected the rest, the wealth of her Nobility might have sucked
her Provinces, but must have enriched the People, and so rather have watered
her Roots, then starved and destroyed them as it did. In this Case therefore
the Nobility of Oceana, would not moulter like wild Foul, but be strong of wing
as the Eagle.

One Argument more I have heard urged against the populousness of the Capital
City which is, that the rich in time of sickness forsaking the place, by which
means the Markets come to fail, the poor least they should starve, will run
abroad, and infect the whole Country. But should a man tell them at Paris, or
Grand Cairo (in the latter whereof, the Plague is more frequent and furious,
then happens with us) that they are not to build Houses, nor increase so much,
least they should have the Plague, or that Children are not to be born so fast,
lest they die, they would think it strange news. A Common wealth is furnished
with Laws, and power to add such as she shall find needful. In case a City
be in that manner visited it is the duty of the Country, and of the Government,
to provide for them by contribution.

The difficulty in making the Agrarian equal and steady Consid. p. 87.
through the rise or fall that may happen in money, which is the fourth throw
of the Praevaricator; is that which it might have been for his ease to have
taken notice, was long since sufficiently barrd, where it is said, that if a
new survey at the present Rent were taken, an Agrarian ordaining that no Man
should thenceforth hold above so much Land as is there valued at the rate,
however money might alter would be equal and steady enough.

His last cast is, that the Agrarian would make war against Consid. p. 89*
universal and immemoriall Custom, which being without doubt more praevalent
then that of Reason, there is nothing of such difficulty as to persuade men at
once, and crudely, that they and their Forefathers have been in an error.

Wise men, I see, may differ in Judgment or Counsel, for, says Sir Francis
Bacon. Surely every Medicine is an Innovation, Essay 24.
and he that will not apply new remedies, must expect new evils: For Time is
the greatest Innovator: And if Time of course alter things to the worse, and
Wisdom and Counsel may not alter them to the better, what must be the end?

But the Case of the Agrarian receives equal strength from each of these
Counselors or opinions; from the latter, in that it goes upon grounds which
Time has not innovated for the worse, but for the better, and so according to
the former comes not to have been at once, and crudely persuaded, but
introduced by custom, now grown universal and immemoriall. For who remembers
the Gentry of this Nation to have worn the blew coats of the Nobility, or the
lower sort of people to have lived upon the smoke of their Kitchins? To the
contrary, Is it not now the Universal custom for men to rely upon their own
fortunes or industry, and not to put their Trust in Princes, seeking in their
liberality or dependence the means of living? The Praevaricator might as well
jump into his great Grandfathers old breeches, and persuade us that he is ( a
la mode) or in the new cut, as that the ways of our forefathers would agree
with our Customs. Does not every man now see, that if the Kings in those days
had settled the Estates of the Nobility by a Law, restraining them from selling
their Land, such a law had been an Agrarian, and yet not warring against their
ancient Customs, but preserving them? Wherefore neither does the Agrarian
proposed, taking the balance of Estates as she now finceth them, make war
against, but confirm the present Customs. The only Objection that can seem
in this place to lie, is, that whereas it has been the custom of Oceana that
the Bulk of the Estate, should descend unto the Eldest Son, by the Agrarian,
he cannot in case he have more brothers inherit above two thousand pounds a
year in Land, or an equal share* But neither does this, whether you regard the
Parents or the Children, make war with custom. For putting the case the
Father have twenty thousand pounds a year in Land, he goes not the less in his
custom or way of life for the Agrarian, because for this he has no less: and
if he have more or fewer Sons to whom this Estate descends by equal or
unequal portions, neither do they go less in their ways or customs of life
for the Agrarian, because they never had more. But, says Aristotle, (speaking
of the Ostracism as it supplies the defect of an Agrarian) this course is as
necessary unto Kings, as unto Common wealths: By this means the Monarchies of
Turkey Pol. l. 3. c. ^9.
and of Spain preserve their balance; through the neglect of this has that
of the Nobility of Oceana been broken; and this is it which the Praevaricator
in advising that the Nobility be no farther Levelled than will serve to keep
the people under, requires of his Prince. So, that an Agrarian is necessary to
Government, be it what it will, is on all hands concluded.

Chap. XII. Whether Courses or Rotation be necessary unto a well-ordered
Commonwealth? In which is contained the courses or Pare^bole of Israel before
the Captivivity, together, with the Epitome of Athens and Venice.
ONe bout more, and we have done; this (as Ocean. p. 22.
reason good) will be upon wheels or Rotation, for,

As the Agrarian answers unto the Equality of the Foundation or Root, so does
Rotation unto the Equality of the Superstructures or branches of a Commonwealth.

Equal Rotation is equal Vicissitude in, or Succession unto, Magistracy
conferred for equal terms, injoyning such equal vacations, as cause the
Government to take in the body of the People, by parts succeeding others,
through free Election, or suffrage of the whole.

The contrary whereunto is prolongation of Magistracy, which trashing the wheel
of Rotation, destroys the life, or natural motion, of a Common wealth.

The Praevaricator, what ever he has done for himself, has done this for me,
that it will be out of doubt, whether my Principles be capable of greater
Obligation, or confirmation, than by having Objections made against them. Nor
have I been altogether ungrateful, or nice of my labor but gone far (much
farther then I needed) about, that I might return with the more valuable
Present, unto him that sent me on the Errant; I shall not be short of like
proceeding upon the present Subject, but rather over.

Rotation in a Common wealth, is of the Magistracy; of the Senate; of the
People; of the Magistracy and the People; of the Magistracy and the Senate; or
of the Magistracy of the Senate, and of the People; which in all, come unto Six
kinds.

For example of Rotation in the Magistracy, you have the Judge of Israel,
called in Hebrew, Shophet, the like Magistracy Grot.
after the Kings Ithobal and Baal came in use with the Tyrians, from these with
their Posterity the Carthaginians, who also called their Supreme Magistrates,
being in Number two, and for their Term Annual, Shophetim, which the Latins
by a softer pronunciation render Suffetes.

The Shophet or Judge of Israel, was a Magistrate, not that I can find,
obliged unto any certain Term, throughout the Book of Judges; Nevertheless, it
is plain, that his Election was occasional, and but for a time, after the
manner of a Dictator.

True it is, that Eli and Samuel, ruled all their lives, but upon this, such
impatience in the People followed through the corruption of their Sons, as
was the main cause of the succeeding Monarchy.

The Magistrates in Athens (except the Areopagites being a Judicatory) were all
upon rotation. The like for Lacedemon and Rome, except the Kings in the former,
who were indeed hereditary, but had no more power than the Duke in Venice,
where all the rest of the Magistrates (except the Procuratori; whose Magistracy
is but mere Ornament) are also upon Rotation.

For Rotation of the Senate you have Athens, the Achaeans, Aetolians, Lyceans,
the Amphictionium, and the Senate Pol. l. 2. c. 7.
of Lacedemon reproved, in that it was for life, by Aristotle: Modern Examples
of like kind, are the Diet of Switz, but especially the Senate of Venice.

For the Rotation of the People, you have first Israel, where the Congregation,
which the Greeks call Ecclesia, the Latins Comitia, or Concio, having a
twofold capacity; first, that of an Army, in which they were the constant Guard
of the Country; and secondly, that of a Representative, in which they gave the
Vote of the People, at the Creation of their Laws, or election of their
Magistrates, was monthly. Now the Children of Israel after their Number, to
wit, the chief Fathers, and Captains of thousands 1 Chronicles. 27.
and hundreds, and their Officers that served the King in any matter of the
courses which came in and went out month by month, throughout all the months
of the year, every course, were twenty and four thousand.

Such a multitude there was of military age, that without Grot. ad locum.
inconvenience, four and twenty thousand were every month in Arms, whose Term
expiring others succeeded, and so others, by which means the Rotation of the
whole People came about in the space of one year. The Tribunes, or Commanders
of the Tribes in Arms, or of the Prerogative for the month, are named in the
following part of the Chapter, to the sixteenth Verse; where begins the
Enumeration of the Princes, (though God and Ashur, for what reason I know not,
be omitted) of the Tribes, remaining in their Provinces, where they judged the
People, and as they received Orders, were to bring or send such farther
enforcement or recruits, as occasion required unto the Army; after these, some
other Officers are mentioned. There is no question to be made, but this
Rotation of the People, together with their Prerogative, or Congregation, was
preserved by the monthly Election of two thousand Deputies in each of the
twelve Tribes, which in all, came to four and twenty thousand; or let any man
show how otherwise it was likely to be done, the Nature of their Office being
to give the Vote of the People, who therefore sure must have chosen them. By
these, the Vote of the People was given to their Laws, and at Elections of
their Magistrates.

Unto their Laws, as where David proposes the reduction of the Ark. And David
consulted with the Captains 1 Chronicles. 13.
of thousands and hundreds, and with every Leader. And David said unto all the
Congregation of Israel, If it seem good unto you, and it be of the Lord God,
let us send abroad to our Brethren every where (the Princes of the Tribes in
their Provinces) that are left in the Land of Israel, and with them also to the
Priests and Levites, which are in their Cities and Suburbs, that they may
gather themselves unto us; And let us bring again the Ark of our God to us; for
we enquired not at Gror. e. Tertul.
it in the days of Saul. And all the Congregation (gave their suffrage in the
Affirmative) said that they would do so; for the thing was right in the Eyes of
the People. (Nulla lex sibi soli conscientiam Justitiae sua debet, sed et a
quibus obsequium expectat) Now that the same Congregation or representative
gave the vote of the People also in the Election of Priests Officers and
Magistrates, Moreover David and the Captains of the Host separated to the
service of the Sons of 1 Chronicles. 25.
A^aph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should Prophesy with Harps with
Psalteryes and with Cymballs. But upon the occasion untowhich we are more
especially beholding for the 1 Chronicles. 28. 2.
preservation and discovery of this admirable order ( David having proposed the
business in a long and pious speech,) the Congregation made Solomon the Son
of David King the second time and anointed him unto the Lord to be Chief,
Governor, and Zadok to be Priest. For as to the first time 1 Chronicles. 29. 22.
that Solomon was made King, it happened, through the sedition of Adoniae to
have been done in have and tumultuously by those only of Jerusalem; and the
reason why Kings 1. 23.
Zadoc is here made Priest is that Abiathar was put out for being of the
Conspiracy with Adonia.

I may expect (by such Objections as they afford me) it should be alleged,
that to prove an order in a Commonwealth, I instance in a Monarchy; as if
there were any thing in this Order Monarchiall, or that could, if it had not
been so received from the Commonwealth, have been introduced by the Kings, to
whom in the Judgment of any sober man (the Praevaricator only excepted, who
has been huckling about some such Council for his Prince) no less could have
followed, upon the first frown of the people, then did in Rehoboam, who, having
1 Kings 12.
used them roughly, was deposed by the Congregation or the Major part. It is
true, that while Israel was an Army, the Congregation, as it needed not to
assemble by way of Election or representative, so I believe it did not, but
that by all Israel assembled to this end, should be meant the whole people
after they were planted upon their lots, and not their Representative, which in
a political sense is 1 Chr. 9. 29.
as properly so called, were absurd and impossible, Nor need I go upon
presumption only, be the same never so strong, seeing it is said in Scripture
of the Korathites, that they were keepers of the gates of the Tabernacle, and
their fathers being over the Host of the Lord, were keepers of the Entry. That
is (according to the interpretation of Grotius) the Korathites were now keepers
of the gates, as it appears in the Book of Numbers, their Ancestors the
Kohathites Number. 4.
had been in Camp, or while Israel was yet an Army. But our Translation is lame
of the right foot as to the true discovery of the Ancient manner of this
service, which according to the Septuagint and the Vulgar Latin was thus, they
were keepers of the gates of the Tabernacle ((...), and familiae eorum per
vices) and their fathers by turns or Rotation. So that offices and services by
courses turns or Rotation are plainly more ancient then Kings in the
Commonwealth of Israel; though it be true that when the courses or Rotation of
the Congregation or Representative of the people were first introduced, be as
hard to show, as it would be how, after the People were once planted upon their
lotts, they could be otherwise assembled. If writers argue well and lawfully
from what the Sanhedrim was in the institution by Jehoshaphat unto what it had
more auntiently been, to argue from what the Congregation was in the
institution by David, unto what it had more auntiently been, is sufficiently
warranted.

These things rightly considered, there remains little doubt, but we have the
courses of Israel for the first Example of Rotation in a Popular Assembly. Now
to come from the Hebrew unto the Grecian prudence, the same is approved by
Aristotle, which he exemplifies in the Commonwealth of Thales Milesius, where
the people, he Poll. L. 4. C. 14.
says assembled ((...)) by turns or rotation. Nor is the Roman prudence
without some shadow of the like proceeding, where the Prerogative (pro tempore)
with the jure-vocatae being made by Lot, gave frequently the Suffrage of the
whole people. But the Gothic prudence in the policy of the Third State, runs
altogether upon the collection of a Representative by the suffrage of the
People, and though not so diligently regulated, by terms and vacations as to a
standing assembly were necessary, by Turns, Rotation, Parembole, or courses; As
in the Election of the late House of Commons, and the constitutive vicissitude
of the Knights and Burgeses is known by sufficient experience.

When the Rotation of a Commonwealth is both in the Magistracy and the People,
I reckon it to be of a fourth kind, as in Israel, where both the Judge and the
Congregation were so elected.

The fifth kind is when the Rotation of a Commonwealth is in the Magistracy
and the Senate, as in those of Athens, of the Achaeans, of the Aetohians, of
the Lycians, and of Venice; upon which examples, rather for the influence each
of them, at least Athens, may have upon the following Book, than any great
Necessity from the present occasion, I shall enlarge my self in this place.

The Common wealth of Athens was thus administered.

The Senate of the Bean being the proposing-Assembly Epitome of the Athenian
Common wealth.
(for that of the Areopagites, called also a Senate, was a Judicatory)
consisted of four hundred Citizens chosen by Lot, which was performed with
beans, these were annually removed all at once. By which means Athens became
frustrated of the natural and necessary use of an Aristocracy, while neither
her Senators were chosen for their parts, nor remained long enough in this
function, to acquire the right understanding of their proper Office. These thus
elected, were subdivided by Lot into four equal parts, called Prytanys, each of
which for one quarter of the year was in Office. The Prytany or Prytans in
Office elected ten Presidents, called Proedri, out of which Proedri or
Presidents, they weekly chose one Provost of the Council, who was called the
Epistata. The Epistata and the Proedri were the more peculiar Proposers to the
Prytans, and to the Prytans it belonged especially to prepare business ((...))
for the Senate: they Petit. de Leg. At.
gave also audience unto any that would propose any thing concerning the Common
wealth, which if, reported by the Prytans, it were approved by the Senate, the
party that proposed might promulgate the business, and promulgation being made,
the Congregation assembled, and determined of it. ( Sic data concio Laelio est,
processit ille and Graecus apud Cic. pro Flac.
Graecos, non de culpa sua dixit, sed de paena quaestus est, porrexerunt manus,
Psephisma natum est).

The Prytans and their Magistrates, had right to assemble the Senate; and
propose unto them; and what the Senate determined upon such a Proposition, if
forthwith to be offered unto the People, as in private cases, was called
Proboulema; but if not to be proposed, till the People had a year's trial of
it, as was the ordinary way in order unto Laws to be enacted, it was called
Psephisma; each of which words with that difference, signifies a Decree. A
Decree of the Senate in the latter sense had for one year, the power of a Law,
after which trial, it belonged to the Thesmothetae ((...)) to hang it in
writing upon the Ulpian ad Phil. 1.
Statues of the Heroes, and assemble the Congregation. These Magistrates were
of the number of the Archons, which in all were nine, the chief more peculiarly
so called* was Archon Pollux. L. 8. C. 8.
Eponymus, he by whose name the year was reckoned or denominated (his
Magistracy being of a Civil concernment) the next was the King, a Magistrate of
a Spiritual concernment) the third the Polemarch (whose Magistracy was of a
Military concernment): the other six were the Thesmothetae, who had several
functions common with the Nine, Others peculiar or proper to themselves, as
((...)) to give the People (by ply-carts) notice when the Judicatories were to
assemble, that is, when the People were to assemble in that Capacity, and to
judge according to the Law made; or when the Senate, or the People were to
assemble upon an ((...)) a crime that was not provided against by the Law, as
that of Alcibiades, (the wits about that time in Athens, being most of them
Atheists) for laughing at Ceres discovering her secrets, and shaving of the
Mercury's. If an Archon or Demagogue were guilty of such a Crime, it belonged
unto the cognizance of the Senate, otherwise unto that of the People, whom the
Thesmothetae were also in like manner to warn, L. 8. C. 16.
when they were to come unto the suffrage.

These six like the Electors in Venice, presided at all Elections of
Magistrates, whether made by the lot as the judges, or by suffrage, as the new
Archons, the Strategus or General, and most of the rest. They also had the
hearing and introducing of all causes into the Judicatories.

But the right of assembling the Ecclesia or Congregation belonged to the
Prytans, by whom the Senate proposed unto the People.

The Congregation consisted of all them that were upon the role of the
Lexiarcha, that is to say, of the whole People having right unto the City* The
Prytans seated upon a Tribunal were Presidents of this Assembly; The Assembly
having sacrificed and made Oath of fidelity unto the Commonwealth; the Proedri
or Presidents of the Prytans, proposed by Authority of the Senate unto the
People in this manner. July the 16th Pol^cles being Archon, and the Tribe of
Pandion in the Prytaneate, Demosthenes, Peaneus, thought thus, or was of this
Opinion. The same Custom whereby the first Proposer subscribes his Opinion or
Part with his name, is at this day in Venice. Proposition being made, such of
the People as would speak, were called to the Pulpit; they, that were fifty
years of age, or upwards, were to come first, and the younger afterward; which
Custom of prating in this manner, made excellent Orators or Demagogs, but a bad
Common wealth.

From this that the People had not only the result of the Common wealth, but
the debate also; Athens is called a Democracie, and this kind of Government is
opposed unto that of Lacedemon, which because the People there had not the
power of debate, but of result only, was called Aristocracy, sometimes
Oligarchy: thus the Greeks commonly are to be understood to distinguish of
these two; while according to my Principles, (if you like them) debate in the
People makes Anarchy, and where they have the result, and no more, the rest
being managed by a good Aristocracy, it makes that which is properly and
truly to be called Democracy, or Popular Government. Neither is this Opinion of
mine new, but according to the Judgment of some of the Athenians themselves;
for says Isocrates in his Oration unto the Areopagites for reformation of the
Athenian Government; I know the main reason, why the Lacedaemonians flourish, to
be, that their Common wealth is popular. But to return. As many of the People,
as would, having showed their Eloquence, and with these the Demagogues, who
were frequently bribed, concealed their knavery; the Epistata, or Provost of
the Proedri, put the Decree or Question unto the Vote, and the People gave the
result of the Common wealth by their Chirotonia, that is, by holding up their
hands; the result thus given, was the Law, or Psephisma of the People.

Now for the functions of the Congregation, they Them. Phil. 1.
were diverse; as first, Election of Magistrates, ((...)); Namely, the Archons,
the Strategus, or General, the Field-Officers, the Admiralls, with diverse
others, all, or the chief of them Annual, and commonly upon Terms and
Vacations, though it be true, (as Plutarch has it) that Phocion was Strategus
four years together, having that honor still put upon him by the Congregation,
without his seeking. The next Office of this Assembly, was to elect Judges into
five Courts or Judicatories, for the People being in the Bulk too unweildy a
body for the performance of this duty, they exercised the supreme Judicature,
by way of Representative, into which Election was made by Lottery, in such
manner, that five hundred one thousand, or 1500. of them (according to the
importance of the occasion) being above thirty years of age, and within the
rest of the qualifications in that case provided by the Law, became the
Sovereign Judicatory, called the Heliaea. In all Elections, whether by lot or
suffrage, the Thesonothetae were Presidents, and ordered the Congregation.
Farthermore, if they would amend, alter, repeal, or make a Law, this also was
done by a Representative, of which no man was capable, that had not been of the
Heliaea, for the rest elected out of the whole People: this amounting unto one
thousand, was called the Nomothetae or Legislators. No Law received by the
People, could be abrogated but by the Nomothetae; by these any Athenian (having
obtained leave of the Senate) might abrogate a Law, provided, that withal, he
put another in the place of it. These Laws the Proedri of the Prytans, were to
put unto the Suffrage.

First, the old, whether it agreed with the Athenian people, or not? then the
new; and whether of these happened to be chirotonized or voted by the Nomothetae,
was ratified; according to that piece of the Athenian Law cited by Demosthenes
against Timocrates ((...)) what has been said of the Commonwealth of Athens,
in relation unto the present purpose, amounts unto thus much, that not only
the Senate and the Magistracy in this Policy was upon rotation, but even the
People also, at least, as to the Nomothetae, or their Legislative power, and
the Supreme Judicatory of the Heliaea, each of these being a Representative,
constituted of one Thousand or fifteen hundred Citizens.

But for what follows in the second book it is necessary that I observe in
this place the proceeding of certain Divines, who endeavor to make use of this
Commonwealth for ends of their own* as particularly Doctor Seaman; who in his
book called Four propositions, argues after this manner.

Chirotonia (as Suidas has it) signifies both Plebiscitum a Law made by the
People, and Psephisma. Now (says he) Psephisma is the ordinary word used in
the Attick laws and in Demosthenes, for (Senatesconsultum) a Law made by the
Senate; whence he draws this conclusion. As, when the People make a Law, they
are said to Chirotonize; so may the Rulers in like manner, in those Laws that
are made by themselves alone.

These ways with divines are too bad. The words of Suidas are these ((...))
Chirotonia is Election or ratification by the Many: which expressly excludes
the Few or the Senate from being otherwise contained by the word Chirotonia,
than a part is by the whole. Nor has the Author the word Psephisma, or
Plebiscitum in the place. I would feign know what other word there is in Greek
for Plebiscitum but Psephisma; and yet the Doctor puts it upon Suidas that he
distinguishteh between these two, and, taking that for granted where he finds
Psephisma in Demosthenes and the Attick Laws, will have it to signify no more
then a decree of the Senate. It is true that some decrees of the Senate were so
called, but those of the people had no other name, and when ever you find
Psephisma in Demosthenes or the Attick Laws, for a Law, there is nothing more
certain then that it is to be understood of the people, for to say that a Law
in a Popular Commonwealth can be made without the people, is a contradiction.

The second passage, is a what think you of these words Pollux, l. 8. c* 9.
of Pollux ((...)) which the Doctor having englished in this manner; The
Thesmothetae do privately prescribe when Judgment is to be given, and promulge
public accusations, and suffrages unto the people, asks you whose Suffrages
were these, if not the Ruler's? By which strange construction, where Pollux
having first related in what part the function of the Thesmothetae, was common
with that of the Nine Archons, comes ((...)) to show you what was peculiar to
themselves, namely to give notice when the Heliaea or other Indicatoryes were
to assemble; the Dr. renders it, they do privately prescribe: as if the Session
of a Court of Justice, and such an one as contained a thousand Judges, being
the representative of the whole people, were to be privately prescribed, then
to this private prescribing of Justice, he adds that they do publicly
promulge ((...)) citations upon crimes not within the written Law; as if
private prescription and public promulgation could stand together. Next
whereas promulgation in the very Nature of the word signifies an Act before a
Law made, he presumes the Law to be first made by the Rulers, and then
promulgated by the Thesmothetae to the people, kim kam to the experience of all
Commonwealths, the Nature of promulgation, and the sense of his Author, whose
words as I showed before, declare it to have been the proper or peculiar office
of the Thesmothetae to give the people notice when they were to assemble for
Judicature, or when for giving their Chirotonia or suffrage, by promulgation of
the cause ((...)) upon which they were to determine.

For the fourth passage the Dr. quoting a wrong place for these words, ((...))
that the Nomothetae (being a Representative, as I showed* of the whole people,
chosen by lot, and in number one thousand) chirotonized or gave the Legislative
suffrage; thence inferrs* that the Rulers chirotonized, voted or made Laws by
themselves without the People: which is, as if one should say that the
Prerogative Tribe in Rome, or the House of Commons in England, gave their Vote
to such or such a Law, therefore it was made by the Rulers alone, and not by
the People of Rome or of England.

For the fourth passage, Stevens quotes Demosthenes at large in these words,
((...)). This the Doctor interprets of an Officer; to which I shall say more,
when he shows me where the sentence is, or what went before: for as yet I do
not know of an officer in any Common wealth, whose Election was indifferently
made, either by the Senate, or by the People; nor do I think the Doctor has
looked farther for this, than Stephens, who has not interpreted it.

The fifth passage is, That a Decree of the Senate in Athens, had the force of
a Law for one year, without the People. So had the Edicts of the Praetores in
Rome; But I would fain know, whence the Senate in Athens, or the Praetors in
Rome, originally derived this right (which was no more then that such Laws
might be probationers, and so better understood, when they came to the Vote)
but from the Chirotonia, or suffrage of the People.

The sixth passage, stops the mouths of such as having nothing to say unto the
matter of my writing, pick quarrels with the manner or freedom of it, the
liberty I take in the defense of truth, seeing the Doctor takes a greater
liberty upon other terms, while he bids his Antagonist (one that desended the
cause now in my hand) go and consult his Authors, namely, Stephens and Budaeus
again; for, says he, you wrong those learned men, while you would have us
believe that they were as ignorant of the Greek Story as your self, or that
things are to be found in them, which are not. To which confidence, I have
better leave to say, that the Doctor should do well to take no worse counsel
than he gives.

But what is become of my Praevaricator, I have quite lost him, else I should
have entreated him to compare his Notes out of my Sermon, with these out of the
Doctors: or retract that same affectation, in saying, I know not, but Mr.
Harrington has conceived a great unkindness for the Clergy. As if these their
Stratagems, with which they make perpetual War against the unwary people, did
not concern a man that has undertaken the cause of popular Government.

The Policy of the Achaeans consisted of diverse Commonwealths under one, which
was thus administered, the Cities sent their Deputies twice every year of
course, and oftener if they were summoned by their Strategus, or their
Demiurges, to the place appointed. The Strategus was the Supreme Magistrate,
both Military and Civil, and the Demiurges being ten, were his Council, all
Annual Magistrates elected by the People. This Council thus constituted, was
called the Synarchy, and performed like duties, in relation unto the Senate,
consisting of the Deputies sent by their peculiar Soveraignties or Cities, as
the Prytans unto that in Athens. The Policies of the Aetolians and Lycians, are
so near the same again, that in one you have all; So both the Senates and the
Magistracy of these Common wealths, were upon rotation. To conclude, with
Venice.

The Common wealth of Venice, consists of four parts, The Epitome of the
Commonwealth of Venice. The great Council.
great Council, the Senate, the Collegio, and the Signiory.

The Great Council is the aggregate body of the whole People, or Citizens of
Venice, which for the paucity of their Number, and the Antiquity of their
Extraction are called Gentlemen, or Noble Venetians; every one of which, at
five and twenty years of Age has right of Session and Suffrage in this
Council; which right of Suffrage, because throughout this Commonwealth, in all
Debates and Elections, it is given by the ballot, is called, The right of
ballotting, whereby this Council being the Sovereign power, creates all the
rest of the Orders, Councils, or Magistracies; has constitutely the Ultimate
result, both in cases of Judicature, and constitution of Laws.

The Senate called also the Pregati, consists of Sixty Senators, The Senate.
properly so styled, whereof the great Council electeth six on a day, beginning
so long before the Month of October, that these being all chosen by that time,
then receive their Magistracy; it consists also of sixty more, called the
Juncta, which are elected by the Scrutiny of the Old Senate, that is, by the
Senate proposing, and the great Council resolving; the rest of their Creation,
is after the same manner with the former. In the Sixty of the Senate, there
cannot be above three of any one kindred, or Family, nor in the Junta so many,
unless there be fewer in the former. These Magistracies are all Annual, but
without intervall, so that it is at the pleasure of the great Council, whether
a Senator having finished his year, they will elect him again.

The Collegio is a Council, consisting more especially of The College.
three Orders of Magistrates, called in their Language Saui as the Saui grandi,
to whose cognizance or care belong the whole affairs of Sea and Land; the Saui
di Terra ferma, to whose care and Cognizance belong the affairs of the Land,
and the Saui di Mare, to whose Cognizance appertain the affairs of the Sea,
and of the Islands. These are elected by the Senate, not all at once; but for
the Saui Grandi, who are six, by three at a time, with the interposition of
three months; and for the Saui di terra ferma, and the Saui di mare, who are
each five, after the same manner* save only that the first Election consists
of three, and the second of two; Each Order of the Saui elects weekly one
Provost, each of which Provosts has right in any affair belonging unto the
Cognizance of his Order, to propose unto the Collegio. Audience of Ambassadors,
and matters of foreign Negotiation, belong properly unto this Council.

The Signiory consists of the Duke, and of his Counselors. The Signiory.
The Duke is a Magistrate created by the great Council for life, to whom the
Common wealth acknowledges the Reverence due unto a Prince, and all her Acts
run in his Name, though without the Counselors he have no power at all while
they can perform any function of the Signiory without him. The Counselors,
whose Magistracy is Annual, are elected by the scrutiny of the Senate* naming
one out of each Tribe, (for the City is locally divided into six Tribes) and
the Great Council approving; so the Counselors are six, whose function in part
is of the Nature of Masters of Requests, having withal, power to grant certain
privileges: but their greatest pre-eminence is, that all, or any one of them,
may propose unto any Council in the Common wealth.

The Signiory has session and suffrage in the Collegio, the Certain Rights of
the Councils.
Collegio has Session and suffrage in the Senate, and the Senate has Session
and suffrage in the Great Council. The Signiory, or the Provosts of the Saui,
have power to assemble the College, the College has power to assemble the
Senate, and the Senate has power to assemble the Great Council; the Signiori,
but more peculiarly the Provosts of the Saui, (in their own Offices and
functions) have power to propose unto the College, the College has power to
propose unto the Senate, and the Senate has power to propose unto the Great
Council: what ever is thus proposed and resolved, either by the Senate (for
sometimes, through the security of this Order, a Proposition goes no farther)
or by the Great Council, is ratifide, or becomes the Law of the Commonwealth.
Over and above these Orders* they have three Judicatories, two Civil, and one
Criminal, in each of which, forty Gentlemen elected by the great Council, are
Judges for the Term of eight months; to these Judicatories, belong the
Avogadori and the Auditori, who are Magistrates, having power to hear causes
apart, and, as they judge fitting, to introduce them into the Courts.

If a man tell me, that I omit many things, he may perceive I write an Epitome,
in which no more should be comprehended, then that which understood may make a
man understand the rest. But of these principal parts, consists the whole
body of admirable Venice.

The Consiglio de Dieci, or Council of Ten, being that which partaketh of
Dictatorian power* is not a limb of her, but as it were a Sword in her hand.
This Council (in which the Signiory has also Session and suffrage) consists
more peculiarly of ten Annual Magistrates, created by the Great Council, who
afterward elect three of their own number by Lot, which so elected are called
Capi de Dieci, their Magistracy being monthly; again, out of the three Capi,
one is taken by Lot, whose Magistracy is weekly, this is he, who over against
the Tribunal in the Great Council, fits like another Duke, and is called, the
Provost of the Dieci. It belongs to these three Magistrates, to assemble the
Council of dele Ten which they are obliged to do weekly of course, and oftener
as they see occasion. The Council being assembled, any one of the Signiory, or
two of the Capi may propose to it, the power which they now exercise, (and
wherein for their assistance they create three Magistrates called the grand
Inquisitors) consists in the punishment of certain heinous crimes* especially
that of Treason; in relation whereunto they are as it were Sentinells, standing
upon the guard of the Commonwealth: But constitutively with the Addition of a
Junta, consisting of other fifteen together with some of the chief
Magistrates, having right in cases of important speed or secrecy unto this
Council; they had the full and absolute power of the whole Commonwealth, as
Dictator.

That Venice either transcribed the whole and every part of her Constitution
out of Athens and Lacedemon; or happens to be framed, as if she had so don,
is most apparent. The Result of this Commonwealth is in the Great Council,
and the debate in the Senate* so was it in Lacedemon. A decree made by the
Senate of Athens had the power of a Law for one year without the people, at
the end whereof the people might revoke it: A decree of the Senate of Venice
stands good without the great Council, unless these see reason to revoke it.
The Prytans, were a Council preparing business for the Senate; So is the
Collegio in Venice; the Presidents of the Prytans were the Ten Proedri; those
of the Collegio are the three Provosts of the Saui. The Archons or Princes of
Athens being Nine, had a kind of Sovereign inspection upon all the Orders of
the Commonwealth, so has the Signiory of Venice consisting of Nine besides the
Duke. The Quarancys in Venice are Judicatoryes of the nature of the Heliaea in
Athens; and as the Thesmothetae heard and introduced the causes into that
Judicatory, so do the Avogadori and the Auditori into these. The Consiglio de
dieci in Venice is not of the body but an Appendix of the Commonwealth; so was
the Court of the Ephori in Lacedemon, and as these had power to put a King a
Magistrate or any Delinquent of what degree soever unto death, so has the
Consiglio de dieci. This again is wrought up with the Capi di dieci, and the
weekly Provost, as were the Prytans with the Proedri, and the weekly Epistata,
and the Ballot is lineally descended from the Bean; yet is Venice in the
whole, and in every part, a far more exquisite policy than either Athens or
Lacedemon.

A Political is like a natural body. Commonwealths resemble and differ, as
men resemble and differ; among whom you shall not see two faces, or two
dispositions, that are alike. Peter and Thomas in all their parts are equally
men, and yet Peter and Thomas of all men may be the most unlike; one may have
his greater strength in his arms, the other in his legs; one his greater
beauty in his soul, the other in his body; one may be a fool, the other wise*
one valiant, the other cowardly. These two which at a distance you will nor
know, one from the other; when you look nearer, or come to be better
acquainted with you will never mistake. Our Considerer (who in his Epistle,
would make you believe, that Oceana is but a mere Transcription out of Venice,)
has Companions like himself, and how near they look in matters of this nature,
is plain, while one knows not Jethro from Moses, and the other takes a state
of Civil War, to be the best model of a Civil Government.

Let a man look near, and the shall not find any one Order in Oceana (the
Ballot only excepted) that has not as much difference from, or resemblance
unto any one order in Rome or Venice, as any one Order in Rome or Venice has
from, or to, any one Order in Athens or Lacedemon: Which different temper of
the parts, must of necessity in the whole, yield a result, a soul or Genius,
altogether new in the World, as embracing the Arms of Rome, and the Counsels of
Venice; and yet neither obnoxious unto the Turbulency of the one, nor the
Narrowness of the other.

But the sum of what has been said of Venice, as to the business in hand,
comes to no more, then that the Senate and the Magistracy of this Common wealth
are upon Rotation. No more: nay I am well, if it come to so much. For the
Praevaricator catching me up, where I say, that, for all this, the greater
Magistracies in Venice are continually wheeled through a few hands, tells me,
that I have confessed it to be otherwise. I have indeed confessed, that albeit,
the Consid. p. 93.
Magistracies are all confes'd for certain terms; yet those terms do not
necessitate vacations, that is, the term of a Magistracy being expired, the
party that bore it, is capable upon a new Election of bearing it again without
intervall or vacation; which does not altogether trash the Rotation of the
Common wealth, though it render the same very imperfect. This infirmity of
Venice, deriveth from a complication of causes, none of which is incident unto
a Common wealth, consisting of the Many: wherefore there lies no Obligation
upon me, to discover the reason in this place. But on the contrary, seeing, let
me show things never so new, they are slighted as old; I have an Obligation in
this place, to try whether I may get esteem* by concealing some thing. What is
said, every body knew before; this is not said* who knows it?

A Riddle. Riddle me, Riddle me, what is this? The Magistracies in Venice
(except such as are rather of Ornament then of power) are all Annual, or at
most Biennial. No man whose term is expired, can hold his Magistracy longer,
but by a new Election. The Elections are most of them made in the Great
Council, and all by the Ballot, which is the most equal and impartial way of
Suffrage. And yet the greater Magistracies are perpetually wheeled, through a
few hands.

If I be worthy to give advice unto a man that would study the Politickes; let
him understand Venice, he that* understands Venice right, shall go nearest to
judge (notwithstanding the difference that is in every Policy) right of any
Government in the world. Now the assault of the Considerer deriving but from
some (Pique, or) Emulation, which of us should be the abler Politician; It the
Council of State had the curiosity to know either that, or who understands
Venice, this riddle would make the discovery; For he that cannot easily unfold
this Kiddle, does not understand her.

The sixth kind of Rotation is when a Commonwealth goes upon it in all her
Orders, Senate, People, and Magistracy. Such an one taking in the Many, and
being fixed upon the foot of a steady Agrarian* has attained un^o perfect
Equality. But of this, Example there is none, or you must accept of Oceana.

The Rotation of Oceana is of two parts, the one of the Rotation, of Oceana.
Electors which is Annual, and the other of the Elected which is Trienniall.

Speaking of Electors in this sense, I mean as the great Council in Venice are
Electors of all other Orders, Councills, or Magistrates. But the Commonwealth
of Oceana taking in the whole People cannot, as does the great Council of
Venice (wherein they that have right are but a few) attain unto this capacity
at one step: for which cause she takes three steps; One at the Parishes, where
every fifth Elder is annually elected by the whole people* (there is no doubt
but there was some such Order in Israel whereby the Monthly Rotation of her
Congregation or Perogative, by election of two thousand in each Tribe, was
preserved). The next step she takes is at the Hundred, whereby Election of
Officers and Magistrates, the Troops, chosen at the Parishes, are well near
formed. Her third step, is at the Tribe, where the whole body of her deputies
are in exact form, discipline, and function, Headed by proper Officers and
Magistrates, these altogether consisting of One fifth part of the whole people.
This Rotation, being in it self Annual, comes in regaurd of the body of the
People to be Quinquennial or such as in the space of five years gives every Man
his turn in the power of Election.

But though every Man be so capable of being an Electpr* that he must have his
Turn, yet every man is not so capable of being elected into those Magistracies,
that are Sovereign or have the Leading of the whole Commonwealth, that it can
be safe to lay a Necessity, that every Man must take his turn in these also;
but it is enough that every Man, who in the Judgment and Conscience of his
Country is fit, may take his turn. Wherefore upon the Conscience of the
Electors, (so constituted as has been shown) it goes to determine, who shall
partake of Sovereign Magistracy, or be, at the Assembly of a Tribe, elected
into the Senate or Prerogative; which assemblyes are so Trienniall, That one
Third part of each falling every year, and another being elected, the
Parliament is thereby perpetuated.

Such was the constitution of those Councills which the Praevaricator has
confessed he always thought admirable: but now the toy takes him to be quite
of another mind; for, says he, That, Ancient Republics have through a
malicious Consid. p. 90.
jealously (let them take it among them) made it unlawful even for persons of
the clearest merit to continue long in Command, but have by perpetual
vicissitude substituted new men in the Government is manifested enough; but
with what success they did this, will best appear by Veturius, Varro, and
Mancinus. He is still admirable: One would wonder what he means, if it be that
there were but three weak or unfortunate Generals in the whole course of Rome;
how strange is it to urge this as an argument against Rotation, which is as
strong an one as can be urged, for Rotation? If the Romans by this way of
Election, having experience of an able General, knew ever after, where to have
him; or lighting upon one they found not so fit for their purpose, could in the
Compass of one year, be rid of him of course, without dishonor or reproach to
him, taking thereby a warning to come no more there; was this a proceeding to
favor malice; or such an one as removing the cause of malice, left no root for
such a branch or possibility of like effect? Certainly by this Assertion the
Praevaricator has Joled his presumptuous head; not only against the prudence
of Ancient Commonwealths, but of God himself in that of Israel. Veturius,
Varro, and Mancinus (though some of them cannot be at all points excused) by
this mark upon them, may be thought hardlier of, than is needful; for which
cause there being that also in their Stories, which is neither unpleasant nor
unprofitable, I shall endeavor to make the Reader somewhat better acquainted
with them. One of the greatest blows Rome ever received was by Pontius,
Captain General of the Samnites, who having drawn her Consulls, Posthumous and
Veturius, by Stratagem into the fastenses of Caudium, a Valley of narrow
Entrance, and shut up the mouth of it Live. l. 9.
by possessing him self of the only Passage, the rest being environed with
insuperable Rocks, the Samnite came to have both the Armies, and so upon the
matter, the whole strength (in those days) of Rome inevitably at his
discretion. Hereupon, having leisure and being desirous (in a matter of such
moment) of good advice he dispatched a messenger unto his father Herennius the
ablest Counselor in Samnium, to know what might be his best course with the
Romans now inavoydably at his mercy, who answered that he should open the
Pass, and let them return untouched. The young General amazed at this
Counsel, desired farther direction; whereupon Herennius for the second time
made answer that he should cut them off to a man. But the General upon the
strange disagreement of such opinions, having his fathers age (for he was very
old) in suspicion took a third course, which neither (according to the first
advice of wise Herennius) making friends; nor (according unto the second)
destroying enemies, became as he prophesyed the utter ruin of the
Commonwealth of Samnium. For the Romans being dismissed safe, but
ignominiously, the Senate upon their Return, fell into the greatest straight
and consternation, that had been known among them. On the one side to live and
not revenge such an Affront was intolerable; on the other to revenge it, was
against the faith of the Consulls, whose Necessity (the loss of two Armies
lying upon it) had in truth forced them to accept of a dishonorable League
with the Samnites. Now not the Armies, but the Senate it self was in Caudium,
not a man of them could find the way out of this Vale environed with Rocks, but
he only that could not find it out of the other, Posthumous, who having first
showed, that neither War nor Peace could be so made, as to engage the Common
wealth ( injussu Populi) without the Command of the People, declared that the
Senate returning the Consuls, with such other as had consented unto so wicked
and dishonorable a peace, naked, and bound unto the Samnites, were free, nor
ceased till the Senate (thereunto pressed by the Necessity of the Common wealth)
resolving accordingly, He, Veturius, and some of the Tribunes, were delivered
unto the Samnites; who nevertheless, to hold the Romans unto their League,
dismissed them with safety. The disputes on either side that arose hereupon,
and coming to Arms, ended with the destruction of Samnium, I omit: that which
as to the present Occasion, is material, is, the reputation of the Consuls, and
Veturius, though he were not the leading man, being for the rest, as deep in
the Action as Posthumous; the People were so far from thinking themselves
deceived in this choice, that the Consuls were more honored in Rome, for
having lost, then Pontius in Samnium for having won the day at Caudium.

I do not rob Graves, nor steal Winding-sheets; my Controversies are not but
with the Living, with none of these that have not showed themselves best able
for their own defense; nor yet with such, but in the prosecution of truths
opposed by them unto the damage of mankind; yet the Praevaricator accuses me
of rude charges, what are his then in defense of falsehood, and against such as
cannot bite? or whether of these is the more noble?

For Varro, who being Consul of Rome, lost the battle of Cannae unto Hanibal
Captain General for the Carthag nians, though without Cowardice, yet by
rashness, he is not so excusable.

But for Mancinus, brought (as was Posthumous, by the Florus. l. 2. c. 18.
Samnites) unto dishonorable condition* by Megera* Captain General of the
Numantines, there be excuses: As first the Numantines, for their number not
exceeding four thousand fighting men, were the gallantest of so many, on which
the Sun ever shone.

Fourteen years had their Commonwealth held tacke with the Romans, in courage,
conduct, and virtue, having worsted Pompey the Great, and made a League with
him, when she might have made an end of him, ere ever Mancinus (of whom Cicero
gives a fair Character) came in Play: So his misfortunes having great Examples,
cannot want some excuse, but suppose ner' One of them deserved any Excuse, what
is it at which these Examples drive, against a Commonwealth? Sure the
Samnites, the Carthaginians, the Numantines were as well Commonwealths as the
Romans; and so wherever the advantage go, it must stay upon a Commonwealth;
Or if it be Rotation that he would be at (for we must guess) granting Pontius
the Samnite, and Megera the Numantine, to have been no more upon Rotation, then
Hannibal the Carthaginian; yet is it plain that Rome upon her Rotation overcame
not only, Pontius, Hannibal and Megera; but Samnium Carthage, and Numantia. So
much for Rome, but, says Consid. p. 91.
he, No less appears by the rabble of Generals often made use of by the
Athenians, while men of Valor and Conduct have layn by the walls.

A Rabble of Generals did I never hear of before; but not to meddle with his
Rhetoric, whereas each of his Objections has at least some one Contradiction
in it, this has two (one a Priore, another a Posteriore) One in the Snoute,
another in the tail of it. For had there been formerly no Rotation in Athens,
how should there have been Men of valor and conduct to lie by the walls? and
if Rotation thenceforth should have ceased, how could those men of valor and
conduct have done other than lie by the walls? so this inavoydably confesses,
that Rotation was the means whereby Athens came to be stored with persons of
valor and Conduct, they to be capable of Employment, and the Commonwealth to
employ the whole virtue of her Citizens; And it being (in his own words) an
Argument of much imperfection in a Government not to dare to employ the whole
virtue of the Citizens; This wholly Routes a standing General, for the
Government that dares employ but the virtue of One, dares not employ the virtue
of all. Yet he jogs on.

Those Orders must needs be against Nature, which excluding Consid. p. 91.
persons of the best qualifications give admission unto others, who have
nothing to commend them but their Art in Canvasing for the suffrage of the
People. He never takes notice that the Ballot bars Canvasing beyond all
possibility of any such thing; but we will let that go; Canvasing, it is
confessed, was more frequent in Rome and Athens then is laudable, where
nevertheless it is the stronger Argument for the integrity of Popular
Suffrage, which being free from any aid of art, produced* in those
Commonwealths more illustrious Examples, (if a Man go no farther than
Plutarchs lives) then are to be found in all the rest of Story.

Yet (says he) this Law has been as often broken as a Commonwealth Consid.
p. 91.
has been brought into any exigence, for the hazard of trusting affairs in
weak hands then appearing, no scruple has been made to trample upon this
Order, for giving the power to some able man at that time rendered incapable by
the Vacation, this Law requires. The continuation of the Consulship of Marius
is sufficient to be alleged for the proof of this, though if occasion were
it might be backed by plenty of Examples. His choice confutes his pretended
variety, who jests with edged tools, this Example above all will cut his
fingers, for by this prolongation of Magistracy, or to speak more properly of
Empire (for the Magistracy of the Consul was civil and conferd by the people
Centuriatis comitiis, but his Empire was Military and conferrd Curiatis) Rome
began to drive those wheels of her rotation heavily in Marius, which were quite
taken off in Caesar.

I have heretofore in vain, persuaded them upon this occasion, to take notice
of a Chapter in Machiavill, so worthy of regard, that I have now inserted it at
length* as follows.

The proceedings of the Roman Commonwealth, being well Match. Discor. B. 3.
Chapter 24.
considered, two things will be found to have been the causes of her
dissolution. The Contention that happened through the endeavor of the people,
(always opposed or eluded by the Nobility) to introduce an Agrarian; and the
damage that accrued from the prolongation of Empire: Mischiefs which had they
leen foreseen in due time, the Government by application of fit remedies might
have been of longer life and better health. The diseases which this
Commonwealth, from contention about the Agrarian, contracted, were acute, and
tumultuous, but those being slower, and without tumult, which she got by
prolongation of Empire were Chronicall, and went home with her, giving a
warning by her Example, how dangerous it is unto States that would enjoy their
liberty, to suffer Magistracy, how deservedly soever conferd, to remain long
in the possession of the same man. Certainly if the rest of the Romans, whose
Empire happened to be prolonged, had been as virtuous and provident as L.
Quinctius, they had never run into this inconvenience. Of such wholesome Example
was the goodness of this man, that the Senate and the people, after one of
their ordinary disputes, being come to some accord, whereas the people had
prolonged the Magistracy of their present Tribunes, in regard they were persons
more fitly opposed unto the Ambition of the Nobility, then by a New Election
they could readily have found, and hereupon the Senate (to show they needed not
be worse at this game) would have prolouged the Consulate unto Quinctius, he
refused his consent, saying that ill Examples were to be corrected by good
ones, and not encouraged by others like themselves; nor could they stir his
resolution, by which means they were necessitated to make new Consuls. Had
this wisdom and virtue (I say) been duly regarded, or rightly understood, it
might have saved Rome, which through this neglect came to ruin. The first
whose Empire happned to be prolonged was Publilius Philo, his consulate
expiring at the Camp before Palepolis, while it seemed unto the Senate that he
had the Victory in his hand (Actum cum Tribunis Plebis est ad Populum, ferrent
Live. b. 9.
ut cum Philo Consulatu abijsset, Proconsule rem gereret) they sent him no
successor, but prolonged his Empire, by which means he came to be the first
Pro-Consul. An Expedient (though introduced for the Public good) that came in
time to be the public bane: For by how much the Roman Armies marched farther
off, by so much the like course seeming to be the more necessary, became the
more customary; whence ensued two pernicious consequences, the one that there
being fewer Generals, and Men of known ability for conduct, the Art with the
reputation of the same, came to be more engrossed, and obnoxious unto ambition:
the other, that a General standing long, got such hold upon his Army; as could
take them off from the Senate, and hang them on himself. Thus Marius and Sylla
could be followed by the Soldiery to the detriment of the Commonwealth, and
Caesar to her perdition. Whereas had Rome never prolonged Empire she might
perhaps not so soon have arrived at Greatness, or acquisition, but would have
made less have to destruction.

All the Dilemma that Machiavil observes in these words is, that if a
Commonwealth wilt not be so slow in her acquisition as is required by
Rotation, she will be less sure then is requisite unto her preservation: But
the Praevaricator (not deigning to show us, upon what reasons or experience, he
grounds his Maxim) is positive.

That the Dilemma into which a Commonwealth is in this case brought is very
dangerous, for either she must give her self Consid. p. 92.
a mortal blow by gaining the habit of infringing such orders as are necessary
for her preservation, or receive one from without.

This same is an other Parakeetisme: these words are spoken by me after
Machiavill in relation unto Dictatorian power, in which they are so far from
concluding against Rotation, that this in case of a Dictator is more especially
necessary ( Maxima libertatis custodia est, ut magna imperia Mamercus apud.
Live. l. 4.
diuturna non sint, and temporis modus imponatur, quibus juris imponi dele non
potest) which could not be more confirmed then by him, who in the example of
Marius shows that the contrary course spoild all.

The Romans if they had sent a successor unto Publilius Philo at Palepolis, it
may be might have let the Victory slip out of his hands, it may be not; However
this had been no greater wound unto the Commonwealth, then that her
Acquisition would have been slower, which ought not to come in Competition with
the safety of a Government, and therefore amounts not unto a Dilemma, this
being a kind of argument that should not be stubb'd of one horn, but have each
of equal length and danger. Nor is it so certain that increase is slower for
Rotation, seeing neither was this interrupted by that, nor that by this, as the
greatest Actions of Rome, the Conquest of Carthage by Scipio Africanus, of
Macedon by Flaminius, and of Antiochus by Asiaticus, are irrefragable
Testimonies.

I would be loath to spoil the Considerers preferment, but he is not a safe
Counselor for a Prince; whose providence not supplying the defect of Rotation
whether in civil or military affairs, with some thing of like nature,
exposes himself if not his Empire as much unto danger as a Commonwealth.
Thus the Sons of Zeruiah, Joab Captain 2 Samuel 3. 39.
of the Host and Abishai his brother, were too strong for David; thus the
Kings of Israel and of Juda fell most of them by their Captains or Favorites,
as I have elsewhere observed more particularly. Thus Brutus being standing
Captain of the Guards could cast out Tarquine: Thus Sejanus had means to
attempt against Tiberius, Otho Arnisi.
to be the Rival of Galba, Casperius Aelianus, of Nerva; Cassius, of
Antoninus; Perennis, of Commodus; Maximinus, of Alexander; Philippus, of
Gordian; Aemilianus of Gallus, Ingebus, Lollianus, Aureolus, of Gallienus;
Magnesius of Constantius; Maximus, of Gratian; Arbogastes of Valentinian;
Ruffinus of Arcadius; Stilico of Honorius. Go from the West into the East,
upon the death of Marcianus, Asparis alone, having the command of the Arms,
could prefer Leo to the Empire: Phocas deprive Mauritius of the same, Heraclius
depose Phocas, Leo Isaurius do as much to Theodosius Adramyttenus; Necephorus,
to Irenes; Leo Armenius, to Michael Curopalates; Romanus Lagapenus, to
Constantine, Nicephorus Phocas to Romanus Puer; Johannes Zismisces to
Nicephorus Phocas; Isaac Comnenus, to Michael Stratioticus; Botoniates to
Michael the Son of Ducas, Alexius Comnenus to Botoniates; which work
continued in such manner till the destruction of that Empire. Go from the East
unto the North. Gustavus attained unto the Kingdom of Sweden, by his power and
command of an Army, and thus Secechus came near to supplant Bolessaus the third
of Poland. If Wallesteine had lived, what had become of his Master? In France,
the race of Pharamond was extinguished by Pipin, and that of Pipin in like
mannner, each by the Major of the Palace, a standing Magistracy of Exorbitant
trust. Go to the Indies: You shall find a King of Pegu to have been thrust out
of the Realm of Tangue by his Captain General. Nay go where you will,
though this be pretty well, you shall add more than one Example. But as to the
Praevaricator, if he were not given to make such mouths as eat up nothing
else, but his own words, I needed not have brought any other Testimony to
absolve a Commonwealth of malice in this order than his own, where he says,
that when some Consid. p. 47. 48.
person over-tops the rest in commands, it is a disease of Monarchy which
easily admitts of this cure, that he be reduced unto a less volume, and
levelled unto an equality with the rest of his Order. Now a Prince can no
otherwise Level a Noble Man, that excells the rest through Command, unto
equality with his order, then by causing those of the same Order to take their
turns in like command. Good wits have ill Memoryes. But, says he, I know not
what advantage Mr. Harrington may foresee from the orders of this Rotation, for
Consid. p. 93.
my part I can discover no other effect of it then this, that in a
Commonwealth like that of Oceana, taking in the Many (for in Venice he
confesses it to be otherwise) where every man will press forward toward
Magistracy, this Law by taking off at the end of one year some Officers, and
all at the end of Oceana, p. 213.
three will keep the Republic in a perpetual Minority. No man having time
allowed him to gain that Experience; which B. 2. 9.
may serve to lead the Commonwealth to the understanding of her true interest
either at home or abroad.

What I have confessed to be otherwise in Venice, I have shown already at least
so far as concerns the present Occasion, the causes of that defect being
incompatible with a Commonwealth consisting of the many; otherwise why was not
the like found in Athens or Rome, where though every man pressed forward
toward Magistracy, yet the Magistrates were, for illustrious Examples, more in
weight and Number, than are to be found in all the rest of the world.

If where Elections were the most exposed to the ambition of the Competitor,
and the humors of the People they yet failed not to excel all others that
were not Popular, what greater vindication can there be of the Natural
integrity of Popular suffrage even at the worst? But this, where it is given by
the Ballot, is at the best, and free from all that pressing for Magistracy in
the Competitor, or faction of the People that can any ways be laid unto the
former; or let the Considerer consider again, and tell me by what means either
of these in such a State can be dangerous or troublesome, or if at worst the
orders for Election in Oceana must not perform that part, better then a Crowd
and a Sheriff. Well but putting the case the Elections which were not
quarreled much withal be rightly Stated; yet this Law for Terms and Vacations
by taking off at the End of One year some Officers, and all at the end of
Three, will keep the Republic in perpetual Minority, no man having time
allowed him to gain that Experience, which may serve to lead the Commonwealth
to the understanding of her true interest at home or abroad. Because every Man
will press forward for Magistracy, therefore there ought not to be Terms and
vacations, least these should keep the Commonwealth in perpetual Minority. I
would once see an Argument that might be reduced to Mood and Figure. The next
Objection is, that these Orders take off at the end of One year some Officers,
which is true, and that at the end of Three years, they take off all, which is
false; for whereas the Leaders of the Commonwealth are all Trienniall, the
Orders every year take off no more then such only as have finished their three
years term, which is not all but a Third part. Wherefore let him speak out;
three years is too short a Term for acquiring that knowledge, which is
necessary unto the leading of a Commonwealth. To let the courses of Israel
which were Monthly, the Annual Magistracyes of Athens and Rome go. If three
years be too short a Term for this purpose, what was three months? A
Parliament in the late Government was rarely longer lived then three months,
nor more frequent then once in a year, so that a Man having been twelve years a
Parliament man in England, could not have born his Magistracy above three
years, though he were not necessarily subject unto any Vacation. Whereas a
Parliament Man in Oceana may in twelve years have born his Magistracy. fix,
Notwwithstanding the Necessity of his Vacations, which of these two are most
straightened in the time necessary unto the gaining of due experience or
knowledge for the leading of a Commonwealth? Nevertheless the Parliament of
England was seldom or never without Men of Sufficient skill and ability;
though the Orders there were more in Number, less in Method, not written and
of greater difficulty then they be in Oceana: There, if not the Parliament man,
the Parliament it self was upon Terms and Vacations, which unto a Council of
such Nature is the most dangerous thing in the world, seeing dissolution,
whether unto a body Natural or Political is death. For if Parliaments
happened to rise again and again, this was not so much coming unto themselves,
(seeing a Council of so different Genius has not been known) as a New birth
and a Council that is every year Newborn indeed must keep a commonwealth in
perpetnall Minority or rather Infancy; always in danger of being overlaid by
her Nurse, or strangled by her Guardian: whereas an Assembly continued by
Succession or due Rotation regulated by Terms giving sufficient time for
digestion, grows up, and is like a Man, who though he change his flesh neither
changes his body, nor his soul. Thus the Senate of Venice changing flesh,
though not so often as in a Commonwealth consisting of the Many were
requisite, yet oftenest of any other in the world, is, both in Body and Soul or
Genius, the most unchangeable Council under Heaven. Flesh must be changed or
it will stink of it self; there is a Term necessary to make a man able to lead
the Commonwealth unto her interest, and there is a Term that may enable a Man
to lead the Commonwealth unto his interest. In this regaurd it is, that
(according to Mamerous) the Vacations are ( mazima libertatis custodia) the
Keepers of the Libertyes of Oceana.

The three Regions into which each of the leading Councills, is divided, are
three forms (as I may say) in the School of State, for them of the Third
(though there be care in the choice) it is no such great matter what be their
skill: The Ballot which they practiced in the Tribe being that in the
performance whereof no Man can be out, and this is all that is Necessary unto
their Novitiate or first year, during which time they may be Auditors: by the
Second, they will have seen all the Scenes, or the whole rotation of the
Orders, so facile, and so intelligible, that at one reading a Man understands
them as a Book, but at once Acting as a Play, and so Methodicall, that he will
remember them better. Tell me then what it is that can hinder him for the
second year from being a Speaker; or why for the third, should he not be a very
able Leader.

The Senate and the Prerogative, or representative of the people, being each of
like constitution, drop annually four hundred, which in a matter of ten years,
amount to four thousand experienced Leaders, ready upon new elections to resume
their leading.

Another thing which I would have considered, is, whether our most Eminent Men
found their parts in Parliament, or brought them thither. For if they brought
them, think you not the Military Orders of the youth, the Discipline of the
Tribes, the eight years Orb of the Ambassadors, the Provincial Armies of
Oceana, likely to breed Men of as good parts, as no such matter? Nor have
Astronomers that familiarity with the Stars, which Men without these Orbs will
have with such as are in them. He is very heavy, who cannot perceive that in a
Government of this frame, the Education must be Universal, or diffused
throughout the whole Body. Another thing which is as certain, as comfortable,
is that the pretended depth and difficulty in matter of State, is a mere cheat.
From the beginning of the World unto this day, you never found a Common wealth,
where the Leaders having honesty enough, wanted skill enough to lead her unto
her true interest at home or abroad: that which is necessary unto this end, is
not so much skill as honesty, and let the Leaders of Oceana be dishonest if
they can. In the leading of a Commonwealth aright; this is certain, wisdom and
honesty are all one, and though you shall find defects in their virtue, those
that have had the fewest, have ever been, and for ever shall be the wisest.

Rome never ruined, till her balance being broken, the Nobility forsaking
their ancient virtue, abandoned themselves unto their lusts; and the Senators,
who as in the Case of Jugurtha, were all bribed, turned knaves; at which turn,
all their skill in Government, (and in this never men had bin better skilled)
could not keep the Common wealth from over-rurning. Cicero (an honest man)
labored might and main. Pomponius Atticus another, despaired: Cato tore out
his own bowels, the Poigniards of Brutus and Cassius, neither considered Prince
nor Father. But the Common wealth had sprung her Planks, and spilt her ballast,
the World could not save her.

For the Close, the Praevaricator, who had judged before, that There was much
reason to expect, some of the Clergy (against all of whom, Mr. Harrington has
declared War) Consid. p. 36. p. 94.
will undertake the quarrel: tells me in the last line, that There be unto whom
he has recommended the disquisition of the Jewish Common wealth.

It is a miserable thing, to be condemned unto the perpetual Budget; once turn
an honest man to me. In the mean time, that it may be farther seen, how much I
am delighted in fair play, it being, so belike, that some Divines are already
at work with me, and I have not so fully explained my self upon that point,
which with them is of the greatest concernment, that they can yet say, they
have peept into my Hand, or seen my Game; as I have won this trick, Gentlemen,
or speak, so I play them out the last card in the next Book for up.

FINIS.
Advertisement to the Reader, or direction contained in certain Quaeries, how
the Commonwealth of Oceana may be examined or answered, by diverse sorts of
men, without spoiling their high Dance, or cutting off any part of their
Elegance, or freeness of Expression.
To the Scholar that has passed his Novitiate in Story.
I. WHether the balance of Propriety in Land coming through Civil
vicissitude by slow and undiscerned degrees, to alter as it did, and to stand
as it does in Oceana, any other Government could have been introduced
(otherwise then by the interposition of foreign Arms) that could have
subsisted naturally without violence or reluctance, or steddily without
frequent changes, alterations, and plunges, save that only of the Common wealth
proposed?

II. Whether the Balance in Land so standing as has been shown, the Common
wealth proposed, being once established, were without the immediate hand of
God, as by Pestilence, Famine, Inundation, to be altered or broken, and which
way.

To the godly man.
1. WHether Humane Prudence be not a Creature of God, and to what end God made
this Creature?

2. Whether the Common wealth of Israel in her main Orders, that is to say, the
Senate, the People, and the Magistracy, were not erected by the same rules of
humane Prudence, with other Common wealths?

3. Whether Jethro were not an Heathen?

4. Whether God did not approve of the Advice of Jethro, in the Fabric of the
Common wealth of Israel?

5. Whether the natural body of a Godly man, can any otherwise be said to
support and nourish it self in the Air, or between Heaven and Earth, then by a
figurative Speech? or whether it be any more possible for the Political body of
a People so to do, then for the Natural body of a Godly man?

To the Grandee, or Learned Common-wealths-man.
1. WHether a Noble Housekeeper have an Horse-keeper, that is as well to live
as himself, and whether the Housekeeper, should he loose his Estate, would not
be an Horse keeper, rather then want bread?

2. Whether Riches and Poverty (more or less) do not introduce Command or
Obedience (more or less) as well in a Public, as in a Private Estate?

3. Whether the Introduction of Commandor obedience, more or less, either in a
public or private Estate, do not form or change the Genius of a man, or of a
People accordingly? Or what is the reason why the Paisant in France is base,
and the lower People in England of an high courage?

4. Whether the Genius of the People of Oceana, have been of late years, or be
devoted, or addicted unto the Nobility and the Clergy, as in former times?

5. Whether the Genius of the People of Oceana, not being addicted unto the
Nobility and Clergy, as formerly can be said to be for Monarchy, or against it?

6. Whether the People be not frequently mistaken in Names, while as to things
they mean otherwise; or whether the People of Oceana desiring Monarchy in
Name, do not in truth desire a Government of Laws, and not of Men?

7. Whether for these Reasons, not to know how to hold the Balance or
foundation of a Government steady, nor yet to reform, or vary the Orders of the
same; as the foundation comes to vary, be not to deliver a Nation unto certain
ruin, and destruction?

To the Rational Man.
1. WHether there be any thing in this Fabric or Model, that is contradictory
unto it Self, unto Reason, or unto Truth?

2. Whether a Common wealth can be framed entire or complete in all her
necessary Orders, without any manner of contradiction to her self, to reason,
or to truth, and yet be false, or insufficient?

The Errors of the Press in the first Book.
For falt, page 4. l. 38. read salt. for of, p. 8. l. 1. r. the. For
instructed, p. 45. l. 12. r. entrusted. For will say, must, p. 86. l. 25. r.
will say but must. For expect, p. 89. l. 14. r. except. For famyly'd p. 89. l.
39. r. families. For Ply-earts, p. 109. l. 22. r. Placarts. Sans Comparison, if
taken as English, is right enough, but if you take it for French, is to be read
sans comparaison.

THE SECOND BOOK.

OR A Political Discourse CONCERNING ORDINATION.

Against Dr. H. Hammond.

Against Dr. L. Seaman.

And the Authors they follow.

Optat Aprum aut fulvum descendere monte Leonem. E. W.



LONDON: Printed by G. Dawson, for Tho. Brewster, and are to be sold at the
three Bibles in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

ADVERTISEMENT To the READER.
BOOks, especially whose Authors have gotten themselves Names, are leaders,
wherefore in case any of these err in leading, it is not only lawful, but
matter of conscience unto a man that perceives it, as far as he is able, to
warn others. This were apology enough for my writing against Dr. Hammond, and
Dr. Seaman; and yet I have happened to be brought under a farther obligation
unto this enterprise, their books having been sent me by way of objection
against what I have formerly said of Ordination, and am daily more and more
confirmed I shall make good. However, there can be no great hurt in this Essay,
Truth being like Venison, not only the best Quarry, but the best Game.

Order of the Discourse.
TO menage the present Controversy with the more clearness, I have divided my
discourse into five Parts, or Chapters.

The First explaining the words Chirotonia and Chirothesia, paraphrastically
relates the story of the perambulation made by the Apostles Paul and Barnabas
through the Cities of Lycaonia Pisyaia, etc. by way of Introduction. The second
shows those Cities, or most of them at the time of this perambulation to have
been under popular Government. In which is contained the whole administration
of a Roman Province. The third shows the deduction of the Chirotonia from
popular Government, and of the Original right of Ordination from the
Chirotonia. In which is contained the institution of the Sanhedrin, or Senate
of Israel by Moses, and of that at Rome by Romulus. The fourth shows the
deduction of the Chirothesia from Monarchical, or Aristocratical Government,
and the second way of Ordination from the Chirothesia. In which is contained
the Commonwealth of the Jews, as it stood after the captivity. The fifth
debateth whether the Chirotonia used in the Cities mentioned were (as is
pretended by Doctor Hamond, Dr. Seaman, and the Authors they follow) the same
with the Chirothesia, or a far different thing. In which are contained the
diverse kinds of Church Government introduced and exercised in the age of the
Apostles.
I am entering into a discourse to run much for the words, upon a language not
vulgar, (which therefore I shall use no otherwise than by way of parenthesis,
not obstructing the sense) and for the things upon Customs that are foreign
which therefore I shall interpret as well as I can. Now so to make my way into
the parts of this discourse, that whereas they who have heretofore menaged it
in English, might in regard of their Readers have near as well written it in
Greek, I may not be above the vulgar capacity; I shall open both the Names
whereof, and the things whereupon we are about to Dispute by way of
Introduction.

A POLITICAL DISCOURSE CONCERNING Ordination.
THE INTRODUCTION, OR First Chapter.
THe Names or words whereof we are about to Dispute are Greek, the one
Chirotonia, the other Chirothesia; the first signification of the word
Chirotonia in Sindas, imports a certain lewd action of the hand, which seems
also by the Greek that renders it by the same word, to have been intimated by
Isai. 5. 9. In the second signification with Suidas, it is ((...)) Election,
(that is to say of Magistrates) or ratification, (that is to say of Laws) by
the Many: which amounts both by his testimony, and that generally of ancient
Authors unto this, that the most usual and natural signification of the word
Chirotonia is popular Suffrage, whether given as when they speak of Athens by
the holding up of hands, or as when they speak (as does Suidas in the place
mentioned) of Rome, and other Commonwealths, (whose suffrage was not given
with this Ceremony,) without holding up of hands.

Chirethesia ((...)) is a word that in the strict signification imports laying
on of hands, and no more: but the Jews using to confer their Ordination most
commonly by laying on of hands; and yet sometimes by word of mouth, or by
letter, the word both as it relates to the custom of the Jewish Commonwealth,
and Ordination thence transplanted into the Church of Christ, signifies
Ordination conferred by one Man, or a few Men, that is to say, by some distinct
Order from the people, whether with Imposition of hands, or without it.

These words thus interpreted, I shall throughout my discourse (which else must
have run altogether upon the Greek) presume as already I have done, to take for
good English, and so proceed unto the things whereof we are to dispute; first,
by opening the Scene of this perambulation, which will be done best by the help
of Erasmus a man as for his learning not inferior to any, so for his freedom
not adicted unto interests, or parties. For the Remainder then of this
Introduction, I shall begin with the nineteenth Verse of the eleventh, and
continue my discourse unto the end of the fourteenth Chapter of the Acts,
interweaving the Text where it is darker with the Paraphrase of that excellent
Author for light, and his Paraprase with the Text, where it is clearer for
brevity in manner following.

They whom the heat of persecution from the death of Stephen had dispersed,
traveled through the Cities and Act. 11. 19.
Villages as far as Phenice, and the adjacent Island of Cyprus; as also through
Antiochia, which lies between Phenice and Cilicia, preaching the Gospel
received from the Apostles, which nevertheless they dared not to communicate,
but to such only as were of the Jewish Nation, not out of envy, but a kind of
Superstition, they believing that to do otherwise were to give the Childrens
bread unto dogs, which Christ has forbidden.

But some of them that believed being of Cyprus and Cyrene, when they came unto
Antioch, had the boldness to speak of Christ unto the Greeks, preaching the
Lord Jesus, in which they made such progress, through the blessing of God upon
them and their labors, that a great number of these also believing the Gospel,
were turned unto the Lord. The tidings of these things coming unto the Ears of
the Church, which was at Jerusalem, a man of Apostolical sincerity, Barnabas
the Levite, a Cyprian born, was sent by the Apostles to take a view of what was
done upon the places, and if he found it to be according unto the will of God
to approve of it, by authority of the Apostles. So great caution in receiving
the Gentiles unto the Gospel was not, but the thing was greatly desired by the
Apostles: but least it should afterward be repeated or made void by the Jews,
as done rashly, or that the Gentiles should rely less upon what was done, as
conceiving it needed ratification by the Law. Wherefore Barnabas so soon as he
came to Antioch, and found the Greeks by Faith, and without profession of the
Law, to have received the same grace of God with the Jews, was very much joyed
that the number of Believers increased, and exhorted them to remain constant in
their Enterprise of adhering unto the Lord. For he was a good Man, and full of
the Holy Spirit, and of Faith. Wherefore through his Ministry it came to pass,
that a Multitude of other Believers were added unto the former. Now Antioch
being not far from Cilicia, the Neighborhood of the place invited him to seck
Paul the fittest helper in this work, as chosen by Christ to preach his Name
unto the Gentiles, and Kings of the Earth. For when Paul fled from Jerusalem,
the Disciples had conducted him to Caesarea of Phenice, whence he went to
Tarsus, whom therefore when Barnabas had found there, he brought to Antioch,
hoping in a City both famous and populous, (but with a confused mixture of Jews
and Greeks) to receive the better fruit through the aid of an Apostle more
peculiarly designed unto this work. These two being conversant an whole year in
the Church of Antioch, which by the confluence both of Jews and Greeks, became
very numerous, so many were added by their preaching, that whereas hitherto
not* exposing the Name of Christ unto Envy, they had been called Disciples,
they now began first at Antioch from the Name of their founder to be called
Christians. In these times certain Prophets came from the City of Jerusalem
unto Antioch, whereof one named Agabus, standing up in the Congregation,
signified by inspiration, that there should be a great dearth through the whole
world; which came to pass under Claudius Caesar the Successor of Caligula. At
this time they at Jerusalem, partly because they were poor at their conversion
unto the Gospel, partly because they had deposited their goods in Common, and
partly because they had been spoiled by the Priests for their profession of
Christ, Ordained that by the contribution of such as had wherewithal,
especially among the Believing Gentiles, money should be sent unto the relief
of the Christians dwelling in Judea: but so, that this Contribution was not to
he forced but free; and according unto every man's ability. This money thus
gathered was sent by Paul and Barnabas unto the Elders at Jerusalem to be
distributed at their discretion unto such as were in need. While Paul and
Barnabas were thus employed, King Herod, the same that had beheaded John, and
returned Christ clothed through derision in white unto Pilate, being grieved to
see this kind of People increase, and the Name of Jesus King of the Jews to
grow famous in diverse Nations, became concerned to root out such a Faction, and
so spreading; wherefore he stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the
Church, killed James the Brother of John with the sword, and because he saw it
pleased the Jews, proceeded farther to take Peter also, who being imprisoned,
was afterward miraculously delivered. But Paul and Barnabas having performed
the Trust committed unto them by the brethren, and delivered the Contribution
for relief of the Poor unto the Apostles, returned from Jerusalem unto Antioch,
taking with them John whose Surname was Mark.

Now the Church of Antioch flourished in such manner, that she had some filled
with the gift of Prophecy, and others withthat of teaching, among whom was
Barnabas and Simeon alias Niger together with Lucias a Cirenian, and Manaen who
had been brought up with Herod the Tetrach, whom he left to come unto Christ;
but the chief of them was Saul endowed with all the gifts and graces
apostolical. While* all these were intent upon the Ministry of the Church,
employing their several gifts unto the glory of God, and in his most acceptable
service, the salvation of Souls with Fasting and Prayer, The Holy Ghost being
stirred up by their zeal, signified his will by the Prophets, saying, Separate
me Barnabas and Paul for the work whereunto I have called them, namely, to be
Doctors of the Gentiles, that by them I may propagate the Gospel. The command
of the Spirit was obeyed, and Barnabas with Paul, to the end that every one
might see who were chosen, were separated from the rest; and when the
Congregation had unanimously imoplored the favor of God by Prayer and Fasting,
the most eminent in authority among them, laid their hands upon the persons so
separated, and sent them wherever the Spirit of God should direct them. By this
impulse therefore Barnabas and Paul went unto Selencia, being a Promontory of
Antiochia, and thence sailed into the Island of Cyprus, where landed at Salamis
a famous City upon the Eastern part of the Island, they preached not humane
inventions, but the Word of God, nor that by stealth, but in the Synagogues of
the Jews, whereof through the Neighborhood of Syria there was store. This
honor by the Commandment of Christ was always deferd unto the Jews, that the
Gospel should be first offered unto them, least they being a querulous and
repining Nation should complain that they were despised; thus traveled these
Apostles through the whole Island, till they came unto Paphos, a City
consecrated unto Venus upon the Western Coast of Cyprus. Here they found a
certain Magician called Bar-Jesus, that is the Son of Jesus a Jew, both by
Nation and Religion, under which color he falsely pretended unto the gift of
Prophecy. This Man followed the Court of Sergius Paulus Pro-Consul or Governor
of the Island for the Romans, otherwise a prudent Man; but this sort of Vermin
insinuates it self into the Best to choose that so their corruption may do the
greater and more compendious mischief unto Mankind. The Proconsul nevertheless
having understood the Gospel to be planting throughout Cyprus, not only forbore
to stop the Ears of others, but by sending for Baruabas and Paul seemed
desirous to open his own. Wherefore Bar-Jesus endeavoring to resist the growth
of the Word, as an enemy to Christ, and resisting the Truth with falsehood, a
strife arose between the true Prophets, and a false One, (for such is the
interpretation of the Syriack word Elymas,) whom Paul at the length confuted of
spiritual blindness, by taking away the Eyes of his body miraculously stricken
in the presence of the Pro-Consul, who at the same time receiving the Light of
the Gospel, embraced the Christian Faith This being done at Paphos, Paul
embarked there with his Associates for the lesser Asia, and came unto Perga,
being a City of Pamphylia; here John whose Surname was Mark left them, and
returned unto Jerusalem, while they when they had visited Pamphylia traveled
unto Antiochia, a City of Pisidia, where having entered a Synagogue, they sat
after the usual manner with the rest ^tentive unto the Law and the Prophets;
whereof when the parts appointed were read, and no Man stood up, the Rulers of
the Synagogue perceiving that the strangers by their habit were Jews, and such
as by their aspect promised more than ordinary, sent unto them, desiring that
if they had any word of Exhortation for the people, they would speak. Whereupon
Paul standing up preached unto them Christ; whence came the word of Lord to be
divulged throughout that Region, albeit the Jews out of Envy to the Gentiles
stirring up the devoutest of the Matrons (an Art not unknown in these times)
and by them the chief of the City raised such sedition in it, and tumult
against the Apostles; that Paul and Barnabas being cast out, shook off the dust
from their feet against them, and went thence unto Iconium a City of Lycaonia.
When they were come unto Iconium, Chapter 14.
entering with the Jews after the custom into the Synagogue, they preached as
they had done at Antioch, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and with such efficacy,
that Multitudes both of the Jews* and Greeks believed; here again the Envy of
the Jews became the Author of Sedition, by which means the City was divided
into two parts or factions, whereof One stood for the unbelieving Jews, and the
other for the Apostles. At length when such of the Gentiles as were joined with
the Jews, and the Rulers of the City made an assault upon the Apostles, to
offer violence, and stone them; they being aware of it, fled to Lystra (a City
of Lycaonia, which is a part of Pamphylia) and Derbe. At Lystra there was a Man
lame of his feet from the Womb, who having listened unto Paul, with great
attention and Zeal, was miraculously cured by the Apostle; when the People
seeing what Paul had done, cried out, the Gods were descended in the likeness
of Men: a persuasion that might gain the more easily upon the minds of the
Lycaonians for the fable of Jupiter and Mercury, said to have descended in
humane shape, and been entertained by Lycaon, from whom the Lycaonians received
their Name. Wherefore they called Barnabas for the gravity of his aspect,
Jupiter, Paul for his Eloquence, Mercury, and the Priest of Jupiter, who dwelt
in the Suburbs, brought Bulls and Garlands unto the Gates of the House, where
the Apostles were, to have offered Sacrifice with the people, which the
Apostles abhorring, vigorously dissuaded. In the mean time certain Jews by
Nation that were unbelievers coming from Antioch of Pisidia, and Iconium, drew
the people unto the other extreme, who from sacrificing unto the Apostles fell
on stoning them; a work which was brought so near unto an end, that Paul being
drawn by them out of the City was left for dead, though he soon after
recovered; and went thence with Barnabas unto Derbe; when they had propagated
the Gospel there also, they returned unto Lystra, Iconium and Antiochia,
confirming the Disciples whom they had converted. Now because the propagation
of the Gospel required that the Apostles should be moving through diverse
Nations, They chirotonizing them Elders in every Congregation, or Church, that
is, ordaining them Elders by the votes of the people in every City, left them
to perform the duties of the absent Apostles, and when they had fasted and
prayed, commended them unto the Lord. These things being brought to a
conclusion, or finished at Antioch in Pisidia, when they had perambulated this
Country, they also visited Pamphylia, sowing the Gospel where it was not yet
sown, and confirming those who already believed till they came to Perga: where
having ordered their affairs, they proceeded to Attalia, being a Maritimate
City of Pamphylia, and from thence they sailed back unto Antioch of Syria,
whence first they set out with Commission from the Elders to preach the Gospel
unto the Gentiles, and where by the Chirothesia or Imposition of Hands, Prayer,
and Fasting, they had been recommended to the grace of God, and designed unto
the work now finished.

In this Narrative you have mention both of the Chirotonia and of the
Chirothesia, or Imposition of Hands, but of the former as of Ordination; For by
that such were made Presbyters or Church Officers as were not so before, of the
latter not, I think as of Ordination, at least in the sense we now take it, but
as of designation of Persons, unto an occasional and temporary Employment, that
had been ordained before, for so sure had Paul at least; howsoever, that which
is offered by Acts 6. 12.
this Narrative unto present consideration, is no more than the bare story.

CHAP. II. That the Cities, or most of them named in the Perambulation of the
Apostles, Paul and Barnabas were at that time under popular Government. In
which is contained the administration of a Roman Province.
THe Romans of all Nations under Heaven were endowed, as with the highest
virtues, so with the greatest humane glory; which proceeded from this
especially that they were in love with such as were in love with their
Liberty, as to begin with their dawn. The Privernates, (a free People,
inhabiting the City and parts adjoining, which at this day is called Piperno,
some fifty miles from Rome, and five from S^sse) being the second time
conquered by the Romans; It was consulted in the Senate what Livy. lib. 8. Chapter
21.
course should be taken with them; where while some, according unto the
different temper of Men, showed themselves hotter, and others cooler, One of
the Privernates more mindful of the condition wherein he was born, than of
that wherein he was fallen, happened to render all more doubtful; for being
asked by a Senator of the severer Judgment, what punishment he thought the
Privernates might deserve, Such (says he) as they deserve, that believe
themselves worthy of Liberty. At the courage of which answer the Consul
perceiving in them that had been vehement enough before against the
Privernates, but the greater animosity, to the end that by a gentler
interrogatory he might draw forth, some softer answer, replied, And what if we
inflict no punishment at all, but pardon you; what peace may we expect of you?
why if you give us a goodone (said the other) a steady and perpetual peace, but
if an ill One, not a long One. At which a certain Senator falling openly upon
ruffling and threatening the Privernate, as if those words of his tended unto
some practice or intention to stir* up the Cities in peace to sedition, the
better part of the Fathers being quite of another mind, declared, That they had
heard the voice of a Man, and of a Freeman. For why (said they) should it be
thought that any Man or people will remain longer under such a burden as they
are not able to bear, then till they can throw it down? There a peace is
faithful, where it is voluntary, if you will have slaves you are not to trust
them, but their fetters. To this opinion the Consul especially inclining,
inclined others, while he openly professed, That they who had no thought but
upon their liberty, could not but be thought worthy to be Romans: whereupon the
Decree past by Authority of the Fathers, which was afterward proposed unto the
Congregation, and ratified by the Command of the people, whereby the
Privernates were made Citizens of Rome. Such was the Genius of the To man
Commonwealth, where by the way you may also observe the manner of her debate
and result, (Authoritate Patrum and Jussu populi) by the advice of the Senate,
and the Chirotonia of the people.

But that which in this place is more particularly offered unto consideration
is her usual way of proceeding in case of Conquest with other Nations; for
albeit bearing an haughty brow toward such, as not contented to enjoy their
liberty at home, would be her Rivals abroad, she dealt far otherwise, as with
Carthage; This case excepted, and the pilling and polling of her Provinces,
which happened through the Avarice and Luxury of her Nobility, when the balance
of popular Power being broken, her Empire began toward the latter end to
languish and decline; the way which she took with the Privernates was that
which she usually observed with others throughout the course of her Victories,
and was after the change of Government made good at least in some part, by the
Roman Emperors, under whom were now those Cities mentioned in the present
perambulation of the Apostles Paul and Barnabas. Strabo for his Credit, among
Humane Autors is equal unto any; he lived about the time of this
perambulation, and being a Greek, is less likely to be partial: Of that
therefore which I have affirmed to have been the course of the Romans in their
Victories, I shall make choice of this Author for a Witness; first where he
Epitomiseth the Story of Athens after this manner, When the Carians by Sea, and
the Baeotians by Land wasted Attica, C^crops the Prince, to bring the people
under shelter, planted them in twelve Cities, (Cecropia, Strabo 1. 9.
Tetrapolis, Epacrea, Decelea, Eleusis, Aphydna, Thoricus, Brauron, Cytherus,
Sphettus, C^phissia, Phalerus,) which Theseus is said to have contracted into
one called Athens. The Government of this City had many changes, at the first,
it was Monarchical, then popular; This again was usurped by the Tyrants
Pisistratus and his Sons, whence recovered, it fell afterward into the hands
of the Few, as when the four hundred once, and again the thirty Tyrants were
imposed by the Lacedaemonians, in the war of Peloponesus; which yoke the
Athenians (by means of their faithful Army) shaking off, restored their popular
government, and held it until the Romans attained unto the Dominion of Greece.
Now though it be true that they were not a little disturbed by the Kings of
Macedon unto whom they were forced to yield some kind of Obedience; they
nevertheless preserved the form of their Commonwealth so entire, that there be
who affirm it never to have been better administered, than at such time as
Macedon was governed by Casander; for this Prince though in other thing more
inclining toward the Tyrant, having taken Athens by surrender, used not the
People ill, but made Demetrius Phalerius the Disciple of Theophrastus the
Philosopher, chief Magistrate among them; a Man so far from ruining their
Popular State (as in the Commentaries he writ upon this kind of Government is
attested) that he repaired it. Nevertheless whether suspected or envied for his
greatness with, or support by the Macedonian, after the death of Casander he
fled into Egypt, while his Enemies breaking down his Statues* (as some say)
made homely Vessels of them. But the Romans having received the Athenians under
their popular form left them their Laws and Liberties untouched, till in the
war with Mithridates they were forced to receive such Tyrants as that King was
pleased to give them; whereof Aristion the greatest, when the Romans had
retaken the City from him, being found trampling upon the people, was put to
death by Sylla, and the City pardoned, which to this day (he writ about the
Reign of Tyberius) not only enjoyes her liberties, but is high in honor with
the Romans. This is the testimony of Strabo, agreeing with that of Cicero,
where disputing of divine providence, he says, that to affirm the world to be
governed by chance, or without God, is as if One should say that Athens were
not governed by ohe Areopagites. Nor did the Romans by the deposition of the
same Author (or indeed of any other) behave themselves worse in Asia, (the
scene of our present discourse, where the same Paul of whom we are speaking
being born at Tarsus a City of Cilicia, that had acquired like or greater
privilege by the same bounty, was also a Citizen of Rome,) then in Greece. Asia
is understood in three significations: First, Sigon. de ant jure Provin.
for the third part of the world answering to Europe and Africa: Secondly, for
that part of Asia, which is now called Natolia. Thirdly, for that part of it
which Attalus King of Pergamum dying without Heirs, bequeathed and left unto
the People of Rome: this contained Mysia, Phrygia, Aeolis, Jonia, Caria, Doris,
Lydia, Lycaonia, Pisidia, and by consequence the Cities whereof we are
speaking: to all these Countries the Romans gave their liberty, till in favor
of Aristonicus the Bastard of Eumenes, many of them taking Arms, they were
recovered, brought into subjection, and framed into a Province.

When a Consul had conquered a Country, and the Romans intended to form it into
a Province, it was the custom of the Senate to send ( December Legatos) ten of
their Members, who with the Consul had power to introduce and establish their
provincial way of Government. In this manner Asia was formed by M. Aquillius
Consul, afterward so excellently reformed by Scaevola, that the Senate in
their Edicts used to propose his Example unto succeeding Magistrates; and the
Inhabitants to celebrate a Feast unto his Name. Nevertheless Mithridates King
of Pontus (all the Romans in this Province being massacred in one day) came to
possess himself of it, till it was recovered at several times by Sylla,
Murena, Lucullus, and Pompey. The Romans in framing a Country into a Province,
were not accustomed to deal with all the Inhabitants of the same in a like
manner, but differently according to their different merit. Thus diverse Cities
in this were left free by Sylla, as those of the Ilienses, the Chians,
Rhodians, Lycians, and Magnesians, with the Cizicens, though the last of these
afterward for their practices against the Romans forfeited their liberty unto
Tiberius in whose Reign, they were for this reason deprived of the same.

Taking Asia in the first sense, that is for one third part of the world, the
next Province of the Romans in this Country was Cilicia, containing Pamphilia,
Issauria, and Cilicia more peculiarly so called; here Cicero was sometimes
Pro-Consul, in honor unto whom part of Phrygia with Pisidia, and Lycaonia were
taken from the former, and added unto this Jurisdiction, by which means the
Cities whereof we are speaking, came to be of this Province: adjoining
hereunto, was the Commonwealth of the Lycians, which the Romans left free;
Into this also the City of Attalia by some is computed, but Iconium both by
Scrabo and Cicero, the latter whereof being Pro-Consul in his journey from
Laodicea, was received Epist.
by the Magistrates and Deputies of this City: Lystra and Derbe being Cities of
Lycaonia, must also have been of the same Province. Next unto the Province of
Cilicia was that of Syria, containing Comagene, Seliucia, Phaenicia,
Caelosyria, and Judea or Palestine. In Seleucis were the four famous Cities
Seleucia, Antiochia, Apamea, the last entire in her liberty, and Laodicea;
Comagene and Judea were under Kings, and not framed into Provinces, till in the
time of the Emperors.

The fourth Province of the Romans in Asia was that of Bithymia with Pontus,
these were all acquired or confirmed by the Victories of Pompey the Great.
Strabo who was a Cappadocian born at Amasia, relates a story worthy to be
remembered in this place. From the time says he, that the Romans having
conquered Antiochus, became Moderators of Asia; they contracted leagues of
amity with diverse Nations; where there were Kings, the honor of address was
deferred unto them, with whom the Treaties that concerned their Countries were
concluded. But as concerning the Capad cians, they treated with the whole
Nation, for which cause the royal Line of this Realm coming afterward to fail,
the Romans gave the people their freedom or leave to live under their own Laws:
and when the people hereupon sending Ambassadors unto Rome, renounced their
Liberty, being that to them which they said was intolerable, and demanded a
King; The Romans amazed there should be Men that could so far despair,
permitted them to chose of their own Nation, whom they pleased; so Ari^barzanes
was chosen, whose Line again in the Third Generation coming to fail; Archelaus
was made King by Anthony, (where you may observe in passing that, the Romans
imposed not Monarchical Government, but for that matter used to leave a people
as they found them) thus at the same time they left Pontus under King
Mithridates, who not containing himself within his bounds, but extending them
afterward as far as Cholchis and Arm nia the less, was reduced unto his
Terms by Pompey, who divesting him of those Countries which he had usurped,
distrihuted some part of them unto such Princes as had assisted the Romans in
that War, and divided the rest into twelve Commonwealths, of which added to
Bythynia, he made one Province, When the Roman Emperors became Monarchs, they
also upon like occasions made other distributions, constituting Kings, Princes,
and Cities, some more some less, some wholly free, and others in subjection
unto themselves.. Thus came a good, if not the greater part of the Cities in
the Lesser Asia, and the other adjoining Provinces to be some more, some less
free, but the most of them to remain Commonwealths, or to be erected into
Popular Governments, as appears yet clearer by the intercourse of Pliny, while
he was Praetor, or Governor of Bythinia, with his Master the Emperor Trajan, a
plece of which I have inserted in the Letters following.

Pliny to Trajane.
SIR,
IT is Provided by Pompeys Laws for the Bythinians that Plin. Epist. lib. 10.
no Man under Thirty years of Age be capable of Magistracy, or of the Senate:
by the same it is also established, that they who have born Magistracy, may be
Senators. Now because by a latter Edict of Augustus, the lesser Magistracies
may be born by such as are above One and twenty; there remains with me these
doubts, whether he that being under Thirty, has born Magistracy, may be
elected by the Censors into the Senate; and if he may, whether of those also
that have not born Magistracy, a Man being above one and twenty, seeing at that
age he may bear Magistracy,-may not by the same interpretation be Elected into
the Senate, though he have not born it: which is here practiced and pretended
to be necessary, because it is somewhat better they say, that the Senate be
filled with the children of good Families, than with the lower sort. My opinion
being asked, upon these points, by the new Censors, I thought such as being
under Thirty have born Magistracy, both by Pompey' s Laws, and the Edict of
Augustus to be capable of the Senate; seeing the Edict allows a man under
Thirty to bear Magistracy, and the Law, a Man that has born Magistracy, to be
a Senator; But as to those that have not born Magistracy, though at the age in
which they may bear it; I demurr till I may understand your Majesty's pleasure,
unto whom I have sent the Heads both of the Law, and of the Edict.


Trajane to Pliny.
YOu and I dearest Pliny are of one mind, Pompey' s Laws are so far qualified
by the Edict of Augustus, that they who are not under One and twenty may bear
Magistracy, and they who have born Magistracy may be Senators in their
respective Cities: but for such as have not born Magistracy, though they might
have born it, I conceive them not Eligigible into the Senate, till they be
thirty years of age.


Pliny to Trajane.
SIR,
POwer is granted unto the Bythinian Cities by Powpey's Law, to adopt unto
themselves what Citizens they please, so they be not foreigners but of the
same Province, By the same Law it is shown in what cases the Censors may remove
a man from the Senate; Among which nevertheless it is not provided what is to
be done in case a foreign Citizen be a Senator. Wherefore certain of the
Censors have thought fit to consult me, whether they ought to remove a man that
is of a foreign City for that cause our of the Senate. Now because the Law,
though it forbid the adoption of a forreigner, commands not that a Forraigner
for that cause should be removed out of the Senate, and I am informed there be
foreign Citizens almost in every Senate: so that many, not only Men, but
Cities might suffer concussion by the restitution of the Law in that part,
which through a kind of consent seems to be now grown obsolete; I conceive it
necessary to have your Majesty's resolution in the case, to which end I have
sent a Breviate of the Law annexed.


Trajane to Pliny.
With good cause (dearest Pliny) have you doubted what answer to return unto
the Censors, enquiring whether they ought to Elect a man into the Senate that
is of another City, though of the same Province; seeing on the one side the
authority of the Law, and of custom on the other to the contrary might well
disorder you. To innovate nothing for the time past, I think well of this
expedient: they who are already elected Senators, though not according unto the
Law, of what City soever they be, may remain for the present, but for the
future Pompey' s Laws should return to their full virtue, which if we should
cause to look back, might create trouble.


This might serve, but there will be no hurt in being a little fuller in the
discovery of Provincial Government.

The Provinces so framed as has been shown, were subdivided into certain
Circuits called Diocesses, That of Asia had six Alabandae, Sardes (anciently
the seat of Craesus) Smyrna, Ephesus, Adramytis, Pergamum. That of Cilicia had
also six, the Pamphilian, Issaurian, and Cilician, the Metropolis whereof was
Tarsus a free City; To these were taken out of the Province of Asia, Cibyra,
Sinnadae, Apamea; what were the Diocesses of the other two, Sigonius whom I
follow does not show. At these in the Winter, (for the Summer was spent
commonly with the Army,) the people of the Province assembled at set times, as
at our Assizes, where the Roman Governors did them Justice.

The Governors or Magistrates unto whose care a Province was committed, were of
two kinds: the first and chief was Consul or Praetor, which appellations
differed not in power, but in dignity, that of Consul being more honorable,
who had twelve Lictors, whereas the Praetor had but six, if the annual
Magistracy of either of these came to be prorogued, he was called Pro-Consul,
or Pro-Praetor.

The second kind of Magistrate in a Province, was the Quaester, Receiver or
Treasurer, who being also annual, was attended by Lictors of his own, if he
dyed within his year, the the Consul, Pro-Consul, or Praetor, might appoint one
for that time in his place, who was called Pro-Questor. The power of the
Consul, Pro-Consul, or Praetor was of two kinds, the one Civil, the other
Military, the former called Magistracy, the latter Empire.

The pomp of these assuming and exercising their Magistracy was reverent, the
Consul, or Pro-Consul had Legates, sometimes more, but never under three,
appointed him by the Senate; these were in the nature of Counselors to assist
him in all affairs of his Province, he had Tribunes, Colonels, or Field
Officers for the Military part of his administration; he had also Secretaries,
Sergeants, Heralds, or Cryers, Lictors, or Ensignbearers, Interpreters,
Messengers, Divines, Chamberlains, Physicians, and besides these his
Companions, which for the most part were of the younger sort of Gentlemen, or
Gallants that accompanied him for his Ornament, and their own Education. Into
this the somewhat-like Train of the Quaestor (who by the Law was in place of a
Son unto the Pro-Consul, and to whom the Pro Consul was to give the regard of a
Father) being cast, it made the Praetorian Cohort, or Guard always about the
person of the Pro-Consul, who in this Equipage having done his devotions at the
Capitol, departed the City Paludatus, that is in his Royal Mantle of gold and
purple, followed for some part of the way with the whole train of his Friends,
wishing him much joy, and good speed,

In his Province he executed his twofold Office, the one of Captain General,
the other of the supieme Magistrate; in the former relation he had an Army
either received from his predecessor, or new leavied in the City; this
consisted in the one half of the Legions, (as I have elsewhere shown) and in
the other of Associates; for the greatness of the same, it was proportioned
unto the Province, or the occasion. To an ordinary Province in times of peace,
I believe an army amounted not to above One Legion, with as many Auxiliaries
that is to a matter of Twelve thousand Foot, and Twelve hundred Horse. The
Magistracy or Jurisdiction of the Pro-Consul, or Praetor was executed at the
Metropolitan City of each Dioecis, which upon this occasion was to furnish the
Praetorian Cohort with lodging, salt, wood, hay, and stable-room at the charge
of the Country. These (though Cicero, would hardly receive any of them) were
toward the latter time of the Commonwealth, extended by the provincial
Magistrates unto so great a burden to the people, that it caused diverse Laws
to be passed in Rome (de repetundis) for restitution to be made unto the
Provinces, by such as had injured them. Upon such Laws was the prosecution of
Verres by Cicero, When and where this kind of Court was to be held, the Consul,
Pro-Consul, or Praetor by Proclamation gave timely notice, being assembled at
the time, and the City appointed, in the Town Hall stood a Tribunal, upon this
the Sella Curulis, or Chair of State, in which sat the Consul, Pro-Consul, or
Praetor with his Praetorian Cohort or Band about him, furnished with all manner
of pomp, and Officers requisite unto the ornament, or administration of so high
a Magistracy. The jurisdiction of this Court was according unto the Laws made
for the administration of the Province, but because they could not foresee all
things, (as appeared by the questions which Pliny put upon the Laws of Pompey,
unto Trajane) it came to pass, that much was permitted unto the Edicts of the
provincial Praetors, as was also in use at Rome with the Praetors of the City:
and if any man had judged otherwise in his Province, then he ought to have done
in the City, made an Edict contrary unto the Law of his Province, or judged any
thing otherwise than accordieg to his own Edict, he was held guilty of, and
questionable for an heinous crime. But what the Law of this or that Province
(which differed in each) was, would be hard particularly to say, only in
general it was for the maine very much resembling that of Sicily called Rupilia.

Lege Rupilia, or by the Law of Rupilius, a cause between One Citizen and
another being of the same City, was to be tried at home by their own Laws. A
Cause between one Provincial and another being of diverse Cities, was to be
tried by Judges whom the Praetor should appoint by lot; what a private man
claimed of a people, or a people of a private man, was to be referred unto the
Senate of some third City. Upon what a Roman claimed of a Provincial, a
Provincial was to be appointed Judge. Upon what a Provincial claimed of a
Roman, a Roman was to be appointed Judge. For decision of other controversies
select Judges from among the Romans (not out of the Praetorian Cohort, but out
of such Romans, or other Citizens free of Rome as were present in the same
Court) were to be given. In criminal causes as violence peculate or Treason,
the Law, and the manner of proceeding was the same in the Provinces, as in
Rome.

For the Iributes, Customs, Taxes, leavies of Men, Money, Shipping, ordinary,
or extraordinary for the common defense of the Roman Republic, and her
Provinces, the Consuls, Pro-Consuls, or Praetors, proceeded according unto such
Decrees of the Senate as were in that case standing or renewed upon Emergent
occasions; in gathering these say the Magistracy or office of the Quaestor: if
the Pro-Consul were indisposed, or had more business than he could well turn
his hand to, Courts of this nature might be held by one or more of his Legates.
With matter of Religion they meddled not, Every Nation being so far left unto
the Liberty of Conscience, that no violence for this cause was offered unto any
man, by which means both Jews and Christians, at least, till the time of the
persecuting Emperors had the free exercise of their Religion throughout the
Roman Provinces. This the Jews liked well for themselves, nor were they
troubled at the Heathens, but to the Christians they always grudged the like
privilege. Thus when they could no otherwise induce Pilate to put Christ to
death; they accused Christ of affecting Monarchy, and so affrighted Pilate
being a mean conditioned fellow, while they threatened to let Tiberius know he
was not Caesar's Friend; that he complied with their ends. But when at Corinth
where Gallio (a man of another temper) was Pro-Consul of Achaia, they would
have been at this Ward again, and with a great deal of Tumult had brought Paul
before the Tribunal, Gallio took it not well, that they should think he had
nothing else to do than to judge of words, and names, and questions of their
Law, for he cared no more for the Disputes between the Christians and the Jews,
than for those between the Epicureans and the S^^ick^. Wherefore his Lictors
drove them from the Tribunal, and the officious Corinthians to show their love
to the Pro-Consul fell on knocking them out of the way of other business.

Now though the Commonwealth of the Achaeans, being at this time a Roman
Province under the Pro-Consul Gallio, enjoyed no longer her common Senate,
Strategus and Demiurges, according unto the model shown in the former Book, yet
remained each particular City under her ancient form of Popular Government so
that in these, especially at Corinth; many of the Greeks being of the same
judgment, the Jews could not dispute with the Christians without Tumult. Of
this kind was that which happened at Ephesus, where Christianity Acts 19.
growing so fast, that the silver-smiths of Diana's Temple began to fear they
should loose their Trade: the Jews liking better of Heathenisme than
Christianity, set Alexander one of their pack against Paul.

This place (in times when men will understand no otherwise of humane story,
then makes for their ends) is fallen happily unto my hand, seeing that which I
have said of a Roman Province, will be thus no less than proved out of
Scripture. For the Chancellor of Ephesus perceiving the Ecclesia, (so it is in
the Original) or Assembly (as in our Translation) uncalled by the Senate, or
the Magistracy to be tumultuously gathered in the Theater: their usual place
(as in Syracusa and other Cities) of meeting, betakes himself to appease the
people with diverse arguments: among which he has these. First, as to matter of
Religion, Ye have brought hither (says he) these men which are neither robbers
of Temples (Churches, our Bible has it, before there was any Church to be
robbed) Nor yet blasphemers of the Goddess: In which words (seeing that they
offering no scandal, but only propagating that which was according to their
own judgment were not obnoxious unto punishment) he shows that every man had
Liberty of Conscience. Secondly asto Law. If Demetrius and the Crafts-men which
are with him have a matter against any man, the Law (says he) is open.
Thirdly, as to the matter of Government which appears to be of two parts, the
one provincial, the other Domestic, for the former (says he) there are
((...)) Pro-Consuls, (he speaks in the plural number with relation unto the
Legates, by whom the Pro-Consul sometimes held his Courts. Otherwise this
Magistrate was but one in a Province, as at this time for Asia P. Suilius) and
to the latter (says he) if you desire any thing concerning other matters, that
is such as appertain unto the Government of the City, (in* which the care of
the Temple was included) it shall be determined in a lawful Ecclesia, or
Assembly of the people. By which you may see that notwithstanding the
Provincial government, Ephesus, though she were no free City, (for with a free
City the Pro-Consul had nothing of this kind to do) had ((...)) the government
of her self, (as those other Cities mentioned in Plynies Epistles) by the
Senate, and the people, for wherever one of these is named, as the Senate by
Pliny, or the people by Luke, the other is understood. When the Chancellor had
thus spoken, he dismissed the Ecclesia. It is Lukes own word, and so often as I
have now repeated it, so often has he used it upon the same occasion.
Wherefore I might henceforth expect two things of Divines; first, that it might
be acknowledged that I have good Authors, St. Luke and the Chancellor of
Ephesus, for the word Ecclesia in this sense; and secondly that they would not
persuade us, the word Ecclesia has lost this signification, least they condemn
this place of Scripture to be no more understood. The manner of Provincial
Government being thus proved, not only out of profane Authors, but out of
Scripture it self; and the Cities that were least free having had such power
over themselves, and their Territories; why if the Romans took no more of them
for this protection, than was paid unto their former Lords, did they not rather
undertake the patronage of the World than the Empire, seeing Venice, and
Dantzig, while the one was Tributary to the Turk, the other to the King of
Poland, were nevertheless so free Estates, that of a King, or a Commonwealth
that should have put the rest of the world into the like condition, no less in
our day could have been said? And yet that the Romans, when the nature of the
Eastern Monarchies shall be rightly considered, took far less of these Cities,
than their old Masters, will admit of little doubt. Cicero would not lie, He
when he was Pro-Consul of Cilicia, wrote in this manner concerning his Circuit,
to his friend Servilius. Two days I stand at La^dicea, at Ap^mea five, at
Sinnadae three, at Pilomelis five, at Iconium ten, then which Jurisdiction or
Government there is nothing more just or equal. Why then had not those Cities
their Senates, and their Ecclesiae, or Congregations of the people as well as
that of Ephesus, and those whereof Pliny gives account to Trajane?

Corinth was in Achaia, Perga of Pamphilia, Antioch of Pisidia, Iconium,
Lystra, Derbe of Lycaonia, were in Cilicia and with these as some reckon,
Attalia. Ephesus, and the other Antioch were in Syria. Achaia, Cilicia, and
Syria were Roman Provinces at the time of this perambulation of the Apostles.
The Cities under Provincial administration, whether free are not free were
under popular Government; whence it follows, that Corinth, Ephesus, Antioch
of Syria, Antioch of Pisidia, Perga, Iconium, Lystra, `Derbe, Attalia, being at
this time under Provincial administration, were at this time under popular
Government. There has been no hurt in going about, though indeed to show that
these Cities (had quandam (...)) were under popular government, we needed to
have gone no farther than the Text, as where the Chancellor of Ephesus to get
rid of a tumultuous Ecclesia, or Assembly of the people, promises them a
lawful one. In Iconium Lystra, Derbe and the rest, you hear not of any King,
(as where Herod stretched out his hand to please the Jews, and vex the Church)
but of the people, of their Rulers, of their Assemblies, and of their tumults.
The people at Lystra are now agreed to give the Apostles divine honors, and
anon both at Iconium and Lystra to stone them: Now to determine of divine
honor, or of life and death, are acts of Sovereign power. It is true, these
nevertheless may happen to be usurped by a mere Tumult, but that cannot be said
of these Congregations, which consisted as well of the Magistrates and Rulers,
as of the people, and where the Magistrates show that they had no distinct
power whereby to restrain the people, nor other means to prevail against them,
than by making of parties, which passages as they prove these Commonwealths on
the one side to have been ill constituted, evince it on the other, that these
Cities were under popular Government.

CHAP. III. The deduction of the Chirotonia from Popular Government, and of the
Original Right of Ordination from the Chirotonia. In which is contained the
institution of the Sanhedrin, or Senate of Israel by Moses, and of that of Rome
by Romulus.
DIvines generally in their way of Disputing have a bias that runs more upon
words, than upon things; so that in this place it will be necessary to give the
interpretation of some other words, whereof they pretend to take a strong hold
in their Controversies; the chief of these has been spoken to already,
Chirotonia being a word that properly signifies the suffrage of the people,
wherever it is properly used, implies power; wherefore though the Senate decree
by suffrage as well as the people, yet there being no more in a Decree of the
Senate than Authority, the Senate is never said to Chirotonize, or very seldom
and improperly, this word being peculiar unto the people: and thus much is
implied in what went before.

The next word in controversy is Psephisma, which signifies a Decree or Law,
and this always implying power, always implies the suffrage of the people,
that is, where it is spoken of popular Government; for though a Psephisma or
decree of the Athenian Senate was a Law for a year before it came to the
suffrage or Chirotonia of the people, yet the Law, or constitution of Solon
whereby the Senate had this power, originally derived from the Chir^tonia of
the people.

The third word ((...)) signifies to constitute, or ordain, this in the
political sense of the same implies not power, but authority; for a man that
writes or proposes a Decree or form of Government, may be said ((...)) to
propose or constitute it, whether it be confirmed by the Chirotonia of the
people or not; nay with Hal^carn^ssaeus the word signifies no more than barely
to call or assemble the Senate; (...).

Now if these words be sometimes otherwise taken, what words be there in any
language that are not often used improperly? but that understood politically,
they must of necessity be understood as I have shown; or will so entangle and
disorder Government, that no man shall either make head or foot of it; is that
which I make little question to evince in the surest way, that is by opening
the nature of the things whence they derive, and whereof they are spoken by the
best Authors.

And because the words (though the things they signify were much more ancient)
derive all from Athens, I shall begin by this constitution to show the proper
use of them. Chirotonia in Athens as has been shown out of Suidas, (who
speaking of Rome relates to this) was Election of Magistrates, or Enacting of
Laws by the suffrage of the people, which because they gave by holding up their
hands, came thence to be called Chirotonia, which signifies holding up of
Hands. The Legislative Assembly, or Representative of the people called the
Nomothetae, upon occasion of repealing an old Law, and Enacting a new one, gave
the Chirotonia of the people, And yet says the Athenian Law ((...)) Let the
Proedrigive or make Demost. contra Timocr.
the Chirotonia unto either Law. The Proedri as was shown in the former book
were the ten Presidents of the Prytans, which Prytans upon this occasion were
Presidents of the Nomothetae. Again, whereas it was the undoubted right and
practice of the people to Elect their Magistrates by their Chirotonia, ((...))
Phil. 1.
it is nevertheless shown by Pollux to have been the peculiar Office of the
Thesmothetae ((...)) to Chirotonize the Magistrates. For as the Proedri were
presidents of the people in their Legislative capacity, so were the L. 8. C. 8.
Thesmothetae upon occasion of Elections: thus the Chirotonia of the Proedri,
or of the Thesmothetae signifies nothing else but the Chirotonia of the people,
by which they Enacted all their Laws, and elected all their Civil or
Ecclesiastical Magistrates, or Priests, as the Rex Sacrificus, and the
Orgeones, except some by the lot, which ordination as is observed by Aristoile
is equally popular. This whether ignorantly or wilfully unregarded, has been
as will be seen hereafter the cause of great absurdity, for who sees not that
to put the Chirotonia, or sovereign power of Athens upon the Proedri or the
Thesmothetae, is to make such a thing of that Government, as can no wise be
understood.

What the people had past by their Chirotonia, was called Psephisma, an Act or
Law. And because in the Nomothetae there were always two Laws put together
unto the Vote, that is to say, the Old one, and that which was offered in the
room of it, they that were for the old Law were said ((...)) to pronounce in
the Negative; and they that were for the new ((...)) to pronounce for the
Affirmative.

These Laws, these Propositions, or this frame of Government having been
proposed first by Solon, and then ratified or established by the Chirotonia of
the Athenian people: Aristotle says of him ((...)) that he instituted or
constituted the popular Government with constitution, implies not any power in
Solon, who absolutely refused to be a King, and therefore the word ((...)) as
to him implies no more than authority. I have showed you the words in
controversy, and the things together in the Mint; Now whether they that as to
Athens introduced them both, understood either; I leave my Reader by comparing
them to judge.

It is true that the things expressed by these words have been in some
Commonwealths more, in others less ancient than the Greek Language, but this
hinders not the Greeks to apply the words unto the like constitutions or
things, wherever they find them, as by following Halicarnassaeus I shall
exemplify L. 2.
in Rome.

((...)) Romulus when he had distributed the people into Tribes, and into
parishes proceeded to ordain the Senate; in this manner the Tribes were three,
and the parishes Thirty; out of every Tribe he elected three Senators, and out
of every parish three more, all by the suffrage of the people; These therefore
came to ninety nine chosen by the Chirotonia, unto which he added one more, not
chosen by the Chirotonia, but by himself only; Which Election we may therefore
say was made by the Chirothesia, for as in this Chapter I am showing that the
Chirotonia is Election by the Many, so in the next I shall show that the
Chirothesia is Election by One, or by the Few. But to keep unto the matter in
hand, the Magistrate thus chosen by Romulus was ( praefectus urbi,) the
Protector of the Commonwealth, or he who when the King was out of the Nation,
or the City, as upon occasion of War, had the Exercise of Royal Power at home.
In like manner with the Civil Magistracy were the Priests created, (though some
of them not so anciently) for the Pontifex maximus, the Rex Sacrificus, and the
Flamines were all ordained by the Suffrage of the people, (Pontifex Tributis,
Rex centuri^^tis, Flamines Curiatis) the latter of which being no more than
Parish Priests, had no other Ordination than by their Parishes. All the Laws,
and all the Magistrates in Rome, even the Kings themselves were according unto
the orders of this Commonwealth to be created by the Chirotonia of the people,
which nevertheless is by Appian sometimes called ((...)) The Chirotonia of the
Tribunes whether that these Magistrates were Presidents of the Assemblies of
the people, or Elected by them. Sic Romani historici non (...) untur Calv.
Inst. L. 4. cap. 3.. 15.
con^ulem qui comitia habuerit creasse ^^vos Magistratu, non aliam ob causam
nisi quia suffragia receperit and populum moderatus est in eligendo.

What passed the Chirotonia of the people, by the Greeks is called Psephisma,
((...) Dion. Hal. L. 8.
when the Congregation of the people was to be dismissed, Marcus standing up,
said, your Psephisma, that is, your Act is exceeding good, etc.

This policy, for the greater part, is that, which Romulus (as was shown) is
said ((...)) to have instituted, or ordained, though it be plain that he
ordained it no otherwise than by the Chirotonia of the people.

Thus you have another Example of the three words in controversy, (
Chirotonia, (...), Psephisma) still applied in the same sense, and to the same
things. Have I not also discovered already, the Original right of Ordination,
whether in Civil, or religious Orders? This will be scandalous. How! derive
Ordination as it is in the Church of Christ, or asit was in the Church of the
Jews from the Religion, or rather superstition of the Heathens! I meddle not
with their Religion, nor yet with their superstition, but with their
Ordination, which was neither but a part of their policy. And why is not
Ordination in the Church or Commonwealth of Christ, as well a political thing
as it was in the Churches, or Commonwealths of the Jews, or of the Heathens.
Why is not Election of Officers in the Church as well a political thing, as
election of Officers in the State? and why may not this be as lawfully
performed by the Chirotonia in the one, as in the other?

That Moses introduced the Chirotonia, is expressly said by Philo de inst. princ.
Philo; though he oppose it to the ballot, in which I believe he is mistaken,
as not seeing that the ballot including the suffrage of the people, by that
means came as properly under the denomination of the Chirotonia, as the
suffrage of the Roman people, which though it were given by the Tablet, is so
called by Greek Authors. All ordination of Magistrates, as of the Senators, or
Elders of the Sanhedrin, of the Judges, or Elders of inferior Courts, of the
Judge, or Suffes of Israel, of the King, of the Priests, of the Levites,
whether with the ballot, or viva voce, was performed by the Chirotonia, or
suffrage of the people; In this (especially if you admit the authority of the
Jewish Lawyers, and Divines called the Talmudists) the Scripture will be clear,
but their Names are hard; Wherefore not to make my Discourse more rough then I
need, I shall here set them together; The Authors or writings I use by way of
paraphrase upon the Scripture are the Gemara Babylonia, Midhar Rabba, Sepher
Si^^ri, Sepher Tanchuma, Solomon Jarchius, Chiskuny, Abar^inel, Ajin Israel,
Pesiktha Zoertha, these and many more being for the Election of the Sanhedrin
by the ballot. I might have spoken them more briefly, for the truth is in all
that is Talmudical, I am assisted by Seldom Grotius, and their quotations out
of the Rabbis, having in this learning so little skill, that if I miscalled none
of them, I showed you a good part of my acquaintance with them.

Nor am I wedded unto Grotius or Seldom, whom sometimes I follow, and sometimes
I leave, making use of their learning, but of my own reason. As to the things
in this present controversy, they were no other in Athens and Rome than they
had been in the Commonwealth of Israel.

When Moses came to institute the Senate, he asked counsel Numb. 11. v. 16. 24.
of God. And the Lord said, Gather unto me seventy men of the Elders of Israel,
and Moses went out and told the people the words of the Lord: that is, proposed
the Dictate of the supreme Legislator unto the Chirotonia of the Congregation,
what else can we make of these words of Moses to the people? Deuteronomy. 1. v. 13,
14, 15.
Take ye wise men, and understanding, and known among your Tribes ((...)) and I
will constitute them Rulers over you. Now how the people could otherwise take
or choose these Rulers or Magistrates thus proposed, than by their Chiro oxia,
let Divines -- show or notwithstanding the constitution of Moses, both the
Senate of Israel, and the inferior Courts were decreed by the Chirotonia of the
people. For the people upon this proposition resolved in the affirmative, or
answered, and said, the thing which thou have spoken is good for us to do. This
then was the Psephisma, or decree of the people of Israel, whereupon says
Moses ((...)) I constituted or ordained them Governors. In which example you
have the three words, or the three things again, nor as to the things, is it,
or ever was it, otherwise in any Commonwealth, whence it is admirable in our
Divines, who will have (...) constituted, to be the word of power, that they do
not see by this means they must make two powers in the same Government, the
(...) or constitution of the Legislator, and the Chirotonia, or suffrage of the
people, or else say that the Commonwealth of Israel was instituted by the
power of the Legislator, and the authority of the people, then which there is
nothing more absurd. But the people staid not upon their first Psephisma, or
result that the thing was good for them to do, but did accordingly. The manner
of their proceeding at different times was somewhat different; for it was
sometimes viva voce, sometimes by the lot, without the suffrage, and sometimes
by the ballot, which consisted not of the lot only, but of the suffrage. Also
each of these are equally popular, (for neither of them gives any advantage
unto any person or party) but not equally prudent ways of proceeding; the lot
committing too much unto For tune, except in some kinds of businesses, as first
in the division of Lands, whence the suffrage was properly excluded, for the
civisions being made by three Deputies out of each Tribe, if there happened to
fall some advantage or disadvantage unto any man by the lot, it was equal or
impartial; whereas if it had fallen by the suffrage, it must have bin unequal,
or partial: such was the cause why the lot in the division of the land of
Canaan was used wthout the suffrage. In case of a crime committed by an unknown
Author, but among many of whom some one or more must have been guilty, as in
the cases of Achan and Jonathan; the lot was also used without the suffrage,
somewhat after the manner of decimation in an Army, when many that are guilty
throw the dice, and he on whom the lot falls is punished; yet with considerable
difference, for whereas decimation is not used but for punishment where the
persons are as well known as the guilt; this use of the lot in Israel was for
the discovery of the unknown Author of some known crime, that some one of many
being put to the question (who if either by his own confession, or other proof
he were found guilty, was punished accordingly, otherwise not,) Men might have
less encouragement that their crimes would be the more hidden, or less
punishable for company, or the shadow of it.

When the people were set upon the introduction of a new Magistracy, and cared
not at all who should be the man, as in the Election of Saul, at which time the
Philistines lay hard upon them, and they looked upon the Ease they hoped from a
King, without coveting the trouble which he was like to have; it seems unto
me; that there was a third use of the lot without the suffrage.

But that the common use of the Lot in Israel employed also the suffrage, and
was of the nature of the ballot at this day in Venice is little to be doubted,
or you may satisfy your self, when you have considered the manner how the
Senate or Sanhedrin was first elected ((...)) or constituted by Moses.

Upon the Psephisma, or decree of the Legislator and the people, the thing
which thou have spoken is good for us to do, they proceeded unto Election of
Competitors in this manner. Each of the twelve Tribes (to be hereafter as well
locally, as they were yet but geneologically divided) were to make the
Election, not excluding the Thirteenth, nor yet nominally taking it in; for
Levi though genealogically, as distinct a Tribe as any of them, yet was not
designed locally so to be but to have the right of promiscuous inhabiting,
cohabiting, or marriage with all or any of the rest, and with right of suffrage
accordingly; For this cause, the Tribes being thirteen, are reckoned but
twelve. So each of the twelve Tribes elected among themselves by their
suffrages, six wise men, and understanding, and known among them, which being
Elected, were written, and being written were delivered each in a several
scroll unto Moses. Moses having received all the scrolls, had seventy two
Competitors, which caused a fraction; for the Senate, as is plain by the Text,
( gather me seventy men, that they may stand with thee,) was to consist but of
seventy with Moses, that is, in all, of seventy one: So Moses having two
Competitors more than he needed, caused two Vrnes to be brought, into one of
which he cast the seventy two Competitors, or names written in the scrolls; and
into the other seventy two scrolls of which two were blanks, and seventy were
inscribed with the word Presbyter, this being done, the whole Congregation
prayed, and when they had prayed, gave forth their lots.

The Lots were given forth after this manner, first a Lot was drawn out of the
Vrne of the Magistracies, then another out of the Vrne of the Competitors; The
Competitor unto whose name a blank was drawn departed: but he unto whose name a
prize was drawn, or given forth became a Magistrate.

They who had thus gained Magistracy were (...) by this Psephisma decreed to be
together of the number of the seventy Elders. But whereas in the Vrne of
Magistracies there were two blanks, two that had been written Numb. 11. 26.
Competitors must of necessity have failed of Magistracy. So Eldad and Medad
being of them that were written Competitors Numb. 11.
by the Tribes, yet went not up unto the Tabernacle; that is, attained not to
be ((...)) numbered among the seventy, who were to sit in the Court of the
Tabernacle, as afterward they did in the pavement, or stone-chamber in the
Court of the Temple.

In this place I shall mind you but once more of the three words in
controversy. Moses the Legislator ((...)) constituted, the people
chirotonized; and that which they had chirotonized, was Psephisma, their Decree.

There be in these times that are coifed with such opinions, that to show
Scripture to be reason, is to make it loose weight with them, and to talk of
the Talmudists is to profane it; of these I shall desire no more than to know
how they understand that place of Eldad and Medad, for if they can no otherwise
make sense of it, than as I have done, it is a sufficient proof, (letting the
Talmudists go) of all that I have said. What therefore has the Hierarchy, and
the Presbytery for their opinion that the Sanhedrin was instituted by the
Chirothesia, or Imposition of Hands?

There is in the Old Testament no mention of laying on of Hands by way of
Ordination, or election, but only by Moses in the designation of Joshua for his
Successor; and in this Moses did first as Romulus afterward in the Election of
the Prefect or Protector of Rome; but upon a far greater exigence, for the
Commonwealth of Rome, when Romulus did the like; was seated or planted, but
the Commonwealth of Israel when Moses did this, was neither seated nor
planted, nor indeed a Commonwealth, but an Army designed to be a
Commonwealth. Now between the Government that is necessary unto an Army, and
that which is necessary to a Commonwealth, there is a vast difference. The
Government even of the Armies of Rome, when she was a Commonwealth, was
nevertheless Monarchical: in this regard Moses himself exercised a kind of
Dictatorian Power for his life, and the Commonwealth being not yet planted,
nor having any balance whereupon to weigh her self, must either have been left
at his death unto the care of some man, whom he knew best able to lay her
foundation, or unto extreme hazard; wherefore this Ordination which was but
accidental, regarding the present Military condition of the people, Moses most
prudently distinguishes from the other; in that he showed them how they should
manage their Commonwealth, in this he bequeaths them the man whom he thinks
the most likely to bring them to be a Commonwealth; of which judgment and
undertaking of Moses, Joshua the next illustrious Example, most worthily
acquitted himself.

There is in these Elections another remarkable passage, but such a one as
being so far from political, that it is supernatural, does not properly
appertain unto this discourse, and so I shall but point at it. When the Elders,
thus chosen, were set round about the Tabernacle, the Lord came down in a
cloud, Numb. 11. v. 24. 25.
and took of the spirit of Moses, and gave it unto the seventy Elders, and it
came to pass, that when the Spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, and did
not cease. So Joshua was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his
hands upon him. And Deuteronomy. 33. v. 9.
Paul minds Timothy, Stir up the gift of God which is in thee 1 Timothy 1. v. 6.
by the laying on of my hands. But the Talmudists themselves do not pretend
that their Ordination was farther accompanied with supernatural indowments than
the first institution; and if Divines were as ingenuous, no less might be
acknowledged of theirs: Moses was a Prophet, the like unto whom has not been
in Israel, and has there been an Apostle like Paul in the Christian Church?
Every body cannot do miracles, we see they cannot. Take heed how you deny
sense, for then bread may be flesh. If we be not to make choice of a political
institution without a miraculous test or recommendation; either Ordination was
at first accompanied with supernatural gifts, and from thenceforth (as I
conceive) neither. Divines me thinks as such should not be so much concerned in
the Ordination of the Sanhedrin, or of Joshua, who were Magistrates, as the
people or the Magistrate, yet if these should hence infer that their Election,
Ordination, or designation of persons conferred supernatural gifts, Divines
would hardly allow of it; and why are the people, or the Magistrate obliged to
allow more unto that of a Clergy? To return.

Such as I have shown was the Ordination of the Senate, or great Sanhedrin,
that of the lesser Sanhedrin, or inferior Conrts, was of like nature, for it
follows; I took the chief of your Tribes, wisemen and known ((...)) and made
them Heads over you, Captains of thousands, and Captains of hundreds, Deuteronomy. 1.
v. 15.
etc. which were other Magistrates than according unto our custom, we should
readily expect to be intimated by such words, for they were the Judges of the
inferior Courts, those that sat in the gates of each City, and others that
appertained unto the Villages, as in the next Verse: and I charged your Judges
at that time, saying, hear the Causes, and judge Ver. 16.
righteously.

The next Magistrate whose Election comes to be considered is the Dictator, or
Judge of Israel. Where it is said of this people, that the Lord raised them up
Judges, which delivered Judge. 2. 16.
them out of the hands of those that spoiled them, it is to be understood
(says Sigonius) that God put it into the mind of the people to elect such
Magistrates, or Captains over them. For De Rep. Heb.
example when the children of Ammon made war against Israrael, God raised up
Jephtha, whose Election was after this manner: the Elders went to fetch Jephtha
out of the Land of Judges 11.
Tob, and when they had brought him unto Mizpeh (which in those days was the
place (where (...)) the Congregation of Israel usually assembled) the people
made him Head and Captain over them. Now that the Election of the King was as
much in the Chirotonia of the people, as that of the Deur. 17. 15.
Judge is past all controversy, seeing the Law speaking of the people says
thus. One from among thy brethren shall thou set King over thee: and
accordingly when the Government was changed to Monarchy, it was not Samuel, but
the people that would have it so; thus Saul was chosen King by the Lot. Where
the contradiction of Grotius is remarkable, who in this place to show that the
Lot is of popular institution, quotes Arist. Poll. B. 6. C. 2.
Aristotle; and yet when he comes to speak of the Lots that were cast at the
Election of Mathias, says it was that it might appear not whom the multitude,
but whom God had ordained; as De Imp. S. P. C. 10.
if the Magistrate lawfully elected by the people, were not Elected by God; or
that the lot which thus falls into the lap were not at the disposing of the
Lord. But if the League by which the people received David into the throne, or
the Votes by which first the people of Jerusalem, and afterward the
Congregation of Israel (as was shown in the former Book) made Solomon King,
were of the Lord, then Election by the people was of the Lord, and the
Magistrate that was elected by the Chirotonia of the people, was elected by the
Chirotonia of God, for as the Congregation of Israel is called Judges 20.
in Scripture ((...)) the Ecclesia or Congregation of God; so the Chirotonia of
this Congregation is called by Josephus ((...)) the Chirotonia of God, who as I
noted Jos. L. 4.
before out of Capellus, was in this Commonwealth Political King, or Civil
Legislator (Sans comparison) as Solon in Athens, and Romulus in Rome; that is
to propose unto the people, ( Haec est lex quam Moses proposuit,) and whatever
was proposed by God, or the lawful Magistrate under him, and chirotonized or
voted by the people was Law in Israel, and no other. Nay and the people had not
only power to reject any Law that was thus proposed, but to repeal any Law that
was thus Enacted: for if God intending popular Government should have ordained
it, otherwise he must have contradicted himself, wherefore he plainly
acknowledges unto them this power, where ((...)) they rejected him (whom they
had formerly chirotonized, Josephus. L. 6. C. 5.
or chosen King) that he should not reign over them: and elected Saul. This if
God had withstood by his power, he must have introduced that kind of Monarchy
which he had declared against, wherefore he chose rather to abandon this
sottish and ungrateful people unto the most inextricable yoke of deserved
slavery, telling them, when he had warned them, and they would not hear him,
that they should cry unto him, and he would not hear them, one tittle of whose
words passed not unfulfill'd.

By this time I have shown that all the Civil Magistrates in Israel were chosen
by the Chirotonia of the People, or to follow Josephus by the Chirotonia of
God, which is all one; for the Chirotonia of the President of the Congregation,
as I have instanced in that of the Proedri of the Thesmothetae of the Consuls,
of the Tribunes, and the Chirotonia of the Congregation is the same thing; and
of the Congregation of Israel God (except only at the voting of a King) was
President.

To come then from the Civil Magistrates unto the Priests, and Levites, these
were chosen in two ways, either by the lot, or by the Chirotonia.

The office and dignity of the High Priest being the greatest in Israel, and by
the institution to be hereditory, caused great Disputes in the Election: to
this Moses by the command of God had designed Aaron his Brother, which
designation, the command of God being at first either not so obvious, as that
relation, or the ambition of others so blind that they could not, or would not
see it, caused great combustion. First through the conspiracy of Korah, Dathan,
and Abiram; and next by the murmuring of the Princes of the Tribes, all Emulous
of this honor. Korah being not only a great man, but of the Tribe of Levi,
could not see why he was not Numbers 16. Josephus L. 4.
as worthy of the Priesthood, consideration had of his Tribe as Aaron; and if
any other Tribe might pretend to it, Dathan and Abiram being descended from
Reuben were not only of the Elder House, but troubled to see a younger
preferred before them Wherefore these having gained unto their party three
hundred of the most powerful men of the Congregation, accused Moses of
affecting Tyranny, and doing those things which threatened the liberty of the
Commonwealth; as under pretense of Divination to blind the eyes of the people,
preferring his Brother unto the Priesthood ((...)) without the suffrage of the
Congregation: of which charge Moses acquitting himself in the Congregation,
tells the people that Aaron was chosen both by God, and ((...)) by their
suffrages, which ( Korah being upon this occasion miraculously destroyed) were
thereupon once more given by the people. Nevertheless the Princes of the Tribes
continuing still discontented, and full of murmur, God decided the controversy
by a second miracle, the budding of Aarons rod: (and so (...)) being thrice
confirmed by the Chirotonia of God, he was confirmed in that honor. Now that
the Chirotonia of God in this place of Josephus signifies the Chirotonia of the
people, is plain by that in Scripture, where they made Solomon King, 1 Chro.
29. 22.
and Zadock to be Priest. After the captivity, as in other things, so in this
power the Sanhedrin came (as I conceive) to overreach the people: Joshua the
Son of Josedech being thus elected High Priest by the Sanhedrim, and this
honor Grot. ad Hag. 1. 1. Josephus de Judge. l. 4. Maymon. Hal. Cele
Hamikdasch. Chap. 4. and 5. 2 Chronicles. 24. 5. 25. 8. 26. 13.
thenceforth as appears by Maymonides being at the disposing of this Court. Nor
could any inferior Priest serve at the Altar, except he had acquired that right
by the lot, as is not only delivered by the same Author, and by Josephus but in
Scripture. Now the lot as was shown giving no prerogative either unto any
person or party is as popular an institution as the Chirotonia. So in election
of Priests, the Orders of Israel differed not from humane prudence, nor those
of other Commonwealths, the Priest of Jupiter having been elected after the
same manner in the Commonwealth of Syracusa, the Augustales, and the Vestals
in that of Rome; and if the right of bearing holy Magistracy, being in Israel
confined unto one Tribe or order, may seem to make any difference, it was for
some time no otherwise in Athens, nor in Rome, where the Patritians or Nobility
assumed these Offices, or the greatest of them to themselves, till the people
in those Cities disputed that custom, as introduced without their consent,
which the people of Israel could not fairly do, because it was introduced by
their consent.

To come unto the Levites in their Original Ordination, God commanded Moses
saying, Thou shall bring the Levites before the Numb: 8. v: 9, 10.
Tabernacle of the Congregation and thou shall gather the whole assembly of the
children of Israel, and they shall put their hands upon the Levites. This in
the sound of the words may seem to imply the Chirothesia, or Imposition of
Hands, but take heed of that, Divines will not allow the Chirothesia to be an
Act of the people, but in this proceeding the whole people acted in the
Ordination of the Levites, wherefore the Levites also were ordained by the
Chirotonia, consent, vote, or suffrage of the whole people employed in this
action. But for the Ordination of Priests and Levites, whatever it were, it is
not unto the present purpose; Divines deriving not theirs from Priests and
Levites, but from Dukes, Generals, and Magistrates, from that of Joshua and of
the Sanhedrin, always provided, that this were of the same nature with the
former, that is, hy the Chirothesia, or Imposition of Hands, and not by the
Chirotonia of the People. However the Ordination of the Magistracy was
certainly Political; and so in this Exodus 29.
deduction they themselves confess that their Ordination also Numb. 8.
is a Political Constitution: yet whereas Moses is commanded by God to bring
Aaron and his sons unto the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and
having washed them there, to adorn them with the Priestly Robes, with the
Mitre, and to anoint them: whereas he is commanded (the Children of Israel
having first laid their Hands upon the Levites) to cleanse them, and offer them
for an Offering; Divines of the Hierarchy and the Presbytery (though it be
otherwise with Wallaeus, and such as acknowledge Popular Government) give the
Congregation, or consent of the People for nothing, and put the whole
Ordination of the Priests and Levites upon the washing and cleansing or other
Ceremonies of their Consecration: as if to put the Ordination of Saul up on the
Ceremony of anointing by Samuel, (though performed by the immediate command of
God, were not absolutely contradictory to Scripture, and unto the known Law of
Israel, which speaking of the people, expressly says, One from among Philo de
inst. principiis.
thy Brethren shall thou set King over thee; upon which place says Philo, Most
wise Moses never intended that the royal dignity should be acquired by lot, but
chose rather that the Kings should be elected by the Chirotonia, or suffrage of
the whole people; the Congregations of the people assembled, upon this as upon
other public affairs, required a sign or confirmation from God: for as much
as by his will man is to the rest of nature, as the face unto the body.
Whereunto agrees that of the Heathens, Os homini sublime dedit Coelumque tueri
jussit, and their divinations upon the like occasions by entrails, none of
which were ever understood as destructive of the liberty of the people, or of
the freedom of their Chirotonia.

Where Solomon is made King, and Zadock Priest by the people, albeit the
ceremony of anointing was doubtlesly performed, and perhaps by the Prophet
Nathan, it is wholly omitted in the place as not worth the speaking of. The
opinion that the Ordination of the Priests and Levites lay in the Ceremonies of
their consecration, is every whit as sober and agreeable unto reason, as if a
man should hold the Kings of England to have been made by the unction of the
Bishops, Israel from the institution of Moses to the Monarchy, was a Democracy,
or popular Government; in popular Government the consent of the people is the
power of the people, and both the Priests and Levites were ordained by the
consent of the people of Israel.

To bring these things unto the Cities in the perambulation of the Apostles,
which by the former Chapter I have proved to have been popular Governments; it
is acknowledged by Grotius unto the Cities of Asia, not only that they used the
Di^m. C. 10.
Chirotonia, but in the strictest sense of the word, that is, to give their
suffrage by the holding up of Hands, and that they had the liberty of their
Religion, the choice of their Magistrates, both Civil and Ecclesiastical in
their Ecclesiae, or Congregations, has been also undeniably evidenced; whence
it must needs follow that there were Cities in Asia ((...) (...)) Chirotonizing
or ordaining them-Elders, that is, Magistrates and Priests in every
Congregation (with Reverence be it spoken) long before Christ was in the flesh,
or the Apostles any of them were born. Wherefore to sum up what in this Chapter
I conceive to be sufficiently proved, I may boldly conclude, that the
Chirotonia deriveth from popular constitution, and that there was a way of
Ordination by the Chirotonia.

CHAP. IV. The deduction of the Chirothesia from Monarchical or Aristocratical
Government, and of the second way of Ordination from the Chirothesia. In which
is contained the Commonwealth of the Jews as it stood after the Captivity.
WHat pleases the Prince (says Justinian) has the force of a Law, seeing the
people in his Creation have devolved their whole power upon his person? which is
which the most? But when Popular Government is changed into Monarchical, either
the whole power of the people, or a great* part of it must of necessity accrue
unto the King. Hence says Samuel, he will appoint him Captains over Thousands,
and Captains over Fifties: in which words perhaps is intimated the Judges of
the inserior Courts, or Jethonian prefectures; so 1 Samuel 8. 12.
that hereby Samuel tells the people they shall no more have the Election of
their Rulers, but the King will have it: who it may be changed the nature of
some of these Magistracies, or added others, for when David came to reign over
all Israel, 2 Samuel 8. 15.
Joab was over the host (his Strategus or General) Jehoshaphat was Recorder,
Zadoc and Abi^elec were the Priests, Seraiah was the Scribe, and Benaiah was
over the Pelethites, and the Cerethites; that is, was Captain of his Regiments
of Guard, called perhaps by these names, as those of Romulus were called
Celeres. But it should seem that few or none of these Officers were elected by
the Chirotonia, that is by the people, but by the Prince, which kind of
Election as will be shown anon may be called Chirothesia. For the deduction of
this kind of Ordination, or Election, we shall do well to hearken first unto
Doctor Hammond; who in his Quaere, or Discourse 10.
concerning Ordination, by the Imposition of Hands, puts it thus. To lift up
the Hands was a Ceremony in Prayer, and Exodus 17. 11.
accordingly to lay hands on any, (differing no otherwise from lifting up, than
by the determining that action to a peculiar object, (the person that was
prayed for) was generally among the Jews, a Ceremony of benediction used first
by the Father to the Children; in bestowing the blessing upon them, (and with
that the succession to some part of his Estate or Inheritance) as appears in
Jacobs blessing the Children of Joseph: he stretched out his Genesis 48. 14.
right hand and laid it upon Ephraims head, and so his left hand on Manasses,
and so he blessed, etc. From thence it was accomodated among them to the
communicating of any part of power to others as assistants, or to the deriving
of any successive Office from one to another. Thus when Moses had from Heaven
received, and long used his Commission to be under God the Ruler of the People,
the seventy Elders were by Gods appointment Numb. 11. 17.
assumed to assist him: it being certain from the Jewish writings, though the
sacred Scripture have no occasion to mention it, that the succession of the
seventy Elders under the name of San^edrim o Council was continued through all
Ages by their creating others in the place of those that dyed, by this Ceremony
of Imposition of Hands. To this purpose are the clear words of Maimonides,
Moses our master created the seventy Elders Tit Sanhed. C 4.
by Imposition of Hands, and the Divine Majesty rested on them; and those
Elders imposed Hands on others, and others on others, etc. So a little before
the departure of Moses out of his life, when a Successor was to be provided for
him, God commands him to take Joshua, and lay his hands upon him. And Numb. 27.
28, 23.
Moses laid his Hands upon him, and gave him a Charge as the Lord commanded by
the hand of Moses: that is, derived unto him by this Ceremony the Authority
which himself had, and constituted him his Successor in that Government. And so
it is Deuteronomy. 34. 9.
repeated Joshua was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his Hands
upon him.

This is the Doctors deduction of the Chirothesia, or ordination by the Laying
on of Hands from the Commonwealth of Israel: and (says he) from the three
Uses of this Ceremony there, that is first in praying for another, secondly, in
paternall benediction; thirdly in creating successors in power, either in
whole, or in part, derive three sorts of things in the New Testament, to which
this Ceremony of Laying on of Hands is accomodated; that of prayer simply taken
was of two sorts, either for the cure of Diseases, or pardoning of sins. For
Diseases: They Mat. 16. 18.
shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. For sins* they were done
away also by this Ceremony in the absolution of Penitents, to which belongs
that Exhortation of Paul to Timothy, Lay Hands suddenly on no man, ( that is)
not without due 1 Timothy 5. 22.
examination and proof of his penitence, least thou be partaker of other men's
sins. From the second, that of Paternal benediction, was borrowed, first that
of blessing Infants, with the Ceremony of Imposition of Hands, as it differed
from Baptism. And secondly, that of confirming those of fuller age, that had
been formerly Mat. 10. 16.
Baptized. Lastly to create Successors in any power, or communicating any part
of power to others, as to Assistants, is answerable that Imposition of Hands in
Ordination so often mentioned in the New Testament, sometimes in the lower
degree, Acts 6. 6.
as in the ordaining of Deacons. Elsewhere in the highest degree, setting
Governors over particular Churches, as generally when by that laying on of
Hands, it is said they received the Holy Ghost, whereas the Holy Ghost contains
all the (...) required to the pastoral function, and so signifies power from on
Luke 24. 49.
high; the Authority and function it self; so it being given by Imposition of
Hands* makes the parallel exact between this of Christian Ordination, and that
observed in the Creating Successors in the Jewish Sanhedrin. So far the Doctor.

Now say I if the Scripture be silent as to the Ordination of Deuteronomy. 1. Numb. 11.
the Elders in Israel: what means that place: Take the wise men, and
understanding, and known among your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over
you; once in their lives let them give us the sense of it, or of that other,
where Eldad and Medad are of those that were written, and yet went not up unto
the Tabernacle: Otherwise that we hear no more of these, is from the silence of
Divines, and not of the Scripture. But if the Scripture be not silent in this
point, is there not a great deal of fancy in going on to cure the sick, to
pardon sins, to bless Infants, confirm the Baptized, ordain Ministers, nay,
give the Holy Ghost, and all the graces belonging unto the pastoral Function,
from a place that has no such thing in it? for if the Sanhedrim according to
Scripture were not ordained by the Chirothesia, there is no such thing to be
derived by the Chirothesia from the Sanhedrim. The first Chirotonia indeed of
the Sanhedrim was accompanied with miraculous indowments, wherefore if they
will derive these gifts and graces from the Sanhedrim, why are they sworn
enemies to the Chirotonia? Again the Sanhedrim was a Civil Court or Senate,
wherefore then by this title should not these gifts and graces be rather
pretended unto by the Civil Magistrate, than by Divines? what becomes of the
Priest Aaron and his Lots? is he left unto the Civil Magistrate, while Divines
derive themselves from General Joshua and his Chirothesia? But if the Sanhedrim
and inferior Judicatories were otherwise ordained originally; then no
Magistrate in Israel was originally ordained by the Chirothesia but only
Joshua. It is admirable that Divines should look upon God, as if in the
institution of a Commonwealth he had no regard at all unto humane prudence;
but were altogether fixed upon their vain advantages. Who made humane prudence?
or to what end was it made? Any man that understands the politics, and
considers that God was now proceeding according unto this art, as in his
constitution of the Senate, and of the people, or Congregation is most obvious,
must needs see that this power he indulged unto Moses of making his own choice
of one man could not possibly be intended, as a permanent constitution, for
whereas he intended Popular Government, nothing is plainer then that a people
not electing their own Magistrates can have no popular Government. How absurd
is it to conceive that God having already made an express Law that the people
if at any time they came under Monarchy, should yet have the election of their
King, should now make a Law that the people being under a Commonwealth, should
no longer have the election of their Magistrates? for who sees not that to
introduce the Chirothesia as a standing Ordinance, had been to bar the people
of this power? Israel at this time, though designed for a Commonwealth, had no
Land, no foundation to balance her self upon, but was an Army in a Wilderness,
encompassed about with enemies; to permit unto the people in this case, the
choice of all their civil Magistrates was nevertheless safe enough, nay best of
all, for at the election of wise men, and understanding, and known among their
Tribes, so far as was needful unto civil administration, their skill must needs
have been at any time sufficient, but the Commonwealth was yet in absolute
necessity of a Protector, and of Dictarian power. Now to know who was fittest
in this case to succeed Moses, required the wisdom of God, or of Moses, and
therefore was not yet safe to be ventured upon a people so new in their
Government. For these reasons I say Moses used the Chirothesia for once, and no
more, or let them show me among all the Dictators, Judges, or Kings, that
succeeded Joshua, any one that was chosen by the Chirothesia, and be all
Dictators. It is now above three thousand years since the institution of the
Sanhedrim, from which time the ambitious Elders first, then the Talmudists, and
of latter ages Divines have been perpetually striving for, or possessing
themselves of this same Oligarchycal invention of the Chirothesia pretended to
be derived from Moses; though there be neither any such precept of God or
Christ in the Old or New Testament, nor any unanimous result upon the point,
either by the Talmudists or Divines themselves. And for the clear words quoted
by the Doctor out of Maimonides, they are such unto which I shall in due time
show Maimonides to be elsewhere of a clear contrary opinion. But in this
Controversy, without some clearer deduction of the Chirothesia, we shall make
no happy progress, in this therefore I shall follow Seldom the ablest Talmudist
of our age, or any.

The Commonwealth of Lacedemon (if I could stand to show it) has strange
resemblances to that of Israel, not only in the Agragrian, which is nothing to
the present purpose, but in the Senate, which to prevent catching another time,
I do not say was a Iudicatory only, but not only a Senate, but a Iudicatory
also. For Lycurgus of all other Legislators was in this the likest unto God, or
unto Moses, that his work was so exquisitely perfected at once, and his Laws so
comprehensive, that if the Senate had had no other function than to make or
propose new Laws, there being little or nothing of that wanting, they would
have had little or nothing to do. Now it being thus, and much more than thus in
Israel, the Sanhedrim was not only the Senate, but the supreme Iudicatory. And
because one Court in a Territory of any Extent is no where sufficient unto this
end; therefore the Sanhedrim had diverse branches distended not only unto the
Cities of Judea, but even unto the Villages, these were called the Lesser
Sanhedrim, or the Iethronian Praefectures.

The Great Sanhedrim consisting (as has been shown) of 70. Seldom de Syn.
Elders, sat first in the Tabernacle, and afterward in the Court of the Temple.

The Iethronian Praefectures consisted some of three and twenty Elders, and
others but of three. Of the former kind there were two in the gates of the
Temple, and one sitting in the gates of every City, of the latter there was one
almost in every Village.

The power of the I^thronian Court consisting of twenty three Elders, was in
matter of Judicature, equal with that of the great Sanhedrin, only in cases
of difficulty they observed this precept. If there arise a matter too hard for
thee in judgment Vide* Grot. ad Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
between blood and blood, between plea and plea, between stroke and stroke,
being matter of controversy within thy gates; then shall thou arise, and get
thee up into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose (in the future, for
the Commonwealth was yet but designed, not planted) and thou shall come unto
the Priests and the Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those days,
and enquire, and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment. That is, thou
shall consult the Sanhedrim, or if there be no Sanhedrim, the Suffes or Judge
of Israel. The reason why the Sanhedrim in this Text is mentioned under the
name of the Priests and Levites is, that these about the beginning of this
Commonwealth having (as were also the Egyptian Priests at the same time) been
the learned Men, whether for Lawyers, or Physicians, there were scarce any
other chosen into the Sanhedrim, though toward the latter end it happened to
be far otherwise. For whereas sacrificing was feasting* the Priests enjoying a
f^^idl^ness, became in latter times so heavy, that as to the Election of the
Sanhedrim not only the Levites of inferior rank were upon the matter wholly
laid by, but the High Priest himself sometimes omitted, the rest of the Tribes
far excelling this in Learning.

The power of the Triumvirates, or three Judges in the Villages extended no
farther than to inflict stripes to a certain number, and pecuniary mulcts to a
certain sum. These possibly had the same recourse upon occasion of difficulty
unto the Judges in the gates, as the Judges in the gates had to the Sanhedrim:
but their power is not so much to the present purpose which regards only their
manner of Election. This having been institutively exercised, as has been
shown by the Chirotonia, or Ballot of the People, came sooner or later, (I find
no man that can resolve npon the certain time) to the Chirothesia. For though
when a Judge in the gate, was dead, that Court elected his Successor out of
their Disciples, (each Court in the gates had 99 Disciples that were their
constant auditors) or out of the Triumvirates; and when an Elder of the
Sanhedrim dyed, the Sanhedrim elected his Successor out of the Courts in the
gates, more particularly those in the gates of the Temple by suffrages; yet no
man was capable of being elected into any of these Courts, that was not a
Presbyter, nor was any man a Presbyter that had not received Mikotzl Misna
Gemara
the Chirothesia: nor could any man confer the Chirothesia that had not first
received it, or been so ordained a Presbyter himself: nor though he were so
ordained, could he confer the like Ordination, but in the presence of two
others, whether ordained or not ordained: and no Ordination could be conferred
but either this way, or by some one of the Iudicatories. Abr. Zacuth.
Maimonides.
The manner how this Ordination was conferred, if the party were present, was
either by laying on of Hands, or by saying a Verse or Charm, or if he were
absent, by a Letter, or Patent.

An Elder thus Ordained was called Rabbi, might have Disciples, Rab. Jonah.
Rab. Nathan.
teach, practice, or expound the Law, declare what was thereby free or
forbidden (which with them was called binding and loosing) ordain others with
the assistance mentioned, or be capable of Election into some one, or any Court
of Justice, according to the nature of his Ordination, the Conditions mentioned
at the conferring of the same, or the gift that was in him by the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery, which in some extended no farther than to show how
meat should be killed and dressed, how uncleanness should be purified, what
were vices of the body, what might be eaten or drunk, and what not? in others
it extended to some one or more, or all the facultys expressed; but I am
inclining to believe that a plenary Ordination, used not to be conferred but by
the Great Sanhedrim, or at least some one of the Iethronian Courts.

They used also to confer this Ordination some time occasionally, and for a
season in this manner. Receive the gift of Maimon. Tit. San. Cap. 4.
judiciary Ordination, or the right of binding and loosing, til such time as
you return unto us in the City. Where the Christian Jews still following their
former Customs in higher matters, as the observation of the Sabbath, and of
Circumcision, even unto such a degree, that Paul not to displease them took
Timothy and circumcised him, seem unto me to have followed this custom, who
when the Prophets at Antioch had informed them that Paul and Barnabas were to
be separated unto an extraordinary work, laid their hands upon them, and sent
them Acts 13. 3.
away: for otherwise as to Ordination Paul and Barnabas had that before; At
least Paul by Ananias, and for any such Acts 9. 17.
precept in the Christian Religion there was none.

Josephus, Philo, and other Authors, that tell us the Commonwealth of Israel
was an Aristocracy, look no farther than the introduction of the Chirothesia by
the Presbyterian party, which must have taken date some time after the
Captivity, or the restitution of the Commonwealth by Ezra, there heing not one
syllable for it in Scripture, but enough to the contrary, seeing God introduced
the Chirotonia. By which it is demonstrable that a Presbyterian party may bring
a Popular Government unto Oligarchy; and deface even the work of God himself,
so that it shall not be known to afer-ages; as also that Ecclesiastical Writers
(for such are the Talmudists) may pretend that for many hundred years together,
as Divines also have done, to be in Scripture, which neither is, nor ever was
there. But have I yet said enough to show that Ordination especially as in this
Example, not of a Clergy, but of a Magistracy, whether by the Chirotonia, or
Chirothesia is a political institution? or must I rack my brains for Arguments
to prove that an Order or a Law having such influence upon the Commonwealth,
that being introduced or Repealed, it quite alters the whole frame of the
Government, must needs be of a Political nature, and therefore not appertain
unto Divines, or unto a Clergy, but unto the Magistrate, unless their
traditions may be of force to alter the Government as they please? all is one,
they can abate nothing of it, let what will come of the Government, the
Chirothesia they must and will have. Then let them have Monarchy too, or
Tyranny, for one of these according as the balance happens to stand with or
against their Chirothesia is the certain consequence; either Tyranny as in
Israel* or Monarchy as in the Papacy, and from that or the like principle, in
all Gothic Empires, which examples to begin with Israel, well deserve the
pains to be somewhat more diligently unfolded.

All Elections in Israel, (save those of the Priests who were Eligible by the
Lot) being thus usurped by the Presbyterian party, and the people by that means
divested of their Chirotonia; some three hundred years before Christ, Hillel
Senior High Priest, and Archon, or Prince of the Sanhedrim found means to draw
this power of Ordination, in show somewhat otherwise, but in effect unto
himself, and his Chirothesia, for by his influence upon the Sanhedrim it was
Malmon. Tit. San. Cap. 4.
brought to pass, that whereas formerly any man Ordained, might (in the manner
shown) have ordained his Disciples; it was now agreed that no man should be
ordained without the License of the Prince, and that this power should not be
in tbe Prince, but in the presence of the Father of the Sanhedrim, or Speaker
of the House. Thus the Aristocracy of Israel becoming first Oligarchical took
(according unto the nature of all such Governments) long steps toward
Monarchy, which succeeding in the Asmonean Family, commonly called the
Machabees, was for their great merit (in vindicating the Jews from the Tyranny
of Antiochus) confirmed unto them by the universal consent and Chirotonia of
the people. Nevertheless unto him that understands the orders of a
Commonwealth, or has read the Athenian, Lacedemonian, or Roman Story, it will
be plain enough that but for their Aristocracy they needed not to have been so
much beholding unto, or to have stood so much in need of one Family. It is true
both the merit of these Princes, and the manner of their free Election by the
people; seem to forbid the Name of Tyranny unto this institution. But so it is,
that let there be never so much merit in the man, or inclination of the people
to the Prince, or the Government that is not founded upon the due balance, the
Prince in that case must either govern in the nature of a Commonwealth, as did
those of this Family, reforming the policy after the Lacedemonian Model, or
turn Tyrant, as from their time, who lived in the Age of the Grecian Monarchy
did all their Successors, till under the Romans this Nation became a Province.
From which time such endeavors and insurrections they used for the recovery of
their ancient policy, that under the Emperor Adrian, (who perceived at what
their Ordination, being not of Priests, but of Magistrates, and of a Senate,
pretending unto Sovereign Judicature and Authority seemed to aim) there came
(says the Talmud) against the Israelites an Edict out of the Kingdom of the
wicked (meaning the Roman Empire) whereby whosoever should ordain, or be
ordained, was to be put to death, and the school or City in which such an act
should be done, to be destroyed; whereupon Rabbi Jehuda Ben Baba (least
Ordination should fail in Israel) went forth, and standing between two great
mountains, and two great Cities, and between two Sabbath days journeys from Osa
and Sephara, Ordained five Presbyters. For this feat the Rabbi is remembered by
the Talmudists under the name of Ordinator; but the same (as it follows) being
discovered by the Roman Guards, They shot his body through with so many Darts,
as made it like a sieve, yet staid not the business here, but so obstinate
continued the Jew in the superstition unto which this kind of Ordination was
now grown, that whereas by the same it was unlawful for them to Ordain in a
foreign Land, and at home they could not be brought to abstain, the Emperor
banished them all out of their own Country, whence happened their total
dispersion. That of a thing, which at the first was a mere delusion, such
Religion should come in time, and with education to be made that not only they
who had received advantage could suffer Martyrdom, but they that had lost by
it, would be utterly lost for it, were admirable in the case of this people, if
it were not common in the case of most in the world at this day: custom may
bring that to be received as an Ordinance of God, for which there is no color
in Scripture. For to consult Maimonides a little better upon this point.
Whereas (says he) they grant in Halac. San. C. 4. S. 11.
case it should happen that in all the Holy Land there remained but one
Presbyter, that Presbyter assisted by two other Israelites, might ordain the
seventy, or great Sanhedrim, and the Sanhedrim so constituted might constitute
and ordain the lesser Courts, I am of opinion that were there no Presbyter in
the Land, yet if all the wisemen of Israel should agree to constitute or
ordain Judges, they might do it lawfully enough. But if so, then how comes it
to pass that our Ancestors have been so solicitous, least Judicature should
fail in Israel? Surely for no other cause than that from the time of the
Captivity the Israelites were so dispersed that they could not upon like
occasions be brought together. Now I appeal whether the clear words of
Maimonides, where he says that out Master Moses ordained the Sanhedrim by the
Chirothesia, be not more clearly and strongly contradicted in this place, than
they are affirmed in the other, since acknowledging that if the people could
assemble, they might Ordain the Sanhedrim; he gives it for granted, that when
they did assemble, they had power to Ordain it, and that Moses did assemble
them upon this occasion is plain in Scripture. Again if the power of Ordination
fall ultimately unto the People, there is not a stronger argument in Nature,
that it thence primarily derived. To conclude the Chirothesia of the
Presbyterian party in Israel is thus confessed by the Author no otherwise
necessaty, than through the defect of the Chirotonia of the People: which
ingenuity of the Talmudist, for any thing that has yet past, might be worthy
the imitation of Divines.

In tracking the Jews from the restitution of their Commonwealth after the
Captivity to their dispersion, it seems that the later Monarchy in Israel was
occasioned by the Oligarchy, the Oligarchy by the Aristocracy, and the
Aristocracy by the Chirothesia. But that this Monarchy, though erected by
Magnanimous and Popular Princes, could be no less than Tyranny derived from
another principle, that is, the insufficiency of the balance. For albeit from
the time of the Captivity, the Jubilee was no more in use, yet the Virgin Mary
as an Heiress, is affirmed by some to have been Married unto Joseph, by virtue
of this Law, Every Daughter that possesses an Numb. 27. 8.
inheritance in any Tribe of the Children of Israel, shall be Wife unto one of
the Family of the Tribe of her Fathers, etc. By which the popular Agrarian may
be more than suspected to have been of greater vigor than would admit of a
well balanced Monarchy.

The second Presbytery, which is now attained unto a well balanced Empire in
the Papacy, has infinitely excelled the pattern, the Lands of Italy being most
of them in the Church. This if I had leisure might be tracked by the very same
steps: at first it consisted of the seventy Parish Priests, or Presbyters of
Rome; now seventy Cardinals creating unto themselves an High Priest, or Prince
of their Sanhedrim, the Pope, but for the Superstition whereunto he has
brought Religion, and continues by his Chirothesia to hold it, a great and a
Reverend Monarch, established upon a solid foundation, and governing by an
Exquisite policy, not only well balanced at home, but deeply rooted in the
greatest Monarchies of Christendom, where the Clergy by virtue of their Lands
are one of the three States.

The maxims of Rome are profound, for there is no making use of Princes without
being necessary unto them; nor have they any regard unto that Religion which
does not regard Empire. All Monarchies of the Golthick model, that is to say,
where the Clergy by virtue of their Lands are a third estate, subsist by the
Pope, whose Religon creating a reverence in the people, and bearing an awe upon
the Prince, preserves the Clergy, that else being unarmed, become a certain
prey unto the King or the people; and where this happens (as in Henry the
Eighth) down goes the Throne, for so much as the Clergy loses, falls out of
the Monarchical into the Popular scale. Where a Clergy is a third estate,
Popular Government wants earth and can never grow: but where they dye at the
root a Prince may sit a while, but is not safe; nor is it in nature (except he
have a Nobility or Gentry able without a Clergy to give balance unto the
people) that he should subsist long, or peaceably: For wherever a Government
is founded upon an Army (as in the Kings of Israel, or the Emperors of Rome)
there the saddest Tragedies under heaven are either one the stage, or in the
Tiring-house. These things considered, the Chirothesia being originally nothing
else but a way of Policy excluding the people, where it attaineth not unto a
balance that is sufficient for this purpose, brings forth Oligarchy or
Tyranny, as among the Jews: And where it attaineth unto a balance sufficent
unto this end, produces Monarchy as in the Papacy and in all Gothic Kingdoms.

The Priests of Egypt, where (as it is described by Siculus) their revenue
came unto the third part of the Realm, would, no question, have been exactly
well fitted with the Chirothesia pretended unto by modern Divines. Suppose the
Apostles had planted the Christian Religion in those parts. and the Priests had
been all converted, I do not think that Divines will say that having altered
their Religion they needed to have deserted their being a third estate; their
overballance to the people, their lands, their preheminece in the Government,
or any part of their Policy for that: and I am as far from saying so as
themselves.

On the other side, as Paul was a Citizen of Rome, let us suppose him to have
been a Citizen of Athens, and about ((...)) to constitute the Christian
Religion in this Gommon-wealth where any Citizen might speak unto the people.
Imagine then he should have said thus. Men of Athens, that which you ignorantly
seek, I bring unto you the true Religion, but to receive this, you must not
alter your former belief only but your ancient Customs; your political
Assemblies have been hitherto called, Ecclesiae, this word must loose the
ancient sense, and be no more understood but of spiritual Consistories, and so
whereas it has been of a popular, it must henceforth be of an Aristocratical,
or Presbyterian signification. For your Christonia that also must follow the
same rule insomuch as on whomsoever, one or more of the Aristocracy or
Presbytery shall lay their hands, the same is understood by virtue of that
Action to be Chirotonized. How well would this have sounded in Egypt, and how
ill in Athens? Cercainly the Policy of the Church of Christ admits of more
prudence and temperament in these things, though the Apostles being Jews
themselves, satisfied the converted Jews that were used to Aristocrrcy by
retaining somewhat of their constitutions, as the Chirothesia yet when Paul and
Barnabas come to constitute in Popular Commonwealths: they are ((...))
Chirotonizing them Elders in every Congregation.

CHAP. V. Whether the Chirotonia mentinoned in the fourteenth of the Acts be
indeed as is pretended by Dr. Hamond, Dr. Seaman and the Authors they follow,
the same with the Chirothesia or a far different thing; in which are contained
the diverse kinds of Churchgovernment, introduced and exercised in the age of
the Apostles
EIther I have impettinently intruded upon the Politics, or cannot be said so
much to meddle in Church Matters, as Churchmen may be said to have meddled in
States matters. For if the Chirotonia be election by the many, and the
Chirothesia be election by one, or by the Few, the whole difference between
Popular and Monarchical Government falls upon these two words; And so the
question will be, whether the Scriptures were intended more for the advantage
of a Prince, of an Hierarchy or Presbytery, than of the People. But that God in
the Old Testamentiinstituted the Chirotonia, not only in the Commonwealth as
by the election of the Sanhedrim, but in the Monarchy as in the Election of the
Kings is plain; so if there remain any advantage in Scripture unto Kings unto
the Hierarchy, or Presbytery, it must be in the New Testament. Israel was Gods
chosen people, and God was Isreal's chosen King; That God was pleased to bow the
Heavens, and come down unto them, was his choice, not theirs; but in that upon
his proposition, and those of his servant Moses, they resolved to Obey his
voice, and keep his Covenant, they chose him their King. In like manner the
Church is Christ's chosen people, and Christ is the Churches chosen King. That
Christ taking flesh was pleased to bow the Heavens, and come down in a more
familiar capacity of proposing himself unto Mankind, was his own choice, not
theirs; but in that the Church upon his proposition, or those of his Apostles
sent by him, as he was sent by the Father, resolved to obey his voice, and keep
his Covenant, she has chosen him her King. Whatever in nature or in grace, in
Church, or in State, is chosen by Man according unto the will of God, is chosen
by God, of whom is both the Will and the Deed. Which things considered; I
wonder at Doctor Hamond, who says:

Sure the Jewish and Heathen Cities, to whom the Gospel by 36.
Christ's command was to be preached were not to choose their Guides or
Teachers. Christ was not chosen by them to whom he preached, for says he, ye
have not chosen me, he came from Heaven, sent by his Father on that Errand, and
happy they whom he was thus pleased to choose, to call, and preach to. And when
his Apostles after his example go and preach to all Nations, and actually
gather Disciples, they chose their Auditors, and not their auditors them. To
make short work, I shall answer by explaining his words as they fall.

A Roman choosing whether he would speak unto the Senate or the People, chose
his Auditors, and not they him: Nevertheless if it were the Consul they chose
him, and not he them. It is onething to be a Speaker unto a People, that have
theliberty, when that is done, to do as they think fit, and another thing to be
a guide whom the People have consented, or obliged themselves to follow, which
distinction not regarded, makes the rest of his Argumentation recoyl upon
himself, while he proceeds thus, and they that give up their Names to the
obedience of the Gospel, (choose the Preachers as I should think of that Gospel
their guides) One branch of this obedience obliges them (by their own consent
it seems, because before they gave up their Names) to observe those that (being
thus placed over them by their consent) are placed over them by God, such not
only are their Civil Magistrates (who succeed unto their places by, and govern
according to the Laws which the people have chosen) but also their Pastors,
whom the Holy Ghost either mediately (according to the Rules of
Church Discipline in Scripture) or immediately (upon some such miraculous call,
as the people shall judge to be no imposture) has set over them. From which
words the Doctor not considering those qualifications, I have shown all along
to be naturally inherent in them, concludes that a Bishop is made by the Holy
Ghost, and not by the people.

If he would stand to this yet it were something, for if the Holy Ghost make a
Bishop, then I should think that the Holy Ghost ordained a Bishop, and so that
the Election and Ordination of a Bishop were all one. But this hereafter will
appear to be a more dangerous concession, than perhaps you may yet apprehend.
Wherefore when all is done you will not find Divines, at least Doctor Hamond to
grant that the Holy Ghost can ordain, he may elect indeed, and that is all, but
there is no ordination without the Chirothesia of the Bishops, or of the
Presbytery. Take the Doctors word for it.

When St. Paul says of the Bishops of Asia, that the Holy 107 Acts 20. 28.
Ghost had set them Overseers, I suppose that it is to be understood of their
Election or nomination unto those dignities, for so Clement speaks of St. John,
who constituted Bishops of those that were signified by the Spirit, where the
Spirits signification notes the Election or nomination of the persons, but the
constituting them was the ordination of St. John.

God may purpose as the Electors do to the great Council of Venice, but the
power of the Council, that is to resolve or ordain is in the Bishop says
Doctor Hamond, and in the the Presbytery says Doctor Seaman. Indeed that
Election and Ordination be distinct things, is to Divines of so great
importance, that loosing this hold they loose all For as I said before whatever
is chosen by man according unto the Will of God, that is according unto Divine
Law, whether natural or positive, the same whether in state or Church, is
chosen by God, or by the Holy Ghost, of whom is both the will and the deed. To
evade this, and keep all in their own hands, or Chirothesia, Divines have
invented this distinction, that Election is one thing, and Ordination another.
God may Elect, but they must constitute, that is, God may propose, but they
must resolve. And yet Grotius who in these things is a great Champion for the
Clergy, has little De Imp. sum. Pot. C. 10. 31.
more to say upon this point than this. Whether we consider ancient or modern
times, we shall find the manner of Election very different, not only in
different Ages and Countries, but in different years of the same age, and
places of the same Country; so uncertain a thing is it to determine of, that
which the Scripture has left uncertain. And while men dispute not of right,
but of convenience, it is wonderful to see what probable Arguments are brought
on all sides. Give me Cyprian and his times, there is no danger in popular
Election. Give me the Nicene Fathers, and let the Bishops take it willingly.
Give me Theodosius Valentinian, and Charles the Great, then Royal Election there
is nothing safer. Upon the heels of these words treads Doctor 104
Hamond in this manner. That Election and Ordination are several things, is
sufficiently known unto every man that measures the nature of words either by
usuage or Dictionaries; only for the convincing of such as think not themselves
obliged to the observation of so vulgar Laws, I shall propose these evidences;
In the story of the Creation of the Deacons of Jerusalem. There are Acts 6.
two things distinctly set down, one proposed to the multitude of Disciples to
be done by them: another reserved unto the Apostles, that which was proposed
unto the Multitude, was to elect, etc. Election of the persons was by the
Apostles permitted to them, but still the ((...)) constituting is reserved to
the Apostles. Then comes Doctor Seaman: Be it granted, as it Of Ordinat. p. 13.
is by Protestants generally, that Paul and Barnabas made Elders with the
consent of the people, their consent is one thing, and their power another.

Where in the first place I for my particular (who have had the Books of Doctor
Hamond, and Doctor Seaman, sent to me by way of Objection, need not go a step
further. All that I have inserted in my Occana concerning Ordination, is in
these three Votes acknowledged and confirmed. For the Probationer, to be there
sent by an University unto a Cure that is vacant, may by a Doctor, or the
Doctors of the same University already ordained, receive Imposition of Hands,
if that be thought fit to be added, and then the Election of the same
Probationer by the people does no hurt, nay says De Imp. c. 10.
Grotius, is of the right of nature; for it is naturally permitted unto every
Congregation to procure those things which are necessary unto their
conservation, of which number is the Application of Function. So Merchants have
the right of Electing of a Master of their Ship, Travelers of a Guide in their
way, and a free people of their King. The Merchant it seems does not make the
Master of his Ship, the Traveller his Guide, nor the free people their King,
but elect them. As if Van Tromp had been Admiral, a Robber upon the Highway
had been a Scout, or the guide of an Army, or Saul a King before they were
elected. The point is very nice, which instead of proving, he illustrates in
the beginning of the same Chapter by these three similitudes.

The first is this, the power of the Husband is from God, the Application of
this power unto a certain person is from consent, by which nevertheless the
right is not given, for if this were by consent, the Matrimony might be
dissolved by consent, which cannot be. As if an apparent retraction of
Matrimonial consent, as when a Wife consents unto another than her own Husband,
or commits Adultery, did not deliver a man from the bond of Marriage by the
Judgments of Christ. There is an imperfection or cruelty in those Laws, which
make Marriage to last longer than a man in humanity may be judged to be an
Husband, or a Woman a Wife; to think that Religion destroys humanity, or to
think that there is any defending of that by Religion which will not hold in
Justice, or natural equity, is a vast error.

The second similitude is this; Imperial power is not in the Princes that are
Electors of the Empire, wherefore it is not given by them, but applied by them
unto a certain person.

This is answered by Peter, where he commands Obedience 1 Pet. 2. 13.
unto every Ordinance of Man (or as some nearer the Original every power
created by men) whether it be unto the Roman Emperor as Supreme, or unto the
Pro-Consuls of Asia, and Phrygia, as sent by him (for this is the sense of the
Greek, and thus it is interpreted by Grotius) now if the then Roman Emperor
were a creature of man, why not the now Roman Emperor?

The last similitude runs thus: The power of life and death is not in the
multitude, before they be a Commonwealth, for no private man has the right of
revenge, yet it is applied by them unto some man or Political body of men. But
if a man invade the life of another, that other whether under Laws, or not
under Laws, has the right to defend his own life, even by taking away that (if
there be no other probable remedy) of the invader. So that men are so far from
having been void of the power of life and death before they came under Laws,
that Laws can never be so made as wholly to deprive them of it after they come
under them; wherefore the power of life and death is derived by the Magistrate
from, and conferred upon him by the consent or Chirotonia of the people,
whereof he is but a mere creature, that is to say an Ordinance of man.

Thus these candles being so far from lighting the house, that they die in the
socket: Grotius has been no less bountiful than to grant us that the people
have as much right, (where there is no humane creature or Law to the contrary)
to elect their Churchmen, as Merchants have to elect their Seamen, Travilers
their guides, or a free* people their King; which is enough a conscience. Nor
is Doctor Hamond streighter handed, Election (says he) was permitted by the
Apostles unto the multitude, and therefore the same may be allowed, always
provided that the ((...)) constituting be reserved unto the Pastors, or
ordained Doctors and Preachers: and Doctor Seaman upon condition that the
people will not say that it was done by their power, but think it fair that it
was done by their consent is also very well contented; So all stands straight
with what I have heretofore proposed. Let no man then say what ever follow,
that I drive any ends or interest, these being already fully obtained and
granted, nevertheless for truth sake I cannot leave this discourse imperfect.
If a Politician should say that the Election and the Ordination of a Roman
Council or Pontifex were not of like nature. That the (...) contract of the
Senate of Rome with the people in the Elelection of Numa ( ut cum populus regem
jussisset, id sic ratum Livy L.
esset, si patres authors fierent) included or employed the Sovereign power to
be in the Fathers. That the consent of this people was one thing and their
power another: If I say he should affirm these or the like in Athens,
Lacedemon, or any other Commonwealth, that is or has been under the Sun,
there would be nothing under the Sun more ridiculous than that Policitian. But
should men pretending unto Government of any kind be not obliged unto some
consideration of these rules in nature and universal experience; yet I wonder
how the word ((...)) to constitute with which they make such a flourish, did
not lead them, otherwise than they follow, this as it was said of Solon by
Aristotle being that which I have already shown to be used both in the Greek of
the Scripture, for the constitution of the Sanhedrim by Moses, and in other
Authors for that of the Senate by Romulus, each of which was then elected by
the people; whence it may appear plainly that this is no word as they pretend
to exclude popular suffrage, but rather to imply it. And indeed that it is of
no such nature, as necessarily to include power, could not have been overseen
in the New Testament, but voluntarily where ((...)) they are signified by it
that conducted Acts 7. 15.
Paul. But they have Miracles; such indeed as have neither words nor reason for
them had need of Miracles. And where are these same Miracles? why the Apostles
by the Chirothesia or laying on of hands conferd the Holy Ghost. So they did
not only when they used that Ceremony in reference to ordination, but when
they used it not in that relation, as to those that were newly Baptized in
Samaria, Acts 8.
men, and women: now it is not probable, that these, who should seem to have
been numerous, were all ordained, at lest the women; And so the Miracle is to
be attributed unto the hands of the Apostles, and not unto ordination in
general. Joshua was full of the Spirit, (not because he had been ordained by
the Chirothesia, for so had many of them that Crucified Christ and persecuted
the Apostles, but) because Moses had laid his hands upon him.

Would Divines be contended that we should argue thus; the Chirotonia or
suffrage of the people of Israel at the first institution was followed with
Miraculous indowments, therefore who ever is elected by the people shall have
the like? Or what have they to show why the Argument is more holding as to
their Chirothesia, seeing for above one thousand years all the Hierarchy and
Presbytery laid together have done no more Miracles than a Parish Clerk?

A continued Miracle, as that the Sea ebbs and flows, the Sun always runs his
admirable course, is nature. Intermitted nature as that the waters of the red
Sea were mountains, that the Sun stood still in the dial of Ahaz, is a Miracle.
To continue the latter kind of Miracle were to destroy the former, that is, to
desolve nature. Wherefore this is a certain rule that no continued external Act
can be in the later sense Miraculous. Now Government whether in Church or State
is equally a continued external Act. An internal continued Act may indeed be
natural or supernatural as Faith.

A natural man being even in his own natural apprehension fearfully and
wonderfully made, is by the continued Miracle of nature convinced that the
world had a creator, and so comes to believe in that which is supernatural;
whence it is that all Nations have had some Religion: and a Spiritual man being
convinced by the purity of Christ's Doctrine, and the Miracles whereby it was
first planted, is brought unto the Christian Faith. However Christ may require
such continued Faith or Spiritual exercise of his Church as is supernatural, he
requires not any such continued Act or bodily exercise of his Church as is
supernatural. But the Government of the Church is a continued Act or bodily
exercise. It should be heeded that to delude the sense is not to do Miracles,
but to use imposture. Now to persuade us, That Monarchical, Aristocratical,
Popular, or mixed Government have not always been in nature, or that there has
ever been any other in the Church were to delude sense; Wherefore give me leave
(in which I am confident I shall use no manner of irreverence unto the
Scripture, but on the contrary make the right use of it) to discourse upon
Church Government, according unto the rules of prudence.

The Gospel was intended by Christ to be preached unto all Nations, which
(Princes and States being above all things exceeding tenacious of their power)
is to me a certain Argument that the Policy of the Church must be so provided
for, as not to give any of them just cause of Jealousy, there being nothing
more likely to obstruct the growth of Religion, and truly the nearer I look
unto the Scripture, the more I am confirmed in this opinion.

Christ being taken up into Heaven the first Ordination First way of Ordination
in the Church of Christ. Acts 1.
that we find was that of the Apostle Matthias after this manner.

The Aristocracy of the Church, that is the Apostles assembled the whole
Congregation of Disciples or Believers at Jerusalem, being in number one
hundred and twenty, where Peter (it having as it should seem been so agreed by
the Apostles) was Proposer, who standing up in the midst of the Disciples
acquainted them, that whereas Judas was gone unto his place, the occasion of
their present meeting was to elect another Apostle in his room: whereupon
proceeding unto the Suffrage, they appointed two Competitors, Joseph and
Matthias, whose names being written each in a several Scroll, were put into one
Urne, and at the same time two other lotts whereof, one was a blank, and the
other inscribed with the word Apostle were put into another Urne, which done
they prayed and said, Thou Lord which know the hearts of all men, show
whether of these two thou have chosen: The Prayer being ended they gave forth
their lotts, and the lot fell upon Matthias ((...)) and by this Psephisma (the
very Popular word, and not only so, hut being applied unto the ballot, in the
very literal and Original signification) he was added unto the eleven Apostles.
So you have the first way of Ordination in the Church after Christ was taken up
into Heaven performed by the Election or Chirotomia of the whole Church.

Now except any man can show that Matthias ever received the imposition of
hands, these several things are already demonstrated. First, that the
Chirotonia is not only the more ancient way of Ordination in the Commonwealth
of Israel, but in the Church of Christ. Secondly, that the Chirothesia or
Imposition of Hands is no way necessary unto Ordination in the Christian
Church. Thirdly, that the discipline of the Christian Church was primitively
Popular (For to say that in regard of the Apostles it was Aristocratical, is to
forget that there is no such thing, without a mixture of Aristocracy, that is
without the Senate, as a Popular Government in nature.) Fourthly, that
Ordination in the Commonwealth of Oceana being exactly after this pattern, is
exactly according unto the discipline of the Church of Christ. And fifthly, that
Ordination and Election in this example are not two, but one and the same thing.

The last of these Propositions having been affirmed by Mr. Hobbs, Dr. Hamond
tells him plainly, that his assertion is far from all truth: Let us therefore
consider the Doctors 115.
Reasons, which are these; seeing the Congregation (says he) is affirmed by
the Gentleman to have Ordained, and it is plain by the words of St. Luke, that
God Elected, Election and Ordination by this Example, must be distinct things:
which in another place going about to fortify with this Argument, that it was
done by Lottery, and Solomon says, the Lot is at the disposing of the Lord, he
utterly overthrows without and beyond help; for in this Solomon not denying,
but rather affirming that he was chosen King by the People, plainly shows that
Election by the People is Election by God. Where it is affirmed, that God
raised up Judges in Israel, it is not denied that the People elected them. The
Doctor is at it in Maimonides more than once, that the Devine Majesty's rested
upon such as were Ordained by Imposition of Hands. But whereas it is affirmed
by Maimonides more often, that when the People (Ecclesia Dei) or Congregation
of Israel assembled then the Divine Majesty, or the Holy Ghost rested upon
them: Of this he never takes any notice: The People whether in Israel, Athens,
Lacedemon, or Rome, never assembled for Enacting of Laws or Election of
Magistrates without sacrifice and imploring the assistance of God, to whom when
their work was performed they always attributed the whole result or election;
and would the Doctor have Christians to allow him but a Piece? for whereas God
Electing there had in the sense both of Jews and Heathens, his choice of all,
God electing here had in the sense of Divines, but his choice of two, which
were next this or none, but that indeed, where he has not the whole he has
none at all: Is that then far from all truth, which the Gentleman, or that
which the Divine has said, either in this part, or where he adds, that the
hundred and twenty Dr. H. of Imposition. 115.
in the text are never mentioned but once, and then it is in a Parenthesis? I
will but transcribe the place.

And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples, Acts 1. 15.
and said, (the number of the Names together were about an hundred and twenty),
etc. Are the Disciples in the Parenthesis, or out of it? Are they but once
mentioned, and that is in a Parenthesis? Or are they but once numbered, and that
is in a Parenthesis? If a Gentleman should do thus, what would they say? Or,
what were ill enough to be said? But to mend the text, and bring the Disciple
into the Parenthesis, they have more ways than one; whereas the Heathen People
(while the Priests were willing) mixed these duties with devotions, Divines
will not suffer a Christian People upon like occasions to pray, for where it is
said, they prayed, it went before, they appointed two, and it follows, They
gave out their lotts: which antecedent and consequent if the People prayed,
must be equally understood of them, and so they could be no Parenthesis.
Therefore pray they must not, or Divines are lost; But how will they silence
them? To show you this art I must transcribe the Heads of the Chapter.

The Apostles being returned from Mount Olivet unto Jerusalem, Ver. 13.
went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter and James, and John, and
Andrew, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of
James.

And in these days Peter stood up in the mid est of the Disciples, 15.
and said (the number of Names together were about one hundred and twenty)

Men and brethren. 16.


Of those men which accompanied with us all the time, that 21.
the Lord Jesus went in and out among us.

Must one be ordained to be Witness with us of his Resurrection. 22.


And they appointed two Joseph and Matthias. 23.


And they prayed and said, Thou Lord which know the 24.
hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou have chosen.

And they gave forth their lots, and the lot fell upon Mathias, 26.
(...).

They whom Peter acquainted that one must be Ordained, one would verily
believe* were the hundred and twenty Disciples, in the midst of whom he stood
up, and made the Proposition, and so much the rather, because this was no more
than the Apostles knew before: and (in all right understanding of Government
and sense) were already agreed upon, it being the Office of the Aristocracy or
Senate in a Commonwealth (and such exactly were the Apostles in the Church)
upon all new Orders or Elections to be made; first, to debate and determine by
themselves, and then to propose unto the Chirotonia or ultimate result of the
People. But Divines say absolutely no, which word to make good, They appointed
two, and they prayed, and they gave forth their lots, being sentences that
stand plainly together, or hunt in couples, must leap sheere over nine verses,
Peter's whole Oration, (which by this means is no more than a Parenthesis
neither) and over the hundred and twenty Disciples; without touching an hair of
their heads, to light plumbe upon the thirteenth verse, and the eleven
Apostles! Never man used his Grammar so since he threw it at a Pear tree! yet
that Chrylostome (who understood Greek) allows of no such construction, is
confessed by the Grotius.
learnedest of this opinion; and whereas they fly unto the Latin Fathers,
that retreat is wholly cut off by David Blundell in his very learned Treatise
of the right of the People in Church Government,

But what do we stand upon words? Are these such whereof the things unto which
they relate may be interpretors? Or unto what things can they relate but the
Institution of the Sanhedrim by Moses? That at the Institution of the Sanhedrim
the Competitors were Elected by the suffrage of the People, and from thence
that the Ballot of Israel consisted not only of a Lot but of a Suffrage too,
has been already demonstrated out of Scripture; and that the Election of
Mathias was by the Ballot of Israel is not less apparent in it self, than fully
confessed upon the place by Grotius.

They that under color of Religion, in matter of Government Demonstration that
God never ordained any policy Ecclesiastical or Civil, but upon the principles
of humane Prudence. Josh. 9. 11.
slight prudence, are mistaken or do not mean honestly. Neither God nor Christ
ever instituted any Policy whatsoever, upon any other principles than those of
Humane Prudence. The Ambassadors sent from the Gibeonites to Joshua, deliver
their message in this manner, The Elders and all the Inhabitants of our Country
spoke unto us saying go meet them, and say unto them, We are your servants,
Therefore now make you a League with us. They that had power to send
Ambassadors, and to make a League with a foreign Nation, had sovereign power,
this sovereign power was in the Elders, or Senate, and in the People of Gibeon;
wherefore God constituting his Commonwealth for the main Orders (that is to
say the Senate and the people) upon the same Principles, on which the
Gibeonites had long before built theirs, laid his foundations upon no other
than humane prudence; so for the inferior Courts they were transcribed by
Moses ont of the Commonwealth of Midian, upon advice of Jethro his Father in
Law. According unto such patterns was Israel framed, and by that of Israel this
first Policy of the Church of Christ so exactly, as ( sans comparison) any man
shall show the Commonwealth of Occana to have been transcribed out of Rome or
Venice. Let them that would have the Government be somewhat between earth and
heaven consider this place. Nor is Ecclesiastical Policy only subject unto
humane Prudence, but unto the same vicissitudes also whereunto humane prudence
is subject, both in her own nature and as she is obnoxious to the State wherein
she is planted, and that inavoidably; as I come now to demonstrate by the
Alterations which happened even in the Age of the Apostles themselves; for this
at the Election of Mathias being altered, the next form of Ecclesiastical
Policy introduced in their times, is resembled by Grotius unto that of Athens,
of which, for the better clearing of what follows, it is necessary that I
first say something by way of introduction.

The Thesmothetae, being in number six, were Magistrates of the highest
dignity, power and rank in Athens. These Arist. 2. lib. 2. c. 10.
says Aristotle, were elected by the Chirotonia or suffrage of the people, and
says, Pollux being Elected underwent the inquisition of the Senate, where they
were to answer to these Interrogatories, Whether they worshipped the god of
their Countries? Whether they had been dutiful unto their Parents? born Arms
for the Commonwealth? paid duties or taxes? In Pol. lib. 8. c 9.
which particulars the Senate being satisfied, They were sworn and Crowned with
Mirile: which comes to this, that the ((...)) or constitution being reserved
unto the Senate, the Thesmothetae were Elected by the Chirotonia of the people.
Now though the Government of Athens throughout the Cities of Asia (being most
of them of the like Model) was most known, I will not say that the Apostles
wrote their Orders out of Athens, but seeing all Political Institutions must
needs be according to humane Prudence, and there is nothing to be written out
of this but what will fall even with some other Government that is or has
been, I may say as Act. 6.
Grotius has said hefore me) that the frame of Church Government in the
ensuing example was after the manner of Athens.

When the number of the Disciples (or Believers) was multiplied, Second way of
Ordination in the Church of Cstrist.
there arose a murmuring among such of the Jews as having beenbredin Alexandria
or other parts, were for their Language (which was Greek) partly strangers,
against the Hebrews or converted Jews, that spoke their own Language, as if
these indeed used them like strangers, their widows being neglected, or not
dealt so liberally withal as those of the Hebrews in the Contributions due
for their constant maintenance.

Hereupon the twelve Ayostles (after the manner of the Senate) having without
all question debated the business among themselves, as appears by the speech
upon which they were agreed, assembled the people (which is still Senatorian)
or called the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, It is not reason
that we should leave preaching, or the word of God, to be taken up with this,
though charitable, nay, seeing we have introduced community of goods, most just
and necessary employment of providing food and clothing for every one of our
fellowship or community (the Christians in these times, much after the manner
of the Lacedemonian Convives used to eat in public and together) to do this as
it ought to be done, were to become Caterers, and be taken up in serving
Tables. Wherefore brethren (take the wise men and understanding, and known
among you) look out sev^nt Men of honest report full of the Holy Ghost, and of
wisdom, ((...)) whom we may appoint over this business.

This saying, that is, this Proposition of the Senate or Apostles pleased the
whole multitude (like that of Moses, the thing which thou have said is good for
us to do) So they chose Stephen, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Permenas
and Nicholas, whom being Elected, they set before the Apostles, who when they
had prayed, laid their hands upon them.

What fuller demonstration can be given of any thing, than that in this
example, Ordination and Election are one and the same, and that this was
conferred by the Chirotonia of the People? If there be any possible way of
making this clearer, it must be by Opposition. Wherefore let us see what
Divines have to say to the contrary.

Grotius gives all we ask from this place, which he gives for nothing, because
it concerns not the Election of Pastors, but of Deacons. As if Stephen and
Phillip had not only been Preachers of the Gospel, but done Miracles. What Dr.
Seaman denies or grants in relation unto the same, I have endeavored to
understand, but it will not do. Dr. Ham^nd is so plain, that his Objections may
be of use. He to prove that the Ordination of these Deacons was not in the
Chirotonia of their Disciples; but in the Chirothesia of the Apostles has
these Arguments.

There be two things distinctly set down Election permitted unto the poople
(and the (...)) constituting reserved unto the Apostles.

To which I answer, That there were two things set down by the Athenian Law,
Election of the Thesmothetae by the People, and the ((...)) constituting of
them by the Senate, yet that the Ordination was in the power, and that the
power was in the people of Athens; he thar makes a doubt is not resolved
whether the most popular Commonwealth that ever was* were a Democracy.

But says he, this looking out of men (or choosing) was permitted unto he
multitude by the Apostles with these three bounds. First to take seven neither
more nor fewer. Secondly, those men generally known and well reputed of. And
thirdly, full of the Spirit and of discretion or parts fit for Government. To
which I answer, that the Election of the Thesmothetae was permitted by the Law
unto the people of Athens, with these three bounds, First to take six neither
more nor fewer: Secondly, those generally known and reputed of. Thirdly in such
estimation for their honesty and ability for Government as in their consciences
(to which also they made Oath) they should judge fittest for the Commonwealth;
yet is all this so far from any proof, that Athens was no Democracy, or that
the Sovereign power, whether in Enacting of Laws, or election of Magistrates by
the lot or the suffrage (institutions equally popular) was not in the people,
that it amounts unto the strongest argument the people were Sovereign, and the
Commonwealth was Democratical. Could truth desire greater advantage than
redounds from such opposition? We have another example of the same model, in
which, because it has been paraphrased upon already in the Introduction, I
shall be briefer here. In the Church of Antioch where the Acts 13.
Disciples were now become so numerous, that they began to be called
Christians, there were among them Prophets, so being assembled upon occasion
(as I conceive) of giving an extraordinary Commission after the manner of the
people of Athens when they Elected Ambassadors, or (that I may avoid strife
upon a point so indifferent) to choose two new Apostles; The Holy Ghost said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work wbereunto I have appointed them;
that is, (for so it is rendered by all Interpretors) the Holy Ghost spoke those
words by the mouths of the Prophets. Now the Prophets being well known for
such, this suffrage of theirs was no sooner given than (as one that can allow
Prophets to be leading men may easily think) followed by all the rest of the
Congregation: so the whole multitude having fasted and prayed, the most eminent
among them, or the Senatorian order in that Church, laid their hands upon Paul
and Barnabas, who being thus sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto
Seleucia.

To evade this apparent Election, or Chirotonia of the whole Congregation,
whereby these Apostles or Ambassadors unto the Churches of the Gentiles were
ordained; Divines have nothing to say, but that they were elected by the Holy
Ghost: as if the Chirotonia of the people were more exclusive unto Election by
the Holy Ghost, than the Chirothesia of the Aristocracy, for which in the mean
time they contend: but if neither of these were indeed exclusive of the Holy
Ghost, how is it possible, in this frame (where though of natural necessity an
Aristocracy must have been included, yet the Aristocracy is not in the Text, so
much as distinguished from the people, or once named) that the power, and so the
ordination should not have been in the people? The Council of the Apostles, of
the Elders, and of the whole Church at Jerusalem, and other Councils, not of
Apostles, nor of the whole Church in other times or places, used this form in
their Acts, It seems good unto the Holy Ghost, and Acts 15. 22.
unto us: but does this where a true, or where a pretended style exclude that
act from being an Act of that whole Council? or how comes it to pals that
because Paul and Barnabas were separated by the Holy Ghost, they were not
ordained by the Chirotonia of the whole Christian people at Antioch?

The Chirothesia can be no otherwise understood in nature, nor ever was in the
Commonwealth of the Jews, than Election by the few: And so even under the mere
Chirothesia, Ordination and Election were not two, but one and the same thing.
If Moses ordained Joshua his Successor by the Chirothesia, he Elected Joshua
his Successor by the Chirothesia, and for what reason must it be otherwise
with the Chirotonia? That a Pharisee could do more with one hand, or a pair of
hands, than a Christian Church, or Congregation can do with all their hands, is
a Doctrine very much for the honor of the true Religion, and a sovereign
maxim of Ecclesiastical policy.

The third constitution of Church Government in Scripture Third way of
Ordination i the Church c Christ.
(whether consisting of Bishops or Presbyters, between which at this time a man
shall hardly find a difference) runs wholly upon the Aristocracy without
mention of the people, and is therefore compared by Grotius unto the Sanhedrim
of Grot ad 2 Timothy 4. 14.
Israel, as that came to be in these days; from whence Divines also generally
and truly confess that it was taken up, to which I shall need to add no more
than that it is an order for which there is no precept, either in the Old
Testament of God, or in the New of Christ: This therefore thus taken up by the
Apostles from the Jews, is a clear demonstration that the Government of the
Church in what purity soever of the times, nay though under the inspection of
the Apostles themselves, has been obnoxious unto that of the State wherein it
was planted. The Sanhedrim from the institution of the Chirothesia for a
constant Order, consisted of no other Senators than such only as had been
ordained by the Imposition of Hands, which came now to be conferred by the
Prince in the presence, or with the assistance of the Sanhedrim; the same order
was observed by the Jewish Synagogues, of Grot. ad Mat. 19. 13.
which each had her archon: nor would the Jews converted unto the Christian
Faith relinquish the Law of Moses, whereunto this way of Ordination, among
other things, though erroneously, was vulgarly attributed: whence in the
Church, where it consisted of converted Jews, Ordination was conferred by the
Archon, or first in order of the Presbytery with the assistance of the rest.
Hence Paul, in one place, exhorts Timothy thus: Neglect not the gift that is in
1 Timothy 4. 14.
thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the 2 Timothy 1. 6.
hands of the Presbytery. And in another thus: Wherefore I put thee in
remembrance, that thou st^r up the gift of God which is in thee by the putting
on of my hands.

I grant Divines, that Ordination by this time was wholly in the Presbytery,
what say they then unto the distinction of Ordination and Election? Are these
still two distinct things, or may we hence, at least, compute them to be one
and the same? If they say yes; Why then might they not have been so before? If
they say no; Who in this place but the Presbytery elected? Why says Doctor
Hamond, 106.
it is plain that the Spirit of Prophecy elected? But to give account of no
more than is already performed, were the spirit of History rather than of
Prophecy, to which it appertains to tell things before they be done, as did the
Prophets now living in this Church, that Tim thy should come to be ordained, so
the place is interpreted by Grotius, and how it should otherwise be understood
I cannot see: But putting the case some Act preceded, as Saul and David were
elected Kings by Prophecy: Yet did ever man say that for this Soul or David
were any whit the less elected Kings by the People? To the contrary in every
well ordered Commonwealth ( a jove principium) the disposing of the Lot and of
the Suffrage too, has universally been attributed unto God.

The Piety of Divines in persuading the People, that God 134.
elects for them, and therefore they need not trouble themselves to vote, is as
if they should persuade them that God provides their daily bread, and therefore
they need not trouble themselves to work. To conclude this point with Doctor
Hamonds own words upon the same occasion; this didinction of Ordination and
Election is in Divines the procreative mistake, or ignorance producing all the
111.
rest.

The reason why Paul ordained now after this manner among the Jews, is unto me
an irrefragable Argument, that he ordained not after this manner among the
Gentiles; for whereas the first ordination in the Christian Church, namely that
of Matthias, was performed by the Chirotonia; which by degrees came now in
complacence with the Jews unto the Chirothesia; it seems he was contented not
to alter the worst of Political institutions or customs, where he found them
confirmed by long and universal practice; and if so, why should any man think
that he would go about to alter or weed out the best, where they had taken like
Root? That this administration of the Jews was of the very worst, is clear in
the nature of the politics, there being no example of a pure Aristocracy, or
of a Senate, such as was now the Sanhedrim without a popular balance that ever
governed with Justice, or was of any continuance. Nor was the Chiroth sia, by
which means this work came to effect in Israel, introduced by the prudence of
God, but by the corrupt arts of men. Now that the Governments at the same time
of the Gentiles, all balanced by the Chirotonia of the people, were in their
Nature more excellent, and indeed more accomodated unto ancient prudence, as it
was introduced by God himself in the Commonwealth of Israel, has been already
sufficiently proved; Nevertheless to refresh your memory with one example more.

Crete having been (as is affirmed by the consent of Authors) the most ancient,
and the most excellent Commonwealth in humane Story, was founded by
Rhadamanthus and Minos, an age before the Trojan War; These were held to have
learnt their arts by familiar discourse with Jupiter, and from point to point
to have framed their model, according unto his direction. Nor though all
acknowledge Minos to have been a King, did he found his Government upon any
other than a popular balance, or a fundamental regard unto the Liberty of the
people. For the whole Commonwealth Epitome of the Commonwealth of Crete
was made up of these three parts, The College, The Senate, and the People.
The College consisted of the Annual Magistrates called the Cosmi, these had
the whole extentive power, some in leading forth the Armies, and others in
judging the people, which functions were accordingly assigned by the Orders
unto each in particular; that which was common unto them all, was to propose
such things as they had debated or prepared in their College or Council unto
the Senate, The Senate being Elective for life, was the Council unto which
appertained the Debate of what ever was to be proposed unto the Congregation.
The Congregation or Assembly of the people of Crete had not the right of
Debate, but in enacting of Laws, and election of Magistrates had the ultimate
result of the Commonwealth, such was the copy after which Lycurgus wrote himself
so famous a Legislator: And thus stood this frame unto the six hundred and
eight year of Rome; when this people having been too favorable unto Pirates
then infesting those Seas, turned the arms of the Romans upon themselves, and
by these under the conduct of Quinctus Metellus, thence called Creticus, Crete
was made a Province, though the chief Cities being first freed, it should seem
(by Cicero's second Oration against Anthony) that the whole Island was at
length restored unto her ancient Liberty. However by the manner observed by the
Romans (as was shown) in Provincial Government, the Gities under their
Magistrates (who while the Commonwealth was a Province, perhaps might have
exercised the Office of the Cosmi) were not yet deprived of their popular
Assemblies, at least in their distinct Cities, electing all Magistrates for
their ((...)) peculiar or domestic Government; such was the state of Crete,
when Paul having appealed from the Jews unto Casar; and being thereupon
conducted by Sea toward Rome, touched in his way upon this Island, where he
left Titus to constitute Elders in every City. The word ((...)) Constitate our
Divines will have to signify Ordain by Imposition of Hands, and Imposition of
Hands fo signify an Act of power, excluding the people. But why Paul, who
among the Jews had complied with their customs, should enjoin, or how Titus
had it been so enjoined should accomplish this where the power was Popular,
they have not shown nor considered. To introduce Religion, or Government there
be but two ways, that is to say, either by persuasion, or by force. To persuade
the people of Crete, in whom was the power unto this new way of Ordination;
Titus must have spoken to this effect, Men of Crete.

Minos being a King could not choose but have a natural inclination unto
popular power, wherefore his pretense that Jupiter told him, Power was to be in
the people, may be suspected to have been imagined merely for his own ends; or
this is a certain sign that Jupiter is no true, but a feigned god; seeing the
true God will have it that the people should have no power at all; but that
such upon whom his Ambassadors shall confer power, be without all dispute
obeyed. How! are you starting at this! are you solicitous for your
Commonwealth! it is true that upon carnal principles or humane prudence,
without power in the people, there can be no Commonwealth: but Israel was a
Commonwealth without power in the people * Where Moses made all the Laws by
the power invested in him by God, and created all the Magistrates, not by
popular suffrage but by his Chirotonsia. Wherefore Men of Creet know ye that on
whomsoever I lay my hands, the same is in all spiritual affairs or matter of
Church Government to be obeyed by you, after the sam manner that you have
hitherto obeyed such Magistrates or Priests as have been ordained by your own
Election, or Chirotonia. Of what other nature the Arguments of Titus to the
pretended purpose could have been; I am not able to imagine; nor how this
should have done less than provoke the people unto a dangerous jealousy of
such a Doctrine. But Divines to set all straight, think it enough to repeat the
words of Paul to Titus in Greek. For this cause left I thee in Crete ((...))
Tit. 1. 5.
that thou should ordain Elders in every City. It is true that Demosthenes
speaks somewhat Decorond.
like words concerning the expedition of Phillip, of Macedon, in Peloponesus
((...)) when he had ordained Tyrants in every City: but then Philip had an
Army; what Army did Paul leave with Titus? or if he ordained his Elders neither
of these two ways, I see no other than that only by the known and legal
Chirotonia or Suffrage of the people. But if this be clear the Clergy come from
Crete, not upon the wings of Titus, but of Icarus, whose ambitious wax is
dissolved by the Sun.

So much I conceive is now discovered concerning Churchgovernment, as may show,
that it was not of one, but of three kinds, each obnoxious unto the nature of
the civil Government under which it was planted, in as much as the Chirotonia,
or ballot of Israel being first introduced pure, and without any mixture, as at
the Ordination of Mathias, came aftewards to receive some mixture of the
Chirothesia, as in the ordination of Stephen, and last of all by excluding the
people to degenerate wholly into the Chirothesia of the Presbytery, as in the
ordination of Timothy; all this by the testimony of Scripture, and in the
purest times, even the age of the Apostles. Whence my undertaking to show that
as Christ intended his Doctrine should be preached unto all Nations, so he
intended his Discipline should be such as might suit with any Government, (as
indeed if the choice of any of these three be lawful, it does exactly) is I
hope performed. For where the Government is popular, it is the same with the
first, where it is Aristocratical or Monarchical, it agrees with the last, and
where it is mixed, it is between both, and responsible unto the second. Of
these three in the further exercise of their natural and intended compliance
with humane prudence, it may be convenient to give some fuller Exemplification.

That any other Ordination than that of the first kind for the original
Authority or practice of it whether in the Commonwealth of Israel or in the
Church of Christ, and indeed for the prerogative of the same in nature should
have been introduced by the Apostles, where it might, much less where the
nature of the civil Policy would admit of no other, is neither propable by
Scripture nor Reason; whence it is that in the Cities of Lyeaonia and Pisidia,
the Government of these being then Popular, we do not find any mention at all
of the Chirothesia, the Apostles in these places ((...)) Chirotonizing Elders
in every Congregation.

To evade this place, our Adversaries turn tails to the 3.
things, and make their whole flight at the words. In taking one of them into
the disputation, I shall take in all, for they run all upon the same
quotations, or with little addition.

That the word Chirotonizing, (says Doctor Hamond) in this place signifies no
more than Ordaining by the Imposition of Hands, is not so generally
acknowledged by late Writers, but that it may be useful to give some few
Testimonies out of those Wtiters which were nearest the times of the Scripture.
Thus Philo Judaeus of Joseph ((...)) he was ordained Governor of all Egypt
under the King. So again of Moses ((...)) he was constituted their Ruler. So of
Aarons sons ((...)) God constituted them Priests. Alexander son of Antiochus
Epiphanes writes to Jonathan Joseph. An. L. 13. C. 5.
((...)) we (in the regal style) constitute thee High Priest. Lucian says of
Hephestion ((...)) that Alexander made him a God when he was dead. Appian
(which is added out of Grotius whence most of the rest is taken) to signify
Election of Magistrates made by the Roman Emperors uses no other word; and
later Writers speak of some that were chirotonized Emperors by their Fathers.
For the use of the word among Christian Writers take one place in the Author of
the Constitutions L. 7. C. 45.
for many; Clement after the death of Linus ((...)) was ordained Bishop of Rome
by Peter. But what need Acts 10. 41.
any more, Christ's Disciples are said ((...)) designed or fore-constituted by
God the witnesses of his Resurrection: by all which that of Paul and Barnabas
((...)) is but constituting or creating Elders in every Church. Wherefore they
that have looked so far back to the Original, as to think it necessary to
render the word to create by suffrages, are sure guilty of very impertinent
nicety. I promise you had this been against one of our Doctors, it might have
been a rude charge; but it is but against Erasmus, Beza, Diodati, and such as
took upon them to translate the Switz, French, Italian, Belgicke, and (till the
Episcopal correction) the English Bibles. And what apparent cause is there of
such confidence? What necessity is there even in the places alleged why the
word Chirotonia should be understood in the sense imposed? The People of Egypt
till having sold their Lands they came to loose their Popular balance, were
not servants unto Pharaoh, wherefore when Joseph was made Governor over all
Egypt they were sree, now that a King should make a Governor of a free People
without their consent, or some advice as we say of his Parliament, is
altogether impropable, the rather because a Protector in the absence or
minority of the King has been no otherwise made in England, nor pretends the
present Protector unto any other title than the like Chirotonia. But that Moses
is said by the same Author (who affirmed that he introduced the Chirotonia in
Israel) to have been Chirotonized Ruler of the People, can in my judgment be
no otherwise than originally and literally taken, seeing God himself was no
otherwise made King in Israel than by the suffrage of the People. That the like
must be understood of the Sons of Aaron has been already shown. The Doctor is
the first has told me, that the plural number for the royal style is so
ancient as Epiphanes: Sure I am it was not derived from his Macedonian
Predecessors, for in the Letters to the Athenians and the Thebans recited by
Demosthenes, Philip of Macedon De Cor.
writes in the singular number. But the Letter of Epiphanes to Jonathan must it
seems import that he at single hand (though the words carry double) had
Chirotonized an High Priest of the Jews: Who can help it? Some Princes have not
only given out that their Priests have been chirotonized when they were not,
but that themselves have been Chirotonized when there was no such matter. When
a Prince says that he was Chirotonized or Elected by the People, to talk of
Rhetorique is to have none. Divines in this case commonly understand it to be
proper, or literally meant, for to impose a new sense is to spoil the word, and
spoil the word, spoil the Prince. Lucian is a droll and intends a jest, but not
so good an one, as that he of all other should come nearest to help up with an
Heirarchy. For the Chirotonia or Election of the Roman Magistrates by the
suffrage of the People or of the Army, every man knows that it is literal;
Suidas himself interpreting the word by this very example; where he affirms it
to signify Election or Ratification by the many. The quotation out of the
Constitutions, with those of Bishop Bilson, and others out of the Greek
Fathers, and out of Councils, do not only imply the word Chirotonia, but the
thing, while they all relate unto that kind of Ordination, which being in those
Churches yet administered as at the Ordination of Stephen, was not conferred
without the consent of the People. But it is above all, that laboring to prove
the Chirotonia and the Chirothesia, to be the same thing, they should rely most
upon the place where the Apostles are said ((...)) to have been
fore-chirotonized by God; as if it were clear in this, that God ordained the
Apostles by the laying on of Hands, for so it must be understood, or it makes
no more for them, than for us. Or if they mean it only to show that the word
Chirotonia or suffrage is used for some Ordination that cannot be taken in our
sense; so the word Chirothesia ((...)) or laying on of Hands, where Ananias
being neither Bishop nor Ptesbyter but only a Disciple, that is a Christian,
lays his Hands upon Paul, is used for some Ordination that cannot be taken in
their sense; or a man not Ordained may Ordain as well as they, for to say that
the call was extraordinary where the like is, or is pretended, will avayl
little. But there is no need that we should go so near the wind; wherefore to
give them all these places in their own sense, even till we come to the Cities
in question. What word in any Language is not sometimes nay frequently used in
some other than the proper sense? With what elegance, if this be forbidden, can
any man write or speak? Is a word like a Woman that being taken with a
Metaphor, it can never be restored unto the Original Virtue? If Chirotonia have
(as Divines pretend) lost all other but their signification, how shall we
understand it in Isaiah or where Paul speaks it of the Brother ((...)) 2 Cor.
8. 19.
Chirotonized, or chosen by the Churches? Certainly in this one place at least
it is of our sense, and in the word (...), it is but once yet in all the New
Testament of any other, so that if we gain the place in controversy, we have
it twice of our sense in Scripture for once not in theirs, but in any other;
and in humane Authors, they will not so much as pretend to have it once for
them of an hundred times for us; which is pretty well for the vindication of
the propriety of one word, and somewhat more perhaps than can be done for
another. But in the sense of words that are sometimes properly and sometimes
improperly taken, may we admit of the things whereof they are spoken for
Interpretors? Or if Lillies and Roses have been almost as often said of Ladies
Cheeks, must we understand them no otherwise when we are speaking of Gardens?

Yes says Doctor Hamond, and therefore to say of the Apostles Paul and
Barnabas, that they created ^ld^rs by their own suffrages, is no were than to
say that they jointly did create, and indeed being but two, there could be no
place for suffrages, and to affirm they did it by the suffrages of others, is
not agreeable to the pretended use of the word, for where it is used of
choosing by suffrages, as when the people are said to Chirotonize, it is
certain that their own, and not others suffrages are meant by it.

It were hardly possible to have contrived a greater number of His own words to
Mr. Hobbs. 118.
Affirmations inso small a compass, nor to have gone farther in them from all
truth. Phrases as words are to be understood according unto the Rule and Law of
Speech, which is use, and thus that the Apostles created Elders by their own
suffrage, is not said, that they did it by the suffrage of others, is
necessarily employed; as also that the people are understood to chirotonize as
well when it is said of the Presidents of their Assemblies, as of themselves.

Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadratarotundis. When a man is said to build an
House, or marry a Daughter, he is not understood to be the Mason, of the
Bridesgroom; But the Apostles built Churches in these Cities, therefore the
people were not the Masons. The Apostles married Christ unto these Nations,
therefore the people gave not their consent or suffrage! what a construction
were this, in-ordinary discourse or writing, and yet in the language (as I may
say) of a Commonwealth the phrase is more usual. How often does Demosthenes
speak of his Laws, ( see my Psephisma, peruse my Law) and those of other
private men: after De Coron.
which Copy the Par^e, or Laws in the Commonwealth of Venice, are called by
the names of the Proposers, as were those of Rome, Rupilia, Cornelia, Tr^bonia,
in which manner we have Poynings Laws* and some Statutes bearing no other Style
than Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, which nevertheless are known
to have been all Enacted by the Parliament. Thus the Laws of Moses
Rhadamanthus, Minos, Lycurgus, S^lon, Romulus, King Edward, were ( leges and
consuetudines quas vulgus elegerit) such as the people had confirmed or chosen
by their Chirotonia. But they may say granting you this use of speech in
relation unto Laws, what have you of this kind for Elections? The exception is
nice, but to leave none.

The High Sheriffs in England proposing unto their Counries the Names of such
as stand, are said to Elect Parliament men. They that thus propose Competitors
unto the Great Council in Venice are called Electors, and said to elect the
Magistrates. The Proedri certain Magistrates to whom it belonged to put the
question in the Representative of the people of Athens consisting of one
thousand, were said ((...)) Demost. cont. Timocrat.
to give or make the suffrage. The Thesmothetae who were Presidents at the
creation of Magistrates were said ((...)) to chirotonize the Generals. Josephus
Pol. l. 8. c. 8.
renders those words of God unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people
((...)) Ant. l. 6. c. 4.
I command thee to chirotonize them a King, which Authors vindicating Luke for
his understanding, both of the Grecian customs, and propriety of speech, at
each of which he was expert, come up unto the full and genuine interpretation
of the place in controversy, where Paul and Barnabas ((...)) Chirotonizing
them Elders in every Congregation, can be no otherwise understood than that
they here, as Moses at the institution of the Sanhedrim; Samuel at the Election
of the King; the Proedri at the passing of Laws; the Thesmothetae at the
creation of Magistrates; the Electors in the great Council of Venice; and the
High Sheriffs in the Counties of England, were no more than Presidents of that
Chirotonia, which was given or made by the suffrage of the people.

Wherefore the Greek is thus rendered by these several Translations of the
Bible. That of Zurich. When they had created them Elders by suffrages in every
Congregation. That of Beza. When they had created them Elders by suffrages in
every Congregation. The French. When by the advice of the Assemblies they had
established Elders. The Italian. When by the advice of the Congregation they
had constituted them Elders. That of Diodati. When they had ordained them in
every Church by the common votes of the Elders. That appointed by the Synod of
Dort. When in each Church by the holding up of Hands they had Elected
Presbyters. That used in England from the time of the Reformation, until the
Episcopal correction of the same. When they had ordained them Elders by
Election in every Congregation.


Indeed the circumstance of the place forbids any other construction of the
words, for if the suffrage or Chirotonia, (which were scarce sense) related
unto the Apostles only, what needed they have done that in every Congregation,
or Church, which they might have done in any Chamber or closet? The
circumstance of the action forbids any other construction, for the people were
assembled upon occasion of Election or creation of Officers, which thing does
not use to be done in Assemblies gathered for Divine service; besides these
Congregations were not always of one mind, but sometimes for sacrificing unto
the Apostles, sometimes for stoning them, which are acts of power; wherefore
they were political Assemblies. Now these consisting also of a people that had
in their Cities ( quandam (...)) the government, of themselves, hence arises
the strongest circumstance of all, forbidding any interpretation of the Text,
that might exclude them from election of their own Magistrates, Priests, or
Ecclesiastical Elders, such as had been the Asiarchs, though Heathen Prelates,
yet remembered by the Scriptures as affectionate Acts 19. 31.
Friends unto Paul, or such as were those, though to a better end, now ordained
by the Apostles. Wherefore Grotius, notwithstanding all the art he uses in
other places to avoid this sense, giving his note upon the Text yields; though
chirotonizing may be said of any Election made by one, or by the Few: yet to
the Election in this place it is probable that the consent of the people was
given, no less being employed in the beginning of the Chapter, where the
Multitude believed, where they were stirred up, where they were evil affected,
and where part held with the Jews, and part with the Apostles. Which shows that
the people were active in the business. But says Doctor Seaman, There is
difference between the consent of the people* and the power of the people,
which is not to understand the case in controversy, nor to take notice that
the people whereof we are speaking were under popular Government, for where
ever the people are under popular Government, between that which is done by
their consent, and that which is done (Iussu populi) by their power, there is
no difference. How should the people give their consent but by their suffrage?
or what difference, where they have power, can there be between the suffrage,
and the power of the people?

Doctor Hamond upon this point is far more quainct, where the Scriprure says
that the multitude were evil affected, and where part held with the Jews, and
part with the Apostles, he thinks it even like enough. But where it is said
that a great multitude of the Jews, and also of the Greeks believed; he seems
to have no opinion of it. For says he, It is evident 134
that Believers were at first but few in every Town or City, they were not
whole Corporations at once converted, nor consequently could they act in a
common capacity: But as Clemens Romanus says, they that were by the Apostles
constituted Bishops and Deacons in several Cities and Regions, were constituted
over those that should after believe, there were often so few at the present. And
then as fast as any did come into the Faith, they readily submitted themselves
to those by and under whom they did come in, and were not at all troubled
(honest men) with the consultation or deliberation about the way of electing
their Teachers and Guides.

Come away; to leave the Scripture a while, and follow Clemens, be it so for
discourse sake that in those days there was no where any such thing as a great
multitude believing, much less whole States or Commonwealths at once
converted, whereby they might still act in a common capacity, but only some
private or gathered Congregations or Churches, and that in such it was the
Apostles Paul and Barnabas chirotonized: yet these as they were found, or as
afterward they came to be made, must of necessity have been Corporatioos, for
what can a number of Men coming into a Society regulated by certain Laws,
Constitutions, or form be but a Corporation? Some Ecclesiastical policy or
discipline they must have had: and that probably seeing the greatest
Legislators, even Moses himself) have written after Copies, according unto some
pattern, what was this pattern? and whence came it?

Why says he, not from their Heathen customs, but from 125.
the Metropolis; for it must be remembered that wheresoever the Gospel was
preached, it came originally from Jerusalem, and then 135.
as Agrippa in Philo says of that City, it was the Metropolis not only of
Judea, but many other Regions, because of the Colonies thence sent into Egypt,
Phenice, and both the Syria's; nay to Pamphilia, Celicia, and a great part of
Asia, as far as Bythinia and Pontus. So in reason the Churches in Lystra,
Iconium, and Antioch, where Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders were to follow
the pattern at Jerusalem, and there We know it was not by the suffrage of the
people, that an Elder was assumed into the Sanhedrim, but the Prince or head of
the Sanhedrim received him in by Imposition of Hands; it will be much more
reasonable to deduce the circumstances of ordaining Elders from the customs
familiar unto them that preached the Faith unto them, than from the former
usages of them, to whom it was preached, who were not to dispute, but to
believe and receive the institutions as well as Doctrines which were brought
them.

These me thinks are strange arguments; the Gospel came to us from Rome, is
Rome therefore the Metropolis of England? It is true Agrippa being a Jew, and
writing unto Caligula in the behalf of the Jews* not of the Christians, tells
him, That Jerusalem is the Metropolis of the Jews, and of all their Colonies;
so is London of the English, and of all their Philo delegatitione ad Cajum.
Colonies; but does it follow from hence that either Jerusalem, or London is
the Metropolis of Christendom? But the Jews* had many Colonies in Asia, and
therefore the Churches of Lystra, Iconinm, and Antioch were to follow the
pattern at Jerusalem. The Jews indeed had Synagogues in Iconium and Lystra, as
the French have Churches in England, but is this a good argument, the French
have Churches in England, therefore the English are to follow the orders of the
French Church? The Jews withstood the Gospel at Iconium, for says the Text,
The multitude of the City was divided, and part Acts 14. 4.
he^d with the Jews, and part with the Apostles: therefore the believing
Iconians must have acknowledged Jerusalem to be their Metropolis, and were to
follow the pattern of that City. And what was that? why there we know it was
not by the suffrages of the people that an Elder was assumed into the
Sanhedrim, but the Prince or head of the Sanhedrim received him in by
Imposition of Hands. The Government of the Iconians was popular, that of the
Jews was Aristoeratical; therefore the Iconians receiving the Christian Faith,
were bound to change their Democracy into Aristocracy. The Apostles to comply
with an Oligarchy, had altered that ordination, which originally (as at the
election of Mathias) was popular unto Aristocracy; therefore being now to plant
the Gospel in a free State, they might not alter it from Aristocracy to
Democracy: to please the Jews they might change for the worse, therefore to
please the Iconians they might not change for the betrer, but must tell the
people plainly that they were not to dispute, but to believe and receive the
institutions as well as Doctrines that were brought them from the Metropolis.
How would this found unto a people that understood themselves!

Sic volo sic juheo stat proratione voluntas. The right temper of a
Metropolitan, to whom Popular power is an Heathen eustome, and with whom
nothing will agree but Princing of it in the Senate. But with the Apostles it
was otherwise, who making no words of the Chirothesia where it was needless,
were glad of this occasion to Chirotonize, or elect them Elders in every
Congregation by Popular fuffrage. But this (they will say) is not to come off
from the haune, but to run still upon the People in a common or public
capacity. Though the Scripture speak of great multitudes believing, believe it
there was no such thing; Clemens says they were very few, their Assemblies
private, and very scanty things. As private as they were, by the judgment of
Divines they were it seems to receive from their pattern (if that were the
Sanhedrim) a form that was public enough, and why might not they have received
this from that public from whereunto they were accustomed, rather than from a
Foreign Policy, and one contrary to their customs? why should they suffer
such power in new and private, as they would not endure in their old and
public Magistrates? or if they received the Scriptures, why should they choose
that Ordination which would fit them worst rather that which would fit them
best? That of Timothy, rather than that of Matthias? Or let their Assemblies
have been never so private or scanty, yet if the Apostles Chirotonized them
Elders in every Congregation, Is it not demonstrable that they did receive that
of Matthias, and not that of Timothy?

Thus much for the Propagation of the pure or first kind of Ecclesiastical
Policy unto the Cities of Lycaonia. The mixed or second kind into which (the
Christian Presbytery delighting to follow the stepps of the Jewish) the former
might soon degenerate, continued in the primitive Church (to speak with the
least, for Wall^us brings it down to Charles the Great) three hundred years
after Christ; which Assertion in Mr. Hobbs proved out of Amianus Marcellinus,
Doctor Hamond has either willingly overseen, or includes in this Answer, it is
most visibly void of all appearance of truth. Wherefore to the quotation
mentioned, I 138.
shall ad the words of Platina. Damasus the second by Nation a Bravarian
surnamed Bagniarius, or as some will Popo; possessed himself of the Papacy by
force, and without consent of the Clergy and of the People. Now what can be
clearer than that by this place the Clergy and the People had hitherto right to
elect the Pope? The Doctor comes near the word of defiance unto Mr. Hobbs, in a
matter of fact so apparent unto any judgment that I need not ad what goes
before in the life of Clement the second, where the Emperor ingageth the
People of Rome not to meddle with the Election of the Pope without his express
Command: nor what follows after in Leo the ninth, where the whole power of
Election was now conserred by the Emperor upon ihe Clergy. Again Victor the
second, (says the same Author) obtained the Papacy rather by favor of the
Emperor, than by free suffrages of ihe Clergy and the People of Rome, who
apprehended the power of the Emperor whose displeasure they had sometime
incurred by Creating Popes: So then the People, (it is clear) had hitherto
created the Popes. The power of Election thus in the whole Clergy came
afterward, as at this day, to be restrained unto the Cardinals only; and so
to devolve into the third kind of Ordination exactly correspondent unto the
Sanhedrim and their Chirothesia, as it was exereised among the converted Jews,
when Timothy was Ordained by the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery.

Now this is that with which of all others Divines are so inamoured, that they
will not endure it should he said there is any other: It is also propitious
above all the rest unto Monarchy, as that which according unto the inherent
nature or impotence of Oligarchy, must have a Prince at home or abroad to rest
upon or become the inevitable prey of the People. Herein lies the Arcanum or
secret of that Antipathy, which is between a Clergy and a Popular Government,
and of that simpathy which is between the Mitre and the Crown. A Prince
receiving a Clergy with the Monopoly of their Chirothesia, has no more to do
than to make a Metrapolitan, by whom he governs them, and by them the People,
especially if he endow them with good Revenues, for so they become an Estate of
his Realm, and a more steady Pillar of his Throne than his Nobility themselves,
who as their dependence is not so strong, are of a more stirring nature. This
is the Gothic Model from whence we had our Pattern, and in which No Bishop, no
King.

Thus for the dignity of Ecclesiastical Policies, whether in Scripture or
Humane Prudence, Popular Government you see is naturally inclined unto the very
best, and the spiritual Aristocracy unto the very worst. It is also remarkable
that the Political balance extends it self unto the decision of the question
about Ordination. For as a People never offered to dispute with a well
balanced Clergy, so a Clergy dis-mounted never gained any thing by disputing
with the People. As to the question of Empire, or Government, ( I Propheti
disarmati Rovivano) The Apostles became all* things unto all.

Thus beyond all measure improsperous are this Divines undertakings His own
words to Mr. Hobbs* 122.
against Mr. Hobbs, and the undertakings of Divines upon this Subject.

FINIS.
Advertisement to the Reader, or Direction to the Answerer.
THe Answer of this Book must lie in proving that the Apostles at the several
times and places mentioned, introduced but one way of Ordination, and that the
same unto which Divines now pretend: or if the Apostles divided, that is to say
introduced diverse ways of Ordination, than the People or Magistrate may choose.

I have taken the more leisure and pains to state (I think) all the cases of
Controversy that can arise out of the Commonwealth of Oceana, as you have
seen in these two Books, to the end that I may be no more obliged to write; and
yet not omit Writing upon any occasion that shall be offered, for if my
Principles be overthrown (which when I see I shall most ingenuously confess
with thanks unto the Author) such an acknowledgement will lie in a little room;
and this failing, I am deceived if I shall not now be able to show any Writer
against me that his Answer is none, within the compass of three or four Sheets.

This also will be the fittest way for Boys play, with which I am sure enough
to he entertained by the quibling University men, I mean a certain busy Ginge
of them, who having publicly vanted that they would bring forty examples
against the balance, and since laid their Caps together about it, have not
produced one. These vaunts of theirs offering prejudice unto truth, and good
Principles, were the cause why they were indeed pressed to show some of their
skill; not that they were thought fit Judges of these things, but first that
they had declared themselves so, and next that they may know they are not.

The Errors of the (...).
FOr Sanhedrin read Sanhedrim, this error (...) place, for Sindas p. 1. l. 4.
r. Suidas, for stand p* 21^l^3^. ^* stayed, (...) Zotertha p. 27. l. 29. r.
Zotertha, for (...) (...). (...), for (...) p. 24. l. 39. r. (...), page 28. l.
34. dele Also, for Golthick p. 49. r. Gothic, for Christonia p. 50. r.
Chirotonia, for (...) p. 26. l. 45. ^. (...). for (...) p. 26. l. 32. (...),
for Council p. 56* l. 26. r. Consul, for the p. 54. l. 26. r. ye.


