A FVLL RELATION OF The Defeat given, and Victory obtained upon Saturday last,
by our Forces at ABBINGTON: Commanded by that Noble and faithful Commander,
Major General Brown, against the Oxford Forces, Commanded by the two Princes,
Rupert, and Maurice, who then with much confidence came to storm and take the
aforesaid Garrison. In a Letter from Collonell Samuel Harsnet, to Captain
Jones in LONDON.

Imprimatur,

Ja. Cranford.



LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill, 1645.

A FVLL RELATION OF THE Defeat given, and Victory obtained upon Saturday last,
by our Forces at ABBINGTON.
January 12. 1644. SIR,
I Have had a longing desire to requite your love in giving me a Relation of
that Fight of Alford; but never could meet with an opportunity, but some thing
the Lord has now vouchsafed worthy the Relation to our worthy Friends.

I came on Friday night from Henly with our Company that came with us from
London. Some others of our Garrison that we found at Reading, and from thence
after midnight, past very quietly by Wallingford, and so about three a Clock
came safe to Abbington, seeing none in our way to trouble us, but having been
not above three hours here, we had an Allarum from the same way we came,
which was about half a mile from us in Oxfordshire, called Cullum Bridge,
which they posseft themselves of, before we had time to draw forth any party
to charge them; there were parties from Oxon, and from Wallingford, Prince
Rupert Commanding in Chief, with whom was Prince Maurice, Sir Henry Gage,
Governor of Oxford, and many other great Commanders; their Force were supposed
to be in all about three thousand Horse and Foot, with two pieces of
Ordinance.

Behind the said Bridge was a great hill with many hedges, which they lined
with Musketeers, to the great annoyance of our men. But our Noble Major
General upon hearing of the Allarum, Commanded our men to Arms, which was
cheerfully obeyed: and by parties were drawn along the Cawsie, that did lead
from the Town to that Bridge, (Meadows over-flowed with water, being on both
sides) and coming to charge them at the Bridge, the Enemy stoutly opposed us,
but to their loss, whereupon we had two Drakes commanded thither: And our men
cheerfully drawn into the water on both sides, did so pelt them, while the
Drakes played upon the Bridge, that after four hours fight we drove them from
the Bridge and the Hedges, and made them retreat, and we having got the
Bridge, which being of Stone, they had partly broken down.

Yet our men got over, Commanded by Major Bradberry, Major to Collonell
Sparrowes Regiment of Essex, at the entering over which Bridge he was slain,
but have not lost above eight or ten men at the most, and so the Enemy was
forced shamefully to retreat.

The Fight began betimes in the morning, at which instant there was a party
of three score and ten, or fourscore Horse from Farringdon, to set upon our
Horse, quartered at a Village called Drayton in Barkeshire, on the other side
of the Town, near two miles off, the Enemy was there, Commanded by Major
Hatton Farmer, Major of the Prince his Regiment, our Horse carried themselves
very courageously, beat the Enemy out of their quarter, and pursued them within
a mile of Farringdon, and killed the Major with diverse others, and mortally
wounded the Captain Lieutenant of the Prince his Regiment, took many of the
Men and Horse, amongst whom were five Irish men, which we hanged the same day
in the Market place, and not above twelve of these Horse got into Farringdon,
the rest slain or taken, without the loss of any one of our men, or Horse.

Their intent was, as we are informed by Prisoners, and a Trumpeter, that this
evening came from Oxford, to desire the Majors body, that the Horse should give
us an Allarum on the one side, whilst the Foot stormed us on the other. And
another that this day came from Oxford, did give our Major General
information, both of them affirm, that we have slain Sir Henry Gage,
Governous of Oxford, and many others of great quality. It is reported that
Lieutenant Colonel Lower, Deputy Governor of Wallingford, is slain, time
will produce more: I am confident the Enemy had a great advantage of us by the
bridge and hills, yet the Lord fought for us, and has delivered us out of
their hands, for which we desire thanks may be generally given to the Lord of
hosts, the God of Victory and in particular for this preserving of us in our
passage hither, the Enemy being upon their march very near us; and had they
taken us, it would have occasioned great Triumph in the Enemy; there being of
us four Colonels; besides other Captains and Commanders. Our Major General,
Doctor wilson, and Quartemaster General Burrowes, remember their loves to you,
and would have given you a touch hereof, but I undertook to save them that
labor; I pray you acquaint our Friends herewith: as having expressed nothing but
what I know to be truth.

One of the Messengers from Oxford informs us that Prince Rupert engaged
himself to the King and Lords, that he would have Abbington on Saturday
before twelve a clock at noone, but missing his hopes he was ashamed to march
into Oxford with the Forces that returned, but came in privately another way,
and there the Lords mocked him, asked him Where is Abbington, that he boasted
he would so suddenly have. But we gave them such a breakfast, that I think,
he will have little stomach hereafter to come and visit our Noble Major
General; we could not for want of Horse pursue the victory, Colonel Fines
having left us, and I think God would not vouchsafe to do him so much honor
as to be present at so noble an exploit: for the number of ours slain, I have
already given youan account: The slain of the enemy are not yet certainly
known; the Country reports of three or four Carts of dead and wounded Corpse
they took with them. Besides many of theirs were drowned; others thrown in
after they were slain, and some found dead upon the place.

Abbington the 12 of January, 1644. at nine a clock on Sabbath day night. I
rest your Loving Friend and Neighbor, SAM. HARSNEY.


FINIS.

