A TRVE RELATION OF A Company of Brownists, Separatists, and Non-Conformists,
In Monmouthshire in Wales. With the manner of their Doctrine, Christnings,
VVeddings, and Burialls. TOGETHER With a Relation of the knavery that some of
their Teachers practiced to enrich themselves withal. The truth whereof will
be justified by sundry people of good quality inhabiting in the said County.

By Edward Harris.

Printed in the year 1641.

A TRVE RELATION OF A company of Brownists, Separatists, and Non-conformists in
Monmouth shire in WALES.
IN the County of Monmouth in Wales, in diverse parts a number of
Non-conformists being assembled together, not regarding in what place they
meet, whether in field, garden, orchard, barn, kitchen, or high ways, being
(as they teach) as available to their devotion as the Church: where by their
doctrine they persuade their auditory to contemn the prayers of the Church,
and the Preachers of the Gospel; also avowing their own zealous prayers to
have such power with God, as that they dare challenge him extempore. By which
lewd persuasion of theirs they have drawn diverse honest men's wives in the
night times to frequent their Assemblies, and to become of most loose and
wicked conversation, and likewise many chaste Virgins to become harlots, and the
mothers of bastards; holding it no sin for a brother to lie with a brothers
wife; as also a virgin gotten with child by a brother not to be the worse, but
by another, then by the wicked, and so consequently a sin.

And first of Christenings;
Which is that the Father shall bring his child to such of that sect as shall
profess himself to be a minister, who shall take the child into his hands and
wish the Father to name him, and being named, the Minister uses to cut the
child in the ear until it shall bleed, and then after (delivering the child
to the Father) says, by such a name thou child shall be called; in which
action they use neither the sprinkling of water, sign of the cross, God
fathers nor God mothers, nor any of the prayers in the Common prayer book
appointed to be used for that purpose; and they will allow of no churching of
women by any means.

The manner of their Marriages
Is, that he that takes upon him the place of a Minister, shall ask the man
that is to be married, if he will have such a maid or woman to be his wedded
wife, who saying that he will, he also usually asks the woman that is to be
married if that she will have that man to be her husband, who saying that she
will; then their Minister will usual say, go together and multiply; in which
action they never use the plighting of troth, ring, prayers, or ceremonies
whatsoever.

Of Burialls.
They will allow of no prayers or ceremonies at all at the burying of the dead,
but give directions that the body be thrown into a pit, much like a thing
nothing worth: And being that these sects in all things are inclined to
maintain contradictions as is before said, touching the points of salvation,
so they will in all other things; And (inter alia) command the dead to be laid
in the ground acrosse the Church or Churchyard, or with their heads toward the
East, but never with their feet Eastward, as the ancient custom was.

Of a Pavier (being one of the zealous Brothers, seeing one of the Pastors of
that sect get 20. l'. under color of cancelling of sins) that by his own
practice in the like nature got 3. Cheeses and 9. l' and by an accident escapt
hanging in the earning thereof, as follows.
The Pavier or zealous brother, being very intimate with the grand Doctors of
that unsanctified discipline, and being privy to most of their ways and
secrets, and hearing it taught at one of their Coventicles or meetings, that it
was a great sin for a woman to conceal any money from her husband (which
exercise being finished) one of the women of that auditory acquainted the
Teacher, that she was guilty of that sin, in regard that she concealed 20.
l'. from her husband, and demanded what she should do to be forgiven of that
sin, who commanded her to bring the money to him, promising so to dispose
thereof amongst the people, that her offense in that behalf should be
pardoned, which the simple woman did, whereby she and the poor were cosened by
a knave.

How the Pavier taking this president of the holy man of God his practice,
cozened three women of their cheeses.
Who speedily repaired unto three rich women of his neighbors (that he knew to
be well stored with good cheese which he wanted) and made them believe that
they were such heinous sinners against God, that if speedy means should not be
made for the remission thereof, they were in the state of damnation; whereat
the poor women being put into a great fright earnestly besought the Pavier
(who they conceived to be a learned man full of sanctity and a detester of
vice) to find out how Gods wrath might be appeased, and their sins remitted;
who (after much entreaty and promises of rewards) told the women that first
they should confess their sins, and that according to the quantity thereof,
means should be made for the remission thereof: and being demanded how and to
whom their transgressions should be acknowledged whereby the quality thereof
might be evident, wished each of them to fetch him down a cheese of the biggest
they had, and scales to weigh them in, which being weighed and notice taken of
the weight thereof; the Pavier did cut a round circle in the middle of every
one of the cheeses, and took out the cheese within those circles in lumps
unbroken; insomuch that there was a round hole in the middle of every of the
said cheeses almost through; and thereupon the Pavier delivered every woman her
own cheese again charging every of them by the next morning to confess all
their sins in those holes and that he would then come to them, and in the
mean time would go home and pray for them, and study means for the remitting
of their iniquities, and did take home with him the lumps taken out of the
cheese, and cut off all the cheese thereof near from the rine, and made round
lumps of lead fit for the filling of them holes, which he took in his pocket
the next morning, and coming to the women, they brought their cheeses to him,
saying that they had confessed all their misdeeds that they could remember that
ever they did, whereupon the Pavier wished them to fetch scales thither to
weigh the cheeses, and in the mean time cunningly clapped the lead into the
holes which he covered with the rine of cheese that he had in his pocket, which
(being weighed) fame exceeded the weight they were of the day before, whereby
the Pavier expressed unto them, that the quality of their sins appeared to be
so great, that if speedy means wore not eftsoons observed for the remitting
thereof, doubtless they should prese them down to hell, and therefore the
Pavier for to banish the multitude of their confessed sins from off the face
of the earth, took the cheeses and threw them over a great bridge into a great
river called Eboy, wherehence the Paviers wife and children by his directions
took them up and feasted upon them a goodwhiles after.

What means the Pavier prescribed to have the Women's sins forgiven, and how
he cozned them of 9. l'. by promising to die for their sins and how be was
like to be hanged by a boy in earning the money.
Upon a serious conference between the Pavier and the women, he made it appear
unto them that every sin was mortal and that therefore there ought to be a
death before those sins could be blotted out of the sight of God; whereat the
women being in a perplexity not knowing what to say, desired him to invent some
other way whereby they might save their lives, and promised to give any
content; whereupon the Pavier standing steadfast upon his former words, told them
that there must be a death had before God would be satisfied for their
transgressions, and that he loved them so well that he for a reasonanable
reward would die for them rather then they should remain in the state of
damnation for their misdeeds, whereat the women became very joyful, giving him
many thanks, brought three pound a piece, which he received, and was the only
thing he aimed at, and presently thereupon took a little stool and a rope
with him into an upper room in one of the women's houses where spying a cross
beam tied the rope about it, making it ready for to be hanged therein, for to
puchase a pardon for the women's transgressions.

Whereupon he (together with the women, having joined in fervent prayers) stood
upon the stool, and telling them that the spirit was then strong with him, did
put the rope about his neck, and wished the women to go into the next room,
and pray for his happiness in so great a task. And when as they should hear
him groan, they should help him down, for that by that time satisfaction
would be made, and their sins absolutely forgiven. And so away the women
went as he had bid them, leaving him upon the stool with the rope about his
neck; instantly thereupon a son of the woman of the house (being a pretty
big youth, in regard of much whispering that he spied up and down the house,
stealing up stairs to see the mystery thereof) saw the Pavier standing upon
the top of a stool, with his back toward him, and his neck in a rope, and
in a manner playing therewith: at the sight whereof the youth calling to mind
that the Pavier had been a means to procure him to be whipped at school diverse
times for playing at Tennis and Cat upon the Sunday, intended to be revenged
upon him then, and suddenly shifted the stool from under the Paviers feet, and
run away, leaving him there swinging, in a way indeed to perform what he had
undertaken. But the women being near unto him, and hearing him schreech,
speedily run to him, and by much ado made a shift to save his life. Now for
the women's pains in hindering the Pavier to perform what he had undertaken, I
could find in my heart in a manner to wish them the success that the Pavier
should have, had he been left alone, and not by them hindered in his
proceedings.

FINIS.

