TRODDEN DOWN STRENGTH, BY THE GOD OF STRENGTH, OR, MRS DRAKE REVIVED.

SHOWING Her strange and rare CASE, great and many uncouth Afflictions, for
ten years together: Together, With the strange and wonderful manner how the
Lord revealed himself unto her, a few days be ore her death.

Related by her sometime unworthy friend, HEART ON-HI.

PSALM. 66.16. Come and hear, all ye that fear God; and I will declare what
he has done for my soul.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop for Stephen Pilkington, and are to be sold at his
Shop next to the Red-lyon Inn in Fleet Street, 1647.

November. 12. 1646.
I Have perused this Discourse, concerning Mrs Drakes dangerous tentations and
fearful desertions, with her blessed recovery, and joyful issue out of all
her troubles; and think it well worthy to be Printed and published, as a
singular antidote to preserve others in her condition, from being plunged into
and quite swallowed up with deep despair.

John Downame.

TO THE MEMORY OF THAT EVER MEMORABLE MERCY SHOWED UNTO THAT LATE WORTHY
GENTLEWOMAN OF FAMOVS MEMORY Mrs IOANE DRAKE IN ESCAPING SATAN'S MANY MIGHTY AND
IN SHOW INVINCIBLE TEMPTATIONS.

TRODDEN DOWN STRENGTH, OR, MRS DRAKE REVIVED.
THE matchless rare Case, and in that kind unparalleld trouble of that
sometime worthy Gentlewoman, Mrs Joan Drake of famous memory, wife of Francis
Drake late of Esher Esquire; with the glorious and strange conclusion the Lord
made with her, (I believe the like never read nor heard of) was the cause of
writing this ensuing discourse. Whose Case and trouble of ten years continuance
being so rare and seldom met with; for that the Relation thereof might perhaps
help some hard-hearted mourning Creatures hereafter, to gather heart and
strength, not to despair (how desperate soever their Case may seem either to
themselves or others to be) I have therefore by Gods help, and for the comfort
of such, undertaken to set down here, for the glory of God, and confusion of
Satan (her maine strong enemy) her Case, and cause thereof, with the progress
and issue of all, as briefly as possibly I could, to remain as a pertuall
monument whilst time lasts, of Gods great goodness and infinite mercies even
to the most hard-hearted and miserable that may be. To the end, that as it was
said by James of Job and his Case, Behold the Patience of Job, and what end the
Lord made; so it may likewise hereafter be said of this good woman, Behold the
hardness of heart, stiffnesse and stoutnesse of Mrs Drake for a long time
rejecting all means in a long continuance, and what a comfortable end the Lord
made with her. Wherefore it being a discourse full of windings and turnings,
fraught with many of Satan's subtilties and intricate multifarious tentations,
wherein Proteus like, he according unto the occasion, changed shapes, to have
overthrown this good Gentlewoman; all the ends whereof cannot (because of the
variety and strangeness) easily be knit together: I do entreat the Readers
patience to bear with me, if sometimes I seem to loose my self, or be too
tedious, or for want of memory and multiplicity of matter be enforced sometimes
to bring Hysteron Proteron: But howsoever the business, if largely related,
might fill up a very great volumne, I intend only as I am able, to gather
together some of the most special material things, knitting them as briefly
as may be together; seeing by Gods mercy I was made an unworthy Instrument of
her recovery, and an eye-witnessing Actor in all her Tragick-Comedy: (Not
daring but to erect this Trophee of eternal thankfulness for her) in
imitation of former Worthies in their deliverances; I was enforced and durst
not but thus vent the business of her rare Case, unto succeeding Posterity.

how she was set upon and assaulted in the night with fear and horror, with
her foregoing disposition, character, and what forerunners ushered this her
distemper which raised so great a storm.

By what strange means, and way, the Lord made the Relater an unworthy
Instrument, to have compassion on her, and find her out, helping to furnish
her with the Instrument and means of her recovery; and what entertainment she
gave that means at his first coming unto her, and after, until the time that
she revealed the Devils counsel, was contented to live, and use the means
having any hope to be saved.

Her deportment and carrige from this fornamed time, until a little before her
death.

The preparation unto her death, with the strange manner how the Lord revealed
himself unto her, before the same, the like never heard of.

1. For the first, she was the daughter of that worthy Gentleman William Totle
Esquire, one of the six Clerks of Chancery, his only Heir apparent, being
likely to have enjoyed all his fortunes which were very great, according
whereunto she had all the excellent breeding, which is usual, and befitted a
Gentlewoman issued from such worthy Parents, whose too great indulgence toward
her in her youth (by her own confession) occasioned so much sorrow unto her in
her riper years, receiving then no correction at all.

Her character.
She was of a low well compacted stature, of a lovely brown complexion,
having a full nimble quick Sparrow-hawke eye, of a natural joviall
constitution, accidentally melancholy, full of love, courtesy, mercy and
meekness, affable in conversation, with a deep and nimble quick pleasant
present wit, tenderhearted, free and bountiful, in nothing covetous but of
grace: the freest alive from all hypocrisy, unless it were to belly her self,
wearing her worst side outmost, being plain, true and tender open-hearted,
modest, easily drawn with love and good words; but if opposed, stout, stern and
inflexible, using the outward contentments of the times, yet in a very
indifferent, modest, inoffensive way, resolute in her undertakings, valewing
even then real goodness where she saw it in any without hypocrisy,
detesting shows without substance: though then she were not acquainted with
the power of godliness, yet had she it in admiration, where she saw it shine
forth; so as though sometimes in a little mirth, she would vex and jest with
the supposed worser sort, who at good times came to her of her neighbors; yet
those who were in her judgment right, she used thus far to open her self
unto her waiting woman touching them, in this strange presaging manner.

Do thou see these people, some of whom I do so jeare at and vex? of my
conscience I shall one day ere I die, be one of them; for those of them who
are right, are the only happy souls, which was a strange prediction of her
(even then when she was so far from, and contrary unto them) as afterward
it came to pass.

Cause of her melancholy.
Gods providence, and her Parents pleasure, appointed unto her a Match, but
such a one (thought he was a worthy fine Gentleman of good birth, parts and
fortunes) yet whom at first she could not affect, so as she was married
against her will (a great Oversight in Parents) which first bred in her the
foundation of those storms and tempests, which in time were in danger to have
overthrown her. Wherein though she were obedient and dutiful unto her
Parents; yet it stuck close unto her, though her strength of spirit and joviall
temper endeavored with all her strength to have shaken it off, out-worn it,
and by all means to have out-faced it, without semblance of discontent, by
merry company and diverse journeyes (which usually divert melancholy thoughts)
as though there had been no such matter. But grief being like unto fire, which
though for a time smothered, yet could not long be concealed, her disconten^s
did secretly work upon her a habit of sadness in midst of her mirth with her
friends, as Solomon shows than even in laughter the heart may be sad.

Cause of her distemper.
About this time not long after her marriage she was brought to bed of a
daughter (a dear daughter unto her) because in that delivery being much wronged
by her Midwiffe, she was ever after troubled with fumes and scurvie vapors
mounting up unto her head, which bred in her for the most part a continual
headache, like unto a megrum, together with somewhat like unto a fire
continually burning at her stomach, which no physic could remove, or was not
Gods pleasure it should; the which drew her toward a more constant
constitution of sadness and distemper, though yet with her usual strength of
spirit and cheerful disposition, she out-faced, as though all had been well.
But a fire of discontent being kindled full of sad thoughts in her; which bred
and increased all the time she lay in of her daughter; thus shortly after it
fell out, That

Her Father and Mother being very indulgent toward her in this Case, and both
of them being with her, when at a time she was ill at her House at Esher in
Surrey; her Mother to comfort and hearten her up, then lying one night with
her; It came to pass that in the forepart of the night she fell asleep, but
not long after fell out into terrible shricks and outcries, to this purpose,
The first grand tempest she endured.
that she was undone, undone, she was damned, and a cast away, and so of
necessity must needs go to Hell, and therewith shook, dropped down with sweat,
and wept exceedingly: Wherewith her good Mother Mrs Totle much troubled, being
a very religious tenderhearted Gentlewoman, did give her many good and
comfortable exhortations, to be quiet, to trust in God; not to believe
illusions, telling her, that the Devil was a liar, and so fell a praying with
her, A strange change.
she being in show well recovered and pacified. Which being past, she fell
asleep again, and wakened as full of extraordinary joys, as formerly she had
been of terrors; rejoicing exceedingly, and then told her Mother, What a
wonderful comfortable dream she had been in, and how from an Angel she was
assured of her salvation; that now all her former fears she saw were false,
now she would doubt no more, being assured to go unto Heaven; and so prayed
again with her Mother.

Some hours after this she fell asleep again for an hour and more (as her
Mother told the Relator) but at her awaking was now in a more fearful case
then ever, The tempest begins roughly.
in a fearful trembling and sweat, shaking exceedingly and crying out, That
now she was a forelorne creature, being assuredly damned, without hope of
mercy, without all remedy, confident that she must needs go unto hell; with
shricks and loud Cries, the bed shaking, yea, the whole chamber seeming to rock
and reele: Which breeding to her Mother, much fear, amazement and grief, in
that it was now past her skill to fasten upon her daughter any thing which
might allay, comfort, or quiet her distemper she now was in. In which woeful
posture she still continued, notwithstanding all the comforts of persuasions
vented either by her Mother or any others; all which were in vain, there being
joined with her sadness and distemper, some outrage now and then, abstinence
from meat as much as might be; strange desperate speeches, unruly carriage, far
from her former natural constitution: sometime slighting and laughing at all
said unto her, they now not daring to trust her alone, but to have her watched
continually night and day by two Gentlewomen by turns, most of the bolts and
locks being taken off in the rooms, lest Satan should have circumvented them.
She in the mean time all this while living in much discontent, against her
will, but that she was so watched and tended, that she could by no means hurt
her self, never left alone, but overawed with Overseers who were jealous of
her ruin. In this Case she with much ado was brought to eat, but sparingly,
very musing and silent; but when she was by her Husband, Father or Mother, much
urged to the contrary; who by their authority only prevailed much with her: now
at length growing desperately hopeless, refusing all means, slighting and
scorning to speak with any Ministers, all who came to her, she shaking them
off, as we see a great Mastiffe to turn off many shall Curres; laughing at
them, and sending them away with much derision and discontent; which she of
purpose delighted to do, so to discourage all of them, that they might have no
mind to return again: So as she wearied out all who came unto her, who left
her as a creature hopeless of recovery. In which sad Posture, now in her own
eyes and most of others, hopeless and helpless, being the astonishment of
Husband, Father, Mother, and of all her friends; we will now for a while leave
her unto her keepers, to show in the next place, the second thing propounded;
How strangely the Lord caused the Relater to be a means to find her out,
bring one of a thousand unto her, and what strange entertainment she gave him
at his first coming unto her, to declare unto her, both what her iniquity, and
righteousness was.

How God caused to find her out.
As by Gods good Providence the Relater was one day at dinner in Isleworth, at
the house of the Lady Scudamore, where the late worthy Minister Dr Burges the
Elder then also was, whose help she had rejected. Amongst other discourses
there interposed this also of Mrs Drakes great distemper, pitiful strange
unusual Case, how desperate it was, and what a great work of mercy it would
be to be a means any way to help her. It then being concluded by all, that if
Mr John Dod of Ashby, could be entreated or won to take so much pains, under
God he were the only fit person, with his so mild, meek and merciful spirit,
do deal with hers, which was so out of tune and off hooks: upon whose prayers
and pains, more good success might be expected, then any one they could then
think of. This motion though for the time neglected, yet after a fortnight
wrought so strongly, day and night upon the Relater, that he could have no rest
until he had moved the business unto Mr Dod then in Town; who modestly put it
off as a business beyond his strength and leisure to wait upon, yet being
contented to see her and speak with her. Whereupon the Relater then wrote unto
her Husband (a stranger unto him) to this purpose; that hearing of the strange
Case and danger his wife now was in, out of mercy unto her, he had procured,
the fittest man known to come to see her, and do his best to help her according
to his ability, one Mr Dod Minister of Cannons-Ashby in Northamptonshire. He
then after enquiring of Mr Dod, found such a general good report of him, that
he suddenly came unto the Relaters chamber in the White-Friers, where Mr Dod at
that time was, who acquainting himself with him, entreated his help and company
to visit his wife, and so took us both along with him unto his house.

But it is strange to hear what suttlety the Devil then used, A sudden device
of Satan.
and uncouth entertainment he caused her then to give unto him: for, she being
in the dining room above, having no knowledge of his coming (which was
concealed from her) yet as we came near unto the door below, she suddenly
flung up stairs unto the next chamber above, and shut her self in: Whereupon
her Husband took the great iron forke in his hand, and run up after her,
threatening to beat down the door, if she would not open it. Who seeing him
resolute so to do, at length opened the door and let them in; her Husband
then getting betwixt her and the door, they both kneeled, and Mr Dod (as his
custom in great matters was) kneeled and went to prayer without speaking of
one word unto her: at which time she stood and would not kneel, until the
latter end of the same, when she also conformed her self, and kneeled with
them. Prayer being done, Mr Dod said nothing unto her, but in her hearing
uttered some speeches concerning her Case, unto her Husband, tending unto her
comfort and encouragement for her to make use off: and so did both before and
at dinner, expecting from her some speeches to have given some pertinent
occasion for further discourse with her, which she at that time omitting, he
supplied with other seasonable discourses for her good, touching his
experiences in the like kind, of the Devils suttleties and the danger of
keeping his council, with the advantages accrewing unto him thereby; whereunto
she patiently attended. Dinner being done, he being asked in his chamber at
her house (where he now was persuaded to lodge) what he thought of the
business? made this gracious hopeful Reply; very well, because the Devil was
afraid, run away, and durst not stand to it.

She seems to neglect and depise prayer.
That night after she was a bed, he was brought in by her husband to pray by
her; but she seemed as though she would not hear, hid her self over head and
ears in the bed: notwithstanding which he went on constantly in his
determination unto the end thereof. The next day at his coming, he set in to
speak with her; at which time she replied nimbly and strongly, using to
purpose all, or much of the Devils rhethorike taught her against her self;
yea, and alleged many Scriptures, Strange.
which she had never read, but only as tumbling and tossing over the Bible (as
her custom was) to find places against her self, she had hit upon many;
which by her nimblenesse and strength of wit and Satan's help, she had learned
to wrest, and press hard against her self. A sad sore and woeful condition
for the time.
But in all her discourses with him, the upshot of all still was, That she was
a damned Reprobate, must needs go unto Hell to live for ever; that her heart
was harder then an Adamant or Anvile, that God had forsaken her, and given her
over unto a reprobate sense, her hard heart could not repent, and that in all
her actions she but heapt up wrath against the day of wrath to her further
condemnation; and that in that she could not grieve, nor be sorrowful for
that woeful estate she was now in, this show the desperateness thereof; that
it was in vain, and too late for her to use any means: and therefore, that
she would use none, nor ever go to Church again. That it was needless,
fruitless and in vain, for him or any body else to loose their time or labor
any more with her or her occasions, the Decree of her rejection and damnation
being past and irrevocable: And therefore, all her comfort and portion being in
this life, she was resolved to spend the remainder of her time in all jollity
and merriment, denying her self of no wordly comforts; and therefore, wished
him to let her alone, for it was impossible for him to do her any good, nor
she would not either be ruled or advised by him; with a great deal of the
like scurvie rotten stuff, and that she was quite destitute of all natural
affection unto Husband, Father, Mother, Children, and every body else, having
in brief no love either to God or man; and therefore persuaded him to leave
her, not to pray for her, nor come any more at her.

Here was a sad discourse, with heavy accusations against her self, had all
been true; but the Devil being a liar, and the Father of lies, made her thus
fiercely and unjustly accuse and charge her self in such rigor: for even then
she feared Hell fire, quaking sometimes, and trembling at it, venting her
self unto her friends in private, and weeping bitterly, she used to say, O
do not ye pity me, who must go to live in Hell torments for ever? Besides, A
strange hypocri^e unusual.
even then she was pitiful and merciful unto others, but in secret so hid
and clokt with words and shows of the contrary, that it was treason against
her for any she entrusted, to bewray any part or parcel of her goodness;
because she would gladly have been thought past hope, and praying for, which
made her earnestly to beg of every one not to pray for her, it being that the
Devil aimed at, that she might, past hope, A new invention of Satan.
finally despair. For, for two years together, by her goodwill will she would
not be prayed for, using many times at her Mothers usual time of Prayer to
send suddenly for her, of purpose to interrupt her, who if she came not
presently, as sent for; when she came, asking her pleasure, she used to
reply, now I have nothing to say unto you, for you have been at your Matins.
But to return to Mr Dods progress with her; It was yet none at all, she
remained still the same, seemed not to hear or regard his speeches and words
spoken; would laugh and jest at all he said in derision: In her thoughts
likening him unto Ananias, one whom at a play in the Blackfriars she saw
scoft at, for a holy brother of Amsterdam; and when he look pitifully upon her
and reprove her for such strange carriages and speeches, telling her what a
shameful thing it was, so to laugh and jest at heavenly things; she usually
Replied, Why then, seeing you see what a wicked creature I am, why do you
trouble your self any more with me?

Diverse fasts were kept for her in private, Another of his subtle devices.
the next Chamber above hers, both then and diverse times after, in midst
whereof the Devil so made her restless, that she would come up to the door,
disturb them, of purpose, and make them believe that if the desisted not, she
would throw her self down stairs headlong. Yea once she being a bed, and he
at prayer, she to make him leave off, took a bed-staffe, and threatened to knock
him on the head, but did not. All these and many more tricks the Devil used,
still upon occasion to serve his turn, changing his weapons, so as scarcely
could it be known at what ward to find him long: so to show his malice, did he
change his posture and weapons.

Now she would toughly dispute the business, She holds fast her doleful
conclusions.
but all to no purpose, she retaining those devilish conclusions fastened in her
still. So that Mr Dod wearied out thus, having stayed a Month with her
departed home, stayed away a Month and returned again, doing thus three or
four times together: yet found no amendment, but still the same arguments
stiffely maintained over and over again a hundred times together, without any
good (in show) effect upon her, who could not in two years time be won or
persuaded to come to Church or Sacrament, or to use any means at all; but
carried her self as a desperate forlorn creature, notwithstanding which the
overcoming thoughts and terrors of Hell did much affright her; so as gladly
she would have had a door of hope opened unto her: A nice pretty story, proving
that she wished for salvation.
For, a Kitchin-Maide she kept, who had both wit and memory enough to do and
retain a message; she would usually send unto diverse Preachers with Messages
of enquiry touching her (concealing her name,) Whether such and such a
creature, without Faith, Hope, love to God or man, hard-hearted, without
natural affection, who had rejected all means, nor could perform any, or
submit unto the same, with many the like aggravations (bad enough you may
imagine) yet might have any hope to go to heaven? Who still brought unto her
such returns tending to hopeful encouragement: that such like and much worse
(though as bad as Manasseth) might by the mercy of God be received into favor,
converted and saved, which privately did much allay her spirit; for no worser
returns of her secret messages were brought unto her from any she had sent
unto.

For all this, A further extent of the Devils malice.
yet did the Devil hold her close unto his maine end of desperation, to have
made her self away: For she swallowed down many great pins, so to have
dispatched her self; all which by Gods mercy without hurting passed through
her: And being forbid Oranges (as naught for her) she made shift by the
foresaid Maid to have forty brought unto her, so to have sped her self; but
it so pleased God, that these proved excellent medicines unto her, purging away
abundance of black ugly filthy matter, which made her to look much better. She
used also now and then ^at meals, to shift a knife secretly in a napkin, and
then to slip it up in then inside of her arm; but being watched and taken
therewith she left off so doing, thus continuing, until she had in a manner
wearied out every body: for, the shorter the Devils reign was, he played the
more tricks, making her by fits to be the more raging and troublesome unto her
self and others.

A strange farewell.
Now as is said, Mr Dod in a manner wearied out with her, as he was about to go
home for a while, and to take leave, she gave unto him this rude farewell, To
pray him to get him gone, to return no more unto her, enquiring at him what
warrant he had, being a holy religious man, who should give good example unto
others, to leave his Calling, House and Family so long, and to come to her,
where he was but an unwelcome Intruder, having no hope to do her any good?
Which speech was so set on with such an edge of vehemency (spoken as it
appeared against her will to prove him only) bred in him such astonishment, as
resolving to follow her counsel, he made her this short Reply, That this was
but a bad requital of all his pains and love unto her, to have no more thanks
for his labor, but to be chid out of doors, that he was very sensible of her
reproof and dismission, and therefore meant hereafter to stay at home, and
look unto his own matters, not troubling her any more: Which speech it seemed
touched her to the quick; for though to discourage him and try him, she had
made him such an untoward speech, yet was she inwardly very sorry for what was
done: Only before his departure, she took him aside, desiring to speak with
him in private; when she told him, that now ere his departure she would deal
freely with him, and show the cause and ground of all her distempers and
trouble, and what just cause she had thus to have complained, as hopeless,
enjoining him silence. A way opened for her cure.
And so in her own chamber, none but he being present, she opened her whole
heart sincerely, so as he perceived that she had concealed nothing from him
of all that was in her heart; which made (now that the Devils counsel was out
and disclosed) to conceive good hope of her recovery.

For this quite marres, and is in danger to over throw all such persons, Danger
of conceiling the Devils counsel.
whilst the Devil so holds them in bondage, as to make them conceal his
counsel all the while, having this advantage thereby, as to make mountains of
mole-hils, and of mole-hils to make mighty mountains; never suffering them to
come unto the knowledge of the quality and nature of their disease, whilst the
thing oppressing and seeming great unto them, is usually little, and nothing at
all in respect of that he makes it; sometimes but a lie, a delusion, such as
the parties themselves upon such discoveries in relating become ashamed of; As
in some sort it fell out with this good woman's Case, which was nothing in a
manner in regard of that the Devil urged and persuaded her; it was, he proving
a strong liar unto her, and his suggestion only a meare false illusion as will
hereafter appear. Then unto all that which she had then vented unto him, he
then made her only this general Reply, That she was much mistaken and deluded
in the quality, kind and nature of her Case, that the Devil had thus far
tormented her spirit with a strong abuse in corrupting her judgment; and
encensing her so unjustly against her self, setting her affections on fire, by
his injected wildfire temptations. That he made no doubt of her recovery; but
that now being acquainted with her Case and mind, he would go home and
consult with God what were fittest answers for the same; returning ere long
again if God were so pleased: then to endeavor to satisfy and heal all her
doubtings: In the mean time, until then, enjoining her cheerfulness,
patience, moderation in all things before her Husband and Parents, and to
attempt no more violence against her self; all which she faithfully promised
and kept.

Still she holds the maine conclusion.
He being gone, in his absence she carried her self discreetly and modestly,
not refusing to speak with any of those Divines who in the interim came to
visit her; and would sit and dispute with them a long time together, but still
in the old bias, holding her strong maine conclusions, the fabric whereof
appeared to be so strongly rooted in her, that they seemed unremoveable, all
who, as appeared, did no good unto her, save so much as they could to persuade
her from such stiff peremptory conclusions against her self, and from prying
into Gods secrets, presuming to know those things which God in this life
reveals not unto any, but reserves as his own high prerogative, only to know
what his decree is touching the everlasting state of the Creature to come:
affirming that this knowledge which she pretended to have thereof was false,
and that this revelation, was only known in the sanctified use of means, which
she so far refused, as she could not be persuaded to go to Church by any,
though they much urged her unto it: Only now she would kneel and join in
prayer with them, but by no means in singing of any Psalm, which she
affirmed not to belong unto any in her Case, being now very sad and retired,
and now and then in weeping fits, and sometimes in shows of jollity and mirth,
so by turns it pleased her to outface her present misery.

Patience, moderation and mild dealing much prevails with such.
But this as a Catholicon we observe in dealing with her, that the more patient
we were, to suffer her to complain and bemoane her self, repeat one thing
over a hundred times as she used, over and over again, giving her good words,
using much meekness, affability and service unto her, even in her most
untoward cross carriages, this got much ground upon her spirit, and brought
her to do many things which no harsh crossenesse could possibly effect with
her. And therefore this couse was now taken, not to vex her any more, or urge
her with persuasions to go to Church, or to do any thing so displeasing unto
her, but to go along with her spirit, with patience abounding with love,
mercy, good words and the like, until she were convinced in judgment, when
they needed not to hale or pull her, Duties would then come off freely: For
indeed, this is the undoing of many poor souls in the like, or any distempers,
to chide, rate, and urge them to much; which is a cross way, displeasing and
unprosperous, yea, disproportionable unto that course Christ takes (whom we
should imitate) not to break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax;
and a cross way, To make judgment return unto victory: In which Case, Jacobs
pace with his flocks, with such, is the best and safest way to drive them
gently; especially those who are with young, in whom Christ is now but
abreeding and forming, that so he may (as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 53) see of
the travel of his soul, and be satisfied: And indeed, such harsh spirits who
are too quick with such poor souls being too nimble with them before they know
their disease, are but like rude Surgions, or unskilful Physicians, who venture
to give physic before they know the ground of the disease; who many times in
place of curing, do either kill, or so much the more ulcer their wounds.

Hitherto we have seen Satan malicious, A change in her occasions.
violent, subtle, various in his temptations, changing shapes, by all means
striving to have overthrown this good soul* abuse her judgment, affections,
fancy, and best reason to fight against her self; notwithstanding all which,
the Lord miraculously preserved her, was with her in, and brought her through
this fiery affliction, to wonder and admiration: Wherefore, if the Reader will
have a little more patience, he shall see how the Lord overthrew all those
strong holds, which the enemy had by his wildfire unresisted temptions, and
fiery darts injected in this good creature; which being not presently cast
forth again (as wildfire should be) thus enflamed her affections and
endeavors against her self; as in part has been and God willing shall be
related.

That she had sinned that great unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost; and
therefore, that it was in vain for her, either to use any means for
salvation, or hope for it; and therefore, that it were fruitless and in vain
for her to hear the word, read, pray and the like; which he wonderful fastly
had radicated in her.

by Gods Decree she was a Reprobate, a cast away, appointed for damnation;
being she was such a hard-hearted impenitent sinner, not being able to repent:
and therefore was a treasurer up in all she did of wrath against the day of
wrath and the revelation of Gods just Judgments againsts her: and therefore,
seeing that she must eternally perish, living for heaping up sin only for
aggravation of her punishments, therefore to make her self away, the sooner
the better: which temptation a long time stuck fast, seeming unremovable.

therefore now it was in vain to use any means at all; but seeing her portion
was now only in this life, therefore to deny her self no manner of pleasures
or jollity and mirth, but to cast off all these sad and sour things of holy
duties performing, which were to no purpose, now that the irrevocable Decree
was past, which was unchangeable: And therefore, if she should be saved she
should be saved howsoever, and that God would soften her heart, and give her
grace to use the means: But that the fearfulness of her estate did show (he
suggested) the contrary, that all her endeavors would prove in vain; this
stuck hard a long time.

Now against any of these, nothing could be fastened upon her against them,
which was not presently shook off again: But especially in that first mentioned
of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, herein she kept close the Devils counsel,
revealing the same at first unto none, but unto Mr Dod; though afterward of
her self three years after, being in a good humor, she acquainted the Relator
herewith; and more also then he has thought fit to vent abroad (as
unnecessary) giving him leave to publish and make known after her death so much
of her Case as might in some such misery be useful unto others.

After this Mr Dod at his appointed time returned, having seriously pondered
all her business, and digested the same, and was joyfully welcomed of her
friends, though by her in a muddy strange way (former tentations by that time,
having again grown somewhat strong upon her) when yet he in his usual
merciful way, cheared her up, encouraging her what possibly he could. And so
in some few days after fell flatly upon the business, how to beat down and
convince her erroneous opinions wherein she was so settled, and wherein she
thought her self most secure in her own judgment, unremoveably settled.

The sin against the Holy Ghost discussed and stated.
The maine and grand matter troubling her, and quite unhooking her off from all
manner of duties (as has been said) was, That she had sinned that unpardonable
sin against the holy Ghost, which she firmly believed: Whereunto Master Dod
thus replied, directly crossing all her thoughts herein, in the negative,
affirming that she neither had sinned this sin, nor was ever hitherto so
qualified, as to be guilty thereof; which seemed unto her very strange to
prove, but was easily done. For, he showed unto her, our of Heb. 6.4. That
those who commit that sin fight against their convinced enlighting, having
tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, having also
tasted of the heavenly gift, being made partakers of the holy Ghost; who in
their practice crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to
an open shame; and trample upon the blood of the Covenant, maliciously opposing
the known truth, in a constant course remorselesse unto the end: having lived
and thriven under powerful means, which yet they slight, maliciously and
purposly oppose and persecute. But that she being still in her natural estate,
A strong assumption.
by her own confession being far from this enlightening, never having tasted
of this heavenly gift, nor of the powers of the world to come, was never thus
qualified, and so had never, neither could have committed this sin: so that
her temptations and fears in this kind were but mere delusions only. And for
that other sort who committed this sin, without the former inward
illumination and taste, such as were the Scribes and Pharisees, Julian the
Apostate, and the like, who maliciously persecuted and blasphemed Christ,
notwithstanding that by his Doctrine and Miracles they were convinced of his
Diety; of this he showed her, she could not be guilty of, All she could
allege against her self, consisting only in a matter of thoughts, which
could not without action and former qualification be that sin, or within the
compass thereof: Which were only things wrapped up in that we call (tentatio
Foeda) strange injected thoughts of God, as Romans 1.23. representing him to the
fancy in abominable similitudes, likening him unto the vilest and basest
things; which were only Satan's wild fire tentations; for which seeing she even
then, and since, abominated them, being sorry for them, Satan must answer for,
they being hers no further then as she entertained and allowed of them. And
also, that these thoughts being thought of and injected betwixt the top and
bottom of the hill whereupon her Fathers house stood, never breaking forth
into any speech or action which she was sorry for, could not be any such sin
as she imagined; and therefore prayed her to content her self and to rest
satisfied, and not suffer the Devil to delude and torment her any more in this
kind.

All this discourse she heard willingly without replication until he had
finished what he would say, when she being very rational and convinced of the
truth of what he had delivered, acknowledged her error, and Satan's delusion,
promising no more to entertain any such like thoughts of that sin, A further
complaint.
But withal she told him, that it was no matter for this, though she were
free thereof, yet she had other sins enough to damn her, and was assuredly a
Reprobate and cast away, being she could not love God, nor any other creature,
being devoid of all natural affection, and given over to a Reprobate sense, so
as she was most certain that the Decree of God against her was past, being
that she had no heart or power to perform any holy duty, but was like a
creature stark dead, yea twice dead, good for nothing but for hell fire;
wherewith she sometimes would laugh and smile; but we must conceive that even
in the midst of this laughter the heart was sad; for in private not long after
she would have sore fits of weeping.

In vain it was now to dispute with her, Knowledge of Gods Decree denied unto
any one.
or persuade her in any thing until her judgment was convinced and rectified
in that matter of the Decree of God: For she flung off all with seeming
assurance of her knowledge being sure that the Decree of her reprobation was
past, of her rejection whereof she was sure and certain: Therefore, this being
the next strong hold to be battered down, he bent in the next place all his
strength this way, Denying unto her that it was possible either for the Devil,
or any other creature to know the Decree of God, either for salvation or
reprobation; but that this revelation came in the use of means God blessing
the same; for which cause all must use the means who would be saved, not
meddling with the Decree of God, nor prying into his secrets; for which then was
alleged that excellent Scripture, Deuteronomy. 30.12. That what they were to perform
and know, Was not in heaven, that we should say, Who shall go up for us to
heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it: Neither is it
beyond the sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the sea for us?
etc. But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart that
thou may do it. Further he urged, that if thus much were certainly know by
her, he showed her, it must be by a Spirit of revelation; demanding of her,
what spirit had revealed thus much unto her? If the spirit of the Devil (as it
could be no other) then he was a liar and the father of lies, as Christ Ioh.
8.44. speaks, he speaking of his own and not from God, therefore not to
believed. And as the for the Spirit of God (he showed) who only searches knows
and reveals unto us the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. none but he knowing
the things of God, not any creature, This holy Spirit (he showed her) had no
such office assigned him of Christ in the word to be a spirit of discouragement
to revealed reprobation, being the Comforter appointed to lead the Saints in
all Truth, to reveal and tell things to come and teach us all things, Ioh.
14.26. of things to come; this being that which was only proper unto Jehovah
himself, by his spirit to show and reveal; advising her to beware in this
kind, not to increase the wrath of God against her, seeing God, Isa. 44.7. and
46.10. differencing himself from Idols, and all their discoveries, is to know
things that are come and a coming, declaring the end from the beginning, and
from ancient times the things that were not yet done: From all which issued
this deduction, that she was infinitely abused in this strange conception, and
that the Devil or she from him were not certain of any things to come
(unless revealed by the Spirit of God) she having from thence no such
revelation; that therefore she was by Satan utterly cozened and abused in the
matter of Gods Decree, and so was bound to use the means, trust and wait upon
God therein; she being his creature, to let him do what he pleased with her,
either in life or death.

This strong fiery dart thus repulsed quenched, she became also convinced in
this point, that only God (not the Devil) could reveal his own Counsels and
Decrees; and therefore, that perhaps she might be deceived in this her strong
confidence in that kind: But still retaining the third, That her indisposition
unto all manner of goodness, Satan holds hard having once got ground.
pronenesse unto all manner of evil, her natural temper and composition of
mind, not able to use any means, or take any pains for heaven, too evidently
demonstrated that she had no part or portion there, and therefore that she had
better leave off all then labor in vain: Austin speaks) that he who made us
without us, The use of means is strongly pressed upon her, to be saved.
will not save us without us: and therefore that all our life time we must be
humble suitors, laborers after, endeavourers and strivers after that salvation
which he has appointed for us, using all those means constantly, and not to
lie still in a ditch without endeavoring to rise, and to cry Lord help us;
such a one he told her did worthily perish. It was further now also pressed
unto her, that God now after that miracle of all miracles, in the sending his
Son to assume our flesh and save us, now ordinarily wrought not the same
miraculously, but by ordinary concurring means and endeavors revealed in the
word; that as those who in the Wilderness were stung by the fiery Serpents,
were not healed unless they looked up unto the Brazen Serpent; no more any now
could obtain salvation unless they believed in christ, its antitype: put the
case (which he denied) that she must needs perish; yet much better it were to
perish in a way of obedience and duty full of hope all the way, and usually
successful, whereunto were annexed many promises wherein the truth of god who
cannot lie, but is faithful in all his promises is engaged, then in a wilful
way of disobedience. Ioh. 5. lay at the poole of Bethesda, ere he had help:
And therefore seeing her case was now just like those four Leapers who sat at
the Gate of Samaria, 2 Kin. 4. pressed home.
Who being like to perish in that great famine, resolved, if, and since they
must needs perish, if they sat still there; but if they adventured into the
Camp of the Aramites, they might peradventure be saved, (at the worst but die)
at their approach thither, finding the Amarites fled, they had choice of the
spoil. So if she used not the means, but despised them, she must of
necessity perish; but if used, she might no question be saved. And so to this
effect were urged those places, Micah. 2.7. O thou that art called by the name
of the house of Jacob, is the Spirit of the Lord straigthned? and those his
doings? do not my words do good to them that walk uprightly? and this, Seek
ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment: seek
Righteousness and seek meekness; It may be ye shall be hid in the day of
the Lords anger, Zeph. 2.3. And so that of Amos 4.12. Therefore this will I do
unto thee, O Israel, and because I will do these things unto thee, prepare thy
self to meet thy God O Israel: even that God who is said, Amos 5.8. to turn
the shadow of death into the morning; all which put her on strongly unto the
matter of endeavor, seeing as it is, Micah. 4.12. None know the thoughts of the
Lord, neither understand they his counsel: so that their being a possibility
for ought she could know to use the means as she was able; there was an
absolute necessity for her to submit her self unto the means.

These and the like things thus deliverd, did much amaze her spirit to have
been thus far deluded and mistaken in her own Case, and wherein she was so
settled, resolute and confident; unto all which she at length made this Reply,
Her convinced answer.
That now she was convinced and did certainly believe, that none but God knew
things that were to come; that she had erred in judgment in so thinking of
her self: That the desperate Case and estate she was in had caused her to
make such conclusions against her self: That now she believed the Devil had
no knowledge of Gods Decrees, concerning the everlasting estate of the
creature, no more then pleased God to reveal unto him: That she was contented
to do what she could in using of the means, if she might be assured to
reap any benefit thereby: But that the accidental indisposition both of her
body and mind were such, as she in this Case could do nothing to help her
self, no more then a stark dead creature could; and therefore, that God must
do all; in which Case, if he were so pleased to give unto her strength and
grace to work, then she would, otherwise she could do nothing: a sore
temptation, which even until her last she could hardly shake off.

Ioh. 5. That the time then was, and was a coming, when the dead should hear
the voice of the Son of God, and those who heard his voice should live:
Wherefore, seeing that their was such a mervellous efficacy in hearing of the
Word and use of means, (Wherein the power of the Spirit, did cooperate to
make the same effectual) There was an absolute necessity to use the means for
the attaining of salvation, or else one were thus guilty of their own
damnation in wilful rejecting and refusing of the means: Unto all which, her
answer was, Her further answers.
That she had no power so to do, but when that God would enable her, then
she would: Yet he prayed her, to read the alleging prayed him to urge her no
more in this kind, until God were pleased to work somewhat in her, with
abilities so to do, which (if he had a purpose to save her) he would surely
do.

She is brought off and from the third grand temptation.
But for his pains and for his conviction of her judgment, rectifying of her
from those forementioned errors she gave him thanks, promising no more to
torment her self with cogitations of them; for she was satisfied in the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, in the matter of the Decree; and in Satan or her
ignorance of any things to come, his knowledge to be none at all: But that for
the present, here she must rest, no further she could possibly go, wishing
him to share himself from being any more vexed with her untowardnesse

He much abashed at her present distemper, and resolute show of stoutnesse and
stiffenesse of Spirit; yet was not discouraged, seeing he had got so much
ground of Satan, as to beat her from her former strong holds, hoping in time
also to perform the rest, which seemed a tough task to effect: because the
indisposition and melancholy temper of her body was such as hindered much the
works, she therewith being averse unto Physic. Therefore, Discretion not to
press too much at once.
he resolved for that time, to depart home and press no more upon her at that
time, but give her time to ruminate and think upon those things delivered,
hoping to find her in a better tune at his return, and so accordingly giving
charge to watch her diligently, in a mild and loving way, after he had given
her many and good Exhortations to use the means and to have a good conceit of
God, he departed, because at this time he would not tire or overload her, or
more new toil out himself.

Satan is not idle, a new storm arises.
A little after his departure she began then to be somewhat in the old posture
of frowardness and distemper, uttering many times desperate speeches and
hopeless, still refusing all means; saying, that all were but in vain: And
was so far gone this way, That the great snow, and all the disastrous
direful events happening abroad anywhere, she said were all long of her, and
for her sake, she guilty of them, and that things would never be better so
long as she were alive: For then indeed Santan taking advantage of her
melancholy temper, wrought her much woe thereby, making her thus over-charge
and accuse her self, and endeavoring to have brought her back again unto her
former errors: So that now much ado there was with her, to stay, support, or
allay that accidental fierceness, which now those new distractions brought
upon her; which bred much grief unto her Husband, Parents and Friends, but was
not so to be wondered at, that Satan should cause unto her or them so much
disquietnesse by his incessant new tentations, steering his time in Mr Dods
absence, to regaine his dispossessed hold, or drive her unto final desperation.

In, or near this interim she was visited by diverse worthy Ministers about
the Town, amongst whom was that famous worthy man, Dr usher, since Primate of
Ireland, a magzine of all knowledge and learning, a powerful plain Preacher,
none like him in setting forth Christ in his high perfections and surmounting
excellencies, and in pointing the right straight next way unto him; and withal
as a very wise stout man, so the mildest humblest and meekest man alive, of his
infinite reading, knowledge, and parts: This worthy man many times did visit
her, would entreat, persuade, open Christ unto her, magnified the riches of
Gods mercy that way extended unto the sons of men; showing the freeness of
the gift of God this way, and that none were debarred, who did not wilfully
exclude themselves, with much meekness and mildness endeavoring to win her
spirit unto a real embracing of those tenders of grace made unto her in the
use of means; whom she willingly heard, delighted to hear speak; but withal
still kept within the road of her old bias, Her answer unto him.
her inability to perform holy duties or endeavor that way; that all these
were excellent things he spoke of touching Christ, for them unto whom they
belonged, but she had no share therein for for ought she knew she said: but
yet used she him always with much love, reverence and respect, in whatsoever
temper she was in, endeavoring still to give him all content and respect; and
he being wise and judicious, seeing the temper of her spirit, a great work to
be wrought, the issue whereof time must show, to be effected by degrees, did
not much press upon her spirit, or much urge her unto any thing, being
contented when he came to her to drop upon her many sweet distilling showers of
precious speeches; leaving them to work after he were gone.

And now also about this time, Her excounter with Mr Forbs.
came to visit her another worthy Minister, whom the Relater brought to see
her and judge of her Case; a wise, acute, learned, discreet man, of great
judgment and parts, one Mr John Forbs, Minister at Middleborrow for the
Merchants. This man having first a great while viewed her and said nothing, at
length broke silence and told her, that he had heard of her trouble and
discouragements, and therefore had come to tender his service unto her, to try
if any thing were within the compass of his power wherein he were able to
serve here: She courteously gave him thanks, but withal told him that her Case
and doom was already determined and past, and therefore there was no good to
be done by any one unto her: Yet seeing him so an acute sharp quick witty man,
she was pleased to have a strong bout of discourse with him alone, walking at
her house in Esher Gallery, where having toughly disputed with her a long time
and no good to be done, but thwarted with many strong uncouth objections and
Scriptures, sophistically applied by her, beyond the skill or strength of her
own spirit or wit as he judged, he confessed she was too hard now on a sudden
for him. So at one bout having the better of her in a discourse of Faith, he
broke off laughing, with a jest, called her Husband near by an said, Sir, now I
can stay no longer, but I will study how to answer you Wives Arguments, and
will now leave her in a good estate: (In faith, professing infidelity,) who
having taken his leave and departed: The Relator enquired what his judgment
was of her and her Case? Who made this answer, That it was the strangest that
ever he had seen, heard or read of A strange presaging Censure.
That the Lord had some strange work to do by her, but whether in mercy or
judgment he could not determine: no more he would come to visit her, nor
could be drawn unto it.

Upon this her late distemper and untowardnesse, the good old man Mr Dod being
again sent for and come, was notwithstanding entertained by her in show
lovingly, yet with a sad louring countenance by and by accompanied therewith,
as though he had not been welcome; which he in his usual cheerful manner not
regarding, using her with all meekness and love, which he found gained much
upon her spirit; after which having discoursed, and two or three days prayed
with her, and for her, she began to mend, but yet could not be persuaded to
read, pray by her self, or go to Chruch; wherefore he thought it expedient
to leave urging thereof, until her judgment were convinced therein: which was
the next work to be done, a tough task to effect, and which she strongly
opposed and withstood by one maine Argument (being beaten off from all her
other shifts) which was this out of Romans 14. ult.

Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin; but she did not believe, nor could do
any thing in faith, therefore all her actions must needs be sinful; so
aggravating her condemnation, she having sins therefore enough to condemn
her, would no more this way increase their number already too many.

ultimum vale, and last refuge; whereunto he after a little pause, thus
Replied, That he denied the assumption, that she could not do anything in
faith; for, the degrees of faith must be considered: There was a degree of
initiation of babes in Christ, and of strong men in Christ: That she must now
be considered of in the lower from of the school amongst the babes in Christ,
needing milk not strong meat (as the Apostle speaks) and therefore, though
things were not done in a strong, yet they might be done in a weak and true
faith, which might have a true and suitable reward: So that there being in the
World many and large promises made unto the reading and hearing of the Word
(some whereof we then repeated) now for brevity omitted: That duties done in
obedience unto the command of God, were then so done in faith, because
according to and with a respect unto the commandment; and must needs because
of the truth of God who cannot lie nor deny himself, be rewarded. And put the
case (which he then denied) that she must eternally perish, yet God has many
outward mercies and blessings in store, wherewith to reward such outward
obedience, many times far beyond our slight performances, freedom from many
temporal judgments, lessening, delay, and mitigation of them, in number,
weight, measure and continuance, remove-all of them and the like, in his best
time: So that all things considered, the best for her were to submit her self
unto the will of God, lie down Saint-like at his feet: use the means, trust,
wait upon him, and then to let the Lord as ( Ioab said to Abner) do that
which seems best in his eyes.

all her good actions done, should be upon record, and all her sins should be
forgiven and done away, so that this should not hinder her obedient walking.

Yet for all these things, will I be sought unto of the House of Israel) she
not being able to ask or make obedient endeavor to wrap her self up within
the promise, so as to have interest, or challenge the same, that therefore it
were in vain for her to use any means.

Yet that God being a free agent to give and work at his good pleasure, had not
so tied himself unto any method so in his working, but that at his pleasure
he might despence therewith: And that therefore for her inability and
weakness, God could at his good time strengthen her to his work, so in the
mean time, that she did her best endeavor according unto her ability, not
being this way wanting; for where much weakness was, yet God many times helped
and took in good part our weak performances, and that weakness with truth and
doing to our power went far in Gods acceptance: he loving us not for any
thing in us, but freely for what he works in us; as that Hos. 14.4. I will
heal their backslidings, I will love them freely, etc. And that Revel. 3.8.
Unto the Church of Philadelphia, Thou have a little strength and have kept my
word. So was showed unto her that of the Disciples, Ioh. 17.8. being weak
ignorant men in many things touching salvation, for whom Christ yet pleads with
his Father, They have kept my word, though formerly they were not able to bear
those things might otherwise have been revealed unto them, Ioh. 16.12.
Therefore from hence was much pressed upon her the use of means howsoever unto
her weak power and strength, which God would increase unto a greater growth,
being that he gives strength to the weak, and unto them that have no strength,
Isa. 40.29. Her Case was showed her to be no worse then that Ezekiel. 16.4.5. of
the people of Israel polluted in their own blood, cast forth in a miserable
condition, no eye pitying of them, any way to help them; whom yet God in his
mercy pitied in that woeful condition, saying unto them, That even then they
should live, they should live, when they were thus in their blood, Ezekiel. 16.6.
Therefore to hope well in the mercies of the Almighty, not measuring the same
by the scantling of her shallow conceits of God, in whose sight all the sins
of the world are nothing, in comparison of the infinite price paid of that
blood of the everlasting Covenant, and infinite value and merit of the same,
which speaks better things then the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24. and whereby we
have access with boldness unto the Throne of Grace, by a new and living way
which he has consecrated for us through the ^ei^e, that is to say his flesh.

The strength of these things thus enforced, so overcame her thus delivered,
that herein she was also convinced, that she ought to use the means to her
power, trust and wait upon God for the issue, being contented of his good
pleasure whatsoever, and therefore resolved and promised, that now she would
go to Church, She is brought to go to Church.
use the means and try what Gods pleasure were in time to do with her;
conceiving now some small hope that possibly she might be saved in the use of
means: and so was persuaded to go to Church; at her first going, being
brought to hear Dr Gibson; who knowing of her coming, applied himself
covertly for her occasions, yet not so, but she suspected that he had been
prompted, and had spoken things of purpose for her case (which she murmured
at) but was passed over; for indeed the burden wherewith she had over-loaded
her self was so great, that we durst never add any thing thereunto, but fed
her with all encouragements, she being too apt to over-charge her self, and to
despair upon any addition of fuel unto that fire which already was kindled
in her: And so wheresoever she went to hear, notice was still given, so to
manage their business, that he might know they had at that time a hearer
thus qualified before them, whereby she received no discouragement in hearing
of the Word; but by the contrary matter of encouragement, her spirit being
still jealous that all things were prompted for her sake (hearing no more
terrible things) as indeed they were.

Yet in this interim, things being not yet well settled within her, not daring
to trust her alone, it was thought fit in the next place to fetch off her
endeavors from her own destruction, which by Gods mercy was thus effected: How
she was brought from attempting against her self.
One day being in a very good humor, merry and well pleased, Mr Dod prayed her
that she would resolve him truly of one Question, which he would demand of
her, which she faithfully promised to do. Then he demanded of her, That if now
she were condemned to be burnt, or hanged, drawn and tortured, to be first
rackt, scourged and many times whipped and tortured, Whether or no she would not
esteem it to be a high favor and promotion, to be reprived and respited for
ten or twenty years or thereabouts, to live longer? Which she affirmed she
would take in this case for a very high favor (not perceiving his scope and
drift in the Question;) Then said he, tell me (taking her lovingly by the hand
and smiling,) Why then did you all this while past make such haste to have
posted away unto Hell fire for ever, the torments and misery whereof are many
thousand times in violence beyond all the possible torments of this world,
seeing it is uncertain whether ever you shall go thither or not, but that God
in the use of means will soften your heart and save you? But seeing the time
(if ever) will be too soon whenever: therefore it were madness and extreme
folly in you, to fall into that course which might precipitate and cast you
there presently before the time; but to live forth natures course, trying what
end the Lord will make: She being by her own confession in some sort caught
now as David was by Nathan the Prophet, now perceiving the drift of this
surprise, took him by the hand, and prayed him, That in that kind no more
jealousy or suspicion might be had, for now she was so by him convinced, that
she was resolved to live so long as God would permit her, and that she now
was very sensible of his discourse of Hell, and what small reason she had to
make haste thither.

Having thus by Gods mercy brought her to submit her self unto the means,
She is convinced, that she ought and might receive the Sacrament.
and hearing of Word, wherein faith and salvation are usually conveyed and
wrought; there wanting yet one thing, to bring her unto the Sacrament (unto
which she was very averse:) The next thing this good man went about, was how to
compass this, and convince her judgment that she ought, might and must
participate herein, as well as in hearing of the Word: This was by her thought
a very strange thing to do, that such a one as she imagined her self to be,
should dare to Communicate. But hereof he assured her the truth, from the
equity and necessity of that command of God where all the Males in Israel were
commanded to appear three times a year before the Lord at Jerusalem to eat of
the Passover; in which case whosoever refused to come, or despised the same;
he was to be cut off from his people: Whence he inferred this conclusion,
that whatsoever our worthiness or unworthiness in that case were, yet the
command of God must be obeyed; all were bound to come and eat of the Passover:
And therefore that all within the Pales of the Church, ought to Communicate and
receive the Sacrament howsoever qualified: In which case unworthy receiving
should not damn them, if once in all their life time they should or did
receive worthily: Showing that in Hezekiahs time, many then had received the
Passover unworthily, for whom notwithstanding he prayed the good Lord to
forgive them, though they had not eaten according unto the preparation of the
sanctuary. Besides this he showed her, That the Sacrament was not a comforting,
strengthening, building up Ordinance only, but also a converting and healing
power being therein for help of the sick and diseased, a reviving quickening
Ordinance also; so as all ought to participate of the same.

Cor. 11.29. That unworthy Receivers did eat and drink their own damnation, and
therefore she durst not adventure any more to aggravate her condemnation and
punishments.

for the word Damnation must not there be taken in the terrible sense, the
Original not carrying it so, but thus, (such eat Iugdement) unto themselves,
viz. temporal punishments: which the ensuing verse 30. corrects the same thus,
For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep, etc. Which
shows the meaning only is, that such endure sometimes temporal punishments;
who yet may be saved and go to Heaven. So that still the general holds in
equity, as in and under the Law; that Gods Ordinance in the Sacrament is not to
be neglected of us for our unsufficiency and unfitness for the same, no more
then under the Law during the Passover; because, it may be a means to fit,
Let the scrupulous note this well.
heal, cure, strengthen, revive, quicken and enable us to be worthy Receivers:
For we come not to bring virtue unto the Sacrament, but to receive virtue,
life, strength and quickening from thence: And that howsoever in this case we be
qualified, it were best to be obedient and use the means, all which with much
more the Relator remembers not, was set on with more excellent illustrations,
exhortations and pithy remonstrances: which discourse being finished she became
in this also convinced in judgment, that she promised him thus far to
submit herself yet further unto the means, that she would now also go unto
the Sacrament: Only in this Case she begged exemption not to be urged, because
she could not neither was able by her self to perform any private duties of
prayer, or reading of the Word constantly: whereunto, because they would not
over drive her, put her beyond her strength, or molest her spirit, they spared
to urge her, contented with what they could with gentleness and entreaty
persuade her unto.

A very strange experience and wonderful.
Yet it is most strange to hear, how the Lord dealt with her in one thing,
wherein she delighted, and was hardly broken off, viz. She had a custom in
tumbling over of the Bible, to put her finger suddenly upon some one verse as
it hit; saying, now whatsoever my finger is upon, is just my Case, whatsoever
it be, and my doom: But so the Lord directed all her fingers so put, that
looking upon the verse, still it was found encouraging and comfortable, not
discouraging: whereupon being much prayed and entreated, seeing hitherto she
had found all places to speak for her, that she would desist, and not any more
thus tempt God; who prayed that she might do but once more so (it being in the
presence of many) promising faithfully that after that one time, she would
never do so any more, to attempt any such trial: Whereupon at length all
adventured to suffer her once more to see what Gods providence would prove in
so strange a Case. But withal if some cross place came, they prayed her not
to be discouraged; whereupon she suddenly opened the Book, about the middle
thereof, in the Prophecy of Isaiah, and without looking or reading a word, or
knowing what she did, she put her finger upon that excellent verse. Isa. 40.27.
Why say thou O Jacob, and speak O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord?
have thou not known, have thou not heard that the everlasting God the Creator
of the ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary; there is no searching
of his understanding: he gives power to the faint, and to them that have no
might he increases strength; even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the
young men shall utterly fall; But they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew
their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, and they shall walk
and not faint: Which place being considered of and read, so crossing her hopes
and expectation, made her being much abashed to blush. For therein she was
reproved for her cross conceits of God touching her, as neglected of the
Almighty; and for all her weakness and imperfections was showed, that God
could help all, who with a word made heaven and earth, enabling her to do all
duties at his good pleasure; being therewith encouraged to wait and depend upon
God in the use of means by such an excellent promise: And so was therewith
showed how good God was unto her, every way showing love, notwithstanding her
untowardnesse, and tempting of him by such signs: At which, not knowing what
to say, she flung off poorly, saying, Jacob and Israel; It was nothing unto
her and her Case: Whatsoever was written before hand, was written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope; and so was thereby vanquished in judgment, that she promised now to be
satisfied, and never any more to make any such trial, but to offer her self
unto the use of means, and to wait the Lords leisure what he pleased to do
with her: Yet still alleging the impotency in her, that she was able to do
nothing herein toward this great work, but that God must do all, when being
enabled, she would do that whereunto she should be strengthened.

She is persuaded to join in singing of some sort of Psalms.
Yet wanted there one thing more, to gether to join in singing of Psalms, which
with much ado she was brought unto, alleging that her Case admitted of no
such melody, neither had she cause to sing, but to mourn all her life time:
Yet being told that it was a duty to sing praises unto God, for all his
mervellous mercies, power and goodness, as well as to join in hearing of the
Word; and that thanksgiving being the everlasting work of Heaven in continual
praising of God, was a work could not be too soon begun upon earth; and that
the Psalms being of diverse compositions and postures; of thanksgiving,
petition, gratulation, complaint, and deprecation, she might join in some,
many of which might fit her Case; she was contented to join in Psalms of
complaint, petition, mourning and deprecation, but in no other of any
acknowledgement of any mercy received: For said she, If I be only reserved as
a stalled Ox unto the slaughter, what cause have I to give thanks; and if I be
not to go to Heaven, what have I to do with the work of Heaven before the
time, or having some work wrought in me, whereby I may be assured of my
interest therein?

Why she would have lived under a powerful Ministry.
About this time willingly she would have live under some powerful Ministry,
hoping, that thereby some such work might be wrought upon her, as might enable
her to perform duties; and for this cause secretly made the Relator go into
Essex to try whether or not that worthy powerful late thundering Preacher, Mr
Rogers of Dedham, would have entertained her at his house, who willingly
granted the same: But when the business was moved unto her Father and Mother,
neither they nor her Husband would consent unto the same, though Mr Dod, and Mr
Culvervell both affected to have gone with her, so too indulgent were they over
her; which refusal much unhookt her spirit, and had almost put her in her
former Case again, so much did it afflict her; but not remedy, An ex^erience
of her sp^^^^, (...) her.
at length she conformed her self unto necessity.

I should much transgress, and wrong this discourse of Gods mercies into this
good creature, if I should omit any passage of Satan's subtelties and attempts
against her, how far they prevailed; for so, the Power and goodness of God
unto her in saving her at length, will so much the more evidently appear to
his glory: Therefore this ensuing passage I relate, as the furthest extent of
Satan's malice: One day as she was walking in her garden at Waltham upon Thames
with the Relator and another friend (for Esher that place where her trouble
first began, she never after could endure) suddenly she stopped and fixed her
eyes fast upon the ground, staring upon it with strange wild looks, for half
a quater of an hour, from which we could hardly divert her, but at last did,
though she seemed much troubled to be interrupted; and then (as her custom
was when the waters of her spirits and thoughts were become muddy) she began to
seem to cast off all means again; saying, That her heart was so heard, as it
could never be softened; this was by those with her then much opposed and
denied as fast as she affirmed the same, enforcing that God who with a Word
made Heaven and Earth could soften it; whereunto she in anger replied, (why
then God cannot soften my heart) at hearing of this blasphemous speech, spoken
in the height of temptation, the Relator without speaking one word unto her
suddenly left her; for such speeches were not to be born with, countenanced, or
disputed with, but to be cast off, with detestation and abomination, for
(contra principiis non est disputandum) they say: A little while after, she
being then ready to ride abroad and go to her house at Esher to take the air,
going to take horse, she demanded of the Relator, whether he would not ride
abroad with her, whereunto he replied, No, he durst not go in her company,
who did so lately blaspheme, for fear the ground would open and swallow them
up; but that seeing under the Law the blaspemer was to die the death; that he
would go to the Archbishop and complain of her, bear witness against her,
and provide faggots to burn her; wherewith we both parted in seeming
disconrent. She being gone, the Relator ere his way-going, went to her
waiting woman, and left his remembrance unto her, which when her woman, at her
return told her; she would not believe that he had so done, but asked her
Maid, what farewell did thou think he gave me, That he would go complain
of me, and provide faggots to burn me: To which her Maid answered, Then
Mistrisse, you have spoken some strange untoward things; I think I did so, said
she: In this interim the Relator sent and wrote very kindly to her in his
absence, and after a Months time returned again unto her; when, Confession.
she prayed him to stay no more so long away, gave him thanks for his harsh
usage of her; saying, she had deserved worse, and would never so do any more;
Telling also that then when formerly she had stood staring on the ground, she
was then assaulted with fierce and strong temptations; all the while a
brick-making for the Devil; and prayed him when he saw her do so any more, to
put her out of that posture, and not to spare her, how angry soever she should
for the time be.

Now as she was in a seeming good tune and posture of endeavor to use the
means, A new storm.
in tumbling over the Bible, she encountered with that terrible place, Heb. 6.
enferred upon the sin against the Holy Ghost, That the ground which was often
watered, and brings forth nothing but briers and thorns, was near unto cursing
and burning, etc.

any such powerful Ministry, as to have been often thus watered.



the Holy Ghost, against their enlightening; which by her own confession, was a
pitch above her, that hitherto she never had attained unto; therefore she
needed not to make any such rigid application, or construction of the place
against her self; wherewith, and the like mild speeches unto her to this
effect, she was at length pacified as before.

The journey past recounted.
Good Reader be not weary, I will now suddenly make way unto a conclusion, for
much of our work, and the greatest part is done and hardest to compass; Lo
now, we have brought this good To ask the way (in some sort like one of
Jeremies Converts) to Zion with her face thitherwards. She is brought out of
the house of bondage, from he brick-making slavery, Pharaoh pursues as it were
still after her, but has not overtaken her, she is driven to fly and wander
up and down the wilderness, now backwards now forwards, as the Church in the
wilderness was, ere she can arrive at her heavenly Canaan; and I hope we
shall ere long see her Jordan stand up, and give her a fair passage in
thither, though she has been well buffeted by the way.

the Holy Ghost (as Satan persuaded her) being in this settled.

Decree of God, not to meddle therewith, and that no Creature, Devil, Man or
Angel, save God himself had any knowledge thereof.

that she ought and must set her self in what possibly she could, to use the
means, wait therein, and to trust God with the issue of all.

Fourthly, She has been persuaded to live as long as possibly she could, not
to be a means of her own destruction.

of the lawfulness and necessity of her communicating, notwithstanding all her
seeming averseness, and indisposition thereunto.

in tempting God by putting her finger suddenly upon places of Scripture, to
try her stare, all which fell out contrary unto her expectation, good still.

on what conditions she was brought to join in singing of Psalms: all which
being past, one would think, that now there had not been much ado, but to have
had a quick end of her troubles, and sufferings.

But the Lord wonderful in working, and excellent infinitely in counsel and
wisdom, had otherwise so appointed the same, that she should yet a few years
longer be storm beaten and sick, and wander as it were in a wilderness, ere
she arrived at her heavenly Canaan: And therefore out of her habitual
impotencie seeing she was so stiff and slow to work out her own salvation or
take pains for it, She had at length her desire, though he made it cost her
dear ere he at length revealed himself unto her: And therefore heareat she
stuck still even to the last, expecting what extraodinary work God would work
in her, to enable her to take pains for her salvation: A strange temptation,
which all her life time could hardly ever be quite removed: Until God in a
strange and unusual manner, for matter of feeling revealed himself unto her
in such a measure, as mortality was incapable of, to the over-comming of her
spirits (who lived not long after) to be in its place related.

About this time that famous worthy man of God, Mr Robert Bruce some time
Minister of Edenborrow, then in prison amongst the wild Irish, for not
preaching or assenting unto the truth of the Earl of Gowries Treason, hearing
by the Relator the trouble and true state of this Gentlewomans Case, with the
progress thereof, and how she had been brought to reveal the Devils
counsel, wrote a letter unto the Relator touching his censure of her Case, and
hopeful issue thereof: who being for afflicted consciences one of ten thousand
(he himself having been for twenty years in terrors of conscience, ere he
was forced to settle unto the Ministry) gave a judicious prophetical censure
of the event of her case, as in some sort it fell out (too long here to insert)
but in conclusion with this upshot: That now she had bewrayed so freely the
Devils counsel, he knew that all would shortly be well are long, and that
her trouble would have to admiration a strange event; and that for her final
estate, he thanked God, he made no more doubt thereof then of his own, which he
assured himself of, because God had given him so large a heart to continue
instant for her in prayer with a great deal of comfort; concluding his letter
with a patheticall speech turned in behalf of the Gentlewoman toward Satan,
worthy to be written in letters of gold, which being so rare and unusual in
the Press speeches of this nature, I have therefore adventured here to ensert.

A Speech to Satan.
O Enemy Satan, although thy enmity for the present be troublesome unto this
patient, yet I thank my God through Jesus Christ, that thou art an enemy unto
her; and that he has put her in his Camp to fight against thee. When I
consider how in Paradise the Lord proclaimed irreconciliable enmity betwixt
thee and the blessed seed, I account her happy in that thou art her enemy, and
that strength is given her to fight against thee, for hereby I perceive that
she is none of thine, but stands on that side whereof Christ is the Captain,
and all the Saints are Soldiers; where the victory undoubtedly must be both
sure and certain on her side. O deceitful Serpent! If we find such terrors
and ensigns of thy fury for these smaller sins of frailty which we foolishly
by thy enticement commit; what should we have found if we had followed thee,
in the rest of thy deadly assiduall and unmeasurable fiery injected
temptations? from the which the Lords preventing and restraining mercy has
kept us. I have often by experience heard that thou art a faithless traitor;
because thou temptest a man to sin, and for the selfsame sin which by thy
instigation we commit, thou art the first accuser, and the last tormenter. The
Lord increase our faith, and confirm his good purpose in our hearts, that we
never hearken any more to thy lying words, nor suffer our souls to be
circumvented by thee and thy deceitful snares. And as for the work of her
salvation, since it is a work which our God will work in spite of thee;
wherefore should she or we any more regard thy lying testimony? Thou did
most maliciously put the question unto our Savior, whether or no he were the
Son of God? And then what marvel is it that thou dare say unto his children
that they are none of his? Is there any such undoubted truth that thou dare
not deny? or any falsehood which thou dare not make good and justify? Why
therefore should we enter in disputing with thee? for, her salvation consists
not either in thy questioning, or in her disputing against it; but upon the
Lords unchangeable Decree of Election. If thou should speak for her, and
plead her cause, she were so much the worse, and nothing the better; and now
that thou pleadst against her, she is nothing the worse. I love no testimony
which proceeds from thee. When thou confessedst that Jesus was the Son of God,
he rebuked thee, and would none of thy testimony; and when thou cryedst out
that Paul and Sylas were the servants of the most High God, although thou
spakest the truth, yet they would not accept of thy testimony. So although
thou would affirm that she were the child of God, were she any thing the
better? no, but so much the worse; thou can vent no truth but with an intent
to deceive: Therefore keep thy testimomie to thy self, speak what thou will,
thou art ever like thy self, a liar; cursed art thou, and cursed shall thou
be, with all thy Confederates, and cursed are they that are in friendship with
thee: So in conclusion, thy pursuit of her, and her safety hitherto from thy
power, shows me that she is none of thine.

The Lord power in his comfort and grace in her weak heart, that she may find
and feel the sweetness of the things we write of, and from her feeling to
give God the praise of his glory, and of her victory, which I am sure to be
most certain in Gods good time, and that her salvation is as sure as mine own,
I praise God.

By this time three whole years having past, since Mr Dod began with her,
having endured so many hot skirmishes with Satan, made so many long journeys,
being toyld out in body and spirit, and desirous now to rest awhile, having
facilitated his tough task, and fitted it for some other to finish and build
her up further, he having in all things convicted her judgment, that God who
does all things well, and makes all things Romans 8.28. work together for good
unto his children; who when Moses was old, appointed the young man Joshua in
his place; and who when Manna failed, brought the people into Canaan flowing
with milk and honey, did now also out of his good Providence appoint a fit man
to succeed as a helper in Mr Dods place, meet for that posture of strength she
was now in, In a strange objecting, disputing way, followed by Satan's
temptations, and prompted with strong objections against her self: So that now
her great want was of an able man to be continually with her, to dispute
constantly with all her temptations and objections, able to answer and crush
all.

This and such a Helper did God in his infinite mercy in the next place provide
for her. Another fit help succeeds to M^ster Dad.
For it pleased God in his wise providence, so to order the matter, that her
Husbands Cure at Esher being a Donative, and not a Presentative endownment was
void and to be disposed of: In which interim, notice was given unto him of
one Mr Hooker then at Cambridge, now in New England: A great Scholar, an acute
Disputant, a strong learned, a wise modest man, every way rarely qualified; who
being a Non-conformitan in judgment, not willing to trouble himself with
Presentative Livings, was contented and persuaded by Mr Dod to accept of that
poor Living of 40 l. per annum, Mr Drake her Husband being a worthy welbeloved
Gentleman, and able to procure his liberty, and retain him still in the same:
This worthy man accepted of the Place, having withal, his diet and lodging at
Esher Mr Drakes house; and so by this means, as to free Mr Dod from his toil
and trouble, so to be at all assayes ready to manage and work her spirit,
encounter all her objections, epsy all Satan's windings and turnings, and catch
her at all nonplus advantages, being acute, quick, nimble-witted, well skild
in knowing and opening of the Scriptures; withal a good Logitian, a strong
Disputant, as he could well do. And so the good old man as occasion served,
sending and writing unto her, after diverse sad and serious discourses with her,
wherein she covenanted to observe all promises past, retaining her former
resolutions in those things wherein in judgment she was convinced, he was for
that time lovingly dismissed, and rewarded largely by her Parents.

This man Mr Hooker being a good acute, smart Preacher when he listed, besides
that information Mr Dod had given him, was so wise, first to try her spirit,
to find her disposition, using her with much mildness and love, ere he would
adventure to meddle with her spirit, choosing rather that way made from her
might usher the way unto his discourse, then that at first he should enforce
any thing upon her: Which was not long in suspense; for now having a fit person
to rough hew her (as it were) whom she could neither weary out nor overcome
in Argument, but was able to discern and catch Satan in all his Sophismes,
there every way fell out strong disputes betwixt them: But all within the
compass of those former things wherein Mr Dod before had convinced her: Satan
delighting still to raze new uprores in her, and (as his custom is) not to
suffer us to be at peace though we be out of danger: Such now were his
practices anew, to wind up his old bottomes, and to renew disputes, even in
those things she was convinced of. For Mr Hooker being newly come from the
University had a new answering method (though the same things) wherewith she
was mervellously delighted, and being very covetous of knowledge, was pleased
with new disputes and objections to fasten further upon her self those
forementioned things; still further and further sifting into the same old
Truths whereof she was well persuaded (and as is said) convinced.

Yet could not he so evenly hold the balance in mannaging of her spirit, but
that now and then she would fly out, By degrees she is sometimes off hooks
still.
in many distempers, wishing to leave off all, for she now saw that there was
no remedy, the means did not work nor prove effectual unto her: To what
purpose should she any more labor in vain? But especially toward the
Sacrament, then usuaally she would be off hooks, either not coming, or
unwillingly, if she did: Upon whom this place for her waiting and depending
upon God was strongly urged, Hab. 3. ult. That the vision of Gods deliverances,
was for an appointed time, therefore to wait; for though it tarried, yet it
should come and not tarry; and that also of Isai. 8. I will wait upon the Lord,
who has hid his face from the house of Jacob; and I will look for him:
affirming unto her that these and the like hard travels, were incident unto
Gods best beloved people, to have many, hard and long trialls, and yet at
length glorious deliverances, as was alleged from that place, Amos 3.2. You
only have I known of all the Nations of the earth; therefore I will punish you
for your iniquities: (which God may do forgiving the sin, though be take
vengeance of their inventions:) And that Heb. 12. what son is there whom the
Father chasteneth not? If therefore ye be without correction (whereof all are
partakers) then are ye bastards and not sons. Which with the like
insinuations from the word closely urged, brought down her spirit to mildness
and meekness: For though her indisposition and temptations, made her many
times contrary unto her natural disposition harsh and untoward, with the
habit she had accrewed in time to be cross, and try those soundly she
conversed with; yet this happy endowment she had, to be very rational
according unto her conception, and would be set down and satisfied with
pregnant places of Scripture being seasonably pressed and lovingly opened unto
her.

But the matter of repentance much troubled her, Quest. of repentance, discussed
that she could not repent; demanding, Whether it were possible for her to go
to Heaven without Repentance?

Hereunto was answered: First, Sol. I.
That God did not tie salvation unto any measure of repentance; but might at
his pleasure save, especially where there were no gross sins to dam up
mercies gates; whereof praised be God she was free.

Secondly, That God exacted no more of his creatures then he gave unto them: as
the Apostle to the the Corinths writes, If there be first a willing mind,
accepting of us, not according unto those things we have not, but according
unto those things we have: And therefore, that her weak desires and measure
whatsoever given, might be accepted of God. For, she could not deny, but her
wishes were that she might repent, and she was in some sort sorry for her
indisposition and hardness of heart, which being a burden and a kind of
grief unto her, was so a kind and sore of repentance: Therefore was she
exhorted to be patient, and not to limite the Holy One of Israel nor prescribe
the fountain and depth of all wisdom which were the best way to bring her
unto Heaven; but to submit her self unto the good pleasure of God; trust, hope
with the best, and use the means.

Thirdly, Further alleging unto her, That it was not the greatness, number
or continuance of our sins that could stop mercy from us; but final
impenitency and obduration.

Fourthly, Repentance being the gift of God, which he might at his pleasure
give and accept in good part whatsoever measure thereof he were pleased: It was
not to be doubted of, but that she might in time attain unto so much thereof
in the use of means, as he would accept of, and as might bring her unto
heaven. For God of all his Attributes is said only to delight in mercy, Micah
7. his nature being to forgive and forget iniquity, transgression, sin and
sins of custom.

Fifthly, That as sin was a perpetual act in us, so in God there was a
perpetual act in pardoning of sin, not transient, but in a perpetual
constant current; as Zach. 13.1. a fountain opened, ever running, to wash away
all sin and uncleanness; with many the like things, which now again won
her spirit to rest upon God; though now and then upon diverse occasions she used
to fly out a little: Yet being continually hammered and hewn with the tough
acute disputations of this good man, Mr Hooker, who was very assiduously
industrious in watching her disposition, and various inclinations of her
changes and tentations; by Gods mercy she grew still better, using to present
her self constantly to the use of means: having prayer, catechizing,
expounding and reading of the word, and singing of Psalms constantly in the
family, now with delight and willingness acted: being never weary to have the
word expounded; yea, and in private spending some time by herself alone daily;
as the indisposition of her distempered body, heart-burning and in a manner
perpetual headache, would permit her; but yet would not be known nor confess
unto any what in private she did being alone.

The good soul is yet tossed up and down.
Now have we her in the wilderness tossed up and down, like the Church in
their march unto Canaan, fraught with diverse storms, now backwards, now
forwards, with many turning and winding temptations, restless in her thoughts,
because (desire has no rest) having some glimmering glimpse of hope, but (as
she faid) had no grounds for the same, expecting when the Lord would be
pleased to work in her some great work for enabling. In which Case, now up, now
down, the better she grew in her mind, having still therewithal the greater
weakness and indisposition of body, she continued a long time, her old friend
Mr Dod now and then once in a quarter of a year coming to visit her, whom she
much rejoiced to see, praying not any more to stay so long away; for now she
rested assured her time on earth was but of small continuance. About which time
it fell out, that Mr Hooker also having acted his part with her, and done his
best, to comfort, uphold and rectify her spirit, so fitting her for mercy, as
nothing remained to be done but a full gaile of spiritual wind to blow upon
her, to bring forth her fruit, that by Gods Providence he was married unto her
waiting woman: After which both of them having lived some time after with her,
and he called to be Lecturer at Chemsford in Essex, Master Hooker leaves her.
they both left her, her Husband having provided another for the Cure, but not
like unto the other; who also came often to visit her, being much there. And
there lived also two miles from thence, a worthy good Minister, one Mr
Witherell of Waltham upon Thames, whom she went constantly to hear, and was
always very helpful unto her (but especially when Mr Hooker had thus left
her) whom every Thursday she heard, he being a painful, able, good merciful
man, did then much help her, both in public, and also in private helps of
conference and expounding of the Word, which now she much delighted in at all
occasions; especially she found a little comfort in opening of that chapter
Micah 7. one time when Mr Dod was with her three Months before her death,
though (as she said) she durst not acknowledge nor confess the same for fear
it had not been so.

But ah, should I now lance forth into the discourse of the loss of so good a
friend? The preparation unto her death.
but what say I of loss? No, she was not lost, she was now found with her
face strongly bent home Heavenwards: Having therefore thus far proceeded in
this said Trage-Comicall discourse, I must now proceed to the Catastrophe
thereof: If therefore good Reader, thou will have a little more patience to
hear the rest, thou shall quickly see the Scene change with a joyful Comicall
conclusion: For though all this while she has gone forth weeping carrying
precious seed, now thou shall see ber return with sheaves of everlasting joy;
though weeping has been many an evening, yet now thou shall see joy come in
an everlasting morning. Though Satan has much toyled, wearied out and vexed
her spirit, yet thou shall see how the God of peace shall shortly tread down
Satan under her feet: her reward infinitely surpassing all her momentany
sufferings; which now comes to be the fourth and last thing propounded, Her
death, and the preparation unto it.

Diverse years since Mr Dod left her, and some large time also after that Mr
Hooker was removed unto Chemsford, she remained more cheerful in mind,
though tormented with her heart-burning and in a manner perpetual megrum,
which made her to lie much of the day upon her bed, unfit for any other actions
of endeavor in the use of means she would or should otherwise be employed in.
About this time a strong distaste was given her from a near friend, A new
grief is added to the former.
(not necessary here to relate, nor to our purpose:) Which yet fastened so upon
her, that it grew more and more, and brought her into a posture of great
discontent, so as she became in her thoughts a woman in some sort of another
world; who being resolute in her way, unremoveable, having resolved and always
purposing, when she found her self near unto her last, to die at her Fathers
House, and lie with her kindred and friends at Ammersum, She suddenly told her
Husband, that she found her self very ill, and therefore that she was
purposed to go suddenly unto her Fathers House: He much wondering at the
suddenness of her resolution, told her, If her resolution were such, to go so
quickly, his business was such as he could not yet go with her, unless she
would stay until his business was dispatched; but if she were resolute to go,
that he would not stay her, she might when she would. So she being resolute,
the next day with two of her men she departed for her Fathers House, where
being arrived, they wondering that she came so without her Husband, she in
plain terms told them, That she always had resolved to die at Sharolois,
and therefore she not knowing how long her time should be, finding her
weakness great, had now come without her husband to die there, saying, that
her husband would shortly follow after.

They much wondering at this sudden news from her, and unexpected strange
speeches; yet at her coming smoothed her over, telling her that this was but
some unwarranted fear had surprised her, and that she would find herself
herein as in many other surmised things deceived. But she still maintained the
maine, that her time was at hand, and she very weak, though she carried it
fair; after which her Husband in a week or ten days arrived: But the posture
of her carriage for all this was the same, She being in a surpassing
extraordinary strange humor of talking of the best things perpetually night and
day without intermission, not having any jot of sleep almost night or day;
whereby her spirits were both much spent and tired out.

The Relator who still had a watchful eye upon all the passages of her
occurrences, Mr Dod is gone for to come unto her once more
knowing of her late discontent and cause thereof, and hearing that she was
removed to Sharolois, made no more ado, but with all haste went and brought Mr
Dod thither, fearing that this might prove his last journey unto her (as indeed
it proved,) when he came unto her two Sundays before her death, he by that
time found her much weakened in body, keeping her bed; but with such vehement
desires to discourse of, and hear of the best things, reading, expounding and
singing of Psalms, that all were struck with admiration: and would not stay
with her so long, as she would have had us; nor read unto her, because we
would gladly have had her to rest, which could not be done; for she continued
still speaking both night and day to some one or other who watched with her,
yet all of the best things; for her time being short, she imagined (as she
said) she could not too advantagiously improve the same.

The first of the two Sundays before her death, She instructs, and prepares
her children, to bear her death
she would not suffer her children to go to Church that day, but made them
stay with her, to instruct them, and speak her mind unto them, alleging that
she must take time whilst she had time; for, she knew not whether or not she
should live until the next Sunday: when she vented unto them in the best
manner she could at large, all she had to say unto them, expounding diverse
Scriptures unto them, formerly expounded unto her (which she had a large
strong memory to retain) this day finishing all she had to say unto them,
saving at last to give them her blessing.

Now the Monday after this, was all spent in continual conference with Mr Dod,
so much as he would confer with her, for fear of over-toyling her spirits,
she being in the other extremity more forward to entertain and speak of the
best things, A strange change.
then formerly she had been backwards; which showed some strange change at
hand: yet all this while could she, or would she never sleep, night or day,
but in a perpetual motion of speaking of variety of all sorts of things; but
by her good will, still of Divinity, and of the life to come, undervaluing all
this world, and eating sparingly.

On the Tuesday next in the morning she sent for Mr Dod, who prayed and talked
a while with her, with variety of excellent discourse of death, heaven and
eternal glory; when suddenly as prayer was done, about eight of the clock in
the morning we were strangely enterrupted by a strange and uncouth outcry
which proceeded from her, I am assured the like was never heard or read of
before: which uncouth language (in show a rapture of another world) a few words
whereof the Relator can show or express, only he hopes the Reader will pardon
him, if he miss in recounting things of another world, which Paul himself was
at a nonplus in after his rapture, 2 Cor. 12.4.7. and Peter also after his
descent from the Mount, Mark. 9.6. not knowing what he said: So difficult it is
to express things unutterable.

A strange Rapture of feeling.
Oh, oh, oh, what is this, what is this, what is this? I am undone, undone, undone,
I cannot endure it, endure it: O, o, o, let me be gone, let me be gone, o, I
must be gone, I cannot tarry, I cannot tarry; o what shall I do? what shall I
do? O Father, O Mother, O Husband, kiss me, kiss me, and let me be gone:
Come all, farewell all, let me take you by the hand and be gone: Lo, lo, the
Angels are come, they wait, they stay for me; O dear Mother! why hold you me?
I must be gone: O, he is come, he is come, he is come: Now you have it, you
have it, you have it, why hold you me? let me be gone, my work is done: O call,
call, call, where is my Crown? fetch me my Crown: Bring, bring, bring me my
white Robes, quickly, quickly, quickly, why run you not? The Angels stay, now
you have it, you have it, you have it. (Meaning that now we had the issue and
fruit of all our Prayers) O, it overcomes, overcomes, overcomes me; I am
undone, undone undone; what shall I do? what shall I do? what shall I do? O
you will not let me be gone.

With innumerable such swift expressions could not be remembered, she in that
short time of half a quarter of an hour speaking more then one can treatably
in an hour, with an incredible sweetness (no ordinary action of this life)
when withal she heaved and heaved up still all the time with fixed eyes
toward the house top, as though she had seen some Vision, and would have
flown away from them all, making a hole through the chamber Roof: During which
time (as we cannot blame them;) the posture of all the Spectators was (save
her Husband who went weeping and wringing his hands up and down the Chamber)
silence, wonder, and admiration; they in all their life time having never seen
or heard of the like: Which put Mr Dod, her Husband, and all of them to a
nonplus (as being beyond all experience:) But if the Reader will have
patience, this good Creature shall her self expound this rare Riddle, yea, and
comment upon it.

This fit of sudden, extreme, ravishing unsupportable joy, (beyond the
strength of mortality to retain or belong capable of) being over, and she
laid again; who formerly had striven to have got away from them all; they all
being in an amazed astonished silence; she her self began thus? Why are you
all silent? Her speech after her Rapture.
where is Mr Dod? Who being near unto her, sat down on the beds side by her,
unto whom she thus directed her speech, Sir, what did you think of me lately
in this strange posture I have been in? did not you imagine me to have been mad
all the time? Mr Dod Replied, No, but that it was very strange unto them all,
having never heard or seen the like. So (said she) surely it was, it was very
strange, But will you know how it surprised me? As this morning ere you came
to prayer, I being alone prayed to God that he would not absent himself for
ever: but that that once before my death, he would reveal Christ unto me,
give me some sense and feeling of his love: And open the brazen Gates of his
hard heart of mine, that the King of glory might enter in. After which as you
had prayed, this sudden out-crying fit of unsupportable joy and feeling
surprised me with such violence rushing in upon me, as I could not contain my
self, but make this sudden outcry amongst you all: But I must confess unto
you, I know not, neither do I remember what I said: But now I beseech you to
make this use hereof hereafter unto all in my Case.

Triumphant rare Speech and confession.
After me never despair of any, how desperately miserable so ever their Case
be (which at the worst cannot exceed mine) but use and apply the means unto
them, and they will prevail at length. I was like a piece of knotty timber,
who have endured so many the more knocks with strong wedges, so much ado there
was so work me; but now I thank God, who has heard my prayer and revealed
Christ unto me, and now I care not for all this world: The fountain of all my
misery has been, that I sought for that in the Law which I should have found
in the Gospel, and for that in my self which was only to be found in Christ. A
wrong way I confess, which has occasioned unto me so much sorrow; but now all
is well; O pray, pray, pray, O give thanks; for, now you have it, you have it,
you have it.

This so solid and strange speech, so heavenly, rational, gave a great deal
of contentment unto all present; Mr Dod according unto her desire, framing
himself unto a prayer altogether of thanksgiving, admiring Gods infinite work
in her, and for her, beseeching a happy close of this great work begun: For
matter of petition now she cared not for, lying like a Conqueror, with an
extraordinary cheerful aspect, full of rapt joy, as now she had been
possessor of all things, having no need of any thing; now that Christ was hers,
all things being hers also; the remainder of the day being spent in over-joyed
speeches, with exhortations to Thanksgiving; still telling us, Now you have it,
ye have it, you have it: and taking our hands in hers, and heaving them up and
down many times together very thankful unto us all, as she wished us to be
thankful unto God for her.

This same Tuesday, She bath the like Rapture again.
again about four a clock in the afternoon, the Chamber being full of her
friends, joyful to see her so fraught with joy, after so many sorrowful
days: Suddenly she fell out again, in a strange manner, in such an other
rapt fit of joy, beyond all expression, uttering just about the same things as
formerly, in the same manner as in the morning, enduring about the same time;
and so ceased and was quiet again as formerly: She thereupon called Mr Dod,
wondering at the strangeness of the thing, told him, That her joy and sense
thereof, was so over-comming and strong, as she could not for her life
contain her self, from bursting forth thus again; for as she said her
frail flesh was overcome therewith; and so she entreating him again to give
thanks, he did so, spending the remainder of that day in heavenly discourse of
another world; hoping that she should that night have slept soundly, having
now watched and been without sleep, above a week together: But it seems, as as
the lame man, Act. 3.8. having received his feet, for joy did nothing for
awhile but skip, frisk, and leap; so she now having been as it were in another
world, revived with uncouth new joys, could not take any rest or sleep, but
rejoice always and talk of the same. And so that night having diverse friends
to watch and sit by her, she spent the same in good discourse and singing of
Psalms.

All the time she had been ill, she could not of all the Psalms endure to
join in singing of the thirty Psalm, but that night of her self she called for
it, with this expression, Cousin now turn to the thirty Psalm (by the Relator
always urged upon her to belong unto her) but I durst never appropriate or
apply the same unto my self, until now, and so that Tuesday night sung the
same very cheerfully, as was said, she passing this night over also without
any inclination to rest or sleep.

On the Wednesday morning, Her dressing for the grave.
her indulgent Mother, that worthy good soul Mr Tottle, did rise betimes and
came to visit her, when finding her in a strange unusual Attire, for that
morning (now apprehending death* at hand) she had caused her self to be
dressed from top to toe all in white, concealing her conceit therein until her
Mother came; who seeing her thus strangely dressed, spoke lovingly unto her in
her accustomed phrase: How now Daughter, what is the matter with thee? me thinks
thou look like a Bride, So I am Mother (said she) a Bride now trimmed for
Christ the Bridegroom, and now Mother I have my last suit to make unto you
(for I am a woman of another world) when I am dead, I pray you, dress me just
thus as you see me now, and so let me be laid in my grave; for, for this cause,
I caused my self to be dressed thus this morning, that you might see how I
would be laid in the grave: Whereunto her Mother bursting forth into weeping,
she comforted her all she could, saying, Mother, me thinks you should rather
rejoice to see me so near home, after that I have so long a time been storm
beaten and sea-sick, not now to grudge that I am arrived so near the haven:
And so prayed her to suffer her willingly to depart home in peace: whereupon her
Mother for that time (being a matchless tender Mother) parted with many tears.

Soon after this came Mr Dod and Dr Pres^on to her, unto whom she with a great
deal of joy told the same discourse as formerly she had done unto her Mother,
That thus as she was then dressed, she desired to be laid in the grave: After
their departure having prayed with her and given thanks (for no other part of
prayer she now affected, as being heir of all things, not having need of any
thing) she sent for diverse of the house severally, She schools the servants.
unto whom she gave seasonable and suitable exhotations, fitting unto their
places, thaking her leave of them all; wherein she was so punctual, that with
her good will she would have had every servant of the house to have come
severally unto her; but that her Mother fearing that which after came to pass,
some weakness to ensue so much watching, speaking and toyling incessantly of
her spirits, durst not expose her unto the hazard of so insupportable a toil.

Being now very much spent, this Wednesday after dinner, she caused to void
her Chamber of every body, and sent for her Father to speak with, school, and
take leave of him; whom she dealt with and schooled (having him all alone) for
above an hour together; She chooles and takes leave of her father.
whom when she had said her mind unto, and taken her leave of, she dismissed
him. At his descending from her, the Relator did what he could in a a fair
way to have fished from him, what she had said unto him: Of whom nothing could
be obtained, save in the general, That she had given him very good counsel,
both touching his wife and himself, and concerning the ordering of his estate
and family, and to keep a Preacher in his house; with many other, all good
things, as he said.

Presently after this she called to speak with the Relator, Her farewell,
speech to the Relator.
whom having made to sit down by her, she first gave him many solemn thanks
in a sull gaile of loving expressions for his care and pains taken with her;
and then she said she had a suit unto him: Who replied, that any suit of hers,
if in his power, was granted ere known; which yet served not the turn, but
she would have his hand to forgive her; which being done, she prayed him to
forgive her; who wondering at the strangeness of this needless suit, told
her, that he had rather cause to ask forgiveness of her, having much failed
both in duty and love unto her: A rare confession.
O no, said she, you must forgive me that you for so many years together
having showed me so much love, and been a means of my everlasting comfort
and happiness, that yet I have been so unkind unto you, for I have not loved
you by the hundred part, in that measure I ought to have done, according to
that love you have showed me: But will you know the cause? I could love no
body as I should so long as I was not assured of Gods love to me (for that
only sets our love a fire to run strongly the right way) I could until then
neither love you nor any body else, during so much distraction and diversion as
I should have done: And now that my love is thus kindled, this is my sorrow (my
time being short) that now I can no otherwise express my self then by this
poor acknowledgement, in a time I am so unfit and disabled to perform my
desires: But I well hope, that what I cannot do, that God who set you a work
for my good, and my other friends will perform, when I am gone: And so for
that time with abundance of love and thanks dismissed the Relator.

Thus having in some ample manner disposed of all the business she seemed to
have in this world: The remainder of this afternoon she lay in her former
joyful posture, rejoicing to speak of the best things unto every one near
unto her; yet without any rest or sleep, or inclination that way. When Mr Dod
and Dr Preston came to visit her, she still entreating to give thanks, no
other discourse she had, as wanting nothing: So continuing all this day,
until the evening late, that there was a great change, as in part shall be
showed; for least she should be lifted up through her former revelation,
joys and rapture, so short which endured not, surpassing her strength, she
had a weakening cooler to keep her down low.

For, lo, lo, She is surprised with a weakness.
the Scene now changes again, the curtain waves and tosses a little with an
uncouth wind, party colored, no firm impressions appeared: She who lately
was in a glorious triumph, flying away forcibly from us all, as it were with
Eagles wings mounting upwards, is now suddenly surprised with an extreme
fainting and weakness of spirits, being for ten days and nights over-wearied,
watched and toyled out, so as now she bewrayed some weakness in her
expressions, not being as formerly so lively and substantial; which continued
the Thursday and Friday after, never having any rest or sleep all the time;
which distemper, made them send post to London for two Physicians, hoping by
their advice to have made her rest: But all in vain, No physic could cure her
but heavenly physic: Therefore on the Saturday, Mr Dod, Dr Preston, and Mr
Hooker, A Fast kept for her.
kept a private fast for her; the issue whereof was, in that forenoone she fell
asleep, rested soundly some five or six hours together, and then waked in a
very middle gentle temper. Then she called unto her Cousin Herreis (a good
Gentlewoman, always exceeding careful of her) Sarah, tell me, did not I
lately in some speeches forget my self? Whereunto her Answer was, Truly Cousin
so you did, but we imputed the same to your many days and night-watching, and
over-wearying of your spirits, unable so long to hold out: So it was, said she,
My spirits were spent and gone, which caused that weakness.

Then she remembering all that had passed, Her death.
her strange Raptures, (but nothing which then she had said in them) retaining
her former grounds, comfort and cheerfulness (as in so much weakness could
be expressed) called for Mr Dod, Dr Preston, with the rest of her friends,
causing them to give thanks with her, and for her, venting her self unto them
thus, That her time was now at hand, prayed them not to leave her, and being
very weak, spoke then her mind unto her Father, Mother, and Husband, in a sort
taking leave of them, sent for her Children, and blessed them, now imagining to
have done all her work: And so from thence fell into a silent Rapture of
joyful singing of Hymns, and verses of Psalms, not greatly caring to speak
unto any body, save now and then unto Mr Dod when he moved an occasion: And so
she lay this Saturday night, and the next Sunday, only when Mr Dod came
desiring still to give thanks, all which time she grew weaker and weaker,
having by this time no audible but a hollow low voice, scarce to be understood.

The Monday after in the morning when she fell asleep being come, Mr Dod with
the rest coming unto her, she when she saw them all about her, rejoiced and
smiled, taking them all by the hand with a cheerful countenance, beckned unto
Master Dod to give thanks, and bent her self what she could with lifted up
hands to join, speaking softly unto her self in her Hymning way: And so
whilst they were at Prayer, suddenly her hands falling, and her lips going, she
sunck down in the bed and departed, leaving all her friends mourning about her.

Thus have we seen the strange Story, and scarce credible, the like never
heard of before I believe, of this good Gentlewoman, whom now we will suffer
to rest in peace, freed from all the storms and tempests wherein she left her
survivers, Her burial.
Who two days after was buried according to her desire at Ammersum, in that
Attire she before her death had dressed her self; Dr Preston Preaching her
funeral Sermon, with the infinite tears of all her friends and poor of the
Parish.

She was of an extraordinary sincere, plain, true heart; full and abounding
in love, mervellous secret in all her goodness, very charitable to the poor,
of an unblameable conversation and life; and the best Anti-hypocrite (Christ
excepted) that ever lived; for, she always wore her worst side outmost, and
wonderfully clock'd all the good things she ever did or said; with all her
skill endeavoring to extenuate all she this way did or said: Of her jewels and
other things her Husband lovingly gave her way to dispose of, she left
Legacies and remembrances unto all her friends who had been most helpful unto
her: and forty shillings a piece unto some few good poor women, whom she had
secretly, unknown unto any, procured to pray constantly for her.

And now that we have brought this good Creature into Heaven, god Reader give
me leave, out of all which has been said (for memories sake) to sum up
briefly her grand Case; least it should be mistaken.

A good Creature, in her natural estate, The sum of this grand Case.
qualified with the best of mere natures endowments; accidentally encountering
with some grand difficulties, which a little overcame her natural parts. By the
way, being surprised with admiration and wonder at the power of godliness in
some eminent Professors her Neighbors (the reflex whereof struck her with a
strong conviction, not to be yet the same, as to be saved she must needs be)
with her other concurring crosses, wrought so upon her, as she became very
melancholy, yet with an enforced mirth to cloak the same; which advantage Satan
espying (who still loves to work out his ends by that doleful temper) he
assaults her with fearful night-dreames, seconded with diverse wilde-fire
temptations to have driven her unto final despair, which he had well near
effected. Mean while God intending to make her an everlasting monument of his
mercy, intending a great work unto others by her trouble and deliverance; to
convert by the way her Husband and Parents with diverse others in both Families
(so stopping diverse gaps with one bush) and (as he always does, and has
done) to over-shoot Satan in his own Bow; provides and sends one of a thousand
to find her out, wrestle with all her temptations, foil Satan, and convince
her judgment; so drawing her unto a conformity of the means; though with much
opposition. But yet so, as an habitual indisposition she had acquired (spiced
with the dregs of remaining temptations) kept her off from endeavor, never
all this time having had any comfort or feeling, without pains taking for it,
in the interim she is well beaten; God at length yielding unto the importunity
of prayers for her, affords her such an immense measure of comfort and feeling
for a small time, as mortality was incapble to retain: After which (her
spirits thereby vanquished) out-wearied with watching and incessant speaking
for diverse days and nights together, for a small time she bewrayes some
weakness. But upon a private Fast kept for her two days before her death,
she revives again, maintains her grounds, former joys and feeling; from
thence until her death, remaining in a silent Rapture of joys; wherein she
departed: leaving her self, the ever memorable mirror of Gods wonderful
mercies, unto all the stiff, obdurate, hard-hearted for ever.

And now, good Reader, tell me, Is it fit or possible that we should part with
so grand, strange, rare, and matchless a CASE, without some brief use thereof
unto the Survivers? for which cause it has been written, and for ought we
know, all her sufferings were: O no, courage then, hold out a little, and I
will now dispatch briefly, endeavoring in the Catastrophe of this our
Tragi-Comedie, to recompense thy patience, with the fragrances of some sweet
smelling close of some Divine rarities.

Use. First, Then here we may learn, That not the great things of this world
makes one happy, but the favor of the great God: Nothing being able to content
the soul, but that which is able to fill it, which all this world cannot do:
Showing that there is nothing such in these earthly things (as we imagine) in
the evil day or times of trial. Witness this good Gentlewoman, the subject
of our discourse who might have swimmed in the fullness of all earthly
pleasures; all which were nothing unto her, she was dampt in the midst of all;
so as nothing could revive or joy her (like unto David) save the light of Gods
countenance to be lifted up upon her. And therefore, not to deceive our selves,
but to settle in our judgments, that wherein only true solid lasting
happiness consists, the favor of God, and follow that with all our might.

Secondly, Then see hence, That of all the Burdens in this world, sin is the
most insupportable, especially when therewith in any measure is joined a sense
of the wrath of God: For if God, as it is in Amos, complain, that he is
pressed down under the same, as a Cart under the sheaves, the sense thereof
also making David to roar for grief of heart, having also bred so much
terror, amazement and trouble unto this good Gentlewoman, for so many years
together, being free of gross sins; what may they think of themselves, who
go on sinning! without fear, living and going on in grosser sins without
repentance?

Thirdly, Here we may see, That in the best, where there is sin, there must
and will be smarting punishments, though it be forgiven as David's was: Yet we
may soundly be beaten for the same, he taking vengeance of our inventions, as
the Psalmist speaks: for this good Gentlewoman, though saved and forgiven, yet
was soundly beaten ere she departed hence. Therefore to be afraid to sin,
and to stand in awe of the anger of the great God; for though he may forgive,
yet if he open Hell unto us, keep us in perpetual fear as upon the rack, as
he did this good Gentlewoman, letting Satan loose to buffet her, oh what
comfort can we have in such a tormenting dying life? having our happiness hid
from our eyes?

Fourthly, Hence also we may learn, That the more beloved, usually the
soundlier beaten, sifted and tried, Amos 3. You only have I known, of all the
Nations of the Earth, therefore you shall not go unpunished for all your
iniquities; wherefore corrections being a sign of love, not of reprobation (as
the Devil persuades) that the Saints should not be discouraged though
storme-beaten in their journey homewards; they may go to Heaven for all this,
as this good Gentlewoman did.

Fifthly, And so here also we may gather what need we have of patience to have
its perfect work in us, to fit us for the greatest and most smarting
afflictions: there being yet some light in this dark cloud; the sorest and
most smarting crosses, ending usually in the greatest and most glorious
deliverances: Witness the nonesuch troubles of Jacob, Joseph, Job, David, the
Churches forty years Pilgrimage in the Wilderness, and of this good
Gentlewoman, all ending in peace and joy; because the promise is, that of
necessity, the patient abiding of the righteous must needs end in joy.

Sixthly, Then also we see here, that crosses and afflictions are only lesser
and greater, as it pleases the great God to set them on less or more: as it
pleases him to abstract the light of his countenance from us, turn loose Satan
upon us, enfatuate our judgments, giving us some taste and sense of his
encensed wrath: Oh! who then can dwell with such everlasting burnings? and if
smaler sins discovered thus set on and torment, yea, some thoughts only, as in
this good Gentlewoman; Oh! what may the greater do, if he should aggravate
them, discovering the wrath due unto them, without a suitable sight of mercy?
Therefore to break off our sins betimes, repent of them, and to sow for our
selves in righteousness, that we may have a sure reward, and be able at last
to stand with boldness before the Son of Man.

Seventhly, So seeing too eager desire of feeling cost this Gentlewoman so
dear though she had her desire, therefore not to dote too much upon it; being
restless until they have it, as many good souls do, who like Rachel
restless for children, cried out still, comfort, comfort, feeling feeling, or
else we die: But let them be contented of what measure thereof God of his
infinite wisdom thinks best for them: For, He who has created them for
eternity of glory, surely knows the best means and way to bring them thither:
Seeing, feeling at the best is uncertain, short and quickly vanishing; and too
much doted upon and eagerly persued, brings us only to a habit of
coffeehouse without it: whilst we cannot be contented unless every day
the Almighty feast us, forgetting that we walk by faith, and not by sight; and
that the life we now live in the flesh is by the Faith of the Son of God;
vision and sense, for to come.

Eighthly, Then behold from this rare experience here this lesson, Not to
prescribe or appoint God a way which way to bring us unto glory; He knew the
fittest and shortest way to have brought the children of Israel unto the Land
of Canaan, without passing through a red sea: But out of his infinite wisdom,
he made choice of the wilderness way unto them, That (as Moses shows) he
might prove them, try them and do them good at their latter end: And yet how
crooked soever his ways seem unto our corrupted senses, they be always
straight, how full soever of turnings and windings; as the Psalmists, That he
brought them out by a right way unto Canaan: Therefore to rest confident
herein, that this which God appoints is always best for us; whether he lead
us in a wilderness, in a a straight, crooked, smooth, tedious long afflicted
way, by the gates of Hell unto Heaven, or with a more gentle comfortable gale
of joy; let us be contented, so he bring us thither, as he did this good woman
here; if by any means we attain unto a joyful Resurrection of the Dead, it
is a very great purchase as Paul acknowledges.

Ninthly, For (which is the next) Sure it is, Seeing a glance of Heaven, a
little taste of heavenly joy is so prevalent to make us to forget all, even an
age of afflictions, as this good Gentlewoman found, who thereupon forgot all
her bypast troubles swallowed up in surmounting joys; I say, if a touch, a
taste, a short glance only be so forcible and ravishing, How surmountingly
excellent glorious and revishing shall that estate be to drink at the
fountain head of the beatificall vision, out of the rivers of his pleasures
for ever? Therefore to rest confident and patient in all afflictions, seeing
our comforts are at length beyond all our crosses; seeing God ruins none by
afflictions, but purges, purifies, cleanses, whitens, enlightens and fits us
thereby to be vessels capacious of so much the more glory; out of the ruins
of the flesh, erecting, framing and building up that glorious structure of the
new creature, to mount up at length out of the wilderness of this world,
fraught with Myrrh and Frankincense, and all the spices of the Merchant, unto
eternity of glory for ever.

Tenthly, Next hence observe, That God never comes too late unto his servants,
but will always be seen in the Mount, making our extremities his
opportunities: as he did unto Abraham in Isaac's case, and as this good
Gentlewoman found, who being much afflicted, comfortless for many years
together, even at the point of death: yet at length he was entreated, came and
revived her, in a swifter course then the running swift Charets of Aminadab:
nay, came flying as it were upon the wings of the wind, passing ans skipping
by all the hills of sins and mountains of her corruptions; when (in her
appearing last suit unto him, and extreme weakness) she had beg's now at
length once before her death to open the brazen gates of her hard heart, that
the King of glory might enter in; which was abundantly done. Therefore, though
he stay never so long, let all the hard-hearted gain by this experience of
hers; with the Churches resolution in Isaiah, I will wait upon him who hides
his face from the house of Jacob; and I will look for him; and reason good, For
he never fails of coming, being waited for, and engaged by so many promises;
wherein it is impossible for him to deny himself.

Eleventhly, Further also hence we may learn how to deal with those in
affliction in whatsoever Case: View them well first, be not too brief with
them; Hear them vent themselves, Try the symptoms and pulses of their
disease, as Jobs three friends who sat (it is written) seven days and nights
silent, because they saw his grief was great; for unseasonable comforts are
and prove but like rain falling upon hard stones, which runs off as fast as it
comes, making no impressions: whilst their buzzing heads and transported
spirits are gadding, plodding elsewhere with strong diversions; as it fell out
with this good Gentlewomen; who passed not for all was said unto her for a long
time, neither was hope of cure, until the Devils counsel was bewrayed.

1. Therefore, it behooves to be circumspect and patient awhile to find out the
cause and circumstances of distempers, or else no good can be done; for though
counsel in the heart of a man be like deep waters, yet Solomon shows, that a
man of understanding will fetch it out.

2. And then his counsel being bewrayed, the Patient must be mildly, meekly
and gently used, not hald and pulled, hurried and chid; O no, this is a wrong
course; but used with abundant patience and love, waited upon, with many good
words, and suffered to bemoane themselves as much as they list, repeating one
thing still over and over again, as often as they please; Many good things fit
for them must be uttered in their hearing not too soon pressd upon them, as
spoken unto others; they must have here a little and there a little, not pressd
beyond their strength; won by degrees with a loving sweet affable carriage;
as all these years of this good woman's trouble she was served by all her
friends which won much, and wrung many things from her in love which could
not otherwise possibly have been attained: For alas, All that while they are in
a spiritual fever; and what and Physician will adventure to give physic in a
burning fever?

3. When they begin to mend and become more docible, we must no then bring
like Jobs friends (who mistook his case) the Law for the Gospel. This is Satan's
work usually, most of them are to apt to lay too much load upon themselves; It
is an easy matter to throw down, when one is a going (facilis discensus
Averni) then it is Satan's work, down with it, down with it, down with it even
to the ground: O, but it is the work of the great God to raise one up who is
dejected: It is the work of the Holy Ghost in that case to raise up, encourage,
and convince us in a despairing estate: Wherefore spiritual Physicians must be
like Christ the great Physician, of whom it is said, A bruised reed shall he
not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, until he bring forth
judgment unto victory, or a victorious sanctification in us: as we were glad
to do by this good creature, by all gentle means to toll on, uphold and
cherish her spirit, until God at length came in, and did all.

Twelfly, But lo, lo, whilst we are now toward a conclusion, where
Thanksgiving also appears, in treating on the passages of this Rare Case not
to be forgotten, so as the stupidi^y, dullness, deadness and sluggishnesse of
our sinful dispositions might be whetted and set on edge more then ever
thereby unto more exact and serious frequent actings thereof; for our freedom
from those innumerable troubles, sorrows, sicknesses and diseases, both inward
and outward, of all sorts, which tormenteth many others better then we; who
enjoying abundance of unperceived, ordinary mercies, do therefore slight and
neglect the same: For, when vexations of toothache, stone, strangury,
convulsions, gout, palsies, burning, fevers, agues, ulcers, swellings, broken
and dis-joynted bones, streined sinews, displaced arteries, inflammations and
the like annoy us; terrors of conscience, with a wounded spirit; Satan's
incessant buffettings, apprehensions of Hell, and the wrath of God affright us:
O what torments, doleful days and miseries do we endure, to bec as it is,
Deuteronomy. 28. In perpetual fears, having no assurance of our lives? And yet O how
unthankful are we and senseless of so great and wonderful mercies, as daily
and nightly we are freed from, the least whereof (when their contraries
surprise us) makes us cry out as most miserable: witness this good Gentlewoman
forementioned, Who being and living in continual fears, valued nothing at all
this world, took no comfort in any thing here below: And yet it is strange how
daily we slubber over our Thanksgivings and freedom from miseries we enjoy, as
though they were not most great and wonderful, every morning renewed mercies;
or else we should have wonderful and doleful days: But it is our misery and
frailty, that a prick of a pin in our flesh usually we are more sensible of,
then of the health and harmonicall concord both of soul and body: And therefore
hereafter, to chafe, survey, and consider of our present mercies, to bruise and
toss them, as men do Aromatic sweets, that their fragrancies may the more
abundantly spread forth themselves, whilst the North and South wind of the
spirit thus blows upon them, to show forth and make us consider of their
excellencies unto Admirations utmost wonder; thus to ascend a higher pitch upon
this mount of Thanksgiving, and become more perfect upon earth of our endless
work in Heaven.

Thirteenthly, As we began with this good Creature, who led forth the Van in a
Tempest; so now having been victorious, let us so far honor her as to bring up
the Reere, and make the last Use, which she her self made unto all succeeding
Survivers howsoever afflicted, especially, by dissertion or hardness of Heart:
That they should upon experience of her CASE, and Gods goodness unto her, not
be so discouraged in any estate whatsoever, as to give over the use of means,
but to ply them still; trust and wait, and they would prevail at length.
Therefore then from hence, let all such learn to wait and depend upon God: And
since (as it is Isa. 30.) he waits in all their troubles for an opportunity to
show mercy unto them; therefore to wait and depend upon him until he come:
For though they may wait long, yet herein they may abundantly comfort
themselves, That God will comfort them according to all the days they have
been afflicted, and the years wherein they have seen evil; That he who has
showed us sore and great troubles, will yet quicken us again, and bring us up
from the depth of the earth; increase our greatness, and comfort us on every
side, Psalm. 71.20.21. That though they have been led through fire and water,
causing men ride over their heads, yet that he will bring them forth unto a
wealthy place, Psalm. 66.12. That when they walk in the midst of trouble, God
will revive them, and maintain their cause, Psalm. 140.12. That after
deliverances from affliction, their souls shall be as a watered Garden, and
shall not sorrow any more at all, Ier. 31.12. And that in deliverance, they
shall have several comforts, answering their several crosses, Ier. 31.8.
being built up again, as at the first, Ier. 33.7.

And therefore to persist and go on, trusting still and depending upon God;
because though they may for the present want sense and feeling of Gods love;
yet (as Peter speaks) because in the interim they are kept by the power of God
unto salvation, that they are all in Gods hand at the worst, Deuteronomy. 33.3. from
above having the eternal God for their refuge; beneath being claspt in his
everlasting arms, Deuteronomy. 23.27. And so, Because he brings light from
darkness, perfection from weakness, by death bringing unto life, and by the
gates of Hell unto Heaven: Seeing he makes all things work together for good
unto us, and all his works (how crosses so ever) beautiful in time. O let the
Saints after so rare a President of this good woman, never hereafter be out of
Heart, assuring themselves of deliverance whatsoever their Case be, in using of
the means: For, What is a hard heart, yea ten thousand hard hearts unto that
great God, who with a Word made Heaven and Earth? for whom nothing is too hard,
Genesis 17.1. Who over-turneth the Mountains by the roots, who shakes the Earth;
Heaven dropping at his presence, Psalm. 78.8. who calls all the Stars by their
names; by the greatness of his might, spans the Heavens, clothing them with
blackness, making Sackcloth their covering; commanding the Sun not to rise,
and sealing up the Stars, etc.

Upon all these grounds therefore, and many more (too tedious to relate) let all
stoop unto God, Saint-like lie and sit down at his feet, receiving of his
words, taking the experimental counsel of this good woman, to keep close unto
God in the use of means, and then they are safe, Resolving that though they
die, yet to die at his feet; and so to wait, and trust still unto the last, for
he will come at last unto them; as Habacuc has it, The vision is for an
appointed time, though it it tarry, yet wait, for it will come and not tarry,
as it did unto this good woman after ten years expectation, whose abundant
feeling and comforts in the end, did manifoldly surmount all her sufferings and
troubles in an unspeakable manner and measure, leaving her self as the
matchless monument of Gods unspeakeable mercy, unto all stout, stiff, and
hard-hearted sinners for ever, even though for a while they do resist the
means; who for all this may be won by overcomming mercies as she was; so
tryumphing over all their spiritual enemies, as to sing at length in a more
ensulting and lofty way with Deborah.

Judge. 5.21. O my Soul! thou have trodden down strength.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 52. 1. 9. for kn^w, ^ead known p. 138. l. 2^. for strangely, ^. suddenly.
p. 131. for Mr, r. Mistrisse. p. 162. l. 13. for fell sleep, r. had slept.


