A PANEGYRIC OF The most Renowned and Serene Princess CHRISTINA, By the Grace
of God, Queen of Swedland, Goths and Vandals.

Written Originally in French, by the learned Pen of Mr. de Harst, And now
Translated into English By W. L. Gent.

Si been, sat feci; si male, nimium. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, and are
to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of (...) George in Fleet Street, near
Cliffords-Inne, 1656.

For the Fair and honored hands of Mis R. G.
Madam,
YOu may well expect that I should appear in guilty colors, and even blush my
self into blood at the thought of my temerity; You may justly condemn my
presumption, and reproach my confidence, that durst attempt to dedicate these
recreations to your reading, or think, that Ink and Paper could be a Present
that might deserve your acceptance: No, Madam, though it were possible they
could be writ with a quill plucked from the wing of an Angel, yet could they
not deserve so great a blessing. What then can I hope for, who make my
Addresses so poorly? Who is there that will not judge me to be so great an
offender, as to have soared above the reach of your pardon, and that you ought
to invent new punishments, if you would have any that might ma^ch my crimes.
But when I consider that variety of Ornaments wherewith Nature has so
plentifully enrich't you, that had she made another like you, she had utterly
undone the whole race of perfection, and no woman would hereafter have had the
privilege to becall'd handsome; when I consider in the shallowness of my
fancy all that is excellent in you, I cannot but think that Charity has a
great share in your soul, and that you can pardon a person, whose ambition in
sending these unrefined papers to kiss your fair hands, was not at all to
disturb you in your higher and better employments, but only that in such small
things I might explain the greatness of my Devotion. I confess that the
largeness of gifts are generally powerful in the minds of the Receivers, and
can either create merits where there are none, or set a luster upon those that
are but small: but I know, you have a soul of another composition, and can
value the gift by the person, and not the person by the gift: and truly it is
that which renders you most like your self, and makes you approach nearest to
Divinity; For, heaven receives a Prayer, or a grain of Incense, (if free from
impurity and hypocrisy) with a greater relish and respect, then if they had
sacrificed whole Hecatombs, or emptied Arabia of its Perfumes. I begin
therefore to think it a crime of no small extent, to mistrust your favor,
being I offer this with the same zeal and reverence, in which a Lover courts
his Flame, or a Pilgrim his God. It Is true, Madam, when I cast't my eyes upon
you, and surveyed the height of your merit, and then turned them upon my self,
and beheld the meannesse of my own, the greatness of the disproportion made
my duty struggle with my respects, and I doubted, whether I might write or no:
But all oppositions were vain, and quickly vanished; for, were my Teeth a row
of Thorns, yet my Tongue would through, when it is to make its addresses to
such an Angel as your self, whose every look utters Captivity, and can turn
Saints to Idolaters.

When I first took notice of this Panegyric, as it appeared in the French its
natural Language, and finding the Matter well and orderly disposed, the Sense
persuasive and eloquent, the words high and significant, I judged it worthy to
be translated for my self; but, when I considered the strangeness of the
subject, that it was a Woman; and the dignity of the person, that it was a
Queen, that had deserved all these Encomiums, I then began to think, (pardon
the expression) that it was worthy to be translated for you: For, Lady, do but
strip the great Christina, of her Majesty and manly Virtues, and I Will then say,
I do but present you with those graces, which you represent, and, like a true
Glass, only show you what you are.

But, Madam, in the reading of these my Endeavors, if you find any thing to
be well done, I must pay my thanks to you; for, it is from your fair eyes that I
fetched my directions and influence. But, if any thing look with an unpleasant
aspect, my unskilfulnesse in the language, and the fewness of my years, being
yet arrived but at the age of twenty, may make up, if not a just reason, yet
(at least) a prevailing excuse.

It is not my ambition, nor was it ever my desire, to appear in Print, I
always judged my self then most secure, when most private; nor had I now
exposed my thoughts to the public view, had not the importunity of some
friends, and a desire to serve you, and your fair sex, (like two persuading
Orators) so wrought upon my resolutions, that they could no longer deny to pay
obedience to such powerful reasons. Some persons there are, who strive to
eclipse the glories of Women, and draw a cloud over that flowing luster, that
always attends their graces; but I have here discovered to the world and them,
in the happy example of this great Queen, that Women, as well as Men, have
Souls; that may not only be capable of great matters, but can also enjoy all
those ornaments, which may make up a just accomplishment, and render persons
both happy and admired.

I will not say, that this Translation is exact, nor dare I say, it is
acceptable; but, as to that part which belongs to my endeavors, I freely
confess, it is not worth your perusal: Yet, Fair, do you but throw your eyes
upon it, and it presently becomes precious, and may be fit for the Cabinets of
Princes. So the daring Prometheus, wrought a Picture out of clay, deformed and
cold in the touch; but it was the fire which he stole from heaven, that added
life and motion to that imperfect Embryo.

But, Madam, being it is to you that I write, it might well be expected, that I
should not so much strive, how to translate a Panegyric, as how to compose
one: For, the world might count me an Infidel, one void of the light of Reason
and Nature, if, having so fair an opportunity as this, presented to my
acceptance, I should not glance upon the endowments of your person; Nay, I
should think it a piece of justice, if heaven, because I would not praise you
when I might, should strike me dumb, and not let me praise you when I would.

But, Madam, your commendations are so copious a subject, that every thought of
them, puts my fancy in a Labyrinth, where the greatest of inventions may for
ever wander, and yet never find a thread to procure their liberties. The
choice of Wits might here strike sail, and confess, that silence is their
best Orator; and that a look from your face, can more explain your graces in
one minute, then their tongues in a whole age. And therefore I shall only say,
that heaven has dealt with you, as the Geographers with the World, which
though a vast Body in it self, they have contracted into the narrow compass
of a Globe. So, all those graces that are scattered about the world, are united
in your face; and while I contemplate you, I behold them all. Some Women, like
the Panther, have fair and well-proportioned bodies, but are fain to obscure
their faces in their silken clouds, fearing to betray the miserable ruins,
either of time or diseases: Some are like Ermines, beautiful in nothing but
their skins, and some are like rough Diamonds, whose outsides carry no
enticeing charms, but look within, and you will find souls full of brightness
and action. But in you, Madam, as so many Lines running to one Center, these
several graces meet, and frame up an exact Harmony. You shine above others, as
a Planet above a private Star: And if there be any yet, who dare overvalue the
excellency of a Lady, and call her a Star, I Will say, you are a Constellation:
for it is but justice, that I should rank you with your deserts; and, as nature,
so description, might make you exceed.

Perhaps, Fair, you may say, that I flatter. But, Oh! don't brand my innocence
with so great a sin. I confess, had I said this to another, I should have been
my own Judge, and condemned my self, as a person guilty of that crime: Had I
told another, that her eyes carried fire enough, to tempt the gods to invent
new disguises, and visit the earth again. That Lillies and Roses enjoyed no
Whites and Reds, till her Cheeks taught them their complexions, I should have
thought, I lied; but when I speak the same things to you, that which before was
false, is converted into truth, and that which was a sin before, is now become
piety. And therefore don't think, that I write this out custom, but devotion;
not as though I use to speak so, but because you use to be so.

But, Madam, I shall no longer suspend your judgment, or spin out time and my
thoughts in a discourse, where my respects may prove as tedious, as your graces
are alluring; I fear, lest while I strive to entertain the more pleasing
subject, I keep you from the more pleasing matter; for, methinks I see your
inclination more toward the Author, with a desire to hear him breathe, where
you will find wit and invention run like paralells, exact and equal. As for
the Language, so much as refers to the translation, I resign it to the
justness of your censure. My thoughts are yet but Meteors, and maintain only a
flattering and borrowed light; it rests only in the power of your creating
smiles, to make them seem real Stars, and become six'd. In which blessing,
though I claim nothing, yet I scarce doubt an interest. For it were a crime to
think, that a Body, soft and melting, like yours, can be inhabited by a soul of
a more stubborn constitution.

If, Fair, you will now vouchsafe to pardon all those defects, which you find,
either in my Pen or my Person; either in what I write, or what I am, your
goodness will multiply my debts, and add new chains to those fetters, wherein
you have so bound me, that sooner can heaven want power to punish offenders, or
your fair face to procure adorers, then I have a Being, and not be,

The greatest of your Votaries, W. L.

On his Ingenious friend, Mr W. L. his Translation of this PANEGYRIC.
WHen that the warbling Echo does sing over,
Those pleasant Notes the voice had tuned before
It Is not an easy matter for to say,
The Echo, or the Voice has won the day:
But when she sporteth, and resolves to show,
How far her lesson is her skill below,
Seven times you may her hear, your Note rehearse,
Make Song, and Chorus of one single verse:
Needs must you boast, that sweet your Musick's held,
Seven times repeated, though as oft-excel'd:
So when this Princess fame, in heavenly tone,
By the shrill Trumpet of your Author blown,
You a more learned Echo, to us do
Not only render, but interpret too.
Where sits the Judge, that w'ont give you the Bays?
You render us his Book, we you his praise:
Yet shall the Authors name remain in brass,
You him eternize, while you him surpass:
You have confirmed, that music yields sounds,
More lofty, from the water when it bounds,
Hence have these praises sweeter flown from thee,
You brought them out of France, they have crossed the Sea:
You Will have us understand, when you inten^
For to Transtate, it signifies to mend.
On his worthy friend Mr W. L. His Translation of the PANEGYRIC.
NOt all the glory, not the Pompous Train,
With which Romes-Bishop did her entertain
Can countervail that honor, which has been
Rendr'd from your Translation, to the Queen:
You Have placed her higher, then when she stood before,
On the seven Hills, and to be seen to more,
There too she is only seen, you are so good
Unto her Virtues, here she is understood;
You also have contrived your treatment so,
She Is th'entertain'd, and entertainment too.
The state of France, which was before her laid,
Th'address your Author made her, has outweigh'd.
You outdo both, each do confess and know,
You only could her pay, what they did owe.
Tho. Devorax.

To his ever honored Cousin Mr. W. L. Upon his Translation and Addition
TO speak thy praise, were nothing but to hold
A Candle to the Sun, or to enfold
Light in a shadow; thy deserts are grown
Greater then Language, nor can they be shown
By any Quill, but what writes as Divine,
And rich a Style as that which flows from thine.
This piece had slept, had not thy quickening Pen
Repaired the loss, and gave it life again.
Thou well Translat'st, but there thou do not dwell,
Thou show'st the world, that thou can write as well.
So that, of what is opened to the view,
Thou art both Author and Translator too.
In this, like to the Moon, thou seem bright
Under the beauties of another's light:
In that, like the unborrow'd beams oth' Sun,
Fancy and Wit from thy Invention run.
You Are thy own Fountain, Tagus never wore
A richer stream upon his yellow shore.
If Jove (when love first pierced his wanton breast,
And changed the amorous God) had but possest't
Thy Language, fair Danae in her Tower
Had stoop't, and he had saved his golden shower.
G. L.

To his much respected friend Mr. W. L. On his Ingenious Translation.
IF from my untefined wits could run,
As clear a stream as from thy Helicon,
Could I but breathe thy fire, then might I be
In hopes to speak my love, and merit thee,
But now alas! Like to the morning Star,
(Lights Herald, and the days Ambassador)
I only stand to prophecy thy fame,
And tell the approaches, of a brighter flame:
Hail happy thoughts, whose issues sweeter are
Then Hybla's Hills: each line speaks softness, far
Beyond the silk, and every Period shows
More smoothness, then the face of Crystal does:
All things fall so composed from thy Quill,
We no more speak, but now admire thy skill:
We wonder how thy Pen could build so clear
And high a Style, and not forsake the sphere,
Thy Author moves in: but we more admire,
How such young years could breathe so bright a fire:
Some empty heads love to use words that are
Nothing but noise, and just like bubbles bear
Only a bulk, but every word that flies
From thy clear vein, both speaks and signifies:
But since thy styl's so great, and mine so bad,
That it will rather clip thy praise then add,
To the prodigious luster of thy fate,
Ble only say, that while thou did translate
This curious Panegyric, and make known
Another praise, thou do endite thine own.
James Draiton.

A PANEGYRIC To the most Renowned and Serene Princess CHRISTINA, By the Grace
of God, Queen of Swedland, Goths, and Vandals.
My Lords,
WHen I consider this glorious Assembly, composed of so many honest men; when I
behold the happy presence of such great worthies, illustrious by so many
considerations; and lastly when I cast my eyes upon this fair and noble
Princess, known to be the most warlike and the most generous in the world, who
has fixed her standards, wheresoever she directed her desires; I cannot but
conceive, by a fair feeling of vanity, a good presage of that which I have
purposed to speak: for such a value and so great a Generosity, which in you
meet, so happily united, cannot but inspire me with resentments, as truly
noble as sublime.

But when I advance my ambitious eyes, and traveling above this middle Region
of the Air, I lift them up to the firmament, there to contemplate the Sun; I
would say, when I raise them up to your Sacred Majesty, that divine star,
which there, by its reflection, shoots forth beams so magnificently, and with
so great a spendor; I almost wonder in this dazzling, that my repentance don't
arrest my design, and that my temerity by being forced into silence finds not
out a punishment for its boldness. Be not astonished, my Lords, at my
surprise, though I seem balanced between what I ought to say, and what I
ought to do; and though you see my cheeks usurped by a redness, which the
acknowledgement of my own disability to entertain this Assembly, has invited
thither. There is nothing so natural to men, as to disrelish their fortunes,
though it be in the meanest concernments; nor are they less prone to nourish
a facility to all those things which flatter them; and yet they do not know
the dissiculty then, when the greatness of the subject does oblige them to
humble their vanities. You see an example in my person: and I ought not to hide
from you any of that pompous and divine matter, wherein I had figured to my
self this adorable Princess, the object of our admiration, and the subject of
our discourse, though I confess I cannot represent her, but in an imperfect
Idea: and therefore it is that at this time considering the Carriere which I
have purposed to accomplish, and viewing it in all its apprehensions, I
acknowledge the weakness of my reason, that cannot dive into the difficult
and counterfeit illusions of my senses, which, always like to themselves, and
always deceivers, have, under vain apprehensions, shaddowed forth to me their
delightful Fables. And truly! consider with me that which I can tell you, of a
person who has no quality but what is divine, and who authoriseth the
disproportion that she meets with among the vanities of Greece, the pride of
Rome, and the transcending truths which we see with our eyes; all that the one
and the other, ingenuous to deceive, would make us believe to be more admired
and greater in their Heroina's, who have drained the most delicate Rhetoric,
to furnish their Nurslings: it is we only that can make Adorers and Mutes of
their Panegyrists and Orators, to whom the respect to so happy a Majesty, and
their inability to utter, what could neither be conceived nor expressed, would
equally command a silence. In respect of this Lady, the purple of Tire and
Sidon have but a languishing splendour; and the flowers, the fairest and best
cultivated, which art (to say truth) did ever produce, have but an earthy smell
and feeble charms, since they cannot, unless by shameful Negations, say any
thing of this miracle of Nature. And this talkative, I might say, this proud
Eloquence, which has formerly gloried to have been the bestower of Eternity,
and the dispensatrice of the destiny of Kings, finds her self now punished
with justice, to gaze upon a Queen, for whom she cannot find words, which may
answer the dignity of the subject; for whom the worlds brightest Luminaries, I
mean persons of the greatest quality, have been either obliged to hold their
peace, when they would undertake to speak worthily of her, or else contented
with an imperfect Oration, and a true acknowledgement, that they can conceive
more then they can utter: but yet neither their conceptions nor their
imaginations, can, without a manifest in sufficiency, signify the smallest
part of her perfections.

So it is, Great Queen, that unless you please to condescend, and so obscure
your person, we cannot, in that prodigious elevation, where you are fixed, take
notice of you, but with that reverence, wherewith we apprehend the glorious
Intelligences, who have no communication with mortals: The comparison holds
well; for those celestial creatures are of a nature pure like yours; your
virtues are great like theirs; and you as well as they do suffer, without
indignation, men to speak of your Majesty in terms, that carry no proportion
to your greatness. It is that resplendant goodness, which makes you proffer
those illustrious hands (accustomed to carry Scepters and sustain Crowns) to
all those who have the honor to approach your sacred person. You can receive
all favorably, though they should bring nothing but a little water in their
hands, a present which a poor Persian once offered to his thankful Prince.

These are the glorious reasons, my Lords, which have put me in the way, from
which I began to wander, and have thoroughly confirmed me in the design which I
have taken, to give you a Character of that divine Princess, who puts a
Confidence into all that approach her with fear, confirms them that tremble
in their respects, and encourages those, whose Modesty permits not their eyes
to enjoy the freedom of Nature. Let us draw near therefore, but let us draw
near with hearts sanctified, and with expressions not intending so much to be
choice, as purified from all that, which might eclipse or diminish the luster
of a virtue so eminent. Let us approach with the same humility as men pay to
the Deity, since we must come to a Queen, who is the most glorious Type and
magnificent Copy of that invisible Original. But if our small merits, the
great defects that are in us, and a thousand other considerations, be still our
impediments, let us imagine that heaven takes a pleasure to hear her name sung,
though from the mouths of Infancy and Ignorance; and lastly, consider, that we
cannot speak of any thing that is great, when we begin to discourse of the
Great Christina.

Those who have a resolution to pron ounce the Elogy of any illustrious person,
after they have entreated their Auditors to afford them a favorable silence,
and honor them with a calm attention, they are usually accustomed to cut off
those things that are far from their matter, and yet to speak not a little
of the fathers of those upon whom they build their discourse. But I shall not
tread in their steps, for it is impossible that any should live ignorant, that
the father of our Princess, was the greatest King and the greatest Conqueror
in the world. All mouths have said it; all tongues have pronounced it; all
hearts have agreed to it; and all people have confirmed it: what then is it,
that we can produce to entertain your ears, which has not a thousand and a
thousand times been spoken of that illustrious Monarch, whose actions and
invincible courage attracted the admiration of all those, who were so happy as
to see him fighting. Nevertheless (by the way) we may glance upon that, which
our Histories of France have gloriously preserved: It is recorded that this
good King, a little before the pale hand of Death had seized upon his person,
being inspired by some prophetic thoughts, told his people that they would be
the cause of his death, being they put too great a confidence and security in
his courage; for, they began to judge him immortal, by those immortal actions
which they had seen him perform, and the perils to which with an incredible
success, he had exposed his sacred person. This was a prophecy in its
effects too true, and deplorable to as many as were Christians: and without
doubt God to chastise our pride, and put us in mind of our brittle
constitutions, summoned up to heaven that pure virtue, in the flower of his
age, after he had plentifully adorned him with blessings here below, and had
made him carry with him, the two glorious and deserved titles, of a King and
Prophet.

But let us travel no farther; let us not touch that Marble and that Jaspar,
which have been fashioned by the most ingenuous workmen of our age; let us
rest fatisfied that we see him live in her, who so happily enjoyes his
Greatness; and, if by one excellent name we would eternize, and render him the
Admiration of all the world, let us say he was the worthy Father of our Queen:
But! when I say he was the father of our Queen, what can be said that has not
been already spoken, and drawn from him by an infallible consequence? since
it is not possible, that the incomparable Christina, could have a father less
heroique then Gustavus the Great, or that the Great Gustavus could have a
daughter more excellent then Christina. Both of them are the miracles of their
Sexes; both, the Terrors of their age; and both the Admiration and delights of
their people. But there is this difference between them. That if Gustavus has
been the Model of the perfections of Kings, if he alone has engross't all
those virtues which the greatest Princes of our age, could have wished to have
enshrined in their own breasts; yet Christina enjoyes the higher preferment,
and has not only been the Copy of that King, whose dignity she possesses,
but laso the illustrious Abridgment of all those virtues, that conduce to the
accomplishment of Kings and Queens, Subjects and Sovereigns. This Throne
could not be furnished with a more emient person, this fair Scepter could not
be managed by more glorious hands, and these Crowns could not be set upon a
head more beautiful and more sufficient; for such a burden would have
oppress't any person, that had been less resolved, or less discreet then you.

It is not at all my endeavor to relate, how she has attained to all those
endowments, wherein her soul glitters with an extraordinary brightness; and
though I ought (that so I might hinder persons from being surpised at the
infinite greatness of her merit) to begin the History of her life from her
Cradle: yet I will not say any thing of the Infancy of a Lady, whose age never
found its parallel, who could reason as soon as speak, and whose virtues did
not attend, but outstrip the course of her years: but seeing it is the Queen
of Sweden of whom I speak, I will not set her forth to you but upon a Throne,
nor will I say any thing of the Princess Christina; till her ability to govern
has adorned her with a Diadem.

If I were to make an Oration before a strange Court, or if I were to speak to
persons, who have not had the honor to see, and discourse of the natural
Graces of this Princess; I might happily at this time have found an occasion to
deliver the description and Idea of your beauty, while I explain that of your
person: but it would argue me to be a man of a shallow Judgment, and so no
consideration to draw a bad Copy in a place, where the Original can be its
own Orator and appear with so much luster. Let us only say, that she has a
Character of Greatness and Majesty stamp't in her forehead, which communicates
it self to her very picttures; and so reflects upon those, who regard them,
that is imprints in them a Reverence, full of respect and fear. But it is not
only the comeliness of her person that sets her forth with so much
approbation, but also the Greatness of her Soul, the Nobleness of her
inclinations, the Generosity of her heart, and the Sharpness of her wit. But
let us take a view of that which falls into the apprehension of our senses: she
delivers herself to all the Ambassadors that come to her Court in the language
of their own Nation; but with such a facility, such an Eloquence, and such a
grace; that it quickly calls up their admiration. Her knowledge is not limited
only to the understanding of foreign Languages, which she speaks as fluent as
her own, but there is no Science in which she is unlearned. She has an
unalterable Stability in her resolutions, a Faith inviolable to her Allies, and
in a word, the whole stock of Royal virtues stand united together in her fair
soul. This is she that has lately chased the Imperial Eagles, and defeated so
many Armies, to establish that Religion, which those furious persons endeavored
to suffocate: and this is she that has given breath to those Princes, who had
put themselves under her protection; that has broken the forces, which that
proud Family had prepared in Germany; and lastly, that has restored that
Country's liberty, which was so near threatened with a cruel servitude and
slavery. Hear me, O Germany; I say, it is not to any but this blessed Queen,
to whom thou stand'st indebted for all the joys, and all the delights of thy
peace; it is she that has stopped the course of thy blood; it is she that has
fillited up thy envenomed wounds with her own royal relief, which she never
spared when thy safety begged it.

So glorious a travail, so long a war, and so many advantageous victories,
do well deserve, That repose and divertisements should follow, That
magnificence should deck their palaces, and that Their warlike and tumultuous
thoughts should be converted into peace and tranquillity. And now there cannot
be but a great pleasure in the fruits of victory; To be attended by the
blessings of the people, to receive the Homages of Princes restored to their
liberties, and, in a word, to be courted by the acclamations of all Europe, and
the whole world: This we have hitherto seen, upon the forceing of Cities,
defeating of Armies, and conquering of Crowns. She has inherited the Realms
and provinces of the Great Gustavus: she has enjoyed by a natural succession,
the beauty of his spirit, and the Graces of his body: but above these qualities
of succession, and hereditary Graces, she has acquired a large addition of her
own. She is both modest and magnanimous, eloquent and learned, gracious and
Majesticke, her beauty is also a beauty illustrious and full of splendour, a
beauty of command, a beauty of action, and (which is more, a beauty courageous
and masculine; but to add something that is greater then all this, it is the
beauty of a Princess. Her proportion is perfect, her Countenance confident,
her Decorum lofty and daring, her Eyes shining and full of fire, and all her
exterior parts equal to those which painters give to virtue and victory. Al
which happy ornaments render her to the view full of Dignity, and an Authority
no less agreeable then comely, which can persuade without speaking, and subdue
souls with looks. Yet to increase your wonder, this body which is so perfect,
is inhabited by a spirit that excels it, and which sits there, like a fair
Intelligence in a beautiful Planet. She is expert in the Science of Princes,
and therefore in her own: She is skilled in Politics, and the art Military:
she equally enjoyes the knowledge of all those things that are suitable and
profitable. She is so well read in History, as well in the one as the other, as
well in the Ancient as the Modern, as well in that of the Church, as that of
the World, that she her self is the very Annals abridg'd: and in this she has
outshone the glory of the most illustrious Conquerours that were as renowned by
their pens as their swords, and who at night composed in their Tents,
whatsoever in the day time they had performed in the field.

But let as passe-by these ambiguous Elogies and these equivocal Titles, we
have some that are proper and particular. Let us not only say that Christina is
descended from a long succession of Kings, that Crowns and Scepters have been
for many ages the portion of those her Ancestors, who have been enrowled in the
throng of that illustrious Family; this is a praise in which she shares with
other Princes, and in which other Kings may have a propriety as well as she.
There is none but would perceive a vanity in such strange commendations. Let us
not seek any thing of that nature for our Queen, who has them as her proper
and natural endowments: let us not throw away our praises upon glass and a
counterfeit brightness, where we can entertain our eyes with so many Diamonds
and so much luster. Let us rather say that she has a heart more high, a soul
more Royal, and a Reason more sovereign, then all those Kings and Queens,
from whom she draws the greatness of her Original. Let us not esteem of that
beauty, which is as well common to the Poppy as the Rose, as well to the unruly
as the chaste, as well to the luxurious as the modest; but of that, which is
virtuous and well disciplined, of a good report and a fair example. Let us not
praise her Graces, nor her Judgment; but let us extol the modesty and
continency of her Graces; let us commend the greatness and equality of her
Judgment. Let us not speak of her Liberalities, since there be persons both
liberal and unjust together; or else let us say that they are in her choice,
and done with method. In fine, let us admire the veneration, which she
continually has for all persons, that have made any progress in knowledge or
virtue: witness, those harmless Intelligencers, which she has in all places
of the world, to take notice of those, who are enriched with any extraordinary
merit: these are they whom she truly looks upon, as subjects worthy her
Liberality: and I am sure there was never any person that did not respect her
as much, as if she had been his lawful Queen: Also the Muses, especially
those in the French lauguage, have not been wanting to extol the greatness
of that virtue, which has so well rewarded them; And certainly they would be
very ungrateful, if they should not commend, or if they should deny such just
acknowledgments to her, who is so favorable to them, and who has prevented
their wants, by a supply from her own benefits: This Princess is the cause
why they are altogether so triumphant, for she entertaines them as her
familiars and companions, she sports with them in prose and verse, but the
pastime never concludes without some present, which produces a smoothness in
their periods, and puts life into their stanza's,

But let us traverse her Royal virtues only, and seek those which altogether
compose the Abridgment, and frame up the Idea of an accomplished Queen: for we
would not have our Reason stick in one place, or employ all its endeavors
about one thing, where she may elect so many, that are equally worthy to be
chosen. It is impossible that we should praise all the virtues of our Princess
in singulars, because our eyes cannot so well distinguish them among so great a
multitude. But she has some that are reserved and particular, which are
therefore the more considerable, because they are less common, and because
they are such that when we once know them, our eyes are too feeble to look
upon them with a fixed aspect, or to see them in all their dimensions there are
constantly some of diverse orders and diverse degrees, some of all Sexes, as well
as of all Ages, of all conditions and of all times, of Majesty and humility,
and lastly, the ornaments both of Princes and subjects. These which are of the
latter and nobler rank disperse their blessings about the Nation, and are of
four sorts; Justice, Prudence, true-Glory, and Piety: These are the four
wheels that guide the revolutions of Empires, and constitute the destiny of
Monarchies. The first maintains peace in the Nation, renders to every one his
own, and secures the poor from oppression. The second dives into, and
dissipates the Counsels of enemies, prepares them for ruin, and assures a
quietness in the State, as well by the strength of the mind as the courage of
the hand. The third draws a reputation from all things. And the last crowns
the endeavors of all the rest. Our Queen enjoyes them all, but not after that
rate, as they are possess't by the world's greatest Princes, who preserve them
only as servants to their passions; They make their Cruelty to pass currently
for the effects of Justice; they imagine their breach of faith and subtilties,
to be a weighty argument of Prudence; their pride and disdain, to be the
materials of a true Glory; and lastly, their infamous Superstition and
shameful Idolatry, to constitute the exactest and best ordered Piety. But our
Christina is ignorant of these adulterate virtues, and counterfeit vices:
Disguise and Dissimulation are the two evils which she principally hates and
derides: and yet when those appear in another, she has so great a reach that
she can unvaile and unmaske their darkness. In this manner she has reclaimed
those fair, though straggling virtues, which had been long banished from the
Courts of Kings and Princes, and which at last have attained an Asylum, under
the protection of this adorable Queen, who has extended her welcomes to
relieve those amiable prostrates. This is she who is the true Pole of the
Christian world, whereon the whole Catalogue of beauties are displayed; it is
she that has such an attractive virtue, as can allure to her obedience, the
most stubborn and rebellious souls, if they be but once touched with that
divine Load stone.

That Justice which is only moral, is (to say truth) nothing else but an
authorized opinion; it is a cruel and unmercifull Tradition; it is a lawful
offender and in the scrupulous observation of Mine and Thine, suffers with
unrelenting thoughts the dearest persons to be despis^d and ruined. But that of
our Queen is of another constitution it is an upright, an all-seeing, and a
gentle Justice, but yet a Justice that was always absolutely perfect. And we
can resolutely say, she is so just as to shake off all her choicest
Inclinations, rather then to do the least wrong to the meanest of her
Subjects: and if this virtue which is the foundation of all the rest, finds at
any time any resistance to hinder the carrying on of its resolutions, it is
only her Clemency, that enclines her pardon to reach some notorious Malefactor.
In a word, all her actions are so curiously cemented to the high severity of
Justice, and the calm sweetness of Mercy, that a thousand happy results
spring from these two Virtues, and make her equally feared and loved by her
people.

That prudence which the world breathes, and the Kings of the earth put in
practice, is usually no other then an instructed and disciplined Malice; it is
nothing but a virtue tempered with phlegm, and managed with artificial
motions. But that of Christina is so purified as well within as without, that
it expels all Forgery and Deceit, and knows not what is meant by being
captious or doubleminded: One may rely upon her word with more assurance then
upon the oaths of others Her Lights cannot be false, being derived from so
much Nobleness, and an Original so pure and clear: they cannot be erroneous,
being sprung from so much Justice, and aiming at a conclusion so right and so
honorable. She with her own person is assisting to all her Councels, she is
thoroughly instructed in all her affairs, and understands them so admirably,
that there is not a person can tax her proceedings; nor can any one reproach
her, that by any neglect or slacknesse she has withheld any thing for base
ends, or that she ever sought to secure her actions by an artificial prudence.
And though she alone supports the burden of her estate, yet her ingenuity is so
quick and piercing, that she is not at all entangled in the greatness of her
employments: her vast Genius, which might govern the whole world, and her able
Prudence to which all the kings of the earth might confidently and with great
assurance, deliver up the conduct of their whole Estates, finds not any thing
in the largnesse of her dominions, that can be altogether her employment. What
is there then that can be compared to the situation of a soul, and the ability
of a wit, that can dive into the bottom of all things: for prudence has given
her a look beyond others, has fixed her in a seat that over-awes fortune,
and is of such force that we may well say Agamemnon had reason in his ordinary
wishes, to desire rather ten men as circumspect as Nestor, then as valiant as
Achilles: for in effect that petty Prince of a poor Island, having attaine'd
the favor and gifts of the prudent Minerva, was the principal author of the
surprising one of the greatest Cities, that the world ever knew.

The love of glory suites well with those virtues, which are in heroique
persons; it breathes spirit into their actions, and spurs them forward to
perform great things, for no other consideration, then, That they do them.
This is that only virtue which is not at all mercenary, and scorns to demand
any thing for recompense of service done to the Republic, unless, the glory
to have served her freely and without reward. Those glorious Romans, whom
History makes us (as'twere) to see to this day, were all possessed by this
humor, when they enterpriz'd those famous actions, of which yet the very
memory affrights us. They would attempt and bring to pass, things that were
apparently impossible, and whose only mention would strike terror into the
greatest Princes of our age. Ancient men would appear in the Armies, they would
seek out a multitude of Combats, so to draw on the occasion of a battle, and,
among a thousand dangers, they would still labor how to be employed in the
greatest.

But why do you think they hunted after so many perils and Combats? would you
have me tell you the reason? It was to obtain a Triumph, to behold their
Statues fixed in the public view, and to purchase to themselves a new and
honorable Name. But yet this Statue served for no more then an unprofitable
Marble, and this name augmented not their fortunes, but only in the addition of
three or four Syllables. After the same manner were those Recompenses that were
bestowed upon the Illyrians, Macedonians, Numantines, Achaians, Africans, and
many others, who for these things only, have willingly been prodigal, both of
their pains and blood, to promote the credit of their Countries. But our
Queen limits her glory by a conclusion far more illustrious: Vanity swells
not her soul; but Generosity only, makes her the performer of so many noble
actions: It is not at all to get a fresh addition of Titles, or procure her
self a new name, for she can not pitch upon a choice more fair or more famous
then her own; but it is for the only reputation, To have done nobly: There
never appeared a glory comparable to here is. The envious and the mistrustfull
would make us believe that the Graces could not well be linkt with the Virtues,
and that the fair and the knowing, proved very seldom to be the chaste and
the modest. But she has given the lie to those mutinous and suspicious
persons; and those who have talked much of Elizabeth of England, Marguerite of
France, Eleanor of Spain, Beatrice of Portugal, have not adventured to compare
them to so clear a reputation. Virtues used in their Mediocrity, are usually
the subjects of Envy: men impute crimes to them, of which they are altogether
Innocent, or at least slenderly culpable: the smallest blemish, and the
smallest irregularity, does ordinarily procure some advantageous color for a
reproach. But! that of Christina is of another degree, and of another
composition; she sits enthroned above the reach of Calumny, in a word she is
all celestial, all pure, and all divine. Who can then find fault with her, who
is more illustrious then Augustus or Livy, more wise then Cornelia, more fair
then Helen or Cleopatra, and in fine, more chaste and more pure, then all the
Sybils of Greece, or the Vestals of Rome. She has in her self the true
resemblance of Zenobia, Eudoxia, Amalazonta, and all those things, that even to
these happy days the world has seen to proceed from the most illustrious and
greatest Hero's.

But let us discourse a while of that reigning and Victorious piety, and of
that Christian devotion, which the fair name of Christina defines so
perfectly. It Is without doubt a proud and profane piety, which the great ones
practice; they make it only serve their affairs, and use it no farther then
their interest obliegeth them. But Here Is bears no likeness to these ordinary
pieties, nor to those devotions which are only for show, and consist altogether
in appearance: Here Is are of a higher elevation, and warmed by a zeal, much
differing from those, who limit their meditations to a seeming modesty, and
signify them in three or four tears, squeezed from their eyes by force. Her
Religion is not a precise, nor conceited Religion, it is neither scrupulous nor
profane. But far otherwise is that of those artificial and disguised
penitents, who compose their motions, and proportion their Gestures, to the
eyes and observation of others, who have their Countenances musing, their faces
moist with tears, and pray only because it is a custom; and in fine, who mock
themselves in private, for that which they had done in public, and laugh at
those persons in their Closets, before whom they had played the Counterfeits in
the Church. But Christina, totally averse from this Hypocrisy, draws from the
bottom of her heart, the fire, the Incense, and the victime of those
sacrifices, which she offers: and, which is more agreeable to the Infinite
Majesty, then all the Gummes of the earth and sea, and which pleases his
palate more, then the fat and blood of murd'red flocks; she always presents
him with the contrition of a heart that is sovereign, with the humility of a
head that is crowned, with thoughts humble and full of worship, and with an
Authority, not only submissive but also religious. Her goodness yet passes
farther, and her aim is much more excellent then report proclaims it; her
care and endeavors move strongly for the propagation of the faith, for the
defense of God's name, for the surety of his people, for the peace and
quietness of her estate, and for the tranquillity of the whole Christian world.

We may also say that this is the common good of her Realms, that it is her
piety, which is the Tutresse of her dignities, the Directresse of her actions,
and the Overseer of her policies. It is this, from whose advice, all her
virtues of war and peace, as well the rumultuary as the pacificke, as well
the outrageous as the calm, receive their directions and conduct; and in a
word, this is that virtue to which our Princess is so much devoted, that we may
call it her commanding virtue. Is it not this piety, and this love of God, O
you Swedes, that has chained Fortune to your party, when the death of your
late king, seemed to set her at liberty? Is it not this that has established
your reputation, which was very likely to follow the recoile of that wavering
Goddess? Was it not she that crowned the ashes of that good Prince, who led
victory to his funerals, who gave resolution and courage to the fainting
Swedes, and who made them look upon their enemies with courageous and terrible
tears, and fight with a sadness resolute and triumphant, in a time when the
miserable assaults of a matchless sorrow, did scarce give her eye the power to
distinguish her own party.

O with what astonishment and admiration together, did the wisest of the earth,
and the most sharp witted of that age, look upon this mavelous Spectacle,
when they began to examine, whether their prudence could have been so capable,
and whether their imginations could have mounted so high! when, I say, they
considered a young Queen, struggling all alone against so great and dangerous a
tempest; when they saw how she had overthrown her enemies, as young and tender
as she was. She made a sure conquest, and brought all things to a fair issue,
after an infinite number of victories and Combats. Thus after the revolution of
many years, she returned safe to her harbors in spite of wind and seas,
loaded with the Colors and Ensigns of the conquered, stuff't with their
pillage, and adorned with a thousand other marks of victory. God relieves
those that are his, he distributes his assistance to those that fear him, and
he has made us all see in this example, those illustrious marks of his
goodness, which he has always communicated to those creatures, in whom he
finds the true Symptoms of a sincere piety and a real devotion. O who of our
posterity will believe, that in our time there should be a Queen, such a one
as the great Solomon could never find in his? who will think, that he could
breath out his wishes and descriptions for a woman, and yet we to enjoy his
desires, and her! Solomon that pompous and magnificent king, did never, in all
his glory, see any thing like to our Queen: and he is obliged to content
himself, to have drawn twenty six ages passed, a fair picture, or rather a
fair imperfection of her, since that all that he has said in his time of a
powerful woman, was not accomplished but in ours. Behold here then this
renowned Queen, whom posterity though never so indulgent to antiquity, will
scarce ever take the pains to believe; but she will stagger in her faith,
when she understands, that her very infancy had the prudence of old men, the
justice of the most just, the glory of souls advanced, and the piety of Souls
sanctified; Will she not rather believe, judging by the actions of her life,
which appear like so many prodigies, that she came into the world, high,
great, fair, and ready armed, as once Poetical inventions feigned of the wise
Minerva? That Alexander, who is known by the name of Great, finds much
incredulity among us, when we read the History of his life; how at the age of
nineteen years being then an Orphan, he by his prosperous valor overcame all
difficulties, and scattered all those obstacles, that had interposed and
hindered him, from ascending the throne of his Father; and how at those
youthful years, he assured the possession of his tottering estate, so divided
at home, and in confusion with his Neighbors. But what will posterity say,
when in a sex less vigorous by nature, and in an age less advanced by time,
she shall see that which surpasses those wonders, which sprang up in the reign
of Alexander. If the first found these divisions at home; Christina finds her
self grapling with one of the most puissant families of Europe: If Alexander
encountered many difficulties, to establish his dignity, Christiana has beheld
her self embarked in a holy, yet a bloody, War, as soon as ever she attained
the Throne: The first had nothing to do, but to quell Mutinies; but Christina
was entangled in hereditary broiles.

Magnificence is yet a virtue of the greatest Souls, and the highest fortunes,
and is not banished from her Court: There one sees nothing, but costly Feasts,
one sees nothing there, but innocent Recreations and spiritual Pleasures; and
if any one desires a liberality that should be pompous and heroic, all the
world knows, and many by their own experience can testify, that this great
Queen delivers out her bounties so freely, as if God had established her in his
room, to deal out his blessings, and enrich those that are his. She does not
only extend her charity to those that ask it, but to those also, who neither
pretend nor expect any thing: she gives much, and delays not; she gives
cheerfully, and repents not; and, in fine, Liberality is a virtue, which she
practices after so noble and generous a manner, that she stretches it so far,
as it may be called liberality; and she cannot extend it farther, without
making it cease to be a virtue. She does not at all counterfeit the liberal or
the magnificent, for it would be a hard matter for her, to keep her self from
not being so: Therefore she need not struggle for a disguise, or labor to seem
that which she is. While she permits her self to follow the stream of her own
inclinations, she can never fall into any thing, but what is just and virtuous;
and therefore her good actions flowing from their Original, and not being
drawn out by violence, as those of many Heroes have been, nor overflowing
their banks, as those of some Prodigalls, are not less admired for their
easiness and continuance, than for their luster and magnificence. Thus she is
the honor of her age, and the general benefit of the world; the Sun may
sooner wrap his flames in eternal darkness, and hastening Rivers stop their
motions, then Christina cease to exercise her goodness. A renowned person in
the time of Augustus, addressing himself to Maecenas in a Poem, cries out,
Maecenas, you have given me too much, I am weary with receiving. And truly we
may say, that it is only the discretion of those, to whom she distributes her
benefits, that can put a stop to her magnificence.

Excess and Vanity may imitate Christina, simple natural Goodness may
proceed as far as she; but they must remember, that this greatness of courage
is not solitary, and without company; all the Virtues do march either before or
after, and the very same Fountain, from whence the particular ones draw forth
their favors and graces, does furnish the Commonwealth with benefits and
rewards, with counsels and resolutions, with mirth and recreations. But, if we
would see where She surpasses her self, and how She is altogether inimitable,
let us speak of her Spirit; let us say, that among all the passions of her
soul, Love is the most powerful; but it is the love of Sciences. She is all
just, all prudent, all glorious, and all magnificent; but there is something
that appears with a presence, greater then all this, She Is all-knowing too,
and one may pronounce her to be as well the Queen of the Muses, as the Queen of
the Swedes. Her Jurisdiction is as general and as large over good Spirits, as
her Soveraignity is absolute over her People. ^here is not a Person who is
ignorant, of those admirable and clear lights, wherewith the study of Learning
has enriched her; nor is there any, that has arrived to so great a
perfection, as that we should appeal to him from any of her Judgments. She has
so great an insight into the merit of every one, that it would be a very
difficult thing for her, to mistake or deceive her self.

It is no more a new thing to Swedland to have learned people, and persons
capable of great matters, since she has a Queen who alone possesses
whatsoever the Sciences contain, that is either obscure or much sought after;
who can dive into the very center of things supernatural, so that nothing that
savours of goodness can be shut up in darkness or kept from the reach of her
piercing soul. She is a Queen, who cuts off time from her own divertisments,
and shakes off all imaginable pleasures, to divert her soul after this
admirable fashion. We need no more wonder, how this State prospers so well, or
by what means it is so marvellously governed, since we in our days enjoy that,
which Cato wished for with so much passion, in his imaginary Republic; He
desired, as a chief means to make States happy, that they might either be
governed by Kings that were Philosophers, or by Philosophers that were Kings.

But she that holds the Government, is she not yet more then all this, seeing
she is not only a Queen and a Philosopher together, but she rises higher
still, and is the Queen of Sages and Philosophers. Lie still then, and sleep in
security, for it is she that is your conduct: You need not fear any shipwreck
of your happiness, so long as she sits at the Helm: You may deride the fury
of Storms and Rocks, for it is not possible that you should miscarry.
Christina watches for you, her Genius guides you, and her prudence is
answerable for your safety. Who would then think, that this great Queen should
disrelish her fortunes, who nourishes so just designs, and who, besides so
many great men now living, to whom she communicates her intentions, and admits
into her counsels, she yet bestows her hours, and the dearest of her life,
upon the hearing of so many dead Counselors, I would say, so many good Books,
which instruct her with liberty, and teach her all that, which may render
Queens illustrious and commendable to posterity; she also understands them, in
whatsoever language they speak to her: so that there is nothing considerable,
of which this apprehensive Princess has not an exact knowledge, or utters not
with a good grace.

But who is there, that will not above all things admire those complete and
learned Letters, which she is so generous, as to write to Persons, eminent by
their fortunes and virtues. May not one say of her, with more reason then of
Chrysostom, That a stream of gold flows from her tongue and her mouth, and
that she takes a special care to polish that gold, and adorn it with a
pleasing luster. We may say this, and (without mentioning here, those who have
rejoiced in so precious a benefit, and been possessours of so admirable a
treasure) we may maintain with astonishment, that she alone can comprehend
whole Volumes in a few Lines, and contract great Books into small Papers. Her
words are so pure, so exact, and so delicious; her sentences so choice, and so
ponderous, her expressions so full of familiarity and freedom, and all the
flowers of Rhetoric so curiously dispersed through them all, that it may with
the same confidence be said of her, as of Saint Ambrose, That the honey sucking
Bees were her Nurses; for, she is enriched both with understanding and
discourse, and has an Eloquence sweeter, then the treasures of Hybla. Her
Secretaries in effect are rather Officers in show then of necessity: She her
self composeth the most difficult, and the most important Dispatches; and when
she would explain her self in commanding terms, and a style full of Majesty;
or, when she would apply the characters of her favor, and use expressions
civil and obliging, she never usurps borrowed thoughts, nor picks words out of
another fancy; her own ingenuity presents her with variety of excellent
matter, that may either allure affections by courtesy, or compel them by
violence. And truly, if there is a place, where Learning is disintangled and
methodicall; where Eloquence is orderly disposed, and vigorous; where Zeal is
pleasing and powerful; where the Graces are instructive and edifying, we may
securely say, it is in this great Queen. She cannot content her self only with
the depth and solidity of her opinion, but she adds also the dignity of
expression, and the magnificence of words. She gives a splendour and acuteness
to her sentences, a smoothness and luster to her periods; and the mixtures
which she makes of things, profitable and suitable, is so just, and tempered so
to the purpose, that she seems only to please and divert, when she speaks with
sovereignty and command. There is as much of greatness as Majesty, in all her
actions, but this Greatness is polished and well managed, and this Majesty is
pleasing and full of charms.

I do not here intend to give you an Analysis, nor to comprise as 'twere in an
inventory, all the virtues of this glorious Princess; and though I should be
so daring as to take it in hand, yet my endeavors could never be successful;
for, in the performing of such an enterprise, the eloquence of Greece and Rome
would find an apparent impossibility; since the powerful Genius of
Demosthenes, and the flowery Rhetoric of Crassus, never possessed any term or
figure, which could represent what that age was never blessed with. But if those
great Orators, whose persuading tongues, did, in their times, entise away
hearts, commit violence upon the will, and make souls Prisoners by the ear,
could never arrive at any but shallow expressions, and thoughts altogether
unfit to set forth our Princess: What censure will you pass upon my temerity,
who have undertaken that, of which I acknowledge them to have been incapable:
I, to whom age has denied the experience of those great men: I, who have never
approached the Sanctuary of Kings: I, to whom Nature has refused all those
Graces, which are necessary to this illustrious Matter: And I, who in
literature have had but a common and ordinary education. Yet I dare say, and my
Vanity has a very plausible foundation, that of all those mouths, which have
had the happiness to praise our Queen, I am he, who will bear her Elogy the
highest, and approach nearest to a complete description. I know well,
Gentlemen, that your attention is awakened, and that you long to understand the
effect of my boasting promises, which seem to you to be no less a paradox,
than the saying of an ancient Philosopher of Greece, who vaunted, That he could
drink up all the Water in the Sea. But I will not hold you any longer in
suspense, I will not make you linger any more, in expectation of a thing, which
I perceive you wish for with so much ardency. Yet, if you think, that when I
intend to speak worthily of Christina, I ought to produce large Elogies of her
beauty, you very much deceive your selves; if you imagine, that I must praise
her prudence, you are still wide from my aim; or if you think, that I must
make long Commentaries upon her virtues, you do not at all comprehend the
excellency of her merit. See, see, after what manner it is, that I ought to
speak worthily of her: When you meet with any deserving person, who shall
discourse to you of the Virtues and the Graces, who shall make an illustrious
comparison of the beauties of the Body with those of the Soul, and who in fine
shall introduce Justice, Temperance, Prudence, and greatness of Courage, in an
elevation so high, as was never yet attained by any: say only one word, and
that shall be of greater efficacy then whatsoever we have yet expressed: say
only, That our Queen enjoyes all these fair virtues, in a degree more eminent
and more illustrious then he has yet spoken of. But proceed no farther; take
not to your self the liberty to say that which you believe should be added to
make the Elogy more complete, and more accomplished: for, if there should come
a third that should say to you, Our Princess exceeds whatsoever you say; This
last is he that would merit the Palm.

When you perceive any of those famous Orators, who, to render the vices
odious, endeavor by plausible Invectives and eloquent Declamations to
represent to you, how disgraceful they are in their nature, how deplorable in
the use, and how dangerous in the issue; say, that our Queen has not one of
all these Defects: and you shall comprise more in that apt Negation, then if
you had called to your aid all the precepts of the most knowing Rhetoric. Let
us content our selves therefore to acknowledge the extent of that which rejects
all measures; let us rest satisfied with the admiration of that which we cannot
comprehend: let us follow her only by the view, since no swiftness can
overtake her; let us see her at a distance and contracted, since we cannot
approach so near to her, as to behold her in all her Dimensions. What man is
there, that is not transported with amazement and admiration to this Maiden
Queen, who in the first flower of her youth was the general astonishment of the
Universe? who is mounted upon a Throne, whose Majesty the greatest Princes
cannot parallel, who bears sway over the most Martial Nation of the whole
World? who alone carries the burden of her affairs? who is learned, who is
knowing, who is just and merciful to all alike? O what an adoreable person is
this, who can sustain upon her shoulders a burden so ponderous, as would make
the rest of the world sink under the weight! O the vastness of her Genius, that
can comprehend all that the world knows powerful! O the Divinity of that soul,
which animates so glorious a substance.

I know well, that the Jews have had women for their Judges, Prophetesses, and
Generals of their Armies: The Romans and Greeks have had some, who knew how to
Conquer, and bring home Triumph and Victory. All the world will witness, that
they have been adored both with wisdom and knowledge, and many States cannot
without ingratitude deny them to have been the Redeemers of their Countries
Liberty: in fine, the virtue of this Sex is as ancient as the world, and has
produced many fair examples in all Times and Ages. Women have publicly taught
Philosophy and Rhetoric at Athens. It was a Woman that succeeded in the School
and reputation of Plotinus of Alexandria. The Universities of Padua and
Bolognia, have had some of that Sex Graduates and Regents. Holland has lost
one lately, whom they did esteem to be their tenth Muse: and to say nothing of
those whom Orators and Poets have had for Competitors and Rivals; there is not
a Nation who has not embalmed in History, some female Hero's, or warlike
Amazons: But I am fully assured, that all those things which can be said of the
fair qualities of this Sex, meet happily assembled in our Queen. She has the
admirable Justice and Piety of those illustrious Jews, who were both Warriers
and Prophetesses; She has the courage of those victorious Greeks; and the
power of those conquering Romans; She has all those affections for her people,
that those generous Mothers of their Countries could be capable of: In fine,
She enjoyes all that large capacity and profound learning, which added splendour
to those wise and knowing Women, who with honor supplied the places of learned
men and Philosophers. But if she alone has all the virtues of all the others
together, don't think, O men, that she can have the least defect in any of them
in particular! nothing less then that; every thing shines in her with an
unspotted flame; but let me only say, that she is good naturally, that she is
also good by industry, and it will suffice to stiffle all those thoughts, which
may hinder you from rendering justice to her glory.

It is certain, Great Queen, that all that which we are about to say, cannot be
suspected for flattery, none can ever reproach the excess or swelling of our
words, they may blame rather our sterility then our abundance, seeing that at
this day the eyes of all Europe are fixed upon you, and there is not a mouth,
if it have but the smallest relish of Christianity, which makes not you the
object of its blessings. You are the Model of Kings, but it must be meant of
good Kings, and not of Tyrants, not of those who lay oppressions upon their
people, and enforce them to stiffle their Religion, but of those only who
establish it by their example, and whose moderation renders them the delights
of their people; these last are they to whom you are the ordinary
entertainment; and it cannot be but a sweet satisfaction, that so many
Sovereigns, and so many illustrious Princes, should descend from their Thrones
to become your Spectators, and (I may resolutely say, for it is no more then
truth) to become your Adorers: That Consort cannot but be harmonious, which
springs from the noise and acclamations of so many victorious persons, who
applaud you with their Palms, which though peaceable and clear from blood, are
as worthy as those stained and tumultuary ones, which you have gained in the
common dissension of Europe. And truly it is no small glory for you to have
out-gone whatever Histories and Annals have for six thousand years produced,
fullest of renown and astonishment; for in all those acclamations which your
Armies afford you, your reputation gains a greater height and luster, from your
virtue, which is so victorious over hearts, than from that fortune of yours,
which has been glorious by so many Armies defeated, by so many Journies and
Battles obtained, and by so many Towns assaulted.

And you, Noble Princess, the illustrious Pillar that sustaines the welfare of
this Monarchy: You, my Lords, who have gloriously Conquered and triumphed over
your enemies: You, who under the Great Gustavus Adolphus, have been always
Invincible, and always Victorious under your illustrious Queen: You, (I say)
who have so often besprinkled her glorious Palms with your blood, who have
made them thrive in the shade of your victorious Arms, and who have engraff't
her Trophies upon your sweat, and painful Travels: nay farther, You whom she
calls with Justice her Right hand: It is a glorious thing for you to have
brought into subjection, so many people both within and without Germany, both
upon Sea and upon Land, to have forced all those either to bend or break, who
would have resisted your valor, to have cleared your Frontires, and added
whole Provinces to the flourishing Empire of your Queen; to have made him
tremble, to whom a spiritual Tyranny allows the vanity of wearing a
Triple-Crown, and to compel souls to the Chains and Shackles of a miserable
servitude: And in fine, to have humbled that proud Family, who had for a long
time forecast the foundations of an Universal Monarchy, which you have
brought down to the language of Petitions, and have constrained them to ask
that peace which they denied to others with abundance of rigor.

And you, my Lords, who have interposed with your weighty Counsels, who have
marked out the delineaments of those glorious enterprises, and have carti'd
away the praise of beginning that with your Brains, which others have executed
with their Courage. It is no small glory for you to make an equal division of
your Palms and Laurels, since that you have all consorted and conspired so
advantagiously for the welfare of your Country. But after all, when you,
illustrious Warriors, shall have carried away more Victories, then you have yet
done; when you shall have over-throwne all the Empires, which you have yet but
shaken, and then triumph over all the world; when you shall have charged with
Chains so many Kings, whom you shall make your Prisoners, and lead them to the
feet of your Queen: And you! when you shall have given Counsels yet better, if
it were possible, then those you have hitherto given, when they shall be put in
practice; and (to carry the ma^ter a little farther) when all events shall be
submitted to the prudence of your reasonings; you shall then have a glory more
magnificent and significant then all that; which is, the glory to see
Christina. O happy people! O happy Nation, that can enjoy such a Queen! happy
is that Generosity, which can be sacrificed to her service! happy Lords! happy
Commons, that can live under so delicious a Government, and behold in their
days so many successive wonders! happy Earth, that can be the supporter of a
burden so worthy, and a weight so well balanced! happy Pole, which disperses
from above, such sweet and delightful influences! happy Stars, which have
been the Ascendants of a Constellation so blessed, and a birth so favorable!
but more happy yet is Heaven, from whence all blessings fall upon your heads in
so plentiful a shower. As for me, I confess, that after so many learned men,
who have composed the Elogy of the most Renowned Queen in the World, I ought
to have took it into my Consideration, either to have held my peace, or to
have spoken something that might have answered the merit of my Subject, and to
have recompensed you for that calm and continued patience, wherein you have
wrapped your attention. I had also been in doubt whether I should have obeyed
my first resolutions, and so slept in silence; but a glorious Emulation, and a
lawful Envy, confirmed my thoughts in this liberty. It grieved me much, when I
perceived how the praises of this adoreable Princess, was promoted among all
people and Nations, and Celebrated in all sorts of Languages, and that the
French only, the French I say, which is so much obliged to her, and which this
Princess has cherish't as her own, should be altogether silent in this
matter. Truly it is this reason which makes me choose rather to speak to you in
French, then in any other language; it is this which has emboldened me to
ascend into this place, and given protection to my weakness. It is true, that
this most illustrious Lord, whom the Commonwealth of England has sent hither,
and that train of Nobility which attends him, have much contributed to the
natural disposition which I always nourished, to admire the actions of this
incomparable Queen. The Benedictions of so many religious vows, which all of
them in particular have made for her prosperity, are manifest by experience:
Also it would not have been possible for me to have confined within my self,
those happy acclamations and wishes, which all England breathe forth for her
advantage. Do not suspect that my words are couch't in a disguise, they are
neither dissembling nor servile: they carry the hearts of persons that are
truly free, and from whom Tyranny can force up nothing of unworthy flattery.
This puissant Republique, which makes a world by it self, and which with the
help of Swedland, might give Laws to the whole Earth, produces nothing, but
what is of desert and value. If she knows how to chastise those, who raise
themselves against the glory of God, who pervert his service, and oppress their
people: She also knows how to heap her Benedictions and Praises upon good
Kings: With these she endeavors to conserve a real alliance; with them, she
intends nothing but an eternal War: In a word, She admires the one sort, as
much as she detests the other You ought not any more to doubt of this after so
glorious a Testimony, explained in this Embassage, which she has sent to you,
and by the worthy choice which she made of one of her most illustrious Lords.
If that wise Common wealth had not with much affection, wished for a good
correspondence with you, for the advancement of Gods honor, and if she had not
regarded with admiration the merits of Christina, she would not have chosen out
the most illustrious Person, among the most illustrious, or the most capable
among the most capable of all that great Island, which is accustomed to produce
so many gallant men: and to speak all in one word, she could not have chosen a
person more noble, or more worthy of Christina.

Let us draw to a Conclusion therefore: my Lords, seeing that all the virtues
of this glorious Queen are truly Royal; and that inferior and private
persons, cannot arrive at any that may be comparable to those; since then, they
cannot be communicated to any but her self, let us admire them as we ought:
and if for the better fixing in your memory, what has been already said, we
are obliged to repeat all again: I Will say, we cannot deliver to your eye a
perspective to make you behold those things, than which the Sun sees none
more mavelous: for, if you consider her Infancy, you will find it full of
admiration and wonders; if her life, you will see it replenished with Prodigies
and extraordinary actions. The first is one Series of continued miracles; and
that little time which has been drawn from her precious life, has it not been
crowned with a perpetual interlacing of Victories? And has she not now
undertook to settle your Repose? May she receive along benefit from that sweet
peace which she has procured you: May she rejoice a whole age in that felicity
which she has purchased for you. May she also render to Christianity, those
years which were due, and which Death ravished from her Father, and your King:
and, to shut up all, Let us earnestly beseech the great King of Heaven, that,
whatsoever he has deprived us of in the renowned Gustavus, he would add it to
the prosperity, to the glory, and to the long and continued Reign of Christina.

To the Fair, Virtuous, and nobly honored Lady Mrs R. G. Upon this Panegyric.
Madam,
WHen this bless't Panegyric, which has been
Embalmed by th'Name and virtues of a Queen,
Shall court the expense of a few idle hours,
From others eyes, as now 't has done from yours,
The curious Reader may perchance mistake
Our Author's mind, and think, while he did make
Her Elogy, he strove not how to fit
His matter to her worth, but his own wit..
(Yet we may think her merits stretch so far,
Both are defective and come short of her.)
But would I trace your virtues, there does lie
Subject enough to draw the Muses dry:
When I Would explain one Grace, another then,
And then another, checks my daring pen,
Till in such happy s^ms they do appear,
Arithmetic might lose its Numbers there.
So, fling a Stone into a Pond, it hurles
The willing Waters into wanton curles,
One Ring creates a second, that does make
A third, the third a fourth, until they shake
The Circles into more, and so they grow
To multitudes as your fair Virtues do.
You sit like her enthroned in such a Sphere,
Envy or Flattery cannot reach you there;
And what is said of her, if said of you,
Would be thought little, rather then untrue,
For you so much excel, are so complete,
You need no Titles for to make you Great.
The Queen of Sweden we allow to be
Majestical, but you are Majesty:
She Is good, you goodness are; each King
And Queen may have the Name, you are the Thing.
And the same Princess (such is your renown,
Your head is wreathed with such a glorious Crown
Of worth) would take it as a favor done her,
To be accepted as your Maid of Honor.
Imperious Pharaoh, and the tawny crew
Of his dark subjects, when old Nile withdrew
His watery blessings from that fruitful land,
Were kept from Famine by the thrifty hand
Of saving Joseph, in that fatal dearth,
Had he not fed them, they would been food for earth.
So did not you distribute Virtue here
And there, to some few Ladies; where, O where
Should we then find it? You from heaven were sent
As the only proper and fit instrument
To convey goodness: Though the multitude
May make us more, yet you must make us good.
Thus, thus, your growing Virtue does dispense,
And (like the Seas unbounded influence)
S^pplies the lesser Rivers, till their sides
Grow big, yet feels no want in its full rides.
You other souls make rich, and yet are grown,
Not one small grace the poorer in your own.
Strange operations, noble Fair! when you
Can be alone both Stream and Fountain too.
When I behold some fair illustrious Grace,
Or Virtue, revell in the soul or face
Of some bright beauty, strait my Fancy flies
To you, to know what that Grace signifies:
For whatsoever's Good or Great, it is all
Copied from you the true Original.
The greatest souls are in your colors shown,
You are their Light, they your Reflection:
They, but like shadows which the Sun has drew,
Are only dark resemblances of you;
And as dark shadows set fair pictures forth,
So their defects add luster to your worth,
Whose conquering brightness is now grown so high
The Persians had forsook their Deity,
Had they known you; their old superstition
Had changed its course, and in new channels run,
You could have shot into their breasts a higher
And warmer zeal, then his neglected fire.
Your soul is so well breathed, from spots so free,
Angels might there a purer substance see
Then themselves are: Divines may learn from thence
How Adam's soul looked in its Innocence.
Thus is your inside framed; yet you can show
A face, which does as much perfection owe
As that draws wonder, each of them must pass
Unmatch't, unless each be the others Glass.
Let daring Monarchs follow warlike sounds,
Delight in death, revel in dismal wounds,
Let them their louder Conquests boast, and build
Their idle Trophies up, yet must they yield
Blood for this purchase; blood, whose drops may rise
To greater value, then their Victories.
You need not this, for you more deaths can deal
By looks, then Armies by their fatal steel:
There Is not a half born smile, that salli's from
Your noble face, but brings a prisoner home:
Not one glance falls from you, but what does fly
Tip't with the powers of Love and Victory.
Here lies a Captive (in's chains fortunate)
Who speaks your praise, though thence he drew his Fate.
Another there, proud of his fetters, cries,
His heart is fetched from your triumphant EYES.
There, there is the cause of all, thence it is that thus
You always do become Victorious.
Their Globes are with such forcing fires possessed,
They can dart flames into the frozen breast
Of a cold Hermit, and with little pains,
Make wanton blood trace in a Cynick's veins:
That which we falsely call a Wart, does prove
To be the very Magazin of Love,
The strongest Tower of warlike Cupid, whence
He flings his fires, had but the Giants thence
Fo^ght against heaven, they quickly might invade
Th'opposing Gods, and heaven their Throne have made
All the Artillery of Cupid lies
Couch't in the piercing luster of your eyes:
They like sure Agents set his plots on foot,
It Is he may speak, it is they must execute:
They Are two great Theaters, Beauty and Love
There act their parts, and in just Triumphs move.
Do you but frown, the stoutest souls are slain,
Do you but smile they all revive again:
Such power lies in your eyes, that you alone
Can antedate the Resurrection.
The Poets (men, who in their brains comprise
A Mint, where Fancy can coin Histories,
And feign Creations) have so loudly praised
The beauties of a Venus, that they raised
Her person up to heaven, and gave her there
The glories of a Goddess, and a Star:
But there was no one such, nor could she ever
Attain those beauties which the Poets give her
There Is but one way to make their praises true,
To say, They are a prophecy of you,
And then they are all fulfilled: you only are
The Goddess that deserves the name of Fair:
You are the rule of beauty, she alone
That is like you, has gained perfection.
Sheba's great Queen, traveled to gaze upon home
The glories of the prudent Solomon:
Had you then lived, you might have staid at
And seen as much: he would to you have come.
He Would have despised his Buildings, and made you
His only Temple and Devotion too.
Amongst all the Beauties of the loudest Fame,
Your Body's built in the exactest frame:
O happy 'bove the joys of gods, is he,
Whose Stars shall so plo^ his felicity,
As to give him a Gem of such high price,
And let him ransack that soft Paradise.
But, stay fond thoughts, where does your fancy run?
Had you first learned to unstrip the Sun,
And count his Atoms, then perhaps you might
Number those Graces that are infinite.
While I thus strive to set your wonders forth
At full, I drop far short of your great worth:
Ixion so in his ambition proud,
Looked for a Goddess and embraced a cloud.
Smile on the Sacrifice that here I bring,
And your acceptance makes it meriting:
Altars of Goddesses bestow a share
Of worth, on th'Incense that is offered there.
Your most Devoted W. L.

FINIS.

