THE Priests Patent CANCELLED, OR THE Lay-mans Answer, to the PRIESTS
OBJECTIONS.

Wherein the pretended grounds of the Ministry for the upholding of their
Arbitrary practices, over the Consciences and Estates of the People are
answered, and refuted, by undeniable Arguments from scripture and Reason.

By William Hartley.

Zach. 13.4. And it shall come to pass in that day the Prophets shall be
ashamed every one of his vision, which he has prophesied, neither shall they
wear a rough garment to deceive. Verse. 5. But shall say I am no Prophet, I am
a husband man, for man taught me to keep Cattle from my youth.

Laicis licet curam de reformanda religione, and ecclesia suscipere,
cestantibus, vel non facientibus officium, vel facultate destitutis Episcopis
and Ecclesiasticis. Polan.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson for Henry Cripps and are to be sold in Pope's Head
Alley. 1649.

The Lay-mans Answer to the Priests Objections, etc.
IT is no small piece of Sophistry, that the enemies of the Gospels Freedom
have made use of; In putting terms of Odium and scandal upon the persons and
endeavors of those, who desire to promote the Peoples Liberty: viz. Puritan,
Roundhead, Anababtist, Independent, etc. to which may be added, that learned,
deep, and most Authentic expression (mentioned in the Scots Declaration) to
wit Tubpreachers: and now as (if these names were worn thread bare) those who
stand for equal and impartial Justice, are stigmatized, and branded under the
notion of Levellers; giving many groundless, and improbable constructions upon
their candied endeavors tending unto public safety: charging them with
dismounting Magistracy, overthrowing Ministry, denying Property: whereas their
desire is, that Magistrates rule by Law, and not by Will; Ministers walk after
Gospel order, and not carry themselves as Many Ministers write themselves
Rectors of such a place.
lords over Gods Inheritance, and every man to enjoy his birthright due unto
him, by the laws of God and Nature: and no man to be (by Patent) vassalized,
either in Person or Estate: And for a want of a right understanding, or serious
consideration, of the intentions of the persons scandalized: Hence it is, that
the People fight against their own Freedom, cry up a King, cry down a
Parliament; speak against the Army, Malign the well-affected, etc. All which
mischeifes may be properly interpreted to flow from the generality of the
Clergy, who through the powerful influence, and subtle insinuation, they
have gained upon their hearers affections, do bend the Peoples hearts to the
crooked bow of their self-concernments: What a great and cross wheel the
Clergy have been to this Kingdom, is evident by several ancient writers;
omitting former presidents, I refer you to the Reign of Henry the eighth. In
whose time, Cardinal Woolsey and the Clergy (the King not pleasing their
humors) did disavow the Majestracy of the Nation, pretending their Oath of
Allegiance to the Pope; but Woolsey with Abbots, Priors, etc. being rooted, the
Clergy (seeing themselves brought into such a premenirie) easily dispensed
with the Oath to the Pope, and swear supremacy to King Henry: but at that time
(says my Author) the Clergy was in great danger to have been overthrown; And
when the Bishop of Rochester made a plausable argument (grounded upon custom)
for continuance of their Spiritual Livings, a Gentleman of Grays Inn made
answer, See the large Chronicle of England page 923.
It was a custom for Thieves to Rob upon Shooters Hill, ergo, they may Rob.
The insolency of the Bishops against the supreme authority, viz. (the
Parliament) crowned with their own ruin is fresh in memory. (I forbear to
instance any thing from the Synod) But, how mutable in principles of Religion
this generation of men have been, is notoriously manifested; I speak not to
prejudice any pious man (being fully persuaded there has been, and is, (even
at this time) a competent number of godly Ministers, who have, and will seal
the Testimony of Truth with their Bloods) but in reference to the generality of
the Clergy, whose Religion Be of any Religion rather then suffer, or loose
their benefices.
turns (like Cocks of weather) with the strongest Wind: In the time of Henry
the eighth, the Clergy were Papists; In Edward the sixth, Protestants; in
Queen Mary Reign, Papists; in Queen Elizabeth's time Protestants, and now
Episcopal, Presbyterian, for Church Government, Regis ad exemplum, etc.
etc. which being considered, does it not deeply concern all Christian, (
Berean like) to search the Scripture for Truth and Knowledge; and no longer
take their Religion upon trust from their Ministers: but, by a principle of
light in themselves from the Gospel, may be able to render a reason of their
own Faith. It is to be well approved of, for great men to entertain Chaplains
in their Families; but it would add to their Honors if (after religious
Brooks example) they would become their own Mediators to God, to pray, give
thanks for, and to instruct those who are committed to their charge. And as we
highly commend the Parliament in desiring godly and able Ministers to pray and
preach before them: so likewise we should heartily rejoice if the Kingdoms
Representatives would Then the contention betwixt M. Love and M. Dell, would be
at an end.
themselves (rather then by proxii) being best privy to their own
concernments, represent to God their own condition; and although this may
appear Mr. Bates interrupted Mr. Hartly in his exercise, refusing either to
hear or confer, being assisted with a company of rude, ignorant, and
unworthy persons, broke up the Meeting with disorder.
grievous in the eyes of Ministers, and persons ignorant of the knowledge and
privilege in the Gospel, yet it is a glorious and acceptable work in the eyes
of God and all persons, whose ends are for the advancement of Truth. Let Us
hear what can be said against it.

Jehovah (Lord Almighty) is the God of Order, 1 Object.
and in all Ages, as there were Kings elected to execute the Magistraticall
Office in matters of Civill-Government: so there were persons separated and
appointed, to exercise jurisdiction in things spiritual. Therefore the
Ministry of the Church of England is grounded upon fundamental authority.

We answer, God is not the Author of confusion: Reply*
And in order to Government there was a Law given (Gods only Vicegerent) unto
which, all persons were bound to yield subjection alike: Masters of Families,
eldest, or Genesis 34.19.
Noblest of Tribes, (which were styled Heads or Chief of the people) stand
authorized in point of execution. As for Monarchs, Kings, or more properly
Popes, when by your Clergy rendered over all persons, and all causes, whether
Ecclesiastical, or Civil supreme Judges, and Moderators. Such creatures were
never of 1 Samuel 8 7. Hosea 13 10.
Divine institution, their foundation, and continuance, being ( ex
superabundanti) grounded upon conquest and tyranny. And as for persons
qualified with an outward power over their brethren in things Spiritual, we
find no such thing; God being the God of all Spirits, and unto him shall all
flesh come. Is not the Sea a proper Continent for every Rivelet?

2 Object,
There is a fallacy in Dolus versatur generalibus
generals; but I shall give you particular instances warranted by Scripture
even before the Flood. Whom do you conclude Enos to be? The Scripture
witnessing, that in his days Genesis 4.26.
men began to call on the name of the Lord. And do we not read that Noah was a
preacher of righteousness. If Noah was a Preacher, it will necessarily imply
he had an Auditory: which being granted, this must follow, that all were not
Preachers.

Reply.
It is true, Commune non distinguit.
Universals yield no safe conclusions: Therefore we shall answer to your
presidents. First to your Querie touching Enos, doubtless he was a godly man,
as also were the generality of people in his time: so intimate the words by you
quoted, viz. at that time There were six generations between Enos and Noah,
till whose time we read not of the worlds Apostasy.
men began to call on the name of the Lord; and Enos was one of those men.
Whether Noah preached righteousness to the world, either by perfecting of the
Ark, or by way of Exhortation, or both, is not much questionable: This being
most clear, that those which called upon the Lord (with Enos) were preserved;
and those who refused to be preachers (like Noah) of Gods righteousness, were
destroyed. And doubtless, if Noah, and Lot, had had more fellows (in their
generations) those most useful servants Fire and Water, had never proved
Sodoms, and the Worlds implacable masters.

3 Object.
But what say you to Melchizedeck? was not he a man in order of the Priesthood?
approved by God, justified by man, for unto him faithful Abraham paid his
Tenths. Now if all be Priests alike, and no distinction in persons, why did not
Abraham receive Tithes of Melchizedeck, according as Melchisedeck did of
Abraham?

Reply.
We give our judgment, this Melchizedeck was not man, but God, as is
manifested, Heb. 7. by his Title, or Motto, that is to say, King of
Righteousness, King of Peace. And in all Ages (since the world began) we have
not read of such a King as Righteousness, or such a Kingdom as Peace. And
that this Melchisedeck was God, or the very Christ, is clear from Heb. 7 3.
Without Father, without mother, without descent (or pedigree) having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God,
abides a Priest for ever.

This is a manifest contradiction of the old and new Testament: For if this
Melehisedeck had been God, 4 Object.
then Abraham had presently died: For no man can see God and live, and you know
Abraham continued long after time. Neither could he be Christ, being not born
till thousands of years afterward. When the fullness of time was come, God
sent his Son, etc.

No contradiction at all, Reply.
(only your misprision) be it granted, God as he is in his Essence, and
incomprehensible glory, cannot be seen or comprehended by any mortal eye, yet
God in his dispensations and manifestations, is both seen and comprehended of
the creature. What say you to the burning Bush in the Wilderness that spoke
unto Moses, and the still Voice that talked with Elijah, Do not the Scriptures
say, God was in the Bush, and God was in the Voice? which the Author to the
Hebrews lively sets forth, Hebr. 1.1. God (says he) who at sundry times, and
after diverse manners spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these
days spoken unto us by his Son, who is the brightness of his Fathers glory,
and the express image of his person; which image we interpreting according to
the mystery of the Gospel, Jesus Chrtst is rendered to be God manifested in the
flesh. This considered, we have ground to believe that Melchisedeck which
appeared unto Abraham in the shape or form of a man, was Christ: And his own
words (at a conference with the Jews) seem to imply as much, viz. Abraham saw
my days and rejoiced.

It Is granted Melchisedeck was a Type of Christ, 5 Object.
and so the Scripture quoted by you says, Hebr. 7.3. like unto the Son of God,
but you know every Omne simile non est idem. Reply.
like is not the same.

We understand a Type to be a Form, or Image, representing somewhat that is not
properly in its self, or a shadow which vanishes upon the apparition of the
substance: Now if this Melchizedeck was a Type, or representative, Christ (the
represented) being come, this type is of no validity, but (as minded before)
this Melchisedeck abides for ever: and it was the apex or height of Christ's
dignity to be styled a Priest of the same Order. And for your Schoole-Maxime,
Every like is not the same; in the Scripture sense the words similis and sicut
(vel aut quasi, like or as) are of propinquity, John 1.14. We beheld his glory
as the glory of the only begotten Son of God,

6. Object.
But if Melchizedeck were God or Christ, why did he take Tithes? God or Christ
has need of Abraham's substance, but this Melchizedeck (as you must confess)
did really receive Tenths of Abraham; if so, to what end or use did he take
them, except for conformation of a Priesthood.

Reply.
We Answer, That the Tithe which Melchizedeck received of Abraham, was not the
tenth of increase of Cattle, Corn, Wine, Oil, etc. but a Tenth part of the
prize that he had obtained in overthrow of the four Kings that took his Nephew
Genesis 8.18.
Lot prisoner: Moreover Melchizedeck was not a Priest to Abraham, for Abraham
was his own Priest to offer up his own sacrifices, as may be instanced in the
stretching forth his hand to slay Isaac: and to your quaere, to what end, or
what use Melchizdeck made of the Tenths received, I shall resolve you when I
know after what manner the three Angels did eat of Sarahs Milk, Butter, and
dressed Calfe. How inconsistent then to Scripture or Reason is your argument
for Tithes or Priesthood from any president of Melchizedeck.

7. Object.
While our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were in a strange land, there could
be no settled Priesthood; but when the Israelites were an entire People, then
Aaron and his seed were appointed to teach the People, no other tribe permitted
to that office; and do you not read of Gods Judgment inflicted upon Corah,
Dathan and Abiron, for meddling with the Priests Office, a fair warning for
Laymen to take heed how they thrust themselves into the office of the
Ministry.

Reply.
We answer, That the Ceremonial and Typical part of Gods worship was
appointed to the Leviticall Priesthood, as the offering up of sacrifices of
Sheep, Goats, or the like; for sin offerings, heave offerings, etc. But the
real and substantial part of Gods worship, as Prayer for pardon of sin,
Praises for mercies received, Preaching or declaring the goodness of God one
to another, etc. was referred to all persons indifferently: as may appear by
the desire of Moses, when he was acquainted that others besides the Priests
taught in the Camp, would God (says he) that all the Lords people were
Prophets: and for your president in the punishment of Corah, Dathan and Abiron,
(we conceive) it had relation to their contempt and mutiny against Moses and
Aaron, (as public Officers) and not merely or simply for offering Sacrifice:
As may be instanced, that it is lawful at a bar of justice for all standers by
to go along with the Majestrate in condemning a Malefactor, but it is a high
offront to justice for any there present to pull the Judge from the seat of
Judicature to give sentence themselves: you may consider the altar erected (for
a good end) by the Rubenites, Gaddites and half the tribe of Manasseth is not
condemned; and Manoah (no Levite but an Ephramite) his Sacrificing a Kid upon a
rock was by God approved: and for your prerogative distinction of Laity and
Clergy, the Scripture does hold forth no such thing, God having made of one
blood all mankind, Jew and Gentile, Male and Female, Bond and Free, are all
one in Christ; Acts 10.
and we much wonder at that self-conceited expression in your formal prayer,
viz. the Tribe of Levi the lot of thine own inheritance: seeing God is no
respecter of persons; but in every Nation he that fears him, and works
righteousness is accepted. And to your caveat of Laymen entering into the
ministry (if you mean preaching and declaring the word of God) be it answered,
we have as good right to that employment or (function) as to the lands we hold,
or clothes we wear.

But you may understand Christ speaking to the Tribe of Levi, Ye tithe Mint
and Commin, 6. Object.
and neglect greater matters, these things ye ought to have done and etc. here
Christ approved of a Priesthood to receive Tithes: now if some had power to
receive, others were appointed to pay; so it will necessarily follow, there is
to be a distinction in persons, some ministers to bear rule in the Church and
teach, Reply.
others to hear and yield subjection to their government.

We answer, That Christ commanded obedience to the Leviticall Priesthood, and
approved the paying and receiving of Tithes: but the time when, and end for all
duties commanded by God of the Creature is to be Taking scripture out of place,
makes this conclusion and division amongst us.
considered, as it may be instanced, at the institution of Circumcision, in the
time of the law, it is written, every male which is not circumsized, that soul
shall be cut off from his people: but in the time of the Gospel, it is said, If
ye be circumsized, Christ shall profit you nothing: so then, you are to
consider the time when the Leviticall Priesthood was commanded, and you shall
find it to be before Christ took Aarons Office: for when he offered up himself
(once for all) then the Leviticall Priesthood had an Christ when he was upon
the cross said all was finished, and then gave up the ghost.
end: and for your better satisfaction, take the Apostles argument, Heb. 7.11.
if perfection were by the Leviticall Priesthood; what further need was there
that another Priest should rise after the order of Melchizedeck, and not be
called after the order of Aaron: the next verse thus, If the Priesthood be
changed, there is made a Mark our liucy woolsie Clergy, ministers of the
Gospel, yet exact tithe according to the Levitical priesthood.
necessity of a change of the Law: that is, if Christ (the only High Priest)
has made a perfect reconciliation, and atonement unto God by his own blood,
there needs no more sacrifice for sin, and that law which did enjoin the
people to bring offerings or pay tithes, for upholding of those typical
sacrifices; is now abrogated: for you are to take notice, that the end of the
institution of Tithes was more properly for the maintenance of a daily
sacrifice, and not solely or simply for the Priests profit, as you may read
Numb. 18.26. When ye take tithes of the children of Israel (which I have given
you from them for your inheritance) then ye shall offer a When the Parson
takes a tithe Calf, Lamb, Pig, Goose, etc. it fills his belly or his purse.
heave offering for the Lord: It was a complaint upon 1 Samuel 2.29.
Elies sons, that they had made themselves fat with the offerings of the
people. So then, it is evident Christ is our High Priest, and all the Saints of
God are partakers of his Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. and have all interest alike
(by him) to offer up Romans 12.1.
spiritual sacrifices unto God.

9 Object.
But what says St Paul, 1 Cor. 12.28. God sent some to be Apostles, some to be
Prophets, some to be Teachers: Are all Apostles? 1 Timothy 4.14.
Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? And it was charged Timothy, not to neglect
the gift that was given him by laying on of hands of the Presbytery, that is to
say, ordination of Ministers.

Reply.
We answer, that the Apostle in the chapter quoted, did inform the Corinthians
of the diversity of gifts, or several operations of Gods Spirit, as not
hereditary to any particular persons, or society of men, and that in the
Church, or among the Saints, all are not alike gifted. For, says he, All
cannot prophecy, all are not qualified with abilities to teach, all have not
the gift of healing, etc. Its your duty, as verse. 31. to covet earnestly the
best gifts, that is, labor to become Apostles, covet to prophecy, desire to
be able to teach; intimating that it was a great fault to be always learning,
and yet never come to perfection. For the gift that Timothy was commanded not
to neglect, is prophesying, and imposition or laying on of hands (as we give
our judgment) was used either in point of confirmation, or healing, as may be
instanced, James 5.16. If any be sick let him send for the Elders of the
Church, etc. and if the Translator had put in Eldership for Presbytery (which is
the proper signification of the word from the original) (...).
We might have understood something of the religion in the Kirk of Scotland,
and we wonder at the quaint speech of your Church Reformers, viz. Orthodoxall,
Canonical, Classical, Provincial, (though significant) yet not Gospel, or
vernaculer words: It is desired that the Clergy would use plain Scripture
language, and not amuse the peoples understanding by obscure and AEnigmative
expressions

To deny ordination is to give way to confusion, 10 Object.
and to open a door for the spreading of all errors, heresies, and schism,
every Mechanic f^llow will be stepping up into a pulpit to vent his own fancy.
Does not the Apostle Peter tell you, that unlearned men pervert the Scriptures
to their own destruction.

We answer, that graces and abilities from God do ordain, Reply,
constitute, and create a Minister, not an University, hand patent, or license
of the creature: For, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.12
I thank Jesus Christ our Lord, who has enabled me, for that he counted me
faithful, in putting me into the Ministry: to which you may add that
expression, Gal. 1.11. I testify unto you brethren, that the Gospel which was
preached of me, is not after man, for I neither received it of man, neither was
I taught it, but by revelation of Jesus Christ. To your caution touching the
spreading of errors, heresies, etc. we answer, The light of truth is able to
overthrow the darkness of error; one burning lamp is able to convince the
vanity of a thousand dark Lanthornes. No ignis fatuus can abide the Sun. And
for Mechanic men preaching, if you mean Tradesmen, or Artificers, viz.
Carpenters, Fishermen, Tentmakers, such were the Apostles of Christ, and no
disparagement to their Cloth (as you call it) or Ministry: Nay, the Apostle
lays an injunction upon the Ministers to labor, from a president of himself,
Acts 23.24. These hands have ministered to my necessities, I have showed you all
things, that so laboring you ought to support the weak, and remember the
words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It was a more blessed thing to give then
to receive. And for those unlearned men that pervert the Scriptures, are such
who are untaught and unlearned in Christ, the Scriptures quoted having no
relation to humane learning in the tongues: For in all ages the greatest
Scholars were most ignorant of Ch^sst, and the poor and simple receive the
Gospel. Be it granted, that some through ignorance (or misprision) have
perverted the Scripture; because some tender eyes have been prejudiced by the
Sun, Ergo, it is not good to behold the light of the Sun at all.

FINIS.
Nihil and natum and perfectum,
Gloria in excelsis Deo, sit salvus populus.


