APHORISMS POLITICAL.

BY James Harrington.



LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Fletcher, at the sign of the three Gilt
Cups in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Aphorisms Political.
I. OBsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. The Errors and Sufferings of the
People are from their Governors.

II. When the Foundation of a Government comes to be changed, and the
Governors change not the Superstructures accordingly, the people become
miserable.

III. The Monarchy of England was not a Government by Arms, but a Government by
Laws, though imperfect or ineffectual Laws.

IV. The Latter Governments in England, have been Governments by Arms.

V. The people cannot see, but they can feel.

VI. The people having felt the difference between a Government by Laws, and a
Government by Arms, will always desire the Government by Laws, and abhor that
of Arms.

VII. Where the spirit of the people is impatient of a Government by Arms, and
desirous of a Government by Laws, there the spirit of the people is not unfit
to be trusted with their Liberty.

VIII. The spirit of the people of England, not trusted with their Liberty,
drives at the Restitution of Monarchy by Blood and Violence.

IX. The spirit of the people of England, trusted with their Liberty, if the
form be sufficient, can never restore Monarchy; and if the form be
insufficient, will restore it without Blood or Violence.

X. The sufficiency of the form wherein the spirit of a people may be trusted
with their Liberty, amounts to a well-ordered Commonwealth, or Democracy.

XI. Where there is a well-ordered Commonwealth, the people are generally
satisfied.

XII. Where the people are generally dissatisfied, there is no Commonwealth.

XIII. The parties in England declaring for a Commonwealth, hold every one of
them something that is inconsistent with a Commonwealth.

XIV. To hold that the Government may be managed by a few, or by a party, is
inconsistent with a Commonwealth.

XV. To hold that there can be any National Religion or Ministry without
public Indowment and Inspection of the Magistracy, or any Government without a
National Religion or Ministry, is inconsistent with a Commonwealth.

XVI. To hold that there may be Liberty, and not Liberty of Conscience, is
inconsistent with a Commonwealth that has the Liberty of her own Conscience,
or that is not Popish.

XVII. Either Liberty of Conscience can have no security at all, or under
Popular Government must have the greatest security.

XVIII. To hold that a Government may be introduced by a little at once, is to
wave prudence, and commit things unto chance.

XIX. To hold that the Wisdom of God in the Formation of an House, or of a
Government, goes not universally upon natural principles, is inconsistent with
Scripture.

XX. To hold that the wisdom of man in the Formation of an House, or of
Government, may go upon supernatural principles, is inconsistent with a
Commonwealth, and comes to a kind of breaking of Jests; as if one should say,
God ordained the Temple, therefore it was not built by Masons; He ordained the
Snuffers, therefore they were not made by a Smith.

XXI. To hold that Hirelings, or an endowed Ministry, ought to be removed out
of the Church, is inconsistent with a Commonwealth.

XXII. Nature is of God.

XXIII. Some part in every Religion is natural.

XXIV. An universal Effect, demonstrateth an universal Cause.

XXV. An universal Cause is not so much natural, as it is Nature it self.

XXVI. Every man, either unto his terror or consolation, has some sense of
Religion.

XXVII. Man may rather be defined a Religious, then a Rational Creature; in
regard that in other Creatures there is something of Reason, but nothing of
Religion.

XXVIII. Government is of humane Prudence, and humane Prudence is adequate unto
man's nature.

XXIX. The prudence or Government that is regardless of Religion, is not
adequate nor satisfactory unto man's nature.

XXX. Where the Government is not adequate or satisfactory unto man's nature, it
can never be quiet or perfect.

XXXI. The major part of mankind gives it self up in the matter of Religion
unto the public leading.

XXXII. That there may be a public leading, there must be a National Religion.

XXXIII. Where the minor part takes away the National Religion, there the
major part is deprived of the Liberty of Conscience by the minor.

XXXIV. Where the major part is deprived of the Liberty of Conscience by the
minor, there they will deprive the minor of that Liberty of Conscience which
they might otherwise enjoy.

XXXV. In Israel there was an endowed Clergy or Priesthood, and a National
Religion under inspection of the Magistrate: whence the Christians in
Apostolic times defraying their own Ministry, could have Liberty of
Conscience; whereas if the Christians by going about to take away Tithes, and
abolish the National Religion, had endeavored to violate the Consciences of
the unconverted Jews, these being far greater in number, must needs have taken
away the Liberty of Conscience from the Christians.

XXXVI. Paul in Athens could freely and undisturbedly convert Dionysius and
others; therefore in Athens there was Liberty of Conscience: but if Paul and
his Converts had gone about to drive Hirelings, or an endowed Priesthood or
Clergy our of that Church, who sees not that the Athenians would have driven
Paul and his Converts out of Athens?

XXXVII. That there may be Liberty of Conscience, there must be a National
Religion.

XXXVIII. That there may be a National Religion, there must be an endowed
Clergy.

XXXIX. Till a Commonwealth be first framed, how such a Commonwealth should
make an effectual Union with another Nation, is not possible to be seen.

XXXX. The Union with Scotland, as it is vulgarly discoursed of, is destructive
both to the hopes of a Commonwealth in England, and of Liberty in Scotland.

XLI. The Union vulgarly spoken of, is by uniting Deputies of diverse
Commonwealths or Nations in the same standing Councils.

XLII. If the Commonwealth of England receive Deputies from Scotland in a
greater number then that of her own, she receieth Law from a foreign interest,
and so loses her own Liberty.

XLIII. If Scotland be received in an equal number, it obstructeth the freedom
of both, or occasioneth War or Dissension.

XLIV. If Scotland be received in an inferior number, she receives Law from
England, and so loses her Liberty.

XLV. Where Countries are diverse in their Laws, and yet are to receive Laws
one from the other, neither the Commonwealth giving Law knows what to give,
nor the Commonwealth receiving Law, understands what she receives: in which
case the Union returns unto force or confusion.

XLVI. The best way of holding a Nation different or not different in Laws, is
by way of Province.

XLVII. A Province, especially if she have strong holds, may by defraying of a
small guard, be kept unto a just League, and for the rest enjoy her own Laws,
her own Government, and her perfect Liberty: other ways of Union, will be found
more chargeable, and less effectual, on both sides: for if England have no Army
in Scotland, Scotland will receive no Law from England; and if England have an
Army there, her hold consists not in the Union, but in the force.

XLVIII. If a Country be very small, and not able to subsist of it self, as
Wales, it may be safely united, and held: but the advantage that Wales has in
participation of all Magistracies and Offices, is not that which England is
able to afford unto such a Country as Scotland, without subjecting her neck
under the yoke.

XLIX. The order of a Commonwealth requires, that it consist first of a Civil;
secondly, of a Religious; thirdly, of a Military, and fourthly, of a Provincial
Part. The manner of uniting Provinces or different Nations, appertains unto
the last part; and in the formation of a Commonwealth, to begin with that
first, which is naturally last, is to invert the order, and by Consequence the
Commonwealth, which indeed is nothing but order.

L. Where there can be any other Government, there can be no Commonwealth.

LI. Where there can be a Commonwealth, what tumults soever there happen, and
which soever prevail, there can be no other Government; that is to say, without
foreign invasion, which throughout, I must be understood to except.

LXII. If Sir George Booth had prevailed, he must either have introduced a
Commonwealth, or have restored a King.

LIII. If a King were restored, he must either govern by an Army, or by
Parliaments.

LIVE. A King governing now in England by an Army, would for the same Causes
find the same effects with the late Protector.

LV. A King governing now in England by Parliaments, would find the Nobility
of no effect at all.

LVI. A Parliament where the Nobility is of no effect at all, is a mere popular
Council.

LVII. A mere popular Council, will never receive Law from a King.

XVIII. A mere popular Council giving Law unto a King, becomes thereby a
Democracy, or equal Commonwealth; or the difference is no greater then in the
imperfection of the Form.

LIX. A Commonwealth or Democracy to be perfect in the Form, must consist
especially of such an Assembly, the result whereof, can go upon no interest
whatsoever, but that only which is the common interest of the whole people.

LX. An Assembly consisting of a few, may go upon the interest of one man, as a
King; or upon the interest of one party, as that of Divines, Lawyers, and the
like; or the interest of themselves, and the perpetuation of their Government.

LXI. The popular Assembly in a Commonwealth, may consist of too few, but can
never consist of too many.

LXII. If the popular Assembly consist of so few, and so eminent persons as are
capable of any orderly debate, it is good for nothing but to destroy the
Commonwealth.

LXIII. If the popular Assembly consist of so many, and for the greater part of
so mean persons as are not capable of debate, there must be a Senate to help
this defect.

LXIV. The Reason of the Senate, is, that a popular Assembly rightly
constituted, is not capable of any prudent debate.

LXV. The Reason of the popular Assembly, is, that a Senate rightly constituted
for debate, must consist of so few and eminent persons, that if they have the
result too, they will not resolve according unto the interest of the people,
but according to the interest of themselves.

LXVI. The Senate and the popular Assembly being once rightly constituted, the
rest of the Commonwealth will constitute it self.

LXVII. The Venetians having slain diverse of their Dukes for their Tyranny, and
being assembled by such numbers in their great Council as were naturally
incapable of debate, pitched upon thirty Gentlemen who were called Pregati, in
that they were prayed to go apart, and debating upon the Exigence of the
Commonwealth, to propose as they thought good unto the great Council; and from
thence first arose the Senate of Venice, to this day called the Pregati; and
the Great Council, that is, the Senate and the popular Assembly of Venice: and
from these two arose all those admirable Orders of that Comwealth.

LXVIII. The popular Assembly of Venice at this day, consists of about two
thousand: the popular Assemblies in the Province only of Holland, consist of
about five hundred; by which I guess, that in all the united Provinces, they
may amount unto about three thousand: in Switz they come unto a far greater
number; and all, or the most of these, are perpetually extant.

LXIX. If a popular Assembly consisting of eleven hundred or a thousand, may be
so framed in England as to be sufficient to preserve the interest of the
people, such an Assembly of so few, in a Territory of so large an extent, will
be altogether new in the world, and without any example.

LXX. That a people of themselves should have such understanding, as when they
of Venice did institute their Pregati or Senate, is rare.

LXXI. That a Senate or Council of Governors having supreme power, should
institute a popular Assembly, and propose to it, though in all reason it be the
far more facile and practicable, is that which is rarer.

LXXII. Where such Elections are proposed unto the people, as being made
accordingly, must needs produce a well-ordered Commonwealth, and the people
(who never stick at such work) elect accordingly, there not the Proposers of
any power in them, but the people by their peculiar and natural right and
power, do institute and ordain their whole Commonwealth.

LXXIII. An Assembly of men (being all Assemblies are naturally void of
invention) is not capable of inventing any perfect Model or Method of
Government.

LXXIV. The wisest Assemblies (through this necessity) have in the Formation or
Reformation of their Governments, still pitched upon some one man.

LXXV. It is not below the dignity of any Assembly, but according unto the
practice of a good Commonwealth, to admit of any man that is able to propose to
them.

LXXVI. One man's reason is as another man's judgment; yet is it in Art to say
things which will do themselves, at least it is lawful for any man to appeal
unto Event, and so do I in these Aphorisms.

Aug. 25. 1659.
FINIS.

