The Last NEWS From the North.

SHOWING Our Brethrens farewell and Fidelity in delivering up of Newcastle,
Carlisle, Durham, Hartlepool, and other Northern Garrisons into the hands of the
Parliament.

AS ALSO Their full intentions to march speedily against Montrosse, Kilketto,
Antrim, with the rest of that barbarous crew.

With some special observations thereupon, vindicating our Brethren of those
many jealousies cast upon them by the adverse party, which should be a strong
motive to stir up our English hearts to bless God for their Brotherly
assistance and faithfulness in this cause.

Also some Objections against Independency.

Psalm. 124.2, 3. If it had not bin the Lord who was on our side, when men rose
up against us,

Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was was kiindled
against us.

Psalm. 133.1. Behold how good and pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together
in unity.

Written by J. H. a Well-willer to the Commonwealth.

LONDON, Printed by E. Purslow. 1646.

THe last News from the North.
Honored Sir,
THe eyes of the whole Kingdom looking this way, true Intelligence cannot but
be acceptable. The Kings leaving Newcastle, and of the manner of taking leave
mutually between him and us, is no news, nor the Paper de(...) Murrey for
Montrill; nor Major-Generall (...) possessing New Castle, and of the paying of
the 200000. l. and how Durham, Carlisle, Hartlepoole, and other Northern
Garrisons have been delivered up to the Parliament; these things are now no
news.

I shall now tell you of the manner of our march, which was very civil, we
went from Newcastle to Morpith, where we staid till our Artillery (which was
brought up by English) came to us; from hence we intend to Alnewick, and so to
Northam, and then we shall soon be over the River Twede; we have ten days
allowed for our march, but General Leven hopes to finish it in five.

When we come into Scotland, we know not the place of Rendezvous, some think
near Edenborough, we shall disband all but 5000. Foot and 11800. horse which
shall be employed against Montrosse, Kilketto, and the rest of that barbarous
crew, which yet hold some small Mountain Garrisons, which we shall soon
reduce and then we shall be able to assist our poor Brethren in Ireland.

Out of Scotland we hear of the great preparations of our friends to welcome
us home, expressing much cheerfulness to hear of our daily motion toward
them.

I had almost forgot one particular very remarkaable, how General Leven
executed one of his Soldiers for murder, which gives great content to the
Country people; they came in to our assistance, to throw down the hedges and
make the ways even for our march, rejoicing to see such harmony at the
farewell, being glad that the work is so well ended; and the rather, because
many wicked people would have rejoiced at our divisions, and laid a foundation
for more misery by a second War.

By the next, (hoping that this may come safe to your hand) you shall hear
from me out of Scotland. In the interim, I have no more to say, only Sir, that
I am

Your obliged Servant, Ja. Anderson,
Morpith, Feb. 11. 1646.
HAving perused much joyful News from the North; I could not let it pass
without some Observations thereon: I must confess it is but a mite of
thankfulness, I could wish it might be a Monument, that being erected, might
eternize the honor of the Scottish Nation, which they have purchased by their
Fidelity to our Kingdom: I wish it might swell future Chronicles to large
Volumes of Thankfulness; let it be written in leaves of Marble with a pen of
iron, that it may be able to withstand the devouring teeth of envious Time,
never, never to be forgotten, till all things shall confess their ashes, and
time shall be no more. Would I could persuade our English Countrymen to
prepare their hearts and enlarge their Meditations to let in these mercies,
that our unworthiness tells us we have not merited; Here Is a Union worthy to
be commemorated to all posterity: No more Anglia and Scotia, but Brittany,
Famous Brittany, England and Scotland united; Two made One.

Here therefore you shall have in an Epitome the faithfulness of our Brethren,
a great deal of matter in a little room: The Discourse needs no Division,
it is of Union. To tell you of our Brethrens coming to our Assistance, were but
to tell you, that that has been delivered by former Pens.

One may observe very many circumstances that makes this courtesy very
acceptable, they owned us, and that in the day of our distress; they helped us,
when we could not help our selves, and when some that were amongst us, were
risen up against us.

'Twere not unseasonable to speak of the time in which they came into our
aid, and helped the Lord against the mighty: They took a hard march, a hard
task, in a hard season, fighting with a potent, stubborn, powerful
adversary, who was well appointed, ready Garrisoned, provided, and prepared to
receive an enemy, though very powerful and formidable.

Amongst the many things that might be spoken in our Brethrens commendation,
this I account as none of the least, viz. the great doubt which party would
prove Conqueror; it is sufficiently known with what variety of faces the truth
of this appeared, the most judicious could not tell, whether we might be
reckned amongst the living or the dead.

But our provident God foresaw all, the Lord of Hosts (that was (and is) the
giver of victory) has crowned our sufferings with the happiness that we now
enjoy: Our Prayers are turned into praises, our sighs into Songs of
deliverance; for our War we have peace, for fear of utter ruin, the fruits of
a present happiness: For our former wants (in which we did abound) we have as
much felicity, as the frailty of man is capable of: You know who it was that
said, Sorrows may endure for a night, Psalm. 30.5.
but joy comes in the morning: We have had our Night, a black, dark, sad
stormy Night, but now the bright beams of the morning has dispel'd all these
vapors, and we have our morning of happiness, after our night of misery: We
have had news of this Town lost, that Castle lost, that Garrison surrendered,
Witness that barbarous act of P. Rupert at Bolton in Lancashire.
another Fort yielded, and all our men massacred: We had then many of Jobs
messengers; but yet (we see) we are left alive as living Monuments of the
Lords mercy, and do reap the fruits of this blessedness, which our Brethren
have purchased with their dearest blood.

And here I may fitly speak a word of those that dyed in defense of this
cause, (Englands Cause for her Rights and Liberties) may we not envy their
Happiness? they act their parts gloriously in Heaven, that acted them well on
earth, they are raised to the highest pitch of happiness, most fortunate, most
blessed, most wise, most all, they dwell all upon superlatives, Quis non
optaret sic moriendo mori? How noble is it to dye in a justified cause? A cause
so just, so righteous, so equal, that we may justly pronounce those unjust and
wicked, that would have rather let it sunk then patronize it:

Our luke-warmnesse here at home could not do that that their zeal has
performed, 'twas that that set them on this work and acted it for them: If I
should descend to particulars, and take a view and a regard full search of
their zeal in this Reformation, I should swell my Pamphlet beyond its intended
brevity: I shall name one act of our Brethrens of late, (if I did not speak,
the thing would speak it self,) I must confess it quadrates well with my
Genius, viz. their care for the observation of the Lords day, to which end they
have provided, and so ordered, that no Fayres or Markets be kept on Mondayes or
Saturdayes, and I hope there is none but will agree with me in this point, but
that it is a very worthy act, a memorable Act, and worthy of our best
imitations; they have hitherto chalkt out a way for our Reformations; if we
tread in their steps in this particular, the world will not call us unhapy,
having such good Conductors, Josuah 22.
and so good a Copy to write after.

The two Tribes and a half, after they had helped their Brethren to conquer the
promised Land, in their return homewards built an Altar of testimony, the end
why is showed in the 24. verse. lest the Children of Israel might say to the
children of the two Tribes and a half, What have you to do with the Lord God
of Israel? The name of the Altar was Eol (which being transl^ted by the holy
language) is a Witness, this was a Witness, lest in time to come the seed of
the children of Israel might say to the seed of the two Tribes and a half, Ye
have no part in the Lord: The plainness of the History applies it self; if we
can set up such a Witness between us for the Government of the Church, we
shall be happy in a most absolute manner: so far I have deviated from my
circumstances.

But now I come to one more, and that is of the seasonablenesse of the
deliverance; that in the very nick of time, they came in to do us good; and
when we found we could not find a way how to break the power of our
Adversaries, they interposed, and the controversies ended, the question's
decided: To a poor condemned man there is nothing more acceptable as a pardon,
and if it come in the opportunity and nick of time (just before the intended
execution) nothing comes more welcome: The Application makes it self. We were
condemed, and (if same were not too lavish) our estates divided: The story of
them that bought the Bears skin is very remarkable, worthy only to be
imitated of such greedy Chapmen. There Is yet one thing that heightens the
Deliverance, and that is that, after the burden had lain so long upon our
backs that it should then be removed, when our miseries were at the highest
pitch, in the superlative degree, the addition of more miseries could scarce
have made us more miserable; who is then more welcome then a deliver? When a
Coliah was in Arms against Israel, who more acceptable then a David? whose
part our Brethrew has so well acted, as that I am sorry for nothing more then
that we are not able to reward them.

We were a long season in the Furnace, but the seasonablenesse of the
deliverance makes us forget all former miseries; Barclay says, That wars
never last so long in England as in other Lands. Barclay ^cun. Animorum.
Costly experience tells us, this is rather a Fable then a Chronicle: You cannot
think but that we escaped from Scythian cruelty, when we were like to be
brought into an unworthy servitude; and virtue was like to become a slave to
those that had sold themselves to Vitiousnesse.

Now (I hope) you will say, if these things deserve not an observation, and a
perpetual commemoration to the honor of that famous Kingdom, the World will
call's unthankful.

Come we nearer to our Brethren that are gone from us, their names shall last
the longest length of time, they are equivalent to the very best of men,
inferior to none, the singular Ornamerits of this Age, Europes wonder: These
expressions proceed from me, because I do not desire that Valor should have
Oblivion for its grave: But the memory of their Opponents shall perish, and
their names shall be buried in the eternal night of Oblivion: And yet if you
will have them recorded, let it be in times brazen-leaved book with ignominy
and disgrace, there to remain as a Caveat for Generations yet unborne.

Our Brethrens carriage in these late affairs has been terrible to their (and
our) enemies, fear striking amazements to our Adversaries, that ere now have
bin so numerous, that the spacious fields could hardly afford room for their
armed Troops; and now we see by our Brethrens valor, fidelity and assistance,
they are reduced to a better method, there scarce remaining a stump or stem of
that huge Tree, that one while overspread whole Countries: for this their fame
is gone out through the spacious Orb, and their victorious hands will be
remembered by all succeeding Generations.

Their zeal, their justice, their magnanimity has made them inferior to none
of their Predecessors in greatness of true glory, never, never to be blotted
out of the Registers of memory.

And left forgetful time should make us liable to ingratitude, 'twere not
unfit that there were an annual Observation of this our Brethrens Deliverance;
and that as we are wont to write from the Gunpowder-Treason so many years;
from the Spanish-Armada so many years; so to add this to the rest, Since
Englands grand Deliverance from her plundring conspirators, so many years: A
plot that equallizes any of these two famous Deliverances, an a^^versary that
would have dispoiled us of our lives, livelihoods, goods and fortunes, and (had
it been feacible) they would have plundered us of our God, of our Religion, of
our being and well-being, I hope (you well borne Englishmen) your hearts will
tell you that I speak no more then the greatness of this Deliverance calls for.

'Twere easy to be infinite, the deeper I dig in this golden Mine, the more my
fancy is enriched; yet all this will speak us Atheists, if we speak no other
language before the conclusion. We know why Herod was eaten up of worms, Acts
12.23.
because he gave not God the glory: Let us look then to that primum mobile, In
whom we live, and move, and have our being: Acts 17.28.
Let the glory of the day be given to him that is the Giver of the day; we do
not attribute these performances to man, we know that he is not proportioned
for such employments, such high affairs; Man is not able to conquer himself,
much less his enemies.

But one Observation I mark in our Adversaries, they were haughty and
self-confiding men, when as we know that there is no such enemy as a patient,
humble, self-denying enemy: Experience reaches us, that the highest structures
have the lowest foundations; and it is not the high Towering Rocks, but the
humble Valleys that are fruitful.

And now let us imitate the Prophet David, who after the receivall of many
mercies, poses himself with a What shall I render? When we are in afflictious,
the first thing is Prayer, and being delivered, the next must be praise; so
that we may conclude that there is no deliverance, where God does not foresee a
Thankfulness; without this we shall be without God.

If we receive the Lords Mercies without a grateful retribution, and an humble
acknowledgement, we shall turn his Mercies into Judgments, his Blessings into
curses, 2 Cor. 7.21, 22.

There Is mention made of Solomon's Temple, how that if then the people (a people
of so many mercies) should fall off, why this house which is so high shall be
an astonishment to every one that passes; so that he shall ask, why has the
Lord done this unto this Land? If we be ungrateful, Pharaoh like our hearts
will be hardened; and as Gods Mercies increases, so will our sins.

Acts 8.
Let us therefore of this City imitate the Citizens of Samaria, where we read
that the Church was much in affliction, and much in Deliverance, much in sorrow
and much in joy; sorrow for their afflictions, joy for their deliverance.

And therefore in the 8 verse. it is said, There was great joy in that City; And
Prove. 11.10. Prove. 11.10.
When it goes well with the City, the Righteous rejoices: the words may be
very well inverted.

Gods people are sometimes a mourning people, anon a rejoicing people, in
variety of estates and conditions, in Canaan and in Egypt, 12. wells of waters
as Elim, but bitter water at Maras.

We have had our Egyptian bondage, now we have our blessed Liberty and
refreshment.

I think if I should here lay down some Arguments that calls for thanks, it
were not amiss, but truly I find them so many, and so great, that I stand
amazed which to touch at first, here is poverty in plenty.

First then, for the Gospel, it being a blessing,

For the thrice-fortunate and famous union of the two Nations; this multiplies
and advances our one, by an invincible Union, may ever be able to preserve our
Joys, that these Great Joys may procure Great Acknowledgements; so that by
this our Happy Union no Foreign Enemy (how potent soever) unless he be
weary of his own Fortunes, will dare ever to offend us.

And if we look to our Ancestors, there is an 88. a famous deliverance. 3.
Armado.


And that other miraculous deliverance that is still fresh in our memories, of
1625. 4. Powd. plos.


And then (for I cannot number them all) if we come to mercies of a latter
date, 5. Parliam.
and never to our selves; how many Obligations of thankfulnesses lies upon this
Kingdom for this Parliament? E cujus pendet nostra salute salus.
whom God has given to regulate the inconveniences, exorbitancies and errors,
both in Church and State; when as a famous Writer of this age says; Dr. Brown
in his Religio Medici.
that by the ambition and avarice of Prefates, the fatal corruption of Times,
Religion has bin decayed, impaired, and fallen from its native Integrity: in so
much that it required the careful and charitable hand of these times to restore
it to its primitive Integrity; by these Worthies we enjoy what we do enjoy:
if I should go about to particularize, there would not be room for all our
Miseries, nor for all our Mercies.

I should come in a word or two more to our Brethren, for my zeal to them
makes me confess, that there is no mercy that I enjoy, but next under God) I
account them the Authors of it. I should not conclude here were it not for that
they say of Hercules, who ever disprais'd him but an Enemy? There Is none that
speaks ill of them, that deserves so well, unless it be their enemies, whose
tongue at no time is a slander.

And now I should here have concluded, were it not for some new thoughts that
do arise, and that is the disappointment of all our adversaries that did wait
upon our divisions, and would have boasted at our falling out. And of them we
know that there are two sorts, the one an open professed enemy, one that not
long since was in open Rebellion against the Parliament, a Malignant, stubborn
adversary; the other the close private Sectary, which mingles himself amongst
us, and goes along with us in many things, yet perhaps he also would have
rejoiced to have seen us ruin each other, their hopes are both frustrated;
concerning the former I think it in vain to use any arguments to persuade
them.

And for the latter, I wish I could bring any water to quench these flames,
seeing so many add oil to augment them; it is come to it, that there is scarce
a man that can enjoy a singularity in an error, without a Heresy, nor be the
Author of an Opinion without he be of a Sect also.

'Twere a good way to suppress these unhappy dissentions, if we would but
suffer them to flame upon their own substance, without the addition of new
fuel, and then they would go out insensible of themselves.

They would be no longer Heresies, but bare Errors and single lapses of our
understanding, without a joint depravity of our wills: but the nature of
Heresy is like a Gangreene, still dilating it self, they that are troubled
with it have depraved understandings, and diseased affections never thinking
the disease to be far enough spread, til it be Epidemical.

Let Us consider that a Kingdom divided cannot stand, if it be divided with
domestic factions it is easily conquered, but when it is perfectly united, it
knows not its own strength; let us also know that there is a mean between
both extremes, and that middle disposition between those two, is of
transcendent excellency, being exactly framed to the Image of true perfection.
Let us walk then in the middle way of the Gospel, neither following
superstitious Popery, nor affecting licentious Liberty; the former must not
rule, the latter shall nor, let the golden mean the Presbytery decide this
great Church-controversie.

There Is an error on the right hand, so there is on the left, Prove. 7.24. There
are thieves on both sides, only Christ in the midst: that man reforms amiss,
that receives wholesome admonitions, to avoid Covetousness, and becomes a
Prodigal.

A certain K. of France commands his Secretary to bring the best word, that
ever he met withal in his reading: he brings him Moderation. Dedalus his
advise to Icarus was, inter utrumpque vola, and Phoebus his council to Phaeton.

Medio tatossimus ibis, ficta arguunt, the moral's good.

They plead much for Ovids golden age.

Sponte sua, sine lege, fidem rectumque colebat, and this is the predominant
humor of this age. Let Us think of the many offenses that will arise by
liberty, when as restraint checks loosnesse, how did Spurta flourish by its
Damasimbrotes restrayning of youth.

And never did Romes Commonwealth dilate her borders more then by the practice
of Legal Austerity, nor decrease more then by the introduction of Lawless
Liberty.

Peroratio.
Twice commendable and lawdable, if all of us could turn our disputes into
prayers, and put up our Petitions unto Almighty God, one for the other, that he
would be pleased to make a comfortable close of all our sad divisions, and
power forth the spirit of Reconciliation into the hearts of the people of this
divided Kingdom.

FINIS.

