THE ROTA: OR, A MODEL OF A FREE STATE, Or equal COMMONWEALTH: Once proposed
and debated in brief, and to be again more at large proposed to, and debated by
a free and open Society of ingenious Gentlemen.

Ite fortes, ite foelices. LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Miter, near
the Middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street, 1660.

At the ROTA. December 20. 1659.
REsolved, That the Proposer be desired, and is hereby desired to bring in a
Model of a Free State, or Equal Commonwealth, at large, to be farther
debated by this Society, and that in Order thereunto it be first Printed.

Resolved, That the Model being Proposed in Print, shall be first Read, and
then Debated by Clauses.

Resolved, That a Clause being Read over night, the Debate thereupon begin not
at the soonest till the next evening.

Resolved, That such as will Debate, be desired to bring in their Quaeres upon,
or Objections against the Clause in Debate, if they think fit, in writing.

Resolved, That Debate being sufficiently had upon a Clause, the Question be
put by the Ballatting-Box, not any way to determine of, or meddle with the
Government of these Nations, but to discover the Judgment of this Society,
upon the Form of Popular Government, in abstract, or secundum artem*

THE PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT:
ALL Government is Founded upon overbalance, in Propriety.

If one Man hold the overbalance unto the whole People in Propriety, his
Propriety causes absolute Monarchy.

If the Few hold the overbalance unto the whole People in Propriety, their
Propriety causes Aristocracie, or mixed Monarchy.

If the whole People be neither over-ballanced by the Propriety of one, nor of
a few, the Propriety of the People, or of the Many, causes Democracie, or
Popular Government.

The Government of one against the Balance, is Tyranny.

The Government of the few against the Balance, is Oligarchie.

The Government of the many, (or Attempt of the People to Govern) against the
Balance, is Rebellion, or Anarchy.

Where the Balance of Propriety is equal, it causes a state of War.

To hold, That Government may be founded upon Community, is to hold, That there
may be a black Swan, or a Castle in the air; or, That what thing soever is as
imaginable, as what has been in practice, must be as practicable, as what has
been in practice.

If the overbalance of Propriety be in one Man, it Necessitateth the Form of
the Government to be like that of Turkey.

It the overbalance of Propriety be in the Few, it Necessitateth the Form of
the Government to be like that of King, Lords, and Commons.

If the People be not over-ballanced by one, or a few, they are not capable of
any other Form of Government, then that of a Senate, and a Popular Assembly.
For example, as follows:

For the FORM or MODEL In Brief of a FREE STATE, or equal COMMONWEALTH; It
has been proposed in this manner.
1. LEt the whole Territory of Oceana, be divided as equally as may be into
fifty Parts or Shires.

2. Let the whole Inhabitants (except women, children, and servants) be divided
according unto their age into Elders and Youth; and according unto their
estates into Horse and Foot.

3. Let all such as are eighteen years of age, or upwards to thirty, be
accounted youth; and all such as are thirty or upwards, be accounted Elders.

4. Let all such as have one hundred pounds a year, or upwards, in Lands,
Goods, or Moneys, be accounted of the Horse; and all such as have under, be
accounted of the Foot of the Commonwealth.

5. Let every Parish in a Shire elect annually the fifth Elder of the same to
be for that year a Deputy of that Parish; if a Parish be too small, let it be
laid as to this purpose, unto the next; and in this respect, let every part of
the Territory appertain to some Parish.

6. Where there is but one Elder of the Horse in a Parish, let him be annually
eligible, without interval: where there are more Elders of the Horse, let no
Deputy of the Parish be re-eligible, but after the intervall of one year.

7. Where there be four Elders of the Horse, or more, in one and the same
Parish, let not under two, nor above half of them* be elected, at one and the
same Election, or time.

8. Let the Deputies thus elected at the Parishes, assemble annually at the
Capital of their Shire, and let them then, and there elect out of their own
number, two Elders of the Horse to be Knights or Senators, three Elders of the
Horse, and four Elders of the Foot, to be of the Assembly of the people, for
the term of three years, injoyning an equal vacation, or interval, before they
can be re-elected in either of these capacities.

9. Let there be elected at the same time in each Shire, the first year only,
two other Knights, and seven other Deputies for the term of one year, and two
other Knights, with seven other Deputies for the term of two years, which in
all constituteth the Senate of three hundred Knights, and the Popular Assembly
of one thousand and fifty Deputies, each being upon a triennial Rotation, or
annual change in one third part.

10. Let the Senate have the whole Authority or right of debating and proposing
unto the people; let the Popular Assembly have the whole power of result; and
let what shall be proposed by the Senate, and resolved by the Popular Assembly,
be the Law of Oceana.

The Conclusion.
TWo Assemblies thus constituted, must necessarily amount unto the
understanding and the will, unto the wisdom and the interest of the whole
Nation, and a Commonwealth; where the wisdom of the Nation proposes, and the
interest of the people resolves; can never fail in whatever shall be farther
necessary, for the right constituting of it self.

The MODEL at large of a FREE STATE, Or equal COMMONWEALTH.
Proposed in four parts: First, the Civil, Secondly, the Religious, Thirdly,
the Military, Fourthly, the Provincial Part.

PART 1.
For the Civil Part, it is proposed,
1. THat the whole native or proper territory of Oceana (respect had unto the
the Tax-role, unto the number of people, and to the extent of territory,) be
cast with as much exactness as can be convenient, into fifty Precincts,
Shires, or Tribes.

2. That all Citizens, that is, Freemen, or such a^ are not servants, be
distributed into Horse* and Foot* That such of them as have one hundred pounds
a year in Lands, Goods, or Money, or above that proportion be accounted of the
Horse; and all such as have under that proportion, be accounted of the Foot.

3. That all Elders or Freemen being thirty years of age, or upwards, be
capable of civil Administration; and that the Youth, or such Freemen as are
between eighteen years of age, and thirty, be not capable of civil
administration, but of Military only; in such manner as shall follow in the
military part of this Model.

4. That the Elders resident in each Parish, annually assemble in the same; as
for example, upon Monday next ensuing, the last of December. That they then,
and there elect out of their own number every fifth man, or one man out of
every five, to be for the term of the year ensuing, a Deputy of that Parish;
and that the first and second so elected, be Overseers, or Presidents for the
regulating of all Parochial Congregations, whether of the Elders, or of the
Youth, during the term for which they were elected.

5. That so many Parishes lying nearest together, whose Deputies shall amount
to one hundred, or thereabouts, be cast into one Precinct, called the Hundred;
And that in each Precinct called the Hundred, there be a Town, Village, or
place appointed, to be the Capital of the same.

6. That the Parochial Deputies elected throughout the Hundred assemble
annually, for example upon Monday next ensuing, the last of January, at the
Capital of their Hundred. That they then, and there Elect out of the Horse of
their number, one Justice of the Peace, one Jury*Man, one Captain, one Ensign,
and out of the Foot of their number, one other Jury Man, one High-Constable,
etc.

7. That every twenty hundreds, lying nearest, and most conveniently together,
be cast into one Tribe, or Shire. That the whole Territory being after this
manner cast into Tribes, or Shires, some Town, Village, or place, be appointed
unto every Tribe, or shire, for the Capital of the same; And that these three
Precincts, that is, the Parish, the Hundred, and the Tribe, or shire, whether
the Deputies thenceforth annually chosen in the Parishes, or Hundreds, come to
increase, or diminish, remain firm, and inalterable for ever, save only by Act
of Parliament.

8. That the Deputies Elected in the several Parishes, together with their
Magistrates, and other Officers, both Civil and Military, Elected in their
several Hundreds, Assemble, or Muster annually, For example, upon Monday next
ensuing the last of February, at the Capital of their Tribe, or Shire.

9. That the whole body thus Assembled upon the first day of the Assembly,
Elect out of the Horse of their number one High Sheriff, one Lieutenant of the
Tribe, or Shire, one Custos Rotulorum, one Conductor, and two Censors. That the
High Sheriff be Commander in Chief, the Lieutenant Commander in the second
place, and the Conductor in the third, of this Band, or squadron. That the
Custos Rotulorum be Muster-Master, and keep the Rolls. That the Censors be
Governors of the Ballot. And that the Term of these Magistracies be Annual.

10. That the Magistrates of the Tribe, that is to say, the High Sheriff,
Lieutenant, Custos Rotulorum, the Censors, and the Conductor, together with the
Magistrates and Officers of the Hundred (that is to say) the twenty Justices of
the Peace, the forty Jurymen, the twenty High-Constables be one Troop, and
one Company apart, called the Prerogative Troop, or Company. That this Troop
bring in, and assist the Justices of Assize, hold the quarter Sessions in their
several capacities, and perform their other Functions as formerly.

11. That the Magistrates of the Tribe, or shire, that is to say, the High
Sheriff, Lieutenant, Custos Rotulorum, the Censors, and the Conductor, together
with the twenty Justices Elected at the Hundreds, be a Court for the Government
of the Tribe called the Phylarch; and that this Court Proceed in all matters of
Government, as shall from time to time be directed by Act of Parliament.

12. That the Squadron of the Tribe, upon the second day of their Assembly,
Elect two Knights, and three Burgesses out of the Horse of their number, and
four other Burgesses out of the foot of their number. That the Knights have
Session in the Senate, for the Term of three years, and that the Burgesses be
of the Prerogativ e Tribe, or Representative of the People for the lik e Term.
That if in case of death, or expulsion, a Place become void in the Senate, or
Popular Assembly, the respective shire, or Tribe have timely notice from the
Signory, and proceed in the manner aforesaid unto extraordinary Election of a
Deputy, or Senator, for the remaining part of the Term of the Senator, or
Deputy, deceased, or expelled.

13. That for the full and perfect institution, at once, of the Assemblies
mentioned, the Squadron of each Tribe* or Shire, in the first year of the
Commonwealth, Elect two Knights for the Term of one year, two other Knights
for the Term of two years, and lastly, two Knights more for the Term of
three years; the like for the Burgesses, of the Horse first, and then for
those of the Foot.

14. That a Magistrate, or Officer Elected at the Hundred, be thereby barred
from being Elected a Magistrate of the Tribe, or of the first days Election:
that no former Election whatsoever bar a man of the second days Election at
the Tribe, or to be chosen a Knight, or Burgess. That a man being Chosen a
Knight or Burgess, who before was Chosen a Magistrate, or Officer of the
Hundred, or Tribe, delegate his former Office, or Magistracy in the Hundred,
or the Tribe, to any other Deputy, being no Magistrate nor Officer, and being
of the same Hundred, and of the same Order, that is, of the Horse, or of the
Foot respectively. That the whole, and every part of the foregoing Orders, for
Election in the Parishes, the Hundreds, and the Tribes, be holding, and
inviolate upon such penalties, in case of failure, as shall hereafter be
provided by Act of Parliament against any parish, Hundred, Tribe, or Shire,
Deputy, or Person so offending.

15. That the Knights of the Annual Election in the Tribes* take their Places
on Monday next ensuing, the last of March, in the Senate. That the like number
of Knights, whose Session determines at the same time Rec^^e. That every
Knight, or Senator, be paid out of the Public Revenue quarterly, seventy five
pounds, during his Term of Session, and be obliged to sit in Purple Robes.

16. That annually upon reception of the new Knights, the Senate proceed unto
election of new Magistrates and Counselors. That for Magistrates they elect
one Archon or General, one Orator or Speaker, and two Censors, each for the
term of one year, these promiscuously* and that they elect one Commissioner of
the Great Seal, and one Commissioner of the Treasury; each for the term of
three years, out of the new Knights only.

17. That the Archon or General, and the Orator or Speaker, as Consuls of the
Commonwealth, and Presidents of the Senate, be, during the term of their
Magistracy, paid quarterly five hundred pounds: that the Ensigns of these
Magistracies, be, a sword borne before the General, and a Mace before the
Speaker: that they be obliged to wear Ducal Robes, and that what is said of the
Archon or General in this Proposition, be understood only of the General
sitting, and not of the General marching.

18. That the General sitting, in case he be commanded to march, receive
Field-pay; and that a new General be forthwith elected by the Senate to succeed
him in the House, with all the Rights, Ensigns, and Emoluments of the General
sitting: and this so often as one or more Generals are marching.

19. That the three Commissioners of the Great seal, and the three
Commissioners of the Treasury, using their Ensigns and habit, and performing
their other functions as formerly, be paid quarterly unto each of them three
hundred seventy five pounds.

20. That the Censors be each of them Chancellor of one University by virtue of
their Election: That they govern the Ballot, that they be Presidents of the
Council for Religion: That they have under appeal unto the Senate, right to
note and remove a Senator that is scandalous, That each have a silver wand for
the Ensign of his Magistracy, That each be paid quarterly three hundred seventy
five pounds, and be obliged to wear scarlet Robes.

21. That the general sitting, the Speaker, and the six Commissioners
abovesaid, be the Seigniory of this Commonwealth.

22. That there be a Council of State consisting of fifteen Knights, five out
of each Order or Election; and that the same be perpetuated by the annual
Election of five out of the new Knights, or last elected into the Senate.

23. That there be a Council for Religion consisting of twelve Knights, four
out of each Order, and perpepetuated by the annual election of four out of the
Knights last elected into the Senate. That there be a Council for Trade
consisting of a like number, elected and perpetuated in the same manner.

24. That there be a Council of War, not elected by the Senate, but elected by
the Council of State out of themselves. That this Council of War consist of
nine Knights, three out of each Order, and be perpetuated by the annual
election of three out of the last Knights elected into the Council of State.

25. That in case the Senate add nine Knights more out of their own number
unto the Council of War, the said Council be understood by such Addition, to be
Dictator of the Commonwealth, for the term of three months, and no longer,
except by further order of the Senate, the said Dictatorian power be prolonged
for a like term.

26. That the Seigniory have Session and Suffrage, with right also jointly or
severally, to propose both in the Senate, and in all Senatorian Councils.

27. That each of the three Orders or Divisions of Knights in each Senatorian
Council elect one Provost for the term of one week; and that any two Provosts
of the same Council so elected, may propose unto the respective Council, and
not otherwise.

28. That some fair room or rooms well furnished, and attended, be allowed at
the States charge, for a free and open Academy unto all comers, at some
convenient hour or hours, toward the evening. That this Academy be governed
according to the Rules of good breeding or civil conversation, by some or all
of the Proposers: and that in the same it be lawful for any man by word of
mouth, or by writing in jest or in earnest, to propose unto the Proposers.

29. That for Ambassadors in Ordinary, there be four Residences, as France,
Spain, Venice, and Constantinople, That every Resident upon Election of a new
Ambassador, in Ordinary, remove to the next Residence in the order nominated,
till having served in them all, he return home. That upon Monday next ensuing,
the last of November, there be every second year elected by the Senate some fit
person being under thirty five years of age, and not of the Senate, nor of the
popular Assembly: that the party so elected repair upon Monday next ensuing the
last of March following, as Ambassador in Ordinary unto the Court of France,
and there reside for the term of two years, to be computed from the first of
April next ensuing his Election. That every Ambassador in Ordinary be allowed
three thousand pounds a year, during the term of his Residencies, and that if
a Resident come to die, there be an extraordinary Election into his Residence
for his term, and for the remainder of his Removes, and progress.

30. That all emergent Elections be made by Scrutiny that is, by a Council, or
by Commissioners proposing, and by the Senate resolving in the manner
following: That all Field-Officers be proposed by the Council of War; That all
Ambassadors extraordinary be proposed by the Council of State: that all Judges
and Sergeants at Law be proposed by the Commissioners of the Great Seal. Tha^
all Barons, and Officers of Trust in the Exchequer, be proposed by the
Commissioners of the Treasury, and that such as are thus proposed, and approved
by the Senate, be held lawfully elected.

31. That the cognizance of all matter of State to be considered, or Law to be
enacted, whether it be Provincial or National, Domestic or foreign, appertain
unto the Council of State. That such affairs of either kind as they shall
judge, to require more secreey, be remitted by this Council, and appertain unto
the Council of War, being for that end a select part of the same. That the
cognizance and protection both of the National Religion, and of the liberty of
conscience equally established, after the manner to be shown in the Religious
part of this Model, appertain unto the Council for Religion. That all matter
of traffic and regulation of the same, appertain unto the Council for Trade.
That in the exercise of these several Functions, which naturally are Senatorian
or Authoritative only; no Council assume any other power then such only, as
shall be estated upon the same by Act of Parliament.

32. That what shall be proposed unto the Senate by one or more of the Signiory
or Proposers general, or whatever was proposed by any two of the Provosts, or
particular proposers, unto their respective Council; and upon debate at that
Council shall come to be proposed by the same unto the Senate, be necessarily
debatable, and debated by the Senate. That in all cases wherein power is
derived unto the Senate by Law made, or by Act of Parliament, the result of the
Senate be ultimate: that in all cases of Law to be made, or not already
provided for by Act of Parliament; as war and peace, levy of men, or money, or
the like; the result of the Senate be not ultimate. That whatsoever is decreed
by the Senate upon a case wherein their result is not ultimate, be proposed by
the Senate unto the Prerogative Tribe, or Representative of the people, except
only in cases of such speed or secrecy, wherein the Senate shall judge the
necessary slownesse, or opennesse, in this way of proceeding, to be of
detriment, or danger unto the Commonwealth.

33. That if upon the motion or proposition of a Council, or Proposer-General,
the Senate add 9 Knights, promiscuously chosen out of their own number unto the
Council of War: The same Council, as thereby made Dictator, have power of life
and death, as also to enact laws in all such cases of speed or secrecy for,
and during the Term of three months and no longer, except upon new Order from
the Senate. And that all Laws enacted by the Dictator be good and valid, for
the term of one year and no longer, except the same be proposed by the Senate,
and resolved by the people.

34. That the Burgesses of the annual election returned by the Tribes, enter
into the Prerogative Tribe, Popular Assembly, or Representative of the people,
upon Monday next ensuing the last of March; and that the like number of
Burgesses, whose term is expired, recede at the same time. That the Burgesses
thus entered, elect unto themselves out of their own number, two of the Horse,
one to be Captain, and the other to be Cornet of the same; and two of the Foot,
one to be Captain, and the other to be Ensign of the same; each for the term
of three years. That these Officers being thus elected, the whole Tribe or
Assembly* proceed to the election of four Annual Magistrates, two out of the
foot to be Tribunes of the foot, and two out of the horse, to be Tribunes of
the horse. That the Tribunes be Commanders of this Tribe in chief, so far as it
is a military body, and Presidents of the same, as it is a civil Assembly. And
lastly, that this whole Tribe be paid weekly, as follows. Unto each of the
Tribunes of the horse seven pounds. Unto each of the Tribunes of foot six
pounds. Unto each of the Captains of horse five pounds. Unto each of the
Captains of foot four pounds. Unto each of the Cornets three pounds, unto each
of the Ensigns two pounds, seven shillings. Unto every horseman 2 pound, and
to every one of the foot, one pound, ten shillings.

35. That inferior Officers, as Captains, Cornets, Ensigns, be only for the
Military discipline of this squadron, or Tribe. That the Tribunes have Session
in the Senate without suffrage; that they have Session of course, and with
suffrage in the Dictatorian Council, so often as it is created by the Senate.
That they be Presidents of the Court in all cases, to be judged by the people:
And that they have right under an appeal unto the Popular Assembly, to note or
remove any Deputy or Burgess, that is scandalous.

36. That peculate or defraudation of the public, all cases tending to the
subversion of the Government, be tryable by this Representative; and that there
be an Appeal unto the same in all causes, and from all Magistrates, Courts,
and Councils, whether National, or Provincial.

37. That the right of debate, as also of proposing to the people, be wholly
and only in the Senate, without any power at all of Result, not derived from
the people.

38. That the power of Result be wholly and only the Popular Assembly, without
any right at all of debate.

39. That the Senate having debated and agreed upon a Law to be proposed, cause
promulgation of the same to be made for the space of six weeks before
Proposition, that is, cause the Law to be printed and published, so long before
it is to be proposed.

40. That promulgation being made, the Signiory demand of the Tribunes being
present in the Senate, an Assembly of the people. That the Tribunes upon such
demand by the Signiory or by the Senate, be obliged to assemble the Prerogative
Tribe, or Representative of the people in Arms by sound of trumpet with Drums
beating, and Colors flying, in any Town*Field, or Marketplace, being not
above six miles distant, upon the day, and at the hour appointed, except the
meeting through inconvenience of the weather, or the like, be prorogued by
consent of the Signiory and the Tribunes; That the Prerogative Tribe being
assembled accordingly, the Senate propose to them by two or more of the
Senatorian Magistrates thereunto appointed, at the first promulgation of the
Law: That the proposers for the Senate open unto the people the Occasion,
Motives, and Reasons of the Law to be proposed; and the same being done, put it
by distinct clauses unto the Ballot of the people. That if any material clause
or clauses be rejected by the people, they be reviewed by the Senate, altered,
and proposed, (if they think fit) to the third time, but no oftener.

41. That what is thus proposed by the Senate, and resolved by the people, be
the Law of the land, and no other, except as in the case reserved unto the
Dictatorian Council.

42. That every Magistracy, Office, or Election throughout this whole
Commonwealth, whether annual, or triennial, be understood of consequence, to
enjoin an interval or vacation equal unto the term of the same. That the
Magistracy of a Knight and of a Burgess, be in this relation understood as one
and the same: and that this Order regard only such Elections as are National
or Domestic, and not such as are Provincial or foreign.

43. That for an exception from this Rule, where there is but one Elder of the
Horse in one and the same Parish, that Elder be eligible in the same without
interval; and where there be four Elders of the Horse, or above in one and the
same Parish, there be not under two, nor above half of them eligible at the
same Election.

44. That throughout all the Assemblies and Councils of this Commonwealth: the
Quorum consist of one half in the time of health, and of one third part in a
time of sickness, being so declared by the Senate.

PART. 2.
For the Religious part, it is proposed,
45. THat the Universities, being prudently reformed, be preserved in their
Rights and Indowments for and toward the education, and provision of an able
Ministry.

46. That the legal and ancient provision for the National Ministry be so
augmented, that the meanest sort of Livings or Benefices, without defalcation
from the greater, be each improved to the Revenue of one hundred pounds a year,
at the least.

47. That a Benefice becoming void in any Parish, the Elders of the same may
assemble, and give notice unto the Vice Chancellor of either University, by
Certificate; specifying the true value of that Benefice: that the
Vice Chancellor upon receipt of such Certificate, be obliged to call a
Congregation of his University, that the Congregation of the University to this
end assembled, having regard unto the value of the Benefice, make choice of a
person fitted for the Ministerial Function, and return him unto the Parish so
requiring: that the Probationer, thus returned unto a Parish, by either of the
Universities, exercise the office, and receive the Benefits, as Minister of the
Parish for the term of one year. That the term of one year expired, the Elders
of the Parish assemble, and put the election of the Probationer unto the
Ballot. That if the Probationer have three parts in four of the Balls or Votes
in the Affirmative, he be thereby ordained and elected Minister of that Parish;
not afterward to be degraded or removed but by the Censors of the Tribe, the
Phylarch of the same, or the Council of Religion, in such cases as shall be
unto them reserved by Act of Parliament. That in case the Probationer come to
fail of three parts in four at the Ballot, he depart from that Parish; and if
he return unto the University, it be without diminution of the former offices
or preferments which he there enjoyed, or any prejudice unto his future
preferment: and that it be lawful in this case for any Parish to send so often
to either University, and be the duty of either Vice Chancellor, upon such
Certificates to make return of different Probationers, till such time as the
Elders of that Parish have fitted themselves with a Minister of their own
choice and liking.

48. That the National Religion be exercised according to a Directory in that
case, to be made and published by Act of Parliament. That the National
Ministry be permitted to have no other public preferment or office in this
Commonwealth. That a National Minister being convict of Ignorance or scandal,
be moveable out of his Benefice by the Censors of the Tribe, under an appeal
unto the Phylarch, or to the Council for Religion.

49. That no Religion being contrary unto, or destructive of Christianity, nor
the public exercise of any Religion, being grounded upon, or incorporated
into a foreign interest, be protected by, or tolerated in this state. That all
other Religions, with the public exercise of the same, be both tolerated and
protected by the Council of Religion: and that all Professors of any such
Religion, be equally capable of all Elections, Magistracies, Preferments, and
offices in this Commonwealth, according unto the orders of the same.

PART. 3.
For the military part it is proposed:
50. THat annually upon Wednesday next ensuing the last of December, the Youth
of each Parish (under the inspection of the two overseers of the same)
assemble, and elect the fifth man of their number, or one in five of them, to
be for the term of that year, Deputies of the Youth of that Parish.

51. That annually, on Wednesday next ensuing the last of January, the said
Deputies of the respective Parishes, meet at the Capital of the hundred; (where
there are games and prizes allotted for them, as has been showed elsewhere)
that there they elect to themselves out of their own number, one Captain, and
one Ensign. And that of these Games, and this Election, the Magistrates, and
Officers of the Hundred, be Presidents and Judges for the impartial
distribution of the Prizes.

52. That annually, upon Wednesday next ensuing the last of February, the Youth
through the whole Tribe thus elected, be received at the Capital of the same,
by the Lieutenant, as Commander in chief, by the Conductor, and by the Censors,
that under inspection of these Magistrates, the said Youth be entertained with
more splendid games, disciplined in a more Military manner, and divided by lot
into sundry parts, or Essays, according to rules elsewhere given.

53. That the whole Youth of the Tribe thus assembled be the first Essay. That
out of the first Essay there be cast by lot two hundred Horse, and six hundred
Foot: that they whom their friends will, or themselves can mount, be accounted
Horse, the rest Foot. That these Forces amounting in the fifty Tribes, to ten
thousand Horse, and thirty thousand Foot, be always ready to march at a weeks
warning: and that this be the second Essay, or the standing Army of the
Commonwealth.

54. That for the holding of each Province, the Commonwealth in the first year
assign an Army of the Youth, consisting of seven thousand five hundred Foot,
and one thousand five hundred Horse. That for the perpetuation of these
provincial Armies, or Guards; there be annually at the time and places
mentioned, cast out of the first Essay of the Youth, in each Tribe or Shire ten
Horse, and fifty Foot; that is, in all the Tribes five hundred horse, and two
thousand five hundred foot for Marpesia, the like for Pampea, and the like of
both Orders for the Seaguards, being each obliged to serve for the term of
three years upon the States pay.

55. That the Senate and the People, or the Dictator having decreed or declared
War, and the Field-Officers being appointed by the Council of War; the General
by warrant issued unto the Lieutenants of the Tribes, demand the second Essay,
or such part of it, as is decreed; whether by way of levy or recruit. That by
the same warrant he appoint his time and Rendezvous: that the several
Conductors of the Tribes or Shires, deliver him the forces demanded at the time
and place appointed. That a General thus marching out with the standing Army,
a new Army be elected out of the first Essay as formerly, and a new General be
elected by the Senate: that so always there be a General sitting, and a
standing Army, what Generals soever be marching. And that in case of invasion,
the bands of the Elders be obliged unto like duty with those of the youth.

56. That an only son be discharged of these duties without prejudice. That of
two brothers, there be but one admitted to foreigne service at one time. That
of more brothers not above half. That whoever otherwise refuses his lot,
except upon cause shown, he be dispensed withal by the Phylarch, or upon
penitence, he be by them pardoned, and restored; by such refusal be incapable
of electing, or being elected in this Commonwealth; as also, that he pay unto
the State a fifth of his Revenue for protection, besides taxes. That Divines,
Physicians, and Lawyers, as also Trades not at leisure for the Essays be so
far forth exempted from this Rule, that they be still capable of all
preferments in their respective professions with indemnity.

57. That upon warrants issued forth by the General for Recruits or Levies,
there be an Assembly of the Phylarch in each Tribe: That such Volunteers or men
being above thirty years of age, as are desirous of farther employment in
Arms, appear before the Phylarch so assembled. That any number of these not
exceeding one moity of the Recruits or Levies of that Tribe or Shire, may be
taken on by the Phylarch, so many of the youth being at the discretion of this
Council disbanded, as are taken on of the Volunteers. That the Levies thus
made, be conducted by the Conductor of the respective Tribe or Shire, unto the
Rendezvous appointed: And that the service of these be without other Term, or
Vacation, then at the discretion of the Senate and the People, or such
instructions unto the General, as shall by them in that case be provided.

PART. 4.
For the Provincial Part it is proposed,
58. THat upon expiration of Magistracy in the Senate, or at the annual recesse
of one third part of the same, there be elected by the Senate out of the part
receding into each Provincial Council four Knights for the term of three
years, thereby to render each Provincial Council, (presuming it in the
beginning, to have been constituted of twelve Knights, divided after the manner
of the Senate, by three several lists or elections) of annual, triennial, and
perpetual revolution, or rotation.

59. That out of the same third part of the Senate annually receding, there be
unto each Province, one Knight elected for the term of one year. That the
Knight so elected, be the Provincial Archon, General, or Governor. That a
Provincial Archon, Governor, or General, receive annually in April, at his
Rendezvous appointed, the Youth or Recruits elected in the precedent Month to
that end by the Tribes, and by their Conductors delivered accordingly. That he
repair with the said Youth and Recruits, unto his respective Province, and
there dismiss that part of the Provincial Guard or Army, whose triennial term
is expired. That each Provincial Governor have the Conduct of affairs of War,
and of State, in his respective Province; with advice of the Provincial
Council, and that he be President of the same.

60. That each Provincial Council elect three weekly Proposers or Provosts,
after the manner, and to the ends already shown in the constitution of
Senatorian Councils, and that the Provost of the senior List during his Term,
be President of the Council in absence of the Provincial Archon, or General.

61. That each Provincial Council proceed according unto instructions received
from the Council of State, and keep intelligence with the same by any two of
their Provosts, for the Government of the Province as to matter of War, or of
State. That upon levies of Native, or proper Arms, by the Senate, and the
People, a Provincial Council (having unto that end received orders) make levies
of Provincial Auxiliaries accordingly. That Auxiliary Arms upon no occasion
whatsoever exceed the proper or native Arms in Number. That for the rest, the
Provincial Council maintain the Provincials, defraying their peculiar Guards
and Council, by such known proportion of tributes, as on them shall be set by
the Senate and the People, in their proper Rights, Laws, Liberties, and
Immunitiess so far forth as upon the merits of the cause, whereupon they were
subdued, it seemed good unto the Senate, and the people to confirm them. And
that it be lawful for the Provincials to appeal from their Provincial
Magistrates, Councils, or Generals to the people of Oceana.

FINIS.

