VOX POPULI, OR, GLOSTERSHERES DESIRE: WITH, The Way and Means to make a
Kingdom Happy (by Gods help.) By setting up of Schoolmasters in every Parish
throughout the Land generally. Being fit for the help of Religious Ministers in
their Heavenly Work. And for the removing of the three Capital enormities of
this Land, viz. Ignorance, Profaneness and Idleness. Set forth for the Benefit
of all the young Children in the Kings Dominions: With Schoole-Lawes and
Orders, for every English Schoolmasters, and Family, to have in their Houses.
For the training up young Children, both in Godliness and Manners, for the
good of the Land. With the confuting of certain Objections that would hinder
and make void so good a Work. By Samuel Harmar.

London, Printed for Thomas Bates, and are to be sold at hsi Shop in the
Old-Bayly, 1642.

VOX POPULI, on Glostershires Desire.
The great Evils that do Vuiversaly spread over the Land, are three, that is
to say, Igrorance, Profaneness, and Idleness.
THe special theanes (by God help) to precent thoser evils, is, for to pray.
That the Honorable Assembly of Parliament will be pleased to take it into
their wise, and grave consideration, that honest and Religious Schoolmasters
may be planted in every Parish throughout the Land which is able to maintain
one. It is verily believed, that an honest Schoolmasters in every Parish will
be a special help to a Religio us Minister, in siding with him for the trayning
up young Children in godliness and manners; which work no good Christian can
deny the setting up; seeing it is a work which much tends to the worship of
God and the good of the Commonwealth.

It is a great complaint in many parts of the Realm amongst Religious
Ministers, to see how little their Preaching and Doctrine have thrived and
wrought in the hearts of many young and old people.

One main, reason of this barrenness in goodness is for want of such a member
in every Parish, to educate and instruct all the Children in the Parish, as
well the poor, as the rich, that so the poor est may be taught to write and
read; (which many wealthy Fathers at this time would give much if they could
do it.) And besides the Children shall be taught to understand the Principles
of Religion concerning their Faith and Hope; they being Catechized in such a
Catechize as the Learned Synod with the Approbation of the Honorable House;
shall think most meet to be raught in all Schools of the Realm, for the easy
and plain understanding of the grounds of Divinity.

If this care be taken in every Parish it will be a great means to keep Men and
Women from so many divisions of opinions which are sprung up amongst us, to the
great trouble of the Land and disturbance of many peoples minds. It is the
prayer and desire of many good people that this charitable work of general
Schooling may take effect in the whole Land, for the restraining of vice, and
for the good of poor Men's Children; And besides (by the blessing of God) it
will be a great means to work a Reformation in the whole Land and beger a
uniformity in Religion among us; which is now much out of joint, though there
is, as the Apostle says, but one Body, one Spirit in a Man one Hope one Lord
one Faith, and one Baptism:

A second Benefit that will acrue and arise, by having an honest Schoolmasters
in every Parish, it will be a special means to keep Children out of
Idleness; for when there is a habit of Idleness bred in the bones of little
Children, it will hardly go out of the Flesh; for as the Vessel is first
seasoned, so it will taste long of the liquor whether good or bad: And this
Idlenesle among the poorer sort of chidren by playing in the Streets the better
part of the Day; rather desiring to beg then to work, this Idle life at
length, leads poor children either to become beggars or thieves; and this is
one cause why Countries and Cities are so oppressed with beggars in many places
at this present: and if it happen that these Idle Persons if they cannot get
their living by begging, they will adventure to stea'e, and so do much hurt
many years to many of the Kings Subjects before they be taken: And all this
mischief to the Land in general does greatly arise from the first cruse,
which is the want of a Schoolmasters in every Parish.

Many Parishes at this time do greatly complain for the want of a Religious
Schoolmasters to teach their Children, as well, as for a sober Religious
Minister among them, to teach them.

There are two Objections, which some (malignants) object for the overthrow of
this so Religious, and Commonwealth work, for the general good of the Land.
First, they say, Who shall pay for Childrens Schooling? And secondly, how shall
they be maintained?

The first is answered; If the Law of the Land do enjoyne and rate men's
estates, toward the relieving of the poor in their Parishes. The question is
asked whether the same Law may not as well enjoyne a rate upon Men's estates for
the maintaining of so charitable a work, which is the public good of the Land
and will be a special means to prevent Idleness among Children, with beggary
and theevery, which are apt to follow Idleness as is showed before, and are
great and heavy burdens lying on the Land at this time.

Again, there is another great help for the easy furthering of this work of
general Schooling; they that have no Children, and great Estates, may be
something more liberal then others that have a charge of Children, seeing the
work is so profitable sot the puplike good.

It is reported, that some that have but twenty pound per Annum. would be
willing to give ten shillings per Annum out of their estates, to raise a
competent maintenance, to encourage a Schoolmasters to take pains and to wait
upon his calling. Also, that Children may be kept out of the streets; whereas
now they curse and swear, drawing the vengeance of God upon the Land: And
besides, neither Man nor Beast can pass by them quietly; for some are so
unhappy, like those Children that meeked the old Prophet Elisha, that neither
Men, Women nor Children upon their business can pass by them without a mock
or it may be, a stone at them: And as for the poor dumb Beasts they cannot
pass by them; for either they will throw stones at them or else force them
into Brooks, or Pooles and so danger them or else force them over Hedges and
Ditches, breaking their Legs or breaking their Necks: so that now let Men
judge, whether it be not a necessary, needful work to set up general
Schooling over the Land; for the reforming of Children from those vices which
they Act against God, by belching out daily fearful curses and oaths, and
also by abusing and hurting both old Men, and children and dumb beasts; Tell
some Fathers of these ungod y, hurtful Children, what hurt their Children do
they will give you the hearing and chide them and there is all the correction
they give, and this will be a means to encourage Children more in their
wickedness against God and Men; whereas if there were a Schoolmasters,
Children would live in fear to hurt the least Child that should come by them;
for a Schoole-master-would be a terror to the malicious ones, because he would
be always resident like a Magistrate, to hear the complaints of any that
should complain against them, and so the Offender shall receive correction for
his offense; but let the punishment to the Scholar be in mercy, the Maste
(being enjoined, not to give above four lashes with the Rod, that so Children
may not be dishartened in going to School, because some Schoolmasters are
merciless in correcting their Scholars.)

The considerations of these evils are sufficient to encourage People to be
liberal; to gain a Schoolmasters for the restraining of the great and
manifold vices that are in little Children.

The second and last Objection; How shall poor Children be maintained? Answer.
Those that are painful Parents, and are willing to set their Children to
spinning or knitting; or to work upon Hemp or Flax, or any other work, whereby
it may cause plenty of Food and Raiment in a Commonwealth (and to prevent
complaining in the streets) do enjoune their Children, to get a Penny, before
they go to School and another when they come home, which is a commendable
thing of those Parents that are thus careful of their Children. If all
Children were thus looked unto, to gain two pence a day by their labor it
would be a good help toward their maintenance, and besides, an ease to the
Parish in their daily taxations: Whereas on the contrary, playing in the
streets againes nothing but poverty in the Land, with thousands of curses and
oaths, fightings, and other wicked mischiefs, to the great dishonor of God,
and hurt to the Commonwealth; and all for want of a Master over them.

And furthermore, as concerning that Objection. How Children shall be
maintained at School for provision? It is common in the mouths of many poor
people. That if, they could be free from the charge of their Childrens
Schooling, they would not charge the Parish for their Childrens maintenance.
These are sufficient Answers, for the overthrow of the two Objections, which
would hinder so charitable a work, and so Religious for the general good of
the Land. Therefore let every good Man and Woman pour out their Prayers to God
for the speedy and pure purging of those evils reigning in the Land and
threatening Gods Judgment upon us, and the Kings Dominions.

And for this end and purpose the Lord Almighty bless our Honorable House of
Peers and House of Commons that they may take it into their wise and grave
considerations speedily; to take Gods cause in hand, which have been theirs,
and the Lands mighty preserver. And the Lord bless and preserve their designs
and purposes, both for the glory of God and the good of Church and State, Amen,
Amen, Even so be it.

WHereas good Laws in the Land are needful, and makes Men and Women Live in
Subjection; even so good Laws in a School amongst Children will make them the
better verst and obedient to the good Laws of the Land, when they shall come
to Age Having relation to an English School, and observing the Laws of the
School how easily the Master kept his Scholars in godliness and manners
(both for the glory of God, and the good of the Land.) which is an admirable
Heavenly thing to see in little Children. I thought it good to publish the
chiefest Heads, as a Pattern for all Schoolmasters to teach their Scholars,
that they may be a means (by Gods help, to bring a general joy and comfort
through the Land. For there are many Schoolmasters which take great pains to
make their Scholars excellent in humane Learning; but they take little or no
care to train up or teach God inesse and Manners to their Scholars, and the
Reason is because some of them have but little of it themselves.

Godliness and Manners are the very Diadem and Glory of all Learning; What
was Herod the better for his Learning when as the People said, It was the voice
of a God, and not of a Man? when as he wanted Godliness and Manners, in that
he was bloody minded to persecute the poor Saints; as Peter and James, and the
rest. Therefore good Laws and Precepts among Children, may do a great deal of
good to their Souls and Bodies.

The Laws are set down in Four Heads.
1 The first cocerning God and his Sabbothes. 2 The second is, concerning the
duty and love that Children owe to their Fathers and Mothers, and their
Superiors. 3 Their Love to their Brother, Sister, Servant, Schoole-fellowes,
and Neighbors. 4 Their care to their Writing and Reading, and to keep their
Apparel handsomely and whole about them; that so they may not offend their
Master and Parents; which if they observe and keep, they shall be acconnted
good Boys and besides, gains great Love from their Masters, Parents, and
Guardians, which have the tuition and charge of them.
The Laws of the School, fit to acquaint young Children with daily; that so
when they come to be Men, they may be the better fitted to observe the good
Laws of the Land.
BUt before I come to show them, I purpose to propose and put forth one
question.

Whether Lords or Gentlemen if they intend to make them fair Orchards, whether
they do usually plant over their ground old Trees, or young pleasant plants or
stocks?

It is to be granted that old Trees may grow when they are Planted; But
nevertheless there are four things why great Men, and Gentlemen, do not
Plant their fair Orchard-ground with old stocks.

1 Because old great Trees are cumbersome to deal withal, and one or two Men
cannot do it. 2 The Windy storms has a greater stroke at great Trees to
overturne them more then it has at a young plant or stock. 3 Old Trees will
cost much charge and labor to prop them up, which every gust of Wind
endangereth, either to overturne the body, or at least shake the root. 4 And
lastly, if the Lord, or master desires to make an Arbor to his Orchard for
his pleasure; Old trees are not so apt to bend as young Plants or stocks for
that work.
This I make by way of comparison and do with all humility set it forth for
the glory of God, and for the general good of the Land, that the Lord and
Commons of both the Houses of Parliament, will be pleased to take it into their
wise and grave consideration carefully to Plant Orchards of young stocks
meaning young Nurseries of general Schooling in every Parish throughout the
Land, with a careful Gardner or Grafter over them put in trust to foster and
cherish them up, by taking away the hurtful sprouts and syences of
wickedness, that hinder the good growth of them, that so at last England may
become an admirable Orchard, full of Fruit Trees being made fit for the service
of God and good Trees and Members for the Common, wealth.

There are many Clerks and others that have no employment, would be glad to
keep School, if they might have maintenance.

As good Laws do keep and preserve Peace in a Land for the good of all the
Subjects, to keep them in Subjection.

So good Laws sown among Children daily in the School, will be a special
means to keep them in Subjection, both for the glory of God; the good of
themselves and the joy and comfort of their Master, that have the tuition of
them.

Religious and Morrall Precepts of the Master to his Scholars, called the
Laws of the Schools, davided into four Parts.
The first concerning God and his Sabboths. The second is of the Child's Duty
and Love that he owes to his Father his Mother, and his Superiors. The third
shows how he should have his tongue so tipped with good words that he may
minister grace or yield a good example of grace to the hearers. Fourthly and
lastly, shows how a Child should order himself to gain Learning and to
keep his Apparel handsomely in the sight of People.

First, That the Child take heed that he swear not (in every vain talk) by
the God that made him.

Secondly that he swear not by our Lord Jesus Christ our Savior and Redeemer.

Thirdly, swear not by Christ's blood and wounds nor by any part of his body;
because the Lord says For the very cause of Oaths the Land shall ^ourue.
Therefore take head to thy Tongue, that you pluck not a Plague and Judgment
upon thy self and the whole Land for thy sake as Achan did upon Israel.

Likewise beware of lying, which is a srnit of the Tongue. A common Liar is an
Enemy to the God of Truth; And the Scripture says that God is the God (and
Father) of Truth; but the Devil is the Father of Liar; these Offenses against
God deserves four lashes on the Hand with the Rod.

Again it is a special Duty belonging to God and the very Life of Reigeon
that a Child sanctify and keep holy Gods Sabbothes. Therefore beware of
Gameing Gadding and wanton pastime, which draw the heart away from Gods
service. The Christian Sabbath is the day of their Saviors Christ's
Resurrection; which they keep holy above other days: For Christ's Resurrection
is the Faithful Christians Justification, as the Apostle shows saying.
Christ was delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our Justification.
Therefore Christsians observe that day to the Lord; for if Christ had not
risen, both Jews and Gentiles had all come short of the glory of God: he that
shall profane this day deserves four lashes with the Rod, on the Hand.

2 Precept commands the Child to be loving and dutiful to his Father,
Mother and his Superiors, and Elders, being as ready to do their will in good
things as the Servants of the Centurion which when their Master bid them go
they stirred in a moment and went with speed; when he bid them come they came
not carelessly but willingly; and last of all when he bid them do this, or that
thing, they did it faithfully readily, and with speed which is a commendable
thing in a Scoller to do the ^ike; the neglect of this duty, and love,
deserves three lashes on the Hand.

I have read of a Child possessed with the Devil at the Mothers curse, because
it frowned and fumed and would not do as the Mother bid it; a warning to
Children not to be idle and mothers not to be too hasty of their words.

3 Beware of cursing and railing against any one which is a filthy thing in the
Tongue of any Man, Woman or, Child. The Angel of God did not rail against the
Devil; and King David did not rail against Shemei; and Christ Jesus the very
mirror of humility and patience, did not rail nor revile at his persecutors,
but committed his cause only to God; who says, Vengeance is mine, and I will
repay it; and again, he gives to every Man according to his doing, whether
good or bad.

Likewise beware of setting nick names upon any Man's Person being deformed, or
upon any Man's po^^ession, be it never so base; if he b^ needful in the
Common-wealthe: for God despises not foolish things not base things nor weak
things if they stand with the Lord and take his part; therefore do not thou set
nick names upon them, if thou do thou shall have three lashes with the Rod on
the Hand.

And lastly, shows a Child how to order himself to gain Learning, and to
keep his Apparel.

First, a Child must take heed that he keep his stops in Reading, that he
hackle not, nor hamble his words in a humming, snaffling way through the Nose.

Likewise that he be careful to keep his Book clean from blots; that he write
not crooked out of the line, that he keep his Letters even, and straight
together, keeping a distance between every Word, and not linking words
together like a chain from one end of the line, to the other, and so make a
confusion, that the Reader can make no sense of it; which is a fault amongst
many writers writing to their Friends, in that they cobble all their words
together.

The next thing a Child must see to is his Apparel he must take heed that his
Apparel be clean from dirting whole from tearing; that his Stockings be kept
gartered, his shoes pointed, and like a neat Scholar behaving himself in
such a civell manner, that he may be a companion for his betters; then shall
his Master love him, and commend him,

Likewise, he must be courteous to all Men, and when he meets his Elders,
that he put off his Hat, and give them them the time of the Day; this
Scholler-like courteous carriage, shall not only gain their Parents love, but
also Neighbors and strangers will love them and commend them; the neglect of
this behavior, will deserve three lashes on the Hand.

Other things there might be put in, to warn children that they do it not as
^ea^ing fighting, hurting one another in jest or earnest, all which are
breaches of Peace; wherefore for the rest which I have omitted, I leave it to
the wisdom of the wise Schoolmasters, to add more Laws or better: according
as he shall see good; but this is the end of my de^^re: who I hope, there are
many more of the same, I should be glad to see little children trained up in a
Religious and civil way of life, which is the Grace of a Family of a Town or
City, when the children belonging unto those places are well educated and
brought up.

The Voice of the Parliament may do very much in this thing, a thousand
Preachers cannot compare with them for the duelling of sin at this time; I pray
God to give them a time, in his good time, to bring every good work to pass
for his glory, and the Kingdoms good, and theirs.

Now if these School Laws or the like, might be compelled to be read in every
English School twice a Week, like a Lesson of Instruction, it would be a
special means (by the held of God) to bring a very great reformation in
little childrens Hearts for the Law being only read is a terror; and a Rod to
mild children that have a filial fear in them; though they see none
corrected for breaking the Law.

Now when these filial children that have the Law in their Hearts, with much
fear lest they should offend; those (I say) will be a special means (like
little Preachers) to rebuke and persuade other children, that are of a servile
add obstinate Nature, that they come not in the compass of their Masters
correction and so by this means (and Gods blessing with it) the stream and
tide of wickedness, which one carried many thou^ands headlong to wickedness
shall not run so violent as it has done in times past, but shall be assuaged
with the low and humble ebb of Godliness and goodness; for with the meek and
lowly the Lord is pleased to dwell, and such as delight in goodness, the Lord
is pleased to delight in them; according as the Holy Ghost faith Those that
Honor me, I will Honor. So praying to God for a good success in these
things, desiring every good Christian to do the same; for it is goodness that
will make us happy, and not greatness only; for greatness cannot deliver one
in the Day of the Lords wrath; but goodness will make a Man happy and joyful,
through Christ Jesus, at the Hour of Death, Psalm. 112.7.8.

FINIS.

