Irelands Misery Since the Late CESSATION: Sent in a Letter from a Gentleman in
DUBLIN, to his Brother in Law, now residing in London, sometime living in the
County of Cavan in that Kingdom.

Wherein is set forth the great Cruelty and Horrible Massacres, committed upon
the English Protestants in several Castles and places which they have taken
since.

With diverse other remarkable Passages of great consequence concerning the
Affairs of both Kingdoms



LONDON, Printed for Henry Shephard, at the sign of the Cradle in Corne-hill.
January 26. 1644.

A Letter from Mr. Richard Harrison in DUBLIN, to his brother Mr. R. TUKE, now
resident in London, etc.
Sir,
I Have written to you several times of our great and prosperous victories
against our enemies formerly: but now I must write unto you of the fearful
Tragedies acted against our poor Country men, by the barberous Irish, since
the unluckie cessation, our forces being drawn away from hence daily, and our
victuals exhausted through the great and daily concourse of the Irish to this
miserable City, we being left as a prey to the enemy, expecting daily and
hourly to be massacred and murdered in our beds, being strongly conceited so,
through the manifold outrages and slaughters committed upon our poor brethren,
in their several Castles and Garrisons, as in that of Catherlow, Malohon,
Racoffie, and diverse other places, which the Irish have taken, contrary to
their pretended Truce since the bloody Cessation, having cruelly murdered all
our men, women, and children that recided in them: they at this present manage
all the affairs in the City, the Castle excepted, where our Lords, Justices,
and Council* keep themselves close, fearing to be surprised. Our condition is
very lamentable, we are as sheep appointed for the slaughter, our wives and
children swooning in the streets for want of bread, and our woeful eyes made
spectators of their cruel insolences, in setting up their Idolatrous Masses
in all our Churches, whereof they have taken possession, and banished our best
Divines; the Lord for our sins having already begun a great famine of the
word amongst us; neither are we suffered to depart the Kingdom, but are
exposed to the merciless cruelty of hunger, cold and famine, as also the
ending stroke of grizly death which we hourly expect. Oh our miseries are
unspeakable, but like to increase if not prevented by sudden (but I hope in the
Lord) a provided death. But our only woe is, that you are like to suffer with
us, and that very soon, if some speedy course be not taken for the stopping of
the great multitude of Irish Papists which daily flock from hence into this
kingdom, under pretense to assist his Majesty against the Puritans. I do
believe that this shall be the last that ever I shall write unto you (my deer
Brother) but in regard of my duty and loyalty which I owe to my Country* I
will to my best endeavor set down in brief according to my own knowledge how
this plot or misery contrived and still acted in both kingdoms, has been a
working these sixteen years, to establish popery both here and in England, to
the intent that my deer native country men may be the more cautious in not
falling into their mercies as we have done.

About the year 1630, the Earl of Cork and my Lord Chancellor Loftus, being
Lords Justices of this kingdom, the said Earl being zealous of Gods worship,
did put in execution the statute against Recusants, which took such effect
here, that the common sort of Irish came daily to our English Churches for two
months and more: in the mean time the Earl of Westmeaths, Sir Richard
Barnewall of Crickstow, are imploid as agents to the Queen, in the behalf of
all the Irish. I cannot tell how the business is carried, but the Kings
Letters of favor are obtained to the Lords Justices, commanding them not to
molest his good subjects the Irish, in their former liberty of conscience,
which was accordingly obayed. Afterward the Earl of Strafford succeeded in
this government, (who being a cunning man to get wealth) threatened the
subversion of popery (though by him never attempted, the Irish being mightily
terrified) employed Westmeath and Barnewall the second time to the Queen: these
Agents fall cunningly to work, and compounded with his Majesty to afford him a
mighty sum of money throughout the whole kingdom, if so be they might enjoy
their former liberty. Presently they obtain his Majesty's Letters again to
the Earl of Strafford, commanding as they desired, then all things go well
with them: but that the money is not gathered, Warrants are issued out, and
none so deeply taxed as the poor Protestants in purchasing the freedom of the
Papists who afterward cut their throats and dashed their children in pieces:
well the money is collected, the Papists take courage, they build Abbeys and
Couvents in every corner of the land, the Locusts flock in daily to this
miserable City, they build their Mass houses in every street* and increase in
three year to the number of fifteen hundred Priest, Jesuits Friars, and Monks,
as is here still extant by the computation of Paul Harris, one of their own
Seminary Priests: the High Commission is set up for the suppressing of our
honest Ministers, and it is made Court of justice for Seminary Priests to
plead and sue for Parishes for themselves, as may appear by this story
following; the said Paul Harris being Seminary Priest in the Back Lane, was to
be put out of his Parish by the titular Romish Arch Bishop of Doublin, and one
Patrick Cale appointed in his place: Haris appeals to our High Commission
Court, and cites Cale to answer his suit, which he accordingly did: after long
pleading Harris was adjudged to keep the Parish, he having formerly obtained a
Letter of favor from Sir George Ratliffe to our godly Bishops to that intent,
to proceed further in the plot: Strafford disarmes all our English, and raises
an army of the Papists to the number of eight thousand, and sends them to the
North against the poor Scotch, allowing every Regiment as many Mass Priests
as they please to use. But what is all this to the many insolences and
approbrious words used against us, by tearming us traitors to the Crown and
dignity, affirming (they having the Kings Commission for their warrant in
murdering and destroying an hundred and fifty thousand souls. And great
likelihood there is of a strong party they were assured of in England: their
Agents Nicholas Plunket and the rest of his confederates being all that Summer
before the rebellion with his Majesty at Court, and waiting upon his person to
Scotland, from whence they posted into Ireland, and proclaimed openly the Kings
authority to handle in that woeful manner you often heard of. I have sent unto
you for your better satisfaction, the speech made at Granarde in the County of
Longford, by Edmond O Bealy, the titular Romish Primate, the 27 of August,
1641, before the rest of his fraternity. It was found in Latin about Anthony O
Lork, a Franciscan Friar, slain at the Battle of Clodeum Mill, in the County
of Cavan: but afterward translated into English by Archdeacon Watson, for the
better satisfaction of all honest men.

Edmond O Healy, his Speech to the rest of the Romish Bishops at Granarde, the
27 August. 1641.
WE do not presume most reverend Fathers in God, through any pre-eminence of
our place or calling, to make our selves the mouth of the sacred Assembly;
neither do we confide in the small value of either our learning or eloquence,
wherein we know our self to be inferior to the meanest capacity here
assembled: But the zeal of the Catholic cause has eaten us up: the waves of
ungodlinsse having overwhelmed our Holy Mother, the Church. S. Peter's ship was
never so near sinking, when he cried Perimus, as it is now. Its not unknown to
you Reverend Bishops, how the factious Puritan Parliament of England, endeavor
to root out our Holy Church in the three Kingdoms: how our King and gracious
Queen are slighted by these aforesaid wicked Heretics; and how all hope of
her godly assistance is frustrated: all these passages you are certified by our
Agents from Court, but there is hopes that all is not lost, have not we a
blessed Hester to pacify Ahafuorus? have not we a strong party to join with us
both in England and Scotland? and which is more to be considered, are not we
fully certified of mighty combustions to ensue in England, our King and Queen
are blameless in this persecution intended, whose clemency we have tasted
these many years past, therefore Right reverent Fathers lend your helping hands
for to build an Ark to save us from this deluge, let us be courageous as (we
are directed) to destroy all the heretics of this land, they are but a
handful to us, that we may be able to serve our own turn in England in
assisting the King against o^^ enemies, go to I beseech you in the name of the
blessed virgin Mary of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and of all the Saints
and Angels in heaven, all whose blessing we implore in these meritorius
proceedings. Amen.

Sir, you see how our woes begun and what encouragement the Irish had to use us
as they did, or do you think that these inhumane butchers will fight for the
Protestant Religion, the professors thereof being so odious to them, that they
dug all the bones and carcases out of their graves in every Church
throughout the land because forsooth, they would not say mass there as long as
they had any heretic bone within the church, and here they swear too that
they fight for the Protestants Religion, but you shall here their equivocation,
they say that it is the protestation that makes the Protestant and if they
protest to fight against the Gospel, their Protestation makes the Protestant,
and as they say themselves, they may be lawfully termed so.

You see their cunning tricks in striving to overthrow our Religion, I beseech
the Lord to preserve England from their tyranny though I my self never hope to
see it or to escape their cruelty, hoping to meet you in heaven I rest.

Your loving Brother R. Harrison.
Dublin 2 January, 1643. Copia vera, John Dodd.

