Englands Outcry, FOR The sad distractions now lying upon the Church and
STATE. Wherein she humbly implores mercy from God, pity from her Sovereign,
and justice on her Enemies. Laying down, both the primary, and secondary
causes, of her fresh bleeding calamities.

So that Judicious, simple, all may see,
The first promoter of this misery.
Read diligently, consider carefully, and make what thou have read, a case of
Conscience. Written by J. Harris.

This is Licensed, and entered, according to Order

London, Printed by T. Forcet, July 24. 1644.

Englands Outcry: FOR The distracted divisions of Church and State.
It Is a sad sign, when mercy proves the forerunner of misery, when temporal
enjoyments for a minute, ushers on an age of scarlet calamities; when gentle
entreaties work not the desired effect, then smarting corrections must enforce
by power what love could not bring to pass by courtesy. Such is the case of
England, po^^e, miserable, distracted, almost destroyed England. I who was
termed the Virgin Island, the Southern Arcadia, the land flowing with Milk and
Honey, where plenty of all good, and delightful pleasure had its residence,
where Peace brought Honor to the Prince, and Riches to the People, where the
Sovereigns sole delight and study was to preserve the Subject, and the
Subjects care (guided by Conscience) to observe the just commands of the
Sovereign, where the Prince hated Tyranie the Preachers Popery, and the
Subject feared no slavery, but every degree lived in the fear of God, in the
favor of the Prince, enjoying the fruits of their own Vine. I, even I, am now
become as a widow mourning for the loss of her espoused Love: instead of
singing joyful Anthems. I am enforced to take up a great lamentation, and cry
out with the Prophet, Oh that my head were waters, and my eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night (...) the slain of the daug^^ers of my
People. But alas poor ENGLAND, what will (...) veil thee to lament, now when
the acceptable time is past, how happy had thou bin had thou known in
this thy day what had belonged to thy Peace, but the day is gone, the night is
come and darkness covers the face of the whole earth, mercyes could not
prevail, threatening must subdue, threatenings could not subdue, Judgments must
destroy, plagues could not forwarn us (though brought upon us year after
year) therefore the sword must now destroy us. In this great strait, to whom
shall poor ENGLAND complain, if to God, he cannot but appear a just avenger,
a displeased Judge, an incensed Father, for the slaughter of his beloved Son,
whom ENGLAND has cruelly crucified it may be justly expected that in stead of
finding favors a storm of fiery indignation will be showered upon me. If I
complain to neighbor Nations, in stead of redress, I shall find derision,
rejociyng at my misery, glorying in my downfall, I that was the height of their
envy and admiration, am now become the subject of their wish, a desolation, if
I complain to my own, none will hear me, J have often (with prayers and
tears) said O King! Hear me, and have mercy on me, but alas, Flatterers
stood so thick between him and me, that all I said was to no purpose, when I
came with a Petition for Peace, he was so busy with a Council of War, that
my labor was lost, and in all my religious endeavors, to prevent this lasting
misery, I found so many Crosses, that being altogether disheartened, I sat me
down to consider what the cause might be, that so many Papists were turned
Protestants, so many Courtiers turned Soldiers so many Prelates made Peers,
so many Ladies made Counselors, so many Knaves put in authority and the
sequel of all I have found to be, that England having abounded in sin of all
kinds abused mercies, slighted threatenings; surfeited with Manna, was grown
sick of a Plurisie and these were appointed (by a divine Decree) to be the
Horsleeches that should suck away the corrupted and putrified blood, bred from
the evil Court humors and thence diffused through the body of the whole
Kingdom^ and in this they very well agree for they have showed them^^^ves
insatiate blood-suckers not satisfied till by their abounding ^^ey have burst
themselves, and almost ruined what they were ^rdained to preserve, the cure
proving much more desperate ^^en the disease, so much by the way, Sin I found
to be the pri^ary and chief ground of my sufferings, to look back only to
^^e days of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, had England ^^en been humbled
for the bloodshed in the Antichristian per^^cution of Queen Mary, (whose
memory brings timely ^^rrow to my heart) the Enemy had never obtained such
an ad^antage and encouragement as he had to work and plot so ma^^ ways and
stratagems to destroy our then (Faiths defendor) ^^th the Protestant
profession; for sin gives the devil an advantage and when a man lies open
unguarded, it is a happy advan^age for an enemy to take to kill him, penitent
sorrow prevents ^^nne; had ENGLAND made a progression in a Religious
re^ormation in the days of King James, and not sat down in a Wilderness, as
being content to be only freed from that ^GYPTIAN slavery, not regarding to
make a further progress into the land of Canaan Rome had not found such an
opportunity to corrupt our Clergy and to bring us back again to make Bricks to,
subject our selves to Peter's chair* and to endeavor the advancement of the
antichristian Kingdom, Romes Antagonist (Prince Henry) had not been destroyed*
nor so many famous and deserving Peers had their lives shortened but only to
make way for the advancement of Romes Empire and the destruction of poor
ENGLAND, to what end was so many Parliaments dissolved, and Parliaments so long
discontinued, but to subvert Religion and destroy the Law: to what end was the
Spanish faction so much favored but to show that they had declared themselves
ready to protect England, (with a Spanish Fleet, a Powder conspiracy an ^rish
rebellion, an English invasion) to the total destruction of it is Religion and
Liberty, can any man be so sottish as not to see the Bishops, De^nes and
Doctors going in Procession to Rome* just when they began to persecute
Purita^^^ with one ^^^d, and entertain ^esuits, Friars (...) plucking them to
high (...) with both ^and* can it seem reasonable that a Papist should love a
Protestant or Spain love England, where there is no Antipathy, but in
principles of policy: can it be a matter reasonable to think that they that
now declare themselves (the Law's defenders,) against the Kingdom, will
maintain them for the King, could he be won to put them in execution against
them, or may it not appear as great a principle in the Papists of Spain and
France to endeavor the promotion of their Antichristian cause, against
England, as it is in England to maintain ours against them, certainly it
cannot be denied, yet such is Englands misery, Her offspring prove abortives
and Viper-like, endeavor to eat up their native mothers bowels: they endeavor
to destroy what nature enjoynes them to preserve, this devision has sin
brought upon me, Father against Son, Son against Father: what the sword
leaves; the fire destroys, blood touches blood, and fear and anguish upon
every soul. The anger of the Lord has divided us. What earthly power has
ability to join what God has divided, we have seen many experiences. How
long has the sole endeavors of the High Court of Parliament bin employed to
settle these different distractions and to promote the Peace of England, and
what has hindered (Sin) that has divided God and England, and God he has
divided England, in it self, and assuredly know till England make a division
between sin and it, there will never cease to be a division in it, Oh then
for Englands sake! speedily set about this work, if there must be a division
let it be between sin and us. Hear O King and give ear to Englands
Petition, let not flattery pervert Judgment, but let Law and Justice support
the Crown. Hear O Queen Englands Petition, let not Idolatry lead you captive
but embrace the truth, so shall your soul live. Hear O Nobles Englands
Petition, let not Ambition inthrall Virtue, but really endeavor the
advancement of Gods glory, with the good of the King and Kingdom. Hear O
Clergy Englands Petition. Unto you is given to be known the mysteries of the
Kingdom of God. O then endeavor to use convincing and converting arguments,
arm your selves with the power of the Lord and in a Religious Warfare
endeavor the pulling down of Babell and the setting up the throne of Christ.
Hear O People and give care to Englands Petition, how long shall wisdom cry
in the streets and be rejected: how long will you continue in your sins and
wage* War against the great God of Heaven and Earth, O repent repent and
turn from your wicked ways, why will ye dye O ye Church of England. be
persuaded to hate Swearing Profaneness, Sabath breaking, Gospel contemning,
Mercy abusing, Judgment slighting: Heart hardening, self securing think not
that you shall fare better then your brethren in Ireland and England that has
been devoured by the sword for know of a truth except you repent you shall all
likewise perish leave Judging others and judge your selves, leave justifying
your selves and justify others. O King, Queen, Prince Peers, Preachers, and
People. Hear Englands Petition, be persuaded to set upon this work with
speed, now while it is called to day, for who knows what a day may bring forth,
who knows whether the Lord may hear us and have mercy on us, and heal our
iniquities, and give a close to our differences, uniting in a bond of peace the
heart of the King, Parliament and People, and make England once more a Garden
of pleasure, which now appears a terrene Golgotha, a bloody field of Slaughter.

The first Answer to Englands Petition.
Pore England know it is my desire,
That Peace should expiate this fire,
But it is in vain, for Englands doom:
Is hither sent from fatal Rome.
I with poor Englands Foes do jarre,
I seek for Peace, but meet with War.
Then seek to God, to him complain:
It Is he must bring thy Peace again.
ENGLAND.
Oh poor distressed England! Who shall bring
Relief unto thee, since thou now do stand,
Without all hope of comfort from thy King,
Being made a prey unto another land:
Whose Papal Monarch tirany so boasts,
As to wage war against the Lord of Hoasts.
And if against Heaven he dares to advance his sword*
What shall poor England do? Help, help, O Lord.
The second Answer to Englands Petition.
England rebellious, know it is my will,
To force obedience, make thee bow thy knee,
In true subjection to Room's Empery.
It Is not your zealous errors, which you still,
Maintain against Our sacred Profession,
Shall get your Peace out of Our sweet possession:
But of Our fury you shall drink your fill.
Nor will We cease, till We through Blood and Fire
Obtain Rom's Peace, the thing We most desire.
ENGLAND.
Hark Englands Sons and Daughters? Quickly hear*
Your three Years sufferings past, produce new fear.
Destruction's threatened by a fatal power,
Joined with a will, which will not fail to shower,
Her vengeance on you, Room will you annoy*
And by her power, both You and Me destroy.
Ioyn then with Englands friends, and help to save,
The Fame of England from a loathed grave.
Assist her Worthies, let not Room incroach,
Loose not your lives to purchase a reproach
Upon your names, and what will be much worse,
Even from your childrens children fetch a curse.
Let not effeminate smiles enforce you bring
To pass the ruin of your Royal King.
Least when the work is done, (too late) you prove,
Newcastl's guerdon, must reward your love.
Be wise, be valiant, now is the time of hope,
To save the King and Kingdom, from the Pope*
Published according to Order.

FINIS.

