TWO LETTERS Written by Mr HARRIS In Vindication of Himself from the known
slanders of an unknown Author.

To my Reverend friend M. Harris.
SIR,
IT will not (I hope) offend you to see your private Letters made public, it
concerns you, and others, to vindicate your selves in this Catching age, and
the sooner it is done the better, Chide me if you will, yet I will be

Yours still, W. T.
May 2. 1648.

Printed in the Years 1648.

SIR,
TO Your three Queries, touching 1. Non-residency, 2. Exchange of Churches, 3.
And my Pluralities,
I pray accept (in this my haste) this short answer. For the first, I am still
the same (whether you speak of the Locus or Officium) that then I was, when I
Preached and Published that my Concio ad Clerum in your hands.

For the second, I conceive that a Pastor in his removes should be rather
Passive then Active, and fit down by the conclusion of old (...).

For the third, I must needs say more then ever I intended, by reason of a
fresh charge upon me from Oxford this instant April. I acknowledge a double
error.

1. That I yielded so far, as to bear the name of some livings, 'till some
unwelcome suitors were slaved off, and others more desired were wrought in. 2.
That I was too confident, that no man would conceive that I intended to hold
four or five livings at these years, being so near my grave, and at this
time, When pluralities are so decryed and damned, especially seeing in my
younger days, I satisfied my self with one small Benefice, though then I had
offers of more, and that then when Non-residency was more in fashion and
credit, and more dispensable then now it is. Thus far I have erred, and for
this I crave pardon. But now whereas it is pretended that filthy lucre has so
far transported me that I have heaped Living upon Living to a great number,
and to no less a value, then 14. or 1500l per annum, I do profess unto you
in the words of Truth and Sobriety, I never yet received 300l per annum declaro
in one year from any Church Living or Livings, and whereas an audit is made of
the very particulars, be not weary if I touch upon each particular. The first
instance is Hanwell, there I lived forty years, and there had died, had I not
been called away by public Order, and before I might return, my Living and
Goods seized to another use. During which my absence, I was never called to
any settled, though invited to many sequestered places, The first place I
undertook, when Hanwell was taken away, was that at Bhishops-gate (not daring
to venture upon that at the Temple) there I was (at the Parliaments pleasure)
till Hanwell was again opened unto me, touching which I cannot give you a
full account without some trouble to you, and some reflection upon dearest
friends, only this in sum. I am so willing to own that for my old love (as
Pegasus terms it) that I prefer it to any place in the World, were there
suitable accommodations, but the parsonage house being defaced, the Mounds and
Standards removed, many of my Goods, Books, and other implements and utensils
Pillaged, my own proper Houses thereabouts, turned to ashes by the fury of
flame and Sword, It was not in my power to repair my self, nor in the Peoples
to recruit me: true it is; some overtures have been made, some time spent in
projecting a resettlement, but obstructions have been very great. Meanwhile,
what offers have been made on my part, what suits on the Peoples part, how the
place has been supplied what moneys have come at any time to my purse
(Soldiers, Assistants and other emergencies answered) I had rather the most
knowing Inhabitants would speak then my self, who (I believe) will smile at
Pegasus his Arithmetique in summing all up to 160l per annum with an etc.
The Second place is Bishops-gate, how near that reaches to 400l per annum,
M. Fuller (there settled) by this time finds, would this Auditor help me to my
arrear's for times past, he should have my now hundreds thence, for one of his
Pegasus shooe-nailes.

The third is Hanbury, It pleased Oxfordshire Committee, out of their good
thoughts of me and desire of my Neighborhood, to design that for me, yea to
send me (without my suite) an order for it, this I kept by me a while, and in
fine desired them to excuse me, and how ever I might (if I would) have made
some profit of the place, yet I assure you, and the Parishioners will attest
the same, the place was never worth 3d to me; whether in it self it amounts to
toward 300l or no, M. Rogers (the Incumbent) best knows, and this reporter
(within six miles of the place) may know the truth in the premises, if it be
not grievous to him to know the truth and my innocence.

Now comes sequestered Peterfield, then to be left when I go to Oxford: this is
not above forsooth 5. or 600l per annum, warily spoken, he might have made
another remove, and said not above so many 1000l, what it is in this negative
and indefinite way it skilles not much, what I have received, the Sequestrator
has asserted under his hand, and if Pegasus will give me 150l for my 500l per
annum (all things discharged) I will give him Bridle and Saddle into the
bargain.

As for his 4s per diem in the Assembly, he understands as little how and to
whom that is paid, as I do of his 10s for Apostle-ship in Oxford vain man,
who is at leisure thus to throw away time, and to please himself in his own
froth) knows he better then I what I have received or do intend, whether I
settle upon Garsington (an other instance annexed to the College) or no:
whether it were possible for me (if I were willing) to hold many Parsonages now
or not: or say I could and would, knows he never a man (never a worthy man in
his eye) who hathhad 15. or 1600l per annum, and how comes he to be so angry
with one, and so indulgent to another in the same cause, but the Lord forgive
his keenes, not against me only, but against more deserving men. Sir I return
to you, I crave pardon for this digression, if this little will satisfy you, or
any with you, I am glad, if not, I shall do more at more leisure, for I am
resolved that no Pluralist shall justly quote me. I am now a dying man, and I
had rather dye this day, then live one more therein to give just offense to the
Church of God, to his Grace I now leave you, and

Am Sir Your Servant in Christ R. H.

SIR,
YOUR Letter overtook me in my Jorny, you will pardon me, if I answer the
Contents currente calamo.

1. To the exception against me and my Brethren for Pluralities, this I say
for them, I hope it is causeless, I have often heard their defense, and know
that diverse of them have bin hardly put to it, but somewhat. (I conceive) will
be shortly done in their Vindication, and I will not anticipate. 2ly, For my
self, I think I may say without breach of modesty, sum extra noxam sed non est
facile purgatu, I was a little too confident of a fair and Candid
interpretation of my actions and intentions, and therefore made not have
enough, and that which swayed me was this. It was told me that some places
(offered me) would suffer, in case use were not made of my name for a season.
2ly, I was willing (an option being granted, and I being now to settle once for
all for ought I knew) to see what place would suit best with my strength for
the Charge, and with my health for the Air, and thereupon some time run out
before I (who was not my self) could refolve, but it was never intended on any
hand, that I should hold any more places then one, nay it never came into my
thoughts. There is now from Oxford (as you seem to intimate) somewhat said with
no good affection, nay all heightened, ad Conflandum odium and invidiam, things
so represented as if I had no less then 4 or 5 Livings of great Value at one
time, whereas you know that I never had any place (which I could call mine) but
only one, the rest offered me were many (upon several occasions) but all
Sequestered, Tenable (yea and Tithable too) at the pleasure of others. What
reason I had to part suddenly with a more certain, for a less certain
thing, do you judge. All the rest of those places (so offered) are for ought I
know disposed of, some I never saw, from others I never received Penny, the
only Sequestered place that is in question is Peterfield, this was with much
nobleness at first conferred, with much fear and slownes undertaken, supplied
(by reason of my attendance elsewhere, and the Sequestratours and Parishioners
refusing to take the means and please themselves in the choice of the
Assistants) with much difficulty, submitted to that honorable Committee again
upon my derignement for Oxford, and now (the result of Oxford business being
known) to be (according to a former engagement) for ever acquitted, or only
resided upon. As for Hanwell, when a Successor was named by the Patron, I
thought the work done, but it proved otherwise. At present I say this. 1. I
was called thence 2. The place was taken from me. 3. Since it returned, I have
made these offers, 1. That in-case the Parishioners would make the place
habitable, I would (with leave) there live and dye, or 2. That I would resign
it to such a man as they (and others concerned) liked, so as I might be freed
of Delapidations, nay Devastations made by Soldiers, and 3. In the mean, till
Patron and People could concur in a man, I offered that he who Offciated
should take all, Conditionally that he would do and pay all, there remains
but one thing more, and that is this, that I Petition the Parliament either to
relieve me in my great losses and return me thither, or else put in a
suflicient man, in case there be not a speedy Concurrence, (as I truft there
will be now) in such a man as I have engaged my self to leave upon the place.
Thus you have the naked truth represented herein, what you dislike I desire to
know that I may Correct it. Sir I am so little taken with great places, that my
highest ambition is some private Hospital, and so tired with a Pastoral
Charge, that I dislike nothing so much in my lot at Oxford, as that. Hitherto
I have bin passive in all the places I ever had, and now I would gladly sit
down in silence, and go to my grave in peace, and this is all I can stay to
say to your first Quere.

Now for your second touching Oxford, it is not for me to say much: I love the
place, I honor diverse there who are of a different Judgment in some things,
and could heartily wish, that they would have prevented our Journey thither,
and task there, by a timely Reformation of themselves, and free concurrence
with the Parliament in that necessary work, for though you and I and a 1000
more, do honor that our dearest Mother and do unfainedly desire (aconcealement
of her wants, yea) her greatest advancement, yet we cannot deny but that there
is need of a further Reformation, and that without prejudice to our Oaths and
Privileges, (for ought I know) and had that been done long might the
Students for me have enjoyed their Mother, and their Mother them. I think I
may truly say, that there is none put in there by the Parliament, who had not
rather see the place Reformed, then himself preferred. For my self, if my
places in City and Country be so many, so rich as they are reported, it may be
reasonably thought, that it is no great preferment for me to quitt them all (as
I must and will if I settle there) for Trinity College, but the truth is, I do
not think that Pegasus does believe that I have so much in my hands, nay I make
a question whether he would not like it well enough, that I should keep more
Livings, so I would leave one College, and truly I am not very liquorish
after one. Sir you see how apt I am to exceed whilst I confer with you. I
conclude with these requests, believe 1. That I am no friend to Nonresidency
and Pluralities, 2. That I have not husbanded men's kindnesses to mine own
advantage, 3. That I defire no place like my old place, si res esset integra,
you will now present my best to all with you, and continue your prayers for

Your old Friend and Neighbor. R. H.


