St. Edwards GHOST: OR, Anti-Normanisme: Being a patheticall Complaint and
Motion in the behalf of our English Nation against her grand (yet neglected)
Grievance, Normanisme.

Quaenam (malum) est ista voluntaria Servitus? Cicer. in orat. Phil. 1. LONDON,
Printed for Richard Wodenothe at the Star under Peter's Church in Cornhill.
1647.

Ad Lectorem.
Reader,
THis Essay having long waited for room and free audience on the public
stage, Being written Anno Dom. 1642.
does now appear; if thou have a mind to quarrel with it, it must be against
the matter or the form; against the matter thou who art English can not
without betraying either thine ignorance in not knowing thy Nations dearest i.
e. the title and quality of a free Nation.
Rights, or thine impiety in opposing them; being no other then what she
enjoyed and joy'd in, till she lost them by See page 15.
perfidious Robbers; But if it be the form that thou disrelishest, I confess
it needs much favor, and therefore should gladly have seen thee or some other
to have prevented it with a better; yet for thy better bearing with the
prolixity of the historical part of it (occasioned by the copiousnesse of the
subject worth and opposite arrogance,) thou may remember that it was King
Ahashuerus his choice recreation to review the Acts of his Ancestors, and that
the Jews could hear even Saint Steven reciting their high Pedigree,
patiently; however, it shall suffice me in this business to have attempted to
have done worthily, and I doubt not but every true Englishman will not only
indulge the works weakness, but also lend both his heart and hand in all
lawful means toward the accomplishing of its See page 19.
Demands, as without which obtained (at least in a good degree,) this Nation can
never be Honorable nor (consequently) Happy. Vale.

JOHN HARE.

ERRATA.
Page 1 line 8 read magnanimity. p. 2 in margin r. vide Virgilium. ibid. l. 20
for right r. weight. ibid. l 21 r. sulphurous. ibid. l 27 r. ingenuous p. 3 l.
^ r. unnatural'd. p. 9 l. 9 r. Cimbri p 7 l. 1 r. symptoms ibid. in margin,
for subject r. scilicet. ibid* r. Excrescentia. ibid. l. 19 r. records. ibid.
l. 25 r. confessed. ibid. l. 27 r. their. ibid l. 38. r. activenesse* p. 6 l. 14
for of r. as. ibid. l. 16 for is r. are. ibid. l. 26 r. Bulloigne p. 13 in
margin r. Variana. Praeter alia leviora.

Saint EDWARDS Ghost: OR, Anti-Normanisme.
WHile I behold and revolve the great and Exordium.
laborious inversions and eversions of things effected by the representative
body of this Kingdom in this and precedent Parliaments, with that liberal and
vast expense of English blood, lives, labor and cost, which with the height of
animosity and seeming magnamity, former generations have bestowed, and the
present does not spare in asserting the public causes of this Nation, Viz. The
abating of Prerogative, abolishing Courts, Monopolies, etc.
and all excepting what is about some Ecclesiastical nicities, for the securing
(or enlarging) of our Estates and Privileges from domestic oppression, and
concentred in the object of ease and commodity, and such like petty advantages;
I cannot but with shame and grief of mind look upon the genius of our Nation,
Nebuchadnez.
as seeming to have transmigred from that metamorphosed Prince of Chaldea, who
being transmitted from the top of humanity into the condition of beasts of the
field for a great part of his ensuing age, made fodder and other brutish
accommodatione the proper subject of his content and contentions, not
harboring in the mean time a back-looking thought toward that Royal Estate,
by the possession whereof he had been once the most eminent of the mortals of
his age; or as resembling some strange Heroes, who being captived and marked for
a slave, should have his senses so captivated also, as to be more ambitious for
to be chamber'd in his Iayle, and to glister in guilt fetters, then to be
restored to his lost freedom and reputation, contending with earnest extremity
for the one, but not breathing so much as a wish for the procurement of the
other.

That this is our case I would that the heavy long and everlasting, Narratio
oneris Nomini Anglico incumbentis.
(heaven grant not everlasting) groans of the hereditary Liberty and Honor of
our Nation, (the choycest and most essential fundamentals of her temporary
wel-being, and the most precious part of her earthly Patrimony, the happy
ornaments of her youth) long since overthrown, and for many ages together,
lying patients most wretchedly under a mass of unworthy oppression, did not
too evidently evince, whilst we (her sons) in the interim sparing no
endeavors in the behalf of our less valuable rights, are in this respect so
stupidly senseless, that whereas we have cause enough with that Aetnean
prisoner Enceladus (the eternal monument of dejected greatness) to testify
the right of our disgraceful burden with fiery fighs and sulphurous blasts of
indignation; 2. Virgilium. Aenead. 3.
we contrariwise are so far from any reluctance as to lie in a dead sleep
under it, as under our gravestone, having inscribed thereon the Epitaph of our
honor in red letters of shame, not daring, or not willing so much as to breath
forth a complaint, or to wish for a removal of that, then which there is
nothing under heaven more insufferable to ingenious men, and to such as would
be accounted other then the progeny of Cham preordained to servility.

This mountain of dishonor which the English name has so long groaned under,
^x^licatio.
and yet we have never once adventured to complain of, much less endeavored
to remove, is no other then that infamous title of a conquered Nation, and that
by so infamous a conquest; but more especially the still visible fetters of our
captivity, the evidences of that title; those foreign Laws, Language, Names,
Titles and Customs, then introduced, and to this day domineering over ours,
our stupid degeneratenesse consists in this, that in all our contentions by pen
or sword, in all the essays of our Poets or Orators (excepting some few,
whereof Verstegan deserves to be memorized) I could never yet find any
considerable endeavor for our vindication from this thraldom and disgrace,
but rather like tamed Creatures or unnatural Ianizaries, we sooth and applaud
our selves in these gyves and servile robes as patrician Ornaments; and (that
which me thinks no true English man can observe without indignation (many of
those that would be accounted to have honored our Land with their pens, Viz.
Some Poets and Heralds.
have placed that their honoring us for a great part, in celebrating the glory
of that Normanisme and Francisme which the desert of our sins has inflicted on
us, and seem to have sacrificed their love and duty to their own Nation,
together with their discretion for an holocaust on the Altar of that name,
which is diametrically enmity to the English; and such are those that ascribe
so much worth to the Normane blood, and strive to pen up all nobility and
gentry within the accursed Catalogue of those names that came from the gallick
continent.

Indignities that merit a Lucans genius and Tullius dicendi vis, Ejusdem
tolerati Redaergutie
to lay open and explode them; But since the such of this Nation contrary to my
perpetual and earnest wishes and expectation, are undutifully silent herein;
duty to my country shall make it no indiscretion in me to undertake the
task, though (alas) performing it rather by an intimation then due
illustration of the truths which follow.

There is no man that understands rightly what an English man is, 1.
Aturpitudine demonstrata.
but knows withal that we are a member of the Teutonick Nation, 1. A
Claritate generis nostri.
and descended out of Germany; a descent so honorable and happy (if duly
considered) as that the like could not have been fetched from any other part of
Europe, nor scarce of the universe, Historia gentis Teutonicae.
which will be plain and manifest if we take a just survey of the
gloriousness of that our Mother Nation, and that in the sundry respects of her
ancient and illustrious Original, her generous qualification and magnifick and
warlick nature; her atcheivements, domination* greatness and renown; her
Majesty and other heroical points of excellence, wherein she is so
trans^endent, and which make her so Princely, (...) that no other Nation in
every respect (the Scythick excepted) may without arrogance dare to compare
with her.

To begin with her Original of it, I may say as Virgil of Fame, Caput inter
nubila condit she is a primitive Nation, Ejusdem antiquitas.
and vaunts her descent to be from no other place, then from the top of Nimrods
Tower, where was made the first division of mankind into Nations; she derives
not her self (like those of her Neighbors that boast so much of their great
birth) from the conquered relics of ruined Troy; whence also Virgil took so
much pains to deduce his Romans, or from any other Nation, but as most
conceive the first transmigration that the Teutones made, was (as is aforesaid)
from the building of Babel, from whence they were conducted by the great Tuisco
(whose name they still retain) and placed in those seats, which they have not
only ever since defended against all invaders and intruders, but also most
notably enlarged the same upon their Neighbors; others in more ignorant times,
conceited they had their Original and Spring (like the Giants, Tacitus, etc.
Myrmidons, Cadmus his new men and other warlick breeds) from the soil and
earth under them, as which was never known otherwise then appropriate to their
name and possession.

To this Antiquity of the Teutonick house, Fraenobilitas seu Protogenia.
there wants not a conspiring quality of blood effectual to make it the most
illustrious and primer Nation of Christendom; For Gomer Japhets eldest Son is
acknowledged by Historians to have been the first King and Possessor of Europe,
whose heir and first borne was Askenas, the father and denominator of the
German Nation; the Jews at this day calling the Germans Askenites, and the
Saxons (our Progenitors) as the most noble tribe, still retaining (with a
little Metathesis) as well the name as blood of the same Royal Patriarch, but
whether he were one and the same with Tuisco, or else his Progenitor, is left
uncertain.

For the general qualification of these our Ancestors, it has ever spoke them
to be no other then the true Sons of Tuisco, Genii excelsit^do.
that is of Mars (as some interpret him.) The first character that was given of
them to the world, was by great Alexander himself, and resulted from that
compendious discourse betwixt him and their Ambassadors, when upon their
worthy Answer to his proud question, (as the supplement to Curtius his History
records) he pronounced them an haughty and cavaliering Nation, Germanos
superbosesse.
envying that any should be as magnanimous as himself.

The next light that was given of them to the southern world was in lightning
terror; Bellicositas se^ Praestantia animi Corporisque cum rebus gesti^.
this was by that famed expedition of the Cymbri and Teutones peculiarly so
called, when as those our more immediate Ancestors, wanting elbow-roome in
their native Country of Low-Germanie and the Cymbrik Chersonesse, undertook
in a party of 300 thousand adventurers to seek and mend their fortunes in
foreign Countries; the first Country they took in their way was France, then
called Gaul, a Country preordained for the exercise and subject of our
Conquests, and bearing a Nation at that time esteemed the Paragon of the world,
and for strength, valor, and numerousnesse invincible; this France and french
Nation till then unconquered and in their maiden glory, that Almane Army
overran, subdued and trampled under foot, thereby leaving to us the progeny of
their Nation, the prime right and Title of conquering them again; this
Province being ransackt, over the belly thereof those second Anaki^es bore on
their uncontrolled March toward the Alps and Italy, where lay the term and
scope of their resolution and design, which was to try masteries with Rome for
the Empire of the world; Rome was not then in her infancy, under the
displeasure of heaven, and propugned by a disorderly and unskilful multitude as
Brem^^s found her, but flourishing in the height of her fortune, strength, and
youthful vigor; her Discipline unmatchable, her Armies almost invincible, and
those managed and conducted by the greatest General of that age Caius Marius,
so that well might these positive advantages concurring also with sundry
accidental ones (which last were indeed the most efficacious occasions of the
event) lend the Romans the fortune at that time over those our Ancestors; but
although by the disposition of the supreme Will they sell short of their
design, and left the honor of Romes destruction for some others of their
Countrymen, in ensuing ages; yet did they show forth such famous sumptomes of
more then human daringnesse and abilities, Subject the Goths.
that the affrightment which they case before them, shoke all Italy, and loaded
the Roman Altars with prayers at that time, and long after with praises to
their deities, for the deliverance of their City from so formidable an
invasion, a deliverance that endowed Marius with the preeminent name amongst
Romes preservers, as being from the invasion of such whose performances
proclaimed them a Gigantean Army, and the most valiant men that ever the
Romans had to deal with.

Neither did our Ancestors glory fail to increase with the increase of time;
Exce^sc^^tia
for the next age produced Ariovistus, with his martial Army from Germany over
the Rhine to the second Conquest of France; so that twice was that Nation
subdued and broken by our Ancestors the Teutones, before ever the Roman
Eagles durst assail it; and had not the Romans then interposed all France as
well as Belgia had long before the time of Pharamond fallen into the Germans
possession, these Germans at that time (as Caesar recorded) had the French in
such vassalage and subjection as that they durst not so much as mutter out a
complaint, or petition to their Roman friends for relief against them; nor
did the French who had been accounted of all Nations the most valiant in that
age presume in any sort to compare themselves with the Germans, but (as the
same great Author witnesses) consist in plain terms that they were not able
so much as to withstand their fulminating looks; and by the reports of the
Germans formidablenesse, (concurring with the Cymbrick memory) so scared even
Caesar's Legions, that all his Centurions fell to a disposing either of their
persons to a more security by flight, or of their estates to their friends by
Testament; and whosoever surveyes the writings of Caesar, Tacitus, and other
Roman Authors of those times, no less eminent for judgment then Authority,
shall find in them the Teutones our Ancestors to have been always accounted
(in effect) the Anakitish and most soldiery Nation of the world, and for
personage the flower and quintessence of mankind, chosen and advanced above all
Nations to the dignity of the Caesarian Guard; by nature consecrate to heroic
atcheivenesse, disdaining other then sanguinean desudations, and who during the
whole age of the Roman Monarchy resisted the violence thereof, and was as
often invaders as invaded.

After the dissolution of the Roman Empire, Exundationes.
how did the Teutonick glory and puissance break forth and diffuse themselves;
the Germane Colonies filled all Europe; the Frankes seized upon the transalpine
Gaul, sithence from them named France; the Lombards upon the other Gaul
afterward called Lombardy; the Goths on Spain, and the Saxons or English,
(our peculiar Progenitors) in a more plenary way, upon the best part of
Britain which we now possess* to which we have since also added the command
of the Welsh, Irish and Scots, so that in all the Regions aforesaid of the
Sovereignty and Royalty, so also most of the Nobility, and in England the whole
commonalty is Germane, and of the Germane blood, and scarcely was there any
worth or manhood left in these occidental Nations, after their so long
servitude under the Roman yoke until these new supplies of freeborn men
from Germany reinfused the same and reinforced the then servile body of the
West, with a Spirit of honor and magnanimity; in so much that as Dubartas has
well observed, that Land may well be styled the Equus Trojanus or inexhausted
fountain of Europes worth and worthy men, which was also apparent and
conspicuous in that ever-glorious and renowned expedition of the West for the
Holy Land under the conduct of Godfrey of Bullaine, wherein there was scarce a
personage of worth, but who (together with the plurality of the inferior
soldiery) was Germane by birth or blood.

As this out Mother Nation has been transcendent above others in her
achievements, Amplitudo.
and her noble and fruitful issue of Transmigrators and Colonies, wherewith
she has replenished and reedified her sister Nations of the rest of Europe,
and thereby enabled them to hold up their heads, as now they do among the
potent Monarchies of the world; So is she no less eminent in the vast bulk
of her own body, and the ample tract of Land which she holds and possesses,
and so ever has done against all the world, being indeed the heart and maine
body of Europe, as reaching from the Alps, near to the frozen Ocean one way,
and from France and the British sea, unto Poland and Hungary, the other way,
containing for Members her several tribes of the imperial Germans, the
Switzers, Belgians, Danes, Norwegians, Swedes, Goths and Vandals, (besides us
English;) It Is true that the Celtick Nation was once very great and famous, as
possessing both the Gallia's and Britain, but she has long since in all her
three seats surrendered up her possessions, (or liberty) together with her name
to the encroachments of her Teutonick Neighbors; and doubtless were all the
foresaid limbs of the Teutonick Nation as united in the political association
of one head and heart, as they are in the natural ligaments and communion of
blood, laws, language and situation, that Empire would not only be the head of
the West as now it is, The Turk.
but also able to wrestle with the Oriental Competitor, for the command of the
world, or at least to shoulder out of Europe his intruding usurpation.

One more flower of this our mother Nations Royal Garland, and a point of her
Prerogative above other Nations not only of Europe, Libertas inte. (...), seu
(...).
but also of the rest of the world (the Scythick excepted) is her
unconquerednesse, her untainted virginity and freedom from foreign
subjection, which from her first foundation and Cradle, she has so conserved
and defended, that none can truly boast to have bin her ravisher; the Roman
invasions indeed often assayed her, but could never force her; as for
Alexander, the Germans heard of him, but never saw him otherwise then by their
Ambassadors, who gave him and the world notice by their honorable Answer to
his insolent question, how much they feared him; and lastly for Charlemains
Germane Wars they were but as civil and domestic, his Francks and more
particularly himself being then in all things (but habitation) Germans, and
consequently also his archeivements may by good right also be reckoned among
the Germane acts; what other Nation can glory of the like? It Is confessed that the
Greeks and Gauls were for many ages famous assertours of their Liberties, but
the latter of the two never enjoyed theirs since the time of Ari^vistus and
Julius Caesar, and the poor (never enough to be lamented) Greeks, beside
their ancient subjection to Rome, have in these latter times lost not only
their Liberty, but also an Empire to boot, together with their Laws, Religion,
Honor, and never before conquered language, to the cruel oppression of
turkish Barbarism, all which the Teutones have by the special favor of
heaven, from their first beginning preserved inviolate against all invaders;
indeed our Neighbors the Scots boast much of the like privilege, but upon no
equal grounds, for their remoteness and inaccessiblenesse together with the
unprofitablenesse of their soil, have been their thief protection from
following the fortune of their Mother Nation of Ireland, and yet not so
protected them, but as their own Chronicles confess their Land has been
won from them, and they forced into exile for 60. years by the Romans, and
their Nation more then once subdued by our Edward the first, when they so often
swore fealty and subjection to the Crown of England: and for the Scythians, as
they of all the world have the best right to compare themselves, as having
never submitted their necks to any external power, so may they also for that
Privilege in part thank their remoteness and barren Climate, that have
rendered their vast Country not worth the conquering, and themselves as
difficult to be found as vanquished by strong and well appointed Armies.

But that which makes up the sum and apex of this Nations preeminence,
Imperium.
is her imperial Crown the Crown of Christendom, which the divine
providence upon special choice has devolved on her, that so she might be no
less in title then merit the Queen of Nations; this her possessive dignity was
long since foretold by the Druides who (as Tacitus records) prophesied that
the Empire should be translated from Rome over the Alps, and is no other then
what she was borne to in the right of Askenas his blood, educated to in
inviolated freedom and generous exercises, and settled in by the purchase of
the sword and Romes adoption, and the same has been for many ages by her
without competition enjoyed, she possessing also most of the other Kingdoms
and Principalities of these parts by her Colonies, in so much that the Germane
Nation may justly seem to have been created and appointed, for heir of the
western world, even as the Scythick of the Eastern, as betwixt which two
Nations and their Colonies, both the sovereignty and possession of the most
part of Europe and Asia is divided, they being in all things Parallels and
Competitors; heaven grant that at length our Teutonicks, shaking off their
euervating vices and divisions, with the same manhood wherewith in ancient
times their Ancestors retunded that Scythick invasion of the Huns, mawling that
orbis malleum, and in after ages chased the Turks (another tribe of the same
Nation) from the holy Land, and repressed their encroachings on Christendom,
may also in these last times at least un-Europe the same Enemy and his
Barbarism, and readvancing the Eagle in the midst of Constantinople, recover
to great Tuiscoes name that right and honor in Thracia, (which as may be
conceived) his person there sometime enjoyed under the name of Mars,
confirmable by the stil-lasting analogy both in roots and accidents betwixt the
Greek and Teutonick Idiomes.

Such is the transcendent quality of our mother Nation, Transitio a geneae ad
gentem.
and in these sundry respects, she sufficiently appears to be the chief and
most honorable Nation of Europe; of all which honor of hers, we are true
inheritors and partakers, either as Members of that body or as children of that
mother, we being flesh of her flesh, and bone of her bone, yea of the most
ancient and noble of her tribes, (according to the Germans opinion) The Saxon,
still retaining the name (with a little metathesis as is before related) of the
Patriarch Askenas, Page 4.
and this so totally and entirely that whatsoever blood among us is not
Teutonick is exotic; Page 7.
for (as is also before intimated) our Progenitors that transplanted themselves
from Germany hither, did not commixe themselves with the ancient inhabitants of
this Country the Britains (as other Colonies did with the Natives in those
places where they came) but totally expelling them, they took the sole
possession of the Land to themselves, Quae contraria apud quosdam Nomographos
reperiuntur sunt inepta figmenta a Galsrido Monmuthensi and ejus asseclis
dictata.
thereby preserving their blood, laws, and language, incorrupted; And in this
panegyric of the Teutonick blood I have so prolixly insisted, not only to
vindicate our own* as being a stream of the same, and to evince the nobility
thereof, but withal to convince the folly of those wretches among us, who
aversing ours do so much adhere unto and dote upon descents from France and
Normandy.

But least any that cannot reproach us as Germans, Pueritia gentis nostre
ingenu^ and liberatis.
should calumniate us as transmigrators, the consideration of the general
quality of such will be our sufficient Apology, for that it is well known that
most Colonies and transmigrators are made up and consisting of the flower and
choice youth of that Country from whence they are transplanted, and being such
caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt, though they change air they
retain their Spirits; and this is moreover observable for our advantage that
we left not the Land of our Fathers either as exiled for demerits with the
Parthians, nor forced and profligated by Neighbors as many others, nor yet
with the mind of Rovers that go unjustly to despoile others of their goods and
Country, but (then which nothing could be more honorable) the first cause and
occasion of our coming into this Land, was at the earnest suit and entreaty of
the distressed Britains, the ancient possessors of the same, to relieve and
succor their oppressed Nation against the barbarous and more then
unneighbourly vastations and invasions of the Scots and Picts, who with the
height of insolence and ferocity domineered at that time over this part of
Britain; this was no less honorably atcheived then undertaken by our
Ancestors, for Prince Hengistus with a small band of English volunteers which
he brought over from Saxony, renownedly repressed and quelled the pride and
insolency of the Scots, and with his additionall forces so secured this land
against them, that for many ages after they dared not to set fo^^ out of their
own limits; nor ever since could the most sure essefull of their incursions
penetrate to the walls of York.

But did we therefore leave the free-Countrey of our Ancestors, Ingenu^
adolescentia.
and come over hither to relieve and deliver others from foreign subjection,
that weet our s^^ves might succeed in servitude, sure it will scarce appear
that we had any such intent by our ensuing doings and sufferings, for after
that upon our fatal falling out with the Britains about pay, we had long
wrastled with that Nation for the possession of this Land, and with infinite
expense of blood and labor gained it wholly to our selves ( Hengistus his
assistance to the Britains being much of kin to that of Ariovistus unto the
Sequanish Gauls,) what inundations of invasions did we sustain, what
numberless conflicts and encounters did we continually maintain, for the
keeping of our possessions and preservation of our honor and Liberty, as they
were derived inviolate from our Progenitors? and all but against Danish
Intruders; a people that were out Consanguineans, our ancient Contrymen and
Brethren, whose prevailing over us would have introduced scarce strange Laws
or Language, nor other blood then Teutonick, and although in process of time,
being overladen with their inexhausted numbers, and to avoid further profusion
of Christian and Teutonick blood, we condescended to some composition with
them, and permitted them a cohabitation with us; yet afterward did we
sufficiently quit our selves of them and their intruding, and by a general
execution made them an example for such like Usurpers; such was our ancient
antipathy to servility, and the abhorringnesse of our Nations genius from
closing with dishonor.

Neither was this our generosity of blood and freeness of descent and
condition, Ejusdem habitus.
the sum of our inheritance or the whole stock of honor that the bounty of
heaven had committed to our possession; we were also blessed with a hopeful
language and happy Laws, Laws envied but not equaled in Christendom, and by
historians admired as most plain and compendious, Vide Daniels History.
and of such a politic structure, as made our Prince a true and happy Monarch,
and yet our selves as free as any people of Europe; our language was a dialect
of the Teutonick, and although then but in her infancy, yet not so rude as
hopeful, being most fruitful and copious in significant and well-founding
roots and Primitives, and withal capable and apt for diffusion from those her
roots into such a Greek-like ramosity of derivations and compositions, beyond
the power of the Latin and her offspring dialects, as might have with Majesty
delight and plainness interpreted our conceptions and the writings of
forraigners to the capacity of any English man, without tthe help of a
dictionary or the knowledge of two or three other languages, which now is
requisite to him that will rightly understand or speak even usual English;
and our Laws and Language being not only thus laudable, but also congenite and
appropriate to our name and Nation, were most essential parts of our honor,
and no less dear unto us (and that worthily) then our blood, and so the
pleasant subjects of our delight and study, as also our Princes and nobility
being no less naturally our own, were the just objects of our zeal and
affection, as was testified in that title of the Prince Edgar Atheling who was
styled Englands darling, for his bloods sake, and in opposition to the Normane.

ANd is it then suitable to the dignity, Complexio praemissorum scilicet
Red^^gutionis a Turpit^d^ne.
or tolerable to the Spirit of this our Nation, that after so noble an
extraction and descent, such honorable atcheivements performed, so much done
and suffered for our Liberty and honor against the most mighty of Monarchies
and puissant Nations, and after such Privileges conferred on us from heaven,
we should have our Spirits so broken and un Teutonized by one unfortunate
Battle, as for above 500 years together and even for eternity, not only to
remain, but contentedly to rest under the disgraceful title of a Conquered
Nation, and in captivity and vassalage to a foreign power? Siccine in
antiquam virtutem animosque viriles
Et Pater Aeneas and Avanculus excitat Hector?


Did our Ancestors therefore shake off the Roman Yoke with the slaughter of
their Legions, Scilicet in caede variana.
and during the whole age of that Empire (as Tacitus confesses) resist the
puissance thereof, that the honor and freedom of their blood might be reserved
for an untainted prey to a future Conqueror? could not they endure the sight
of a Caesarean Trophie, Vide Tacitum.
set up by Germanicus in their Land? and can we not only endure, but embrace
the title and Ensigns of a Conquest over us, that even still triumphs in our
Land, in her full insolence, while we can turn our eyes and meditations no
where about us, but we meet with some object that reproacheth us as Captives:
if we address a look toward our Laws, they still scorn to speak otherwise
then in the Conquerours Language, and are (if Master Daniel and others write
true) for the most part his introductions, shutting up the remaining Liberties
of our Nation, under the name and ntion of franchises, as if we were no further
to be accounted free, then enfranchised, that is adopted into the quality of
Frenchmen, or made denizens of France, whereby the first point that occurres
to the Reader of our Laws, is our shame; if we survey our Language, we there
meet with so much tincture of Normanisme, that some have esteemed it for a
dialect of the Gallick: if we contemplate the heraldry and titles of our
Nobility, there is scarce any other matter then inventories of foreign
villages, that speak, them to be not of English blood; but tell us (as their
Ancestors sometimes told King John) that their Progenitors conquered this Land
by the Sword; and lastly if we but hear the Royal title rehearsed, we hear
it likewise attended with a post Conquestum, so that we cannot move with our
senses, but we hear the chains of our captivity rattle, and are put in mind
that we are slaves; vinci humanum est, no people but may be overcome, that may
be borne withal; but sub victoria acquiescere, for so many hundred years
together, and in a so long continued possibility of excussing dishonor and
regaining Liberty, to sit as it were snoaring in a captive and servile
condition, and to be fed with the bread of captivity, were more proper to an
Asiatick Nation, (those natis ad servitutem as Tully calls them) then to one of
Europe, and to any European then a Teutonick, and indeed to tame Creatures and
Cattle then to those that profess themselves freeborn men.

But let us a little reflect upon the nature and quality of these Conquerours
with their conquest over us, Aggravatio.
perhaps they may be such as for their dignity may say unto our Nation, as that
Her^s in the Poet, Solamen habeto mortis ab Ae^^^^^ quod sis jugulatus Achillo,
and their domination over us such as against the right and equity whereof there
is no pleading: But alas what was that Tenth Worthy (whom we are not ashamed
even still to surname our Conqueror) but a Normane Bastard (as a Scottish
writer well terms him) or at best, a Vassal Duke of a French Province and
what his Argyraspides, his gallant followers the Normans, but a people
compacted of the Norwegians and Nuestrians, that is, of the off-scowring and
dress of the Teutnique and Gallick Nations, whose ambitions Leader upon a
pretense of a various title to this Crown intruding upon us in a time of
disadvantage, and being thereupon put to try it out by the sword with his then
usurping Competitor, by subtlety (not valor) obtained the hand over him, and
so as Legatee and Kinsman of Saint Edward (the last rightful English King) and
upon his specious and fair vows and promises to preserve inviolate our Laws
and Liberties, was admitted to the throne, so that all the alteration and
dishonor that followed, was by his villainous perjuriousnesse and treachery
introduced upon us, and that title of a Conqueror was not at first, but by the
flattery of succeeding times attributed to him, and has been ever since by our
sordid treachery against our Country continued, The Duke of Lenox in his
Speech to the King concerning war against the Scots.
whereas had he assumed it at first, (as was well observed by an illustrious
personage of our Neighbor Nation the Scots, (who are generally more sensible
of our dishonor in this respect, then most of our selves; perhaps worthily
mindful of the ancient extraction of the most and chief of their
South-Landers from the English blood;) as he (I say) has well observed in a
late speech of his made to his Majesty,) he must either have come short of his
ambitious ends, or have sought after a new people to have exercised his title
upon, so odious at that time was the Title of a Conquered Nation to our
Ancestors.

But admit it were so that he won this Land by the sword, Redargutio secunda
ab Iniquitate.
as he and his followers afterward boasted, and that he obtained such a
dismal victory over us as the Normane writers predicate, (whereas
notwithstanding if we may believe Aemilius Veronensis, Paulus Aemilius
veronensis de^ebu^ gestis Francorum. fol. 91.
in his French History, a more impartial writer in this cause, there was no
such matter; who taxing those Normane writers of arrogance, reports that the
truth of it was that our English Soldiers, whom Harold the usurping King
brought into the field against the Normanes, were no less displeased with him
then with his adversaries, and that they only put themselves in a posture of
defense, Non ipsi homines sed causae defuncti victa extinctaque. ib. fol. 91.
without caring to offend the enemy, and that when in the beginning of the
battle, Harold chanced to be slain by an Arrow, the Controversy was
presently ended without more bloodshed, an agreement made, and the Normane
admitted in respect of his claim, and upon his promises aforementioned, this
he reports) but were it so that our English Nation was directly vanquished and
conquered by the Normanes, (at the sound whereof every true English man's
stomach may well rise,) have not we more then once required their Nation in the
like kind? how often have our Armies vanquished and conquered not only Normandy
but also France it self, whereof the other is but a vassal Province? and why
one victory of theirs over us should be of more moment and effect against us,
then so many of ours against them, I see no other cause or reason then
injuriousnesse toward us and retchlessenesse in us.

But were it so also, Institio.
that the Normane race were as Lawful Lords and domineered by the same right,
of an absolute Conquest over us, as the Turks do at this day over the
Grecians, (betwixt whose case and ours (Religion excepted) there is a near
affinity;) will any reasonable man be so unjust? or any English man be so
impious as to define it for unlawful in us, to endeavor to recover our Right
and lost honor and Liberty? would any man be so absurd as to stigmatize and
detest it for rebellion, in the Greeks to shake off (if they were able) the
Turkish Yoke, and to recover from that enemies usurpation their ancient
honor, Laws, Liberty, and Language that now ly overwhelmed and buried in
Turcisme as ours in Normanisme? surely we our selves should condemn them, if
they would not endeavor it, while our own Laws attribute not to the
wrongful disseisour, any such right to his forceably gotten possessions, but
that he may with more right be redisseised by the the first Owner or his
heirs; and indeed it were so far from injuriousnesse both in the Greeks and
us, to dispossess the Usurpers, that in the mean time we are most injurious
to our selves, our Progenitors and our posterity, while we so traitorously
yield up to those Robbers, what our Ancestors so dearly purchased and
preserved for us to enjoy, and afterward to transmit and leave to their and
our Name and blood in all succeeding ages; but in this we are far more
inexcusable then the Greeks, for that they never yet enjoyed the means of a
deliverance, which we either in a fair or forceable way scarce ever wanted;
and surely if our right does call, our honor does cry out upon us, that if our
Progenitors massacred the Danish Garrisons that usurped over them, we should
not (like the Jews eareboard slaves,) for ever serve the Progeny of their
Subjects the Norwegians, that we who instead of being conquered with other
Nations by Charlemain, have conquered even the French themselves, would not
live captives to their vassals the Normanes; and that since our Ancestors
never submitted their necks to the Yoke of Rome, we should not suffer ours to
be for ever wedded to one brought over from N^^stria the meanest shire of one
of Romes (anciently) captive Provinces, unless perhaps it be more honorable
for our Country to be a Normane municipium, then a Roman Province, to use
the Normane Laws then the Civil of the Empire, and the Normane Language
rather then the Latin; any of which (notwithstanding) the Roman Emperors
during their prevailing over some skirts of our ancient Country of Germany, as
Batavia, Rhaetia, and the borders of the Rhine, never obtruded on our
Countriemen there, but desiring only (for their worth) their personal
assistance in the wars, permitted them (and them only of all Nations) the
continuance of their own Laws, Language and Liberties in all things; But all
these we their degenerate posterity have in a large degree betrayed to the
usurpation of a Normane Colony.

But if we think we have not yet received shame enough by this Normane
Conquest, Redargutio tertia ab Incommodo.
in being thereby stripped and spoiled of all that Stock of honor which might
have descended to us from our Ancestors, and of all that our Nation had to take
pleasure in, we want not a further degree of the same shame to consider our
selves in, that is as we are by this pretended Conquest cast into such a
Predicament and condition as makes as incapable of acquiring new honor ever
after so long as we remain therein; the evidency of this we may descry in our
own Laws, wherein we find that such as are in the nature of Villeines, are
incapable of enjoying freehold Lands, but though they purchase never so much,
it belongs all to their Lords; should the Turks J^^i^ries under their Masters
conduct conquer the whole world, yet could they not justly gain to themselves
the name of men of honor, but only of stout and dutiful slaves; which is also
illustrated by that Apothegme of Tully, who defining the way for one that would
attain to highness, Tunc (says he) incipiat aliis imperare cum suis
iniquissimis Dominis parere desierit, let him first un-slave himself before he
talk of getting honor in inslaving others; and therefore though both France
and Spain should be by us never so often conquered, yet could our name
thereby take no true luster, till it be cleared of this fast-sticking blemish,
and that we have unconquered our selves; but as an ill-humour'd or deformed
body is not rectified by nourishment, but finds its pravity to increase and
dilate with its self; so should our name and fame by our atcheivements be
extended to the worlds both temporal and local ends, yet thither also would
our disgrace accompany it in equal Characters, and proclaiming that we are a
conquered and still-captive people, quash all honor that otherwise might
accrue or adhere unto us. Transitio ad operis scopum.


I should be voluminous should I fully describe how injurious and dishonorable
it is to our Nation, for to continue under the title and effects of this
pretended Conquest, being such as we see and feel even the barbarous and
contemptible Irish to be more then sensible and impatient of the like, while
with so much hazard of their lives and fortunes, and against such formidable
opposition, they endeavor the excussion thereof; But I am far enough from
exhorting to an imitation of their violent and horrid practice, we feel too
much thereof already among us, although for lighter ends; neither (I hope) is
any such way needful, since we all from the greatest to the least profess our
selves English, and would seem to aim at the honor of the English name, his
Majesty for his part having by many passages showed himself the most indulgent
Patron thereof and our Nobility and Commons on both sides contending, (or at
least pretending) for no other, none (I hope) among us dissenting, that if any
should oppugn it, he were worthy to be proscribed and prosecuted either as a
viperous malignant or as a public Adversary; so that it is but the Carcass of
an enemy that we have to remove out of our territories, even the Carcass and
bones of the Normane Dukes injurious and detested perpetrations, much more
meriting to be dug up and cast out of our Land, Vide Daniels Hist.
then those Relics of his body that were so unsepulchred from his grave in
Caen; let us therefore until we have wiped off this shame of our Nation, and
demolished the monuments thereof, no more talk of honor, as being a thing
that we have least to do withal, but yielding that and the glory to the
Normane Name, reserve unto our selves nothing but the inheritance of shame and
confusion of face; yea let us either confess and profess our selves for ever,
mere vassals and slaves, or else attempt to uncaptive our selves (the end and
scope of this whole discourse) that is effectually, (yet orderly and legally)
to endeavor these following particulars.

1. Postulatorum capita.
That William surnamed the Conqueror be stripped of that insolent Title (which
himself scarce ever assumed after his victory, much less pretended to before,
but has been sithence imposed on him by Normane arrogance and our servile
flattery) and that he be either reputed among our lawful Kings by force of
Saint Edwards legacy, or adjudged an usurper; however, that he may no longer
stand for the Alpha of our Kings in the Royal Catalogue.

2. That the Title to the Crown be ungrounded from any pretended Conquest
over this Nation, and that his Majesty be pleased to derive his right from
Saint Edwards legacy, and the blood of the precedent English Kings As being
descended both of David the male heir, and of Maud the heir female of the
English Blood.
to whom he is the undoubted heir; and that he restore the ancient English
Arms into the Royal standard.

3. That all the Normane Nobility and Progeny among us, repudiate their names
and titles brought over from Normandy, assuming others consistible with the
honor of this Nation, and disclaim all right to their possessions here as
Heirs or Successors to any pretended Conquerours.

4. That all Laws and usages introduced from Normandy, be ( eo nomine)
abolished, and a supply made from St. Edwards laws or the Civil, and that our
Laws be divested of their french rags, (as King James of worthy memory once
Royally motioned) and restored into the English or Latin tongue, unless
perhaps it may seem honorable for English men to be still in the mouth of
their own Laws no further free then Frenchified, vide supra p. 14
and that they only of all mortell men should imprison their Laws in the
Language of their enemies.

5. That our Language be cleared of the Normane and French invasion upon it,
and depravation of it, by purging it of all words and terms of that descent,
supplying it from the old Saxon and the learned tongues, and otherwise
correcting it, whereby it may be advanced to the quality of an honorable and
sufficient Language, then which there is scarce a greater point in a Nations
honor and happiness.

(To which may also be added the removal of an Indignity of kin to the former
in quality though not in cause, namely the advancing of the French Arms above
ours in the Royal standard, as if by our Ancestors conquest of that Nation, we
had merited nothing but the public subjection of our honor to theirs; The
Scots (though an inferior Nation) denying us any such Privi in their own
Kingdom.)

These things thus obtained and Normanisme thus abolished, we may then (and
then only) have comfort in our name, as after our excussion of that which is
utterly destructive to the honor of our Nation, which is the motive unto us to
demand and require these things; neither want there reasons sufficient on the
other side why they may and ought to be granted, Pa^^^etica.
some ledge whereof are these.

For his Majesty, 1. Ad Regem.
it will be no prejudice to his title, nor impeachement of the honor of his
blood, should he wave his descent from Normandy, but rather an improvement of
the same, by how much it is more honorable to be derived from free Kings then
vassal Dukes, and from Saxony the heart and noblest part of Germany, then from
Nu^stria or Norway; and it will moreover settle him as well in the true affections
as on the (...) of this Nation, which none of his predecessors since the
pretended Conquest could rightly enjoy, there being too much tincture of
domination in their rule and of captivity in our obedience, and this is
confirmed by that love and honor which the most glorious Kings of this Realm
have here gained by their inclining this way, Witness Henry the first,
approved and beloved above his Normane predecessors, who for that sole purpose
took to Wife Edgar Athelings Neese, the female (...) of the English blood; next
Edward the first, whose memory is no less acceptable for his being the first
reviver of that Name in that line, then for his enlarging the honor and
dominion of this State; Thirdly, Edward the third, the most glorious renowned
and precious of all our Kings, not only for his famous victories, but withal
for restoring in a good degree the use and honor of the English tongue
formerly exiled by Normanisme into contempt and obseurity; to which purpose
also it is observable that none of our Kings since William the pretended
Conqueror and his Son, have bore their name, the imposing whereof on our
Princes their Royal Parents seem purposely to have avoided as justly odious
to the English Nation, whereas with what honor they have continually used both
the name and shrine of Saint Edward, I need not recount, And if these Kings so
lately after the Conqueror, and while the Normane blood ran almost fresh in
their veins, thought it their duty in some sort to profess for the English
name against Normanisme, how little mis-becomming will it be for his Majesty
after his so many ages ingra^^ment into this Nation and disunion from the
other, and having in him for one stream of the Normane blood, two of the true
English, to profess himself altogether English, and to advance that Nation to
the greatest luster he can, whereof he professes himself the natural head,
yea it will so far transfer him above the honor and felicity of his
Predecessors, as it is more honorable and happy for a Prince to be called and
accounted the natural father of his Country, then the exotic Lord of the
same, of which titles the very Tyrants of Rome were ambitious for the forms,
but rejected and detested even the one half of the latter.

For the Normane Progeny, 2. Ad Progeniem Normannicam.
they may consider that themselves (as Norwegians) are originally (as Verstegan
has well observed) of one and the same blood and Nation with the English,
namely the Teutonick, and that in doing what is here required, they shall but
shake off that tincture of Gallicisme which their Ancestors took in N^^stria,
and rejoyne themselves with their ancient Countrymen, which also even their
own honor requires of them, even according to the opinion of the ancient
Treviri, who as ( Tacitus records) though inhabitants of France, yet
disdained to be accounted of the French blood, but ambitiously adhered to their
descent from Germany; the Gallick Nation having been servile ever since the
time of Julius Caesar, and no other their language which we so much honor and
dote upon, then an effect of the Roman Conquest over them, and a testimony of
their long vassalage and subjection to that Empire.

But if they can relish no honor but what must arise and fetch life from our
shame, let them revolve how loath they would be to be served as sometime the
Romans dealt with the insulting Gauls, the Relics of Brennus his Army, whom
they utterly rooted out of Italy, Nequis ejus gentis superesset qui incensam a
se Romam jactaret, as an Historian has it; and if they will needs continue the
Danes Succeeders in insulting over us, they may also remember that we are the
posterity of those English who massacred them, and that when they had a potent
Kingdom at hand to revenge it, which these others are to seek for.

Lastly, State Policy requires it, 3.
it being requisite to the good and safety of the Kingdom in general; Ad
Ordines seu Procuratores Regni.
for if ingenuous valor in the people, and their love to their King, State,
Nobility and Laws, with their regard to honor, be the chief strength of a
Realm against foreign invasions (for instance and testification whereof we
need look no further then the Scots) it is necessary that if our State would
enjoy that strength, our Nation enjoy these demands; for how can we love and
fight for those Laws which are ours only by our enemies introduction, and are
our disgrace in stead of honor, or for that Sovereignty and Nobility, in whose
very Titles (as before is related) we read our Country to be already in
Captivity, and that the alteration of the State will be to us, but changing of
usurpant Masters? Neither will the recordation of our ancient honor be any
better a provocation to that purpose; should the Turk go about to exhort his
Grecian Soldiers to valiantness in his cause and against his foreign
Enemies, by commemorating unto them the ancient glory and prowess of their
Nation, would not that cohortation merit to be taken as an insulting irrision,
and should not the first effect there of be a vindictive incitement of them
against himself as the most proper object thereof in all respects, so also
cannot the remembrance of our ancient glory (if we consider our selves aright)
incite us to any thing more then to the clearing of our selves from this
insulting Conquest; as already and long since pressing us with that dishonor,
which other dangers at most but threaten; and as upon these grounds, we can
scarce find courage to fight for the safety and preservation of the State, so
for the same reasons have we as little heart to pray or wish for the same,
until our National honor be restored to a coexistence therewith.

Since therefore these things are so behoofefull for our Nation to demand,
Peroratio.
and for our State to grant, if after due consideration thereof we continue to
want the happy fruition of the same, it must be ascribed either to an overgrown
baseness of mind in the one, or an natural malignity in the other as indulging
rather to a foreign Name then to the Nation whereof the said State is a part and
entrusted with the welfare and honor thereof; and in this stillservilizing case
it will be ridiculous for us (the Nation) to pretend to honor or
renownednesse, but more proper for us forever to profess our selves of that
quality wherein we take up our rest, to wit, captivednesse and servility; but
if we may descry a glorious morning and (...) of our benighted honor refulging
in the happy accomplishment of these our desires, then shall we with alacrity
press all that the English name investeth, unto the defense and enlargement of
the English Dominion, and instead of disclaiming our Nation and transfuging to
others, as many of us now do, and have done especially in Ireland, we shall
joy to make Anglicisme become the only soul and habit of all both Ireland and
great Britain. Dixi.

October. 1642. I. H.

FINIS.

