A SERMON, PREACHED At St. Gregory's Church by St. Paul's on Sunday the 13th.
day of June, 1658.

INTENDED For the Funeral Solemnization of JOHN HEWIT, Dr. of Divinity, and
late Minister there.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

The Mourning BUSH. A Funeral Sermon upon Isaiah 57. 1.
The Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil
to come.
The INDUCTION.
OUR Prophet Isaiah in the 22 Chapter of this Prophecy verse. 12. makes mention
of a day wherein the Lord of Hosts does call to weeping and to mourning. And
beloved, although there is no day wherein we are without Sin, and so
confequently no day wherein we should be without so now; yet there are four
special days wherein our Lord God expects this duty from us, viz. The day of
any heinous wickedness committed by our selves or others. The day of any
grievious judgment, whether personal or national inflicted. The day wherein
the wicked prosper and the ungodly triumph. Finally the day wherein any of Gods
eminent and faithful servants are snatched away by death; It is not many days
since there was such a day amongst us; and of such a day my Text speaks of; and
the want of a due sense and sorrow, and Mourning when such a day comes, is that
which the Prophet bemoans in the words of my Text. The rightous perishes and
no man lays it to heart, etc.

This Text is a sorrowful and doleful complaint in every part and clause of
it, and looks 2. ways.

1. Upon the good, and bemoans their misery. 2. Upon the wicked, and bewailes
their obstinacy.
It complains of the Righteous, that their persons are destroyed. It complains
of the wicked, that their hearts are hardened. The former complaint is purely
from grief, the latter is from grief mixed with anger, both are very vehement
and fervent. witness the reiteration of the words in both parts. The former in
three clauses. The Righteous perish. Merciful men are taken away. The
Righteous are taken away from the evil to come.

The latter in two clauses, no man laying it to heart, none considering it. In
which we may see what an holy passion our holy Prophet was in; and I pray God
grant that we may resemble him in grief and sorrow, when we hear both of the
righteous, and of the wicked.

First of the complaint the Prophet makes concerning the Godly. The Righteous
perish, and merciful men are taken away. The Righteous are taken away from the
evil to come; And this complaint concerning the righteous you have it first
propounded, and then mitigated. First 'its propounded in the two clauses,
(which are for substance and sense one and the same) The Righteous perishes,
and merciful men are taken away.

But withal secondly, The complaint is in the latter part of the verse,
leviated and mitigated, where it is said. The Righteous are taken away from the
evil to come.

Look upon the matter of the complaint it self as set down in these two
clauses. The Righteous perish, and merciful men are taken away.

First, Where you have set before you both their disposition and their
condition.

Their disposition is very good. Their condition is seemingly very bad. Their
pious disposition. Their miserable condition. The Characters of the one, viz.
their disposition are these two, Righteous, and merciful men. The other viz.
their condition is set forth in these two Characters, Perishing, and taking
away.

First we will take the Character, that sets down their disposition. The
Righteous and merciful men, those that the Prophet bemoans are said to be
Righteous and merciful men. The first word is singular in the Hebrew (...)
where Interpreters, glossing upon the Text, suppose it to be some particular
person that the Prophet points at, and the gloss understands it of Christ
himself, whose passion he foresaw, and consequently foretells: and these titles
most strictly and fully belong to him who is called the Son of Righteousness,
Malachy 4. v. 2. All others are but stars of righteousness, and their lights
borrowed from him: he it is who is completely righteous, and of him it was
verified, he perished and was taken away, none laying it to heart. But we must
not confine it to Christ; for although the first word be singular, the second
is plural. The merciful men, and men of mercy, which is meant of those
righteous ones that were cut off and distroyed by Manasses that filled
Jerusalem with blood. But that you may see how justly these Characters belong
to those persons; take them a sunder; first he call's them Righteous and the
servants of God. Ministers or others may have this name given them in a
qualified sense, for there are none righteous, no not one, (save him that I
named even now) not but that it may belong to them too, for they are Righteous,
really, interpretatively and comparatively.

They are righteous really, in as much as their persons are justified before
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who is called by the Prophet Jeremy, The
Lord our Righteousness. Ierem. 23. v. 6. who is said to cover us with a robe
of righteousness Isa. 63. who is said by S. Paul to be made to us
righteousness, and that we are righteousness in him. Thus they are righteous
because justified, and not only so, but also because their natures are renewed
after the Image of God, that is cretaed in righteousness and true holiness,
in which respect they are partakers of the Divine nature: and also righteous in
ordering their lives according to the rule of the word, which all Gods servants
sets before them, and seek to live according thereunto, that they may give God
his due, and men their due; and thus it is true of the servant* of God, they
are righteous really. And Interpretatively they are so, for as much as God is
pleased to accept them notwithstanding their weaknesses, When Abraham was to
offer up his Son Isacak, it is said, he offered his son, in regard he was
willing to do it, it was therefore Interpretatively so. So the servants of God
in as much as they are lovers and followers of God, and strive after
righteousness, not allowing themselves in any wickedness, making conscience
of all known duties, so that God accepts them as perfectly righteous.

And comparatively they are righteous, though not absolutely, yet comparatively
in respect of others, as it is said of those Worthies St. Ambross speaks of. The
righteous if compared with the wicked of the world are Worthies, so they are
righteous compared with the ungodly.

In the foregoing Chapter verse. 12. the Prophet speaks of certain Epicures and
others, which say, we will fill our selves with strong Drink, and to morrow
shall be as this day, and much more abundant. So in respect of sinners, the
servants of God may have the appellation of righteous, and not righteous only,
but merciful men, or as the Hebrew has it (...) men of mercy: which may admit
of a double construction, whether taken in a passive or active sense; In a
passive sense they are men of mercy: or as the Hebrew word will further carry
it men of good will or favor, they are men to whom God bears a singular
favor, an especial love; There is a Philanthropie which God has to all men,
and though he hates the work of their hands, yet he loves the work of his own
hands: but God here speaks of a favor and good will, which he has to his
servants, and you have it fully and summarily set down in the 24th Psalm
latter end; The Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give grace and
glory, etc. And according to this construction it may be taken: the Prophet
Isaiah speaking of the righteous, how that they are taken away by men of
cruelty, intimates though they are hated by the wicked, they are men of love,
in respect of God: whilst the world reproaches and reviles them, yet God loves
them, though they perish and are taken away we must not think that God hates
them, they are his favorites. Some men think God should not let the wind blow
upon his servants: but it is not that of a mother, but a fatherly love, with
which God loves his children, nor was Benjamin the less beloved because the
Cup was found with him. The righteous they are still men of mercy, yet I rather
conceive we ought to take it in the active sense, they are men that love mercy
and show mercy, and to this I incline in regard of that parallel place the 7.
Micah. 2. The good man is perished from off the earth, etc. So here men of
mercy, that is, men that are practisers and lovers of mercy. Mercy is a
condolencie of others misery, and withal an endeavor to deliver them out of
it, so that there is both pity and bounty, bowels of mercy and works of
mercy, thus a righteous man is a merciful man: the wise man joines them both
together Prove. 21. and 21. And indeed they never go asunder: our Savior has
coupled them together, blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled, then it follows blessed are the
merciful, etc. The righteous have bowels of mercy, their inwards are troubled
at the misery of others, and hence their heads consult which way they may do
them good: the liberal man devises charritable things upon his bed, and their
hearts ache for their brethren, they inquire how, what, which way, to do them
good, they are still going out of their doors in mercy, their eyes behold which
way they may do acts of mercy, their ears listen to their complaints, and their
hands are ready to relieve; it would be too much time spent to let you see how
this spiritual River overflowes, by giving and forgiving, by vouchsafing to our
Brethren spiritual and corporal Alms, that concern their souls and bodies, by
remitting all those injuries they do against us: and thus it is true, they are
men of mercy as for the wicked, Solomon says, their very mercies are cruel,
when they pretend mercy it is in cruelty, nay they show mercy that they may be
wicked, but the righteous he shows mercy even to his beast, it runs down even
unto them, and hence it is here called merciful men, or men of mercy: but now
look upon the complaint it self, and that sets forth their seeming miserable
condition,

The one, of perishing. The other, of taking away.
The righteous perish, the merciful men are taken away: the first of these is
very strange and hard, especially of the Righteous that he is said to perish;
Perish is capable of various acceptations.

1. There is a perishing that neither seaZes on the Righteous nor the wicked.
2. There is a perishing befalls the wicked and not the good. 3.And there is a
perishing befalls both the godly and the wicked.
1. There is a perishing that befalls neither the Righteous nor the wicked: a
perishing of total destruction and annihilation. The Psalmist says: Wicked
men are like the beasts that perish. Sensual men are so in their dispositions,
but not in their natures: the beast perishing dissolveth into his first being
to nothing, and happy were it, if it were so with the wicked, that there were
annihilation.

2. And then there is a perishing that befalls the wicked and not the
Righteous: the memory of the wicked shall not, but it shall not be so with the
just; No dying, no marrying can obliterate their names: but the wicked, their
names perish, and which is worse there is a perishing in the Soul, and it is
that perishing which is opposed to good, to Eternal good, the Righteous is
scarcely saved, it is not almost, they do not perish hereafter, but the wicked
perish Eternally. But then,

3. There is a perishing that is common to the Righteous with the wicked: will
you know what it is? Understand it either of the miseries of this life (as S.
Paul says) if I perish, I perish. Whatever hazard we run or fall into, it may
be termed a perishing, or chiefly, perishing by death, this is common to all:
the Prophet Michael tells us the good man is perished out of the Earth; that is
he dies: when he perishes it is a Relative to perishing in this world, in this
present life. So when the Righteous die he perishes, therefore it was that the
Prophet made use of this word, to let them see what the wicked thought, that
the Righteous perishes, it is not so in reallity, and that we might not be
troubled at the harshness of the phrase in the first clause. Go on to the
second, Taking away. God has given most members double; two hands, two feet,
two eyes, two ears, that if one fail the other may supply, and so the spirit
of God gives two phrases often in Scripture, that if the one be obscure, the
other may make it plain so it is here, least the one should be too hard, here
is another to explain it, when he says, Perish, he means only taking away
from the society of men, that is aIl, as we may very well read the words, the
merciful men are gathered, as the Hebrew will carry it, they perish not but
rather are gathered to their Fathers, as that expression in Ecclesiastes, the
body goes to the grave, and the Soul to heaven, or to him that gave it, it is
that they may be gathered to the innumerable company of Angels, to the Spirits
of just men made perfect, to the beatificall vision; all this is meant in this
one expression, taking away. And the Sum is, the Righteous ones, and the
merciful ones were taken away by death, perished from the earth. And so this
is true in respect of a natural death, the Righteous as well as others perish,
because of the same nature and constitution, and also the remainders of the
same corruptions that are in them; therefore they must die and perish as well
as others, but that which the Prophet aims at is perishing in a violent sense,
and the phrase taken away hints as much, they are taken away and cut of (as
'its spoken of the Messiah) from the land of the living. These candles do not
go out of themselves for want of that which should give them life, but are
blown out by a violent wind; and very well it may be so, because of their
enemies, David says; the wicked watch the Righteous, and why do they watch
him, but to take advantage to slay him, and this many times befalls the godly
ones, and that in great wisdom, even that the glory of Gods power may appear,
his power in sustaining and upholding them, when by death he brings them to
himself, especially strengthening them in the hour of a violent death, and his
power will appear, in raising of their vile bodies, that shall be in the dust:
in raising them, when their vile bodies shall be changed and made like the
glorious body of Christ, and he will have it so that their graces may appear,
and that their faith may be more eminent: if God should translate them as he
did Eliah from earth to heaven, there would be something to appear of glory,
but nothing of strength, and therefore that the faith and courage of his
servants may appear, he thus takes them away, and chiefly that they may be
conformable to Christ, and that he may make the members like unto the head, and
go, as he did, by a violent death, they must drink of the brook and after lift
up their heads, therefore this is a just complaint, the Righteous perish, and
merciful men are taken away. The consideration of this may serve partly to
inform, partly to instruct. First to inform us, That there is another world,
and day of judgment, that there is a time wherein God will put a difference
between the godly and the wicked, between him that swears, and him that fears
an oath, between him that serves him, and him that rebels against him: I say
there must be a time of retribution (or he could not be a Righteous and
merciful God) when there must be a recompense to godly men, you see how the
Righteous perish as well as the wicked, you see the same lot befalls the one,
as well as the other, it assures us therefore that there is another day
coming, when it will appear that there is a reward to the godly.

And it should, secondly instruct all righteous ones that they should make use
of this kind of death, for the glory of Gods name, and the good of his own
brethren. How should all of us Magistrates, Ministers and People approve our
selves in the discharge of our duty, and especially merciful men by showing
mercy, multiplying mercy, when the merciful man is taken away, then all is
taken away there is no more work, nor alms, nor mercy for us to do in the
grave where we are a going. and further it should instruct us, that we should
make use of, and make much of the Righteous men, that are in the midst of us,
because they must perish and be taken from us: these candles must go out, nay
they may by a blustering wind be blown out, make use of them while you have
them. Our Savior bids us, walk in the light while you have the light: so do
you, whilst Gods righteous servants and Ministers are amongst you, make the
best use of them you can (as our Savior said, Me you shall not have always
with you: so these you shall not have always with you, therefore endeavor to
reap all the benefit, and profit from them you can. Finally let us not think
the worse of them because they are taken away, we are ready to be frighted,
because of the trouble that befalls them, but let us remember, that the
Righteous whatever trouble incompasses them, they are delivered from it by
death, nay that taking away of theirs, is a benefit to them, for it is a taking
away from the evil to come. And that leads me to the other branch, which
mitigateth the complaint in the close of the verse.

The righteous are taken away from the evil to come. Taken away from the evil
to come is a phrase which admits of a double construction, we may understand it
of being taken away from the evil to come upon themselves, they are taken away
from those future evils that (if they had continued longer upon earth,) should
have befallen them, thus they are taken away from

Criminal evils, and Poenall evils.
1. From Criminal evils they are taken away, and thereby prevented from those
sins, they might otherwise have fallen into, for the righteous are not
altogether free from sin, while herebelow; and therefore it is that they are
delivered from that which is a great grief unto them, ever to sin against their
Father.

2. From Poenall evils, from those miseries and troubles that do befall them in
this world: Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but God delivers them
out of all: Pain, penury, aches, sickness, etc. and when the righteous is
taken away, he is taken away from all these. But that which is the principal
meaning of the word is, They are taken away from the evil of the place wherein
they live, from the common calamity that is to seize upon the people:
therefore you find in the 26. Isa. 20. where the Prophet says Come my people,
enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self as
it were for a little moment until the indignation be overpast: some understand
those little doors and moments, places and Chambers, to be meant of the grave,
yet there God hides his people, he puts them in the grave where they are quiet:
when he intends to send a blustering tempest, and a storm upon the earth. Thus
God prepares a Zoar for Lot when he brings destruction upon Sodom, and an Ark
for Noah, when he brings a deluge upon the world: so God prepares a grave for
the righteous, when he intends to bring evil upon the earth: but this is not
always so, for God will sometimes keep them in the midst of trouble, he sets a
mark upon their forehead, as in the 9. Ezekiel. 4. And the Lord said unto him, go
through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark
upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations
that be done in the midst thereof. And sometimes God makes them sharers and
sufferers in the evils, because they have not mourned for the sins of the
times and places where they live; therefore God makes them partakers of the
misery; but God many times takes them away from the evil to come. Thus Josiah
is taken away from the evil that was to come upon the Jews: and St. Austin's
prayers were heard, God taking him away before Hippo was taken, whereof he was
Bp: and Luther was taken out of the world before the desolation came that fell
upon Germany: thus is Gods dealing in the taking away of his servants, and that
upon a double account.

1. In regard of themselves. 2. In regard of others.
1. In regard of themselves: That they may not only not see, but also that they
may not suffer in the evil that is to come: and this is the very reason why
Josiah was cut off, that he should not see that general devastation that should
come upon his native Country, and that they may not see the evil, he has
taken them away.

2ly. The chief account why he takes them away, is, that they may not keep of
the evil that is to befall any people: for the righteous and merciful men are
the Chariots and horsemen of Israel, that do defend the places where they live;
the Angel told Lot he could do nothing against the City until he was out of
it: and you know what God said to Moses, Let me alone, etc. A good man (as it
were,) ties Gods hands that he cannot bring evil upon a place, one righteous
man may do more with God by prayer, then a thousand men by arms: there is a
great prevalencie in the prayers of the righteous, And when God will bring evil
upon a place, he first takes away the righteous, that they may not keep it off:
as when a man will take down a house, he first takes away the pillars and
supporters thereof: so when God intends to destroy a people, he remooves the
pillars that support them; God takes away the righteous, as on the one hand
they may not see; so on the other hand they may nor prevent the evils he
intends to inflict.

To wind up this in a word of use. Look on the one hand as there is little
Cause for the wicked to insult over the righteous when they are taken away,
(Rejoice not over me, O mine enemy) says the Church; I say little Cause have
the wicked to rejoice for the taking away of the good, because it is a sad
presage to the bad. The Righteous being taken away, if such things be done to
the green tree, what shall be done to the dry: If the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the wicked appear; If that the righteous be taken away from
the evil to come, it is that the evil may come upon a place: it is an
undeniable consequence if God deal severely with his own: the wicked must
exspect his cup to be filled to the full. If these perish for a time, those for
ever: therefore let not the wicked triumph, and as there is no reason why the
wicked should rejoice, so no cause why the friends of the righteous should be
too much troubled when they perish by what hand soever? for all the righteous
servants of God when they are to be taken away, say to us (as our Savior said
to the Woman, weep not for me,) weep not for us, weep for your selves, and as
they are taken away from evil, so they are received unto good; they are taken
from a Prison to be seated in a Palace; they are taken from a Wilderness to be
transplanted into a Garden; they are taken away from earth and carried unto
Heaven; no reason therefore to weep for them, but for your selves: the evil to
come cannot light on them; but on us; but let them not be disregarded by us, we
are not to be stupid under such a divine providence, least we incur the sin
which the Prophet here complains of: and so I come to the complaint of the
Prophet against the wicked, bewailing their obstinacy, the righteous perishes
and no man lays it to heart: and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come: no man
lays it to heart, no man considers it; the phrases which the Prophet makes use
of, are very emphatical.

The first phrase according to the Hebrew is, no man puts it upon his heart;
and the latter, no man does understand or seriously weigh, or dewly consider:
so that one phrase has reference to the affections, the other to the
judgment: no man lays it to heart, so as to affect it, no man considers, it
so as to understand it, and these two well agree together, and the one infers
the other: that which a man lays to heart, he will consider, if the heart be
affected, the understanding will be employed: a man cannot but revolve that
which he is cut and stricken with; by considering it we lay it to heart: While
I Muse the fire kindled: there is an affection in the mind toward the object,
if it be of delight it brings joy, if sadness it brings sorrow, and these two
phrases are very fruitful expressed here, no man lays it to heart, no man
considers it, And observe what the sin is that the Prophet charges with, and
complains against: it was not a sin of commission, no, it was a sin of
omission; it was neglect of duty: it is as horrid impiety to omit what God
commands us to do, which he forbids; Remember we do provoke God as much by
omitting to do good, as by doing those things he has forbid. Many men please
themselves pharasaically.

When the sinful neglect of any known duty, being judgment, as soon as the
doing of a known sin, I say it is the not doing of our known duty makes us
culpable, and that sin here charged on us is not the rejoicing, and triumphing
when the godly are taken away, but the not laying it to heart that argues a man
to be in the depth of wickedness, to come to sit in the seat of the scorners,
to deride at the calamities of the godly, and make their tears his drink, and
their ruins his play and sport, this is the depth of wickedness when men
rejoice at the miseries and ruins of the righteous, but it is not considering,
or laying to heart the miseries of the servants of God that is here only
meant, though you will find that a great sin, the not laying to heart their
being taken away. One would think it but a a small thing, but you will find it
a great sin, not to lay it to heart when the rightous are taken away. For 1.
take notice it is the perishing of the righteous. When any man dies, the living
will lay it to heart, says Solomon: And shall not the living lay it to heart,
when not an ordinary man but a good man, one of the Prophets of God and those
righteous, merciful and eminent ones are taken away. Shall such stars fall
from the firmement, and no eyes behold it? no heart consider it? Put those
altogether, it was the righteous that is perishing: and besides, when we
consider, it was not an ordinary but a violent death. When a good man dies
naturally, the living will lay it to heart, much more when cut of, when he
might have lived longer: and then consider all oportunities of doing good is
taken away, and when not an ordinary person, and that not by an ordinary death,
perishing, and more then so, taken away, and when this perishing and taking
away of the righteous was a prediction that concerned themselves of their ruin,
their judgments, was at hand, and ready to overtake and overthrow them, and
they not to consider it: and add to this that this shall be so, and that there
should not be a man to consider it, not as if there was none at all; there were
some though, the number be but very small that did bemoan and lay this thing to
heart, yet it is usual in Scripture to express where there is but a few, as
if there was none at all, as in the 53 Psalm. 3. 5 Ierem. 15. Because there is
but a very few, therefore it is expressed as if there were none at all: there
was but a few zealous in regard of the multitude and generally it they did not
consider that the Righteous perish, and they did not lay it to heart, the
merciful men are taken away from the evil to come. I say these things being
put together you will find it was noe small sin, and that the Prophet has noe
little reason to complain, that they did not lay it to heart, if you consider
it in reference,

1. Unto God. 2. Unto them. 3. To our selves.
1. In reference unto God; this was a great work, and aspeciall work of Gods
provience, that he was pleased to suffer his righteous ones to p^rish, and be
taken away. It is a very great sin not to observe Gods dealing; they are
equally bad, when Gods word sounds in our ears, his works appears in our eyes,
and neither is regarded by us. As the Psalmist complains in the 26 Psalm. This
is great impiety that God should pass by us in a special providence, and we
not take notice thereof: if not a sparrow fall to the ground without his
knowledge, nor a hair of our heads fall to the ground, much less our heads,
they cannot perish but by a special providence: and they should be taken
notice of when God intends to take them from us; and as it impiery against God,
so likewise it is a sin against them, it argues that as we want piety, so pity,
as purity, so bowels, when those that are our Fellow Members,

Righteous ones especially: nay when in a higher, rank then our selves,
Ministers or others are in misery, and we are not troubled at their sufferings,
this argues we want much pity: they are but glass eyes that weep not for such
a loss, and it is but a wooden leg that is not sensible, what the rest of the
members endures.

And as it is a sin against them, so likewayes it is an evil against our
selves, it argues a stupid mind, a secure heart, and an obdurate spirit that is
not moved with such providentiall dispensations against us, especially when it
presages judgment and misery to come upon a people, and yet it should not work
upon us. All this considered you will find it was a just matter of complaint,
which the Prophet takes up, the righteous perish, and no man lays it heart,
etc.

I beseech you in the fear of God, let us learn to practice the contrary, and
to lay to heart the miseries, distresses, and perishings of the servants of
God; but especially when they die by a violent death, the Sun daily shines and
noe man regards it, but when once it is in an Eclipse, then every eye will be
upon it, neither do men mind the high mountains when standing, but if it chance
to fall then every eye consider it, and shall we not take notice of the
Eclipses of Gods faithful servants, and so lay them to heart by remembering to
register the deeds of Gods faithful servants. How, and when taken away, and
withal bemoaning, and bewailing both the miseries they suffer, and the
Calamities we are like to suffer, by reason they are taken away from the evil
to come, and by imitating their virtues following their graces, setting before
us their exemplary lives, and treading in their steps, so as to prepare for
dying, for suffering, in the like or any other kind, that death may not find us
unprovided: and if we do live to prepare for the evil to come, judgment is at
hand. Let us be making our peace with God by repenting of our own, and the sins
of the land, that when the evil comes it may not come upon us unprepared, and
though we be taken away, we may be but taken to the fruition of Glory and
happiness; and that I may not be guilty of this sin, I here declaime against
it. I dare not but stir up my self and you, sadly and veriously stir up you and
me to lay to heart this merciful man of God, this righteous man that has been
lately taken from us, I hope none will envy his Character: if we look no
further then his death, it was a violent death, but as for the cause of his
death it concerns not me, it must be referred to that great day, the day of
judgment, I hope without offense to any here, I may look to the manner of his
death, the righteous are said to be bold as a Lion, and has hopes in his
death, and what is this but the serene consequence of a well led life, that
made him meekly bold, and humbly confident, and cheerful at his dissolution: of
all acts of mercies none is greater then that of forgiving enemies, which that
he did, witness those lines, those excellent lines read at his interrment, or
those gracious charitable words, and prayers he uttered upon the Scaffold,
which proclaims him a man full of grace and mercy, I want time, and tongue to
go over his life; and all that knew him will acknowledge this, that the whole
course of his life was a constellation of graces and virtues, both as he was a
Christian, and as he was a Minister. This righteous man is now perished, this
merciful man is now taken away. But I trust nay I have some measure, of
confidence he is but perished from the earth, taken from us and removed to a
better habitation, to enjoy a safer, a more Glorious life: and I hope though he
be out of sight, yet he is not out of mind, and will not be forgotten,
especially by you among whom he has been a faithful, and painful Laborour,
he having spent his time, strength, and labor for your Souls good, therefore
do you lay his death to heart. Remember how often* you have behold him from his
sacred Oratory How often you have heard him dropping, nay overflowing with
faithful reproves, sweet comforts, wholesome admonitious: Remember all those
savery instructions you have heard from him, remember and practice them, that
will be the best way to lay to heart the loss of this viagilant and faithful
Minister, and lay to heart your own barrenesse, and unfruitfullnesse that has
provoked God to deprive, and Rob you of such a Jewel, lay it to heart, that
you have been no more bettered, and mended by those saving Doctrines; and not
only you, but all of us lay it to heart, this and all others of Gods servants
that have been taken from this City, not many years ago, which is a sad
persage, that the ruin thereof is at hand, if a timely repentance and
amendment of life prevent not; which is the end of our discourse, that all of
us may be brought to a serious repentance, as to lay to heart the perishing and
taking away of the Righteous ones, so not to murmur, and repine at those that
have been the instruments of our loss, but to repent of our sins with grief
and sorrow, as the cause thereof by contempt of the word and Sacraments, having
used all means to provoke God to take them from us. Let us for the time to
come, so repent, that if it be possible Gods wrath may be appeased, his
judgments diverted, and those faithful ones that are yet among us, may be
continued, and that more faithful messengers may be sent into his harvest,
which God of his mercy grant, AMEN.

FINIS.

