TOPICA SACRA: SPIRITUAL LOGIC Some brief Hints and Helps to Faith,
Meditation, and Prayer, Comfort and Holiness. Communicated at CHRIST- Church,
Dublin, in Ireland.

BY T. H. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Titon, and are to be sold at the sign of the three
Daggers in Fleet Street. 1658.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY; The Lord Henry Cromwell, the Lord Deputy of Ireland.
May it please your Excellency,
THe reason why I suffer this Discourse to go abroad, and not some others,
(though urged by friends, yea commanded thereunto by your Excellency and the
Council,) is partly to beg pardon for that Disobedience, partly to evidence,
that it was no defect in my Will, but in my notes, and manner of writing, that
hindered me from paying that observance, which now I yield; But especially,
because the Spirit of God, (for mine own, or a worse, neither could, or would
ever have done any such good office for me; I say therefore undoubtedly the
Spirit of God) by these and the like injections and intimations, helping me to
plead and press them, and to hold them up before the Lord, and to spread them
before Him, as Hezekiah did the Letter, has many a time, sustained and cheared
mine own heart, and so renewed the face of that earth, after much Winter
weather, after many trials, troubles, and tremblings: for when God speaks,
where are the Lips that will not quiver at His voice? into whose bones will not
rottenness enter? and happy they, and they only, who now tremble in themselves,
that they may rest in the day of trouble.

This, Heb. 3, 16.
(not to mention any other ground) gives me some small glimmering of hope, that
the same Powerful Spirit, may be pleased also, further to manage and improve
the same Medium, to the relief and advantage of others: and (I can say it) it
is usefulness and service that I have aimed at in this enterprise.

Amongst all the Helps to Devotion that I have seen, (I mean Books so entitled,
commonly containing some forms of Prayers) I remember not any thing, at all of
kin to this Undertaking, which tends to help the Gift, not to stint the Spirit
of Prayer, and only lays a few sticks together, (pointing to the Wood where
more may be had.) which by His own breath, He may be pleased to kindle.

Whatever strangers, either in place or affection may imagine, I know your
Excellency to be a Pleader, and (I hope) a Prevailer with God daily.

I therefore offer this poor Essay unto you, not so much by way of Assistance,
as of Acknowledgement that under God, You have been and are the Instrumental
cause of my enjoying a fullness of opportunities, of doing some service in my
Generation; the value whereof I desire daily to renew upon my heart, above all
the things that this world can afford, or brittle mortality enjoy.

As it has been Your Lordships mercy, that hitherto you have had help from on
High, to know and Love the Lord, His Name and Image where ever you discern it,
and to walk acceptably with Your God, and usefully to His People, for which you
have, your Record on High, your witness amongst men, and in your own Bosom: So
it is now become your Obligation, and only Interest, still to be found in the
same ways of Righteousness; wherein that you may persevere unto the End: and
that your Path may be, as the shining Light, which shines out more and more
unto the perfect day! That you, your most precious Consort and hopeful
Children, may prove an inestimate Blessing in this world, and eternally Blessed
in that to come, is, and shall be the daily prayer of,

(My Lord) Your Excellencies worthless but most willing Servant. Tho. Harrison.

Lemmata Casuum.
Arguments in Case of
1. UNacquaintedness with the Lord. page 28 2. Sense of more then ordinary
unworthiness ever to be acquainted savingly with God. P. 34 3. Jealousy as to
the love of Christ. P. 42 4. Jealousy concerning God the Father. p. 45 5. Fear
of unbelief p. 66 6. Fear of Hypocrisy. p. 71 7. Fear of being acted only by a
slavish spirit of fear. p. 76 8. Sense of fearful backslidings. p. 79 9. Sense
of strong corruptions. p. 84 10. Fear of great Afflictions. p. 88 11. Sense of
extremity of Pain. p. 92 12. Desertion felt or feared. p. 99 13. Exercise in
Friends, Relations, Name or estate. p. 103 14. Suddian disquietment from cloudy
Providence. p. 108 15. Dread of spiritual judgments, hardness of heart,
unprofitableness, under means of Grace. p. 112 16. Fear that prayer is not
heard. p. 120 17. Fear that God can never take any special delight in such a
polluted piece. p. 128 18. Fear of ejectment, or unserviceableness. p. 134 19.
Fear of being cast off at last. p. 141 20. Intercession for others: with
Complaints concerning many things that are amiss in our times. p. 146
ERRATA.
Page 6. line. 4. read out. and l. 12. r, our. p. 7. l. 9. r. own p. 23. l. 18.
r. may. p. 24. l. 25. r. of God. p. 60. l. 16. r. loved. p 67. l. 9. r. a worm.
p. 82. l. 4. r. them. p. 95. l. 9. r. of Job. p. 146. l. 23. r. in. p. 158. l.
26. r. vectigal. p. 164. l. 15. r. in the. and l. 23. r. of. p. 167. l. 26. r.
many times.

Topica Sacra, Spiritual Logic.
JOB 23.3, 4. O That I knew where I might find him, that I might come even to
his seat!

I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with Arguments.


HOly Job, poor now, even to a Proverb, and miserable to a Prodigy, perceiving
his friends Discourses were fuller of Reproaches then Consolations, neglects to
answer them, and resolves to get him to God, the only Support and Refuge of the
miserable.

And thus he entertains himself in the second verse, even to day, after all
that has been said, Drusius in loc.
Exasperatio est querelae meae, the bitterness of my complaint is rather
increased then allayed; wherefore no wonder my mouth is always open to breath
out complaints; and the more I complain, the more I suffer from you, (so some)
or rather from God himself, Grot. in lo. quo magis queror, eo a vobis magis
vapulo.
whose hand I acknowledge in all these strokes; and let me complain as long as
I will my tongue is not so eloquent in complaining as his hand is heavy that
strikes me; my stroke is heavier then my groaning.

And yet for all this, verse 3. he sighs after a Treaty, after a nearer access
and approach unto him that smites him; he quits his seeming friends to make
after his seeming Enemy, and is willing to make this Enemy his Judge, and to
refer all to him.

And then, verse 4. he thinks with himself how he would manage his matters, how
he would bestir himself, and not lose his cause for want of pleading, could he
but get a day of hearing; I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth
with Arguments.

Some think he wishes for a Guide, a Friend to help him to such an opportunity.
Quis det nossem (says Drusius) quis mihi tribuat ut cognoscam (says the
Vulgar) quis dabit scirem (says Montanus) quis est qui possit facere ut valeam
accedere (says the Syriac) he would fain find an Angel to conduct him to the
Throne of God (says Senault) or rather the Angel of the Covenant to afford him
that (...), In his Paraphrase upon the place.
that Manuduction which the Apostle speaks of, as the known privilege of all
Believers, who through him have an access by one Spirit unto the Father, Ephesians.
2.18.

But not to darken the words instead of explaining them, by giving the various
readings and opinions of Interpreters, I will draw out some observations, and
hasten to that I desire to insist on.

Observa. 1. The sorest strokes cannot drive away good souls from God, but
rather draw them nearer to him, my stroke is heavier then my groaning; yet O
that I knew where I might find him!

2. God himself, even for his own sake, is the great Object of a Saints
seekings. O that I knew where I might find him! not this or that to be gotten
by him.

3. Precious souls that have a large Interest in God, are sometimes at a loss,
as to his sweet and sensible Presence; The great God has his unknown Retreats,
whether his best friends cannot sollow him. So verse 8.9. Behold, I go forward,
but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him; on the left hand,
where he does work, but I cannot behold him; he hides himself on the right
hand that I cannot see him. So holy David, Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God,
early will I seek thee. You see his Interest is clear; he can say Thou art my
God, and yet he had but little enjoyment of him: his soul thirsts, longs,
follows hard after him, ver. 8. Such another sigh ye have, Psalm. 101.2. O
when will thou come unto me? do not conclude ye have no interest, because ye
have little enjoyment, no Union, because ye want Vision.

4. A gracious heart seldom or never thinks it self near enough unto God, its
Sun and Shield, and Center: O that I knew where I might find him, that I might
come even to his seat!

5. Gods Judgment Seat where he sits to hear and determine causes, is not
terrible or unapproachable to a Believer, who knows it to be a Throne of Mercy,
as Job here did; for says he, verse 6. how would he use me, if he had me there?
would he overwhelm me with his greatness? will he plead against me with his
absolute Power; No, but he would put strength in me: Happy are all that can say
so, for me must all appear there, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. and it will be terrible to
all those that do not often resort thither aforehand.

6. A poor afflicted creature often thinks he has a great deal to say unto
God, if he could but get an hearing; he thinks how he would order and argue ont
the matter: what a story he would tell him, if he could but get his ear, gain
access and audience from him.

7. It Is good to have our hearts and mouths filled with Arguments when we come
to plead and expostulate, and reason out our great concernments with out God.

This is the point I pitch on, to expel that spirit of slumber, which has so
much weakened the spirit of Prayer in our days, that comparatively they are but
little enriched by it, who trade to Heaven with it, where God has all good
things lying ready by him, and waiting only for Prayer to come and fetch them
away.

When Christ himself would give us a perfect Pattern of Prayer, both fot matter
and manner, he winds and wraps up all with a conclusion, Mat. 6.13. consisting
of certain reasons to persuade God to hear our prayers, or at least to persuade
and assure our selves, that he does and will hear them: the reasons have an
influence into all and every one of the Petitions; Thine is the Kingdom; and
therefore we expect that as a good King thou shoulst receive and answer our
Petitions: Psalm. 72.12, 13, 14, 15.
it is thy concernment as a King to have thine honor advanced, therefore
hallow thine one name, glorify it in the Church, let thy Kingdom come to it,
advance thy Will in it, sustain us thy Subjects, pardon our sins, keep and
defend us from Evils.

So Thine is the Power, which Kings oftentimes want; 2 Kin. 6.26, 27.
but thou art able to exalt thine own name, to extend thy Kingdom over all, to
fit us to do thy will; to minister to our necessities, to pardon our sins, to
preserve us from all Evils.

And thine is the Glory; The hallowing of thy Name is the chief part of thy
glory; thy Kingdom the prime place of thy glory; herein art thou glorified,
when we obey thy Will, when thou providest for thy people, forgivest their
sins, preservest and deliverest them from their Enemies; therefore do thou all
these things for us; therefore do we trust and hope that thou will do all these
thing for us.

Thus our blessed Savior does direct us, and thus the blessed Saints have
practiced in all Ages.

When the people of Israel had made the molten Calf, and committed Idolatry
with it, and God was about to destroy them for it, see how Moses in his prayer
for them lays hold on the avenging hand of God, and stays it by reasoning and
arguing, from the dishonor that would redound unto God if he should destroy
them; and from the Covenant that he had made with their fathers, Exodus 32.11,
12, 13, etc. And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why does thy
wrath wax hot against thy people which thou have brought forth out of the Land
of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand? (thou art now greatly engaged
in the business) the Egyptians will slander thy gracious intentions, and say it
was for mischief with a purpose to slay and consume them. Remember Abraham,
Isaac and Israel thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self that thou
would deal otherwise with their Posterity: and see how he prevails verse. 14.
The Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. So when
he would have destroyed them for murmuring, Moses interposeth again for a
pardon, and fills his mouth with arguments, Number, 14.13, etc. The Egyptians will
hear it, and they will tell stories of thee to the Inhabitants of this Land, and
they will slander thy Power, and say, because thou were not able to carry them any
further, thou did rid thy hands of them in the Wilderness; Now therefore I
beseech thee, show what thou can do, put forth the greatness of thy power in
pardoning, as thou have spoken of thy self, and as thou have practiced hitherto
in forgiving this people stom Egypt even until now. And see how he carries it
again, verse. 20. The Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word.

So Abraham, before him, Genesis 18. 23, 24, 25. will thou also destroy the
Righteous with the wicked? that be far from thee to do; after this manner to
slay (pell mell) the righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should
be as the wicked; that be far from thee; shall not the Judge of all the earth
do right? And you know how he shrunk up and narrowed the number, till he
thought he had got within the verge of Lots Family, and expected that should
afford so many righteous persons as he named; but he was out in his charitable
conjecture; otherwise he had not faild in what he pleaded for. He gained ground
at every advance, and God yielded till Abrabram thought he had Enough, and so
pressed him no further.

Thus Joshua when the people were smitten at Ai, Josh. 7.7, 8, 9. Alas, O Lord
God, says he, Wherefore have thou brought us at all over Jordan? or was it our
ambition and covetousness that brought us over? would to God we had been
content and dwelt on the other side Jordan. O Lord God, what shall I say when
Israel (that used to be victorious) turns their backs before their enemies!
and now they will all hear of it, and environ us round, and cut off our name from
the earth; and if that were the worst, it were no great matter; but what will thou do unto thy great Name? that will hardly swim if ours sink, they are so
twisted together, so imbarqued in the same bottom; and though ours be vile,
that's precious; though ours deserve to rot, what has that deseved? and think
what thou art about to do to thy great Name. thus Hezekiah in his sickness,
Isa. 38.2, 3. Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before
thee in truth: I have had an honest heart toward thee, thou know it; and
must I now be cut off untimely? When all things are so unsettled, now or never
is the time for thee to give Testimony to my sincerity, and you know he had a
Reprieve presently brought him.

Thus he argues in his distress because of Senacherib, 2, King. 19.15. etc.
They have indeed made work with the gods of the Nations, and cast them into the
fire, because they were no Gods; but now that they come to meddle with thee and
thy people, let them find it too hot for them, and let all the Kingdoms of the
earth know that thou art the Lord God, even thou only.

Thus Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. O Lord our God, we rest on thee, thou art our God,
let not man prevail against thee.

Thus Jehosaphat, 2 Chr. 20.6 etc.

Thus Daniel, Chap. 9 to the 20. ver etc. Thus Amos Chap. 7. ver. 2, 3, 5, 6.

Thus the Apostles, Act. 4. ver. 24. to 31.

Not that God stands in need of our informing him concerning our necessities,
which He knows better then we; but because hereby we give some proof that we
are not altogether strangers at home (as many careless ones are) but know
something of our selves, and our own cases, and of Him and his dealings toward
us: but I will give no other grounds for the point, then those of Jobs
resolution for this practice; and they are these.

1. Upon earnest arguing God will undoubtedly answer some way or other; that is
employed, verse. 5. I would know the words that he would answer me, and
understand what be would say unto me. An answer I may be sure of when I fill my
mouth with arguments; he will not sit still and say nothing; he will not sit
like an Image, like a dumb Idol, as the Abominations of the Heathens, their Dii
Stercorei, Tremel.
their dunghil-Gods (as they are called, Deuteronomy. 29.17.) must of necessity do;
they can do no otherwise, though men fill their mouths with arguments, and
empty their veins of their blood before them, 1 King. 18.28.

No says Job, he will undoubtedly answer, could I but have my fill of
pleading; and I might guess at his designs by his anwers (which are now too
wonderful for me) I might understand what means the heat of this great
Burning, and wherefore he contendeth with me, and what he means and intends
toward his poor creature.

Arguments then in prayer are not likely to go unanswered, and praying souls
find it so.

Sometimes he answers gloriously from his secret place of Thunder, yet not in
Thunder but in Lightning, in some glorious irradiation, in some precious
melting Promise born in upon the heart with a strong hand, and there Engraven
in indelible Characters by an irresistible power, whereof gracious souls in our
days have had abundant experience.

Sometimes he answers in some secret support only, as Hannah after her arguing
and pouring forth her sorrowful soul into his bosom, when she had left her
petition in his hand, or but laid it down at his feet; though she had no other
Fiat then what was written on her heart by an invisible finger, yet she went
her way well apaid, and fell to her meat, and her countenance was no more sad,
1 Samuel 1.18.

And surely one or the other of these made David close up so many Psalms with
praises and rejoycings, which he had begun with tears and mourning; an obvious
observation, and clear evidence, that even whilst he was on his knees before
the Lord, the wind came about and blew upon him out of a warm corner, and made
all his spices flow.

Sometimes God answers in some providential dispensations, which both gratify
us for the present, and might instruct us for the future; for many, very many
Providence are Prophetical, and do fore-shew things to come; but the language
of Prophecies is for the most part obscure, and we seldom understand it, till
God interpret it in the accomplishment; an Instance whereof we have in Acts
7.25. Moses his defending the Israelite, and avenging him that was oppressed,
and smiting the Egyptian, had a further reath and drift, and scope in it then
barely, that present vindication, for he supposed his Brethren would have
understood how that God by his hand would deliver them, but they under stood
not: no more do we many times the full Extent and Import of a dispensation
which echoes to Prayer; yet for the most part we pick something out of it to
stay the stomach, and to afford Support; if not satisfaction.

Plead then, and fill your mouths with arguments; for when ever you do so,
beyond all perdventure God will answer.

Secondly, There Is no fear that he will interpret this sawciness and
presumption in thee, and so answer thee with his Fists about thine ears, or
with his foot to kick thee out of his presence; there is no fear that he will
smother thee under the weight of his greatness, or dazzle thee with his beams,
or burn thee with his flames, or drive thee from the Judgment Seat (as Gallio
did the Jews, Act. 18.26.) No, he never beats his people lower then their
knees, and thence suffers them, yea helps them to rise again; nay he will lay
his hand upon thy head; yea under thy feet to do thee good; he will stroke
rather then strike a pleading soul; he will strengthen thee; and put mettle
into thee; this is lobs consideration in the sixth verse, Will he plead against
me with his great and absolute Power, by which he may do what he pleases with
his poor Creatures? Will he serve me so; No, but he would put strength in me,
thus he dealt with Daiel, chap. 10.19.

Thirdly, There the Righteous may plead and dispute with him, even at the Bar
of Equity and Justice, yea and the Judge cannot but pronounce and pass sentence
in their favor; tha's his encouragement, verse 7. there the Righteous may
plead with him, and so shall I be delivered for ever from my Judge, never more
dread him as a Judge, but so as withal to love him, and live with him as a
Father.

There righteous Jeremy pleads with him, Ier. 12.1. etc. Righteous art thou O
Lord when I plead with thee (there is no question to be made of that, that
admits of no dispute (yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgments.

There he invites his people to come and plead freely, Isa. 43.26. put me in
remembrance, let us plead together, declare thou that thou may be justified;
if thou have any thing to say for thy self, say on.

Nay even Idolaters shall have this fair play, permission to plead for
themselves, and for their dumb Idols too, if they have any thing to say for
them, Isa. 41.21. Produce your cause says the Lord, bring forth your strong
Reasons, says the King of Jacob. Have Idolaters this Liberty, and not the true
Worshippers that worship in Spirit and Truth? The Wicked shall they have it,
and not the Righteous? Yes doubtless, this is that (...), (translated boldness
of speech, Ephe. 3.12. He. 4.16. Accedaqmus cum loquendi ubertate ad thronum
gratia. Bez.
2. Cor. 7.4.) mentioned as the great privilege of the Saints, especially now
under the New Testament, Heb. 10.19. etc. (...), having therefore boldness to
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, (a Right and Freedom to enter in
our persons hereafter, and now by our prayers) let us draw near with a true
heart, in full assurance of Faith.

righteous indeed may plead with him, and not be cast in their suit; But where
are those righteous Ones? And who are they; for it is not so with me: God be
merciful to me a grievour sinner; I dare not be so bold with him; Iniquity
must stip her mouth.

share in, yea a sincere desire after the rightteousness of Christ, is
righteous before him, and may in that righteousness plead and prevail, and as a
Prince have Power with God; for this is his own Righteousness of his own
contrivance and appointment: The Righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil.
3.8, 9. A Righteousness spun and woven out of his own bowels, and the obedience
of his dear Son; a better then ever came upon the back of Angels, for which the
personal and legal Righteousness of a Paul, of an Angel, is to be abandoned;
Evangelical being far better then angelical Righteousness, It Is said, when
Pilate appeared in Christ's Garment which he had got from the Soldiers, Caesar
could never be angry with him; it is certain thou can not miss a Blessing in
hi garments, who is not ashamed to be called thine elder Brother, who came to
change clothes and places with thee, and to take all upon himself, that thou
might esape. The Father cannot but be well pleased with the smell of his
Sons raiment; and he sits too upon a seat of Indgement, and must do thee right;
and Justice it self (which will not be twice paid) is as much for thee, as much
thy friend as Mercy, Romans 3 26. He is just, and yet (nay therefore) a justifier
of him that believes on Jesus. So that if thou art not utterly shut up in
unbelief, if there be but the least spark of true faith alive in thy heart,
thou may plead and prosper.

sind away all arguments, and must never open my mouth any more before him.

boast, but to plead thou may.

And have thou nothing to offer? not a sigh? not the groanings of thy soul?
this was Jobs preface, ver. 2. my stroke is heavier then my groaning. O that I
knew where I might find him! where the heart is full as Jobs was (you may
perceive it by his sighing) the mouth will not be empty; a full heart will fill
the mouth some way or other; if the heart be full of affection, the mouth will
be full of arguments; they deceive their own souls who say their hearts are as
good as the best (they thank God) though they make no show, when neither OGd
nor men can hear ought that is good come from them. Psalm. 37.30. The mouth of
the Righteous speaks Wisdom, and his Tongue talks of Judgment; why so?
ver. 31. The Law of his God is in his heart; that sets his tongue a going the
right way; and on the contrary, some men's stinking breath bewraies their inward
parts to be very rottenness; they have not so much sweet breath as to make a
sigh of; if the want of words were all, it were a small matter; that
inarticulate Language of sighs and groans is powerful Rhetorique: Let the
sighing of the Prisoners come before thee (says David, Psalm. 79.11.) according
to the Greatness of thy Power preserve thou them that are appointed to die: and
for the oppression of the poor, and for the sighing of the needy, now will I
axise, (says the Lord himself, Psalm. 12.5.) I will ser him in safety from him
that puffs at him; we own help from the Spirit, when we are enlarged. Paul
says, he helps us, even when we are straightened; likewise the Spirit also
helps our infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for as we ought;
(no not Paul and the Apostles) but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for
us with groanings which cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26. (...) with unutterable
straitnings; our enlargements may be but the flowings of the Gifts of the
Spirit; but our inward pinchings and coarctations may be the Intercession of
the Spirit it self; the more immediate operations of the Spirit. And we forget
that their is such a Prompter hebind the hangings; such an Interpreter (as his
Title signifies, Joh. 14.26. Ille suggeret vobu omnia. vid. Cameroned Mat.
19.3.(...)
as well as Comforter; yea therefore a Comforter; because an Interpreter) to
make known the mind of God to us, and ours to him; and as he betrales the
secrets of God to the Saint, so he rips up their hearts before God (without
doing any wrong, either in the one or other) and it is he who fills their mouths
not only with windy words, but weighty Arguments.

Have thou nothing to complain of to thy Judge? no Sin, no Devil, no Diabolical
Temptations, no superdiabolical corruption, no spititual Plunderers, no
Egyptian Taskmasters, no cruel Bondage that makesthy life bitter to thee? no
Enemy coming in as a flood to oppress and do thee wrong? no Iron-yoak that gals
thy shoulders? no Violence and Spoil to cry out and complain of? Sure thou have
not studied thine own case; thou have not ordered thy cause aright, if this
fountain fail thee.

But will this be admitted? nay the poor soul say; all Complaints are
troublesome, men cannot endure them. I Answer, God will. Out of the abundance of
my Complaint and Grief have I spoken hitherto, says Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.16. and
you know how she sped. Correptionibus. Mont. Lite, Sir.


Nay the word rendered Arguments, I find by the Latin Interpreters rendered
Redargutionibus, Increpationibus. lob in some case is Defendant, as to the
charges drawn up against him by his friends; but here he is Plaintiff also;
could I come near the Bar, (says he) I would make my moan: the whole Court of
heaven should Ring out and be made sensible of my sufferings.

But we are well enough with our English translation of the word, Sane
argumenta qua utrinque, proseruntur a partibus in lite pro causa sua, (...)
D^usi
and it is warranted by the best Critics; the word signifying all proceedings,
all arguments, and reasons used in a cause, by either party, and contains all
that can be alleged or urged by a poor creature any way in his own defense, or
for his advantage.

4. There are some Arguments yet in Archivis, in the Rolls and Records of
heaven which were never yet imbezled; they lie in the Ark of the Covenant, hid
with Christ in God, (under double lock and key,) where neither moth nor rust can
come to corrupt, nor thief break through to steal; yea, they lie (many of them)
in the very heart and bosom, and being God of himself. I hope we shall meet
with some of them anon, and that they may meet with the very case of thy soul,
and that thy soul may meet with God in the making use of them.





2. Has he not given thee those two great friends of his for thine Advocates?
the one at his own right hand in Heaven moving and negotiating, and always
appearing for thee; the other seated in thy breast, (though once a Cage for
every unclean and hateful Birds;) the Dove alights and abides upon that
dunghill, and will not be frayed away: and the voice of that Turtle is heard in
our Land; yea the Fathers own heart is full of love, brim full and running over
upon thee; and this continually pleads for thee, and makes all thine arrows
which fly upwards, inevitable, not one is shot in vain.

3. Good arguments in prayer do show the necesity of prayer, and great equity
for the obtaining of the things prayed for; and so do very much confirm our
Faith, and fire our affections, and enable a man to break through many
Discouragements, which Satan or his own heart may cast in to hinder Prayer: and
certainly though there be no need of Arguments to work upon God, there is to
work upon us; though not to move his love, yet to remove our unbelief; though
not to prevail upon him to give, yet to perpare our selves to receive Mercy.

to hear often from them, Can. 2.14.
to hear their Voices, and see their Faces; he loves to hear what they can say
for themselves: so he dealt with the woman of Canaan; he first seemed not to
hear her, then did deny her suit, and then gave a very sharp and cutting Reason
of his denial, because she was but a Dog, she was none of the Israelites who
were his Children; but when Christ hears her wise answer to his objection:
Truth Lord, but the dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their Masters table,
(which was a strong piece of Logic,) she received an high commendation of her
faith, and A Grant that would be sure to please her, Her will; O woman great is
thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will, Mat. 15.21, 22. etc. She Retorts
his own weapon upon him, and he yields and gives her what is dangerous, if not
good, her own Will.

My purpose is, (leaving all other ways of application or enlargement) to
speak to some principal cases of greatest concernment and most frequent
occurrency in our lives: and I shall only break the ice in each case, (for
facile est invent is addere) to set your wits a work, which men, which
Christians makes least use of in their greatest occasions; we trifle in serious
things, and are serious only in trifles, or rather to rouz up your Graces in
the holy Apostles phrase, (...), 2 timothy 1.6.
to stir up the fire which lies raked up and buried under the ashes of sloth
and supine oscitancy, or rather indeed to Jog the spirit of Prayer which lies
dormant in many bosoms, and does them little service; I would but set that
Plough a going which too many cast in the hegdge as almost useless: which yet
if well managed, would fill your Garners with all manner of store: and to which
whosoever puts his hand without (too often) looking back, shall be fit for the
Kingdom of God.

First then, I Case Unacquaintedness with the Lord.
Is unacquaintedness with God, thy Misery, the matter of thy moan and mourning:
is this thy complaint (as it is of the most knowing) that so little a portion is
heard of Him? that neither the Thunder of his power, nor the Charms of his Love
are sufficiently understood by thee; we rather are known of him, then that we
can say, we know him, Gal. 4.9. and where, or who is he has no need to plead
in this particular? some make this to be Jobs case, in this very text; for thus
they render it, Vtinam nossem Deum and invenirem eum: Apud drusi.
O that I knew God, then I should find him. He that knows God, has found him;
and he shall never find him who never knows him. His friend that spoke last had
advised him, Chap. 22. v. 21 Acquaint now thy self with him, and be peace, etc.
and it may be it is thereunto that he answers: O that I knew him, O that I knew
where I might find him to be better acquainted with him; is this thy case? go
order thy cause before Him, and fill thy mouth with Arguments.

Ask him (with an humble and holy boldness) if he be not willing to be known?
though he cover himself with darkness, (but he is too big and too bright for a
covering) though he make darkness his Pavilion round about him: and if so; then

2ly, Why has he mad eIntellectual Beings capable of knowing him; and
eternally miserable if they know him not! Ioh. 17.3.
thy soul is so for certain.

3ly, Why has he so many ways issued forth and made out Himself? why has he
written such admirable Comments in the things which are seen, upon the
invisible things of God? Romans 1.20.
his eternal power and Godhead!

Why has he sparkled forth such glorious Discoveries in the sacied Scriptures,
in the face of Jesus Christ! in the births and breathings, the hints and
whispers of his Spirit; in the ways and workings of his Providence, in the
experience of all his Saints; yea in thine own heart, mind and soul, dark and
dolesome though it be for the most part, so that thou can not order thy
speech by reason of Darkness!

Fourthyly, why has he so often laid his Commands upon poor sinners to seek
him, if he mean not to be found? show him his own hand for it; thus says the
Lord to the house of Israel, Seek ye me and ye shall live, Amos 5.4. Seek the
Lord, and ye shall live, ver. 6. and yet again, verse 8. Seek him that makes
the seven stars and orion, and turns the shadow of Death into the morning:
What means all this earnestness, if he mean not to be found? or says he
these things to Israel only to Israel after the flesh, and says he not the
same to all Nations? Nay is not his the very end why he gives to all, Life and
Breath, and all things that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel
after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us, Act. 17.27.
and he never said to the seed of Jacob (who wrestle with him) seek ye me in
vain, Isa. 45. 19. And thou hopest thou art one of them, though the weakest of
all those spiritual Wrastlers.

Nay show him his Warrant directed to those who have plowed wickedness and
reaped Iniquity, and eaten the fruit of lies, Hos. 10.12, 13. why then should
thou be excluded?

Fisthly, Ask him if he have nor been found of many a soul that sought him not?
Did not he prevent them and ofter himself, and say, Behold me, Behold me! Isa.
65.1. Is there a soul with him now in Heaven, whose name is not sought out?
Isa. 62.12 And will he now hide himself. from one that seeks him?

6ly. Ask him whence is it, that thou have an heart now to seek him; Is it not
because he has found thee, and means to be found of thee? Ier. 29.12, 13, 14.
etc. and he knows that thy whole heart is, or would fain be engaged in this
work.

Seventhly, Why does he allow so long a time to seek him in? all the time of
this life as some think; at least till the Decree bring forth, Zeph. 2.1, 2.
till he swear in his wrath, till the heart be judicially hardened, which yet
is not thy case (through infinite Mercy) thou art not yet free amongst the
dead, nor bound among the damned.

8ly. Tell him (if thou can say so truly) that it is in order to practice,
that thou would be aquainted with him, not merely to gratify a natural itch
after knowledge; not merely that thou might talk of him; but walk with him,
and love him, and fear him, and obey him in all thing; and even in natural
things, Manus est causa scientiae, the hand contributes more to knowledge then
the Brain: Anaxagnras.
those things we learn to do, we learn by doing them; and as to Spirituals,
Christ has past his word for it, John 7.17. If any man will do his Will, he
shall know of the Doctrine.

9. Lastly, Tell him it is not in a pang, in a fit, in an humor of
newfangledness, that thou art thus covetous, thus ambitious of his
acquaintance: but (though late, though too too lite thou begannest this
enquiry) he knows thou have been of this mind for many a day, thou have (though
weakly) followed on to know him and now thou expectest that good word of his
should be made good unto thy soul, Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know if we follow on
to know the Lord; his going forth is prepared as the morning; and he shall come
unto us as the rain, as the later and former rain unto the earth; press these
things upon him and his Love and Truth will let him hide no longer.

Secondly, Case 2. Unworthiness ever to be acquainted with God.
Does the sense of thy more then ordinary unworthiness oppress thee? Does the
horridness and beynousness of thy sins lie as a mountain of lead upon thy soul,
and stiflle all the movings and mountings of thy Spirit upward? Does this nip
all the buddings and bloomings of faith and hope, and force thee often to sigh
out in secret, It is impossible for me to be saved, I shall certainly at last
prove a Reprobate! Is this thy case? Go order thy cause before him, and sill
thy mouth with Arguments; in all humility ask him if he did not (before the
foundations of the world were laid) choose voluntarily, absolutely and
immutably, what company he would have with him to all Eternity: Ephesians. 1.4.2.
Tlm. 1.9.
sometimes thou think he would never choose thee; there now lies a secret Bar
in thy way; study the point a little, and get it removed.

He was under no necessity to choose any; no not Christ himself to be the head
of the Church, for he might have chosen whether ever there should have been
such a body yea or no: God the Father begets the Son necessarily, not
arbitrarily; that is, from his Nature, not from his good pleasure; but he
chooses him to be the head and root, and Representative of the Church,
arbitrarily, not necessarily; Col. 1.19.
this is from his good pleasure, not from his Nature; How free is he then in
all his other Elections?

He chose in deed in Christ, but not for Christ; as in the natural birth, See
Mr. Norton Orthod. Evang. p. 225. etc.
so here first the head comes forth, and then the Members; Christ is the cause
of the Salvation of the Elect, but not of Election to Salvation. Christ is the
meritorious cause of the application of all good not of Gods volition or
decreeing that good; Election is God himself electing: and there can be no
cause of God; God cannot be an effect: Christ indeed was by, but had not the
naming of the Blect; this was the Fathers part and gives him primitively and
Originally and interest in them; as Christ himself acknowledges, John 17.6.
Thine they were, and thou gave them unto me. Christ himself did not propound
solicit for this or that person; much less any foreseen qualifications, which
are the effects, but could not be the causes of that Love or choice; and if
there was none by to move him, was there any to manacle him, to prescribe Laws
and limits to him? to say unto him, You may not choose such or such a scarlet
sinner: to set bounds and banks to those great deeps of electing Love, and to
say unto them, Hitherto may ye go, and no further, and here must your precious
waves be stayed.

He chose indeed not immediately to Salvation, (that was too great a stride at
once) but to Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.1 Pet.
1.2. not because, he foresaw some would be holy, but that they might be so,
Ephesians, 1.4. The great plot was how to conform sinful, woeful Creatures to the
Image of his Son, Romans 8.29. and this thy soul likes passing well; go then and
put him to it: ask him if he will own this Doctrine, and seal it upon thy
heart: (it matters not how many men disown it) and tell him thou can not by
any thing thou discernest therein conclude thy self to be excluded, though thou
yieldest thy self to be the chiefest of finners, and that thy case is reserved
only for his cognizance; for thou can not fully utter it to any creature
living.

Secondly, tell him it condemning he glorifies but one or two of his
Attributes, Justice and Soveraignity; but in saving he will magnify them all.

Thirdly, Mind him how often he has already sacrificed to his Justice, by
punishing such Offenders as thou have been; Hell is full of Instances, full of
those sacrifices; and yet the sufferings of his Son do more set off the Glory
of his holiness then them all, then all the everlasting torments of the damned.

Fourthly, Ask him if Heaven will not afford plenty of Precedents for the like
mercy thou now need and beggest of him: Ask if Manasses and Mary Magdalene,
and many such like be not there with him.

Fifthly, If he never met the like since the beginning of his Creation (for so
sometimes thou think) ask him if he mean to let slip such an opportunity to
set forth the Greatness and Transcendency of his Grace and Mercy in all its
Pomp and Power, Oriency and Luster; and fill thy heart and mouth with this
Argument: It Is like Goliah's sword to David, there is none like it: see how
David himself weilds it, Psalm. 25.11. For thy names sake O Lord pardon mine
iniquity, for it is great; if this be a good argument, thou do not want one,
it seems David thought so, and so did Moses, Exodus 32 31. Oh this people have
sinned a great sin! but here is work now for the Greatness of Gods Power in
pardoning, which in those cases he flies to, Number. 14.17 and now I beseech thee
let the Power of my Lord be great according ar thou have spoken.

God to honor his Son in reconciling us to himself, Dr. Th. Goodwin. Christ
the universal Peacemaker. page 15.
permits the greatest sins and enmities to be in the hearts and lives of those
he intends to save, (says a precious servant of his) and thou may well hope
God will not be wanting to the Glory of his own Grace: and of his Sons Merits;
for the illustrating and manifesting whereof, the pardoning of so great and
grievous sins will serve abundantly; such an overgrown sinner does Ansam
praebere, give him a fair occasion, and he will not loose it. Cranmer a little
before his going to the stake, relieves his sorrowful Spirit after his sinful
Recantation with this consideration: Magnum illud mysterium, etc. Surely that
great Mystery of Gods Incarnation was never contrived for the pardon only of
lesser offenses; It Is the Top of all thy Saviors Glory, that he is able to
save to the utmost them that come unto God by Him, Heb. 7.25.

Nay, If upon strong grounds thou concludest thy self (all things considered) A
None such: Ask him how he will come off from that Obligation, of drawing all
men (that is, some of all sorts) unto himself, Joh. 12.32. if thine iron heart
feel not the attractive power and virtue of this Loadstone, there will be never
a sinner of thy sort, size and kind, to adorn his triumph at the day of his
appearing! Those sanguine sinners against the Holy Ghost (the only rank and
file of sinners excluded, Matthew, 12.32.) have no mind to plead as thou have,
and thou art none of their number.

Sixthly, Tell him he shall be more admired and loved for such a Miracle of
Matchless Mercy, then for all his curious Works of Creation or dreadful Acts
of Vengeance.

Seventhly, Tell him it must be no small matter, no easy, no ordinary thing
that must beget Eternal Trances; and Ecstasies, and Admirations; the greatest
wonders of this world, last but a little while, those of the next must last for
ever; and the pardoning, and purifying, the sanctifying and saving of such a
sinner will Eternally yield Oil to such a flame.

Eighthly, Tell him no soul in Heaven shall admire or love him more then thou,
(though now thou come in the Rear of all his Adorers!) and thou may
venture to say so, if that of Christ be true (as certainly it is,) Luke 7.47.
that he to whom much is forgiven, will love much.

9. Lastly, Tell him that the wonder shall not be confined to thy person, but
run through heaven and affect all men, and Angels, and that (in all likelihood)
many shall wonder more for his grace to thee then to themselves, who never
sinned up to the height, nor after the similitude of thy transgressions:
especially Angels that never sinned, and such as died in infancy, or lived in
innocence in comparison of thee; how should they know the extent of Grace, were
it not for such superlative sinners? and that's one of his great Designs to be
admired! 2 These. 1.10. and he knows that in thee he cannot miss of it.

The end of Philosophy is said to be to admire nothing; but the end and scope
of Divinity, is to make us admire God in every thing; in this thing especially,
the eternal salvation of the greatest sinners.

Thirdly, Case 3. Jealousy as to Christ.
Have thou any secret fears that this Lord Jesus Christ whom thou have heard
(and talked it may be) so often of, takes no notice of thee, has no mind to do
any thing for thee; is this, (it may be when thou art most retired into thy
self, and most serious) thy cause before him, an fill thy mouth with Arguments;
Remember thy distance, and then,

First, Ask him what made him take so great a Journey? what brought him down
from Heaven to Earth? was it not to seek and to save such lost stray creatures
as thou art, who all fall to the Lord of the soil? if thou art not, have not
been lost every way, even in thine own sense and apprehension, let him skip
over thee and leave thee out,

Secondly, Mat. 11.28.1 John. 3.23. John 3. ult.
Ask him why does he invite all weary burdened poor souls to come unto him; why
does he command them to cast themselves upon him? threaten those that do not,
with the utmost peril and punishment, if he be not willing to bid those that
come welcome? the great quarrel between him and sinners is this, ye will not
come unto me that ye might have life. Joh. 5. v. 40.

Thirdly, Tell him thou verily believe he never yet cast out any one soul
that came unto him according to that blessed Word of his, Joh. 6.37. All that
the Father gives me, shall come unto me, and him that comes come I will in no
wise cast out: (A text that has been a Sanctuary to many a troubled soul) Ask
him now if he mean to begin with thee? if thou shall be the first that ever was
refused by him?

Fourthly, Tell him he knows all things, he knows that thou do not come unto
him for fashion sake, because it is the custom, and they are in no request with
whom Christ is in none, at least in pretense and semblance.

Fifthly, He knows thou do not follow him for loaves, for outward advantage
and accommodations, because preferment waits upon profession.

Sixthly, Tell him it is true indeed, it is necessity inforceth thee to come unto
him, because otherwise thou art lost and ruined to all Eternity; and yet he
knows what a value thy soul has for him, that thou look on an interest in
him as thy great conernment; the one thing needful, the more excellent way;
that all thy treasures, pleasures, honors, yea, thy very Relations (which are
as so many parts and pieces of thy self) are as if they were not, in comparison
to him; are to thee (as all Nations are to him) as a drop of the Bucket,
neither here nor there, if in competition or comparison with Him. Phil. 3.9.


Seventhly, Lastly, thou can say to him that though it is out of Necessity,
it is out of choice too that thou come to him; were it possible for thee to be
saved any other way, thou would choose this rather; there was a time indeed
when thy heart gadded about strangely so often to change thy way; thou would
have gone to any door for relief rather then his; but since thou have had some
little glances and glimmerings of Him, though but in a transient way, though
but in a Glass, or at a Window, or through the Latice, since thou have tasted
some small drops of his sweetness, 1 Cor. 13.12. Cant 2.9.
he knows thy heart is so taken there with, yea with that glorious and most
gracious contrivance of His undertaking for thee (the wicked being delivered,
and the Righteous coming in his stead) yea, with the love and lovely person of
a Savious, that these are now become more with thee, then Salvation it self, if
that were only deliverance from wrath to come; can thou plead thus? Surely, a
full Reward shall be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings
thou art come to trust, though thou art but a stranger, and thy soul in her own
eyes not like to one of his hand-maindens. Ruth 2.10, 12, 13. to allude
thereunto.

But it may be thou art pretty well satisfied concerning the freeness and
forwardness of Christ to help thee; Case 4. Jealousy concerning God the Father.
He has done and suffered enough in all conscience to convince thee: and thou
have very soft and sweet thou hts of him, but terrible ones concerning the
Father, thou look upon him as an Angry God, an incensed Judge, and enraged
enemy, with his Hand always up and ready to strike, but that Christ steps in
and wards the blow; Vld. Dr. Goodwin, Encouragements to Faith, p. 7. etc.
or at least thou suspectest him to be no such hearty friend to thee as Christ
is: that the whole Treaty of Peace tendered to thee by him through his Son is
but an Ambushment laid to catch thee, and to conclude thee under the greater
condemnation, because the Father stands much out of play, and thou know not
what to think of him; is this thy sad case now and then upon misgivings and
tremblings of thy heart about the great business of Eternity? Go order thy
cause before him and fill thy mouth with Arguments.

First, Ask him if that sweet Son of his (whom the World once was so happy as
to see, though so unhappy as not to know him) if he be not just such another
for all the world as himself; See Dr. Iakson 11. book, chap. 28. page 3372.
etc. He that cannot look upon the Sun In Its strength at Noon day, may take the
model of It in the water, or In the moon at full: so we that cannot behold the
glory of Divine Majesty in the Godhead, or in God the Father only, may safely
behold the map or Model of his Incomprehensible goodness in the man Christ
Jesus.
the brightness of his Glory and the express Image of his person, Heb. 1.3.

And sure Christ the sinners friend (as some sinners censured him) was affable
enough, kind enough, compassionate enough, showed love enough to poor sinners,
in his carriage and Conversation: in his abasements and condescentions, in his
Life, in his Death; if not, where and who is he that will come and show more:
Why but says Christ, my Father is Just such another as I am to an hairs
breadth: his heart as full of love and tenderness as mine every whit: know one,
know both, John 10.30. I and my Father are one: and John 12.44.45. Jesus cried
and said, He that believes on me, believes not on me but on him that sent me;
and he that sees me, sees him that sent me; and John 14.9. Jesus says unto
him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not known me Philip?
he that has seen me has seen the Father, and how say thou then, show us
the Father? and I came out of his bosom on purpose to declare him, (...)
Exposuit, Bex.
John 1.18. to be his Exegesis, (that is the word) to expound him as a clear
Comment tells us what is in a dark text; and if this be confirmed to thee by the
Father, if he will own it, (as certainly he will) thou art well enough; but
thou may go further and ask him.

Secondly, If he had not the first hand in the whole Design of Love and Life to
poor sinners, (for there is a priority of Order, and origination, though not of
time) And to believe this, there are grounds sufficient to induce thee: for

First, Isa. 40.14. Heb. 6.17. Ephesians. 1.11. Isa. 25.1. and 01 46 Prove. 19.21.
Was it not He who first summoned that great Council held by all the Persons in
Elohim! when neither man nor Angel existed, nor had been worthy to have been
admitted there, if they had then existed; there he sat in consultation with his
Wisdom and Love, his Word and Spirit, de arduis regni, de arcanis imperii; and
especially about man's Salvation, and can that blessed womb miscarry with any of
its conceptions? Surely no,

Secondly, Was it not He who first pitched upon the Son, and laid him as the
foundation to the whole Fabric; one able to bear up the weight of all the
work; 1 Pet. 1.20. Isa. 28.16. Ioh. 10.36.
though thy Load alone be enough to crack the Axeltree of Heaven and earth: to
break the back of the whole Creation, to bear down any other foundation before
it into Hell: Psalm. 89.19. Isa. 63.1.
yet here is help laid upon one that is mighty, mighty to save? And if the
Angels shouted for Joy to see the cornerstone of the earth laid, Job 38.7.
shall not the Saints with delight see the corner stone of their Salvation laid
by the hand of the Father? and ask of this be nothing unto thee; if thou art to
have no place in this building? however bless him for laying such a foundation.

Thirdly, Was it not He who then took particular cognizance of things and
persons, which is called in Scripture Gods foreknowledge, Romans 8. 29. and
11.1.2. etc. Enough to overwhelm a poor sinner when he comes to get an inkling
of it, that he was then minded; what, me Lord? Did thou then think of me? and
do thou open thine eyes upon such an one, Job. 14.3.

Fourthyly, Was it not He who then picked and chose out of Angels and men, The
Messiah and the Righteous are amongst those seven things; which the Jews say,
were before this world was created: that is, as Mercer expounds them, quae in
mente divina essent ab^aetern^, Merc. on Vent. 1.
whom he would have confirmed amongst the Angels, called called therefore the
Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. and though they were never out of favor, yet they
are said to be reconciled, Col. 1.20. confirmation being that to them, which
Reconciliation is to us; and they had it by renouncing their standing upon
their own single bottom, and running under the wing of Christ; accepting and
owning him as their Head, Col. 2.10. God would not keep an Angel in Heaven,
that would not be beholding to his Son for it: And amongst men he chose whom he
would have recovered, Romans 9.11. 13. Ask how thou may make thy calling and
election sure; and never turn this Grace into wantonness: for to abuse this
Doctrine is one of the blackest badges and saddest signs of Reprobation, Jude,
v. 4.

Fifthly, Was it not He who ratified his choice by a solemn Decree, called the
Purpose of God according to Election, Romans 9.11. The Mystery of his Will
according to the good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself, Ephesians. 1.9.
the Eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord, Ephesians. 3.11. And
yet there is no unrighteousness with God (which Paul foresaw some would charge
him with.) Romans 9. 14. No cruelty, no Dissimulation, no Tyranny; and if the
Lord has purposed. who shall dissanul its Isa. 14.24. and ver. 27.

Sixthly, Was it not He who called for the Books, and caused all the Resolves
to be entered, Heb. 10.5. even to the very names written in the Lambs Book of
Life, Rev. 13.8. and 21.27. with the Golden Letters of Love, with indellible
Characters in his blood; (we read of no black Book of Death, and therefore I
meddle not with it) but had thou ever any help to read thy name written in
Heaven, this is matter of more joy then if thou coldst cast our Devils, and
work wonders, Luke 10.20. if not yet, all in good time, go to the Father and he
will help thee to spell thy name there by his Spirit of Adoption, who was, and
is, a member of this Council, and well acquainted with all that passed there.

Seventhly, Was it not He who then ordered all other things in a way of
subordination and subserviency to the Sanctification and Salvation of the
Elect; Act. 15.18. and 17.26.
good works then received his Seal, Jer. 33.25.
Ephesians. 2.10. Evil ones (by a just Analogy) a Brand, Job 28.26. and 38.10, etc.
He then drew up the Ordinances of Heaven: Passed a Decree for the Sea, and for
the Rain, and for the opening of the Eyelids of the morning; Psalm 119 91.
to cause the dayspring to know its place, and the Sun his going down. unless
forbidden, as in the days of Joshua. He then appointed natural Agents to act
necessarily; the Sun to shine, the fire to burn, the Sea to run in its course:
yet be set them not a going with such an irresistible swing, but that be can
stop them at his pleasure.

Free Agents to act freely, the will of man to be always free in all its acts,
if not Quoad speeificationem, to do good or evil at his pleasure, yet quoad
exercitium, he need never do evil, unless he pleases: so that he is lest
without excuse.

And all other things were ordered as scaffolds to this building; now who but a
mad man would lay his bed on the scaffold and say, that's accommodation good
enough; and so take up with that, no matter for the building; beg that he would
never leave thee to that mandness, but lead thee to things, spiritual and
eternal, by all externals, and that all things may work together for thy good,
according to this ancient appointment.

We give this reason for it, because the Father was directly offended, by sins
marring his work of Creation, and other reasons are given for the Sons
incatnation, Himmelius Disput. 12. These. 14. P. 130.
Eighthly, Was it not by an Agreement between his Son and him, that he should
sit as Creditor in heaven, and the Son come down to be responsible to Justice?
otherwise there was love enough in his heart, to have let the Son sit. Creditor
in Heaven, and to have come down himself as Debtor and dyed for thee: and
therefore says Christ; though I should not pray for you, the Father himself
loves you, John 16.27. Nay, he loves you so well that he does therefore love
me, because I lay down my life for you, John 10.17. what a strange expression
of love is this?

Ninthly, Did not He draw up all the Sons Articles and Instructions, as

1. That he must begin his work in deepest humiliation and abasement.

2. That he must pawn his Glory to go through-stich with it, which he Redeems,
and Redemands upon his performance, Ioh. 17.4, 5.

3. That he must run the Gauntlop in that nature he would Redeem, and be
content that every one should have a fling at him it is Hillaries allusion,
nature nostra contumelias transcurrit.

4. That his Godhead must be eclipsed and veiled, and he made like unto his
Brethren in their natural necessities, sinless infirmities, live by faith, get
every thing by prayer: not do his own will, but his that sent him, and so
fulfill all Righteousness; and why was he thus conformed unto us, but that we
might be made conformable unto him?

Fifthly, That he must in they days of his flesh orally and personally declare
his Fathers Name and love unto his Brethren: and afterward depute and
substitute some to do it to the end of the world; and so long as his Leiger
Ambassadors reside in any place uncalled home, not sent for away: the Treaty of
Peace holds and continues, and their work is not only to declare Christ, but
the Father also: and this was the sweetest promise that Christ could cheer up
his Disciples with, Ioh. 16.25. The time comes when I shall no more speak unto
you in Proverbs, but I shall show you plainly of the Father: and that's a most
sweet and satisfying object, John 14.8. Lord, show us the Father and it
suffices us.

Sixthly, Act. 2.23. and 4 20.
That he must dye a bloody, painful; shameful accuresed death to pay the debts
of his people, Heb. 9.8.
and then rise again from the dead, and bring up his blood with him into the
Holiest of Holies, and there exercise and execute the office of his everlasting
I riesthood; if he would have his death which was of infinite value in it self
to be of infinite virtue and efficacy unto others; and is not all this
performed exactly, and has he not herein commended his love unto us with a
witness. Romans 58 etc.

Seventhly, That whatever was given him, he must presently give of the same to
his members, Act. 2.33. and 5.31.
to fit them for that glorious fellowship, whereunto they are ordained; what he
receives with one hand, he must give with the other; and we see what David calls
receiving, Psalm 68.18. Paul calls Giving, Ephesians. 4.12. as if these were one and
the same thing with Christ, and thou desire no more of Christ then what the
Father has ordered out by him.

Tenthly, After the Father (whose motion and project this was) had wrought of
the Son to undertake it, Isa. 42.6. and 50.9.
did not he then engage to stand by him and to supply him with all necessaries:
a body to suffer in, Heb. 10.5.
and a spirit to that body without measure, Ioh. 3.34. and 6.37, 44, 5, 17.8.29.
and to bring those into him in time by retail, Ier. 31.3.
whom he had given to him in the Lump, before time was, he does more then
invite (as says Arminius) he does effectually draw by an omnipotent sweetness;
and Christ must not scruple to entertain the most Leprous loathsome sinner whom
the Father is pleased to bring unto him; Ay and the Father must help to keep
them also, whom he has brought in, Ioh. 10.28, 29. (a precious Cordial in
Apostatizing times,) and all this being done according to an ancient complot
and agreement, Socinus cannot from these supplies or dependencies infer the
Sons inferiority to the Father; and the poor believing sinner may press him
with all these engagements.

11. Over and aboye all this, Did he not put forth his paternal Authority, and
lay his Commands upon his Son, to engage in this great service, John 10.18. and
12.9, 20. as Pharaoh to express a Pleonasm of Love, commands Joseph to be kind
to his nearest and dearest Relations; which one would think, little needed,
Genesis 45.19. Go look God in the face, and say as David does, Psalm. 71.3. Thou
have given Commandment to save me; And to to whom? To Man or Angels? No: to me,
says Christ: This Commandment have I received of my Father. If Christ fail,
there is not only breach of Articles, but Disobedience too. Thou can not
believe that Christ loves thee so well, as to lay down his Life for thee: But
can thou believe he loves the Father? tha's easy; there is no doubt of that:
Why (says Christ, when he was going to die) that the world may know how I love
the Father as the Father has given me Commandment, even so do I, John 14.31.

12. Yet again to make all sure, Psa;, 110.1. etc.
least the humane nature of Christ upon its affumption, Phil 2.8. etc.
should shrink at the approach of sufferings: Heb. 12.2.
Does not the Father engage to reward him plentifully, to give him a Royal and
an Everlasting Priesthood, a name above every Name, appoints unto him a
Kingdom, Luke 22.29. and above all, assures him of the Salvation of those he
died for, according to this agreement, Isa. 53. 11. without which nothing could
ever have satisfied him, so that as the assumption of the humane nature is the
highest instance of free mercy; so is the rewarding thereof in its state of
exaltation, the highest instance of remunerative Justice.

All this needed not to engage Christ to the work, so much as to engage us to
believe that the Father was first in willing, as he is in subsisting, the Son
second to him therein; but not in heartiness of good Will, for therein they are
both equal; they must needs be one in Will, who are so in Nature and Being: but
still the Father is first in Love, Joh. 3.16. For God so love the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting Life. and 1 John 4. 9, 10. In this was manifested
the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into
the world, that we might live through him; here in is Love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our
sins; and therefore love is laid at his door by the Apostle, 2 Cor. ult. The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the communion of the
Holy Ghost be with you all. The Grace of christ makes way for our enjoying the
love of God; but we had never known the Grace of Christ, had it not been first
for the love of God, who therefore is called our Savior, 1 Timothy 1.1.

13. And as ifas all this were not enough; Did not the Father seal his Son a
Commission, to give life to lost sinners, John 6.27. and therefore Christ so
often mentions the Father as sending him, and furnishing him with miracles, his
letters Credential where ever he came.

14. Nay more, If suffering for our sakes be a sign of Love (as who can deny or
doubt it) to speak after the manner of men: Had not the Father his share of
sufferings as well as the Son? Was it nothing for him to part with his Son?
such a Son, an only Son, the delight of his heart and eyes, and that not
amongst friends, but enemies? Who would seek and suck his blood in this sense
to spare him, Romans 8.32.
and yet in another not to spare him, Isa. 53.10.
but to bruise him, an take pleasure in so doing? Is all this nothing? Mat. 11.
27, and 28, 18.
He may seem indeed to have an easy part to sit in Heaven and receive satis
faction: but you see it cost him something too, nay more; He denies himself,
and disappears, and gives up the immediate management of all affairs into the
hands of his Son: That part the Son took was sharper but shorter, lasted not
much above three and thirty years, but from the time of Christ's resurrection:
It Is along aevum before that God come again to be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24. and
28. and he in a manner remains hid till the day of Judgment, now Christ is all
in all, Col. 3.12. The Son transacts all by the Spirit, till the last day, and
the Father works now only in and through the Son: Thus you see the Father
veiling and eclipsing his Glory, to make it shine the more hereafter, and in
the mean time his love that shines forth herein gloriously.

15. Has not the Father (as well as Christ) an hand in sending the Holy Ghost,
Ioh. 14.16. and 15.26.
to make a discovery and application of all these things? yea he is called the
Promise of the Father, which Christ had often hinted to his Disciples, as the
best news he could bring them from heaven, Act. 1.4. which (says he) ye have
heard of me.

16. Lastly, Was it not he that wrapped up all this in a glorious Covenant, a
Covenant of Grace, Life and Peace, of which I may say as John of the
Commandment of Love, 1 Ioh. 2.7, 8. It Is both the New and Old Covenant; the
first and last and everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. Sententiam sape mutat
Deus, Concilium nunquam. Greg.
called a Promise, (lest the word Covenant should scare us, and make us think
there is more required of us, by way of restipulation, then we can reach unto,)
Tit. 1.2 1 Ioh. 2.25. Covenants of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12. and while we are
altogether, strangers thereunto we are without Hope. The other Covenant was
contrived and given forth chiefly to make way and welcome for this, and it is
this Covennant the precious things whereof are sealed up unto us in the
Sacraments: This is that secret of the Lord which is with them that fear him,
Psalm. 25.13. to make them know, the Covenant he is ever mindful of it, and
therefore sent Redemption unto his People: He has commanded this Covenant for
ever, Holy and Reverend is his Name, Psalm. 111.5, 9. etc. and it is this will
afford, Deathbed Comfort, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my, house be so not with God,
yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and
sure, for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not
to grow.

Now then though all these things are phrased in the Language of men, yet not
without warrant from the Holy Ghost, who condescends thus to lisp out the
mysteries of Salvation, else we could not understand, or take in any thing of
them; and though they are all but one act in God, as all his Attributes are but
one Divine Excellency and Glory, the Divine Essence it self: but this is too
big to come in all at once into our narrow hearts, therefore God lets out
himself by degrees, by drops and beams as we may bear it; it is so in the
discovery of himself, and it is so in the discovery of his Council, and
operations concerning us in Christ Jesus.

And though the operations ad extra are undivided, but (according to an ancient
agreement between them) the operation is attributed to that person: the manner
of whose subsisting appears most in it, beginning work to the Father, carrying
on to the Son, finishing to the Holy Ghost.

Yea though many disown and dislike these things, yet now go, and put them home
to God: and if he will own them; and bear his witness to them, and seal them
upon thy heart, it will be sufficient for thee, to shame thee for all thy hard
thoughts of him, and to secure thee from the like tormenting menting fears for
time to come, and (I know it) he will work wonders (if thy Spirit be stirred up
to put him to it) rather then be wanting in his witness to so great a Truth as
this, and so shall thou be (as, Job speaks) delivered for ever from thy Judge,
from all frightfull Ideas and Apprehensions of him, as an angry severe Judge
and enabled to walk with him all thy days, as with a most indulgent and tender
hearted Father. But what is all this to me (may a poor soul say, Case 5 Fear of
unbelief.
) though I assent unto it, and think I believe it? if my Faith prove a false
blaze of Fancy, Presumption, vain Hope; and thou have cause to fear and suspect
it, because it has not the virtue and operation of that plant of Paradise, The
Faith of the operation of God, Col. 2.12.
the Faith of Gods Elect: Is this thy case many times? Tit. 1.1.
go, order thy cause before him, and fill thy mouth with Arguments; go, bow thy
knees unto the God and Father of our Lord Jesus:

And 1. Tell him, he knows how thy heart is carried forth toward him, only
according to the terms and tenor of a Covenant of Grace, and not of works,
thou can not by any means away with that, that he should deal and do by thee
as thou do by him; no thou can not find the life of thine hand, as it is
said of some, Isa. 57.10. thine hands are not sufficient for thee, as it is said
of Judah, Deuteronomy. 33.7. And will he trample upon worm that would fain creep
toward him, only in that way which he himself has chalked out, and is so
pleasing to him.

Secondly, He knows that the sole ground of thy confidence is the precious and
plentious Grace of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, which tells thee that
Christ dyed for sinners, enemies, ungodly, impotent ones: and ask him, Romans
5.6, 8.
if he have ever a soul with him in Glory that was not once such an one? Mat.
20.28. and 26.28.
that many are ransomed and pardoned by Christ; Mar. 10.45.
but not how many, Why may not thou be one of those many?

That Salvation is neither of him that wills, nor of him that runs: but of
God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16. even to the prisoners of unbelief, Romans
11.32. these and a thousand such like precious things the Gospel utters.

Ask him now if thou must be ashamed of the Gospel, as thou have been of the
Law, Icr. 2.36, 37.
of thy looking for life by it? and if he will reject this confidence also, so
that thou must not prosper in it.

Thirdly, Ask him if there be not a double reconciliation plainly taught in the
Doctrine of the Gospel? Romans 5.9, 10, 11.
the one actually purchased by the death of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.18. etc.
and acknowledged by God at that time; the other at the conversion of a sinner,
when he lays down his arms and enmities, and the knowledge of the one is the
means to the other: Has God then stirred up all his wrath again, and will not
suffer a poor soul to come near him, who would fain receive the atonement, and
be made friends with him?

Fourthly, Ask him wherefore has this Gospel been brought to thine ears, to
thine heart; but that thou should trust in it, and that perfectly,
((...))even to the end, 1 Pet. 1.13. Did he not call thee to Repentance, and
will he now repent of his Calling, that cannot be for his gifts and calling are
without Repentance, Romans 11.29.

Did he not bid thee come unto him upon those waters of the Sanctuary; And must
thou now sink and perish to allude to that of Peter, Mat. 14.30.

Fifthly, Tell him he knows how fully, how thankfully thy soul submits to that
Righteousness which is revealed of offered in the Gospel: and none perish in
unbelief, but they who are ignorant thereof, or submit not thereunto; Romans
10.3. Phil. 3.8, 9.2 Pet. 1.1.(...)
Once indeed thou were proud of thine own poor polluted Rags, but have now cast
them all away, and said unto them with detestation, get ye hence; and wilt
never gather them together again, but blessest him with all thy heart and soul,
for that better provision made in the Gospel, and would fain appear daily,
continually before him, clothed with that righteousness which Christ came on
purpose to bring into the world, Dan. 9.24.

Sixthly, He knows thy heart closes with Christ for sanctification as well as
Righteousness to justify thy Faith, 1 Cot. 1.30.
as that must justify thy person, it closes with the whole Gospel, with whole
Christ in all his offices; and that there is nothing more desirable to thine
eye, then that holiness which the Gospel requires, promises and promoteth.
How fain would thy soul be his Glass, wherein he might view all his own
Gloties, Virtues, Beauties, Graces by reflection; And will he break this glass
in pieces?

Seventhly and lastly, 1 Pet. 2.9.(...)
Ask him if he will but stand to that one good word, spoken in his name by his
servant Rom 5.20. where sin abounded, Grace did much more abound; this is not
the spawn or spume of thy fancy, nor have thou met with this saying in some
good book, whose Author might be mistaken, but if God will make it good (as
thou think him bound to do, even for the Glory of his Grace, Wisdom and
Truth,) thou can tell where there are superfluities of naughtiness, Iam 1.21.
and he can tell where there are super-aboundings, over-flowings of Grace and
Mercy; and if he will draw up the sluices, thou shall not only honor him by
believing, but be encouraged to look for more then ordinary favors from him,
even because sin has so abounded: And is not this the faith that should come?
or must thou look for another? or if this be it, why then is not thy heart
purified, heart and life sactified by it? Why is it not unto his servant
according to his word? Act. 15.9. and 26.18. Plead and press this hard upon
him, and (my soul for thine) he will not deny thee, he will not say thee nay:
you may take not mine but the Apostle Peter's word for it, that this is the true
Grace of God wherein ye stand, 1 Pet. 5.12.

But there is a damp upon thy Spirit, Case 6. Fear of Hypocrisy.
a great discouragement which takes off thy boldness before him: thou fear
that though thou do (as thou think) believe and rejoice for a season in
the Grace believed, yet it is not likely to last always, thou shall not be able
to hold the rejoicing of thy confidence firm unto the end thou shall prove but
a temporary; a dunghill covered with snow; which will melt away, thou find
so much hypocrisy in whatever thou go about, thou have done much evil
without the mixture of any good, but never any good without the mixture of much
evil, and the hypocrite is justly hated of God and man; the world hates him
because he seems good, and God abhors him because he only seems, and is not
truly such: and this sometimes thou fear will be thy portion, and can not
discover the bottom of thy misery to any flesh living, and this ere long will
put an end to thy pleading; thou fear, that both the Gift, and Grace, and
spirit of Prayer (if ever thou had it) will leave thee, according to that in,
Job 27.8.9, 10. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained,
when God takes away his soul, will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon
him, will he delight himself in the Almighty: will he always call upon God?
Well, go to God in this case however, Go order thy cause before him, and fill
thy mouth with Arguments.

I. Tell him He, and He alone knows whether thou aymest not at entireness of
heart before him, both as to the subject, the whole heart which thou would
have kept even from thine iniquity, Psalm 18.23. Psalm. 119.6. and ver. 140.
and as to the object: all his Commandments thou know not one of them, which
thy spirit balks or boggles at, but the more pure his word is, the more thy
soul loves it.

And also as to the means of Grace, they are all dear and precious to thee, and
thou would be found in the use of all his appointments, bid him name that
thing which he requires, and which thou knowingly and purposely declinest: and
is this the guise or way of an hypocrite? only be sure thy heart reproach thee
not.

Secondly, He knows that is the secret end of thy living, and why thou art
desirous or so much as content to continue in this world, not to share in the
pleasures or profits or honors thereof, (the worlds Trinity which it adores and
serves, 1 John 2.16. These three are the worlds All.
and sacrifices it self unto) but to be receiving or doing some good in thy
station and generation; and can it be thus with an hypocrite?

Thirdly, He knows that thou chusest rather to be sickly or poor, or disgraced,
and to walk close with him, then in health, wealth, or honor to wander from
him, or to lie out at a great distance from communion with him, yea rather to
be following hard after Him, though thou should never enjoy his glorious,
ravishing transporting presence, while thou live, then to swim in abundance
of carnal enjoyments, and to have a heart careless of him, estranged from him:
and is it thus with any hypocrite in the world?

Fourthly, Tell him thou had rather he should know all thy secret sinnings
against him, Mat. 6.6
then that he should not know all thy secret sighings and lamentations after
him, the world has seen and stumbled at many of thy miscarriages, but has not
seen nor recovered by thy secret mournings; but he sees in secret: and
therefore tell him,

Fifthly, It will not be for his honor to reject thee, for all must out: all
thy secret sobbings and pantings and pursuings after him, must be know one day:
and what would Angels and men think to see such a mourner in secret cast off to
all eternity?

Lastly, Appeal unto him, He knows thou have been usually as earnest with him
for Holiness in time of prosperity, as in time of straits and adversity: and is
this the manner of hypocrites? Surely no; Vzziah was marvellously helped till
he was strong; but when he was strong his heart was lifted up to his
destruction: for he transgressed against the Lord his God, 2 Chr. 4, 5. and
14.15. It was not so with Iehosaphat, he sought the Lord God of his Fathers,
and walked in his Commandments, and not after the doings of (backsliding)
Israel, 2 Chronicles. 17.4, 5, 6.
Therefore the Lord stablishied the Kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought
him Presents, and he had riches and honor in abundance; And his heart was
lifted up in the ways of the Lord. Piety procures a settlement, and that
brings off the people to an acknowledgement of their Magistrate; and to a love
unto Him, and that ushers in plenty and abundance, and an honest heart in the
midst of it all, is carried higher and nearer to God, as the waters bear up the
Ark, and lifted it nearer Heaven.

If it be thus with thee, in thy measure, there may be and will be some Leaven
of hypocrisy, which may somewhat four thy performances which yet upon thy
humiliaton shall be pardoned: and thy Judge himself and his Deputy in thine own
bosom will pronounce that thou art no hypocrite.

Peradventure thou may reply, Case 7. Fear of being acted only by fear.
though I may prove no hypocrite, yet I shall prove little better then a slave.
I fear I am awed and acted only by a spirit of fear, Romans 8.15.
and this is far from a Gospel Spirit, 2 Timothy 1.7.
from a spirit of Adoption; they are set as adversaries and Antipodies one
against another: and if there were not a dread of God upon my spirit, if
destruction from God were not a terror unto me, I know not what would become
of me, nor whether Satan and my corruptions would hurry me. Well, yet go and
order thy cause before him, and fill thy mouth with Arguments.

Ask him if He have not observed ordinarily thy spirit to be more melted and
humbled when he has filled thy heart with joy, and thy mouth with Praises,
then by any evil felt or feared, then by the sense or approach of any evil
whatsoever, and is this the frame of a slave, or of a child?

Secondly, Tell him it is true, thou fear him (and so do all the Saints and
Angels in Heaven) but it is with such a fear as enlarges thy heart toward him,
and does not straiten it; Isa. 60.5.
such a fear as is an helper of thy Joy, Psalm 2.11.
not an enemy to it; Acts 9.31.
such a fear as furthers the Comforts of the Holy Ghost; 1 Ioh. 4.18.
such a fear as has no torment in it: and therefore love though perfected
shall never cast it our, and thou did never see good day till this took hold
of thee; do never enjoy good hour when this does not overruled thee. It Is a
bitter thing to thee that ever thou were without it, Ier. 2.19.

Thirdly, Hos. 3.5.
Tell Him it is Him and his goodness that thou fear, Psalm 28.1.
his frown, his absence, his silence, Cant. 1.2.
are now more dreaded by thee then all his Darts and Thunders used to be
formerly; the loss of a smile, of a kiss, a kindness, is that thou most
fear, and this thou take to be a spirit of ingenuity, not of slavery.

Fourthly, He knows thy voice, and can tell whether he hear any of his own
Language from thee or no, how badly and brokenly soever it be pronounced;
though thou chatterest like a Crane, or a Swallow, or mournest like a Dove, as
Hezekiah speaks of himself, Isa. 38.14.

Every creature conveys its sound, its tone and tune to the young ones, and
none of his children are still born; the Spirit unties their tongues, and sets
them a crying Abba Father; and he knows thou do cry sometimes: not coldly
tender him some dead prayers, but cry, and not as a thief at a Bar to a Judge
whom he neither loves nor has any confidence in, but as a poor child when in
distress who daily asks his Fathers blessing.

Fifthly, Desire him that he would feel thee as Isaac did Jacob; Genesis 27, 21.22.
the desire of thy soul is not only to have a smooth voice, but hands also so
far from roughness; that he may for ever own thee as one of the seed of Jacob,
thy heart is against a Covenant of works, but for all the works of the Covenant.

Oh, Case 8. Sense of backflidings.
but the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea the treacherous
dealers have dealt very treacherously; thy Revoltings have been multiplied, and
thy backslidings are many, and how shall He pardon thee for this? In puts God
himself to a pawse, to a stand, to demur upon it, Fer. 5.7. and chap. 3.19. How
shall I put thee among the children? Nay, Chap. 2.29 He seems to put a stop
to all further pleading; Wherefore will ye plead with me, ye all have
transgressed against me, says the Lord: Nay, which is worst of all, the Holy
Spirit of God being hereby grieved; where haft thou now another friend to speak
a good word for thee? when the Father is offended, there is the Son to mediate
for thee: and when Chirst is disobliged, yet there is the Spirit to intercede
for thee, but when the Spirit is vexed and quenched, there is never a fourth
Person in the Trinity to make up the breach to comprimise the difference; who
shall now put words into thy mouth, or fill thy mouth with with Arguments? yet
even in this case try him, if he will not help thee at this dead lift, and
prove an Advocate for thee; for he himself has penned a form of prayer for one
in thy case, Hos 14.1, 2, 3. Go then even to this holy Spirit, and fill thy
mouth with Arguments.

First, Tell him thou have read or heard of his goodness, Psalm. 143.10. and of
his Love, Romans 15.30. Not only that which he begets in the Saints, but that
which he bears to them, all the world has had experience of it, the Church
especially; and thou art not altogether a stranger to it, and have now occasion
further to try it; and hopest to find it, no whit inferior either to that of
the Father in giving his Son, or that of the Son in giving himself for thee;
though He has not been equally loved and honored with then, but woefully
neglected and forgotten.

Secondly, Ask him if it be possible for thee to be in a worse plight then when
he first had to do with thee; and did he then fall to work upon thee when he
might have abhord to foul his fingers with thee, and will he now forsake the
work of his own hands; Psalm. 138.8.

Thirdly, Thou hopest he will dwell in thy dust when death has done its worst
unto thee, and raise than again, according to Romans 8.11. and will he now
forsake thy soul and not raise that again, now that sin and the devil have done
their worst against it; for worse then what has been thou think cannot
befall thee.

Fourthly, Have not the most eminent Saints that ever he dwelt in, had their
backslidings, and finned even against that grace wherein lay their excellency,
were they all restored by him, and shall thou only be abandoned?

Fifthly, Were not all those gracious tenders to backsliders, framed, and
filed, and recorded by him? Fer. 3.22. Return ye backfliding children and I
will heat your backflidings: Behold ive come unto thee, for thou art the Lord
our God, Hosea 14.4. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely,
for mine anger is turned away from him; and in many other places; and beg he
would teach thee experimentally to know what is meant by Gods healing
backslidings.

Sixthly, He knows that nothing in the world ever so wounded thee or went so
near thy heart, as thy tempting and grieving of him has done; and thou art
resolved never to forgive thy self, though he do, no (as sometimes thou
think) not in Heaven.

Seaventhly, He knows that thou art to this day wailing, and wondering, and
waiting, to know wherefore thou were so left unto they self, and that thou art
far from wipeing thy mouth and slighting of it; thou can not but think that
God has some design upon thee therein as he had upon Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
God left him to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart: and
little did thou think when God first turned thy heart unto himself, there had
been that in it which since has broken forth from it, nor was ever any so
deceived in thee as thou have been in thy self, Prove. 28.26.
but art resolved now against that folly of trusting in thine own heart any
more.

Eighthly, Ask him upon what terms he first entered upon thy heart; Was it not
with a Commission there to stay, how ill soever treated or entertained? So
says Christ, it was agreed on, Joh, 14.16. And I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.

Thou would not for a world have him only upon the same account. The first
Adam had him in his state of innocence, concurring merely as a third Person in
the Trinity, but by virtue of a relation to the second; and then he must never
leave thee, he must not only alight but abide also, as upon the head, so upon
the Members, Joh. 1.32, 33.

Ninthly, Say to him, hereby shall thou know that he is God indeed, equal to
the Father and the Son, and that though all the world should conspire against
him to un-God him, yet shall his invincible patience, and insuperable good
will, raise an everlasting pillar of witness in thy bosom, let who will cast
him off, he shall be thy God for ever; Who is a God like unto thee, pardoning
iniquities, Micah 7.18. is equally true of Father, Son, and holy Spirit.

But still thy heart aches and is diquieted, 9th Case. Sense of Corruption.
to think that what is said of a man of great wrath, Prove. 19.19. is also most
true of thee, such an one must needs suffer punishment; for if thou deliver
him, yet thou must do it again, he will ever and anon bring himself into the
briars; and this is thy case, though the sweet Spirit of God be willing to
forgive thee former offenses, and to fetch thee off from thy imbroylments, yet
is he likely to have an heavy hand with thee, considering thy corruptions and
temptations; thou art likely to run upon a new score, to run into new
rebellions, and there will be no end of all his labor; yet in this case go and
order thy cause before God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, and fill thy
mouth with Arguments.

1. Ask Him, Math. 4.23. Mind him how long thou have lain and languished of
this disease. lo these eighteen it may be eight and thirty years, or longer.
Was not this one great end why our nature was taken into personal union with
the divine, that the diseases of the one might be healed by the infinite virtue
an durity and efficacy of the other? did Christ come only to cure the
sicknesses of the body? Romans 6.6.
or were not all these cures the types and representations of those he came to
work upon the souls of sinners? sure such as touch him by faith, shall have
their bloody issues stopped, and all other inward distempers cured: in the
dales of his flesh he went about doing good, and healing all that were
oppressed of the devil, Acts 10.38. and lamentable were our loss by his
removal to Heaven, if from thence his virtue could not reach us; and if he
were now on earth, thou art verily persuaded thou might have help from him;
why not from Heaven?

2. Did He not die that sin might die and be destroyed? he was not only
clothed with our nature, but stripped by the separation of soul and body
(though not of the Godhead from either) that sin and our souls might be
separated: why does sin live, seeing Christ died?

3. Demand even of Justice, if Christ has not fully paid thy ransom? why then
art thou kept in bonds? holden with the cords of thy sin? the worst usage which
the worst of men in this world are threatened with; Prove. 5.22. his own
iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords
of his sins; the vilest dungeon to this, without this, is a pleasant palace, a
delightful garden, as was said by some if the blessed Martyrs of their prisons.

4. Complain that these corruptions do wrong, defile and outrage that nature
which Christ now wears in Heaven, and has exalted far above the brightest
Cherub; for He and his are all of piece, Heb. 2.11. and this is a thousand
shames and pities.

5. If there be any seed of God, any beginning of that everlasting work of
sanctification in thee, thou art not become A member of his body, of his flesh
and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. (for Christ never took any but sanctified upon
him) and how then can he hide himself from his own flesh? he would not have us
do so, Isa. 58.7. how can he endure to see his own flesh so shamefully abused?

He who made a Law a man should not hide himself when he saw his enemies beast
sink down under his burden, the Ass of one who hated him, Exodus 23.5. Does he
take care for Oxen and for Asses? and can he himself forbear to help up the
soul of one that loves him? and will he not help with him? or if thou art
afraid to say thou love him, because thy heart is so little with him, yet to
be sure there is a poor sold down, and will he not help it up? will he not help
it? and that against those oppressors which are as well the enemies of his
praise and glory as of thy peace and safety.

And surely these Cananites are left in the Land, as it was in the figure.

To keep down pride, Deuteronomy. 7.22.

To try whether we will follow the Lord or our lusts, Judge. 2.23.

To reach us war, and to exercise our graces, Judge. 3.1.

To make us to keep more above, upon the mountains, Judge. 1.34

To become tributaries and do our drudgery, 1 King. 10.21. God makes our
corruptions do us some service, which our graces cannot do without them.

But peradventure thou may think with thy self, 10th Case. Fear of affliction.
that through grace (whereunto nothing is impossible) thou may be both
pardoned and purified too in time, but it will cost thee dear first, a world of
afflictions must be expected where there has been such a world of
provocations, and yet remains such a mass of corruption; and these fears of
what may come, take thee off from enjoying what is present: Go with this
complaint to thy Judge, that these fears may be disarmed, and bound over, no
more to molest thee; go fill thy mouth with arguments, for who can say his
mountain is strong he shall never be moved? or who can foretell or foresee
the things that may befall him; 2 Samuel 12. ver 13, 14.
even pardoning mercy it self is no sense against this flail of affliction.
Psalm. 99.8.


1. Tell Him whatever comes, it is thy disire to bear his indignation, because
thou have sinned against him, Severa discipliuae misericordia. Heb. 12.6, 7.
Cato chose rather not to be rewarded when he did well, then not to be punised
when he did amiss. Plut. in viz.
Mich 7.9. and that thy stubborn uncircumcised heart may accept of the
punishment of thine iniquity, because even because thou have despised his
judgments, and carried it as if thy soul had abhorred his statutes, Lev. 26.43.
Nay

2. Tell him that thou had rather be under the schooling of his children,
then the cockering of his castawayes, under the severe mercy of his discipline
(as Augustine speaks of that of the Church) then under the impunity of those
desperate lost creatures whom God has thrown up as a lost case, and will not
be at the cost to bestow another rod upon them, even his correcting rod as well
as his supporting staff shall be a comfort to thee, Psalm. 23.4. no punishment
like impunity.

3. Though it be infinitely more eligible that way to be humbled and reformed
then not at all, yet tell him, if he will be pleased to spare thee, 'twill be
more for his honor to do it in the midst of prosperity, because this is more
difficult and more unusual: Jer. 22.21. I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity,
but thou said I will not hear, this has been thy manner from thy youth, that
thou obeyedst not my voice. Now what a glory will it be to him, to bore thine
ear in the midst of thy prosperity.

4. As this will be more glorious for Him, so more useful to others, the
examples of such a convert is much more conspicuous and illustrious; in
miserable ones it is hard to distinguish between a devastation and a
reformation, between their trouble for sin, and for suffering, in persons not
humbled and yet humble, outwardly happy and yet weaned from the breasts of
sinful pleasures, it is very visible that it is not absence but abstinence; that
they do not make a virtue of necessity, that it is voluntary not extorted; and
besided men are far more forward to imitate the happy then the wretched and
miserable, to write after a fair copy then one all blotted and blurd, soyld and
sullied by the tears and swent of affliction, the examples only of such as are
some way happy or eminent carry compulsion in them, Gal. 2.14.

5. Tell Him however so he will go with thee through fire and water, according
to his gracious promise, Isa. 43. 2. thou art not afraid to venture, thou will
interpret it to be his affection as well as his faithfullness, his magnifying
of thee, his setting his heart upon thee, Job 7.17, 18. His utmost kindness
unto thee, seeing he himself styles it so. Cardan de subt. lib. 67. Mountebanks
make use of this experiment.
Jer. 9.7. Behold I will melt them and try them, for what else small I do, what
more can I do for the daughter of my people? Some affirm, if a knife or needle
be touched with a Loadstone of an iron color, it will cut or enter into a man's
body without any sense of pain at all: it is true of afflictions well touched
with the Loadstone of divine Love. Blessed is the man whom thon chastenest O
Lord, and teach him out of thy Law, that thou may give him rest from the
days of adversity, Psalm. 94.12, 13. This then is a blessed conditon, when
correction and instruction are linked together and thou can not be happy
without it, Job 5.17. Prove. 3.12.
nor have thou been over-eager after deliverance, when in affliction thou have
enjoyed his precious presence.

But it is hard to keep in this mind when it comes to the trial, 11th Case.
Sense of pain.
especially when God puts forth his hand and touches to the quick, when he
touches the bone and the flesh, the (says the devil of Job) he will never
endure that, he will curse thee to thy face, Job 2.5.

In extremity of pain when thy spirit is ready to fail before him, and the soul
which he has made; art apt to say in thine heart, where is all that sweetness
and tenderness thou madst thy boast of? Job 4.6.
where is now thy fear, thy confidence, the uprightness of thy ways and thy
hope? and this may be thy case, how strong, how healthful soever thou have
been hitherto.

Yet even then labor to order thy cause before him, and fill thy mouth with
arguments, and if our hearts reproach us not, if they condemn us not for secret
Atheists and notorious dissemblers, we may have boldness and freedom of speech
in all these cases, 1 John 3.21. and in this case it is a shameful thing for a
professed Christian, to know no other way of complaint or cure then a beast
does, Hos. 7. 14. A beast when in pain will cry, and may be cured by time and
remedies; a Christian indeed has a spiritual way of complaining, which
affords more ease then the natural: In case of pain.
therefore in case of pain,

1. Justify him, Job 11.6.
and tell him thou know that he exacteth of thee less then thine iniquity
deserves; tell him those parts that feel the pain, have deserved infinitely
more then they feel; call to mind those very times and places wherein they
have provoked the eyes of his glory; the wicked devices of thy head, the
wretched desires of thy heart, the pollutions of thy hands, the swiftness of
thy feet to do evil (only take heed of repeating those sins by any cursed
titilation or delight in the remembrance of them,) confess the whole body has
deserved to be laid upon the rack in hell, and never let down to all eternity.
Yet

2. Make bold to mind him how utterly unusefull thou now art unto him, unless
he will fill and furnish thee with strength and patience to glorify him in
suffering, now that he is not pleased to employ thee in doing; and if so,
though thou lie in hell, there shall be never a devil in it to torment thee.

3. Ask him if he can take any pleasure in thy pain? if that be agreeable to
the incomparable sweetness of his only good nature? if that can be suitable to
the bowels and compassions of those relations wherewith he has condescended to
array himself? did ever the harshest parent beat a child (how bad soever) all
the day long, and all the night, or so long together without intermission? thus
Hezekiah reasons from day even to night, will thou make an end of me? I
reckoned till morning (I thought then he would give over,) Psalm. 30.5.
I thought though sorrow may endure for a night, yet joy comes in the morning,
but as a Lion, so will he break all my bones, from day even to night will thou
make an end of me, Isa. 38.12, 13.

Can this severity be consistent with the sweerest relations? and what are the
bowels of all the relations in the world to Gods, but flints and adamants?

Ask him then with this complaint Job, Is it good to thee that thou should
oppress, that thou should despise the work of thine hands? Thine hands have
made me and fashioned me together round about, yet thou do destroy me:
Remember I be seech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou
bring me into dust again? (will thou pound me into powder before my time?) Job
10.3, 8, 9, etc. Or if that could be his pleasure and his pastime (which sure
it is not,) yet ask him if thou art a fit match or mark for him? Am I a sea, or
a whale, that thou set a watch over me? Job 7.12. there is a pride and a
power worthy of his curbing and coping with, Job 40. 18, etc.
some Leviathan or Behemoth, may be a fit subject for him that made him, to
make his sword approach unto, his bones are as strong pieces of brass, his
bones are like bars of iron; Job 6.12.
but mine are not so, Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh of
brass? alas no, he knows the contrary, has he not powered me out as milk and
cruddled me like cheese? which will soon crumble under his fingers, wherefore
then hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy, will thou break a
poor leaf driven to and fro, Job 13.24.
and will thou pursue the dry stubble? for thou writest bitter things against
me, Job 10.10.
and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth; cease from me, and let me
alone, that I may take comfort alittle.

And will he not be entreated? mind him that he himself has told thee, that he
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men, to crush under his
feet all the prisoners of the Earth, Lam. 3.33, 34. not the children of men,
much less then the Children of god, his own Children; and thou hopest thou
do look like one of them, yea, that thou art one of them.

Not the prisoners of the earth, and will he crush either with his foot or his
hand the free born Citizens of Heaven, Gal. 4.26.
those whom the Son has made free, Ioh. 8.36.
and so are free indeed; Zech. 9.12.
and if thou art a prisoner, thou art a prisoner of hope; Isa. 49.9. and 61.1.
thou have sometimes thought, that he has loosed thy bands, and said unto thy
soul, go forth and thou can not yet cast away thy confidence.

Fourthly. Isa. 53.10.
Ask Him, Why did he take peasure in the pains of his dear Son, Jer 9.24.
in crushing and bruising of him as in a wine press; Mic. 7.18.
sure that work in it self was no such pleasing work unto Him, but only as it
made way and gave vent to that which is his pleasure, the exercise of love and
mercy; that was but a medium to this end, and in it self a bitter one to God
Himself, save only as this sweetened it,

Now why did he put him to grief if he received no satisfaction thereby? were
not his head, and heart, and hands, and feet, and sides tormented, that thine
might be spared? surely the sins of all believers were punished and paid for
to the full, in and by their Surety, and are only corrected in themselves,
though therefore thou have cause to bewail and to be amazed at the
naughtiness of that heart which calls for such rods; yet it cannot but be a
chearing to thee that God is not reckoning with thee, as if he meant to fetch
his peny-worths, his compensations to his Justice out of thy smartings.

Lastly, Ask Him if He Himself smart not in thy sufferings? if Christ Himself
do not suffer and bleed afresh? if his compassion do not almost renew and
repeat His Passion, has lost his old wont else; In all the afflictions of His
People He was wont to be afflicted, (even before His Incarnation, when He had
not those Bowels of a Man that now He has,) Isa. 63.9. And though no pain can
have any place in Heaven, yet love in its perfection feels something by way of
Simpathy, not only analogous and proportionable, but infinitely more high and
generous then we can think of.

Though therefore there be a far greater height of love expressed in his
afflicting, then in his cockering and carking, yet beg he would either moderate
or withdraw His hand, considering whereof thou art made, and remembering thou
art but dust, and thou shall either have ease and deliverance, or that which is
far better, Heb. 12.10, 11, 12.2 Cor. 1.17.
an ample participation in his holiness, and a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory.

But may some poor soul say; 12th Case. Desertion, felt, or feared.
'twere well if I might escape with the smartings and sufferings of the outward
man, with the pain of the body which is but the body of pain; the sorrow of the
soul is the soul of sorrow, and either I feel or fear desertion; having found
Him whom my soul loves, Cant. 3 4.
I would feign have held him and not have let him go, I would not let him go
without a blessing, nay, I would have the blessing and keep him too, his
presence being the best of blessings, but woe unto me when he departs from me.

Now though this be the most darksome and dolesome condition that can befall
thee, yet it is neither desperate nor unusual; go therefore even in this case
and order thy cause before him, and fill thy mouth with Arguments.

1. Tell Him, it is but fit indeed that he should assert his own sovereignty, by
coming or going when he pleases; but why should he take a pleasure to be a
hiding God, Isa. 45.15.
where he is a Savior, to be a stranger in his own land, in Immanuels land,
and to be at his own house, as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for
a night, seeing he alone is the hope thereof, and the Savior thereof in the
time of trouble? yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us, and we are called by
thy name, leave us not, thus Jeremiah pleads, chap. 14.8, 9.

2. Make bold to mind his blessed Majesty of those many engagements made by
Himself and Son, never to leave thee nor forsake thee: Show him those
promises, Joh. 14.21. he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will
love him and will manifest my self unto him: and ver. 23. my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him, judge; Lord thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee, Joh. 21.17. Nay, has He not
said, that He will not cast off his People, no not for all that they have done
against Him, Jer. 31.37. and if not for what they have done, what is there else
that they need fear, 1 Samuel 12.20, etc. Fear not, ye have done all this
wickedness, yet turn not aside from following the Lord; for the Lord will not
forsake His People, seeing it bath pleased the Lord to make you His People; He
can neither be inconstant in His Love, nor so mistaken in His Choice as to
repent thereof.

3. Tell the Son of Righteousness, it is true, thou can neither bear His
Shinings, nor Eclipses, but much less these, then those; thou had much
rather choose to be burnt up by his flames and imbraceings, then to be frozne up
and starved in the shadow of his absence and withdrawings, thou had rather
gaze out thine own eyes, then weep them out, Deuteronomy. 34.5. So Moses died at the
mouth of the Lord. Super or Domini mons.
would rather choose to dye with Mases at the mouth of the Lord, have thy soul
sucked out by a kiss (as some say his was) then to pine away from day to day,
through the hidings of his face and withholdings of his favor.

4. Tell Him, If thou had never known Him, thou could have been without
Him, at least without any present sense of sorrow for his absence; but now
having tasted that he is gracious, in his favor is thy life, and his loving
kindness is better then life, Psalm. 30.5. and 63.3.
and thou can not make a shift to be one day without him.

5 Tell Him, If the loss were total and final, 'twere perfect Hell, and the
worst of Hell, the punishment of loss being concluded to be far greater then
that of sense; and if it be but partial and for a time, for a moment (as he
calls it, Isa. 54.7, 8. a small moment, though thou think it an age) yet who
can be content to be in Hell, in an Hell above ground, though but for a moment.

6. Tell Him, He had as good return at first as at last, for as till then thou
art sure to have no rest thy self, so he is likely to have but little; Heaven
is like to Ring out, and thou have a warrant under His own hand, to bear thee
out in such a restless importunity; not only watchmen set upon the Walls of
Jerusalem, are never to hold their peace day nor night, but all ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isaiah 62. 6, 7.

7. Ask him, Why was Christ forsaken by him, but that Christians might never be
so: Christ himself expostulated the case, and put the question upon the Cross,
Math. 27.46
My God my God, why have thou for saken me? and thou hopest those living words
of His dying Son have made so deep an impression that they will never out of
his mind, shall never be forgotten.

Yet may some complain and say, 13th Case. Exercised in friends, relations,
name or estate.
God is pleased indeed to spare me both as to souland body, but yet his hand is
out against me, and lies sore upon me in my relations, friends, name, estate,
which are no mean ingredients, either as to the sweetning or imbittering of my
cup: yet in this case go to him, order thy cause before Him, and fill thy mouth
with Arguments.

1. Does He threaten the removal of some near and dear relations tell Him,
they are pieces of they self; and is he now about to rend the cawle of thine
heart, and has not fitted thee for resignation?

2. He knows that the last corruption mortified in His Children, is
inordinatenesse of affection to relations; when they come to dye themselves,
and are already dead to all things else in the world, yet still the heart
hankers after these, this is next to the soul, as the shift is to the body, and
is last put off: and is it so difficult to dye to relations, when we our selves
are dying, putting off from the shore of this world, and launching into the
deeps of eternity: have we so much a do then to shake hands and bid farewell
to our friends? what is it then when we see them plucked from us, when the life
of all passions and affections is whole and strong in us, scarce deaded at all
to our enemies, to those things we ought to hate, much less to our friends, to
those persons whom we ought to love; beg him to consider and pity thee in this
difficulty.

3. Tell Him, He knows thou tookest them as tokens and pleadges of his love,
and were wont to speak of them in thine heart in the language of Jacob, Genesis
35.5. These are the friends, the children; the comforts, which God has
graciously given His Servant; and thou fear now that he is about to take
them away in anger, and the signification of the stroke is that which disquiets
thee, Dan. 5.5, 6.
(like the handwriting upon the wall) much more then the stroke it self.

4. Tell Him (when they are gone or going) thou art resolved never to recruit
with Creatures; Ask Him if He will be pleased to stand in the breach and to
fill up the gapp Himself, (...)
he says he offers Himself thereunto, Heb. 12.7. courting thee to accept of
His company and supply; and if he will make good his offer, he shall be better
unto thee then ten of those relations, friends, comforts, yea, then ten
thousand such things as He first lent thee or put into thy hand to hold for
him, and now has seen it meet to call for, away from thee.

5. Tell Him, As fro thy Name it is in his keeping, must have a resurrection as
well as thy body, though the one deserve to rot as well as the other; and if
his name were not concerned in it, thou would neither trouble him, nor thy
self about it, 1 Cor. 4.3. with me it is a very small thing to be judged of men.

6. He knows that though thy liquoricenesse after Creatures has cost thee
dear, yet it has been the endeavor of thy soul to live upon Him alone, in
the midst of all other comforts, to make Him thy All, above All, with All, who
shall hereafter be All, without All; and that in the mean time, thou might
live upon him without other things; If it should please him to strip thee of
them, as knowing that there was a worm at the root of those gourds, which
would one day deprive thee of their refreshing shadow, and he knows that
sometimes when friends have failed, though at first thou were amazed, yet upon
recollection thou have rejoiced to find thy self laid at his door alone for
help, and thou have found Him alone All-sufficient for thee, and He has done
that alone which he would not do in consort with second causes.

Lastly, He knows how often thou have offered Him (if He would send thee) to go
after those ancient servants and sufferers for His Name, Heb. 11.37, 38. to
wander about in sheepskin and goat skins, so that leathern outside might be
well lined with divine love; to wander in mountains, so thou might be nearer
to Him, in deserts so He would not desert thee, so He would not be a
wilderness or a land of darkness to thee; in dens and caves of the earth, so
they might be furnished and beautified, gilded and glorified with His
Presence, His precious All-sufficeing Presence;

And he makes but a bad bargin, who takes more of what is lest, and is content
to be put off with less of what is most, which thou will never be (through his
Grace) while thou live.

Yet thou may proceed and say, 14th Case. Disquietment from cross providence.
though he spare the main branches, I am often afraid of lopping by some
particular unexpected providence; a little Center of fear or trouble, soon
darkens the whole circumference of Joy and Pleasure, and on a sudden, many
times the whole Heaven is black with clouds and wind, when at first nothing
appeared but a little cloud. Sicut vola hominis, like a man's hand, which one
would have thought would easily have been blown over (as Athanasius said of the
Arrian Heresy, Nubecula est cito pertransit) but it proves far otherwise, and
who can say at all times as Solomon once did to Hiram, 1 Kin. 5.4. Now the Lord
my God has given me rest on every side, so that there is neither adversary nor
evil occurrent; if not now yet thou know not how soon thou may meet with
many adversaries, many evil occurrents? yet in this case go unto thy God,
order thy cause before Him and fill thy mouth with Arguments.

Ask Him if thy dependence be not on him alone, for direction, for success in
all thine undertakings and concernments: He knows thou have no other friend to
rely on for counsel or assistance, and with him the friendless and fatherlss
use to find mercy: because our faith honors him, Hos. 14.3.
he uses to honor it: Psalm. 62.1, 2, 5, 6.
The King trusts in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most high he shall
not miscarry, Psalm. 21.7. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is
stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee, Isa. 26.3.

Nay he is pleased sometimes to make our faith the rule of his favor, and as it
were to give himself captive into the hands of our faith, to be such unto us as
we would have him to be: Matthew. 8.13. Go thy way (faith Christ to the
Centurion) and according as thou have believed, so be it done unto thee. Beg
him to say so unto thee; he knows for what thou have believed on him.

2. Has it not been thy manner to go to him, and beg him to go along with thee
even in thine ordinary and smallest matters (unless thou have been surprised,
and in these it is that men for the most part miscarry and sometimes stumble
fatally, 1 King. 2.20.23.
as Adonijah did in asking of Abshag, Isa. 39.4, 6.
and Hezekiah in showing his treasures; men are jealous and timorous in great
matters and dare not but carry them to God, but think that small ones are
within their own mastery, they need not trouble him about them, and that ruins
them, but it is not wont to be so with thee.

3. Thou do not use after vows to make enquiry; Jer. 42. 5, 6, 20, 21. ver.
to come to him with all thoughts made up before hand, fully resolved what
course thou will steare, as the Jews did about their journey into Egypt, no,
but in an equilibrious frame of Spirit, he may turn the scale with a touch of
his finger which way he pleases; do thou use to let thy Father choose for
thee, as being unable, unfit to choose for thy self, and can he choose amiss?

4. Ask Him if thou did not cast thy self upon Him, beg mercy and direction
in that very thing which hangs now like a thick cloud over thine head, and
threatens thee with storms and tempests; even Saul is afraid to engage
without first arming himself by Sacrifice and solemn supplication, 1 Samuel
13.12. but the soul takes it ill to miscarry when it has done so: not forceing
it self, (as Saul did,) but acting in a spirit of ingenuity, it then
expostulates with the Lord, as the Shunamite with the Prophet, 2 King. 4.28.
Did I desire a Son of my Lord? did I not say do not deceive me?

5. Did not thou think at first that the thing was from the Lord, and that he
gave thee encouragement therein as Jacob pleads with him in this very case,
Genesis 32.9, 12. Thou said unto me return and I will deal well with thee, thou
said thou would do me good, and will thou now suffer my brother to come to
smite me (as I fear he will do) and the Mother with the Children?

Nay, did thou not begin to rejoice in that providence, in that relation, in
that business as dropped from a Father's hand? Ask Him if he must now be ashamed
of thy hopes, and repent of thy rejoycings and the good thoughts thou had
conceived of Him? shall thou find a stone instead of bread, and instead of a
fish a Serpent? No, one who knows him better then so, has assured thee of the
contrary, Luke 11.10, 11, etc. and therefore at the worst it shall but prove an
advantageous affliction to thee, it can never prove a curse.

But what will it avail me (may some sad soul say) that no rod touches me in
any of my outward concernments, 15th Case. Dread of spiritual judgments.
if in the mean time I lie under the lash of spiritual judgments, much
blindness of mind, hardness of heart, deadness, coldness, distractions,
insensiblenesse of spirit in holy duties, under Heavenly Ordinances,
barrenness, unprofitablenesse, unsuitablenesse to all the cost and care and
pains that God bestows upon me. This is a case indeed wherein thou have need to
bestir thy self, to order thy cause before Him and to fill thy mouth with
Arguments. Go tell Him,

1. That of all judgments he knows that spiritual ones are the most dreadful
though least sensible, these though judgments from Him are sins in us, and sin
is the worst of evils, nay, the only evil; These lay load upon the soul, the
most noble and precious part, no matter if the carcass, the cabinet were
defaced so the Jewel were preserved.

These are arguments of the highest indignation, 2 These. 2.12.
the saddest symptoms, the most fearful earnest of damnation.

These do evidence that there is no union with Christ, Romans 7.4.
the end whereof is fruitfulness, no skreen betwixt the soul and wrath, for the
earth which (though it drinks in the rain that comes often upon it) which
bears thorns and briars is rejected and is nigh unto cursing, Ezekiel. 15.6.
whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6.7, 8. They who are not for fruit must be for
fuel, if not for bearing for burning.

Plead therefore as for life, that (unless he meant to damn thee eternally,) he
would make all his Ordinances helpful, sweet, succesfull, precious and
profitable unto thee.

2. Ask Him who poured the oil of consecration upon their heads, whose
appointments are they? whose Image and superscription do they bear? and urge,
that it is not for his honor that they should prove ineffectuall, that thou
should go and come from the place of the holy and yet remain unholy; Eccles.
8.10.
that thou shoudst weary thy self with lugging at dry breasts, which has
occasioned so many in our days, (through their proud impatiency) to lift up
their heels against them; No: let unesefullness be found written upon all
Antichrists inventions, not upon any of Christ's institutions.

3. Mind Him, Gassendus in vitapeirest. page 72.
that in the visible Creation, all light is a kind of flame, though very thin
and exceeding subtle; it is undeniably true of the light of the Sun, 1 These.
5.5.
which being contracted and thickened in a glass, is wont to burn; now why is it
not so in the new Creation? art thou not a child of the day? is not the Sun of
righteousness risen upon thee? why is there not heat proportionable to all the
light that thou enjoyest? why should thy hardness of heart be increased
thereby, rather then abated? as the earth is in a frosty night, though the Moon
then walks about it in all her brightness.

4. Make bold to mind Him, that such is the energy and efficacy of his Law of
nature, that all spirits do move and stir in their appointed seasons; wine in
the vessel is wont to work when the vine trees flourish; Id. ibid. page. 86, 87.
the characters of some fruits imprited on children, at the time when the same
fruits are in season, are of a more lively red then at other times, and in some
persons do rise, and swell, and grow big like the fruit it self, Mulberries or
the like; yea the stains thereof in linen, are said at that time to come
forth, and not before: Gaffarel. our. page 144.
the cause is (besides the power of resemblance) the disposition of the air at
that season, which by the power of Gods appointment, is fitly inclined to raise
up the like spirits wherever they are.

And has he not made a powerful Laws in matters of the invisible creation as
of the visible? are there no spirits in his spiritual appointments? no Law to
make our spirits move and stir in those seasons of love and grace? Why do the
wonders of nature remain, when those of grace seems to cease? yea we our selves
find our spirits move and stir with a wonderful titilation and delight, at
our near approach to some dear relations; why should not our souls feel the
same, when we draw nigh to our best friends? our dearest Father, sweetest
Savior, only comforter? David felt it so, Psalm. 122.1, 2. I was glad when they
said unto me, let us go into the house of the Lord, our feet shall stand within
thy gates O Jerusalem.

5. Mind him that it is one of his Crown-Jewels, his peculiar prerogative, to
teach his people so as to profit, Isa. 38.17. Cathedram habet in caelis qui
corda docet; He who speaks to the heart speaks from Heaven, Luke 16.31.
has his pulpit there, one from the dead cannot do it, an Angel from Heaven
cannot do it, Rev. 3.7. (...) if he be not opening) though he do nothing to
shut) no man can open.

But if he will be the teacher, it matters not what the scholar be; he has no
felllow at it, who teaches like him? faith Elihu, Job 36.22.

6. Mind him of his promise, not only that he will teach, but passively that
his people shall be taught, Joh. 6.45. especially the humble; and it may be
thou can say upon thine own observation, I never was proud of any thing,
never boasted of any good expected, but I mist it, of any good enjoyed, but I
lost it; God will not suffer thee to be proud upon any terms, he will rather
have thee humbled by thy sins, then proud of thy grace; and seeing he has laid
thee and keeps thee so low, will he not teach thee?

7. Mind him of his practice all along from the creation to this day; which of
all his Saints could not say as well as David, Thou O God have taught me from
my youth up until now, Psalm. 71. 17. Nay he teaches the husbandman, Isa.
28.26. For his God does instruct him to discretion, and does teach him: now put
him to it and say, Lord, art thou the plowmans God? and do thou teach him?
and will thou not be my God to teach and to instruct me? to make me wise to
salvation? for this also (if any thing) must come from him who is wonderful in
counsels and excellent in working.

8. His goodness puts another argument into thy mouth; Psalm. 119.68. Thou art
good and do good (and if ever thou would do me a good turn) O teach me thy
statutes.

9. Appeal unto him if it be not thy practice (as knowing the unfitness and
unsuitableness of thine heart to any holy service) to cast it into his hand and
thence to expect it (when the duty calls for it) of another tincture, put in
kelter, Prove. 16.1.
and fitted thereby for spiritual motion?

10. He knows it is the devil, and his agents and factors thy corruptions,
which do distract and disturb thee, and would any parent endure that his slave
should abuse his child before his face, when he is upon his knee for a
blessing, or comes to receive his commands? Ask him how he can endure to see
his execrable slave insult over thee before his face? and does not rate away
that curre, and pluck him off, and fling him down to hell from whence he came?
why will he not do it? It is the reproach of Senacheribs Idol, that they who
came out of his bowels slew him there, 2 Chronicles. 32.21. in the house of his God,
under his Idols nose, in the very act of worshipping, 2 King. 19.37. and he
could not protect him: Tell the Lord thy God, the only true God, the living
God, it will not be for his honor that thou should be continually bafled and
abused by Satan, and those that come forth out of thine ownbowels, when thou
set thy self to worship him, he looking on, who alone is able to rescue and
relieve thee, whose glory the devil strikes at herein, as well as at thy peace
ad safety.

11. Tell Him, if he will allow thee nothing at present, but the comfort of
obedience to sweeten thy attendance upon him, yet that shall not discourage
thee, that shall not rid him of a customer; his work on earth as well as in
Heaven, is both work and wages; not only for, but in keeping his Commandments
there is great reward, Psalm. 19.11. It is joy to the just to do judgment, Prove.
21.15. and through grace it is so in some measure to thy poor soul.

12. Lastly, When at any time thou art afraid to go away from an Ordinance
utterly unregarded, from a Sermon, from a Sacrament, from off praying ground,
and no notice taken of thee: say secretly in thy heart, Lord I am here; thy
poor client whom thou know so well, lo here am I; not one word? not one
look? not one touch this day in this duty?

Say with her in Judge. 1.15. Give me a blessing, for thou have given me a South
land, a dry land, give me also springs of water, place=marg" Isa. 63.1.
and thy Father will be as liberal as hers was, Isa. 32.2.
he will give thee the upper springs and the nether springs; it is well he
finds thee there, though thou do not yet find him, thou shall in conclusion
be no loser by it.

But all these pleadings (may some doubting soul say, 16th Case. Fear that
prayer is not beard.
) for ought I know may prove in vain, for I have thoughts and oppressing fears
sometimes, that a God so high, holy, and happy, is not at all concerned, minds
not the addresses of a worm so woeful, so sinful, so full of distresses and
distractions, no more then a man minds the movings or murmurings of flies or
bees, which moves swiftest or hums sweetest, for we are infinitely less to Him
then they are compared with us; and sometimes I find no answer at all, or so
strange and contrary, that my fears are strengthened and confirmed.

Now though this temptation cannot prevail far upon thee(at least not
finally,) if thou art a constant pleader with God, yet it is neefull when it
does but show it self to go and order thy cause before him, and fill thy mouth
with Arguments against it.

1 Call to mind how god Himself has affirmed the contrary, and tell him thou
dare not question the truth of his engagements, Psalm. 138.6. Though the Lord
be high yet has he regard unto the lowly, he does not at all forget himself
when he remembers thee; Nay, he sets forth himself in all his Sublimity and
Glory, when he professes the greatest kindness and condescension to those who
judge themselves least capable of it, Isa. 57.15. Thus says the high and lofty
one that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dewll in the high and holy
place, here is enough to make all the Creatures that should hear it exceedingly
to fear and quake (as it is said of Moses, Heb. 12. 21.) and yet what follows?
what a soft still voice after all this thunder? I dwell also with him that is
of a broken and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones, so that he who is brought below the condition
of a Creature broken and crumbled to nothing, may yet be a companion for this
high and holy One: so in Isa. 66.2. though Heaven be my Throne, and the Earth
my Footstool; yet to this man will I look that is poor and of a contrite
spirit, and that trembles at my word: Ask him now, whether this be the
presumption, the device of any Creature, or his own discovery which he has
made of himself, and tell him with an holy plainness and boldness, that he has
now ensnared himself (if thou may with reverence say so) with the words of
his mouth, he cannot go back, and thou have no reason to think he has any
inclination so to do; Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble, Psalm.
10.17. Ay and he will regard the prayer of the destitute and not despise their
prayer, Psalm. 102.17.

2. Tell Him it is true the distance is vast, and wide, and infinite, far above
that betwixt thee and the silliest fly, which thou can fillip to death at thy
pleasure, yet he has given thee a capacity of Communion with Him, which those
insectae have not with us; and thou do often observe, that a parent is more
taken with his little ones lisping and offering at words, then with all fluent
Ortor in the words, then with all the Rhetorique of the most florid and fluent
Orator in the world, Psalm. 103.13.
and like as a Father has bowels of tenderness toward his Children, so, yea
infinitely more then so, has the Lord toward them that fear Him; plead then
with Nehemiah, chap. 1.11. O Lord I beseech thee let now thine ear be
attentive to the prayer of thy Servant, and to the prayer of thy Servants, who
desire to fear thy name.

3. Tell Him thy conscience, thine own Books as weel as his, (the Scripture)
assures thee, he takes notice every time thou sinnest against him, why not
every time thou prayest and sighest after him, Psalm. 139.5, first verses, O
Lord thou have searched me and known me, etc. Hear what a great writer
affirms, Dr Jackson 11.
Christ even as man with his humane eyes sees all the wrongs we do or suffer,
Book p. 33.23.
hears all our prayers with his ears, records all our doings; because the
hottest fire on earth cannot impart its heat to bodies ten miles distant,
cannot the Sun to bodies more then ten hundred thousand miles didstant? Christ's
glorified humane nature, having personal union with the Son of God, may not be
measured or bounded by other men's faculties or perfections, The Man Christ
Jesus is Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. and shall be Judge, Act. 17.31. And if the man
Christ Jesus hear thee, will he not answer graciously? if he were on earth thou
would expect it.

4. Tell Him, that most men are quick of hearing, when any thing is said that
pleases them and ask him whether he be more forward to mind what is most
contrary then what is most agreeable to him? that which gives occassion to
execute vengeance, his strange act, Isa. 28.21. or to exercise mercy, his
delight and pleasure, Mic. 7.18. he professes to listen and hearken after the
language of repentance, Jer. 8.6. after holy conference, Mal. 3.16. The Lord
harkened and heard it, and thou have no reason in the the world to doubt it, 1 John 5.14, 15. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask
any thing according to his will 0 he hears us, and if we know that he hear
us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of
him, Isa. 59.1. Behold the Lords Hands is not shortened that it cannot save,
neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear; but there is a great objection ver.
2. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have
hid his face from you, that he will not hear. Well yet,

5. Tell Him, thou must not only go contrary to thy conscience but to thy
experience also to suspect him: for thou can not but acknowledge that many a
time thy prayers have been nearer unto him I King. 8.59. (as Lettes are stuck
in the window which we intend to answer) many a time has he been nigh unto
thee in all the things thou have called on him for, Deuteronomy. 4.7. never had thou
more sensible answers from a man then thou had from thy God; thou can point
to many a mercy as she did to her child, I Sam. 1.27. and say, for this mercy
I prayed and the Lord has given me my petition which I asked of him, many a
time have thou had that great privilege to be one of those that are near unto
him, Psalm. 148.14. and this nearness to God in prayer when thou have come to
thank him for mercies, it has renewed their sweetness, it has exceeded it,
when to beg mercies spiritual, it has been a pledge of them, a part of them?
temporal, it has been an evidence of a grant of them, or of what is as good,
yea, it self has been better; This experience thou have had of nearness to
God in Prayer, and it is not the sincommitting, but the sin-regarding sinner
whose prayer the Lord will not hear; but verily God had heard me, he has
attended to the voice of my prayer, and therefore I hope I am not such an one
in his account and estimation, Psalm. 66.18, 19. it may be thou can say, in
the day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in
my soul, Psalm. 138. 3. and that is the best experience of answer to prayer, and
therefore thou can not call his hearing in question, unless thou would
say with this complaynant (in the worst sense that can be put upon these words)
Joh 9.16. If I had called and he had answered, yet would I not believe that he
had answered to my voice, it looks indeed like the language of a most obstinate
and invincible unbelief; as when a man will not believe his petition granted,
though he see it granted, but it is rather the language of submission and
self-denial, though I speed never so well in my pleading, in my prayers, yet I
will never believe that it is for any worthiness in me or them, no it is not to
my voice, but to the voice of a good Friend of mine, my Mediator that God
hearkens, See Mr Carill upon the place.
and for his sake it is that he so graciously answers; wait therefore patiently
for the Lord, and he will incline unto thee and hear thy cry, Psalm. 40.1. He
never yet prepared any heart to pray, but he also caused his ear to hear,
Psalm. 10.17.

Yet may the believing sinner find cause of complaining and say, 17th Case Fear
that God cannot delight in such a sinner.
things may and do run smooth, and God is many ways kind unto me, yet it can
take no place in my heart, that ever he can take any special delight in one
that has been so stained, so corrupt; Sure Christ Himself after such
pollutions, provocations, prevarications, abuse of so much light and love, will
never look nor speak so kindly as formerly, or as he would have done, had it
not been for these dis-servies and dis-obligements which I have put upon him,
yet try him and order thy cause before him: Go fill thy mouth with Arguments,
in all humility.

1. Ask the Lord Jesus if it be not his work to reconcile, and is the
reconciler himself so hard to be reconcileds is the wrath of a Lamb so
terrible? indeed when the great day of his wrath is come it will be so, Rev.
6.16, 15.
and who then shall be able to abide it? but this is not thy case yet? mind
him, that the wisdom which is from above is gentle and easy to be entreated,
Jam. 3.17. and shall thou not find the essential wisdom of the Father to be
so? is it so where there is but a drop, and not so where there is the whole
Ocean? it is the sickly child that most need of being dandled upon the knee,
Isa. 66.12. The heart of Christ is as fit a receptacle for our sorrows of all
sorts, as the eye is of colors, (as one says) and is it shut up in endless
displeasure against thee only, can any dregs of wrath settle there, unless
toward the vessels of wrath? but Zeph. 3.17. The Lord thy God in the midst of
thee is mighty: he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy: he will rest
in his love, he will joy over thee with singing. And what more can be said to
assure thee of his delighting in the thee.

2. Does not the sweet savor of Christ's sacrifice, the odor of his
intercession, so diffuse it self and fill Heaven, Lev. 16.13. Ephesians. 5. ^.
that the stench of thy sins cannot enter? surely were it not for that perfume,
God could never endure the stinking dunghill of this world so near him, to be
as a smoke in his nostrils all the day.

3. Plead what Christ himself puts into thy mouth, Matthew. 18.13. that the owner
of the flock, looks with more joy, and pleasure, and delight, upon a poor stray
sheep that is recovered, then upon the whole flock that never ran that hazard;
Isa. 40.11.
and has not Christ a long time had thee in his arms, Luke 15.5.
in his bosom, upon his shoulder, to bring thee back to his fold and favor?
It Is a recovering Church and people which Christ is so taken with, and terms
alone for delights, Cant. 7.6. one that had been forsaken and desolate whom the
Lord is said to delight in, Isa. 62.4. Thou shall no more be termed forsaken
and desolate, but thou shall be called Hephzibah, for the Lord delights in
thee; It Is to a reforming people, that the Lord engages, that all Nations
shall call them blessed, for ye shall be a delightsome land says the Lord,
Mal. 3.12. And is not reformation that which thy soul labors and longs
after.

It Is a repaired a re-edified Temple, that the Lord promises to take pleasure
in, Hag. 1.8. And is not this the work which his Spirit is about in thee, to
raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen down.

It Is certain he takes no pleasure in the death of him that dies, surely then
he takes pleasure in the life of him, who through his abundant rich grace in
Christ Jesus recovereth, Ezekiel. 33.10, 11. Therefore O thou Son of Man, speak
unto the house of Israel, Thus ye spoke, saying, If our transgressions and our
sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live? Say unto
them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn ye, Turn ye from
your evil ways, for why will ye dye O house of Israel.

4. Ask whether thou art looked on as in thy self, or as in Christ, 2. Cor.
5.17.
in thy surety, thy second self, thy head, thy husband? and a fair face gives
the denomination of beautiful to the whole person and so makes it a
delightsome Object: Ezekiel. 16.14.
It Is only his comeliness put upon thee must make thee lovely.

5. Ask whether he look on thee as in thy present state and station, or as he
shall see thee, (after a little while) to all eternity? for to him who sits in
that hight Tower of Eternity, there is nothing past nor to come, but all things
are alike in one perpetual now, present before him; now within a while Christ
will present to Himself (that he may take a full view of her,) and then to His
Father, a glorius Church not having spot or wrinkle, nor any such thing, but
holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. and if now he view thee in that eternal
glass, Cant. 4.7.
he may well say, thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.

6. A Supper, a feast is for delight and cheerfulness, and even till Supper
time does Christ wait to be gracious, till the shadows of the evening be
stretched out, till his head be wet with the dew, and his locks with the drops
of night, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear
my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will suppe with him,
and he with me. Now would thou not fain have such a guest who always brings
his cost with him? who is both guest and entertainment? Does not thy soul cry
out to him, Genesis 24.31.
Come in thou blessed of the Lord, wherefore stand thou without? Yea, if
thou can not get open the door, art thou not unfeignedly desirous that he
who has the key of David would open it? nay, rather then fail break it open,
that so the King of Glory might come in and Supp with him.

7. Tell Him, it is infinite mercy that now and then thou feel his quickening,
though thou should never enjoy his comforting, his ravishing presence any
more while thou live in the world; Nay, there is always some comfort in the
sense of his quickening presence; Nay, he knows the posture of thy soul to be
in some measure the same with that of David's, 2 Samuel 15.26. If he thus say, I
have no delight in thee, (though that word break thy heart,) yet here am I
absolutely at his dispose, he can do me no wrong, let him do with me as seems
good unto him. God must be weary of delighting in himself, Son and Spirit, when
he delights not in this frame, which is the work thereof; If the Heaven above
were brass, sure the earth below would be iron, if there were no yieldings in
his heart toward thee, sure there would be none in thy heart toward him, thou
could never delight thy self in the Almighty, if he took no delight in thee;
they draw back unto perdition in whom his soul takes no pleasure, Heb. 10.38,
39. my soul says, he loathed them, and their soul abhorred me, Zech. 11.8.

And yet a generous a noble minded Christian may be ready to say; 18th Case.
Fear of unserviceableness!
all this cannot, ought not, fully to satisfy me, though the Lord admit me to
much sweet secret communion with him, (for which I can never be sufficiently
thankful) yet if he will not honor me so as to use me, and make me some way
serviceable in my generation, this is for a lamentation and ought to be so unto
me; and this is that I fear, that I shall prove but a dry tree, an empty vine,
bring forth no fruit, do no good, neither find God working with me, nor be
admitted to work with God, as it is said of Jonathan, there shall not one hair
of his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought with God this day, 1 Samuel
14.4. so does every good Warrior, every good Magistrate, and that's his
greatest comfort, glory, and safety, that he works with God, and God with them.

So Paul speaks of himself and his fellow laborers in the Ministry; we then as
workers together with him, 2 Cor. 6.1. But I fear I must never have the honor
of that Title whatever my calling or capacity be, for it was not only his way
in the Old Testament, in the old Temple, but it is threatened in that
Gospell-vision, Ezekiel. 44.10, 11, 12, etc. That they who have strayed far from
him in times of temptation and epidemicall apostasy, shall bear their iniquity,
their shame, and their abominations, that is, some sad reward and remembrancer
thereof) and though admitted to the enjoyment of many precious privileges, yet
must be banished from the nearest approaches, and highest services, it is
expressed in the strain and style of the Old Testament; but is intended and
calculated for the Meridian of the new, and reaches not only Ministers but all
Professors, all those who are now the royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. Rev.
1.5. and even amongst good people, where is the man that is able to bear,
being laid aside and cast off at the end of the stage, and to see fresh
instruments chosen? See a sad instance. 2 Cor. 25.10.13. ver.
what is it else imbitters so many spirits? and how should thou be able to
bear such a trial, either to fall from thy standing, or do no good though
continued in it, which of the two is the worst by far: if ever this be thy
case, go order thy cause before him and fill thy mouth with Arguments. Though
guilty of many strayings from him.

1. Tell Him, thou perceivest it is not his will to destroy thee; if the Lord
were pleased to kill thee, Judge. 13.23.
he would not have accepted an offering at thine hand, neither would he have
showed thee all these things, which he locks up from so many thousands, and yet
has acquainted thee with them; thou can look him in the face, and say with
the Prophet, Hab. 1.12. Art not thou from everlasting O Lord my God, mine holy
one, I shall not die: Thou art the King eternal, and swayed not by
time-accidents, but by eternal conside-rations, thou changest not, and
therefore I am not, I shall not be consumed. Mal. 3.6.
Now then

2. Plead upon this ground and tell him, it is not so much for his honor only
to keep thee alive and make no use of thee; to preserve thy soul, only as salt
to preserve the body, but do no service; and if thou had help to do all that
is commanded or can be expected of thee in thy place, is not thy soul prepared
to say, thou art but an unprofitable servant, Luke 17.10. and never open thy
mouth more by way of boasting.

3. Mind him, that through his grace some sad sinners have proved most shining
Saints, as in Scripture the children of women long barren have proved most
eminent instruments in Church and Commonwealth, of Sarah, Isaac; of Rachel,
Joseph; of Hannah, Samuel; of Manoahs wife Sampson; of Elizabeth, John the
Baptist; so amongst sinners, some that came in late into the vineyard, have
plied their hands, and labored more abundantly then they who were admitted
before them: Ahimaaz out-runs Cushi (though he set out after him) and comes to
David before him 1 Cor. 15.9, 10.
and if ever soul had need to redeem the time, and fetch up what has been
lost, thou much more; and it will be to the praise of the glory of his grace if
he will help thee so to do.

4. He knows that thou art now in a way of purgation and purification, and
therefore it will be no dishonor, to him, now to use and employ thee; nay he
has published it by the pen of his Apostle, that if a man purge himself from
these (from the pollutions wherewith he has been defiled) he shall be a vessel
unto honor, sanctified and made meet for the masters use, and prepared unto
every good work, (and thou ask no more,) 2 Timothy 2.21. They who will not be
reduced and made better, are often against their wills reduced and made lower,
if not utterly cashiered and dismissed from further service, but he that can
plead the former may escape the later, as having now (through grace) prevented
the Lord, and saved him a labor.

5. Ask him, if he did not call thee and lead thee to thy present station, and
will he now leave thee, to wither like a bulrush in the mire, and to vanish
away in utter unserviceableness? Who in a way of God can take unto himself the
honor of Magistracy or Ministry, or any other way of usefullness, but he that
is called of God thereunto, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. and yet thou desire to be
prepared to justify him, though he proceed with thee as with Eli's house, 1 Samuel 2.30. Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed that thy
house, and the house of thy fathers should walk before me: but now the Lord
says, be it far from me; for them that honor me I will honor, and they
that despise me shall be lightly esteemed; and thou have been too too often
guilty of despising him.

6. Ask if he remember not how thou did often beg him never to trust thee
with advantages, with opportunities; unless withal he would give thee an heart
to be faithful and fruitful in the improvement of them? Have thou not prayed
(upon these terms) even against power and riches? lest thou should be full
and deny him, and say, Prove. 30.8, 8.
who is the Lord? have thou not been in this regard more afraid of riches,
honor, greatness, then their contraries? yea sometimes more afraid to live,
then to die; fearing lest thou should not live unto him and to his service?
loath therefore have thou been to launch into the world again, after thou have
been laid up by some sickness.

7. How often have thou desired since thou came into the road of
opportunities (in sense and fear of unanswerableness) rather to be removed then
to fill up a room, and cumber the ground, and keep out others that might be
more useful? and will he neither remove thee nor improve thee? niether cut
thee down nor make thee fruitful?

Lastly, Tell him plainly that passage in Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded grace
did much more abound, makes thee (being now found of him in away of faith and
repentance) not only not to fear extraordinary judgments, but even to look for
extraordinary favors; more love unto him, more humility, more holiness, more
watchfulness; and by these, more then ordinary usefullness and serviceableness
in thy generation, let him put or place thee where he pleases: it is not his
disposition to upbraid, Jam. 1.5. and therefore thou expectest he should give
liberally of that wisdom to thee, which may make thee serviceable in thy
station.

After all this there may yet be a secret Achan in the Camp, 19th Case. Fear of
being cast of at last.
which will be fingring the accursed thing (unbelief,) a Jonah in the ship,
which will be raising new tempests, and that is a fear lest God at last should
turn his back upon thee, and thou be found amongst those that are deceivers of
their own souls, being turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17.
when it seems their looks (though nothing else) were toward Heaven; if ever
this be thy case, hye thee to God presently, go fill thy mouth with Arguments.

1. Complain against thine own heart, so far as there is any mixture of
unbelief in this fear; confess that as to God it is an unworthy jealousy, and
thou have need with Gideon to cry him mercy, Judge. 6.39.
to pray that his anger may not wax hot against thee, for asking him so many
signs, considering how often the fleece has been wet and the floor dry already
to give thee satisfaction.

Yet when thou look downward there is misery enough, and matter enough to
justify all thy fears, and to move him to pardon, yea to sanctify them unto
thee, especially considering that thy All is at the stake, and that it is
Eternity, Eternity, Eternity that is before thee; that vast gulf of eternity;
and if thou art mistaken in thy confidence, thou art lost irrecoverably to all
eternity: this may move him to pity rather then to anger; and to say to them
that are of a fearful heart; be strong, fear not, behold your God will come
and save you, Isa. 35.4.

2. For thy further establishment ask him if he have not made all as sure as
grace can make it: yea, it is therefore all of grace, 2 Samuel 23.5.
that the promise might be sure to all the seed, Romans 4.16. as sure as infinite
love, infinite wisdom, infinite power, can make it, and thou dreadest it as
thou do Hell it self, to make the God of all Grace and Truth a Liar, 1 Io.
5.10 to add to all thy other evils that grand abomination of unbelief, which
puts more affronts and scorn upon him then all other sins whatsoever.

3. Ask if all the spirits of just men now made perfect will not confess the
mercies of Christ to be sure mercies, Act. 13.34.
and that he (as Boaz says of Ruth) showed them more kindness in the latter
end, Ruth. 3.10.
then at the beginning, Joh. 13.1.
and that having loved his own which were in the world he loved them to the
end, and reserved the best wine for the last, the last grapes (especially in
Chrifts vineyard) yield the sweetest wine; David makes it obvious to any man's
observation, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: (he
goes current for a perfect man) for the end of that man is peace. And even a
Balaam is forced to acknowledge it, and there is a desirableness in the death,
in the later end of the righous, Numb. 23.10. Let me dye the death of the
Righteous, and let my later end be like his.

4. If yet thou fear as to thine own particular, ask if the holy Ghost (who
makes it his trade to help infirmities, Romans 8.86.
and has helped thee in thine all thy life long) ask if he will not then help
thee when thou art most infirm; nothing but a lump of infirmity and weakness;
surely then, in thy greatest need he will not fail thee.

Lastly, Tell him, he knows why thou would so fain be with him in his Heaven,
not because thou fanciest it a Turkish Paradise, or a Paganish Elisium,
abounding with carnal or corporal pleasures; not only because thou would
escape everlasting burnings (though he himself cannot blame thee for aiming at
this, Act. 2.40.2 Pet. 1.10.
seeing he commands thee by all means possible to endeavor it;) But thy soul
longs incessantly to go to Heaven, because Heaven is the Land of Hallelujahs,
and thou would fain be thankful, really thankful?

Heaven is the Land of Love, and thou would fain take thy fill of love, in
loving and being beloved; in loving as thou art loved, without intermission,
without interruption, enternally, and so be ever with Chirst, which is by much
far better, Phil. 1.23. All these meet daily with a thousand hindrances and
encumbrances, which make thee sick of earth, and sigh for Heaven, groaning
within thy self with that blessed Apostle (who had once been there) 2 Cor. 5.2.
For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house
which is from Heaven.

Hindrances and Imcombrances, which make a Hell above ground, not to be
endured by any honest heart, and how much more intolerable then is the
nethermost Hell, for there is never a nooke, never a corner in it, where a
poor sinner might weep eternally, without blaspheming, without hearing
blasphemies, without hating of God, without sinning against him: He knows how
often thou have told him, if there were, how much more quietly thou could
accept of the punishment of thine iniquity there, and there justify him, and
there bewail thy folly and madness, and lament the loss of him for evermore.
But to lose him and all love to him, and to be sinning against him eternally,
this cannot be consented to, but by a Creature damned already, though above
ground, nothing therefore short of Heaven can satisfy thee or ought so to do,
and if upon these terms thou can not be admitted into his rest, sure he will
have but little, John 14.2, 3
who went thither to prepare a place for thee.

This hope then we have as an Anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, and
which enters into that within the veil, whither the forerunner is for us
entered, even Jesus made an High Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedee, Heb. 6.19, 20. thus building up your selves on your most holy
faith, and praying in the holy Ghost, keep your selves in the Love of God,
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, 20th Case.
hate cossion for others.
, Jude 20, 21. ver.

But have thou not a good mind (before parting) to speak a good word for others
also? this has been constantly the way of the spirit of adoption, when David
came before the Lord upon the saddest occasion that ever his soul was
acquainted with, when he was most full of his own concernments, and had most
cause of fear that his appearing for others might do harm rather then good, yet
then he ventures to frop a word for Sion, and remembers Jerusalem amidst his
greatest grief, as well as he prefers her before his chiefest joy; Psalm. 137.6.
do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, Psalm. 51.18.
build thou the walls of Jeresalem. What his sins had weakened and attempted
to ruin, he endeavors to strengthen and repair by his prayers, and seldom do
ye see him rise from of his knees before he had pleaded the Churches cause, and
oftentimes he makes that his only errand, as you may find by several Psalms,
pend for no other purpose.

Nay many times the best pleaders feel not their hearts warm in the work, till
they come out of the narrow circle of their own personal concernments, and
launch into the business of the body of Christ, and then are their hearts fixed
06 by the spirit of grace and supplication, the great soul of that body.

But now adays many praying persons can find little to say, unless by way of
complaint concerning the public; Be it so, you were told at the first that the
word here translated Arguments signifies complains also; if then thou can
make the cause of the public thine own (as thou ought to do,) Go order thy
cause before him, and fill thy mouth with Arguments.

1. Plead for his poor persecuted people all the world over, ask if it be
nothing to him to see the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ, spilt like
water upon the ground even to this day, in Piedmont, Poland and other places?
are not the eyes of his glory weary of such sad spectacles? ask if there be not
with them, even with them sins against the Lord, and if the rage wherewith
they have slain his servants reach not up to Heaven, 2 Chronicles. 28.9. it was wont
so to do in former times? Complain that their bones are scattered at the graves
mouth, as when one cuteth and cleaves wood upon the earth, Isa. 26.21.
Psalm. 141.7. and ask if he look not on to require it? when shall the earth
disclose her blood, and no more cover her slain?

2. Complain, that there is nothing visible toward a reckoning with that
drunken beast, Rev. 11.2. Though the thousand years, Rev. 20.2. were granted to
begin at the time of Constautines degree, An. do. 311. and to expire, at the
rising of the Ottoman Family, An. 13 10. and the Devil then let loose again,
yet must he have no long time to play reekes in the world, as appears by
comparing, Rev. 20.7. with the 10. ver. see D'Hainend in Loc.
which makes it self drunk with the blood of the Saints as with sweet wine; nay
he seems of late to blow upon some enterprises leveld at them, and to shine
upon the counsels of the wicked. Ask him when shall those forty and two
months be expired (for men miss it in their calculations and conjectures) when
shall the mountains flow down at his presence (and the seven hills amongst the
rest) when shall the powers of the earth melt like wax before the fire, at the
presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of the whole earth? why is his
Charet so long a coming, why tarry the wheels of his Charet? Mind him that the
harvest of the earth is not only ripe, but even dried up and withered, (...),
Rev. 14.15. compared with Math. 13.6. and 21, 19. a wonderful expression of
His Patience; but how long Lord holy and true? when, oh when shall it yet once
be! Ask Him if His soul takes any pleasure in them, Romans 11.26
that he thus long continues them.

3. Cut scores with the poor Jews, we are many a prayer behind hand with them;
Pasal. 74.3.
when shall the Redeemer come unto Sion, Ezekiel, 38.8.
and turn away ungodliness from Jacob? Romans 11.15.
when will he lift up his feet to those perpetual desolations, Bzek. 37.7.
to the mountains that have laid always wast (he speaks one would think, as if
he himself thought the time very long) when shall the receiving of them be as
life from the dead? tell him, we hear as yet of no noise, no shaking at all in
the valley of dry bones, no coming together of the bones, bone to his bone; and
yet how much of the Glory of God, and good of men; how much of the treasure is
imbarqued in this bottom? when shall Saints and Nations be Synonymas and
Termini convertiblies, (...) as is implied, Rev. 15.3. King of Nations, and yet
it is translated, King of Saints, as if at that time Saints and Nations should
be of an equal extent and latitude.

4. Beg a watering upon his plantations abroad; there are many precious
souls worthy of the remembrance, many poor souls that need it, many praying
souls to whom thou owe it, many pleading souls who will repay it; therefore
you that have escaped the miseries that have befalen others, remember the Lord
(his concernments and people) afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind,
Jer. 51.50. Many have friends and relations with whom they enjoy little
Communion in this world, pray ye may meet at the right hand of Christ, never to
part in the next.

5. Complain unto Him of that spirit of prophannesse, which yet domineers in
our Lands, and over the generallity of our Nation, though he has loved our
Nation, and has wrought such Salvations for us, as can no where be matched,
save in the story of Israel; he has given some into our hands, others under
our feet, (I need not name them,) sure of all the world English men are under
the most powerful obligations unto holiness; but alas, how ill do we requite
the Lord, like a foolish people and unwise: Oh pray that Christ may indeed
sprinkle many Nations, and ours among the rest in a special manner, with His
Blood and Spirit, that we may yet become a peculiar people zealous of good
works.

6. Press Him to cast out that unthankful spirit, wherewith so many are
possessed even to a strange degree of distemper that has befallen us, which is
said of Egypt, the Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst of us,
which causes us to err in every work as a drunken man stagereth in his vomit,
Isa. 19.14. We are ready to reel and dash one against another continually, many
abusing, many dispising all their present mercies, thought but a few years
ago, the crumbs of that loathed Manna, which now fall from our tables would
have relished as most precious privileges, worthy to be purchased at the rate
of the utmost hazards and hardships, peevishness keeps many from praying for
their Magistrates, and how can they look for good by them who sin in ceasing to
pray for them, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. what would that blessed man if now alive say unto
us, who so exhorted in Nero's time, and because he knew men would be backward,
he backs his commands with Arguments from the benefit, that redounds to the
Church and from the acceptableness of this practice to God, making
supplications, prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks for all men, for
Kings and for all that are in authority.

7. Ask when that unclean spirit of error, blasphemy and delusion, shall have
its pass (according to his promise, Zach. 13.2), and be sent packing out of our
Lands: Some, not of the worst people, simple souls ((...), as the Apostle calls
them) have been mislead hereby; and he has said, They that erred in spirit
shall come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine, Isa.
29.24: they that erred, and they that murmured, the holy Ghost ranks them
together, as being of one feather; it seems there is no small affinity between
the erroneous and the murmurers; but pity and pray for those, who like Absoloms
two hundred, follow their leaders in the simplicity of their hearts.

8. Bewail before Him, that woeful, wilful, affected, soul-murdering
ignorance, which as a vail covers so many hearts and faces, notwithstanding all
the means of light afforded us: there are indeed too too many dark places even
in all the three Nations (in Ireland especially) which are full of cruelty; but
alas how many are there in the midst of our Goshens without Christ, without God
in the world, mere Atheists, as the Apostle calls them, Ephesians. 2.12. (...),
without any inward appretiative acquaintance with God, without any powerful,
experimental, practical knowledge at all.

When shall the day dawn, Isa. 29.18.
wherein the deaf shall hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind
see out of obscurity, and out of darkness? when will the Lord again make bare
his holy arm? and spread forth his hands in the midst of our Congregations (to
pull in souls unto himself,) as he that swimeth stretches forth his hands to
swim?

When will He smell in our assemblies a savor of rest, Isa. 49.4.
and take pleasure in our solemn meetings, as in the days of old? how long
shall all his poor Ministers complain, that Conversion work has a stop put on
it every wheren?

9. Deal earnestly with Him about the compounding and comprimising of our
differences, distances and divisions, which have given such a wound to
Religion, opened such a gap to Satan, which every one complains of, and yet
helps to widen; beg that all the children of light may walk more in the light
as he is in the light, and then shall we have fellowship one with another, I
Foh. 1.7.

Beg He would put it into the hearts of all His People, to imitate that good
pattern, Fudg. 1.1, 2, etc. which doubtless waits for a spiritual
accomplishment as well as all other things which happened to them in figure.
Judah has the priority given him, Jure divino, by an oracle from Heaven, Judah
should go up first, Behold I have delivered the land into his hand, and yet
hereupon he despises not the aid and assistance of his brethren, but invites
Simion his brother to engage with him against the common adversary and
promises the like assistance unto him, and speeds never a whit thy worse for
it, but the better; God is so far from being offended with this practice that
he blesses it exceedingly, and delivered up the common enemy into their hands;
thus would he deal by us as to our spiritual enemies, could we unite to engage
against them, and leave our pickeerings and carnal contendings, to overtop and
supplant and impose upon one another.

10. Lastly, Prefer one bill of complaint more in a case which few think of,
notwithstanding all our boastings and pretensions to a through reformation, and
that is this: Few men now adays do honor the Lord with their substances, Prove.
3.9, 10.
few look at this as a duty to consecrate any part of their gain unto the Lord,
Donum est intogritas animi. God by exacting this tribute tries the sincerity of
our love, faith, obedience, when the Israclices would not endure the sight of
him, who came to demand the Tribute, is was a sure sign of their total and
final revolt and defection, it was then high time for Rehoboam to get him gone.
or of their substance to the Lord of the whole earth, but carry it as if they
were turned Independents indeed, and did not depend, no not upon God Himself,
or as it God Himself had lost his propriety, and there were now not rent-penny,
no acknowledgment due unto him, save such an one as costs us nothing; Surely
God from the beginning reserved and claimed a part due to himself, who gave the
whole, and whatever there was besides; this also was in the Sacrifices of Cain
and Abel, an acknowledgment that God has a right in every man's goods;
afterward he published and put in his claim more peremptorily, Exodus 22.29.
Thou shall not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits and of thy liquors:
the first born of thy sons shall thou give unto me. Non tardabis. Thou shall
not delay, this no new thing, but a Law of confirmation, and yet this was
before the Levitical institution, Lev. 27.30. And all the tithe of the land,
whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lords: it
is holy unto the Lord, It is the Lords, it is his alreadly, and had been so
from the beginning of the world, and he now appoints the Levite, the stranger,
the widow, and the fatherless, 1 King. 12.18. And it is observed, that Christ
though he reproved all sins, punished none, but that of Sacriledg and
profanation of holy thing; what will he do, when he comes as a judge to call us
to an account for all our receipts and returns.
to be his rent-gatherers or receivers general, Deuteronomy. 26.12, 13. When thou
have made an end of tything all the tithes of thine increase, the third year,
which is the year of tything, and have given it unto the Levite, the stranger,
the fatherless, and the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be
filled.

Then thou shall say before the Lord thy God, I have brought away the hallowed
things out of mine house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto
the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all thy
Commandments, which thou have commanded me: I have not transgressed thy
Commandments, neither have I forgotten them.

It Is due to Him, quasi regale vertigal, as a royal revenue, and he does
proprio jure credere, (says Calvin) when he thus disposes of it? But where is
the defect, the default (may some say,) where is the irregularity to be
complained of? I wish trial were made whether it may not be proved (if the
point were well studied, but I shall only hint it) that the tenth part (or
other proportion) of every man's increase, acquisitions, improvements, and
incoms is due unto the Lord even to this day: Unusquisque de qualtingenio aut
artificio vivit, de ipso decimam Deo in pauperibus vol in Ecclesils dones, Aug.
de rect. Cathol. couvers. To. 9. Fol. 250. Thus did the primitive Christians,
Modicam unusque stipem apponit, etc.
I am far from thinking or saying that it is due unto the Ministry or to any
sort of men, but that it is due and ought to be dedicated to God, and to the
everlasting Priesthood of our Lord Jesus Christ, by way of thankful
acknowledgement to God for the same, a tenth which even the Ministers and the
Glebe it self ought to pay, and so ought to be expended in the supporting of
public worship, in the relieving of the poor at home and abroad, under the
rage of persecution in other Countries, and in the education of poor Children,
the advancement of Learning (that inestimable Jewel) and other pious uses, and
would every man that abounds make such a purse and account it depositum
pietatis, Haec quasi depo sita pietatis sunt, nam inde nou epulis, etc. sed
egenis alendis, humandisq, and pueris ac puellis ve ac parentibus destitutis,
naufragis, etc Ter. Apolog. Quicquid clerici babent, pauperum est, Hie^ In case
of necessity, of extremity, Gods command makes relief due unto others, makes
them owners, masters, of our superfluities, not that they may take it by force,
but that we must give freely, Trappe on Pro. 13.27.
as a sacred treasury or Corban not to be opened but for pious uses; how many
necessitous parents, perishing orphans, poor aged people, persons ruined by
fire, shipwreck, or the like, might speedily be releived? there is no pious
person but judges, something due this way, and the holy Ghost calls even a man's
charity due debt, Prove. 3.27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due,
when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. Say not unto thy neighbor, Go
and come again, and to morrow I will give, when thou have it by thee, verse 28.
What we call giving, God calls paying; what we call charity, He counts due
debt; all the question is about the quantum, how much ought thus to be
dedicated to God, and to fix it upon the tenth part; is neither Popish nor
Legal, or Jewish, but a known truth, or duty long before the oldest of these
was heard of in the world; this was no natural but an adoptive Child of Moses,
nor was it a Type or Ceremony as sacrificing was (which was also before the
Law) for then there must be some spiritual substance tiped out by it, but it
was practiced by the light of nature and law of reason, moral Law, and Law of
Nations every where. Why else did Abraham Genesis 14.20. Pay tithes to
Melchisedec, the great Representee of Christ, who is brought upon the stage
like a man dropped out of the Clouds, only to shadow out Christ, as if he had
neither Father nor Mother, birth nor death, Heb. 7.2.

And that they were paid as a due to the Priesthood of Christ (sustained then
in a figure by Melchisedec) the 7th Chap. to the Hebrews proves abundantly,
Heb. 7.6. (...) He tythed Abraham, which shows he had authority to take
tithes, and seems to subject Abraham, to a necessity of paying of them. Abraham
gave (...) the very top and chiefest part of all, Heb. 7.4.
and that Levi himself who took Tithes, here paid them, and that Levi had only
a Commission pro tempore) to be Gods rent-gatherer, and receiver; they mistake
that think the payment of the tenth part, was then first set on foot to defray
the charges of that costly worship, it was paid long before; Abraham is a full
instance, four hundred and thirty years before the Law (as the Apostle observes
upon another occasion, Gal. 3.17.) and I would know whether that were
will worship in him, or what Law he has observed, what rule he walked by
therein? Abraham would not take a thread or a shoe latchet to himself, Cain
like a churl gives the carrion, the lean stuff, he brought of his fruits.
Abel like a Prince, his first fruits, the best and fattest, Genesis 4.5, 4.
and then returned the rest (though now become his by conquest) to the former
owner, but if he gave the tithe only by courtesy, and not divine authority, it
proves not the thing in hand, the exellency of Melchisedec's Priesthod above
the Leviticall, for surely that had authority to take them, sAdam began this
acknowledgment in the Sacrifices, with the skins of which God clothed him,
Genesis 3.21.
and so had Melchisedec paid then the tenth part was long before the Law, and
Levi had only a Commandment to warrant his taking of the tithes, Heb. 7.5. The
jus decimandi being long before vested in another Priesthood, and only
protempore, lent to that of Levi.

But this was only a tenth of the spoils taken in war may some say? what say
ye then to that engagement of Jacob, Genesis 28.22. Of all that thou shall give
unto me I will surely give the tenth unto, Et hoc tam pro se quam pro posteris
suis vovet, he binds his posterity hereunto as well as himself says, Mercer
in Loc. Methinks he speaks of it as a duty that he had been Catechized and
trained up in the knowledge of. This duty was corrupted by Cain, reformed by
Abel, practiced by Noah, Job, etc.
He had the direction of the spirit for it, says Calvin, and why not also the
instruction of his Ancestors? The answer to Mr Seldens History of tithes, endea
vours to prove that Abraham gave the tenth, not of the spoils only, but of all
he had, however it is a good precedent for Soldiers and for Jacob, he had
ssome sufficient warrant for his resolution.
For Abraham practiced it before him: And yet this good man though he promised
it so surely, was not so careful and punctual in his performance as he should
have been, and his omission of it at his return, (when hasting to pacify his
brother, he pluck away a good fleece from his estate, before the decimation
thereof according to his vow) seems to be the cause why the Angel contended so
sore with him, that he put him to his tears and prayers, as Hosea tells us, Non
quod suo arbitrio Deum colueris nam direct to spiritus vice legisseripta fuit.
Call.
Chap. 12.4. And though he blessed him, yet he sent him limping to his grave,
Genesis 35.1. God calls him to perform his vow, and whether he paid it into the
hands of Heber, or Isaac the head or the family, vel potius consecrarit in usus
sacros, set it a part for pious uses, it is all one to us, here is something
belonging to the Law of nature, or moral Law for our instruction, and
imitation, nor does he engage upon condition, the particle (...) rendered, if
ver. 20. until ver. 15. when Numb. 36. surely Prove. 3.34. This takes away the
great objection if it were a duty according to the moral Law, or Law of
nature, he would have engaged absolutely, and so you see he did
notwithstanding, that If the Text. Thus is was before the Law Ceremonial, and
Christ approves it, Matthew. 23.23. and affirms that dedicating a part to
charitable uses, sanctifies the whole, as the first fruit sanctified the lump,
Luke 11.41, 42. and 12.33. And finds no fault with the Pharisee for his
practice, Luke 18.12. for his giving up of a tenth part to all that he
possessed to pious uses, but for his trusting in it, nor were the tenths all of
them consumed by Christ's Consumatum est, but he teaches us even to the end of
the world, to give unto God the things that are Gods, Mark 12 17. and both we
and all that we have are his, I Cor. 29.14. though he is pleased to accept a
small part in lien of the whole.

And plain it it, Sacrum Deo uon fine in signi in cum injuria ad profanos usus
applicatur, Call. instus. l. 3. c. 7. S. 1.
that there is such a thing as sacriledg, now in the days of the Gospel, all
I fear many more are guilty thereof then are aware of it; nay, well were it, if
they were not most guilty, who seem most to abhor Idols thou that Abhorest
Idols, Id successit in little decimarum, Grotius in Loc.
do thou commit sacriledg, Romans 2.22. Concedimus Deo, says Magna Charta,
Origan who flourished an. Chr. 227.
when it speaks of seperating the tenth part to holy uses which part was called
by the Ancients, Dei censes, Gods Rent, Mentions the payment of the tenth part,
recalled by Urban, which was as soon as anyhad a propriety of estare, till them
beleivers in many places had a community of goods, because of the rage of
persecution, but not in places where they were more free.
nor has God forfeited his Right, because of man's abuse or superstition. I
think also there must be some rule of proportion for that laying by in store
commanded by the apostle, 1 Cor. 16.2. Upon the first day of the week, let
every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be
no gatherings when I come, (according to Deuteronomy. 16.10. According as the Lord thy
God has blessed thee in some due proportion. Now if there be no rule for the
quantity, a large heart may lay by too much and defraud his relations or other
occasions, a narrow heart will be sure to lay by too little, and so be guilty
of sacriledg by alienating that which is due to God, to whom Jure Coronae,
besides homage and fealty, service ad fidelity, we owe an honorary tribute,
though no subsidiary Rent, for that he needs not: But this he requires, and
little comfort shall they have who deny it to him.

This (though far too little for the point) may seem too much in this place,
The poor, the persecuted, the widow, fatherless, and standger, these are. Gods
publicans, to gather this ret, revenue, custom due unto him, his collectors;
and porrers to carry it into his treasury of Heaven, and there you will find it,
Luke 16.9.
, but if the Lord would set on the sense of this duty upon the hearts and
consciences of prosessors, and take them off from their subterfuges, and
cavils, and evasions, how soon would there be a sacred bank, a stock raised, a
Temple-treasury filled, to answer all religious occasions, to give a speedy
relief to the necessities of Saints abroad, at home, who starve many times
while the grass is growing, while the alms are a gathering.

How would this roll away our reproach of being Solifidians, and make the
Gospel cry for fruitfullness in good works, with Popish charity and blind
devotiion, Tit. 3.8. let them who have believed in God, be careful to maintain
good works. How would it cut off occasions from the flesh, which craves and
calls for all, and consumes more upon some one lust, then all a man's graces ever
cost him: How would it bring a blessing and prove a hedge about all the rest of
the estate, like Hannahs loaf which was lent to God, I Sam. 2. 20, 21. He gave
her back five for one, and so will he do by every one that ventures with him
will ye prove him, Mal. 3.10. do but try me says he in this one particular, An
ancient Professor, aster he had heard this point pressed in public told me, it
had been his practice above 30. years, and that by the advice of the renowned
Dr. Usher.
but it is a snare for a man to devour that which is sanctified, Prove. 20.25.
that which is and ought to be separated from common uses: men rob God, Mal.
3.8. and put him to strain for his own, and he does it many to their sorrow,
Hos. 2.8, 9. For she did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and
multiplied ber silver and gold which they preared for Baal, Dr Usher. And that
he found much ease in giving, having always something by him which he looked
on as none of his own, Decima quaeque veteres diis suis offerchant. Paulus,
Diacon. Abridgm, Fest. All Nations by the instinct of nature, have practiced
it, or, they learned it first from the people of God. They did rite dividere,
though not recte offere, they admitted it as concluded on by an universal
Parliament, though things are much varied by carrying far and long continuance,
not answering to the Prototype and original.
they wasted all upon their lusts. Therefore will I return and take away my
corn in the time thereof; and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover
my wool, and my flax, (given) to cover ber nakedness. Si tu decimam non
dederis, tu ad decimam revoceris, (Aug. de temp. Sermon. 219.) Because rich men
will not give the tenth to God, God many times brings them to the tenth of what
they had: God requires a seventh part of our time, because we have that merely
from his bounty without our in dustry, but a tenth of our estate making a
defalcation or allowance for our pains, and if he gives no increase he looks
for nothing, now both as to the seventh part of our time, and the tenth part of
our estate, the Ceremonial and Levitical part being abolished, the moral use
and equity remains to the worlds end, all piety, justice, gratitude requireing
it, no Popish abuse ought to take away the use, and all Nations in all ages,
practicing this duty, See instance in Sr H.sp.and arguments from the New
Testament in Dr Garlton, Dr Sclater, Mr Roberts, Mr Bagshaw, which proves the
duty here pleaded for more strongly then the due they contended for: Thought if
God fail of his due, his servants cannot want theirs.
will rise up in judgment and condemn us, if we who have the right way neglect
it.

And who would repent his obedience hereunto when he comes to dye and to be
torn away from all his outward enjoyments? then it is that men's consciences
wring them, and make them fling away apace what the can grasp no longer. Oh,
Then it is that their hearts dye away with anguish and astonishment, to behold
all the black Items of their expenses, to think how they have served the Devil
with their estates and not God, to whom they are now a going to give an account
of their stewardship when he will trust them no longer, they now feel the hook
which they hae swallowed, and would fain disgorge that which they are afraid to
digest in Hell.

But alas, we have gotten a cheap Religion, and therefore like it because it
saves our purses, though not our souls; what praying heart feels not cause to
bewail it, to go to God about it, and to fill his mouth with Arguments. If we
hold our peace men's land will cry against them, and the furrows thereof
complain, Job 31.38. The rust of their riches shall be a witness against them,
Jam. 5.3.

I have only offered hints to help on this blessed work of pleading and
striving, and wrestling with God (with the arms of his own Spirit,) in Prayer,
the decay and abatement whereof in our days is looked on as a sad symptom,
and justly bewailed by the most spiritual professors. But alas, how few stir up
themselves to take hold of God, Isai. 64.7. Now it must needs be granted, that
the spirit of adoption is the best Logician, the only One, both for invention
and judgment, it was he that taught Aristotle and others to reason with men,
as well as Job and Jeremy and the rest of the Saints, to reason out the case
with. God.

When He has formed the prepositions according to his own Canons and
principles of truth laid down in the Scriptures, and made the assumption
according to his office, which is to bear witness, 1 John 5.6. and so has
made application of the proposition to the person, to the poor solicatous
soul. He will thence clearly and strongly infer the conclusion.

Yea, All Hiss Arguments are highly Satisfactory, his demonstration
irrefragable, his dilemmas unavoidable; So that he convinces of righteousness
as well as of sin, and subdues the soul to the obedience of faith, it cannot
turn from him; and in like manner does he raise and refresh it when it is
weary? If we admit that distinction of a Mediation and Reconciliation, and of
intercession, as that belongs to Christ, so this to the spirit, not exclusively
as to Christ, but as to Angels and Saints departed, Romans 8.26. The spirit it
self makes intercession for us.

And without breach of Charity I dare be bold to say, he has none of that
spirit within him, who can find no help by the conscientious and constant use
of this way of pleading, if it be not to suppose an impossibility that any can
conscientiously use it without him? Nay, I dare say these considerations here
hinted cannot miss if rightly used? Only I would advise every one that would do
any good on it, Been oravisse est, pene studuisse gravias egisse est plus quam
legis se, Alsted, Thesaur. arils memor.
to pick out and select something out of every Sermon they hear, to be repeated
upon the knees in secret, which posture I judge best, both for repeating and
studying any thing of this nature.

And let me add, If God will not hear thee, and answer thee upon these terms;
If he do not put strength into thee, if he be not content that faith should
overcome, then be thou bold to say, that all the Ministers of His holy Gospel
are sadly mistaken in it and him, Heb. 10.35. Cast not away therefore this
confidence, this privilege of speaking freely and pleading with your God, which
has great recompense of reward. He who so graciously answers pious
ejaculations, Nehem. 2.4. will undoubtedly answer the powerful expostulations
of faith and pleadings of his spirit: Forget not therefore how he calls his
people to leave of their reasonings with Satan, with flesh and blood, and with
their own evil hearts, and to come and reason out the matter with him, and
what he promises shall ensue thereon, Isaiah 1.18. Come now and let us reason
together, says the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. And
such are many of our sins, sins of a deep dye, of a double tincture,
relapses are so.

But for those who live not within the lines of this Communication, who come
not within any of the qualifications here mentioned, who cannot own any of
these Arguments, (if it be possible any such should have the leisure and the
patience to read them,) The Lord have mercy upon them, they cannot plead and
will be pressed to death, for want of it.

Thus have I brought you, to peep through the keyhole, through the hole of the
door into the Tower of David, builded for an Armory, wherein there hang a
thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men; and if you have felt your
beloved, putting in his hand by the hole of the door and touching your hearts,
your Bowels have been moved for him and will be more and more? you will not be at
rest till you have been arguing out the matter with him in secret daily; And so
the pouring in a dishfull of water, may help to set the pumpe a going, and
cause a pouring out to your hearts to some purpose, this poor thing may serve
to do the work of a Gibeonite, help to hew wood and draw water for the
Tabernacle and the Altar, it may help you with those Israelites that lamented
after the Lord, to draw water and to pour it out before the Lord. 1 Samuel 7.2.


And let me say assuredly that exercise will infinitely surpass in sweetness
all sports and pastimes, all the treasures and glories of this world, all the
delights of the sons of men, for it is the delight of the Sons of God; it is
Heaven on Earth, Heaven on this side Heaven, and will undoubtedly convey you at
last into the Heaven of Heavens, there to be extasied with joy and glory for
evermore.

FINIS.

