A SERMON PREACHED TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT,
At a public Fast, May, 25. 1642.

By ROBERT HARRIS, Bachelor of Divinity and Pastor of Hanwell. OXON.

Published by Order of that House.

PSALM. 10. 14. Thou have seen: for thou beholdest mischief, and spite to
requite it with thy hand. The poor leaves himself to thee. Thou art the help
of the fatherless.

17. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble: Thou will prepare their
heart: thou will cause thy ear to hear, etc.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the gilt Cup,
near S. Austins gate in Paul's Churchyard, M. DC. XLII.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, now assembled in Parliament.
I Now tender what you are pleased to own: sooner I could not, because wanting
time and health, I had only broken notes. I am now come as near my self, as
my notes will help me. It was my resolution from the first, to hold me to the
work in hand, the work of the day, the work of my calling; accordingly I
made, and pursued my choice, waving all disputes Sacred, or Civil. Things ever
move best in their own Sphere: And O that all things might ever run in
their right channel! My work was to Mourn, to Preach; not to Parliament-it:
and I never brought a sadder heart to a business. Nay, The divisions of Reuben
still stick, and have left those impressions, which will not off. Judge. 5.15.
I bleed still in the breaches of Dying Ireland, and in our Home-Jealousies.
Alas! That Brethren, who promise and purpose so well, work and sweat so hard,
should so hardly understand each other. There is, I fear, a Divine displeasure
in it. Where Unity is, Psalm. 133: 3.
the blessing is. The spirit of Iealousy and division is a Messenger of wrath.
Judge. 9. etc.
And then most, when All complain of it, and No One will own it. For this My
Soul shall weep in secret; and in Rebeccahs case, I will take up her
complaint; Why is it thus! As for you, Noble gentlemen, What can I say now? It
is wisdom (you know) to know ones own Compass, and you are far above me.
Your Place is high, your Task great; and yet your strength not infinite. By
Place, you are Gods: Psalm. 82.
and yet Men; you must Fall, (and may sail) like others. Quidest Ecclesia?
Viri. and mulieres. Chry. in Ephesians. 5.
Gods own Synod (the Church) is made up of men: and men be Men, in the Greatest
Councels. Compare them to the Highest God, their greatest agitations are but as
the busy sweatings of so many Ants in a Molehill. Your work is also great. As
your Place, so your Work is Gods. Your business lies about Laws, and Orders.
Order is a Sacred thing. Law, the work of a God No man can see, or say All in
his Law; Sin will evade; witness our good Laws touching The Lords day,
Swearing, and Drinking. Now (forsooth) you must tell us, what Profaneness is,
what Swearing you mean, and when a man is Drunken. Nay, when a Law is with
some difficulty conceived, and with more brought forth, it is not an easy
thing, to teach it to Speak plainly: nor are men so happy in their expressions
as was S. Paul, who wrote, nor more, 2 Cor. 1.
nor less, then we Read. I speak not this in a Discouraging way. Noble Spirits
know not what that means. Only they know from the Poet, Et neseit remeave
Lon. Claud. (...) etc. Eurip.
That it makes a man, less then nothing. Laws therefore must be; else all goes
to loss. Leave men to themselves; each man's lust will be a Law; each man's
Opinion, a Bible. My speech only tends to this, to provoke you, and my self to
prayer, and dependence. He that will undertake the work of God, with the wit,
and strength of a man, will but shame the work, and break himself. My hope is,
That you will begin, and end with God: that you will do all in his strength,
and do his best work, first. Men's Consciences are miserably perplexed between
Command, and Command. Our Congregations are as much divided, between Teacher,
and Teacher. The conclusion in time will be, We are of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.1
We will believe none of them all. Let me assure you, The case betwixt Pastor,
and Flock will be very sad, if there be not a timely settlement. But things of
this nature I had rather speak in Private, then in Press, or Pulpit. And there
rather to God, then to Man. I therefore reine in and betake my self with aged
Jerome to my Tuguriolum, and there bless God, that I dare sleep, and can say,
that ought is my own, and there deplore my barren ministry for almost twice
twenty years, and implore the blessing of heaven upon my Dear Sovereign, and
his Great Council. Esaias 9. 2 Timothy 2.
Now the Great Counselor give you a right understanding, in all things: 2
These. 3.16.
And the God of Peace himself (he alone can do it) give you peace, in all
things, by all means. So will pray

The unworthiest that serve you in ROBERT HARRIS.
From my poor Study, June 13, 1642.
Die Mercurii 25. Maii 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, that M.
Harris, and M. Obadiah Sedgwick, who this day being the day of the public Fast
at the entreaty of the said Commons preached at S. Margarets Westminster, shall
have thanks returned them, for the great and worthy pains they have taken, and
that they be desired to print their Sermons, and that no man presume to print
them, but such as they shall appoint, till the House shall take further Order.

H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint John Bartlet, to print my Sermon.

Robert Harris.

A SERMON PREACHED TO THE Honorable House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT,
At a public FAST, May 25. 1642.
LUKE 18.6, 7, 8. 6. And the Lord said; Hear what the unjust Judge says.

7. And shall not God avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night unto him;
though he bear long with them?

8. I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily: nevertheless, when the Son
of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?


WE are in a Parable. A Parable delivers some excellent truth under a
comparison. That truth is now Prefixed, now Affixed; It is here prefixed, and
it is this. In prayer we must not faint, nor flagge. This the Point. And this
is pressed from the success, and that is argued ab Impari, thus. If constant
and faithful prayer carry it with the worst, much more with the best: If with a
bad man, then with our gracious God. This is the Sum.

The parts of the Parable are ordinary, 1. A Proposition, 2. A Reddition


In both we have, 1. Persons represented, 2. The success mentioned.


the Persons on the one side are, 1. Praying; a poor, shistlesse, friendlesse
widow who had no advocate but misery and importunity. 2. Prayed to; a sour,
sullen, froward piece, a man without sense of Piety, or Humanity, one who
presents as ill as may'be, whether Place or Person be considered. Yet see, this
woman prevails with this man.


In the second part you have, for one woman, many men; for one stranger, many
children: for occasional petitions, uncessant suits: and for a bad Judge, a
good Father, who can no more deny his own, then himself. If then she, a woman
so weak, overcame a man so harsh: what may not children so many, do with a
Father so good?

Parable. Our work lies in the Reddition, where 1. Our blessed Savior
prefaces and premises, (Hear what the unrighteous Judge says) Hear it to
your comfort; He speaks some comfort, and (in him) God speaks more. 2. He
assumes, and that most strongly, as the question shows; Shall not God avenge,
etc. as if he had said, It is out of question, he will. 3. He concludes. God
will hear, will certainly hear, nay, will seasonably hear, with a non
obstante; notwithstanding he is seemingly slow in his answers, and we certainly
weak in our faith and dependence. I will say no more, as yet, to the words.


Something I have to say to you, from them; and I hold it my happiness, that
I, who have no breath to spare, shall speak to those, who will conceive
faster, and see farther, then I can speak.

For my Errands; the first and maine results from the whole, and this it is.

In point of Prayer, we must gather all arguments of encouragement, and never
yield, Col. 4 12. Romans 15.30.
till we have the day. Prayer is a mastery, and that mastery is a wrestling and
wrestle we must, whiles we can stand. When we are once drawn forth upon this
service, where we pitch, there we must make good our ground, without flight,
or fainting; (...) Militaria verba, ut vult Eustat. aliique.
as one word, in the first verse here, and another in the last verse, Heb. 10.
is conceived to imply. This the Lesson our Master is now teaching, and he
charges it upon us as a duty in the first verse. And for farther proof and
encouragement, I present you only with three Arguments.

1. The first is drawn from God; where he gives, Psalm. 65.2. Can. 2.14.
1. He offers himself to us as a Father; as a Father hearing prayer, as a
Father begging prayer, as a Father loving prayer, Psalm. 1 41.2. Ephesians. 3.20.
as a Father able to exceed all prayers, needs, thoughts. 2. He binds himself
as much by promise, as us by precept. Those promises of his are full, are free;
Romans 10.12. Deuteronomy. 4.7. Luke 11.10
He is rich to all that call upon him: Every one that seeks, finds, and
such like: And those promises are made to Christ, founded on Christ, sealed in
blood, backed with an Oath. Iam 1.6. Heb. 4.16. and 10.22. Ephesians. 3.12. Luke 11.
3. He commands us to beg, and that without wavering; nay with all boldness,
with all confidence of boldness, and fullness of assurance. 4. He arms us
with Parables, experiments, and all arguments of comfort; Indeed such Topics,
as that it is impossible for God to recede, if we stand our ground. And thus
from God.


Next to God, I present you with a cloud of Petitioners, who have stirred up
themselves, to take hold of God, and it has taken well.

Moses. If a man would have been discouraged, Exodus 32.10.
Moses had been the man.

1. The people were stark naught, and passing froward. 2. God seems to take him
off, and to give him a discharge, Let me alone, says he. 3. He seems to take
off all objections. I will make of thee (says he) in stead of them, a great
people. 4. He suspends his answer, day after day, as if he were unwilling to
condescend. Yet Moses stands to it. God cannot get him gone; away he will not,
without his errand, his errand he has.
To him I add Jacob our Father, who concludes Us, as Hosea says. In him God
spoke with us. Hos. 12.4. Genesis 32 24.
This Jacob knows not what discouragement means. God seemed to give him his
answer, in Esau's expedition against him; but he will not take it: God was
willing to put him off; but he will not admit of any Put-offs: he seems to
take his leave; but Jacob, by his leave, will not part so: he seems angry, and
willing to shake him off; but Jacob holds his hold: nay, he seems to crush
him, to maime him, to begin Esau's quarrel against him; but he, like him in
story, when he was maimed on one hand, Cy^girus in Justin.
holds the ship with the other, and when he was handlesse, held with his
teeth, whilst breath held: So our Champion: Froun God, smite he, wound he;
Jacob is at a point. A Blessing he came for, and a Blessing he will have. I
will not let thee go, (says he) unless thou bless me. His limbs, his life
might go: but there is no going for Christ, without a pawn, without a
blessing. This is the man. Now what is his speed? The Lord admires him, and
honors him to all generations. What is thy name (says he) q. d. I never met
with such a fellow. Titles of honor are not worthy of thee. Thou shall be
called, not Jacob, a shepherd with men: but Jacob, a Prince with God. Nay not
Jacob, a wrastler with man: but Israel, a prevailer with God.

To these men, I add one Woman, Matthew. 15. Gorgonia, threatens heaven, Nazi^nz.
and is (as her brother said of her) modestly impudent, and invincible. Nothing
can discourage her. Not her Sex, not her Nation, not her Misery, not her
Delays: but she gathers strength by her wounds, and comfort out of
discouragements. Will Christ give no answer? Good, thinks she: this is no
denial yet. Gives he a discouraging answer? That Is well, says she: I have
obtained words, I expect deeds too: he that opens his mouth, will open his
hand also. Calls he her dog? all the better. Dogs some way belong to the
family, some interest and right they have to some crumbs, to some scraps; and
something she makes of it. You hear the Conclusion. O woman! Great is thy
faith. Be it unto thee, as thou will. I never met with such a woman: have it
she will, and have it she shall, and that instantly, (this very hour;) and
that fully, she is her own carver. And this is our second Argument.

What! a Woman in these cicumstances Masculine! and We Womanish! Consider, I
beseech you, how much is won, or lost, by holding up, or letting fall our
spirits in prayer.

Are we confident? Then consider, that Prayer is the strength of the Creature,
(for it ingages Gods strength) and confidence is the strength of our prayer,
and of our selves: It doubles our strength; It contributes to the Public: It
sets God in the throne, nay us in a sort: for so (with Jacob) we reign with
God. That made Jacob, Israel. Other ways, and things might make him Jacob: but
Prayer denominates him Israel. By this, he, and we, reign over heaven, and
earth, and carry the world in our hand; Plut.
As the Boy at Athens sometimes said (I bring it only for illustration) He
could command all Athens. His reason: He could do any thing with his Mother;
his Mother with his Father; his Father with that State: So here, Faith can do
any thing with Prayer; Prayer with Christ; Christ with his Father; his Father
with All.

But now, on the other side, Faintheartednes in prayer, 1. Hurts us. 2. Robs
the Public. 3. Wrongs God.


1. For God. It is a true Maxim, True defects in the Creature come from
falsly-conceited defects in the Creator. Thence our faith fails, because we
have so low, so narrow, and so poor conceits of Almighty God, whose glory is
so much eclipsed, as we 'bate any thing of his Al-sufficiency, and prayers
Omnipotency. 2. For our selves. Discouragement robs us of Heb. 12 13.
at best, his prayers are fearful, soon receive a check, and take their
answer. And, as it makes God but half a God, and Man's self but half a Man,
so For others. It is not only wanting to the Public: but it has an ill
influence upon all. The truth is, Qui ^i^i^e rog^t, d^ce^g^re. S^n: Deuteronomy. 20.8.
(If I may speak it all at once.) It teaches God to Deny: our fellow soldiers
to Fly: (as the fearful did in Israel: and our selves only to Object, and to
make difficulties, and in the end to Die for fear of Dying, Nabal-like.
Exhort, I cannot but blush at this baseness of spirit, in my self, in our
nature. You are as willing as I to take shame to your selves this day, and to
sit before God (as Ezra did) confounded. Tell me (I beseech you) for the
furthering of our humiliation, Tell me. Is not Cowardice blushfull? Will not
men rather Die, then hear- Cowards? and what is that but Fear and Boldness
misplaced? And what is this but our Temper? who are Daring, where we should
Fear; and there only Fear, where we should be Valiant. I instance in the
present work. We have Gods Pass, and Patent for Prayer, and dare not plead
it: and yet elsewhere presume without License. For I demand. Have not we as
good warrant to Pray, as to Curse? to Bless, as to Blaspheme? yet here we
fear not, we doubt not: there we do nothing else. I bring the case nearer to
our purpose. What think you? Have not we as good warrant to beg of God, as
Rogues and Vagrants of us? They are strangers; They have no promise from us;
none the least invitation: Nay, they trouble us, they charge us, they are in a
disobedience, there is Law against them Asking, and us Giving: yet say, do,
what you please, they will not off. Send to them; they will sooner make your
child or servant their spokesman, then make away. Threaten them with Stocks, or
Officer, or what you please; it is all one. And shall these put forth in such a
tempest, in a contrary wind, when all makes against them? And we sit still,
when wind, and tide, and all is for us? when we have Law on our sides, and
Gospel on our sides, and all the world on our sides? For Prayer ingrosses all
the World, Heaven, Earth, All. I put it yet a little farther.

Have not we as many encouragements from Heaven, as from Earth? Is not God as
rich as Man? as able, as willing, as Free? yet see our practice. We have
suites; these to God, those to Men What Is our deportment? With Men it is our
work to Strengthen the heart; our labor to gather encouragements. Is it a man
we Never troubled? That is made an argument of encouragement. I never troubled
him yet, and for Once he will never deny me. Have we tried him Often? That is
an argument of encouragement. Such an one is my Old friend, my tried friend;
he Never failed me; and therefore I Will to him. Is he a Kinsman? That
incourages. For shame he will not deny his Own flesh and bone. Is he a
Stranger? why then he will take it well, that I conceive better of him, then of
my own kindred. Is he Poor? He Will the better feel me, and the sooner pity
me. Is he Rich? He may the better spare it. Thus with men, we have still
somewhat to say, for the support of hope, though they be poor, hard,
strangers, men no way engaged by Covenant, or the like.

But now when we deal with God (How can we speak of it without blushing!)
we can do little else then Fear, Object, Despair. Sure, he does not love
me; He will do nothing for me; well may I go, and try; but it will be to
no purpose. I shall get no pardon, no power, no comfort, no acceptance!

O cursed Unbelief! Can we conceive hope, without promises? None with them?
Can we find Plea's for Men? None for God? Can Poverty help us, and not Wealth?
Weakness, and not Strength? Will Cruelty pity us, and not Mercy? not Grace?
Be abashed thus to set earth above heaven; men above God.

Yet I have not done. I cannot without horror and trembling. Put the case as
the case is. What think you? Have we not reason to believe the God of Truth
rather then the Father of Lies? Let the Devil promise safety, secrecy, any
profit, or content in a sinful way; we rest in his Word, we make no doubt of
the success: All the threats and curses in the book of God cannot dismay us.
On the other side: Suppose God promises, and the Devil in the mean time
threaten us: which is believed? All the Promises, Sacraments, Oaths,
Performances of God cannot establish us. There is nothing but Presuming, when
Satan promises: nothing but Objecting, when God promises. O blasphemous
Unbelief! How does this sin debase God! belly God! as the word says; provoke
God beyond all provocations! How angry was his Majesty with Israel, for this
sin? How angry with Moses? How angry with Zachary? for this in one
particular; and in a lower degree. O, how low must we cast our selves before
our God this day, for this capital sin! which is so much the worse, by how
much the more Spiritual it is, and Anti-Evangelicall. Seems it a small thing
to us, to make God worse then man? but we must make him worse, then the worst
in Hell? What! Shall our unbelieving hearts not only impute Lying to him, but
put Perjury upon him also? Tertul.
Has not he sworn, that We shall not secke him in vain? And shall we
begin and conclude in unbelief? Is it not enough before prayer to say He
will not hear: but after prayer, when he has heard, to say Has not heard? as
Jobs words sound, to some men's sense. Job. 9.16. But here let us sit down in
our confusion a while. And then let us Advance, and think it long, before we
have wiped off this disgrace, and approved our valor.

We must hold out in prayer. You hear,

The Teacher, the only Master upon earth. I look upon you, as upon S. Lukes
Theophilus, as men grounded in the truth; and therefore willingly decline the
Common Place of prayer, and wave old errors happily buried, Aug. haeres. 57.
and epist. 121. etc.
with the unhappy disputes of this age. How, and in what form the widow
petitioned I dispute not. Written, or not written, a petition is a petition
still. The thing I am to press, is a resolute perseverance in prayer. And this
will need some pressing. For, 1. We have a dull, base, feeble spirit, ready to
receive all impressions of discouragement. 2. Next, from without we shall not
want discouragements, if we will listen to them.


First, our own guilty and unworthy hearts, (as before I intimated) will cast
a thousand perils.

Vid. Ezr. and Nehem.
Secondly, profane spirits will entertain us, as the enemies did the Church,
with a thousand scorns.

Thirdly, Friends ( carnal and spiritual) will tell us, that it is all in
vain, too late, and impossible to prevail.

Fourthly, Satan will roar upon us. Thou pray, O Hypocrite! Thy person is
unwelcome, thy prayers abominable, thy heart, mouth, and hands loathsome; the
pure eyes of the most holy God cannot but loath thee, his glorious Majestly
will confound thee.

Lastly, The Lord himself will sometimes seem an adversary: he will hide
himself, when thou seek him: run from thee as fast as thou runnest after
him: now he will chide, now frown, now delay, now seem to reject thee, and to
scorn thy services: in a word, quite to shake thee off, as Naomi seemed to
beat off Ruth, when yet he desires thy company, as she Ruths. In this case thou
must not show thy self a dastard, but gather spirit from the opposition.

Next the Times call upon us. The children are Ier. 30 7.
and there is no strength to bring forth. It is the time of Jacobs trouble,
Genesis 42.
and therefore we must not, with Iacobs-children, sit as men amazed, but make
out, as the old man advised them; the rather because there are so few, that
either will, or dare, or can lift up one faithful prayer.

In the third place consider the thing it self, I Prayer. It is our life, our
strength. All the world is a dead body, till God act it: and all (within and
without us) lies dead till we act God by prayer: all the comfort in the
creature sleeps, till we extract it with this Limbeck: Dor^it sides, d^it
Cirsius. etc. Aug i^ Psalm. 25.
all our graces, nay all the perfections of God, till we awaken him and them.
You find it, we feel it: you have tried what Wit can do, what Eloquence,
what Policy, what Resolution and Endeavor; yet we stick. Now try another way;
Set Heaven on work, till that move, the earth stirs not. Set God on work, till
he act, nothing is done: and when you have won him, you have won all. Whilst
there is but creature to creature; wit to wit; created strength to strength
created, the war is doubtful, the issue uncertain: But, when by prayer the
great God is made, and so there is the Creator to the creature, and strength to
weakness; then the victory is in sight. My meaning is not to take you off from
other means; only this I say, that a good Engineere is not the worst
Soldier; nor a good prayer the worst Parliament Man. Faith can do more then
wit: Numa apud Plut.
This brings men into the Field; but that God; and he only secures the heart.
(...) said the Heathen, in his greatest extremity; and there is our best
Anchor-hold.

Go on in this your strength, and your spiritual enemies shall melt before
you, as once the Canaanites before Israel, and the Gauls before the Germans
face. Nec ^ultum, nec ^ulorum aciemf^re, etc. Chrysostom. de ora^do Deum. l. 1.
What more shall I say to you, in a way of persuasion? Shall I mind you of
Chrysostoms argument? It is your honor, your happiness, that you may thus
dwell in Gods presence, and express your desires. Do but think what it is to
deal with great Personages, in way of petition. I. There is time spent in
going to them: Then more in waiting on them: After sundry days waiting, we may
happily receive that proud Prelates answer, Hildebr. to Henry 4.
We are not yet at leisure: When we have access, we must be brief, we may
offend: The answer is doubtful; sometimes instead of Bread, men either give,
or speak Stones; however, no man can give all, to all Petitioners. But now when
we deal with the high God, we need not travel far, every place is a
Sanctuary; nor need we abridge our selves, come when we will, in the day, in
the night: speak whilst we will, so long as we speak his language, he will
hear us at large, yea he will help us out, and make English of that, which to
our seeming wants sense. And should not this encourage us? Were they blessed
that stood continually before Solomon? And is it not our happiness that we
may have Gods ear, Gods heart, hand, face, help, all? Or, shall I tell you,
that Prayer is to us, what the water is to the Fish, Chrysostom. lib. 2. de Orat.
the only Element of safety, and our utmost refuge.

Truly the Lord has reserved diverse things to this ordinance of prayer; some
devils will not out, some temptations will not off, some obstructions will not
be removed, some difficulties will not be conquered, some mercies will not be
obtained, but by prayer. What other key will unlocke the clouds in this
drought? or turn about the hearts of men, in this distraction, but only
prayer? And who knows but that therefore God has futured other hopes, and
frustrated other means, to the intent, that he might honor this ordinance?

For Motives I will say no more. Only give leave to tell you in few, how you
shall hold up the heart, from fainting in the work. The way is this.

1. Come well appointed into the field. Assure the That your persons are
accepted, and that you are Gods own, as it is in the Parable; for, till this
be resolved, that God is yours, and you his, all particular doubts will resolve
themselves into this. It is true (will your heart say) God is good to his: But
am I his? His promises are gracious; but do they belong to me? And therefore
lay that as a foundation, I am thine; and Psalm. 119.94.
and then it will follow, as David infers, therefore save me. 2. Assure your
Prayers, that they be acceptable. 1. For the Root; They must be issues of
Grace; not of wit or nature. 2. For the Rule; They must
1. For matter; bear the stamp of God, his precept, or promise. 2. For Order;
they must be tendered in the hand of a Mediator, the Lord Christ. And 3. For
end; The object of prayer Gods self must. be the end thereof. And the more we
secure both Person, and Prayer, the more courage we shall have in standing it
out.
Come well appointed both for 1. Weapons, and 2. Company.

1. For company; The more the better; whereas in other fights and fields
sometimes multitude marres all. There is a special promise upon joint prayers,
Mat. 18. And could we second one another, as Bathsheba, and her friends did, in
her address to the King, 1 King. 1. I should not doubt of as good an issue our
petitions, as she found of hers.

O, That we could meet! if not always in the same place, at the same time:
yet in the same requests. Text.
If one widow can do so much alone; what might not an army of Children do, if
they would close?

2. As for weapons; The Lords own are most approved, and will be only
available. He is a mighty Prince, who will be served only with his own. Look
how it was in the Law: All must be Gods own: The Priest his, the Sacrifice
his, the Altar his, the Place his, All his; to the very knife, and meanest
tools: so is it still. The Person praying must be his own, the Prayer his,
the Mediator his, the Petitions his, the Reasons his, All his. And when you
press him with his own, and say (as she to Judah) Whose are these? Genesis 38.
he cannot deny himself.

Being thus armed, and entered the lists, play the men, and be victorious. There
is but one thing more to be done. Set Faith on work, and that will be your
victory.

If you ask me, How?

The Answer is, Pitch faith upon God. Consider, 1. What he is. Why, he is a
God, says Christ.
1. A God; that is, Power it self, Wisdom, Mercy, oodnesse it self. View him
well: for all in God makes for encouragement, when once we are his. 2. He is
not a God simply, but a God in Covenant; and that Covenant is made with Christ;
and by virtue of the same Covenant Christ, and we are both heard. 3. By virtue
of this Covenant he is a Father; and what will not a Father do, an heavenly
Father for so many children? when all pray, and all in each child prays: for
we make to him, as the child to the breast; all speaks, and works at once,
hands, feet, mouth, all, there and here.
2. What his promises be. How free, how fit, how attempered to our exigencies,
and needs. 1. They are made to the lowest degree of grace, Matthew. 5. 2. They
are made to grace mingled with many wants and corruptions, to bruised Reeds.
What he is in his deeds. 1. He gives us two Mediators; His Son, his Spirit.
2. He gives more then is asked, never less. 3. He gives cheerfully. Before
we end, he begins. 4. He gives to many for our sakes; Es. 65.24. Dan. 9.
maintains a world of men, and creatures, for our use. And so long as we see
one of them alive, we cannot justly doubt of his faithfulness to us. 4.
Lastly, consider what he is in his Parables. Here he shows us what Prayer can
do with a Judge. Luke 11. He tells us what Prayer can do with a Neighbor,
what with a Father; and infers encouragement from all.


Is he a Judge? A Judge may be overcome with importunity.

Is he a Friend? A Friend may be raised out of his bed with entreaties.

Is he a Father? And are we Fathers? and do not we feel the force of that
argument? If ye, that are but sorry Fathers, will give good things to a child:
will not your heavenly Father much more?

Now having by an eye of Faith thus looked upon God, in his Perfections,
Relations, Promises, Performances, Parables: Gather upon God, and hold him to
it, as Jacob did. Did not thou command me? Said thou not thus unto me?
etc. Press him with his Precept, with his Promise, with his Hand, with his
Seal, with his Oath, till we do (...), as some Greek Fathers do boldly speak:
That is, (If I may speak it reverently enough after them) Put the Lord out of
countenance; Put him (as you would say) to the blush, unless we be Masters of
our requests.



Savior his phrase, Luke 11.8. (...)

great God.

man, and in that respect compares himself to man, in these Parables.

Glorious Majesty.

Father. And a Kings son may go as freely to his Father, as a Beggars.

O. But it is too late.

Night, if the Day be lost. At midnight the neighbor heard his neighbor, Luke
11.

O, But my prayers be simple.

simple suitor in the Parable. Art thou a Child? A Father accepts of small,
broken, imperfect speeches from a child.

Judge.

Judge in the Text. Thou have a Mediator, and he is a Son, a Son that never
sinned, never displeased. Plead him, and then make supplication to thy Judge,
as Job did.

O, But?

O Buts. Silence unbelief. Turn faith loose. Our work should be to
strengthen, not to weaken our hearts: to greaten our Faith, not our Fears. And
there is no temptation so strong, but faith will conquer it: no affliction so
great, but faith will supple it: no prison so strait, but faith will open it:
no objection so forked, but faith will dissolve it: no danger so imminent, but
faith will outface it. Help this, and Help all: Awaken this, and Awaken all.
Remember the Story of another Widow, 2 King. 4. She had little: She needed
much. Borrow (says the Prophet) of all thy neighbors: But shut the doors
upon thee. It was time to shut the doors, when many greater vessels must be
supplied from one little one. I say the like to you. Shut the Doors: Shut out
sense, shut out all discouragements, which would put faith out of countenance:
And, if God fill not every vessel, challenge him upon that his word, Psalm.
31.10.
Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. And take this with you. The Cruse
never ceased running, till there was no more room. As elsewhere God never
ceased bating, till Abraham left begging.

I have spoken to the Point. Now the Lord enlarge you in private. I am sensible
of your occasions. I am unwilling to abridge my Worthy Brother. And therefore I
will say as much as I can at Once, to the particular following, and contract my
self.

The ludge in the Prothesis we pass. The Comparison E Medio imitates a mercy,
in Having Judges. I add only the Orators qualification, Ci^p^o Milo^e.
Mado audeant que sentiunt.

The Assumption comes on with great strength, and holds out this to us.

The Lord will certainly avenge his own.

For the Terms this may suffice. His own by Election, as it is added.

Election is either to Glory, or Election is either to Office. We exclude
neither: we prefer the former. God has a Peculiar (not a Puccian) choice. The
Number, whether Materially, or Formally considered, is to him Certain. The
Persons known. And them he will Avenge. (Avenge,) that is, 1. Vindicate them,
and 2. Retaliate their enemies.

For proof thus.

1. Gods title is, The Avenger. Psalm. 94. 1. As The Protector, The Second, So
the vulgar and the 70, often in the Psalms read (...), Protector, etc.
or Champion of his people. 2. It Is his Place, as Judge. Genesis 15. 14. 3. It Is
his Prerogative, as Supreme. A Regality invested in the Deity. Vengeance is
mine. Unless God issue out a Commission, and give power, none must revenge. 4.
It Is his Glory. He Is known by it. Psalm. 9. 16 He shines in it, and is lifted
up into the throne. Psalm. 94. 1. Here all his Perfections, Wisdom, Power
Justice, Truth are Concentrate. That Is from Gods self.
Next, From his People. God is most concerned

1. The Cause is his: and he is struck at in it. The thing pursued in a Saint,
is, not sin, nor the Man's self: But God in his Truth and Graces. Hereupon
the Church intitles him to her quarrels, Psalm. 74. 22. 2. Next, The Persons be
his: his Children. And the Father feels what the Child suffers: and whither
else should Children fly, but to their Father? Nay, in a sort, by Acceptance,
and Interpretation, they are God himself. He, that touches them, touches
him in his tendrest part. Zach. 2. 8. Thirdly, From their Enemies. They have no
aim in their hand. They strike at All, with Haman. Yea they triumph over God
himself, when they trample upon his: as a King is said to be conquered, when
his subjects be subdued. Hence in Scripture, Vid. learned Mede in 1 Timothy 4. 1.
A Nation, and their God stand and fall together. 2 King. 28. 33. Ier. 48. 7.
and 50. 2.
This Point (applied) is 1. Of Private concernment, and 2. Of Public use.


In Private, it has a Threefold prospect.

Gods; set all to Rights this day. It Is the work of this day. It Is The Fast.
Isay. 51. There God shows What is, What is not a Fast to him.

To hang the head for some hours, that is not The Fast.

The Fast is. To loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and
to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke. Is it not etc?
ver. 6.7. Let Us come home therefore to out business. Is any servant defeated?
Any Tenant by us oppressed? Any Creditor defrauded? Any poor Christian any way
wronged? Let my counsel be accepted. -- Break off your sins by
righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, etc. Dan. 4.
Pay for the cure; Make satisfaction for the wrong; Compound with the
Plaintiffs; Let them stay the suite, become mediators for you. This is Gods
way, in the Case of Abraham with Abimelech, Genesis 20. of Job with his Friends,
Job ult.

Give (says God) the man his wife: he is a Prophet, my Prophet: He shall
pray for thee: so thou shall live: else thou art a dead man. And for Job; He
is my Servant (says God) you have done him wrong: Right him again: And Let
him sacrifice: Him will I accept: you without him I accept not.

You see the course. If you tread it, your Fast takes, your Prayers pass: If
not, The Judge is on the bench; he will Have Eye for Eye: Tooth for Tooth. My
meaning is, He will return you your own Coin; and the more silent the
Patient is, the more shrill the Wrong will be; as in the case of Moses, Numb.
12. 2. whilst he is dumb, God speaks, whilst he is deaf, God hears, and
stirs. And surely Fast we must from all Injustice, or Fast from nothing.
Better eat bread, then drink blood, and devour man's flesh. I refer you, in
this haste, to Job 31. 21. to Exodus 23. v. 23.24. and 27. I must away.

2. This respects the time present. Will God Hold ye your hands. 1 Samuel 24.13.
Let wickedness proceed from the wicked. Let not your hand be upon him. Yea
hold your Tongues, your Hearts, and be not so impotent, as to return wrath
for wrath: much less to band jests, and girds. It Is for children to spit at
one another. Be ye so Manlike, so Kinglike, Regiumest, etc.
as to do Best, when ye hear Worst: so Christ-like, as to overcome all evil
with all goodness. And in case you be at any time either played upon, with
David, or trod upon with that Great Prince, Barbarossa, Non tibi, sed Petro. V.
10. V^sin.
say, Non tibi, sed Christo: say, It Is before the Lord. And, if no law will
relieve you, know that you shall do your selves no disservice, in making God
your Chancellor.

Work: but what our Warrant is. It Is certain, we shall meet with oppsition in
the pursuance, and performance of our Callings: Especially You, that are more
public persons, and have more earnest contestation with open delinquents.
Lugge but one swine, and there will be a great outcry. But here is the Point.
Are ye Gods in the Cause? Is the work his? The design his? your weapons his?
your method his? Have you to show a warrant, and Commission from him? Fear no
Colors: Though every brick were a Devil: Go on with Luther. Your names,
lives, posterity are in his hands. He speaks to you, as Absalom to his, Fear
not: have not I commanded you? 2 Samuel 13. 28. And, when you can justify your
proceedings to him, reply upon your own fears, in Nehemiah's words; Should
such a man as I flee? I! who pretend to God! I! a Public person! Should I fly
with a whole Corporation, nay County on my back! Has my Country entrusted
me, given me her self? Et Turnum fugientem haec terra videbit! Far be
this from Noble Spirits. Assure the Cause, Calling, Conscience: and that done,
Fix your visible eye upon the invisible God, as Moses, Heb. 11.27: 1 Reg 22.19.
and Michaiah did before you: and all the Glory and Majesty in the world will
seem no more to you, then it did to them; or then a poor Candle is to the
brightest Sun. So the first Use.

The second is more Public, and it is Double.

You of Public rank must 1. Concur with God the Avenger, 2. Confide in him.


For the first. The Lord has taken you into Commission with himself; put his
Name, his Power upon you. What it is I cannot determine, nor do I meddle with
your privileges. What ever it is, it is Gods; it is of him and for him, and must
be managed accordingly. It shall be your safety to frequent your commission.
It Is Derived, It Is Limited, yea and It Is Public too; and must be managed with
a Public spirit. Private revenge is not within your Commission. That leaves a
stain upon a man some ways innocent; witness Iehu: And puts an innocence
upon the greatest offender; witness Abner.

Here then all selfish affections, and private respects must be 1. strained
out, and Justice Justice, as Moses speaks, that is, Pure Justice without mudde,
must run down. Deuteronomy. 16.20. And 2. restrained in all others. And be assured
that you have done, and shall do your selves greatest right, in Disadopting,
and Disavowing all illegal, tumultuary, selfe-revenging, and libellous ways.
Gods cause needs not man's ly, man's froth, spleen, malice. And it shall be your
happiness to put a wide distance between Iustum and Just: between the
courage of the Son, and the disorder of the Soldier, Manlius. Plus est in
imperio, quam in victoria. Florus l. 1. c. 14.
with that Old General. Your revenge must be public, then yea all public in
it. Person, Cause, Rule, End, All; and then it will be a Sanctuary to the
innocent, a Sacrifice to the Lord.

What Iehoshaphat once said to his Judges, I say to you, Let the fear of God
fall upon you. Take heed; The Judgment is Gods, not man's. 2 Chronicles. 19.

Nothing of man must be seen, heard, felt in this. All must be Gods. God
must be read in your Laws, heard in your Threats, felt and seen in your
Executions: And then things come upon the Conscience with power, when only God
is represented.

Upthen, Ye visible Gods, and remember that God avenges by you. 1. In Civil
causes. Say, what God would say; do, what he would do: you are his mouth,
his hand. Avenge the Widow, Relieve the Oppressed. And if your leisure will not
admit of Jobs search: yet do you admit of Iethro's counsel. Job 29.16. Exodus
18.
Dismiss them timely, when you cannot presently dispatch, lest you tire them,
and wast your selves.

2. In matters of higher Alloy: Avenge God, as he shall avenge you. Make laws
to fence his laws. Plead his right. Vindicate his truths, his name, his day.
And that done, in a conformity to God, then in the next place, 2. Confide in
him. Believe your Savior. God will certainly avenge his own; his own
servants, his own delegates, and substitutes. He will God will avenge, not
Members only, but Whole Churches, and Societies, that are his: His own, all
his own, whether Private, or Public, he will defend. And, if it shall please
him to make us yet more his own, and to draw us nearer to himself in a closer
Covenant, so that we be his Iesurun, he will be to us, as once to Jacob,
The shield of our defense, the sword of our excellency: He will bear us in
his everlasting arms; as it is Deuteronomy. 33. more at large.

Yea he will look upon all the Blasphemies, Insolences, Outrages, and
Conspiracies against this our Church, and State, and at once retaliate our
Adversaries, and justify our cause.

The Conclusion is that of the Kings. Deal courageously: the Lord shall be
with the good. When the Cause is good, and the Heart good, and Warrant good;
God will be with you, in his Counsel to Direct, in his Power to Protect, in
his Goodness to Avenge. So says The Amen, and faithful witness.

3. Nay yet farther. As this must comfort us for our own particular, in this
our Little Moat: So for the public, and the Church in genetall. The cause of
Religion is, you know, Gods cause. The cry of Blood belongs to his
Recognizance. He makes inquisition for blood. Psalm. 9.
The blood of his cries loud, and has cried long against That Man of Sin,
and Man of blood. Under the Fifth Seal the blood of the Then Saints cried
apace, How long! etc. That cry opened a Sixth Seal; and then the Bloody Dragon
cried as fast, O ye hills, and Mountains cover us! etc. Since that, there is an
Inundation of blood, that cries from all Coasts, and cries more then ever. Even
thy blood O Germany, and thine, O France, and thine, O Ireland. God has said,
that He that kills shall be killed, and that blood shall answer blood, Revel.
13.10. The time draws on, and Cry on ye bleeding Churches: Cry on ye
Prophets, and Apostles, in your Sackcloth, in your blood. And thou, O England,
with thy Cranmers, Ridlies, Bradfords. Cry on, and give the Lord no rest, O ye
his Saints, whose blood is shed, till he That Is holy and true avenge your
Blood. And

Ye, O NOBLES, and much honored GENTLEMEN: ^tus lib. 2. ^. 15.
do ye set your hands to this Carthage, that busles most; and this
Blondy-Beast, which bites worst, in her last conflict. And, when ye have done
all, Stand by the Glassy Sea, with your harpes ready, till the Lord shall be
pleased to empty the Fifth Vial upon the throne of the Beast, and cast the
great mil-stone into that Sea of blood. Amen. Even so come LORD JESUS; Take to
thy self thy great power, and let the blood-sheds of the Great Whore come in
remembrance before thee. Amen.

Follows the Third, which delivers the manner how God delivers his.

1. H^e's long ere he begins; 2. He goes through-stitch, when he sets in.
For words; I am loath to entertain time with Criticism's; we have a greater
work in hand. If we follow Chrysostom's sense with the Vulgars, and her
Sworn-men, and read the words Question-wise, Will he suffer long? we shall 1.
Impute to S. Luke worse language then he speaks, who of the Evangelists is most
Attick: And So Homer uses (...) in Vulcans speech to I^o. Iliad. ^ etc and
alibi passim.
2. Cross the maine scope, which drives at perseverance upon delays. If we
follow his follower Theophylact, and modern writers, and render (...), by
(...), sampling it with the Hebrew, we have our warrant. Yet [here's a
difficulty. For, How sorts this Slownesse, with thao [ Speedily] following?


But this is no hard knot. 1. God may seem to us: but is not in himself Slow.
For to be Slow, is to be too late; and God is never so: 2. Again, he bears
at first, yet smites home at last.

I take no pride in varying from advised translations, and therefore pitch
there.

God gives proof of his patience, before he proceeds to execution. He suffers
long, before the Creature suffers. This is generally true. But I must draw down
the point to the present instance. He suffers long, (With Them.) With Whom?
With Adversaries, as the woman phrased it; or With them, whom vengeance abides;
as the Hebrews often couch the Object in the Action. Our Point then must run
thus.

God bears long with adversaries; with worst men. He dispenses not his favors
equally to all: yet to all some. All taste of his goodness, but with a
difference. Though he bear not Ever, yet he bears Long with his enemies. His
Everlasting Name is (...) opposed to (...), (...) say the LXX.
Prove. 14.29. that is, He is not Soon, but Slowly provoked. The Apostle speaks
it roundly, Romans 9. He suffers with much Long-suffering the vessels of wrath.

The truth of this we find in Persons, Cities, Kingdoms, and those none of
the best. But we touch only upon these particulars.

1. Look upon the Persons in their distance, 1. The Provokers are his Own
Creatures, who live upon him. 2. The Provoked, the Highest Majesty. This were
enough to tempt created patience, as he said; 2 Samuel 16.9.
Shall this dead dog rail upon my Lord the King! What! A Dog upon a King! This
requires infinite patience. 2. Look upon their Actions, in their difference.
And there it is hard to say whether be greater, Patience or Provocation.
1. The wicked hate His, for His sake, with a Satanicall hatred, (as David's
word is, Psalm. 38.20.) and would destroy Soul and Body all at once, as that
Villain in Bodin attempted upon another. 2. They cannot be satisfied with One
Mordecai's flesh: They wish all but One head, that they might dispatch all at
one stroke. 3. No time is long enough; no help great enough. They call in help;
they beg and borrow Curses and Blaspemies, to their last breath, Mr. Boltons
Sermon on 1 Cor. 1.26.
as I read of one. 4. They never relent, but write all to their merits, and
wish they could do more. Thus they provoke.
Now what is Gods Patience? Though his soul abhor sin infinitely; Though he
cannot go out of hearing, and shut his eyes, as we may, but must see and hear
all; Though his name, Law and Children be more to him then all the world;
Though heaven and earth sweat under these provocations, and Gods own (struck
down at his foot) cry for help: Yet God Bears, and Bears long; Rom 2.
there is (...)
Nay does them Positive good; Treats with them; Fees them to be quiet, and his
own to be patient; and, when he must needs smite, gives them space, takes time
himself, is Long in bending his bow, and drawing forth his weapons. And after
all this, if then an Ahab will submit, he is ready to reprieve. But this is a
Fathomlesse-depth. Were I in another place, I should hold it needful to say
something, by way of explication. But here it is sufficient to mind you, That
Gods Patience is no way Passive; Nay his Longest-suffering is his
Greatest-Acting, or enjoying of himself, in all Serenity. and Perfection, and
is only grounded upon his most perfect nature.

1. God is Power it self, and therefore can bear long. 2. God is Wisdom it
self; and therefore forbearant. 3. Goodness it self; and therefore so
longsuffering.
And the longer he suffers, the more he exercises and evidenceth these his
perfections. That is the maine ground of the Point; whereto you may add, if
you please, these ensuing Particulars.

Wicked, Gods adversaries are some way his own; and that Ownenesse works
Patience. The Lord is a piece of a Father to them also. For he is A
Common-Father, by Office to all; A Speciall-Father, by Adoption to Saints; A
Singular-Father, by Nature to Christ. A Prince, besides his particular relation
to his Children, is Pater-Patriae, Pater-familias, and is Good to All; though
with a difference: So here.

Christ has purchased a peculiar people to himself, to the purpose of
salvation: yet others taste of this his goodness. The world, you know, was lost
in merit, and ipso facto forfeited, with all its comforts, and appurtenances.
The Lord Christ has restored it, and does keep it standing; and in the
Interim, the worst enjoy it in common with the best, and so far, fare the
better for Christ.

own praise, and design upon his Church.

In short. At present there may be some use of them; and so he reprieves them,
as we do some notorious Felon: and hereafter there may be some fruit come from
them; and the Ill Mother is a while forborne for her Fruit, and Venture sake.
This is all I can stay to speak to the point.

Now were I my self, I would commend this to Two sorts.

1. The worst must take heed of Two Extremities. 1. Not to Vy with Children,
and bear themselves too high upon Gods love, because he bears himself so
patiently, and graciously toward them. No, there is a difference. Genesis 25 5, 6.
Isaac is the Son of the Promise, though all the Abrahamites have something. 2 Chronicles 21.3.
Only Iehoram the firstborne must have the Crown, and Kingdom: Smaller
matters must content the rest. All Joseph's brethren taste of his bounties; but
none to Benjamin. As in the things there is a wide difference: (not now to be
enlarged) so specially in the Issue, and event. The wickeds happiness will
take end, his lease will run out, Eccl. 8.13. That End when it comes, comes
Swiftly; as Ezekiel in his 7. chap. tells them upon another occasion. -- The End
(says he) is Come, is Come, is Come; and so some ten or twelve time minds them
of this. And when that Time is Come, The Lord sets on, How Long, and How Often
he has forborne. Psalm. 95.
-- Forty years long I have borne with this generation. And -- These ten
times have they provoked me. Numb. 14.22. 2. Not to charge God to be an hard
Master: But to give him the glory, not only of his Justice, but of his
Patience, and Goodness: For even in his Executions he is still beneath their
demerit, beyond their desert; and that one day they will know, though now they
will not acknowledge it. But the maine is to the Saint.


If the worst must say, God is patient; must not the Saint? If Sodom, If Babel,
If India must acknowledge his Long-suffering: must not England? must not This?
must not every Town and City? O survey your lives, compare Gods patience with
your frowardness; Gods forbearance with your stubbornness. Call to mind your
follies, passions, infirmities, presumptions. What answers you have returned
upon reproof; how many calls you have slighted; how many means you have
scorned. In few; how many, how great, how lasting your provocations have been.
And, If Cain, and Judas must yield God patient: Do you say, Who is a God like
unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the
remnant of his beritage? He retains not his anger for ever, because he
delights in mercy, Mica. 7.18. And, if the devils themselves think it worthy
a suit, that their torment may be deferred: must not we think it thankworthy,
that we are thus long forborne? O, let every Town ye look upon, every Church
ye come into, every field you walk in, every Creature you see living, draw
from you thanks. -- Let the house of Aaron say, His mercy endures for ever;
Else had we no Church. -- Let the house of Israel say, His mercy endures for
ever, Else had we no State. -- let every man breathing say, His mercy endures
for ever; Else our Atheismes, Oaths, Curses, Idols, Murders, Whoredoms, and
other Abominations had long since sunk us, and swallowed us up.

But what are Words, if but Words? Let the Meditation of this point be improved
unto Humiliation; Repentance; Consolation.

1. For the first. Is God so forbearant? 1. What are we, that we should be so
hasty? What? Is he wounded in his Name, in his Law, and in his Sons? And must
not we be touched in our Dog? Who are we, that we cannot bear (As God,
(shall I say? nay) With God himself! He must smite, when we would have him;
else we question, sometimes his Truth, most times his Care.

Nay farther. Is God so forbearant? What have we done? Or what did we mean,
to provoke so Patient a Father? How great is the provocation of his sons, and
daughters! It is not, It is not (believe it) a Small thing that will Anger this
Father. It is not a little Cloud, that will hide this Sun. In his anger
therefore read our sins, and in his expressions his wrath. His Face, his
Words, his Actions, speak him angry. And Patience will not be angry for
Trifles. What? David hide himself from his Absalom? does not so great a wrath
argue greatest provocation?

And is not Our Father, think you, Angry, when he sends a Spirit of division
amongst us? when he Dashes Child against Child? make a Rod, of a Sword? draws
Blood, and bathes his Sword therein? Turns his Children a begging, and outs
them of all? Is not here wrath? And is it not time now, Number. 12.
to fall before him, with Miriam, whilst he thus spits in our face? Number. 16.46.
To Run with Aaron, when the fire is begun? 1 Chronicles. 21.
To cry with David, when the Sword is drawn? O Lord, spare Jerusalem, spare
our Cities, our People: And to lament after our Father; as the Child does after
his lost Mother. My Father, my Father is lost, What shall I do!

2. In the next place, Let this quicken our repentance: Kindness will melt a
Saul. Should it not a Son? The proper issue of patience and kindness should be
repentance: of long patience speedy repentance.

You are Noble. I report my self to your Judgments. What think you? Are not a
thousand of Oaths, and millions of Lies (to omit other provocations) enough? Is
not 40. years provocation? nay 60? nay 80. sufficient? Has not God waited
long, and long enough? Is it fit, think you, to make him wait longer? Is there
any hope, that ought else will work, if Patience work not? Or is there any
thing left, after Patience abused? Will not Nineveh rise up in Judgment
against us, and say, We had but 40. days patience afforded us: And shall these
abuse Twice 40. years? Will not the damned in hell arise and say, We were born
withal, some but 30. some but 20. years, and these have abused a far longer
patience? Nay, will not the Devils themselves come in and say, We had not the
patience of one hour afforded us; and shall these Ever be spared? I beseech
you by All the mercies of God; by An age of Patience; by A world of blessings;
by that your Candor, and Ingenuitie; and by all the Endearements, that ever
past betwixt Christ, and your souls; pity your selves; pity your Country;
pity your posterity; and be content to be happy. Fall down in private
before the Lord, and say; O Lord, I am ashamed of my Unmannerliness. Thou have
long knocked, and I have made thee stand out of doors. I can stand out no
longer. It is infinite patience, if as yet I may live. O Turn me, and I will
now turn. I Come, I Come with all the strength I have. O draw me! Melt me!
receive me!

3. Lastly, Let this give us an hopeful expectation Posture for mercy, There
were yet hope in Israel. For I demand. Is God patient toward Enemies? toward
Rebels? when there is no fasting, no praying, no reforming thought upon? And
will he Not meet us in the way of his judgments? Vid. Mic. 6.3.
What? Hos. 6.14. and 11.8.
is he so long-suffering toward sinful Ephraim? so loath to think of a
divorce? How shall I give thee up Ephraim! How shall I entreat thee! And so
ready to receive Ephraim, upon submission? Is Ephraim my dear son? etc. Ier.
31.20.
And will he not be gracious to this Our Ephraim, in case we come in? What!
will he plead for Israel, for Nineveh against his Prophets? and of a Judge
become an Advocate? As we see in the case of Elijah, and Jonah. Why Elijath
(says he) Thou art not alone: There be Thousands with thee, and for me: Why
Jonah, do thou well to be so hasty? would thou have me slay the Child
upon the Mother? so young, so many? Will God, I say, thus plead for a people,
when his Prophets cry against them? And will he not be entreated for us, when
of all Ranks some, and the Prophets chiefly importune him? Bear up, Brethren,
and know with whom ye have to do. You deal with a Father, The Father, and
The God of Patience. It Is true. Esa. 54.7.
He can be angry. That Is his Justice: That Is his Goodness to you: But he
cannot be long angry with his own. It Is but for a Moment. It redounds not to
the Person. It Is not Penal, but Medicinal. Sink not under it. Only prize
patience, and abuse it not. Hold this Patient God amongst you, as Moses did.
Chain him up with your prayers and tears, Ex. 33.16. and 34.9.
and say, If we have found grace in thy sight, Go not from us: Abide with us.
And then know, There is patience enough in God for a Thousand Englands. And, if
we do miscary, it is not from want of Goodness in God, but from want of
Grace in us, who have a price in our hands and do not know it. But I must
away. The last thing follows.

God is swift in his help as well as sure. When his be once ready for help,
help is at hand. So Nahum pleads, cap. 1.2.3. God suffers; and God is swift. I
am in have, and cannot open the words. S. Peter says the same, 2 Pet. 3.9.
where two things are spoken.

1. What God is in our conceit; Slack. 2. What God is indeed; Seasonable, when
we are fitted.
God slow?

slownesse, or slucknesse: For that is to Omit an opportunity. He is ever
Opportune, and frames his pace, as there is cause. When we be ripe, he is
ready, he is speedy.

Speedy, 1. In opposition to the Judge here; who is too late; and to men's
opinions, who being too short, think God too long.

Speedy, 2. In reference to our fitness, and fitness of time. He is neither
too early, nor too late; but observes the very height, strength, joint, article
of time. We know not how to express Moses his (...) of time. Ex. 12.41. and
alibi in Genesis
But at present we are upon his speedy help. For this; do but observe how he
represents himself.

1. In his gestures, and postures. He Is said, stand up or arise, to run,,
Vid. Hab. 3. and passim apud Prophetas.
to fly. 2. In his Expressions. He that Comes, will Come, and will make haste,
without tarriance. In the Canticles, he comes leaping, etc.
Hebr. 10.37. 3. In his Performances. Ever at, Es. 31.5. flying, etc.
or before his day, never one hour too late.
The Reason whereof is manifold.

1. If we respect Gods self. 1. He cannot mistake Wisdom it self, and the
just measure of time. That is Esay's reason, Esa. 30.
He is a God of Judgment. 2. He cannot fail of his aim, and end. For he
is power it self. There is nothing in his way, He is in heaven (says David)
and does whatsoever he will. Others must work what, and when they can: God
works when it pleases him, and can do a great deal in a little space. He
can cause to Conceive, and to bring forth the same day, Esaias 66.8.3. He is
goodness it self. Goodness is his nature: and nature delights in its own
operations: it is it is life. The Sun runs rather then stand still; delights
more in shining, then in being overshadowed. 4. He is Truth, and it is his
Word, He will be found in Due time; and his time is the Due time, with
respect to our Fitness. Psalm. 46.1.5.

2. Add in the second place, Gods Relation. He is a Father. Relations, you
know, are very active. Saul would rise early to help his subjects. 1 Samuel 11.
Fathers be rather too hasty, then too slow. They are ready before their
Sons. The child indeed thinks himself fit for Horsmanship, for the Un
versitie, Marriage, or the like: and conceives his Father too slow. But the
truth is, The Father stays upon his Child, and is ready before he is ready;
Especially in cases of danger. A Father runs without legs, when the Child is
hazarded: Nor is there any Beast, which will not fly upon death, when his young
is endangered. Now the Lord has not put this inclination into Creatures, and
deprived himself thereof, the while. His be His, and He will be Theirs, if
it be not long of them. Let the prodigal creep, and the Father will run. Luke
15.

how it passes. Their Cry is still, How long! Make haste. Their Remembrancers
join with them. Esaias 62. and Christ with them. Zach. 1. How long, O Lord of
Hosts, will thou not have mercy upon Jerusalem? etc 12. These, All these sue
God upon his Band, and press the fitness of the time. Dan. 9.2. Psalm. 102.13.
To make end.

If mere self-love will force this Judge out of his pace: will not love of
Justice, Mercy, Truth? Love of Christians, of Christ, of Godsselfe quicken him?
Does not he know how soon their spirits will faint? How soon they will step
forth of the way? and after halting, turn aside, upon too long delays?

Gods people long deferred.

journey to feeble knees. Times are above our reach. The knots, and periods of
them are in the hands of the God of Judgment. When help is seasonable, his
fingers itch, as the Mothers breast aches, when it is time the child had suck.

There is no more now to be done,

1. Blush we at our boldness, who take upon us

1. To Control. 2. To Confine the All-wise God.
1. For the first. Who are we, that we should Maker? and say, in effect, Here
God is out. Here he mistakes his time? What is this but to Charge God
foolishly, as Job did not. What is this, but to Set the Sun by our Dyall?
Job. 2.4 and 7.6. and 11.39.40.
This Caesar terms sancinesse in his Soldiers. This our Savior disliked in
his dearest friends. This the Physician blames in his Patient: Parents in their
Children: you in Us: if so be that we, (at so great a distance, who know so
little of your obstructions) shall charge you, here with too much haste, there
with too much slownesse.

As great a sauciness it is To Confine the Almighty. Now he must help, or
never. This way, or no way. By this Parliament, or by No Parliament. Stop, for
shame. And, if you will wisely enquire into a reason of Gods proceedings,
reflect upon your selves, and charge the slownesse upon your own souls. It is
a truth, God will be ever himself: and has many ends, in One Work. But, in
passages twixt him and us; the fault is ours, not his, if we be not
seasonably helped.

Thence that in Isay 30.18. God waits, that he may have mercy. Gods Heart,
Gods hands are full of mercy: he waits, being A God of Judgment. (i) one,
that dispences mercy in Judgment.

Thence his plea. Isay 58.1. etc. The people wondered they heard not from God.
Why (say they) have we fasted? etc. And God wonders, that he hears not from
them. And more fully ( Isa. 59.1.) he resolves the Case. Gods hand is not
shortened: His ear is not deafned. He is able, he is willing to do them
help. Where is the hindrance then? He tells them, Your sins keep good
things from you.

Thence also it is, That God so expostulates with Joshua. cap. 7.10. Up, (says
he) Why lie thou thus, and cryect to me? As if it were long of me, that
the war succeeds not. Go, deal with thy people. There is an accursed thing
in Israel.

Thus God points us to our duty, and we must Act accordingly. Judges 20. when
the wars of the Church miscarried, the Church inquires of God, with Prayers,
and Tears, and Fastings. In the like case we must do the same thing. We are
here upon Gods work. Things stick. Comfort comes on slowly. Let us Cast Lots
with Joshua, and find out The Achan. Let every man lay his hand upon his heart,
and say, Can God certainly help? Will he speedily hear? What is then the
reason of this delay?

This is a fit question for public, for private, for All Persons.

In Public. Your affections ( Honored and Beloved) we question not. Sure your
endeavors are good, your labors great. Yet must we say with the Prophet, The
harvest is past, Summer is ended, and we are not saved. Ier. 8.20. Where is
the Let? Let Us put it to the Lot.

1. Lot upon your selves, and let each Parliament man Am I ready? Am I fit for
mercy? for honor? I pretend to humiliation. I represent such a people, such a
place (in their sins) this day. Do I humble my self? Do I gage my heart,
pray, weep, mourn alone? I pretend to Reformation. Am I my self reformed? Do
not I, who say others must not swear, swear my self? Do not I give Liberty
to my self, where I make Laws for other? If so, God will never accept of a
good motion from a bad mouth: as that State in Story would not.

2. Lot upon your families. I come hither to reform others: But what are my
Own Children? my Own Servants? What should Philip do abroad, till he has
composed disorders at home?

3. Lot upon your Company, and Associates. Say, Is there never an Esau amongst
us? Never an Achan in our Tent? Never a Jonah in our Ship; who troubles all?

4. Lot upon your Courses. Ask. Whose work am I upon? Gods? or my Own? Ask
farther. (If the work be Gods, and the Public:) In what Order do I proceed?
Vzzah may disturb the whole business, for want of Order. Ask farther. In
what Manner do I go on? If I presume upon the goodness of the Cause, or
greatness of my strength; I may be crossed, as Israel was, in that 20. of
Judges.

You are now before the Lord. Weep with Israel upon these delays, and strike
the right Vein. Say. The Lord is not slow to help: but we are slow to search,
slow to reform, slow to put our selves in a hopeful way of mercy.

This is a fit Question for us also in Private. We (my Brethren) run out upon
God. He forgets. He will not be entreated. We fly upon men. They make no
Haste. They Spinne out Time, with long orations. Were We in place, Ireland
should not be thus deserted; Execution thus futur'd. But who is in fault? What
disorder! What disorder! says Nabuchadnezzar, when the Disorder was from him:
So we. What delays! What delays! No help Comes! O, but what says God? Up
Joshua. Israel has sinned. There is an Accursed thing among you. There is
cursed Pride, Unbelief, Covetousness, Coldness, Neutrality, in the Camp:
What can be done, till this be removed? There are Unblessed Divisions,
preposterous courses We Rangle our own work, and are much wanting to the
public, in our prayers, and amendments. And this is that, that scoat's the
business in public. Nay, shall I tell you? There is that, that hinders all in
public and in private: and in short it is this. We be not to this day
Humbled for Our-Own, and Our-Other-mens sins; we be not broken; we be not
ripe for mercy. And can we think that God will lay Cordials upon Full, and
Foul stomachs? That he will skarfe our bones, before they be set? And lap
up our sores, before they be searched? O it is in vain, (as I hope my Brother
will anon tell you, now my strength is spent.) It is in vain, I say, for us to
dream of Comfort, till we are better emptied and broken. Let us, I beseech
you, when we have done in Public, go to it in Private, and labor to. see
The Plague in our own heart. We speak much of A malignant Party. But shall I
tell you? Our sins be the Malignant Party: Yours, and Mine, and those whom
we represent this day. These tie the hands of God, and man. These stop the
ears of God, and the King against us. Cloare the Lord, and shame your selves,
saying, I have mistaken my self all this while. I have accused God: I have
accused men. I now accuse my self: my backwardness to turn to God is it that
foreslows my comfort. This done,

Coast upon a Cure. You are tired with Working, We with Waiting. Come we
briefly to the Point. Esaias 21.12. If you will enquire, enquire ye; Return,
Come. The Prophet speaks as if he were in haste: and two things are presently
expected.

1. We must be humbled. That Is once. Pride stands in Gods way. And, if we will
make David's prayer, we must make his plea. We are poor and needy: make no
tarriance. Psalm. 40. ult. And this work of self-humbling is a greater work,
then I can quickly deliver. But I presume you have been already pressed, or
will be anon, to this work.

2. We must be Reformed. Sin hangs in our Aaron, and Moses be never so
willing. Let Israel be never so near the Promised land: Sin (coming
between) will turn them round, and Iehoshaphat be never so forward in a
Reformation: The High Places will not down, if the Peoples hearts be not
prepared, 2 Chronicles. 20.33. I have Cut you out your Work. Now upon it.

Psalm 25.
1. Look Backward, and say with David, O Lord pardon my sin: it is very great.
Pardon my house, It is I and my house, that have sinned. Pardon my people, the
Town and County, from whom I come, As Luke 4.23 to cure his Country is to
cure himself.
for whom I appear this day, and which is my Second-self. Weep over them as
David over Jerusalem. Yea over the many many sis, that swarm in this Land; and
there stand betwixt wrath and the people: and then

2. Look forward, with respect to all your relations. As Men, Resolve with
Naaman; I will worship none but the God of Israel. As Masters, with Joshua; I,
and my house will serve the Lord. As Public Persons, with David; Betimes I
will cut off the evil doers. At least plead with Joshua 22.20. Did not Achan
thus, and God was angry with all Israel? For the Lords sake, Form your selves
into a happy body and order; and having so done, Do but what you can to put us
all into a Posture of mercy and safety. Let me tell you, that the Public pulse
beats very ill. Though many particulars give much encouragement: yet the
generality is bad enough. I will not meddle with any thing this day, but what
shall make for the work of the day. I leave your businesses to another day and
place. Give me leave to say thus much;

Credenda.
1. In point of Religion. If we speak of faith: How many be there, who have
(as that Father said) Fidem menstruam? I may add, Hilary.
Neutram, Nullam? 2. If we speak of particulars: Oculis in utram ^artem sluat j
dicarinon potest, probably Sone. Caes. de Bello Gall. l. 1.
Most men move like the river Arar: backward or forward, who can tell?

3. In point of subjection, in this Iubile, and Interval, (as the Vulgar reckon
it) no Magistrate, no Minister, no Officer, no Age is respected. It is with us
in the Country, as it was in his Army. Alcibiades.
All are Leaders, none Soldiers. All Teachers, none Scholars.

4. And for Laws. Whilst you make New, we break the Old: and whilst you are in
the Mount, we are Dancing about a May Pole, or Calfe. I may not dwell longer.

Give me leave to deliver my own and the Common suit of the honest minded, to
you: and I will deliver it to you in his words, Mark 9.22. Master, if thou
can do any thing (says he) have compassion on us, and help us.

My Lord, and Masters, If you can do any thing, Help us with your power (we
will Help you with our prayers.) Help us with your counsel. Help us what you
can (and what you can by Law, that you Can.) Help us to honest Ministers: Help
them to Bread, and Books too. Help them against the Mighty, that they be not
forced to Feast at that Dreadfull-table,, Chrysostom. (...) etc. hinc and (...) apud
Veteres.
as it was once called, they know not whom themselves. O! If we could be once
formed into a good people by a happy concurrence of Our Gracious Sovereign,
and both your Houses, we could not be long in dust and ashes. The Lord would
soon (as he says) subdue our enemies under us, Ps. 81.14. Mal. 42.
and come flying with healing under his wings. Only, if we look for speedy
help, we must speed our Bepentance, and Reformation; and so meet him, who has
promised to meet us. Now let the Patience of God move you, the distresses of
our Brethren (who have nothing left, Prater agri solum; if so much) move you.
Let the sad distractions and Iealousies at home move you. And, since God is
ready, why should we defer? Yet we live: Yet he offers himself as a
Father to us. Here he is this day: O let us not lose this day: but to day,
whilst it is to day, before the other half of it be spent, Come in, accept of
mercy. And, for your encouragement, let me conclude with a word of Comfort.

What? Does God wait, to do us a kindness. Micah 7. I will bear the wrath of
the Lord, I will wait, etc.



Lam. 3. And then Hearken what God will speak: Psalm 85.8.
for his heart and mouth will speak peace to his Broken people. Provided ever
that you leave him to his own both Times, and Means.



Representative-Kingdome, to appoint this meeting? Would he have accepted an
offering at our hands, and sent us a word of encouragement, if he had purposed
our destruction?





too good, too strong, too many. God is sometimes troubled with too much help,
but never with too little. We are sometimes too soon, but he is never too late.



Faiths turn and time. Now let The Just live by his faith. Now with Daniel,
let us Cast up times, and meet the Sunrising; at least before the day shut in.
Grow to his earnestness: O Lord hear; O Lord forgive; O Lord defer not. And
then expect some flying messenger, or other, with a message of comfort. Only
remember how it stands betwixt mother and child. Whiles the child does but
whimper in the cradle, the mother stirs not: But, when he takes up a note, and
cries every whit of him; hands, feet, face, all cry: then the mother flings by
all; then she flies and outruns her self; I come, I come, I come, my child. I
can say no more. My drift in all is, To beat you off (not from the Use of Gods
means, but) from Trusting in them. We have too long Idolized Parliaments,
Creatures, and created abilities: And the Lord has purposely blockt us up,
because our eyes should be only to him. And in him Alone you have
encouragement enough. He has helped already: He waits still: He is more then a
Judge; He is a Father: He can help, He will help. His word is for us,
precept, promise, parable: His servants are for us: His Son is for us, He is
One-of-us, which is beyond all the encouragements yet mentioned: He is termed,
in the words following, The Son of man, a man of Cum Patre dator, inter nos
petitor. Aug.
Prays, a man of Grace, the high Favorite, a man amids us, who Gives with the
Father, who Prays with the Suitor. And shall we yet faint! what I cannot now
do in public, do ye supply in private. Christ is fresh, his Blood fresh. Put
your petitions into his hand, and this day beg your Lives, your Land, your
King, with your Omnipotent Prayers. If you cannot Speak; Weep. Fletu agitur,
August.
non affatu. Tears pray. If you cannot weep, Sigh. God hears Sighs. If you
cannot Sigh, Breath. God feels Breath. Lam. 3.56. At least, let your Actions
pray, your Presence pray, your Submission pray, your Afflictions pray. God
hears Afflictions. Genesis 16.11. He hears our stretched out hands. Do not we
so? Do not we give to many a one, that says nothing; but only holds out a
hand to receive? O think as ill as you will of your selves: but think well of
God. Pray as you Can Pray: and he is a Father, who will make English of broken
prayers. Pray, I say. I say again Pray. And who knows, but Prayer will
lengthen our day, as once it did Ioshuahs? I can now say but little in public.
The Lord enlarge us, ( You, and me) in private, and my Learned Brother in
public. Had God vouchsafed me more leisure, health, enlargements, I had dealt
better with and for you, but at present, this is all that I can do, I shall be
short in prayer, and will not abridge my successor.

FINIS.

