Vox Coelorum.

PREDICTIONS defended: Or, The Voice of the Celestial Light, wherein is proved
Five things:

1 That the Stars have received influences. 2 That they operate and work
upon sublunary things, according to the nature and quality of those received
influences. 3 That God has revealed those received influences to man. 4 That
it is not unlawful to predict according to the known nature and quality of
those received influences. 5 That it is not unlawful to call the Stars by
such and such names; as Pleyades, Arcturus, Orion, etc. And diverse places of
the Scriptures opened and cleared.
With a vindication of M. William Lilly his reputation against the Epirrhesian
Antagonists, in these times of discovery of new Lights.

Psalm. 19. 1. The Heavens declare the glory of God* etc. By Henry Harflete,
Practitioner in the Mathematickes.

Imprinted at London for Mat. Walbancke.

To the Right Worshipful John Boys of the Honorable Society of Graies Inn
Esquire, Counselor at Law, one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County Kent,
and one of the Members of the Honorable House of Commons.
Right Worshipful:
WHen Appolonius desired Vespasian the Emperor, that he would give entrance
and access to Dion, and Euphrates, two Philosophers, he thus answered; (...).
I have my Gates always open to Phisosophers; but even my very breast is open
to thee. Let your Gates be open to all true lovers of Arts and Sciences, that
so learning may be advanced, and its lovers encouraged; and let your ears be
open to the Parliaments servitours, that so desert may be rewarded, and the
laborious animated. I have labored day and night in the Parliaments Service,
and have had some encouragement from your Worship, and other of the Right
Worshipful Deputy Lievtenants, as likewise from Captain Andrew Ball at Walmer
Castle, to whom I am not unthankful; but I must confess I have found slight
respects of some, who have been to me ingrate; that was my comfort, this my
grief. As Walmer n Kenr.
Now go on (Right Worshipful) with truth, equity, and justice, that God may
bless your great designs and weighty affairs for Englands Parliament.

So prays your Worships humble devoted. Henry Harflete.

To the Indifferent Reader.
Reader:
I Know the World in its Iron Age is grown so judicious, especially in
self-conceit, as that there be more censorious then sententious Readers. Let
thy charitable reading precede thy prejudicate opinion; then fear I not the
sentence of the wise, neither care I for the censure of the foolish.

Thine neither at thy best nor worst censures. Henry Harflete.

To all Astronomers, Astrologers, to all real Masters of Arts, and to all true
lovers of the Arts and Sciences.
THe Arts and Sciences have formerly had* acceptance of some, but now scarce
admittance of any. The title of Master of Arts has been with many only
titular, but with very few truly real. It is an error in the vulgar to
think, that a Pone manum in in manum magistri with a turned hood will complete
a Master of Arts: Though he has no other knowledge in him then a little
Logic, Physic, and Metaphysics, no great matter for Ethica. A little ad
regendos mores with some favor and affection will give him an affirmative
certificate, Wingham combination Ma^^ a great God above etc.
and that will be sure to carry him from the Lion in Wingham to Syon-Colledge
in London: He is then sufficiently read in Logic and Philosophy to make him
fit for the Pulpit, and to cry down Astronomy, and Astrology, though he knows
not what Astronomy and Astrology means no more then a Cobbler of two -- etc.
Kekerm. In praefat. Astronom.
whereas I can send him to his Primate Kekerman to learn how necessary
Astronomy and all the Liberal Arts and Sciences are for a Divine. And for
Astrology I can send him to his own Orthodox Melancthon, Melanct. In praefat.
in theoreticas novas Planet arum Georgei Purbrachii Simon Grynen.
and he will teach him how necessary Astrology is for all sorts of people, both
in privatis and publicis, for private and public uses. First, for private
uses, and that first in Medendo, for Physicians. 2. Ad regendos mores. 3. Ad
deligenda studia, for a man in electing his Vocation, and this he adds,
Plurimum refert intelligere quo quemque natura ducat; It is a matter of great
consequence to understand, to what faculty nature it self does lead a man's
inclination; and, 4. Conducit tempestatum observatio ad aeconomiam, the
observation of tempests is very expedient for a family; And 2. For public
uses, Existunt ut in rebus publicis fatales tempestates, in quibus admoniti ab
hac art, multa providere possunt vel ad cavenda, vel ad mitiganda pericula:
Saepe enim fata consilio in melius flecti queunt, saepe fatorum saevitiam lenit
Deus, placatus piorum votis. Quare haec quoque gravis causa fuerit, rerum
futurarum significationes animadvertendi; Prodest enim co^monefieri homines
atrocibus siderum minis, ut a Deo opem implorent: Deinde ut bonitatem Dei magis
agnoscant, cum viderint aliquam esse superiorem ac meliorem naturam sideribus,
quae tristes significationes mitigat, etc. and so he goes forward: Nec eo
detrahenda est arti fides quia aut artifices aliqui inepti sunt, aut non omnes
eventus humani in art monstrantur: sunt enim and aliae quaedam praeter sidera
eventuum causae, etc. I write to them that are understanding, and therefore I
hope I need not bestow the pains to translate. Now what some have objected to
me out af Ulpian, alleging his seventh Book, De officio proconsulis, where
they say, That the Roman Senate made Laws and Decrees against those whom they
called Mathematici and Vaticinatores. I shall answer briefly. First, let them
consider what the Mathematici were. They were such as were condemned by the Law
of Moses, in Deuteronomy. 18. as I have showed in the ensuing discourse; they did
prognosticate by Magical and superstitious Sorceries, and by much abominable
means, and therefore they were prejudicial to the flourishing estate of the
Roman Empire: A^l. Gell. 1 Lib. not. Atticae.
see what Gellius says, Vulgus quod gentilitio vocabulo Chaldaeos dicere
opertet, eos Mathematicos vocat. And secondly, their Divinations, and
Prognostications were forbidden, as found false and deceitful by reason the
Art was very unperfect: until Ptolomy his time, in the time of the Reign of
Antonius Pius, but now it has received more approbation even by longer
experience and observation. But I leave these things to be well weighed by all
that are wel-wishers to the Arts, and consider what strange things have been by
the Arts even without exorcisme, or dealing with the Devil as they call it.
What did Boethius? sure he was no Conjurer, Cassiodore tells him, that many
(even) profound things have been done by him* How many strange things have been
done by the Perspective, by the Statickes and Trochilicks* See what Claudius
Celestinus speaks, even condemning those who overshot themselves, not
considering the means. Hodie magnae literaturae viros and magnae reputationis
videmus opera quaedam quasi miranda, supra naturam putare, de quibus in
perspectiva doctus causam faciliter reddidisset. I shall english it. We see
some men of great learning and reputation to judge certain works as
miraculous, even above the power of nature, of which works a man that has
knowledge in the Perspective may very easily give a reason. I could instance in
many more, as what Archimedes did in his Sphere, Tuscular. Quest. 1.
of whom Tully makes mention; who did fasten the movings of the seven Planets
in a Sphere, he did as God who made the World, as Plato in Timaeo. But I should
not be tedious, I may have other occasion hereafter. I now wish and pray, that
God may bless the studies of the industrious in lawful Arts.

So prays A well-wisher to the Mathematics. Henry Harflete.

Vox Coelorum.
Predictions defended: OR, The Voice of the Celestial Lights, against the
Epirrhesian Antagonists in these times.
THere are three sorts of People, which are great enemies to Science and
Knowledge, and to the noble Sciences of Astronomy and Astrology:

The 1 Ignorant. 2 Envious. 3 Censorious.

The First does slight, because he knows not.

The Second does loath, because he does not love.

The Third does dispraise, because he is not well pleased with those noble Arts
and Sciences.

The First enemy is the

1 Ignorant
Man* Wherefore that ancient adage is even grown to a Proverb: Scientia
nullum habet inimicum nisi ignorantem. Though the word [ nullum] be (according
to the Logicks) an universal negative, yet it is not altogether exclusive, as
though knowledge had no other enemy, then the ignorant; but the meaning is,
That Science has no greater enemy then the ignorant man, because he knows not
the benefit of it. Therefore it is that Plato breaks out with this
exclamation, Plato.
O scientia, quo modo te amarent homines, si scirent. Oh Science, how would men
love thee, if they did but know thee. Man was created (says Aristotle) to
understand, and to do, for knowledge begets Judgment, and by Judgment men
execute all good and virtuous actions. But the ignorant man knows thus much,
That the study of Arts and Sciences is a bottomless Gulf, and so difficult
and hard, that they which think to attain to a perfection, are many times
foundred in the midst, and therefore they account it better not to know much,
yea, no more the the Ox or Ass does. It is enough for them to know, how old
they are; and to keep an Almanac in their pocket, to know what day of the
Month it is, etc.

These be such as Guido Bonatus reprehends, De utilitate Astronomiae.
who inveighs against such, who say, Quod scientia stellarum non potest ad
aliquo sciri: That none can attain unto the knowledge of the Stars: And
against those that say, That the knowledge of the Stars is not profitable,
but rather damnable; and against those that flatly rail against the Judgments
of Astronomy, being ignorant of the commodity of it, because they think, it is
not lucrative or gainefull, it comes not in with advantage: I leave the
ignorant man in his blindness, and come to speak a little with the

2 Envious
Man. He is another enemy, who (perhaps) may know somewhat, but he loths the
Art, because he loves not the Artist; his mouth is full of railing and
bitterness, full of detraction and slanders; Lingua facile volat and facile
violat says Bernard. The tongue speeds easily, but wounds deeply. His tongue
can reach him, whom his hand cannot touch. Detractio est denigratio alienae
famae per occulta verba* says Aquinas: Detraction is a blacking of a man's good
name by secret words. Thus because his weak and shallow capacity cannot dive
into the Mystery of Art, he strikes the Artist through with the term of a
Conjurer, a cunning man* a Hocus Pocus, etc. Let him but contingently Predict
according to the natural operation of the secondary causes, though it be for
the common good, then he is termed, a Jugler, he juggles with the Parliament,
he flatters, he deludes, etc. I wish this pretty fellow would con his Lesson in
Tully. He shows who is the best Predictor, the excellentest Southsayer, if I
may so term him; Augurque cum esset, dicere ausus est, optimis auspiciis
eageri, quae pro Reipub. salute gererentur, quae contra Rempub. fierint, contra
auspicia fieri, Those Predictions are best* which tend to the safety of the
Commonwealth. How basely then does this envious Malignant enemy seek to
scandalize the reputation of that worthy Astrologer, Master Lilly, in giving
him, the before-recited terms; when all his Predictions have tended to the
good and safety of the Commonwealth, without the least show of flattery,
either with the King or Parliament; and his advice good and wholesome. But I
leave this envious Malignant, and come to salute the

3 Censorious
Man. Who likes nothing but what himself acts. This is he that Melancthon
calls Epicureus Theologus. He will dispraise the art, because it pleases him
not: nay his blind zeal, and foolish rashness shall censure that false and
damnable, which himself knows not, but that God in his time may make it
probable.

Melancthon calls this, manifestum insaniae genus, a manifest kind of madness;
and likewise a foolish arrogance. Arrogantia (says he) cum summa stultitia
conjuncta est venati choragium aliquod gloriae ex insectatione artium, quae
sunt gravi authoritate dictorum prudentium receptae. It is an arrogance joined
with the greatest folly to enveigh against those Arts, which have been received
by the authority and approbation of the wisest Doctors. But, Ne suitor ultra
crepidam. Let this devout censurer consider what Alsledius, Kekerman,
Melancthon, and diverse other singular Divines have written in the praise of
Astronomy* Melancthon in his Epistles to Simon Grineus Schonerus, and to the
Preroration of Cardanus five Books declares how far wide this ignorant
censurer alleadges the Scripture against Astronomy* which makes fully for the
Astronomer, as I shall show in this ensuing discourse; Plato in Epinom is (...).
but let him consider what Plato speaks in commendation of Astronomy:
Astronomia sapientissimum quiddam est; nay he brings in a Nolite ignorare. Be
not ignorant that Astronomy is a very high point of wisdom; nay* [
sapientissimum] in the superlative degree* the highest point of Wisdom; and so
it is indeed, for it does in a very high manner set forth the glory of the
Omnipotent Creator. Hear then the voice of the Heavens, Psalm. 19. 1. The
heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19. 1.
and the firmament shows the work of his hands, and that chiefly in setting
forth three of his Attributes: His 1 Power. 2 Wisdom. 3 Goodness.



1. His Power in their Creation, and that in these two considerations
especially.

1. In the manner of their Creation, See it more fully in Kekerman, his Preface
to his Book of Astronomy.
he but spoke the word and they were created; His Distum was punctually and
instantly returned with a factum, he but said, Let there be light, and it was
so, Genesis 1.

2. In that these huge Bodies, as the Spheres are, do keep their intervals and
distances, one not incroaching upon another, but keeping their due course.

2. They set forth his Wisdom, in their Government, as he has Created them
powerfully, so he governes them wisely.

3. They set forth his Goodness, in ordering and disposing of them for the
good of man; for he orders them for his own glory, and disposes them for man's
good, to be a benefit and comfort to mortal and sinful man. He sweetly
tempers and qualifies their natures, that they aptly administer a great benefit
to man. He causes the sweet influences of the Pleyades, and he keeps Orion
within his limits and bounds, Job 38. 31. God said there to Job, Can thou
bind the sweet influences of the Pleyades, or loose the bonds of Orion?

Where I shall prove these five points as briefly as I can.

1. That the Stars have received Influences.

2. That they operate and work upon sublunary things, according to the nature
and quality of those received influences.

3. That God has revealed those received influences to man.

4. That it is not unlawful to Predict and Prognosticate according to the
known nature avd quality of those received influences.

5. That it is not unlawful to call the Stars by such and such names, as
Pleyades, Orion, Arcturus, etc.

First, That the Stars have received Influences: For the opening of which
confider these three things. 1. That there be Influences. 2. That the Stars
have such Influences. 3. That they receive them from their Creator.


1. That there be Influences, where I shall show what an Influence is.

Influxus est virtus Coelestis estellis and coelorum motu oriens, Influxus quid.
and in infcriora descendens.

An Influence is a Celestial virtue or power, arising out of the Stars and
motion of the Heavens, descending upon sublunary things.

I say, It is a Celestial virtue or power] for although all things are not
governed by the influence of the Heavens, yet many and emminent changes do
happen both in the air, and in the body of Man, whose Original cause does
apparently depend upon this Celestial virtue and power.

2. Arising out of the Stars and motion of the Heavens] as sometimes the
Influence is, helped forward through Diabolical and wicked enchantments, so
oftentimes God is pleased to hinder the influentiall virtues of the Heavens at
the Prayers of the faithful. And the Prophet Jeremiah, cap. 10. 2. does warn
us, That we should not be afraid of the signs of the Heavens, as you shall
perceive, and the meaning in the Objections anon, and so the true scope and
meaning of the words. It is sure that so much credit is not to be given to such
Signs, as the vulgar and credulous Astrologer does imagine; neither is their
virtue and power altogether to be rejected, neglected* and despised, seeing we
have many and most notable examples left us upon Record* which show how
prevalent the Celestial influences have been upon some sublunary creatures,
which I shall show hereafter.

3 Descending upon sublunary things.] Though I say, these influences descend,
etc. and they incline a man more to motion, and so apt to perturbations* yet
they do not compel through any necessity; for the free mind of man is not
subjected, and (as it were) enslaved to any positions of the Stars; for,
Sapiens dominabitur astris. It is certain that a wise man may see far by
such positions, and foresee many things whereby he may be warned to prevent
future miseries. An emminent example we read of Thales Milesius, who was the
first among the Grecians that was called (...), Sapiens, a wise man, as
Diogenes says, and the first among them that found out the secrets and
Mysteries of Astrology; by it he foretold the Conversions and Ecclipses of the
Sun: Eudemus in Historia Astrologica
and Callimachus says, he first found out Vrsa minor, and the Stars about
her, whereby the people of Phenicia did direct their Navigation. Tully, de
Divinatione and Aristotle, Lib. 1. Polic. cap. 7. reports of him, who by the
Art of Astrology foreseeing a great gearth of Olives, got into his hands a
great quantity of Olives in Miletum and Chium at a low rate, In Miletum and
Chium.
which he sold again the next year in the time of the dearth at a very great
price, whereby he grew exceeding rich, and whereby he did show the worth and
profit of Philosophy, which men so little regard. And Pliny in his Natural
History says, That Solon, (who was called the wise Lawmakers among the
Athenians) did by the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, Eclipses.
Prognosticate the defects and subversions of certain States and Kingdoms in
Asia. I could enumerate many examples; But how did they this? Did they deal
immediately with the Devil? I never read any such thing but they did it (...)
by their wisdom, Aristotle (as it were) expounds it, when he says, (...)
through the Mistory of Astrology, which shows the effects from the the causes.
Thus there be Influences* And the

2 Stars have Influences
It Is plain. Job 9. 9.
Can thou bind the sweet Influences of the Pleyades? and so Job* 9. 9. He
makes Pleyades and Orion. He makes* that is, either 1. Creavit, he Created,
or 2. he makes, that is, facit operari, he gives them their influences or
vertuall powers.

Aristotle 1. Meteorolog. cap. 2, Est autem necessairo mundus iste superois
lationibus fere continuus; ut inde vis ejus universa regatur: Ea s^quidem causa
prima putanda omnibus est, unde motus principium existit That World, (meaning
the Elementall World) is necessarily almost next adjoining to the supernall or
heavenly motions, that from them all its power or influence may be governed;
for that of all men is thought to be the first cause from whom the beginning of
motion comes, and that is from God, whom Aristotle calls Primus motor, and ens
entium, the first mover, and the being of beings.

I do think that no man is such an idiot, or ignorant, but that he does
daily, even by experience find, that man's body, and all other Elementall
bodies are altered, disposed, and ordered according to the influences and
operations of the Sun and Moon, and other Stars and Planets. Persons that
lie sick upon their Bed, even at the point of death have found this true, and
that Physicians has done them a pleasure to look up to the second causes, as
governed by God the first cause; and it has pleased the first cause to give a
blessing to the means.

Paima Deus causa est, causae sunt astra secunda, nil si prima vetat, causa
secunda valet.

The first cause is God, the second cause is the influence and powerful
working of the Planets, and Stars, and heavenly Motions. If God who is the
first cause hinder not, the second causes will afford a favorable aspect; that
Physician that observes not this may (unboubtedly send many to the Grave,
though he may not have the honor to be advanced as Hamon was, Ester 7. 10. But
look a little further into the tenth Chapter of that book, Aristot. 1
Meteoral. cap. 10
and there you shall find these words: Oporte igitur, ut horum principia
sumamus and causas omnium similiter. Principium igitur vt movens, praecipuumque
and amnium priimum, circulus ille est, in quo manifest salis, latio
perspicitur, to the very same effect he speaks in 2 Lib. de Genesis Aristot. lib.
2. De ger. and cor. cap. 10.
and corrup. cap. 10. Quocirca and prima latio, ortus and interitus causa non
est, sed obliqui circuli latio, ea namque and continua est, and duobus motibus
fit. The uppermost motion (which is the primum mobile, or the upper Sphere) is
not the cause of Generation and corruption, but the motion of the oblique
Circle, (which is the Zodiac) and he gives a reason for it, for that is both
continued, and is caused of two motions: and in his 2 Lib. Physic. c. 2. he
says, That Homo gener at hominem, atque Sol; Man and the Sun are the cause
of man's Generation, which can be no otherwise understood, but that God so
ordered, that man who begets, and the second causes have their influences and
vertuall operations over the Nativity and birth of Man: This is no Heathenish
position, for no man can be so blind, but that he may see by experience, (which
is called the Mistress of fools) the vertuall operation and power of the
Celestial bodies in and upon the four Elements, and other bodies of them
composed, whether perfectly or imperfectly, even by the guigance and government
of their Creator.

Authorities may be brought of three thousand years antiquity and above of
expert, wise, and godly men to prove this Position, which daily and hourly men
may perceive by sense and reason; yea and all Beasts, Frowers, Plants, Herbs,
Trees and Fruits do show by their actions and passions (if I may so term
them) both outward and inward.

Thus they have influences, but from whence? even from him who gives life*
motion, and being to all things, Acts 17. 28. and that is the third thing
herein considerable. That the heavenly bodies have*

2 Reccived their influences from God.
In the 9. of Job. 9. and Amos 8. God is said there to make Arcturus, Job 9. 7.
Orion, and Pleyades; that is, God from the Creation makes them operative
according to their influmentiall virtues which God has given them; and that it
is so the 7. verse of the 9. of Job makes it to appear, where God is said to
seal up the Stars; that is, he can seal up, or as Job 38. ^1. restrain
those sweet influences which he has given them for the good and benefit of man.

So Job 38. 27, 28. and Chap. 37. 11 God is said there to make the Clouds to
labor, to water the earth; or as the last Translation renders it, by watering
he wearieth the thick cloud.

From hence then we may see the folly and ignorance of some confuted and
condemned, who say, That the Stars have received no such influences, and that
God has given them no such influentiall power; this is to say, That God does
not work by his Creatures, as by his instruments and secondary causes; which
is no better then Blasphemy. Nay, some are so stupid and ignorant, that they
cannot be persuaded that any man can find out the Diurnall motions of the
Planets, or that their distance from the earth, their Magnitudes, and the like
can be found by the Art of man; no instrument (they think*) can show such
things as we talk and write of; no marvel then they deny their influences,
which are daily objected to their sense and reason: But let me tell them, that
the whole frame and fabric of the Creatures of God both Celestial and
Terrestrial are to us as a bright Glass, in which they might (if they were
not wilfully blind) see by reflection even radiations and beams, representing
the very image of Gods infinite Power, Wisdom and goodness, whereby we are
taught to praise and glorify our great God who has made the Heaven to send
such sweet influences down upon the earth for the comfort and benefit of man,
who was made after his own image, Genesis 1. 27.

Could the Heathens confess this, and shall any who professes himself a
Christian deny it? Could the very Heathen, who were judged only by the light
of nature find out, and confess that the Stars and heavenly bodies have
received influences from some higher Power, but what to call that Power they
knew not; and shall we who live in the light of the Gospel, and under the very
beams of Grace, and the goodness and mercy of a Great and good God look upon
the Heavens and Stars, as an Ox or Ass; search no further what they are,
why Created, how they execute that for which they were created; the due
consideration of this would make the ignorant (though otherwise zealous)
Christian to confess (without any exposition by an Allegory) with that Kingly
Prophet, Psalm. 19. 1. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament
shows his handy work: even shows that it is not idle, that God has not
given the Heavens influences to lie still and do nothing, but if he has given
them influences, they do, nay they must

2 Operate;
And so I leave the first, and fall upon the second Proposition.

That the Stars and heavenly bodies do operate upon sublunary things,
according unto the nature and quality of their received influences.

This Proposition is confirmed three ways. By 1 Scripture. 2 Reason. 3
Experience.



1 By Scripture, I shall name a few places instead of many.

Job 38. 31. These natural operations are called there influences, the Greek
word is (...) from (...) and (...) Super and fluo; to slow into, or upon. They
must have an Object to work upon, otherwise it would be nonsense to call them
influence, Ier. 10. 13. when he utters his voice, there is a multitude of
waters in the Heavens, Psalm. 135. v. 7.
and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth; he makes
lightnings with rain (or for rain) and brings forth the winds out of his
treasures. Can the vapors ascend and gather together into a multitude of
waters, and not operate? Does God make it Lighten to cause rain, and does he
withold it? Does Mercury aspect with his fellows, and does not God most
commonly bring forth the winds out of his Storehouse? Psalm. 136. 8, 9. Did God
make great Lights, the Sun to rule by day, and the Moon and Stars to rule by
night? Can they rule and not operate according to their influentiall powers?
Job* 9. 7. God is said there to seal up the Stars in his anger, to seal up
their influences, that they shall not operate according to their natural and
influentiall virtues, and this God does to scourge a sinful Nation. Did he not
seal up the Heavens, that it should not rain, 1 King. 18?

And was not that Englands scourge? Did he not restrain the sweet influences
of the Pleyades, not long since causing a sensible Dearth, that Corn was sold
at ten shillings a Bushel, and many starved for want of Bread in the City of
London.

The holy Ghost does not say, He has sealed up the heavens that it shall not
rain, but the Stars, to show that they operate or not operate upon sublunary
things, as secondary causes according to the good pleasure, will, and command
of the first cause, which is God.

I could instance in many more, but these shall suffice; I come to confirm it

2 By reason.
I shall instead of many, give these two Reasons why they must operate.

1 Because hereby they glorify and praise their Creator: It is the voice of
the Celestial Lights, to praise God, Job. 38. 7. when the Morning Stars sang
together, (or as the old Translation,) When the Stars of the morning praised me
together: Now how did they praise God? Even by declaring his wisdom, power and
goodness; And how did they that? By manifesting the same by their effectual
operation in working according to those influentiall virtues God had given
them: And then it follows, all the Sons of God shouted for joy, or as the old
Translation renders it, and all the children of God rejoiced. The children of
God, meaning the Angels, so Iunius, and not that these words should be an
explicatory to the former part of the verse, as though the Stars of the morning
should be the Children or Sons of God; for I can see no reason why that should
be wrested figuratively, when it may be taken literally, and that this is the
meaning, do but compare this place with the 148. Psalm, verse. 2, 3, 4. where he
says, Praise ye him, all his Angels, and in verse. 3. Praise ye him Sun and
Moon, paise ye him all ye Stars of light. Praise him ye Heavens of Heavens,
that is, the whole Heaven, called Heaven of Heavens, in regard of the spheres
and situation of the sixed Stars and Planets: Here you see the Angels and
Stars are distinguished.

3 They operate, because God made them for this end, not to be idle, but to
operate for the use of Man.

Psalm. 8. 3. When I behold thine Heavens, even the works of thy fingers, the
Moon and the Stars which thou hasi ordained; To what end has he ordained
them, but to serve Man, and to work for this use? and therefore he goes on in
the fourth verse, What is man? that thou art mindful of him, etc.

3 It is confirmed not only by Scripture, and by reason, but also

By Experience.
Aristotle says, That the Elements, and all things which are composed of the
Elements, do testify, that their virtues and natural motions do depend upon
the activity of the heavenly motions and influences.

We see daily, that the Mariner by foreseeing the rising, setting and
culmination of some tempestuous Stars, and their conjunction and anglings with
the Planets, has an expert conjecture of storms and tempests, and such
Meteorologicall effects* which are dangerous on Sea, whereby he is prepared
against danger. Plato says, Mutationes, opportunitatesque temporum
praesentire, non minus rei militari, quam agriculturae, navigationique
convenit. It is convenient, not only for the Soldier, but also for the
Husbandman and Mariner to foresee the alterations and opportunities of times
and seasons.

Virgil shows what evident tokens are foreseen by the Sun and Moon. Georg.


-- Sol quoque and exoriens, and cum se condet in undas,

Signa dabit, solemn certissima signa sequuntur.

Et quae mane refert, and quae surgentibus astris.

Ille ubi nascentem maculis variaverit ortum*

Conditus in nubem* medioque refugerit orb:

Suspecti tibi sint imbres, etc.

And then he says,

Sol tibi signa dabit. Solemn quis discere falsum Audeat. --

Now let a man know more then a Common Student, then he is accounted a
Conjurer, he deals with the Divill, etc. Let a man draw and erect a Scheame of
the Heavens, and thereby calculate his Nativity, etc. and frame a Judgment
upon that, be it according to the judgment and experience of ancient Writers,
(which cannot be taxed with the scandal of dealing with the Devil,) presently
he is censured at the Bar of indiscretion; he ascribes fatality to the Stars,
and that this must be: the Position of the Heavens tell him so; Who does so?
Does Master Booker? Does Master Lilly? whom ye term fatal men, and mere
Naturalists? What did Moses? What did David? What did Solomon? of whom
something anon. I shall say no more, but only this, That it is no point of
wisdom to derogate from (and thereby scandalize) the worth and reputation of
the well deserving. But to proceed.

I must needs here tax four sorts of people (the Proposition being confirmed,
and I hope sufficiently proved to a wise man; verbum sat sapienti.]

1 Those that ascribe fatality to to the Stars. These indeed overreach
themselves, thinking that the Stars are answerable to their doubts and demands
upon a necessary tie; these indeed are mere Naturalists, Animals, that will tie
the first cause to the secondary. And because the Heavens promise so much, it
must needs be.

2 Those that deny any Influence at all; being Ignorants. These undervalue the
second Cause, and the powers and instruments by which God works and effects
according to ordinary means. These think that no Influentiall virtue from the
heavenly bodies bear any sway at all in Generation and corruption in this
elementall world. These assign a slight, superficial, even a no power to the
secondary causes at all: They consider not the Sun, the Moon and Stars, how
pure, how bright, how wonderful big, how far in distance, how manifold their
Motions, how constant in their Periods, etc. they are? and so ascribe no more
Influentiall power unto them, then they do unto the sign of the Sun and Moon
hung up in London streets, to call in Twelve a clock Drunkards. Nay, the
Elephant, the Cynocephalus, and the Ant, the Pismire, and other creatures,
shall naturally, by their actions and passions, more confess the Heavenly
Powers, then those ignorant, etc. Such as those will not ascribe so much
vertuall radiation and force to the Celestial bodies, as they see before their
eyes in a little piece of a Magnes, or Magneticall Stone, which at a great
distance shows it operation: They think that the Sea and Rivers ebb and flow
of themselves, when we know they follow the course of the Moon, etc.

3 False Practisers, that Calculate upon false grounds. They confess the Stars
have Influences, but by their false Calculations they derogate from the force
of those influences. John White likewise in the same Praedicament for 1646.
As they confess, that the Moon has Influences. but by their false rules for
her Motion, they (in as much as in them lies) take away the force and power
(God has given her) over sublunary Creatures; I deny not but that that
Scripture Almanac is very good and profitable; but blame the Calculation for
the Moons equal motion, which was well omitted in the printed Sheets.
false Tables for her culmination, according to her equal motion, and so are
short or over her true culmination according to her Apogaeum or Perigaeum, etc.
That is H. J. his Calculation for the year 1646. for indeed I saw it not for
1645. before it was enlarged; fetched out of Master Alestree his Calculation;
but I think he is belied.

4 Superficial Practisers. These deny not, but that the fairnes and foulnes of
the weather may be conjectured, but it must be only when the time is near, and
the natural causes have begun to work; and their reason is, D. Willet upon 1.
Genes.
because our Savior Christ said, Luke 12. 54. When ye see a Cloud rise out of
the West straight way ye say, a shower comes, and so it is; and when the
South wind blows, ye say that it will be hot, and it comes to pass; and
in Mat. 16, 2. When it is evening, ye say, fair weather, for the sky is red;
and in the morning, ye say, to day shall be a Tempest, for the sky is red and
lowering. But mark here, 1. Christ did say as they did say, [ ye say.] 2.
Where is there a certainty in this whereupon to build a certain Prediction,
though the time be near, etc. for though he ads to the two first, [ and it
comes to pass,] yet he leaves it out in the two last 3. Then it should be
lawful to predict these four only and no more. 4. We often see these natural
causes appear, and the effects follow not; other causes (I suppose,) hindering
these effects, which the eye of man perceives not. 5. Christ came to teach
Salvation, not Astronomy or Astrology, and therefore Christ teaches them not
this, but puts them in mind of what they themselves say and teach, he reproves
them not for saying so, but he reproves them for their quick sightednesse in
earthly things, and blindness in spiritual matters. These are too
superficial, and think nothing more but these may be done upon probable
conjecture, if they hold it lawful to predict upon these causes, why not upon
more that may be as probable, though no natural causes have begun to work?
These consider not (as they ought to do) the wondrous works of God in their
natural operations, and influentiall virtues which God revealed to man; and so
I fall upon the third Proposition.

3. That God has revealed those received influences to man.

God would never have asked Job, If he could bind the sweet influences of the
Pleyades, etc. if he had not known them.

No question but God revealed them to Solomon, Lib. sapient. cap. 7.
for so Solomon testifies of himself, when he says, Deus mihi dedit haruin
rerum cognitionem veram, etc. God has given me the true knowledge of things
that are, so that I know how the world was made, and the powers of the
Elements; The beginning and the end, and the midst of the times, how the times
alter, and the change of the seasons: The course of the year, the situation of
the Stars, the nature of living things, and the furiousness of beasts, the
power of the winds, and the imaginations of men, the diversities of plants, and
the virtues of roots; and all things both secret and known do I know, for
wisdom the worker of all things has taught it me. And in the eighth Chaptet
he says, If any man desire great experience, she can tell the things that are
past, and discern things to come; she knows the subtilties of words, and the
solutions of dark sentences: she foreseeth the signs and wonders, ere ever
they come to pass, and the success of seasons and times, etc. and then seeing
God (whom he calls by the name of wisdom) had given him this knowledge; he
says* I shall be found of sharp Judgment, so that I shall be mavelous in
the sight of great men, etc.

And Solomon was no Conjrer, he dealt not with familiar spirits, but with the
living God, who at his Prayer gave him an understanding heart.

Now we must understand that there is a threefold Prognostication, or
Divination: Viz. 1 Superstitious. 2 Supernatural. 3 Natural.



1 Superstitious, and this: Either 1 Heathenish; Or, 2 Oraculous.



1 Heathenish, as Auguration, Aruspice, Necromancy, etc. such as the Egyptians
used; this is impious and vain, and abominable, and therefore the Lord gives
the Children of Israel a special caveat, Deuter. 18. verse. 10, 11. Let none
be found among you that makes his Son or his Daughter go through the fire,
or that uses Witchcraft, or a regarder of times, [that is, a superstitious and
Heathenish regarder of times, as the Egyptians were] or a marker of the flying
of Fowls, or a Sorcerer, or a Charmer, or that Counsels with spirits, or a
South-sayer, or that asks counsel of the dead.

2 Oraculous, and this was practiced by wicked spirits in Oracles, and answers
in Idols, and in possessed persons by the suggestion of the Devil; and such
were the Oracles of Apollo, which were always doubtful. This superstitious
Divination God never revealed to man.

2 Supernatural, and this is only revealed to man by God, and this is not
properly Prognostication, but Prophesying, and this was Solomon's Divination, so
that he may rather be said to Prophecy then to Prognosticate.

3 Natural, and this a man may fore-shew by probable conjecture, arguing from
the cause to the effects; Ex similibus causis similes producuntu effectus. The
effects are produced according to the nature and quality of the known causes,
the Natural efficients are Elements, Planets, Stars, Meteors, etc. which
have their effects; the effect of this efficient is a voluntary action, by
which the Principal (which is God) does act, and by it is helped assisted and
furthered in producing the effect; as the Master builder is helped by his
Servants to build an house. The Heavens and the Planets are efficients,
procreant causes by their operative Motions to bring forth or hinder the fruits
of the earth; and this is that which we called Astrology, from (...), ratio
stellarum, as much as to say, The reason of the Stars and Celestial
effects; and this Sir Christopher Heydon defines to be an Art which teaches to
predict and prognosticate of the natural effects, and mutations which may
hereafter come in the Elements, and these inferior and Elementary bodies. But
how is this done? Even by the motions, configurations, and influences of the
Stars, Planets, and Celestial Bodies: which Art is gotten and goes on to
perfection by study, trial, and experience; so that it must be guided by
reason, and submit it self to the Almighty power of God, who is Natura
naturans, the God of Nature, and the revealer of secrets.

Now God did reveal the supernatural Divination to Solomon extraordinarily,
so he has and does still reveal this natural Divination to man
experimentally. Let me instance, and then let the blind Antagonist ruminate.

It is certain that the state of the weather does by the will and order of the
first cause depend upon the secondary causes; as upon the course of the Sun
meeting with the fixed Stars, and therefore it is that the Holy Ghost says,
Job 38. 31* Can thou restrain the sweet influences of the Pleyades, etc. and
then in the 32. ver. Can thou bring forth Mazzoroth in their time? Can thou
also guide Arcturus with his Sons, and he goes forward in the 33. ver.
Know thou the course of the Heaven, or can thou set the rule thereof in
the earth? As much as to say, Though thou do know the course of Heaven, and
the Celestial Bodies in their motions and influences, yet thou (who art but a
weak creature, and seem to contend against thy Creator) can not set the
rule thereof in the earth; that is, Thou can not cause the Heavenly bodies to
have any power over the earthly tbodies, so Iunius glosseth: certain then they
have power, and Job knew their power, though it lay not in his power to effect,
being a weak creature: but all this makes for the Astrologian, so that he
wrest not his judgment to high, whereby he may seem to contend with his Maker.

But to proceed. The certain time when they meet with the Sun I shall hereafter
show, for the lat. of 51. 30.
It is a received opinion grounded upon long experience, that the Sun in Taurus
meeting with the Pleyades and Heyades toward the North, and the Haedi or Kids
toward the South, and afterward with Orion, and after with Arcturus; all
these (though they be by nature stormy, tempestuous, and moist Constillations)
do stir up notwithstanding sweet and pleasant shewers, which do fresh the
tender-rooted Plants, being warmed by Southerly winds.

And in the Summer when these Plants have received deep root, and therefore
need moisture to further their increase to their full growth, we see that the
Sun meets with the Aselli in Cancer, which bring with them sweet showers, and a
latter Rain to make them prosper; then again, they wanting heat for their
full maturation, the Sun (entering into Leo, being a Sign of the fiery
triplicity, hot and dry) meets with the two Dogs, Syrius and Procion, of the
nature of Mars and Jupiter, which bring great heat to ripen Corn and other
Fruits; this heat notwithstanding is tempered through the providence of God by
the Etesian winds, which commonly arise at that time of the year. Then again,
the Sun enters the Terrestrial Sign Virgo, by nature cold and dry, which does
so abate the heat, that the earth being now cooler, the Husbandman does with
great ease and joy gather in the fruits of the earth.

Then the Sun meeting with stormy Boots of the nature of Mars participating
with Jupiter, brings again opportune and timely, and seasonable showers, to
close up the hollow cones of the gaping earth.

In the Autumn the Husbandman begins to provide for the Crop for the next
year; the qualities of that Quarter being cold and dry, the Sun then comes to
rise in the Morning, when the Pleyades, Hyades, and Orion do set, which cause
some cold showers, yet they hurt not the new sown Corn; And why? Even because
the Sun is then in Sagittary of the fiery triplicity, hot and dry. Thus we see
how it pleases God to cause a sweet temper and qualification of the nature of
the Stars to pleasure sinful man.

But some will say, Object.
It seems by this that the judgment of the weather is certain, and by one
years observation the next is known. To which I answer. Solut.
That the judgment of the weather would be certain has it not pleased God to
set other Lights for signs, and for seasons, and they are the Planets, with
the Sun and Moon, whose aspects cause such various and diverse effects, as we
daily find by experience; for,

1 Their course being various do continually cause a wonderful change of
weather, even to man's admiration.

2 Another reason may be their great distance from us, they darting their
natures upon us as upon a Center, and therefore it must follow, that general
influences must needs overcome particulars; for it may rain in one place and
not in another; here Snow, and there Hail; and I would know whether this be
any prejudice to the Art, or else unto the Artist: It may be true that the
aspects which are most prevalent under such a place at the time aspected
(considering the circle of Position) may happily produce the same effects,
according to the nature and quality of the Planets aspected, though perhaps it
falls otherwise in another place, which is not under the same circle, which
diverse do not consider: yet Artists, as they profess themselves. Amos says,
Amos 4.
cap. 4. verse 7. Prophesying against the Governors of Samaria, tells them,
That God had withheld the rain from them, when it was three months to
Harvest, and I caused it to rain upon one City, and have not caused it to
rain upon another City, but this was the judgment of God.

3 Another reason may be, the curse of God which fell upon Adam, which
descended as well upon his Judgment as Person; and surely since his fall none
can attain to a perfection in any Art, therefore it is that the Sons of Adam
are of such weak understanding and rash judgment; that he considers not things
to the purpose, he considers not the moderatours of every quarter of the Moon,
the Winds agreeing to the seasons of the year and place, for it blows not
alike in all places, etc.

Now then the consideration of all these things will certainly evince the
ignorant of an apparent error, Application.
that say, God never revealed any such things to man. But I write not this to
fools, ignorant, or malicious, but to the wise and rational man. But consider
this, 1. That as God in his goodness, power, and wisdom has Created all
things in number, weight, and measure, so to us of his great mercy he has
revealed means, whereby to attain to the sufficient and necessary knowledge
of those things as he did to Moses, Solomon, Abraham, Job, etc. And 2. Consider
this, Qui sapiens ^ntitur astris, ut bonus Astrologus; qui sensualis, servet
astris ut Nero, qui sanctus dominatur astris, ut Joshua. A wise man uses the
Stars like a good Astrologer; a sensual man serves the Stars like Nero: An
holy man does (as it were) govern the Stars, because he fears them not,
they work for his good, they fight for him, as they did for Barak against
Sisera, Judges 5. 20. and was not this revealed extraordinarily by the spirit
of Prophecy, to the Prophetess Debora, Judges 4.

3. Consider as God has endued a man with Reason, Wisdom, and understanding;
so he has in some measure endued him with Judgment: as God who is the first
and principal cause does work ordinarily by the second causes; so he has
given Judgment to man to show, set forth, find out, and predict the effects
of the second causes according to their nature and quality, and so I come to
the fourth Proposition.

4 That it is not unlawful to predict and prognosticate according to the
known nature and quality of those received influences.

The precedent Premises being considered, the ingenious will confess this
Proposition to be a consequent. Qualis causa, talis effectus, and the causes
being known the effects cannot be hid; and therefore this being thus probable,
it needs no great demonstration. And it being thus probable by the former
Propositions, Non eget probatione nisi apud homines aut parum aequos, aut
stolidos. It needs no probation, unless to men that are not rational or
foolish.

But I shall show two things in this Proposition: viz.

The 1 Defense 2 Fence
of Predictions.
In the first Predictions are defended; in the second, bounded and limited.

1. Defended; It is not unlawful to predict] There is a difference between
licitum, and non illicitum: a thing lawful, and a thing not unlawful: had I
found Predictions in the Scripture absolutely commanded, I should have said
then, That it is lawful to predict; but because I find them no where
forbidbidden, neither explicitly, nor implicitly, therefore I say, That it is
not unlawful, because not forbidden.

But then some will say, Does not the Lord in the tenth of Jeremy and the
second, forbid it, when he says, Object.
Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not afraid for the signs of Heaven,
though the Heathen be afraid of such.

The gloss upon the place runs thus: God forbids his people to give credit
to, or fear the constellations and conjuctions of Stars and Planets, which
have no power of themselves, but are governed by him, and their secret motions
and influences are not known to man, and therefore there can be no certain
judgment thereof. Deuteronomy. 18. 9. thus the gloss, and therefore they say, It Is
forbidden.

For answer hereunto, I shall answe and open the Text before the gloss, and
they shall find no such matter.

First for the Text, Answ.
Learn not the way of the Heathen] What was their way? it is expounded in Deuteronomy.
18. 9. their way is called an abomination. Thou shall not learn to do after
the abominations of those Nations; now what their abominations were, you may
read forward in the 10. 11. ver. Let not any be found among you that makes his
Son or his Daughter to pass through the fire] Lev. 18. 21. they passed to
Molech, which was an Idol of the Ammonites, to whom they burned and sacrificed
their Children, as you may read, 2 King. 23. 10.

Or that uses Witchcraft] or as the new Translation, that uses Divination]
what this Divination was I have told before.

Or a regarder (or observer) of times] that is, that does superstitiously
observe times as the Heathen did, as before. The Roman Laws made aginst them
that were called Mathematici, Chaldae, Arioli, and Divinatores, were made
against those that Moses speaks of in 18. Deuteronomy. of whom Vlpian lib. 7. De
officio proconsulis.


Or a marker of the flying of Fowls, or as the new Translation, or an
Inchanter] such as were the wicked Egyptians.

Or a Sorceaer] or Witch, or a Charmer] in the 18. of Levit. 27. there it is
expounded, such a man or woman that has a spirit of Divination or Sooth-saying
in them, such an one was the cunning woman of Endor, who is said in 1 Samuel 28.
7. to have a familiar spirit, and therefore such an one is called, A consislter
with familiar spirits.

Or a Sooth-sayer, the new Translation, a Wizzard, or that asks counsel at
the dead; or as the new Translation, a Necromancer.

These be the ways, even the abominations of the Heathenish and superstitious
Egyptians, which the Children of Israel must not learn.

Then it follows; And be not afraid for the signs of Heaven, for the Heathen
are afraid, or dismayed at them] Is this Astrology that is forbidden here? No
sure; yet suppose that by these signs of the Heavens should be meant the
influences of the signs? What, do you conclude that the Art is forbidden,
because by the Heathens abused? No, look with the eye of Judgment upon the
words, and you shall find that the Art it self is not reprehended, but the
vain confidence that the Heathen did put in the Art, therefore he says, Be
not afraid; as though he should say, The Heathens did so much trust to their
Diviners, that told them what success should be expected by the signs of the
Heavens, that they did fear if a prosperous success were not predicted, but
they looked only upon the secondary causes; but you (my Children) look upon
me the first cause, and therefore be not afraid of the signs of Heaven (as the
Heathens were who knew me not) though they promise no good success, I am above
them, I can make the Stars in their course fight for you, as you know I did
against Sicera, Judges 5. 20. etc.

Now how it is forbiddin in this place to predict, and so judge of the effects
by the nature of the causes?

Thus for the Text; now 2 For the Gloss.
It is certain that a man may be a good Divine, yet no Astronomer. And for the
Gloss, I am persuaded, that it was neither Junius nor Tremelius upon the Text,
but it was crept in, and thrust in by I know not whom; for mark what he says.
God forbids his people to give credit to, or fear the constellations and
conjunctions] I am sure it is nothing to the Text; and then secondly, how does
this expound it, when as a gloss should make a thing plainer then the Text it
self? Can any man that has knowledge in Astronomy think, that by [ Signes]
should be meant the Constellations, when as a Constellation is the same that
Sydus is, even a knot of Stars compacted; or as another says,
Constellationes vocant notationes syderum quomodo se habeant; cum quis
naseitur; and how can this be understood by the word [ Signes] when as it is
plain, that by signs there Rhetoric will teach us is meant, the influences
of the Signs, by a Figure called a Metonymy, where the cause is put for the
effect: The Heathen did too much fear the influences of the Signs.

Again, he says, The constellations and conjunctions of Stars and Planets]
Sure this is but a little better then nonsense; for [ And] is a conjunction
copulative, and joins together things of several natures. And what Astronomer
did ever read or hear of a fixed Star was ever properly said to be aspected
with any Planet before Master Whartons time.

And then it goes on. And their secret motions and influences are not known to
man] What Motions are they that are secret? their motions sure are not so
secret, but known to man; but for their influences, some are secret, as some
virtues are secret in Herbs that are not known to the expertest Phisician.

And then it concludes, and therefore there can be no certain judgment
thereof] it is a plain Non sequitur. And though the Judgment of man be
defective, yet it may be probable being grounded upon a probable reason and
conjecture; for I say, It Is not unlawful to predict] and who knows not, but
that the word [ predict] is Astronomically nothing else but to fore-shew the
effects that may happen from the nature of the known causes. And what man is
so mad as to reject the advice of the skillful and expert Phifitian, when he
tells him the nature of such a compound is good to give ease to his sick body;
it may be that God will give a blessing to it, or it may not be; if it ease
not, it is a sign of Gods displeasure, etc.

Heywood in his Hierarchy, Hierarahy lib. 7. tit. Principats.
lib. 7. tit. Principats has no manifest or sound Objections, Astrology is
defined to be scientia astris, a knowledge in the Stars, of which (he says)
Pliny in his 57. Book of his natural History, witnesses that Atlanta King of
the Mauritanians was the first inventor.

Indeed I read, that Atlas who was King of Arcadia was the first inventor of
Astronomy, from whom a Mountain in Mauritania takes it name, and is called
Atlas, which was so high that the top of it is said to reach to Heaven, and to
sustain it, and therefore Atlas is said to bear Heaven upon his shoulders,
even by maintaining the Science of Astronomy, he lived, Anno Mundi, 2168.

Can any man think the worse of that Science that was invented by an Heathen,
if he were the first inventor of it.

And then he goes on, Of this Art of Astrology the sacred Scripture in diverse
places makes mention, as Deuteronomy. 4. 19. And lest thou lift up thine eyes to
Heaven, and when thou see the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, with all the
Host of Heaven, should be driveu to worship them, and serve them, which the
Lord thy God has That is, He has appointed them to serve man.
distributed to all people under the whole Heaven.

Is Astrology here forbidden, or is this Astrology? It Is far wide from it,
it is not Astrology here forbidden, but Idolatry, even the Idolatry of the
Egyptians, who are called Heathen, Ier. 10. 2.

Then he quotes 47. Esaias 13. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy
counsels; let now the Astrologers, the Starre-gazers, and Prognosticators
stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.

But I pray what Astrologers, etc. were these? were they not the superstitious
Heathen, such as in the former verse were called Inchanters, and South-sayers,
who did put a vain confidence in such things.

And then he comes to Philosophers, and tells us what Franciseus Patr. de
regno, lib. 2. cap. 16. speaks of Julius Caesar, who of all others was the
most skillful in the Art of Astronomy, by which he had knowledge to predict his
own fate, but he had not the skill to avoid it. But what is this to the
purpose against Astrology?

And then he tells us what Aristotle says in lib. 12. Metaph. cap. 4.
Astrology has a speculation into a sublime substance, sempiternall and
sensible, which is Heaven; and what then, does this make any thing against
Astrology as he pretends?

Thus for the defense of Predictions, I come now to the

2 Fence
Or bounds and limits of Predictions; I say they must keep within bounds, they
must go so far and no further; they must be according to the nature and
quality of those known influences.] An Astrologer must not strain himself
too high, that was the fault of the Heathen, and therefore in Scripture
reproved.

Go to the very essence of Astrology, and you shall find that it does
reasonably demonstrate the operations and effects of the natural beams of
light, and influences of the Stars and Planets in every Element, and
elementall body at all times, in any Horizon assigned.

By it we learn the rising and seting of Stars mentioned by Hesiod, by
Virgill in his Georgicks, by Hippocrates in his Medicinal Sphere to Perdicea
King of the Macedonians, by Diocles to King Antigonus, and by other famous
Philosophers; a thing necessary for manuring of the earth, for Navigation, for
the alteration of man's body being whole, sick, wounded, or bruised.

Mercerus and Iunius allow of four lawful uses of the Celestial bodies, to
which Dr. Willet upon 1 Genesis does consent, and they be these: First, to
distinguish day and night, light and darkness. 2. To be for signs of weather.
3. To serve for signs and seasons, as weeks, days, and years. 4 To give
influence by their heat, light, and motion to these inferior parts. Indeed
superstitious Astrology as Willet calls it, is not by any denied, but to be (as
he faith:) repugnant to Scripture, against reason, vain and impious, and such
Astology I am sure Master Lilly does utterly abhor; and no such is his
Astrology specified and written in his Book, called The Prophetical Merlin,
as some have vainly and foolishly imagined. For his calculations of Nativities,
and finding out things that are lost* etc. which Dr. Willet comprehends under
superstitious Astrology, is not any way practiced by him in the least kind of
superstition; for the manner of his practice, I would wish this Antagonist to
look into his Anglicus for 1646. and he shall find him free from
superstition; and I would wish those that read his Predictions there would
first read his Epistle to the Reader, and I am persuaded they will wave their
opinion: But it is the manner of our ignorant Censurers to read the Book, but
leap over the Epistle, thinking that that belongs not to them; but I am loath
to digress too far though Rhotoricke allow of it. But for other Objections,
and likewise somewhat what that famous divine Meluncthon writes concerning
judicial Astrology, I have in part shown before in my general Epistle, and
therefore I forbear to reiterate it, and come to speak two or three words
concerning the last Proposition, and so conclude.

5 That it is not unlawful to call the Stars by such and such names. as
Pleyades, Orion, Arcturus, etc.

Were it superstition, the Scriptures would not use the words, Psalm. 147. God
is there said to number the Stars, and call them all by their names: And what
names? Some are upon Record in the Scripture, Job, Amos, and others make
mention of Arcturus, Orion, Pleyades, Hesperus, and Lucifer; Homer and Hesiod
mentioned them, especially Syrius, otherwise called the great Dog. The
knowledge of their names as well as of their natures is very requisite and
useful; Seamen have it by experience in directing their course, as Aratus who
was a Grecian Poet, and an Astrologer, and Ovid 3. Fastorum have observed,
where he says thus:

Esse duas arctos, quarum Cynosura petatur,
Sidoniis Helieen Graia carina notet.
For this cause Virgil in 1 lib. Georg. thinks that the skillful Mariner by
the continual observation of such Stars as might fitly direct him in his
course, gave them fit names, for thus he says:

Navita tum stellis m^meros and nomina fecit.
The Mariner has both numbered and named the Stars, but you read in 147.
Psalm, that God did this himself.

Sure then it can be no superstition in these times of a great discovery of
lights to call the Stars by their names, though we find them not all in holy
Writ.

Now to conclude, let the ignorant, envious, and censorious consider well what
I have written and I hope they will be silent; I hope at least have no cause
further to traduce; and pray to God that the Judgments depending in England
may be removed, and the good to the Parliament Predicted may fully be
accomplished: Nothing is certainly (you see) Predicted excluding the
providence of the wise Governor of sublunary creatures. Here Master Lilly
speaks for himself, and I hope the mouth of the sly Detractour will be
stopped. In his Anglicus for 1646. Mr. Lilly, Anglicus 1646.
in Marches observations, where he writes thus; I speak as a man that grounds
his conjecture upon natural causes: positively I conclude not, that is an act
belonging to Gods Providence; Well weigh likewise the places subjected to the
twelve signs in Master Booke^s Almanac for 1644. and I hope those that will
not understand will be mute, and those that cannot apprehend will admire; and
then I hope Master Lillies Supernatural apparitions will startle the ignorant,
his Collections of Prophesies will silent the envious, and his Prophetical
Merlin will curb the censorious. Pray then to God to avert his Judgments, and
to convert all to the good predicted for the true happiness and prosperity,
and honor of Englands PARLIAMENT.

FINIS.

