Valerius and Publicola: Or, The true FORM OF A POPULAR COMMONWEALTH Extracted
Epuris Naturalibus.

BY JAMES HARRINGTON.

Quos perdere vult Jupiter, hos dementat prius.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Fletcher, at the three Gilt Cups in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To the READER.
THe way of Dialogue being not faithfully managed, is of all other the most
fraudulent; but being faithfully managed, is the clearest and most effectual
for the conveying a man's sense unto the understanding of his Reader. There is
nothing in this world, next the Favor of God, I so much desire, as to be
familiariy understood: which that great men have thought below them, has
proved hitherto but the ruin of themselves, and the detriment of the Public:
for which cause, having tried all other means, I now add this. My work, if I be
not given over unto utter blindness, is the same with, or nearest that of the
Nation; and the work of the Nation being not understood, is in horrid danger of
utter ruin.

Valerius and Publicola, etc.
Valerius. DEarest Publicola, how have I longed to meet you, and in the
favorable silence of this long walk!


Publicola. What has my noble Friend Valerius to command his faithful Servant?


Val. Why really, notwithstanding the tumult of these extravagant Changes, your
last Discourse had so much of my attention then, and has had such digestion
with me since, that I feel it running in my Veins.


Pub. Find you in that any temptation to the buckling on of High-shoon?


Val. My thoughts, Publicola, are quite of another strain* sometimes methinks I
see England grasping at Empire, like Rome it self.


Pub. Why then Valerius, my Discourses are not such as they say; there runs
nothing of them in your Veins, that has imbased your noble blood.


Val. The Heraldry of them is of as high a pitch as the Policy; but I would
have them be somewhat lower in some things.


Pub. What are those?


Val. The vulgar complain of you, that you are too learned.


Pub. I thought it was not you, Valerius.


Val. For all that, I could be contented to see you raise your structure by
your own strength, and without the help of other Authors.


Pub. That I dare say you may, when you please.


Val. I must see it then, before I lose the covert of these reverent Elmes.


Pub. You take care, that the building should be well situated; and for the
foundation, I may presume by what has already past between you and me, that we
are long since agreed.


Val. That the threefold Balance or Distribution of Propriety, is the cause of
the triple way of Government, I fully consent with you; as also, that the
Balance now in England is in the people plainly, and exclusively, both to a
King and Lords.


Pub. You are not of them that grant this, and then ask which way a
Commonwealth should be introduced in England.


Val. Why truly yes; seeing not only the people are so wholly unacquainted
with the means, but their Leaders so averse to it.


Pub. Think you that a Plant grows the worse for not understanding the means?


Val. A Plant is not a free Agent; but among men who are free Agents, the
Introduction of Government seems to be Arbitrary.


Pub. What, where there is no more then Hobsons choice, this or none?


Val. It is true, that if they can have nothing else, they must at length have
a Commonwealth; but though they can have nothing else to be holding, yet they
will be trying other things.


Pub. There is all the mischief.


Val. And enough to ruin the Nation.


Pub. To hurt it very sore, but not to ruin it; nor yet to evade a
Commonwealth, except they expose us unto foreign invasion.


Val. I am glad of your confidence.


Pub. You may let it pass for confidence, if you please; but if there be no
other way except that only of Invasion, whereby the present balance can
receive a change sudden enough to admit of any other Form, the reason why we
must have a Commonwealth, is coercive.


Val. And putting the case it be the will of God to defend us from foreign
invasion, how long will it be ere they see at home the coerciveness of this
reason, or which is all one, that all power is in and from the people?


Pub. Good Valerius, how long is it since this was both seen and declared in
Parliament?


Val. Perhaps as they meant, it might be admitted as a principle even in
Monarchy.


Pub. This with your pardon you will revoke, seeing you well remember that this
their Declaration of power in the people, has been exclusive unto King and
Lords, and that in express terms.


Val. But in this they related not at all unto the Distribution of propriety.


Pub. Why then there is not such difference between the growing of a Plant and
of a Commonwealth, as you thought; seeing a Commonwealth knowing as little,
does no less.


Val. This of all other is unto me a consideration fullest of comfort.


Pub. It will in time proceed accordingly, through mere necessity of nature, or
by feeling; but your desire I suppose is to know how it should be rationally
introduced, or by seeing, and that with more ease, and better speed.


Val. If it might please God, I would live to have my share of it, though I
fear I never shall.


Pub. You carve your self ill: for by hope a man enjoys even that which he
never comes to attain; and by fear he is deprived even of that which he comes
not to lose.


Val. I must confess that our Army has it now in their power to introduce a
Commonwealth.


Pub. And there is no other action in their power that can excuse them.


Val. Putting the case they would hearken unto you, what course would you
advise?


Pub. The same that I have advised over and over.


Val. As how?


Pub. As how! is that yet a Question? Let them divide the Territory into fifty
equal parts.


Val. They will never make a new division.


Pub. Why then they shall never have an equal Commonwealth.


Val. What ill luck is this, that the first step should be so difficult?


Pub. You speak as if never any Territory had been divided, whereas there is
none that has not; and Surveyors will tell you, it is a work to be perfectly
performed in two months, and with ease.


Val. Putting the case this were done, what is next?


Pub. The next is, that the Commonwealth were complete.


Val. Say you so? this indeed makes amends: but how?


Pub. With no more addition, then that the people in every distinct division
elect annually two Knights and seven Deputies.


Val. I dare say the people would never stick at this.


Pub. Not stioking at this, they of their own power have instituted the two
great assemblies, of which every Commonwealth consists.


Val. But in advising these things, you must advise men so that they may
understand them.


Pub. Valerius, could I as easily have advised men how to understand, as what
to do, there had been a Commonwealth ere this.


Val. Come, I will have you try something of this kind, and begin upon some
known principle, as this, All power is in the people.


Pub. Content. But the diffusive body of the people (at least in a Territory of
this extent) can never exercise any power at all.


Val. That is certain.


Pub. Hence is the necessity of some form of Government.


Val. That is, the people of themselves being in a natural incapacity of
exercising power, must be brought into some artificial or political capacity of
exercising the same.


Pub. Right, Now this may be done in three ways; as first, by a single person.


Val. How!


Pub. Nay, I am not likely to trouble you much upon this point: but as you were
intimating very now, there are Royalists who derive the original right of
Monarchy from the consent of the people.


Val. There are so.


Pub. And these hold the King to be nothing else, but the Representor of the
People and their Power.


Val. As the Turk.


Pub. Yes, as the Turk.


Val. The peoples power at that rate comes to the peoples slavery.


Pub. You say right; and so it may at other rates too.


Val. As how?


Pub. Why as I was about to say. The power of the people may be politically
brought into exercise three ways: by a single person, by an Assembly consisting
of a few, or by an Assembly consisting of many.


Val. Or by a mixture.


Pub. Nay, I pray you let that alone yet a while: for which way soever you go,
it must come at length to some mixture, seeing the single person you named but
now, without his Divan or Council to debate and propose to him would make but
bad work even for himself. But as the Government comes to be pitched
fundamentally upon one of these three, so it differ's not only in name, but in
nature.


Val. I apprehend you, as Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democracy.


Pub. Nay, you are out with your learning, when you have forbidden it me. But
in Countries where there is not a Nobility sufficiently balanced or enriched,
there can be none of your Aristocracy; and yet there may (as long as it will
last) be a Government in a few.


Val. What call you that?


Pub. Nay, what say you?


Val. Come, it is Oligarchy: when all is done, some words of Art we must use.


Pub. I thought you would come to it; and yet seeing I have promised, I will be
sparing. But with your pardon, you have disordered my Discourse, or by this I
had showed, that if the Power of the people be committed to a single Person,
the common interest is submitted unto that of a Family; and if it be committed
to a few, it is submitted to the interest of a few Families.


Val. Which so many times as they are more then one, is so many times worse
then Monarchy.


Pub. I am not sorry that you are of that mind. For there is no such thing as a
Commonwealth, or as you say Democracy in nature, of it be not pirched upon a
numerous Assembly of the people.


Val. What call you numerous?


Pub. Why an Assembly such for number, as can neither go upon the interest of
one single Person or Family, nor the interest of a few Persons or Families.


Val. How will you constitute such an Assembly?


Pub. Commonwealths for the constitution of their Popular Assemblies, have had
two ways. The first by inrolling all their Citizens, and stating the Quorum in
such sort, that all to and above the stated number repairing at the time and
place appointed, are empowered to give the Vote of the whole Commonwealth.


Val. The Athenian Quorum was six thousand; which toward the latter end of
that Commonwealth, came to five.


Pub. So, so, you may quote Authors. But you may remember also, that Athens was
a small Commonwealth.


Val. How many would you advise for England?


Pub. Put the case I should say, ten thousand?


Val. They will laugh at you.


Pub. What can I help that? or how many would you advise?


Val. I would not go above five thousand.


Pub. Mark you then; they only that are nearest, would come; and so the City of
London would give Law unto the whole Nation.


Val. Why really that same now is clear; but would there be less danger of it,
in case you stated your Quorum at ^en, at twenty, or though it were at an
hundred or two hundred thousand?


Pub. No: for which cause, as to England, it is a plain case, that this is no
way, for the institution of a popular Assembly.


Val. Which way then?


Pub. For England there is no way but by Representative, to be made rise
equally and methodically by stated election of the people throughout the whole
Nation.


Val. Need this be so numerous as the other?


Pub. No.


Val. Why?


Pub. Because it is not obnoxious unto a party, to any certain rank, or such as
are soonest upon the spur, or make least account of their pains or of their
money.


Val. Will you be so curious?


Pub. Hold you this a curiosity? How else will you avoid improvement in the
interest of the better sort, to the detriment of those of meaner rank, or in
the interest of the few to the detriment of that of the many?


Val. Even this way then there is danger of that foul beast the Oligarchy.


Pub. Look about you. The Parliament declares all power to be in the people; is
that in the better sort only?


Val. Stay, the King was to observe Leges and constitutiones quas^ vulgus
elegerit: that vulgus is to be understood of the Parliament; and the Parliament
consisted wholly of the better sort.


Pub. It is true; but then that Commonwealth went for the rest accordingly.


Val. It was, you will say, no Democracy.


Pub. And will you say it was?


Val. No truly: yet this derived in part from the free election of the people.


Pub. How free? seeing the people then under Lords, dared not to elect
otherwise then as pleased those Lords.


Val. Something of that is true; but I am persuaded that the people not under
Lords, will yet be most addicted unto the better sort.


Pub. That is certain.


Val. How then will you prevent the like in your institution?


Pub. You shall see presently. The diffusive body of the People, in which the
Power is, and is declared to be, consists in the far greater part of the
lower sort: wherefore their Representative to rife naturally, and to be exactly
comprehensive of the common interest, must consist also in the far greater part
of the lower sort.


Val. Of what number will you have this Representative?


Pub. Say a thousand, or there about.


Val. What proportion will you have the meaner sort in it, to hold unto the
better?


Pub. Say about six to four.


Val. How will you order it, that it shall be so constituted?


Pub. Why thus: let the people in every Precinct or Shire at Election choose
four, under one hundred pounds a year in Lands, Goods or Money, together with
three at or above that proportion.


Val. I see not but this Representative must be exact.


Pub. It is yet none at all, that is, unless you presume Changes: for one
thousand without change governing the whole people, amounts neither to a
Representative, nor to a Commonwealth, but comes still unto your hard name.


Val. How do you order your changes?


Pub. By annual election of one third part for three years.


Val. So that every year one third part of your Assembly falls out of it, and a
new third part at the same time, enters into the same.


Pub. Even so.


Val. This causes the Representative to be perpetually extant.


Pub. It does so. But to respite that a little, I should be glad, before I stir
farther, to know which way the Vote of a Representative thus constituted, can
go one hairs beside the common and public interest of the whole diffusive body
of the people.


Val. No way in the earth that I can imagine, except through ignorance.


Pub. No Humane Ordinance is infallible; and what is done through mere
ignorance or mistake, at one time, will be found and amended at another.


Val. A thousand men, and six to four of the lower sort, perpetually extant!
this must be a grievous charge to the most of them; it will be hard to bring
them, and impossible to hold them together.


Pub. Upon such as are elected, and come not, considerable Fines must be
levied; and such as come and stay together, must have good Salaries.


Val. Salaries to so many! what will that come to?


Pub. Not, with the rest of the Pomp of the Commonwealth, unto three hundred
thousand pounds a year.


Val. Why? the Kings have rarely had above six.


Pub. And did England ever grudge them of that proportion?


Val. I must confess the quarrel grew, when they would not be contented with so
little.


Pub. Now if England never did, nor needed grudge a King of six hundred
thousand pounds a year, to be spent among Courtiers; why should we imagine she
should grudge a Commonwealth of three hundred thousand pounds a year, to be
spent among Magistrates?


Val. But Parliament Men have taken nothing.


Pub. Have the people given nothing?


Val. That was for the maintenance of Armies.


Pub. And whether had you rather maintain Armies or Magistrates?


Val. But putting the case, that this Assembly needed not to be perpetually
extant, this charge in the whole or in the far greater part might be abated.


Pub. I cannot tell: for how often think you fit that this Assembly should
convene?


Val. Parliaments at the most met not above once a year.


Pub. If they had been perpetually extant, there would have been no King.


Val. No truly, except in name only.


Pub. Therefore the popular Assembly in a Commonwealth, ought not to be
perpetually extant.


Val. To the end (you will say) that there may be some King.


Pub. Mock not; or what other guard of liberty is there in any Commonwealth,
but the popular Assembly?


Val. Come, let them assemble twice a year upon their ordinary guard.


Pub. And what if there be extraordinary occasion?


Val. Then, as often as there is any such occasion.


Pub. How much will this abate of their necessary charge, or of the Salaries?
And how much better were it for a Representative to lead the life of Statesmen
then of Carriers?


Val. Commonwealths, whose Assemblies have been of the former kind, have called
them no otherwise then at stated times, or upon extraordinary occasions.


Pub. But then their Assemblies were not equal. Representatives, but consisted
of such as being next at hand were still ready upon any occasion.


Val. That makes indeed a considerable difference. But were this Representative
always extant, I cannot see but it would have nothing to do.


Pub. And in case it be not always extant, you imagine that it may have
something to do.


Val. Yes.


Pub. Then whether goes it better with the Commonwealth when the
Representative has something to do, or when it has nothing to do?


Val. This is very quaint.


Pub. No truly, Valerius, it is plain, that the guard of Liberty perpetually
extant, in doing nothing, must do much; and not perpetually extant, in doing
much may do nothing.


Val. I am afraid that having nothing to do, they will make work.


Pub. Such I warrant you as the Parliament and the Army made the other day.


Val. Nay, I am not so wide. A civil Council and a standing Army must needs
have interests much more distinct, then two civil Assemblies; and where there
is not like cause, I know well enough there cannot be the like affect.


Pub. I shall desire no more, then that you will hold you to this; and then
tell me what disputes there use to be between the Senate of Venice and the
great Council, which is perpetually extant, and consists of about two
thousand.


Val. Nay, certain it is, that between those two, there never was any dispute
at all.


Pub. Then tell me for what cause such a thing should any more happen between
the Assemblies proposed; or according to your own rule, from like causes,
expect like effects.


Val. You put me to it.


Pub. Nay, it is you that put me to it; for you will be presuming that this
Assembly can have nothing to do, before we come to consider what are their
proper businesses and Functions.


Val. Cry you mercy, and what are those?


Pub. Why surely no small matters: for in every Commonwealth truly popular, it
is inseparable from the Assembly of the people, that first they wholly and
only have the right of result in all matter of Law-giving, of making peace and
War, and in levying men and money. Secondly, that the ultimate Result in
Judicature lie unto them; and thirdly, that they have right to call unto
account, and to punish their Magistrates for all matter of Maladministration
of Government.


Val. I assure you this must amount unto a great deal of business.


Pub. Certain it is, that in some Commonwealths the popular Assembly by this
means, has been perpetually employed.


Val. And so I think it might be in England.


Pub. It might; but I do not think it would: However, if it be in the undoubted
right of the popular Assembly to proceed against their Magistrates for
Maladministration, would you leave it upon the hand of those Magistrates,
whether this Representative should assemble or no?


Val. Come, you have said enough, it were not prudent: but as to the matter of
Appeals it is certain that in Israel the ultimate resort was to the Sanhedrim
or 70 Elders.


Pub. I know it very well: nevertheless you shall find that the Congregation
judged Benjamin; and if you mark the appeal unto the 70 Elders, you shall find
that it was not an appeal of the party for relief, but of the Judges in
inferior Courts for further light and direction in difficult cases of the Law.


Val. Let me but know in what manner this Assembly is to perform these
Functions, and I have done.


Pub. Why as to matter of Law-giving, I told you that they wholly and only
have the right and power of result.


Val. But to Result, there must necessarily go precedent Debate; seeing a man,
much less an Assembly, resolves not upon any thing without some
Considerations, Motives or Reasons thereunto conducing, which ought to be first
orderly and maturely debated: and how will you bring a thousand men, especially
being six to four of the lower sort, to debate any thing with order and
maturity?


Pub. You say that the popular Assembly in Athens consisted at the least of
five thousand.


Val. And I said true.


Pub. Yet this debated: why may not one thousand men debate as well as five
thousand men?


Val. As well! Nay Publicola, if they debate no better in your Commonwealth
then they did in that, you may know what will become of it. And to tell you
true, I do not think that one thousand men can debate any whit more orderly and
maturely then five thousand.


Pub. And so think I too.


Val. How then?


Pub. How then? Why this is the reason of the Senate in every Commonwealth.


Val. So there must be a Senate; which amounts unto thus much, without a Senate
there can be no Commonwealth; and with a Senate, there will always be
practicing upon the Liberty of the people.


Pub. How prove you that?


Val. Why by the Senate of Lacedemon in the beginning* and by the Senate of
Rome throughout.


Pub. But find you the like by the Senates of Athens and Venice?


Val. No.


Pub. Consider then that these were by Election of the people, and upon
frequent removes, and that the former were defective in one or in both these
Circumstances.


Val. You intend your Senate upon removes then?


Pub. Right.


Val. And Elective by the people?


Pub. Yes.


Val. How? by the popular Assembly, or by the body of the people in their
precincts?


Pub. By the body of the people in their precincts, at the same time when they
elect their other Deputies; and with the same circumstances, save that these be
all elected out of such as have one hundred pounds a year real or personal.


Val. What hurt if they were elected by the popular Assembly?


Pub. They would not derive so immediately, nor rise so equally from the
people, as chosen in the precincts; because this way every Shire comes
necessarily to have a share in the Senate: besides, wise men and understanding
are better known in their Tribes, then they can be in an Assembly out of their
Tribes; especially while they are new comers: nor will the popular Assembly
afford so good choice as the whole people. There are other Reasons.


Val. Enough, enough. Of what number constitute you this Senate?


Pub. Of three hundred.


Val. Why should not one hundred be full enough for a debating Council;
especially seeing debate is the more orderly, where the Counselors are fewer?


Pub. You are to bear it in mind, that this Senate is upon annual change in
one third part.


Val. That is, every year one hundred having served three years, go out, and a
new hundred come in.


Pub. Right: for which cause, to have one hundred well practiced in debate,
your Senate must consist of three hundred.


Val. May not those that go out, come presently in again by new Election?


Pub. In no wise; for that were yet another way of continuing the Government in
a few.


Val. Mean you that no man serve in this capacity, or that of the popular
Assembly, but once in his life?


Pub. I mean, that a man having served his term in one of these, may after a
like vacation or interval be elected again to serve in either of them, and not
before.


Val. At what age do you make a man capable of these Elections?


Pub. Not till thirty.


Val. He stays a great while ere he come to preferment, and is soon out again;
at which rate a man should have much ado to attain unto sufficient knowledge
for the leading of the Commonwealth.


Pub. This was never objected against Parliaments.


Val. It is true: but then the Election of Parliament Men was not obliged to
any Interval, and diverse have been of every Parliament that was summoned during
their lives.


Pub. Parliaments ^hen they were the most frequent, assembled not above once a
year, very rarely so often; and how long I pray you did they usually sit?


Val. Some two or three months.


Pub. I allow you with the most you ask: at which rate a man that had sitten in
twenty Parliaments, could not have sitten above four years complete.


Val. And in your Parliament, at one Election he sits three.


Pub. Mark you that?


Val. Yes, and more: whereas a Parliament Man without Interval could in twenty
years have sitten but four complete, in your Assemblies a man observing his
Intervals, may in twenty years serve ten years complete.


Pub. You allow that, I hope, to be some advantage toward acquiring knowledge
in conduct; and yet anciently your Parliament Men were in this point thought
able enough.


Val. Now would I desire no more then to be as fully satisfied, that these
Senators must be honest enough.


Pub. Which way can they be dishonest?


Val. Verily I am not yet acquainted with their ways: but if nothing can be
proposed unto the popular Assembly, save by these only, they methinks should
propose nothing but what is for their own advantage.


Pub. They are the Senate; and in that, they have all the advantages that a
well-ordered Commonwealth can give unto a Senate.


Val. But they will be still hankering after more.


Pub. As what?


Val. Why Riches or Power.


Pub. All Migistrates are accountable unto the popular Assembly; and so without
acquisition of power, I cannot imagine which way they should turn themselves
unto the acquisition of riches.


Val. They will drive then at power; they will be coordinate.


Pub. In the world there has never yet been any Senate that durst so much as
pretend unto power.


Val. No? Had not the Senate of Israel and that of Lacedemon power?


Pub. Executive power they had, in as much as they were Judicatories; but
Legislative or Sovereign power (which is that whereof we speak) they had none
at all.


Val. Other Senates have had other power, as in the managing of foreign
affairs, and the like.


Pub. Which still comes not unto the point in hand, because in these and like
matters, as the creation of diverse Magistrates, the Senate uses to be made
plenipotentiary by the popular Assembly, that is, by Law.


Val. I hear them talk of making a coordinate Senate first, and without the
people, and then of assembling a Parliament in the old way to govern with that
Senate.


Pub. Things Valerius are soon said; but if any Parliament whatever, so it be
elected by the people (and it may be though otherwise) do not make it one of
their first works to pull down a coordinate Senate, I ask no credit to my
Politics.


Val. This is to Prophecy.


Pub. Then to reason. I say, That the Senate assuming power, the popular
Assembly falls immediately to debate; and the popular Assembly debating, the
Senate is ipso facto deposed, there being no other necessary use or function of
the Senate, but debate only.


Val. You said but now, That the popular Assembly could not debate.


Pub. Not orderly and maturely: but upon such an occasion as this, they will do
as they can; nor is it avoidable.


Val. Nay, if there be some occasion in which you allow that the popular
Assembly must and ought to debate, there will hardly be any in which they will
be persuaded that they may not. So this will come to the pulling down of the
Senate, as often as the people please.


Pub. Which is so much the rather to be feared, because you shall never find
that popular Assembly, which did ever actually depose their Senate.


Val. Our Army has pulled down a good many Parliaments.


Pub. What is that to the purpose? is our Army a popular Assembly? yet let them
pull down a Parliament as often as they please, they must set up another; and
in this indeed there may be some resemblance: for let a popular Assembly pull
down the Senate as often as they please, they must set up another.


Val. Or a Single person.


Pub. Right: for that holds both ways too, and (as to our case) will stand
neither.


Val. The people of Athens debated, yet in that was not their Senate deposed.


Pub. Not formally; but it remained little better then a Warrain, wherein great
men did as it were start Hares, to be hunted in the tumult of the popular
Assembly.


Val. Verily Publicola, this model of yours is a most entire thing.


Pub. This with the necessary consequences, as the division of the Senate into
Senatorian Councils, the adorning and actuating of this and the other Assembly
with fit Magistrates, whereof I have sufficiently Discoursed in other places,
amounts unto an entire thing.


Val. And you offer it freely.


Pub. I do.


Val. Would it not grieve you, to see them crop a little of it, and spoil it?


Pub. They had better take it to some purpose.


Val. Nay, what they take, will be to some purpose I warrant you. Come, there
is a party, a select, a refined party, a Nation in a Nation, must and will
govern.


Pub. That is it which I desire to see.


Val. You are of a rare temper; happy in unhappiness.


Pub. O I love often changes.


Val. Is that any of your virtues?


Pub. Yes, where we are certain never to go right, while there remains a way to
go wrong.


Val. They are confident men. They cannot be persuaded but they can govern the
world.


Pub. Till they have tried. Such as can govern the world, are such as can be
governed by reason. Now there is no party refined, select, or what you will in
England, amounting to one twentieth part of the whole people.


Val. One twentieth part of the people, for ought I know, may amount unto one
hundred thousand; there is no party any thing near this account, I dare say.


Pub. A twentieth part of the people, can never govern the other nineteen, but
by a perpetual Army.


Val. They do not like that the worse.


Pub. The people having been governed by a King without an Army, and being
governed by a Commonwealth with an Army, will detest the Government of a
Commonwealth, and desire that of a King.


Val. Yes, such is the spirit of the Nation.


Pub. Such is the spirit in this case of any Nation.


Val. And yet they make it a particular quarrel.


Pub. They make every thing particular: if you speak of Israel, Athens, Rome,
Venice, or the like, they hear you with volubility of countenance; and will not
have it, that God ever minded the matter of Government, till he brought them in
play. Nay, though they have come heels overhead, for this very thing, I know
not how often, yet they are resolved to take no warning.


Val. Publicola, you will be shent.


Pub. I am to perform my duty. To flatter is not my duty!


Val. But between you and me, do you not think that the spirit of the Nation,
or the main body of the people of this Land, desires the restitution of their
ancient Government?


Pub. I make little doubt of it.


Val. How then in case of a Commonwealth are they to be trusted?


Pub. In case of a Commonwealth, it is not the people that are trusted, but the
orders of the Commonwealth.


Val. The Commonwealth must consist of the people.


Pub. The people under the Monarchy, when that invaded them, invaded it.


Val. True, and in such manner as has caused the ruin of it.


Pub. What was the spirit of the people then?


Val. But it is now another thing.


Pub. Nay, the very same: for then it invaded a Government that invaded their
liberty, and now it would invade a Government that invadeth their liberty.


Val. But how should this be mended?


Pub. Do you not see that this should not be mended, but encouraged?


Val. How should it be encouraged then?


Pub. By giving them a form, that must preserve their liberty.


Val. I little doubt but there is in your form a full security unto the people
of their liberty; but do you think that there is in it any full security, that
the people shall not cast off this form?


Pub. If it secure their liberty, why should they?


Val. My question is not, why they should, but whether they can.


Pub. They cannot, without going against their own interest.


Val. But they can go against their own interest.


Pub. Nay, remember your self, whether the form shown be not such, as you have
already granted can in no wise go besides the interest of the whole people.


Val. They that are now in power, have no trust at all in forms.


Pub. Do they sail in Ships, not upon planks? do they ride Horses, not Hogs? do
they travail in Coaches, not upon Hurdles? do they live in Houses, not in
Ditches? do they eat Bread, not Stones?


Val. Enough, enough.


Pub. But in so doing, they acknowledge such a form to be security for such an
use or action. And must the form of a Commonwealth be the only form in which
they can allow no security for the proper use and action?


Tal. They observe none of this.


Pub. Do they observe that there is any security in men?


Val. That, especially in our times, were somewhat an hard matter.


Pub. And how many securities are there?


Val. I know no more, then one personal, or in men; another real, or in things.


Pub. Choose you whether you would have.


Val. Well, be the necessary action or use of your form what it will, I would
see it more plainly and particularly demonstrated, how the spirit of the
Nation, or the whole people, being freely eligible into your Assemblies, must
presently lose that inclination, which now plainly they have to set up
Monarchy, or to persecute for Conscience.


Pub. You will allow no weight in the Argument, that a people in liberty,
unless the orders of their Commonwealth were first fundamentally ruined, that
is, broken in the balance or foundation, did never do either of these.


Val. What weight soever I allow unto this Argument, it is no wise to my
present purpose.


Pub. You will put me then besides experience, and to show by what reason it is
that a Pear Tree must bear Pears, or why men gather not grapes on thorns, or
figs on thistles.


Val. Poor Publicola, be the task as hard as it will, I am for this time
resolved to hold you to it.


Pub. What is it then that any Government can be sufficiently founded or
balanced upon, but such an interest as is sufficiently able to bear it?


Val. Good Sir, a Government ought to be founded upon Justice, I take it.


Pub. Right: and is not that Government which is founded upon an Interest not
sufficiently able to bear it, founded upon injustice?


Val. I suspect whither this will go. A Government founded upon the
over-balance of propriety, is legitimately founded? and so upon Justice; but a
Government founded upon the under-balance of propriety, must of necessity be
founded upon force, or a standing Army. Is not this that which you mean by
Interest sufficient or not sufficient to sustain a Government?


Pub. You have it right.


Val. Atheist, this damns the Government of the Saints.


Pub. Look you now, how irreligious a thing it may be made, to speak but with
common honesty. Do you think that such as are plainly Oligarchists, or shall
exercise by a force, and without election by the people, such power, as is both
naturally and declaredly in the people, and in them only, can establish their
Throne upon justice?


Val. No.


Pub. Do you think that such as are truly Saints, can establish their Throne
upon in justice?


Val. No.


Pub. Why then you have granted, that such as are plainly Oligarchists cannot
be truly Saints. Again, do you still think, as you once intimated, that a
Government now introduced in England, exactly according unto the principles of
prudence and justice, would Rule the earth?


Val. Yes.


Pub. Do you think, that such as are truly Saints, if they introduce
Government, ought to introduce it exactly according to the principles of
prudence and justice?


Val. Yes.


Pub. Why then, let such as are truly Saints but see what it is to Rule the
Earth; and take the Rule of the Earth.


Val. They will not approve of this way.


Pub. How! not the Saints approve of prudence and justice! who is the Atheist
now, Valerius?


Val. Good Publicola, let us keep unto the point in hand. You say, That the
security of liberty lies not in the people, but in the form of their
Government; so I am yet to expect when you will show, what there is in your
form, why it must be impossible for the people under it, to restore Monarchy,
or to persecute for Conscience.


Pub. See you not, that to do either of these under such a form, must be
point blank against their interest?


Val. But so either of these is now, and yet in this posture you will confess
that they would do both.


Pub. Mark how I am used. I speak of a form supported by an interest
sufficiently able to bear it, and of an interest contained under a form
sufficiently able to secure it; and you instance in a posture which is no form
at all, but such a confusion among, and force upon the people, as creates an
interest in them, to rid themselves which way they can of such a misery.


Val. I did acknowledge and must confess, that your popular Assembly is such as
cannot err, except through ignorance; but through this, you your self have
acknowledged, and must confess, that it may err.


Pub. I retract nothing.


Val. Now first, or never, they will restore Monarchy through ignorance.


Pub. But they cannot do this first, therefore they can never do it.


Val. Why cannot the popular Assembly do this first?


Pub. Because it must first be proposed by a Senate, that can neither do any
such thing through ignorance nor through knowledge.


Val. Nay, then have at you; I will set this same Senate and Representative of
yours to work in such a manner, that you shall confess they may set up Monarchy.


Pub. Do your worst.


Val. Your Senate being assembled (I will not have them make long speeches.


Pub. Nor 1.)


Val. Rises me up one of the Senators, and says, Mr. Speaker, This Nation has
been long in labor, but now through the mercy of God, the child is not only
come to the birth, but there is also strength to bring forth: in the number of
Counselors there is strength; the number of this House is good (far better
then has usually been of late) and their Election has been very free and
fair. Here is also, I know not how (but the inventions of men are overruled by
the providence of God) an extraordinary and exceeding great confluence of
honest men, who are not so well here; and if you determine any thing that is
good for your Country, will go home and pray for you. Now Sir, (to be brief)
since our Government consisted of King, Lords and Commons, the ancient, the
only, the most happy Government that this Nation, nay, that the World ever
knew, it is but too well known, that we have had no Government at all:
wherefore my opinion is, that we propose (as they call it) unto these honest
men (who you need not doubt will receive it with glad hearts) the restitution
of right, and of the Government in this Nation by King, Lords and Commons. As
sure as you live, Publicola, thus much being said, your whole Senate will
immediately agree to propose it unto the Representative: and thus much being
proposed unto the Representative, those people will throw up their Caps for
joy, and forthwith return unto their houses.


Pub. But Valerius, thus much has been said in Parliament when the house was
fuller; when they who were for this restitution, were backed by a single Person
in actual possession of the Throne; when over and above the zeal of
Presbyterians, there were parties that knew no other means of
self-preservation; as without Divines adoperating the Oak of every Pulpit; and
within, Lawyers and Salary-men: yet was it so far from being carried, that the
single person has been forced to dissolve Parliaments, and that through
apparent danger of being overrun by the principles of a Commonwealth not in
being. But if this were so when a Commonwealth could scarce be hoped, what will
it be when the Commonwealth shall be in such a condition as cannot be
withstood? for the Senate can never come to propose any thing unto the people,
without first agreeing upon debate, what it is that they will propose; nor is
it possible that such debate should be brought unto any end, but by reasons
thereunto conducing: now it must not only be impossible to find reasons for the
restitution of Monarchy, but the reasons why Monarchy ought not to be restored,
must be obvious; not only in regard that it is quite contrary to the interest
of the Nation, and of these Assemblies, but to the interest ten to one of every
particular man in either of these Assemblies: nor are or have the reasons been
less obvious, or less ventilated in Parliament, why Monarchy as to this Nation
is impossible in itself.


Val. Will you say the like for liberty of Conscience?


Pub. Yes; because without liberty of Conscience, civil liberty cannot be
perfect; and without civil liberty, liberty of Conscience cannot be perfect.


Val. These things are true, but they will never see them, never, Publicola:
you your self say, That the people cannot see, but they can feel.


Pub. I meant that of the diffusive body of the people, not of the people under
good Orders; in which case they are the sharpest sighted, of any kind of
Government whatsoever: and therefore it is not modest, that you or I, or any
particular man or party, blinded with self, should pretend to see with such a
constitution; or show me that eye under the Sun, that sees like that of Venice.
But putting the case it were otherwise as to seeing, these things are plainly
palpable or obvious unto feeling.


Val. I have indeed observed, that in Commonwealths there are very few that see
or understand them, and yet their affection unto that way of Government is
exceeding vigorous.


Pub. Whence then can this otherwise be, then from feeling? But one thing,
Valerius, I take at your hands extreme heavily.


Val. What is that, Publicola?


Pub. That you with one little speech of a single Senator, should run so
regardlesly over these two Assemblies, without taking any notice at all of the
necessary course of them.


Val. What course, Publicola?


Pub. Why you might easily have thought, that among three hundred Senators
there might have been at least one hundred as good Speakers as yours.


Val. Have I said any thing to the contrary?


Pub. And do you or I what we can, ten to one of them will be longer winded
then you have allowed.


Val. For that matter, let them please themselves.


Pub. I but then you should not have made an end of your debate in a minute.


Val. What is all this?


Pub. Why I say, They would have been debating upon that point at least a
fortnight.


Val. Well, and when that had been done, would never have agreed.


Pub. No.


Val. Did not you say that before?


Pub. Well, but I am now upon another point; that was to the matter in debate,
this is to the manner of proceeding: imagine the matter had been such upon
which they could have agreed.


Val. What then?


Pub. Then such an agreement had been a Decree of the Senate.


Val. Is a Decree of the Senate binding?


Pub. If it be upon Law made, it is binding; if upon Law to be made, it is to
be proposed unto the people. Now every Proposition to the people is to be
promulgated, that is, printed and published to the whole Nation, six weeks
before the time that the Representative is to assemble and give the Vote of the
Commonwealth, or that test without which no such Proposition can be any Law.


Val. By this means it must follow, that the whole people both by discourse and
letters, debate six weeks together upon the matter.


Pub. You are right.


Val. How is it then that you say, The Representative of the people must not
debate? allow you unto these less privilege, then unto the whole people?


Pub. No less, nor in this point any more.


Val. Yet amounts this to debate in those that are of the Representative.


Pub. You say well, but not unto any debate at all in the Representative.


Val. Why this Representative is nothing else but an Instrument or Method,
whereby to receive the result of the whole Nation, with order and expedition,
and without any manner of tumult or confusion.


Pub. And is that any thing the worse?


Pub. No; but I am glad you have told it me: for, that those of the
Representative would one way or other have debate, I knew certainly.


Pub. In sum, are you satisfied, that the spirit of the Nation, or the people,
however they may now under no form at all, and in detestation of such as having
governed them by force, will let them see no way out of confusion, desire their
old Government, as having never yet known any other; yet under such a form as
is proposed, can never go about to introduce Monarchy, without obvious
discovery, that as to their interest, it is quite contrary, and as to it self
impossible?


Val. The satisfaction is pretty good.


Pub. Pretty good! give me but half so good, that the spirit of the Army, not
formerly obedient unto Parliaments, and now dreading or despising them, must
apprehend the restitution of Monarchy to be quite contrary to their interest.


Val. You surprise me: for if the Army will have no Parliament, and a King
restored can now in England without an Army have no Government, they may
imagine this their only way unto greatness and continuance.


Pub. Had not the Oligarchy then, if they meant well, better to have used sober
expressions, and minded what those true and real interests are, which in the
foundation and preservation of every kind of Government are Paramount, then to
have overcast them with the mist of new affected phrases, and fallen on
conjuring up spirits?


Val. You have conjured up a spirit will keep me waking.


Pub. Set him on pulling down the Law and the Ministry; when that is done, let
him blow-up Winsore Castle, Hampton Court, and throw Whitehall into the Thames.


Val. It is the only way, for then there can be no King.


Pub. You may be sure of that, seeing the Count of Hollands Domaine, and his
houses are yet not only standing, but diligently preserved by the Hollanders.


Val. Publicola, have you any more to tell me?


Pub. Valerius, have you any more to ask me?


Val. Not, except why you have not given the Parliament to understand thus much.


Pub. I have printed it over and over.


Val. They take no great notice of Books; you should have laid it, as they say,
in their dish by some direct Address, as a Petition, or so.


Pub. I did Petition the Committee for Government.


Val. What answer did they make you?


Pub. None at all.


Val. I would have gone further, and have presented it unto the House.


Pub. Toward this also I went as far as I could.


Val. How far was that?


Pub. Why I think my Petition may have been worn out in the Pockets of some two
or three Members.


Pub. Have you a copy of it about you?


Pub. Let me see -- here are many Papers; this same is it.

To the Parliament of the Commonwelath of England, etc. The Humble Petition,
etc.
Shows,
THat what neither is, nor ever was in Nature, can never be in Nature.

That without a King and Lords, no Government either is, or ever was in Nature
(but in mere force) other then by a Senate endued with Authority to debate and
propose; and by a numerous Assembly of the People, wholly and only invested
with the right of Result in all matter of Law-giving, of making Peace, and War,
and of Levying Men and Money.

Wherefore your Petitioner (to disburden his Conscience in a matter of such
concernment unto his Country) most humbly and earnestly prays and
beseeches, this Parliament to take into speedy and serious consideration the
irrefragable truth of the Premises, and what thereupon must assuredly follow
(that is) either the institution of a Commonwealth in the whole People of
England (without exception, or with exception for a time, of so few as may be)
by way of a Senate, and a numerous Assembly of the People; to the ends, and for
the respective Functions aforesaid, or the inevitable ruin of this Nation,
which God of his mercy avert.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.

Val. I would it had been delivered.


Pub. Look you, if this had been presented to the House, I intended to have
added this other Paper, and to have printed them together.

The Petitioner to the Reader.
Reader,
I Say not that the form contained in the Petition (if we had it, and no more)
would be perfect; but that without thus much (which rightly introduced,
introduces the rest) there neither is, was, nor can be any such thing as a
Commonwealth, or Government without a King and Lords, in Nature.

Where there is a coordinate Senate, there must be a King, or it falls
instantly by the People; as the King failing, the House of Peers fell by the
Commons.

Where there is a Senate not elective by the People, there is perpetual feud
between the Senate and the People, as in Rome.

To introduce either of these causes, is certainly and inevitably to introduce
one of these effects; and if so, then who are Cavaliers, I leave you to judge
hereafter.

But to add farther reason unto experience. All civil power among us (not only
by Declaration of Parliament, but by the nature of propriety) is in and from
the people.

Where the power is in the people, there the Senate can Legitimately be no more
unto the Popular Assembly, then my Counsel at Law is to me, that is, (auxilium,
non imperium) a necessary aid, not a competitor or rival in power.

Where the aids of the people become their rivals or competitors in power,
there their Shepherds become Wolves; their Peace, discord; and their
Government, ruin. But to impose a select or coordinate Senate upon the
people, is to give them rivals and competitors in power.

Some perhaps (such is the temper of the times) will say, That so much humane
confidence as is expressed, especially in the Petition, is Atheistical. But how
were it Atheistical, if I should as confidently foretell, that a Boy must expire
in nonage, or become a man? I Prophecy no otherwise; and this kind of
Prophecy is also of God, by those Rules of his providence, which in the known
Government of the World are infallible. In the right observation and
application of these, consists all humane wisdom; and we read (Eccles. 9.
14.) that a poor man delivered a City by his wisdom; yet was this poor man
forgotten. But if the premises of this Petition fail, or one part of the
conclusion come not to pass accordingly, let me hit the other mark of this
ambitious Address, and remain a fool upon Record in Parliament to all Posterity.


Val. Thou-boy! and yet I hope well of thy reputation.


Pub. Would it were but as good now, as it will be when I can make no use of it.


Val. The major of the Petition is in some other of your writings; and I
remember some objections which have been made against it. As, that a non esse,
nec fuisse, non datur argumentum ad non posse.


Pub. Say that in English.


Val. What if I cannot? are not you bound to answer a thing, though it cannot
be said in English?


Pub. No truly.


Val. Well, I will say it in English then. Though there neither be any house of
gold, nor ever were any house of gold, yet there may be an house of gold.


Pub. Right: but then, a non esse nec fuisse in natura, datur argumentum ad non
posse in natura.


Val. I hope you can say this in English too.


Pub. That I can, now you have taught me. If there were no such thing as gold
in nature, there never could be any house of gold.


Val. Softly. The frame of a Government is as much in Art, and as little in
Nature, as the frame of an house.


Pub. Both softly and surely. The materials of a Government are as much in
Nature, and as little in Art, as the materials of an house. Now as far forth as
Art is necessarily disposed by the nature of her foundation or materials, so
far forth it is in Art as in Nature.


Val. What call you the foundation, or the materials of Government?


Pub. That which I have long since proved, and you granted; The balance: the
distribution of propriety, and the power thence naturally deriving; which as it
is in one, in a few, or in all, does necessarily dispose of the form or frame
of the Government accordingly.


Val. Be the foundation or materials of an house what they will, the frame or
superstructures may be diversely wrought up or shapen; and so may those of a
Commonwealth.


Pub. True: but let an house be never so diversely wrought up or shapen, it must
consist of a roof and walls.


Val. That Is certain.


Pub. And so must a Commonwealth, of a Senate and of a popular Assembly, which
is the sum of the Minor in the Petition.


Val. The Mathematicians say, They will not be quarrelsome; but in their Sphere
there are things altogether new in the World, as the present posture of the
Heavens is, and as was the Star in Cassiopoeia.


Pub. Valerius, if the Major of the Petition extend as far as is warranted by
Solomon, I mean, that there is nothing new under the Sun, what new things there
may be, or have been above the Sun, will make little to the present purpose.


Val. It is true; but if you have no more to say, They will take this but for
shifting.


Pub. Where there is Sea, as between Sicily and Naples, there was anciently
Land; and where there is Land, as in Holland, there was anciently Sea.


Val. What then?


Pub. Why then the present posture of the earth is other then it has been, yet
is the earth no new thing, but consists of Land and Sea, as it did always; so
whatever the present posture of the Heavens be, they consist of Star and
Firmament, as they did always.


Val. What will you say then to the Star in Cassiopoeia?


Pub. Why I say, If it consisted of the same matter with other Stars, it was no
new thing in nature, but a new thing in Cassiopoeia; as were there a
Commonwealth in England, it would be no new thing in nature, but a new thing in
England.


Val. The Star you will say in Cassiopoeia, to have been a new thing in nature,
must have been no Star, because a Star is not a new thing in nature.


Pub. Very good.


Val. You run upon the matter, but the newness in the Star was in the manner of
the generation.


Pub. At Putzuoli near Naples, I have seen a Mountain that rose up from under
water in one night, and poured a good part of the Lake anciently called Lucrine
into the Sea.


Val. What will you infer from hence?


Pub. Why that the new and extraordinary generation of a Star, or of a
Mountain, no more causes a Star, or a Mountain to be a new thing in nature,
then the new and extraordinary generation of a Commonwealth, causes a
Commonwealth to be a new thing in nature. Aristole reports, that the Nobility
of Tarantum, being cut off in a Battle, that Commonwealth became popular. And
if the Powder Plot in England had destroyed the King and the Nobility, it is
possible that popular Government might have risen up in England, as the
Mountain did at Putzuoli. Yet for all these, would there not have been any new
thing in nature.


Val. Some new thing (through the blending of unseen causes) there may seem to
be in shuffling; but nature will have her course, there is no other then the
old game.


Pub. Valerius, let it rain or be fair weather, the Sun to the dissolution of
nature shall ever rise; but it is now set, and I apprehend the mist.


Val. Dear Publicola, your health is mine own; I bid you goodnight.


Pub. Goodnight to you, Valerius.


Val. One word more, Publicola: pray make me a present of those same Papers,
and with your leave and license, I will make use of my memory to commit the
rest of this Discourse unto writing, and Print it.


Pub. They are at your disposing.


Val. I will not do it as has been done, but with your name to it.


Pub. Whether way you like best, most noble Valerius.


October. 22. 1659.
A sufficient Answer to Mr. Stubbe.
THere is a Book newly put forth by Mr. Stubbe, entitled, A Letter to an
Officer, etc. which in brief comes to this, That he would have a select Senate
for Life, consisting of Independents, Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy-men and
Quakers; for which he is pleased to quote Deuteronomy. 23. that he would have all such
as adhered unto the Parliament against Sir G. Booth, to be enrolled as the
people of England: That he would have all the rest of the people of England to
be Holo^^, Gibe^niter or Paysams. This Book I have read; and I have heard a
Tale of one; who, to get something, pretended the showing of a strange Bea^^,
an Horse and no Horse, with the Tail standing where the Head should stand:
which when all came to all, was a Mare, with her Tail tied to the Manger; the
lively Emblem of an Oligarchy. Mr. Stubbe pretending to show his Learning,
takes those things (as it were changing the sex of them) which I have written,
and in his writings turns their tails unto the Manger. Now this, as to the
unlearned Reader, is that upon which it is to no purpose to move any
controversy; and as to the learned, I need no more then appeal, whether in
their proper stables, or in the best Authors, the heads of them stand, as I
have set them, or the tails as Mr. Stubbe has set them. Only let me say, That
as to a select Senate (understanding thereby a Senate not elected by the
people) there is no more of this in all story, then the Senate of Rome only.
Whence it is undeniable by any man of common understanding, that a select
Senate brings in a select interest, that a select interest causes feud
between that select interest, and the common interest, and so between the
Senate and the popular Assembly; which coal in England it is fitter for such as
Mr. Stubbe and his Patrons to blow, then for such as understand story,
Government, or common honesty. But their Reasons who decry the possibility or
plausibility of such Acts or Orders as these, it pleases him to call high
Rodomontado's. Now which are the higher Rodomontado's, these, or those which he
uses in flourishing the Justitia of Anagon, (a patch in a Monarchy, which his
design is to translate by a select Senate, into a Commonwealth) I leave any man
to judge, even by the testimony of his own Author Blanca, and in a place cited
by himself, though not so well rendered. Our ancestors (says Blanca) have
three ways secured our liberties; by the Justitia, by the great POWER of the
Ricos hombres (now he speaks) and by the privilege of the union. The first was
a civil and forensick curb (a gown) the second was a domestic, and more
restraining one (I think so the purse, and thence the power) the third popular
and warlike, an excellent Militia, Now let any man say, even after Blanca, if
without the Nobility, in whom was the balance of this Monarchy; and their
retainers and dependants, of which consisted the Militia, this Court of the
poor Gown-man called Justitia, must not have been a very likely thing to
restrain a Prince; or consider whether without this same Mummery of the
Arragonians, Houses of Peers and of Commons in other Monarchies, have not every
whit as much restrained their Kings, and more, seeing this toy (as at every
election of the Magistrate called Justitia, it received not breath but from a
King) was blown away by a King. His other instances, as the thirty six Curators
of the Public appointed unto Lewis the eleventh of France, by the three
Estates, and the twenty five select Peers, given unto King John of England,
were like shifts, and had less effect. Security in Government must be from
entireness of form; and entireness of form, must be from soundness or rightness
of foundation. But Mr. Stubbe founding himself upon the Authority of Aristotle,
That the Western parts are not capable of a right Commonwealth, is declaredly
for a wrong Commonwealth in England. He minds not, that Venice, for the
capacity, is a righter Commonwealth then was ever any in Greece; nor that the
present State of England, is of a far different, if not a quite contrary nature
to that of the Western parts, in the time of Aristotle.

FINIS.

