ENGLANDS proper and only way to an Establishment in Honor, Freedom, Peace
and Happiness.

OR, The NORMANE Yoke Once more uncased, And the Necessity, Justice, and
present seasonablenesse of breaking it in pieces demonstrated, In Eight most
plain and true PROPOSITIONS with their PROOFS.

By the Author of Anti-Normanisme, and of the Plain English to the neglectors
of it.

Deo, Patriae, Tibi.

LONDON, Printed for R. L. Anno Dom. 1648.

To THE READER.
READER,
THou have here once more my endeavor for to draw this our Nation from under
the Right, Title, Effects, and Badges of the Normane (pretended) Conquest over
us, to which by the iniquity of precedent times, and the ignorant negligence of
the present, we remayn still subject; Conquest (says Doctor Hudson) in its
best attire is the most eminent of Curses, but sure it is a Curse far more
eminent to be so difficult to be persuaded to come out of that quality,
especially while undeniable Justice, power, and opportunity add their
invitations: If what is here made manifest shall meet with due and timely
regard, and produce effects according, we may happily recover that
incomparable Freedom, Honor, Peace and Happiness which we enjoyed under the
glorious and our last right English King Saint EDWARD; but if such cold
consideration shall attend it as seems to have befallen what has been before
sent abroad upon the same errand, I shall esteem it great pity, and am much
deceived, if either by our old or some new Conquerours we be not taught with
more then words, what belongs to such as have not capacity to be either
ingenuous Subjects or dutiful Slaves. Vale.

JO: HARE.

ENGLANDs proper and only way to an establishment in Honor, Freedom, Peace,
and Happiness.
Proposition 1.
That the Right and Title of a (pretended) Conquest over the English Nation, by
Foreigners called Normanes, has been heretofore set up and is still upheld in
this Kingdom, and that all Englishmen by the mouths of their Parliaments and
Lawyers have submitted and do still submit unto the same, and are governed in
great part by Normane Innovations, being foreign Laws and Customs introduced
by the said Normanes in despite of the English people, for Marks and
Monuments of the said Conquest.

Proof.
THat the Right and Title of such a Conquest is still on foot, and stands for
the Basis of this Kingdom, I suppose needs no proof: That it is accordingly
still submitted to, I have proved in my Plain English, page 3, 4. a sufficient
part of which probation is this, (viz.)That by the mouths above said, we do
acknowledge (how truly I shall show in my fifth Proposition) that the Duke of
Normandy absolutely purchased with his Sword the Crown of England and our
Allegiance (for otherwise he could not be as we name him our Conqueror.)
Secondly, That accordingly we do submit to his Heirs, placing him the said
Duke (specificated with his said Title of Conqueror*) for the Root and Alpha
of our rightful Kings; so that it is plain that the said Conquest does enjoy
both our acknowledgement and professed allegiance; That the Normane Innovations
are retained (to the almost exiling of our own proper Laws) is every where both
See Daniels Hist. p. 43.
legible and visible: That they were introduced in manner and for the purpose
above said, and accordingly reseuted and reluctated against by the English
people (while they understood themselves and their proprieties) may appear by
their many exclamations made against them unto the (pretended) Conqueror, by
the Acts of the Kentishmen, and by the Londoners Petition in King Stephens
time, which also occasioned those many Regal Oaths to be then and still taken
(though not yet performed) for retracting these innovations and restoring the
Laws of King Edward, So far are the said Innovations from being any part of our
Legitimate Laws (though our wild Lawyers so repute them) the proper birth or
stamp whereof is to be of the peoples choosing, as the Coronation Oath
testifies: And thus much for to show that while we dispute the duty of Subjects
we profess the allegiance of Captives, while we spurn at English
Proclamations we submit to Normane Laws, and that notwithstanding all our great
Victories and Triumphs, we do still remain as much as ever, under the Title
and in the quality of a conquered Nation; unto which what reasons we have to
induce us, I shall show in my ensuing Propositions.

Proposition 2.
That the said Title of Conquest and Normane Innovations (while they continue
in force in this Kingdom) are destructive to the Honor, Freedom, and all
other unquestioned Rights of this Nation, and much more to the present Legality
and future validity of this Parliaments proceedings.

Proof.
A Great part of the Injuriousnesse of this Title and Innovations, toward our
Nation, I cannot better set forth then in the words of learned Fortescue (cited
by Mr. Prin in his Sovereigne Power, part. 1. p. 37, 38.) though himself a
Normane and arguing only against unlimited Prerogative in the Crown which is
but part of what is inseparably wrapped up in Title of Conquest, who having
declared it to be the undoubted Right of Englishmen to have this twofold
Privilege (viz.) to be under Laws of their own choosing and Princes which
themselves admit, (in which two consists a great part of their Honor and the
sum of their Freedom as I have showed in my Plain English p. 1.) adds, that
of the Benefit of this their Right they should be utterly defrauded if they
should be under a King that might spoil them of their Goods, (as our first
pretended Conqueror did, and as the heirs of his Title by the law of all
Conquests still may,) And yet should they be much more injured if they should
afterward be governed by foreign and strange Laws and such peradventure as
they deadly hated and abhorred (of which sort I have before showed these
Innovations, to be,) And most of all, if by those Laws their substance should
be diminished (as it is by many of these Innovations particularly that of
drawing the generality of Law suits to Westminster) for the safeguard whereof as
also of their honor and of their own Bodies they submitted themselves to his
Government; Thus and more he; To which I may add, that this Injuriousnesse
were yet much more aggravated, if our Kings which were installed by our
Admission and should thus patronize our Honor, etc. Should profess themselves
to be of foreign Blood, declare that they owe their Right to the Crown unto
none but their Sword, and write on our foreheads that we are their Conquered
and Captive vassalls (as our Princes while they retain the said Title, do;)
In sum, the Title and Effects of this (pretended) Conquest are a yoke of
Captivity, unto which while we continue our fond and needless Submission, we
renounce Honor, Freedom and all absolute Right to any thing but just shame and
oppression, being thereby in the quality of professed Captive Bondslaves unto the
heirs of the Duke of Normandy and wearing the open livery of that Pofession;
And although we enjoy a mitigation of our Slavery by Charters, yet are those
Charters revokable at the Kings pleasure (as See M. Pryns S. P. sol. 59. b.
K. Richard the Second well observed) while the Kingdom continues grounded on
the Conquest, Which I have sufficiently proved (in the Preface to Plain
English) from the tenor of Magna Charta it self (which declares the said
Charter to be an Act of mere grace and favor and grounded upon respect not
so much of Duty as of meritorious supererogating toward God, much less of duty
(though benefit) to the Nation, and from a See M. Pryns citation last mentioned.
confession of Parliament, and is also otherwise no less clearly evincible,
for that it is a Maxim, that all Subjects of a Conquest, especially while they
profess themselves such (as we simply still do) are in the quality of Tenants
in villenage, subject and subservient in their persons and estates to the Will*
Honor, and Benefit of their Conqueror and his heirs, according to that
Axiom in In lib. 1. de Bello Gallico.
Caesar (mentioned in my Plain English, page 7.) Jus est Belli ut hi qui
vicissent his quo^ vicissent quemadniodum vellent Imperarent, That the
conquered are by the Laws of War under the arbitrary Rule and Government of
their Conquerours, and according to the practice in the Turkish Dominions,
which are not more grounded on conquest then we yield ours to be; which Captive
and slavish quality, how unseemly it is for Englishmen to continue in,
especially toward a Normane Colony, and that while they may with justice and
facility come out of it, I have shown in my Anti-Normanisme: And as touching
the consequent The example of the extorting of Magna Charta makes nothing to
the contrary, for that was done (as Daniels History testifies) by the Nobility
of those times, under the notion and quality of Normans and coheires of the
conquest, which quality (I suppose) our Parliament will not (if they could)
assume.
Illegality of this Parliaments proceedings (until they either repeal this
Title, or else renounce the quality of Englishmen) if it seem not evident
enough from the premises, it may be seen in my Plain Engl. evinced and proved
against all objections whatsoever; of which illegality, future invalidity is
both the sister and daughter.

Proposition 3.
That the same are also derog^^ry to the Kings Right to the Crown, to his
Honor, and to his just interest in the peoples affections.

Proof.
FOr it is confessed on all sides (particularly by Master Marshall and Master
Pri^ the Prolocutors of the Parliamentarians, and by Doctor Hudson the grand
Royalist) that the Title of Conquest is Likewise by our own Laws, obligations
extorted by duresse (as is fealty to a conquest) are voydable.
unjust, as being gained by murderous Rapine; So that while we ground the Kings
Title on a Conquest, we make him a predonicall Usurper, and defraud him of his
just Right founded on Saint Edwards Legacy joined with this Nations Admission,
besides his Heireship to the English Blood, as I have shown in my Plain Engl.
page the last, and in Anti-Norman, page 19. And as for his honor and just
interest in the peoples affections, they consist in his being Pater Patriae, as
himself also also lately intimated; but the Title of the Conquest holds him in
the quality not only of a forreigner, but also of the capital enemy of his
Subjects, and so affords their minds more provocation unto hatred and revenge,
then unto affection or allegiance, as I have plainly shown in my Preface to
Plain Engl. and in Anti-Norm. page 20, 21. and may be discerned from those
suitable fruits of it, which I shall hereafter specify. Neither do the
Innovations (the Effects and badges of the (pretended) Conquest) want their
share in the like effect, as being a just cause of the dis-relishment and
contempt of our Laws, (so Normanized both in matter and form) by understanding
men, and (no doubt) the ground of that general and inbred hatred which still
dwells in our common people against both our Laws and Lawyers.

Proposition 4.
That the same have been the Root and Cause of all the Civil Wars (about
temporal matters) that ever were in this Kingdom betwixt King and People, and
are likewise for the time to come, destructive to all well grounded, firm and
lasting unity, peace, and concord in this Realm, and consequently to the
strength of the same.

Proof.
THe Narrative is evident from history, the rest from reason; for how can there
be union in affection betwixt those that are professed strangers and enemies one
to another as this Title and Innovations (the Ensigns of hostility) render our
Kings and people, moreover the said Title (by reason of the unlimited
prerogative inseparably appendant) is apt to suggest seeds of Tyranny to the
Crown (as it has continually don't) and consequently of insurrections to the
subject, to the disturbance of the public peace, which is Confirmed by the
said many Civil wars we have had in this Kingdom since these Abuses were
set on foot, whereas before, we never had any; And weakness must needs wait
upon that Body where there is such a disunion and antipathy betwixt the Head
and Members.

Proposition 5.
That the introduction of the said Title and Innovations was, and the retaining
of them is contrary to the fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom.

Proof.
FOr the Normane Duke was admitted as Legatee of Saint Edward, and upon his
Oath to preserve our Laws and Not any History or Record says that he claimed
the Crown (before he had it) as Conqueror of England, much less that he was
acknowledged for such by the English or submitted to under that Title;
therefore the assumption of that Title afterward was usurpatory: See my
Anti-Norm. p. 15, 19.
Liberties, and not as a Conqueror nor yet for an Innovator, as the most
authentic Historians testify, among whom honest Aemilius Veronensis an
impartial stranger writing of this matter, says expressly, non ipss homines
sed causa defuncti victa extinct aque, that it was not the English Nation, but
the Usurper Harold that was overcome, and as (in opposition to the Innovations)
I shall make more clear in the confirmation of my next Proposition; Insomuch
that the violent introduction of the said Abuses was, and the per^tinacious
upholding of them is an usurpant* perjurious and perfidious robbing us of the
Title and quality of a free Nation.

Proposition 6.
That the reteining of the same is contrary to the Coronation Oath of all our
Kings, and to the Oaths and Duties of Parliament and People.

Proof.
FOr it is the first and chief part of the proper and Solemn Oath of all our
Kings at their Coronation (as it was the first Normanes like Oath, either at
his Coronation or (at least) See M. Pryns Pryns citations of testimonies to
this purpose, in his S. P. p. 51, 52. and my Anti-Norm* p. 15.
before his full admission and confirmation by the English State) to preserve
our Laws and Liberties established by Saint Edward, which are inconsistent with
the said Title and Innovations; Neither can any man say, that because the Oath
binds also to the confirmation of other Kings Grants, therefore these
Innovations are included; for Grants imply a precedent asking, and how far
these Innovations were from ever being asked I have before shown; And moreover
the confirmation is especially limited to the Laws of King Edward, as being
both the most desired and desirable. And for Parliament and People, they are
bound both by their natural and official Duties, and moreover by their late
solemn Covenant, unto the vindication of their National Rights and Liberties,
of which tho said Title and Innovations are the greatest opposites, as I have
before shown.

Proposition 7.
That until this Title and Innovations are abolished, there can be no Honor,
Freedom or Happiness to this Nation; That the inception of that enterprise is
the most hopeful means for curing the present Divisions, and that there is no
colorable Objection against the performing it.

Proof.
FOr until the Cause be taken away the Effect is not like to cease, I have
before shown how destructive these Abuses are to our Honor, Rights, and Unity,
While they remain, we are in the quality of captive slaves, and our Kings in
the semblance of foreign and usurping Lords; And as these evils were the cause
of the first fracture and subsequent Antipathy in this Kingdom betwixt Crown
and Subject, So there can be no solid closure between them until they are
repealed; These being removed, the whole Nation (both King and people) will be
restored into the quality of one natural Body, which (as See M. Pryns citation
of him in his S. P. p. 38.
Fortescue has aptly observed out of Aristotle) has a set form of duty and
affection constituted betwixt the Head and Members; And as touching this works
expediencie toward re-uniting divided Englishmen, it is evident, for if the
common honor and happiness of the Nation be the scope of their designs, they
have no other high way to their end but this; also it may be learnt from the
common practice of distracted States, whose usual remedy is the assaulting of
a common Enemy, of which sort are these Abuses, being a foreign usurpation
that has a more general, hostile, and mischievous malignity against our
Nation, in it, then any other adversary we have at this day, save that it wants
strength and formidablenesse, for that there is no man amongst us has any
colorable cause to defend it; Moreover, until this be redrest, all else that
is done is but as building of Castles in the air, that have no firm
foundation, but may be blown down with the Kings arbitrary breath, as I have
before proved; And if any object the troublesomnesse and difficulty of rooting
out the Innovations, I answer, that that particular may be consummated at
leisure, that we have taken more pains about things of lower concernment, and
that the restoration of our Rights ought not to seem unto us more laborious
or difficult, then did to our enemies the introducing of the contrary.

Proposition 8.
That all English men that are active in maintaining the said Title and
Innovations, are the most flagitious Traitors both to their King and Country
that ever were.

Proof.
IT is apparent from the premises, it being also evident that in comparison of
such, Strafford in his worst appearance was a good Patriot; And as for the
defaults of former times in this particular, they are not now pretendible for
excuse, for that now heaven holds forth power and opportunity far more
liberally then ever heretofore or perhaps then hereafter, for asserting of
Truth, and establishing Righteousness in this Kingdom.

FINIS.
Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot.


