TRUE RELIGION IN THE OLD WAY OF Piety and Charity. DELIVERED In a SERMON to
the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen of this City of London, at their
Anniversary Meering on Monday (commonly called Easter-Munday) at the Spittle,
1645.

By ROBERT HARRIS B D. Pastor of Hanwell, Oxon. and a Member of the Assembly of
Divines

JAM. 1.26, 27. If any man among you seem to be religions, and bridleth not
his Tongue, -- this man's Religion is v^ine.

Pure Religion -- is this, to visit the Fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the World.

LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Gilt Cup under Saint Austins Gate, 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAJOR and Court of Aldermen, with other
Citizens of the renowned City of LONDON.
THE Account that I make of my self and service is this: For my self, the
reason of my slownesse in this work grew not from any undervaluing of your so
honorable invitation, but from mine own distemper of body, which at the same
time forced me to deprecate a greater service to a greater Assembly, and to lay
aside this till it was too late to put it off. 2. For the works self, 1. in my
choice, I had respect to custom and entreaty, and in the pursuance of that
choice I looked upon the season and Auditory: Jubet qui rogat, etc. Obligant qui
impetrant, etc.
You have now by your motion (that is) command, made it public, and it being
your own, it is in your power to make it good: That is a good Sermon which
does good, as that is good soil which mends the ground: that good food or
Physic that helps the body: Some worth you have put upon it in your calling
for it, and sending it ready written to my hand; if now you please to translate
it into practice, the work is done. And surely there lies before you the
fairest of opportunities; never was there a fitter seeds-time for Prayer and
Alms; in the one the poorest may concur, in the other they cannot; that is
your happiness that you can give, and will be more yours if you do the thing.
It was some comfort to me to hear (so soon after my service) of a design for
the poor, that news was to me what Jonahs Gourd was to him; and my prayer is,
that this may be more lasting then that: The poor are exceeding many, and
their wants exceeding great, and it is not the least of our griefs, that many
of us in the Ministry can do no more; we meet them hourly, and part but
sadly; they sighing because they cannot receive, and we because we cannot give;
and give we cannot, til we receive better answers then we do from more then
enough: We know you not, we cannot, we will not, we may not support such a -- I
am not (I confess) well read in your Charter, I know not your bounds; this I
know, that this famous City has been heretofore much honored and blessed both
by and for their Ministers; this I know, that magistrates by calling are Heirs
of restraint, Judge. 18.7. Neh. 13.17. Rev. 1.20.41. Prove. 29.18. Jun. ad locum,
and Shindler. Pentag. (...)(sc. (...), and quae sequuntu^ apud Soph.
and that sin uncontrold and unpunished by them, will be set upon their
heads, and beaten upon their backs; Yea, and this I have read, that where
vision (preaching) fails, the people are naked, or (say some) idle and
useless; that where men grow high in sin and scorn, the City is ensnared or
fired, Pro. 29.8. that where any City is divided, it cannot stand, Mat. 12.25.
This I am sure of, and therefore my humble suit unto you is, that as you tender
your selves, your safety, your City, your Posterity, your Religion, your
Christ, your All, do your utmost to restrain all destructive ways of sin,
error, faction, etc. and to establish a settled Government, and sincere
Religion among you: Oh! let it not be free for any men at pleasure to proclaim
their Jubilees, to assert, to preach, to print, what seems good to themselves,
and under color of Christian liberty and free grace, or I know not what new
light, to cry down Magistracy, Ministry, Repentance, Obedience, say I? nay
Scripture it self, Christ himself in his Nature and Offices. My Lord, and
worthy Senators, I Will trouble you no longer, the rest you shall read in
silence; I commend your Persons, your Employments, your honorable City, and
all your public Concernments to the grace of our Lord Jesus, beseeching him
to raise up still amongst you Magistrates of Jethro's mark, (...) Importes all
men of might for wisdom, wealth, courage, men of truth (whether for Theorie
or Practice) but no men for self either ends or turns: So prays

Your humble Suppliant and obliged Servant in our common Lord, Robert Harris.


To the Reader.
UPon the survey of this Epistle to the Right Honorable Thomas Atkins, the now
Lord Major, etc. I conceived it not amiss to add something more by way of
caution; which howsoever it needed not to those that know me, yet being now
cast upon strange men, and strange times, I cannot speak too plainly; be
pleased then to know, that the men of whom I speak, are not such as are truly
(that is, universally, charitably and peaceably) conscionable, nor such as I
therefore distaste, because they be of a different opinion in some things from
my self: No, the Lord keep me from quarrelling men, because their light is
more or less then mine, if that be all their crime, and from judging their
conscience; whilst there is no more in it but conscience, reaching after further
information, these be not the men I mean, but men of another spirit, who
condemn the things they do not understand, and go upon principles, and in
ways that will mar all if they be not timely looked to: What their courses and
tenants be, I am loath to make too public, and therefore rather intimated then
expressed them before, and now do much rather desire their burial then their
life; to that end, I said something to the honorable Governors and godly
Citizens of this place; and do further implore and beseech all others who
desire the peace of the Church, the prosperity of the City, the advancement of
Christ's Kingdom, to bring some Buckets toward the quenching of these wild and
unnatural fires amongst us; yea and above the rest, I humbly pray those of my
Brethren to lend herein their hand and help, who are not (as they conceive)
indulgent toward them, at least (as others think) most prevailing with them.
This is all, and this I hope is enough, being added to that which already has
passed the Press.

Robert Harris.

A SERMON TOUCHING PRAYER and MERCY.
ACTS 10.31. And he said, Cornelius, thy Prayer is heard, and thy Alms are in
remembrance before God.


WE have in this Chapter two great doubts resolved: the one a Soldiers, the
other a Preachers; both consult God, and he resolves both. The Soldier was one
Cornelius, and his scruple was about our blessed Savior, not touching his
offices or his nature, (he knew that there was no other name under heaven where
by he could be saved) but the doubt was touching his person, whether this
pariscular man, which the Apostles cried up, and the Pharisees cried down,
whether he were that Christ, that Savior, yea or no: This was the doubt, and
this doubt sends him unto God in a way of prayer, and God sends him unto Peter
the Apostle for information: Peter (the second person) is not without his
scruple also; his doubt was, with what warrant he might go to the Gentiles
(such Cornelius was) and preach Christ unto them; he also receives satisfaction
from the same gracious hand; and now these parties met together, for their
further confirmation peruse and read their Commission. First, Cornelius begins
(at Peter's motion) and shows upon what warant he sent for Peter, and gives a
very good account of himself, and does very punctually relate the business,
not by way of oftentation, to boast of himself, but by way of satisfaction to
give content unto Peter; he gives him to know how that he had certain
intelligence from heaven about this whole business of sending for him: for 1.
he did use none but Gods means to be directed, that is, Fasting and Prayer;
and then next, he received a direct answer from God, and there could not
possibly be any place for mistake in the same; he well remembers how long ago
it was that he received his instruction, (four days since) says he, no
longer. 2. Then he remembers where he was (in his house.) 3. he remembers what
he was then doing, he was then (praying.) 4. he remembers what time of the day
it was (the ninth hour of the day.) 5. he remembers the Messenger that was
sent, he came in the shape of a man, though he were an Angel, and (in bright
shining apparel) 6. he remembers the message what it was, and what the
direction: 1. he calls him by name, and next he wishes him to go to such a
place (Joppa) there to enquire for one called (Simon) this Simon lay at another
(Simon's house) that Simon was (a Tanner) he lived by the (Seaside;) all these
circumstances were delivered to Cornelius, so that as certainly as Peter was
Peter, and he Cornelius, so sure it is that there could be no collusion or
mistake in this business, and thereupon he concludes, that Peter had a warrant
to come, and he a warrant to send, and therefore now nothing hindered, but that
they might fall on to their work; this is Cornelius his account of himself; we
will stay at this time in this account of his, and in this verse which we have
propounded to you, where we have these particulars observable.

First, a double Act reported, he prayed, he gave Alms.

And then secondly, this double Act is set forth from a double Argument.

1. From the cause of this, Cornelius. 2. From the consequence of these, his
Prayer was heard, his Alms were observed, both were accepted and (recorded) by
God: these be the parts of the Text.
As for the simple terms, we shall not trouble you with many words, they are
plain enough, we will not stand here to discourse of the several acceptations
of the first word, (...), it is taken sometimes for the service, and sometimes
for the place where the service was performed; Sanc. in Act. Apost. Grot. in
Evange. aliosque passim. vise Turneb. l. 1. adversa^. c. 19.
especially in Ecclesiastical Authors, and in after times: we understand what
is meant by Prayer in this place; this Prayer, it is called Cornelius his
Prayer, (thy prayer) says the Text. It is true, that all good things, and
especially prayer is causally Gods, and it is objectively Gods; it begins from
him, it ends in him, but it is subjectively and interpretatively Cornelius'es
too; it is true, it is God that gives us the grace of prayer, as the grace of
faith, of repentance, of every good thing; but then the acting and the
exercising of this, that by interpretation and acceptance is ours, whiles we
do act the same; so that God is not said to believe, or to repent, or to pray,
but man by Gods assistance, as Austen well: Degrat. and lib: arb. c. 16 and
abbi passim, etc.
This is all we will say for the first word, the rest we will speak of in order
as we shall come to them, if need shall so require: in the mean time we
address our selves to some instructions which the words offer to us; we will
not trouble you with the wild conceits of some men, who talk of certain
preparations to grace before grace it self Contra Aug. de praedest. council.
Arausicanum, aliosq.
instancing Cornelius: nor yet of others, who do speak of heathens and
infidels, their acceptance with God, and their salvation by God, though they
have no knowledge at all Id quod per somnium viderunt e veteribus, e
scholasticis, e remonstrantibus, familistis, aliisque sectariis non it a pancis.
of Christ: it is sufficient for us to know, that Cornelius was acquainted with
Christ, and that Cornelius did expect salvation only by Christ; the only
doubt that he sticks at was this; whether this individual person, this man now
in question, that was lately crucified, now was raised up, whether this were
that Christ, that Messiah that he had believed in before: These things thus
premised, we will now proceed. And here it is not my meaning to enter into
those vast common places of Prayer, and of Almsdeeds; we have had occasion
even in this City to speak, diverse years since, in another place to these
heads; we are now to speak another way, and to consider these things as they
lie here in the Relation made by Cornelius, and as they carry with them Gods
answer to the one, Gods respect to the other.

1. We will begin with his Prayer, next we will speak of his Alms, rather of
the success of both; and then in the third place, we will say somewhat of his
person, when we have spoken of his actions, if time and strength will give.

1. We beseech you to take notice of the unspeakable goodness and
graciousuesse of God toward poor suppliants in point of prayer, Doct. 1.
for that is the thing we must grow to; and for this, consider the grounds in
the Text, consider the person now in question, Cornelius, a poor man, was in a
very great straight, feign he would please God, feign he would save his soul;
neither of these could be done without a Christ, and Christ must now be
believed, in a higher and closer way then before; it is not enough for him to
believe, Christians, or in Christ's, but he must believe that this is the very
Christ, that this is the man and none else. Now here sticks the doubt; the
Doctors were mightily divided about this point; the Pharisees and those happily
that had been means of his conversion from heathenisme to Judaisme, they were
altogether against Christ, and looked upon him, and reported him as a seducer.
On the other side, a few unlearned men they stood for him, and they preached
that there was no other way to salvation but in and through this crucified
person; in this case, what should poor Cornelius do more then what he did?
namely, to betake himself to God in way of prayer, and to desire direction
from him in this his doubt; and thus he does, and you see with what success he
does it, how graciously the Lord does condescend and answer him.

1. The Lord does hear him, nay, he does hear him effeetually, for that is
the force of the word here used in the compound in our Text, Heb. 5.7.
(...).

God did hear him to purpose, I say, heard him graciously; and not only so,
2. but he does send him word that he heard him, and sent him word too 3. by an
Angel, and gives him 4. to understand, how that his prayer and all his services
are accepted of God. Oh! what a comfort was this to a poor distressed soul, to
have so punctual, so direct an answer sent him from heaven unto his prayer,
and unto his scruples! but thus deals God with his Children, never more kind
unto his, then when they come unto him begging; then when men begin to be shye
and strange, and to stand off, and to hold off at a distance, then is God most
free, most open, most gracious unto his people; this we see in this Cornelius
here; go (says God) when he had prayed, go, says God unto an Angel, commend
me to Cornelius, tell him from me, that he is more in my books then he is
aware of; I take notice of his name, I take notice of his prayer, I take notice
of every Almes-deed that he does bestow upon my people, I observe all these
things, yea, I record them, and they ever live and stand good before me: what
could be said more to the encouragement of a poor suppliant? thus God deals
with Cornelius: And thus, you know, he dealt with Daniel; the case is much what
alike, in the 9. of Dan. 20. and so forward; you shall read Daniels success
upon his prayer; he prayed for the people of God; and how speeds he? very well:
Observe the circumstances in the Text, the time whilst he was praying, says
the Text; nay (says the holy Ghost there) even at the beginning, at the first
setting out of his petition, the answer, the grant was sealed, and his petition
accepted, God did yield unto the same at the very entrance; he could no sooner
begin to speak, but God resolves of a word of comfort and grace to him.
Consider another circumstance, and that is, the Messenger that God sends to
him, he dispatches an Angel Gabriel, that erst had been with him (it seems)
upon other occasions, he comes to him with a Message, and he tells him Daniel,
greatly beloved; O Daniel the great favorite of heaven, understand that the
great God takes notice of thee, and he writes thy petitions, and has sent me
to return his answer unto thy suite; and the answer is very full and very more
then Daniel did put into his petition; so gracious is God unto his people when
they sue unto him in this way of prayer: What should I instance Abraham now?
what should I speak of Jacob, of David, of Hannah, of Jonah, of other
particulars in this case? I Will conclude with one, Paul, and I Will but touch upon
it: in the Chapter before my Text at the 11. verse, you shall read how God
deals with this same Paul; Paul (alsas Saul) was sometime very rough and
boistrous, breathed out nothing but blood and threats; then God deals with him
in a rougher way: but now Paul is on his knees, and mark what follows,
presently the Lord dispatches one Ananias unto him; Ananias (says he) go to
Paul, thou shall find him in such a place, thou shall have him there at his
prayers, go to him, tell him from me, that he is a choice, a precious Vessel
in my eyes, and in my esteem, let him understand so much from me; Ananias, he
begins to startle; Oh Lord! (says he) this man has been a persecutor, and he
came hither for to do mischief, I am afraid to come at him: tush (says God)
be not so shye of him now; be not so shye, deliver to him from me a message,
and a word of grace and comfort; and why? for (says God) he prays, he prays
(says God) that is the reason of it; now Paul is a praying Paul, the case is
altered; it is a time of his praying, and therefore it is a time of my
pitying, and of my mercy; now he prays, I accept of him, do thou accept of
him; and so Ananias does, for he goes to him, and presently salutes him;
Brother Saul (says he;) when he is Gods child, he is his Brother straight, all
quarrels are laid down as soon as ever Saul falls to praying; he prays (says
God,) that is sufficient. You see how graciously God deals with his when they
fall a praying once.

Now if you would know a reason of this, why God shows himself so gracious to
us in the time and case of prayer; worth of our persons, or of our prayers, in
themselves considered: for alas! what are they in the sight of God? or what
need has he of any service from us at all? you know in the law the burning and
broyling of so many beasts, especially with hides and all (as sometime it fell
out) was a thing that yielded no savoar of rest at all in it self: what could
come from this, but a filthy smoke, a filthy stench? but then there was added
thereto wine and oil, and incense of Gods appointment, and so it was Gods
Ordinance, and then there was a savor of rest in it: Think the same for our
pravers too, as they come from us, and are only ours; there is nothing in them
of worth or acceptance: But when Gods Spirit is in it, when Gods incense, Gods
perfume is put to it, with his blessing upon his own way and Ordinance, then
they come to be accepted, not (I say) simply, because they are ours, but
because they are Gods; his own, and the party praying as his own; and because
he delights in mercy prayed for, and for other reasons that we shall give you
by and by.

First of all, God, he does love prayer, Pro. 15.8. The prayer of the righteous
is his delight; it is Gods music, it is recreation; it is called incense, in
this respect it is pleasing and acceptable unto God, prayer is his delight,
because that it is his own appointment and Ordinance, and that Ordinance that
sets God in the Throne (if I may so speak) I mean that represents him as God
unto his people; for we never give unto God the glory of himself until such
time as we fall a praying; but prayer gives away all from the creature, it
carries all to God; and so sets up God, and therefore God is pleased with
prayer, and delights in the same.

And then again, God loves the party praying (we speak of Gods children that
do pray) I say, he loves the party praying too; and when the person is
accepted, then you know any thing passes very well; let that Damsel, in Mark
6.22. please Herod, though in a toy, you know what Herod says to her straight,
ask what thou will (says he) it shall be given unto thee; let Esther please
Ahasuerus, and then she need not woo him, he will woo her; speak (says he)
O Queen Esther, what is thy petition, and what is thy request? and it shall be
granted unto thee. God delights in the persons of his children, he loves them
dearly; and because they are so precious in his eyes, their prayers and their
entreaties are very welcome to him, John 16.26.

Thirdly, God is a God that delights in mercy, as the Scripture tells us; Jer.
9.24. Micah 7.18.
he delights in mercy, says Jeremy: and, says Micah, mercy pleases him: God
is very well pleased when he has an opportunity to show his bounty, and to
exercise his mercy, and his graciousnesse toward his people (and when he finds
them on their knees, then they are in a capacity of mercy:) God is pleased with
this, even to scatter mercy, and to show himself a bountiful God, he delights
herein, therefore does even heap mercy upon his people when they are capable of
the same: Hitherto, says Christ in the 16. of John 24. hitherto you have asked
nothing in my name, ask and you shall receive. Nothing, that is, nothing to
speak of, as if he would say, nothing that I value at any thing, I do not
satisfy my self in that which I have done for you hitherto, you have hitherto
asked nothing to speak of, ask more, I am ready to give you more; so large are
his bowels and his favors toward his people; God stands disposed to his when
they come asking, as Naaman sometimes did, 2 King 5. toward Gehezi; Gehezi
comes to ask one talent, and one suit of raiment for each Levite (that he
suggests and sues for;) but what says Naaman to him? nay, take two; one is too
little, take two, and the Text tells us that he did press him, and heaps them
upon him: So deals God with his people when they come to him for mercy and for
kindness; nay (says God) take more, or at least, I would you were capable of
more, I could as willingly give it, as you are willing to receive it, if the
stay were not on your own part: God loves mercy, and therefore is ready to
entertain the prayers of his children when they come for mercy. As there are
these reasons taken from Gods gracious and blessed nature, so others may be
added from other occasions.

Fourthly, from the engagements that lie upon God, in regard of his free and
gracious promises; promises very free and very large, both for the matter that
we shall ask; ask whatsoever you will, John 14.13. Psalm. 81.10.
ask in my name (says Christ) you shall receive it: as also for the measure,
open thy mouth wide (says God) and I will sill it: as also for the time when
God will do it, before you speak I will hear, and while you are speaking I
will answer, in the 65. of Isatah. I forbear to name other places, because
they are familiarly known to you, so that God having engaged himself by
promise to do great things, and (as he says in the Prophet) to be very
gracious unto his people in point of prayer, Isa. 30.19.
therefore certainly he will be as good as his word.

And last of all, (which is the maine reason of all in truth) the reason is
from Christ, and from that Covenant and transaction that passes between Christ
and his Father: Christ, he presents our prayers, nay, we present Christ unto
his Father; God looks upon a Christian as a piece and a member of Christ, he
looks upon his prayer, as the fruit of Christ's intercession and Priestdome; our
prayers (being Saints) are indicted by Christ's Spirit, and are presented by
Christ's hand unto his Father; they are perfumed with his intercession, and with
his incense, Revel. 8.4.
and therefore it is certain they be very pleasing to God: God for Christ's
sake will deny none that come in the name and in the Spirit of the Lord Christ;
nay, God has left the whole dispensation of this business unto the Lord
Christ, and has referred all to him, even to do what he will with the Saints
in the Church, as sometimes Ahasuorus did with Esther, left it to her what she
would have done for her people and against her enemies; and as sometimes
Pharaoh said to Joseph, Joseph (says he) thy brethren are come into Egypt
unto thee, bid them welcome, take the Land at thy command, place them where
thou think good; so unto the same effect does God say unto the Lord Christ,
here be friends of thine, members of thine, that are bone of thy bone, flesh of
thy flesh, they come to me for some relief and succor in thy name, here they
be, receive them, take them, do for them what thou see good I will ratify
it, I will make it good; this is the maine reason: And these are the reasons
which I shall give you of the point, why the Lord is so gracious unto his poor
servants, when they come a begging and a suing unto him. Now give me leave in a
few words to bring home this point, and to apply it, and then we will pass to
another.

For time 1. past.
First of all, this must instruct us in regard of time past, it must be matter
of humbling and of blushing unto us, that we have not answered the Lord, and
returned according to the kindness that we have received, we do not give unto
God the glory of his goodness and of his graciousnesse in answering prayer,
but come many times with a great deal of fear, appear before him with many
doubts, and return from him with a great deal of sadness and heaviness: Oh!
how does this offend and displease God? The Emperor was sorry that any man
should come to offer a Petition to him, Flavius. Titus, etc.
as if he were to offer meat to an Elephant (as he said) with a trembling hand:
Another, he was sorry to see any man go sadly out of his presence; and can the
Lord do otherwise,, but take it unkindly (as it were) at his peoples hands,
who are so dear unto him, whenas they are so jealous, so doubtful, so
fearful how they shall be accepted, and speed, when they come in point of
prayer to him? Well, that is a thing we are to blame our selves for first.

2. Present.
And then in the second place,this teaches us for the present to take notice of
Gods goodness this way, and to bless and praise him for this his free grace,
in hearing poor sinners, and poor Petitions put up unto him from time to
time: This David took notice of, he would love the Lord, because God heard his
prayer in one Psalm: Psalm. 116.1. Psalm. 6.9.
In another he blesses God, Blessed be God (says he) that thou have not
rejected my prayer, nor turned thy mercy from me, Psalm. 66.3. Blessed be God,
why? that God did not scorn his prayer, that God did not fling it away from
him with indignation; thus David: And truly, if we did truly understand the
infinite distance that is between God and us, and those many, many flawes and
defects that be in our prayers and services; did we understand these things
aright (his Excellency, and our own lesle then nothingnesse) certainly we
could not but stand in admiration at his goodness this way: Let me express my
self unto you in a comparison, thus: Suppose that we must always in all our
suits apply our selves unto the King, and go to him with our Petitions, what a
business would this be? Consider of it I beseech you, 1. what a long journey
we must take; and then, how long we must wait; and then, how uncertain we
should be of any success or gracious answer at all: Weigh these things with
your selves, and then reflect upon Gods goodness, and admire him for the same:
I enlarge it a little further: A man has a suit unto an earthly King or
Prince, and what must he do? First of all he must take a long journey to the
Kings Court; and then when he is there, he must find out some Courtiers, some
friends to speak for him, and to make way for him, that he may have access;
when that is done, he must wait the Kings leisure, early and late he must be
ready to wait, and so stay his leisure, and his pleasure: When this is done,
that he has got access once, and is brought into the Kings presence, how
then? he is not permitted to speak his heart unto the King, and to say at large
what his grief and his affliction is; nay, he must not speak at all, only
deliver his Petition, and that he must have ready drawn, and fairly drawn,
there must be no blurre in it, very brief it must be, and very succinct, he
must not speak any thing in the world that is impertinent, or that would be
displeasing, but carry it so, as that he may give full content: And when all
this is done, and his Petition is received, he has not presently an answer,
but he must wait and wait again, he must follow the Court into this place, and
that place; and when answer does come, it may be it is but half an answer and
a grant, perhaps the answer is none other but a bare denial, at least a man
cannot build upon it, because he has no promise beforehand that he shall be
accepted, and that his petition shall be granted: Thus it is when we deal with
an earthly Prince, when we come but upon one Petition: But now put the case
that this Petition be granted, what is it? it is but for some partial or some
particular thing; it is not a grant that will make me happy, and that will do
my soul any good at all, I shall need more things; and what if I need again,
must I to the Court again? must I wait again? must I run the same round I ran
before? Oh how troublesome, how costly, how tedious would this be unto me? And
if this be so (my brethren) as you know it is, then I beseech you do but
consider how infinitely we stand bound to Almighty God for his goodness and
his graciousnesse toward us this way: Alas! we need him every hour, and when
we need him we may go to him when we will, he is always at leisure; come in
the night and welcome, come in the day and welcome; and when we come, he is
ready to receive us: his doors (as the doors of the Tribunes once in Rome) are
never shut, they always stand open for petitioners that shall come unto him;
and thou may there speak thy mind, and speak thy heart; all thy fears, all
thy griefs, all thy wants thou may tell him at large, how the case stands
with thee, and speak it in thy own language, in such English and such terms
as thou art able for to utter and to speak; and if thy Petition be not right,
he will correct it and make it good for thee, he will alter it, he will mend it
for thy advantage, and for thy benefit; and if it be too short, he will supply
it, and bid thee put in more; and when he has laded thee with mercy from his
presence, as sometimes Boaz did Ruth, then he will give in charge that thou
should come again to morrow, and that thou should not be too long from
him; he lays it as a charge upon thee, that thou should not be a stranger to
him, but that thou should make use from time to time of his kindness, and
the oftener the better welcome still: This, this is the graciousnesse of our
God unto his poor people; we need not go far, but step into our closets,
there unbowell our selves, and unbosome our souls, and acquaint him with our
sorrows and griefs, and he is ready to hear us, and willing to pass by
infirmities, and to accept of our weak (very weak) prayers, when they are put
up in truth and in humility. Oh consider of this, and let the meditation of
this now stir you up unto thankfulness to God; his grace, his goodness is
so great this way, as that I am swallowed up in the meditation of it, and I
have not words to express what his tenderness and his graciousnesse is unto
us in every one petition that we put up unto him; you do not know what a
friend you have of God, and how many, many favors and kindnesses he shows you
in any one Petition that he hearkens unto, and grants to you at any time.

In the last place, this looks forward too, 3. Future.
and it teaches us a third thing, and then we have done with the first part:
The thing is this: Since God is so gracious toward his people impoint of
prayer, therefore we should be invited now, and encouraged to make use of this
his kindness, and to go to him upon this errand of prayer, as need shall
require: Let us, I beseech you, think as meanly of our selves, and of our
services as you will; but let us always have high thoughts of God, and when we
come to him in his own way, then promise great things to our selves: And know,
that he is able and ready to do abundantly above that we can speak or think
(as the Apostle tells us;) thus we should go to God, Ephesians. 3.
and of his goodness herein we have a great deal of experience; if we will
not believe the promises that are very gracious, yet let us believe our own
experience this way to trust in him: has not God been gracious to us in
particular, has not God been gracious to us in common, for the public, when
we have sought unto him in this way of prayer? If so, then let us conclude,
that God is a constant God, his power as great as ever, his love as much as
ever, his truth the same for ever; he loves prayer as well as ever he did; he
loves Christ as well as ever he did, who is our Mediator; and he loves the
persons of the Elect as much as ever he did; he delights in mercy as much as
ever; therefore let this encourage us to go to God in all our afflictions and
distresses, whether they are personal, or whether they are public.

1. For our personal defects, and our personal distresses, let us go to God
as Cornelius here does; Cornelius he is in a straight, and it was in a point of
great concernment, he must resolve one way or other, off or on; either be for
this Christ, or against him; Cornelius knew not which way to resolve, he prays
therefore, he desires God that he would enlighten him, that he would direct
him: Oh! let us do the like in these distressed times, when there be such
divisions and distractions in the Church of God, and amongst the people of God,
that a poor simple body knows not what is right, and what is truth, and what
is not; knows not which side to adhere unto: Some call him this way, and some
call him that way; and another says this is right, and you must go this way
if ever you will be saved; and another speaks quite to the contrary: What now
should a poor man do? Do as Cornelius did, go unto God alone, pray, fast,
importune him, desire him that he will teach thee, that he will resolve thee,
desire him that he would send some Peter to thee, some Preacher, some Divine or
other, that may settle thee and confirm thee in the way that thou should
go: Thus if we do, God will be the same to us that he was unto Cornelius, God
heard him, and God will hear us too, though he do not send an Angel from
Heaven as he did to him, yet he will send some Peter, he will send some
direction whereby we shall receive some satisfaction, at least for those things
that are simply necessary and fundamental; he will discover so much unto us,
as shall be accepted, and as shall guide us unto his Heavens: This is his
promise, Psalm. 25. he will guide the meek in his way, and he will teach sinners
the way, and he will show unto them his salvation; and in John 7.17. says our
Savior, He that will do the will of God, he shall know the doctrine whether
it be of God or no: If a man in humility of spirit, and in sincerity and truth
of heart will go to God for direction, as Cornelius did, resolving with him, I
and mine are here before God, and whatsoever God shall speak unto us in his
ministry, we are ready to do it, and to follow it: If any man will do thus,
it is certain that God will give him a resolution and a settlement, and such a
settlement as shall be acceptable (as we said before) and shall give
satisfaction to his soul. What I speak of this particular (because the very
case leads me to it, in my Text) that we may say of all other things too: Carry
all thy fears to God, and all thy sorrows to God, and all thy scruples to
God, acquaint him with thy case, and beg help and strength from him, he is
able, he is ready to hear. Yea but will he hear (me?) Yea thee, he will hear
thee. Oh! but my prayers are weak, and poor: He is a gracious God, he passes
by infirmities, do what thou art able to do, and he is as ready to help thee
as Cornelius. 2. What we say for private men, that we may say much more now, in
the public Case, when it comes to public prayer, and to matter of a public
concernment, here we should be encouraged to go to God: Is God so ready to
hear prayer? does he so graciously answer and accept of poor and weak prayer?
Then, I beseech you, why should not we go to God in respect of the Kingdom,
in respect of the Church, and in respect of the present condition that we lie
under now? Oh! let us all set a praying; pray home the King, pray down
Antichrist, pray up the Lord Christ into his Throne, pray against the sins of
the Land, that they may be removed, and all those obstructions that do hinder
the success of our prayers from day to day; for certainly there are very
strange and great obstructions that lie in the way, otherwise; it were not
possible for our gracious God that is so ready to hear the Petitions of one
poor man, to stand out so long against the suits and petitions of all the
people in a whole Nation; the obstructions are great, pray all these out of the
way. Of these I will instance one or two. I will leave the rest in regard of my
haste.

Obstructions in prayer, and its success.
One maine thing which probably hinders our successes in prayer is the blood
that lies upon the Land, that is a heavy thing, that lies heavy upon the heart
of the Land. It Is said, 2 King. 24.4. that God would not pardon the blood that
Manasses shed in Jerusalem; he filled: Jerusalem and the Land from corner to
corner with innocent blood; God (says the Text there) would not pardon this
sin: Nay, this sin lived some successions, after that Manasses was dead.
Oh! this sin, this sin threatens this Land of ours! this blood that lies
upon the Land, the blood that was shed heretofore in the days of Queen Mary,
that innocent blood that has been shed since by this unhappy difference that
is amongst us: Oh! the Sea of blood that runs through this Land; who must be
responsall, who must be answerable for this? this is a great sin that
obstructs our prayers much. It behooves us, Beloved, to do as God ordered them
in Deuteronomy. 21.8. when there was innocent blood shed, and the murderer could not
be found out, then the neighboring Towns they must go forth, they must slay
a Beast, offer a Sacrifice, wash their hands, pray to God; Oh Lord! be
merciful unto the Land, and unto our Cities, lay not to our charge this blood!
So must we do in this case; Oh Lord, be merciful unto this poor Land almost
drowned in blood, do not charge upon us this blood, lay not to our charge this
innocent blood, but accept of a Sacrifice, and an atonement: That is one thing
we must pray against, as a maine obstruction.

non. execution of Justice; let David in 3 Sam. 21. let David (I say) wait, and
stay, and pray from year to year for the removal of the stroke that was then
upon the Land, until such time as execution be done upon the bloody house of
Saul, there will be no cessation of that stroke and of the famine that was then
upon them; but as soon as ever that was done, and justice executed, presently
the face of the State was changed, and the Lord showed himself a reconciled
God: Oh! let us pray here again, that God would stir up many a Phinehas in
this age, and that he would give the spirit of Phinehas to those that be in
authority, Psalm. 106.30.
that they may do execution; and so the plague may cease: Now it is said of
Phinehas, he did an execution, so the plague ceased: Let us pray, that there
may be found in this City, and in other parts of the Kingdom, such a man as
Jeremy describes, chap. 5.1. A man that does judgment, a man that seeks for
truth (he is a man) a public man that stands in the gap: pray, that we may
have such to stand in the breach.

peace that is amongst us, and an aptness to quarrel and fall out within our
selves; I speak not only of that outward war that is abroad, but I speak of
another business within our selves; if God would put up his sword, it is a
question whethen we would put up ours, yea or no: I am afraid of a sacred
war, if the civil war were once ended and determined; many spirits are so
imbittered one against another, men are so enchanted with their own conceits
and opinions, that they will put all into a combustion, rather then they will
lay down any one conceit, or any one quarrel or contention that they have
engaged themselves in; this is a fearful thing; how can we look that God
should put an end to our wars, when we are so willing to be at war one with
another, brother against brother, and friend against friend, without any
difference almost?

carriage toward God in the midst of so many means and mercies: He has given
us his Word; we slight that; he has made a Covenant with us, and we have
renewed the Seal thereof, many of us (I doubt not) of late: this Covenant we
falsify, we profane and abuse; the Lord has executed some judgments amongst
us, and what use do we make of them? where is the man (almost) that is one
whit reformed, or much the better for all these miseries and calamities that
have come upon the State, and upon the Land? this, this is the sin, the
provoking sin, that we are tooto incorrigible this way, and tooto backward to
improve those means and those judgments which are amongst us: For this God
might justly have a controversy with the Land; Oh! let us pray, let us pray,
that we may be of one mind, and of one judgment, that so there may be peace in
our Land, peace in our Churches, peace in our worships, that we do not fight
against our selves in our prayers: And let us pray in the next place, that we
may make better use of the Word, and of the ministry thereof; that we may make
better use of former corrections, and former judgments then we have done, that
so the Lord at length may look upon us, and when we are humbled and do accept
of his punishment, may then. remember the Land, our distressed Land, our
reeling Land, our dying Land, that God in mercy may then think upon it, and
heal it: Thus we should labor, even to pray unto God for the public, that
all hindrances may be removed, and all furtherances expedited, whereby our
happiness may be recovered and resetled: And why should we not set upon this
work now? what reason have we to be dismayed? will suggest, we see our prayers
do not take, and that we do not succeed as we would; nay, the Lord frowns
upon us, and hides his face from us. Cornelius did, think of a Reformation; lay
not all upon praying, and all upon fasting, but do more, as he does; Cornelius
prays, but he fears God too; Cornelius prays, but he reformes his Family
too, (he had Servants, yea, Soldiers too, that feared God in his Family;)
Cornelius prays, but he has respect to all Gods Commandments, to both Tables
as well as unto one: Cornelius prays, but he is faithful in the particular
place and calling wherein God had set him; he was a good Soldier, he was a
faithful Officer and Centurion in the place that he did sustain; and when as
we are thus universally good, suitable unto our selves, that we are good
Christians, and that we are good Masters, and that we are good Commanders, and
that we are good Soldiers, (good and faithful in the particular places
wherein God has set us) then our prayers will pass, and then God will be so
gracious to us, as he was unto Cornelius: And so we leave that point with you.

The next thing Cornelius does, is a work of mercy; he gives Alms; he was not
only a just man, but he was a merciful man, and was merciful throughout; he
had a merciful hand, and he had a merciful heart: The word here used (...),
with words of that form and termination, as (...), and the like, is very
comprehensive; it implies and concludes both, affection and affection, so that
he does exercise mercy with a very merciful and a gracious heart and
affection: The thing here directly spoken of is the fruits of his mercy, the
effects thereof, as the plural does show us; and these are said for to be
before God; they are before God, as they are acted by Cornelius; he did them in
sincerity; and they are before God, as they are recorded by God too, God sets
them upon record, would keep them in memory, they are remembered of God, as the
Text here tells us. I shall not need to tell you how that memory is too low a
thing for to be properly ascribed unto God, he is one that sees and knows all
things at once, sub uno codemque intuitis, so that he has no use of memory at
all, but the Lord is pleased to apply himself to our capacity, and to
condescend to us; and the plain meaning is this, particularities of the same;
he observes 1. who it is that does a work of mercy, Cornelius: he observes 2.
what is the thing that he does, he properly, which has respect unto man's
present life and livelihood, that is the mercy here spoken of: 3. He takes
notice how much mercy much Alms, as it is said in this Chapter; and Doras made
many Coats for many poor persons: Act. 9.
God takes notice of 4. the Time when a man shows mercy; Obadiah in a hard
time, he hid a hundred Prophets, and showed them mercy then, 1 King. 18.5. God
takes 5. notice how poverty, did show mercy to their power, and beyond their
power: 6. Yea, God takes least degree of mercy that is showed by his Servants
to any of his people, even to a little cake of bread, as he does in the Book of
Kings in the Widow; 1 Kin. 17.30. Marth. 10.42.
and to one cup of cold water, as he he does in the Gospel; verily, if a man
give but a cup of water; (water) that is a cheap thing; cold water, no matter
either of cost or pains; says he, if he gives such a cup of water to the
least of mine, it shall not be forgotten, it shall be rewarded: So that God,
you see, takes particular notice, writes down, Grot. ad. locum.
books down every act and work of mercy that is done by his people. I could be
large in proving of this now, but I shall not need to say more to such an
understanding auditory; I must hasten, in regard of the time and my own
strength.

Negative.
The reason is not from the worth (as we said before, of prayer:) So here, not
from the worth of our works, and of those Alms that we are able to give; as
the Farmers of merit in another world and in another Church use for to speak,
who are very high in their expressions this way, touching their Mercy, their
Alms, their good Deeds, for which they expect a great deal of thanks, and
respect frow God, Cartw. on the Rhem. Teli.
but without reason; for certainly (as one has well observed) it is very true
that many of those things which they called works of merey, were indeed the
works of ponance, and were but mulcti, fines and amercements, laid upon them by
their Confessors for faults that they had committed; and certain it is, that
many of those that they did so brag and boast of, are more ours a great deal
then theirs: However the Doners were cainted and sunburnt with some particulais
of Popery; yet in the maine, many of them were moreours, then theirs: So that
they have no reason to brag that way. In truth, what is a man's mercy to God?
our goodness reaches not to him; whac can we give him, but what is his own
already, and what he has given us first? So that that cannot be the reason why
God respects our niercy, for any worth or dignity that is in our Alms: But the
reason is this; God is pleased in Christ to look upon our persons, and then
next to accept of our sorvices for Christ's sake; Reasons.
expressions of Christ's Spirit, and the fruits of his own Spirit, and because
they are Seals of our obedience, and of our thankfulness unto him; and
because that they are means of refreshing the bowels of his poor Servaints.
For these causes, and under these names and notions it is, that God takes
notice of our Alms and Works of mercy, and daignes to regard and write them:
Write them, how? not to help his own memory (that needs not) but to help our
Faith, and to help our Love, that we should be encouraged in this way to do
works of mercy. I have spoken as briefly as I can unto the point, and yet, I
think, sufficient for so plain a point as this is. All the business here lies
in the Application and the Use of this.



If this be so, that God takes particular notice, and writes down every work
of mercy that is done; then this speaks but sad news unto diverse sorts of
people.

The first are such men as are mere strangers unto merey, Almanacks, that are
full of letters, both red and black and bloody on one side, but on the other
side there is fair paper, a waste empty blank, that is all that is to be found
there: Even so it is with many a man's books, if he be a true recorder of his
works of mercy: On the one side, you shall find, Item, so much spent upon
Pride, and so much spent upon Lust, and so much spent upon Revenge, and so much
spent at Dice, and so much spent in Plays, and so much spent upon sin and
Wickedness; this side is full of what has been laid out touching themselves,
and for themselves in pursusuance of their lusts: But now when it comes to a
work of mercy, what have you done for God? what for Christ? what for the
members of Christ? what for the advancement of Religion? or any pious work or
service? what shall you sind there? Even a blank, mere ciphers, nothing else.
Oh miserable men! how will these fare when they shall be called to an account
for their Stowardship? when they have laid out all for themselves, and upon
themselves and their lusts, and laid out nothing at all for God, and for the
love of God. This is one sort.

But then there is another sort worse then these, and they are Opposites,
Enemies, (as it were) to mercy; at loast they walk in a quite opposite way unto
the way of mercy: These, why these do not feed the poor, but they flay them;
they do not cloth them, but they strip them; they make not any provision for
them, but cast how utterly to ruin and to undo them: In stead of healing them
they wound them; in stead of relieving them, they oppress them, and in stead
of being to them any ease and comfort, they lay upon them heavy burdens, heavy
pressures: This is a black crying firm, and will prove so at the last day;
what? if they in Math. 25. (as Austin well inferres thence) if they shall be
shut out of Heaven, and sent from the presence of God with a curse, who have
not fed the hungry, nor cleathed the naked, nor visited the imprisoned? etc. Oh
then! where shall they appear? and what shall become of them that are so far
from this, that they have done what they could to suck out the very blood of
the poor members of Jesus Christ! This is a second sort.

best of us, for certainly we are all short in this business, and have cause
even to blush and hang down our heads, betwixt man and man when it comes to a
contribution, and we see other men underwrite, it may be, so many crowns, or
so many pounds, we are ashamed to appear in the same Roll, and to have our
names listed where farthings and halfpence are set upon our heads; much more
should we blush when we bring our selves into the presence of God, and there
consider that God sees all we do, all that others have done; he writes down
every man's name, every man's work, every man's Alms, and they are bookt, and
this book will be read and produced at the last day: This, this should put us
to the blush, especially when we consider two things yet found upon us:
backwardness unto works of mercy; and barrenness in works of mercy.

backwardness; how heavily do we come off (for the most part) in works of
this kind? Mercy is by our Savior preferred before kindness: Luke 14.13.
Says he, when thou make a Feast, bid the poor, etc. do not bid the rich;
a man may bid his rich friends in a way of kindness, but (says Christ)
prefer the other before that, mercy before kindness; mercy is better then
kindness. But now (my Brethren) is it so with us? do we set mercy above
kindness? in way of kindness and neighborhood, you know what men will do; a
friend defires you to go a journey with him, you will go; you will say, what
though it cost me five pound? what if it be ten pound? what a matter is that
betwixt friend and friend, neighbor and neighbor? When you meet together
(sometimes) in a Tavern, or at an Inn upon some occasions in way of
kinduesse, to drink or feast together, then happy is that man that can be rid
of his money first; I Will pay says one; I Will pay says the other; you shall not
pay a penny says the third, I Will bear all, etc. and now happy is the man that
can be rid of his money quickly; it grows sometimes very near to a quarrel,
because we cannot be suffered to spend our money: Thus in works of kindness.
But now come to a work of Mercy, how is it then? is the money then upon the
Table? is every man ready to throw down then, and to lead the way unto other
men in this case? Nay then, alas! I am in debt; then, my purse is not about me;
or else, when it comes to the opening of the purse, every finger is a thumb,
and it is such a while before any thing will be got out, that it is very
tedious and irk some to a man to behold it: Then the question is not, who shall
be first? but, who shall be last? I Will see what my betters do first, there are
such and such, they are a great deal richer and better then my self, I will
see what they do; happy is the man here that can be hindmost: Oh! my Brethren,
is not this a thing, think you, that should humble us, that should shame us?
that we in way of courtesy to man should be thus free, but when it comes to
works of mercy for God, we should be so bound up, that we cannot cheerfully,
almost, part with any thing? this is one of the things we fault in our selves,
this same backwardness to works of this kind.

But secondly, there is another thing, and that is barrenness self, and on
the public; what a vast difference will there appear upon the very first
view? If a man read his books, he shall find, Item so much bestowed upon
Apparel, and so much bestowed upon a Feast, and so much for my self, my
self-credit, and my self-delight and content, my self I know not what, so much
for self; there it amounts to scores, to bundreds, it may be, to thousands:
But then come on the other side; how much for Gods House? how much for Gods
worship? how much for charitable and for merciful uses? and then there come
two-pences and three pences, and poor short reckonings, not worthy to be
accounted and summed up almost: Is it not thus (I beseech you) with many of us?
are we not thus barren in works of mercy? and should not this shame us now? I
hope, my Brethren, I hope, that there are none of you but will bear me company
in this work, even this night before you sleep, betwixt God and your selves to
confess this your sin, your nigardize toward God, your pinching when it
comes to a work of mercy and charity; whereas you can be profuse and prodigal
when it is to serve your selves, and your own ends.

sorry for our failing this way, but we must labor to reform and amend this
now, to put on to this great work of charity and mercy that is underhand:
Motives.
I beseech you, consider, that we are bound to it as well as Cornelius; and
that we are as able many of us to do it, as that poor Captain was: Consider,
how that we have as fair promises as ever he had, and that we have as saire
opportunities: Opportunities, said I? Nay, never more opportunities then in
this day in which we live; I need not tell you; you cannot be strangers to the
miseries of the Land, and of this City; I am but a stranger here my self, yet
notwith standing, I see and know so much, that if you would be pleased, you (I
mean) of the richer sort, to descend and to go into the houses of many poor
men (hundreds in some several Parishes) and there see how they fare, and how
they lodge, I am persuaded, you would be sorry, that your horse, that your dog
should feed and lie no better then some of them do: And if you would yet go
farther, and look upon many men that labor, and labor diligently, early up,
and late down, that take excessive pains for to get their bread, you should
find that they be not able to afford so much woney as would buy a little fresh
water to make their children drink; yea, that they are so called upon by Wife
and Children within, that they cannot endure the house almost, bread says one,
'drink, says the other; Father, where shal's have victuals, 'oh! I am ready to
sink, I am ready to faint: It is the case of many modest men, laboring men,
that toil and take a great deal of pains, and are not able to maintain
themselves and their Families with their labors, you would find it so upon
search made.

Shall I add a third Instance? there are come to the City (certainly it is the
honor of this City, and God will bless the City for it, and you will all
speed the better for your receiving of them;) there are come to the City, I
say, a company of poor people that are driven out of the Country; they lived,
some of them, in good fashion in their Country, able to relieve many poor (some
of them able men that did bear office in the place where they lived;) men that
stand so disposed, that they had rather half starve, then they would be
burdensome to you; such there are about this Town: Touching these I may say,
that unless God be merciful to them, and the times do mend and settle, and
some course be taken, many of them will be more then half starved. You, my
Brethren, you here sit warm, you here live in plenty, live in abundance, but
my heart bleeds and dies within me, to think of the misery and desolation that
I have in part seen in some parts of the Country: I must tell you, that if so
be the Lord be not pleased to find out some way of relief for many poor
people in the Country, they will be utterly starved and undone; they cannot
expect many more Harvests and crops of Corn: Well may they come up hither and
eat up your plenty, but they will not be able to bring in any supplies to you,
as formerly they have done: Oh! consider, and say not now, men groan without a
cause, and there is not such need as men will pretend: No, certainly, certainly
there is great need; for many men, they have lived as long, and shifted as long
as they know how to live in an honest way; the Lord pity them, and give you
hearts to tender them to your power.

Well, but things so standing, what shall I persuade you to? two things, my
Brethren.

The first is this; that you would labor to make your selves able to do
somewhat: And then secondly, that you will travel with your selves, that you
may be willing to do for those that be necessitous, in misery and want.

1. How able to do works of merey.
For the first; some man will say, Alas, how can we help it now? how (can) we
help it? trade fails us; our burdens, they are heavy, and payments, they are
multiplied upon us more and more; it is not with us as it has been, we are not
able to do what we are willing to do.

Well, I hear your answer, I believe it to be true in some part: But now I
bessech you, good my brethren, let us cast about a little, and see whether we
may not be in some measure enabled do for those that be in greater want then
our selves. 1. Use your hands, you that are able to labor, labor and take
pains, Ephesians. 4.28.
as Paul would have you, Ephesians. 4. that so you may have somewhat to spare for
those that are not heads too, set your wits awork this way, cast about and
contrive as well as you can how the necessities of people may be supplied in
some measure: Cast about, I say; is there no way to prevent these idle
vagrants, and these persons that eat up the bread of the honest poor? Is there
no way for to pull down more of these Play Houses, I mean, Tipling-houses,
Alehouses, and the like; and to set up Working-houses, that people may have
labor, and that they may be set upon somewhat? is there no way for us to cast
and contrive how people may be kept alive? I beseech you that are men of
wisdom and understanding, that you will employ your thoughts this way.

abatement, abate something, and abridge your selves a little, that you may be
helpful to others: Abate something from your backs, and something from your
belltes and something from your delights and recreations; be content a litile
to deny your selves, (to deny your selves a latle, I say) for the supply of
others. I tell you, I am verily persuaded that there would be enough saved and
spared from needless drinking, I mean, from Wine, and Tobacco, and
Strong Water, and the like; and from trimmings, and laces and dresses, and
such like things as are more then necessary; enough spared, I say, to supply
the necessities of many men that do now stand in great need of very
necessaries: Oh! let your Bread be a little browner, let your Tables be a
little shorter, let your Coats be a little plainer, a little course; a little
condescend to the wants of your poor brethren, and impart something unto them
that are distressed and naked.

honor, the port, and the credit of your places too.

Casuists say touching this point in case of extremity, and of mere necessity,
how far forth a man must deny himself that way; we will not stand upon that
now) we will yield you that; and there will be a competency, I hope, without
any such extremity: We do not press you that you should any way deny your
selves any thing that is fit for nature, that is fit for your places, and for
your relations: only I propound and offer this, whether when these are
answered and satisfied competently, whether then there will not be some
overplus? and if so, then I press the point: Will you not deny your selves in
a superfluity? abate a little for Christ? a little finishnesse, and a little
excess and superfluity? What? not abate a little from a dog, from a brid, from
a beast? Will you not do thus much for Christ? Christ bated of Heaven (as it
were) for the time, he was content to lay aside his glorious Robes in our
misery, and in our beggary: Oh! let Christ be so much beholding to you, that
you lay something out of the everplus for him and for his sake: And when you
do what you are able to do, it is accepted; as the Apostle says, It is
accepted according to that that a man has, and not according to that which he
has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. Thus you must labor to be able to do works of mercy.

2. How willing to do them.
But then there is a second thing; and that is, when you are able, you must be
willing and ready to do it too; you must be willing to it, I say; and here God
bears us down with a world of Arguments. 1. If we look to God, he is our
friend, nay our Father; you know, for a friend you will do somewhat; if a
friend come to you, and say, here is such a such a poor friend and Kinsman of
mine in want, for my sake do somewhat, I Will do as much for a friend of yours;
will you not do it? and will you for a God? Consider Christ; Christ comes in
his flesh to you, when poor Christians come to you; he presents a pale face, a
thin cheeks, he presents a bare arm or leg (it may be) to you; will you not
do somewhat for to support Christ, and to cloth Christ in his members, and in
his servants? shall the bones of Christ stare and stand out? shall the naked
flesh and skin of Christ pine away for want of succor? 3. Add to this:
Christians themselves flesh, as the Prophet says, Isa. 58. they are your own
flesh: What? shall the head do nothing for the foot? and shall the hand and
the eyes do nothing for the legs? what? not for its own flesh, body? 4. But
lastly, consider your selves, and have respect to your selves (if you regard
none of the former,) and provide for your selves, labor to place your wealth
safely, to secure it first, and then to improve it next.

For the securing of it, put it into a sure hand; you know, men in these
doubtful and dangerous times cast about where they may safely place their
Treasure and their Goods; some send it to a Garrison, and some (happily) pass
it over the Seas into another Country. But tell me now, I beseech you, is there
any place so safe as Heaven, where no thiese comes, where no plunderer comes,
where no rust comes? is there any place like that? or can you put it into a
better and safer hand then into the hand of God himself? labor to lay it
where you may be sure to have it forth-comming, put it into Gods hand.

Nay, improve your estates this way: you are willing to do that, I hope, sow,
that you may reap, so the Apostle calls works of mercy: Cor. 9.
It is a sowing; it is good husbandry for a man to sow, in pays him for his
pains to sow; what you give in works of mercy, you shall reap for the same a
greater Crop, and a greater harvest. Nay, what says Soloman? Prove. 19.17. he
that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, and the Lord will repay him again.
I beseech you, mark that place: You give to a man, but God takes it not as a
gifi, he takes it as a debt; it is your gist, it is Gods debt; and he becomes the
debtor and the surety for the poor man; you give to man, but you lend it to
God, and God is at least debtor to himself and his own truth.

Yea, but when shall I have it again? says he there, God will (certainly)
repay it, God will ( fully and abundantly) repay it, (...) In Piel.
no man shall lose by God. My Brethren, take Gods word once, take him for your
surety, and lend to him; he has pawned his Honor and his Credit upon it, that
you shall be repaid, first or last. Labor to improve your estates this way;
yea, labor to settle something upon Posterity, put it into Gods hand: We will
put (sometimes) a Portion into a friends hand for a child; trust God with it,
he never dies, he never breaks, he ever lives; make him your Executor, God will
then provide for yours: The righteous, he gives, and he distributes, and his
seed enjoyes the blessing: Oh! lay up your estates with God, lend unto God,
lend it upon this Public Faith, as it were, upon Gods Faith, and God will not
fail you, he will certainly repay you again. Thus you should labor to be
willing unto this good work of mercy: Many reasons more we might press you
withal: I Will only mind you of that of our blessed Savior, in Acts 20. where
it is said (it was a Proverb of his) that it is a more blessed thing for to
give, then it is to receive: Do not you think so? do not you think your case
better to be able to reelieve others, rather then to be relieved by others? is
it not in your eyes better and happier for you to have somewhat to give, then
that you should be beholding to other men? since it is a more blessed thing to
give then to receive, be you more forward to give then modest men will be to
receive gifts: Give cheerfully, bless. God that you have ability to give, and
bless God that you have opportnity to give, and a heart to give, and an
affection to give, and make God a sharer in your wealth, and in your plenty,
and your selves sharers in this blessedness, bless your selves, bless your
houses, bless your estates.

himself and his?

Eccles. 11. opened, see in Part. Tirin. ad locum.
in Eccles. 11.1. and so forward; where the Wise man does prevent all the
Cavils and Objections that flesh and blood is ready for to make against this
work of mercy. 1. Whereas a man would say, it is but cast away all that is
given, it is lost and drowned (as it were) I shall never see it again. No,
says Solomon, though it may seem to be a throwing down the stream; yet
(says he) cast thy bread upon the waters, and thou shall find it many days
after; first or last it will return, it is gone but a voyage, it will come
back with a great return, thou shall find it again many days after: many
poor that now want, that a man may exhaust himself sooner then repair and
satisfy them: Solomon answers him; give (says he) to seven, and give a
portion also to eight; though they be many, proportion it accordingly; give to
this man a little, and to that a little, that every body may have something of
a little. times may come, and what I my self may be put to: Solomon answers
him, while thou have somewhat to give, because thou know not how long thou
shall have it; therefore give, because thou know not what thy self may
come unto: Thou may need mercy, therefore sow mercy, that in time of need
thou may reap. heart, I pity them with my soul, but I am not able to help
them, and to relieve them; I hope, the heart wlil be accepted: Solomon answers,
If the Clouds be full of water they will drop down rain, that is certain; if
there be abundance of rain there, the Cloud will not keep it all to it self,
it will impart it to the thirsty and hungry ground: So must we do: thou have
mercy and charity in thy heart, and it pitties thy heart to see men in this
misery: Oh! remember, if there be water in the Clouds some of it will drop
down; if there be mercy in thy heart, there will be some in thy hand too.
trading, and it is not with me as it is with many others, I cannot give:
Solomon answers you; whether the Tree (says he) stands south, or whether it
stands north; in a more fruitful, or in a more barren place, yet it is the
Lord's Tree still, cadit Domino, it falls to him, and it bears fruit to him,
and so it will be with us too: If we be good Trees, let us live in the north or
in the south, in a better place, or in a worse habitation, if so be we be good,
somewhat will be coming, and we will yield some fruit; so Solomon tells us.
accepted; I could find In my heart (indeed) to give, but I know not how it will
be taken; poor men are captious, and they will not take a little; and rich men
will take exceptions: some will say, I do it out of pride and ambition, and
raise me (it may be) higher in the Subsidy book, because I am so forward and
free of my purse, so that I know not what to do: Solomon answers you; he that
observes the wind and the rain shall never plow, never sow; if a man will be
still objecting, he shall never go on with any work or service whatsoever.
parties to whom I give; there are many hypocrites and dissemblers, that pretend
a great deal of want when there is no such matter: if I did know the men, it
were another matter: Solomon answers; Neither do thou know how the child
grows in the womb of her that is with child, but for all that thou must not
starve the child; we must labor to do that which is fit for us to do, to
follow our light, and our best wisdom and discretion, and when we have so
done, leave the rest to God, whose providence works (as it were) under the
ground for us, as for the child. experience that I have been cheated and abused
by fellows heretofore, and that puts me off now, and discourages me: Solomon
answers thee; in the morning sow thy feed (saves he) and in the night let not
thy hand slack: thou know not which shall prosper, this or that; or whether
both shall be alike; therefore cast not perils, but venture it (as it were)
venture it sometimes, when thou have nothing to the contrary, thou know not
but it may succeed very well: howsoever, what thou do in uprightness, and
with thy best discretion, that God will accept, and that God will take in good
part: Thus Solomon, you see, does wipe off those Objections that flesh, and
blood, and unbelief is apt to make. I could (if it were needful now) add more
which are answered sufficiently by many, specially by two of the Fathers, which
professedly writ upon this Argument; the one is Cyprian, and the other is
Basil, and I must refer Scholars unto them: I should now add some rules for
your better working, Rules in giving. 2 Cor. 8.5.
as touching the ground and order of your giving; you must 1. give your selves
to God, as Paul says; 2. for matter, give your own, whence Alms termed
often righteousness by the Hebrews and the 70. 3. for time, do it quickly
whilst you live, See their Mazker, remembrance of souls, etc.
and men live, and not (as later Jews do) give for the dead, But of these and
other rules I have spoken elsewhere, and you may read every where: and
therefore I here conclude this Point. And now we have done with the two Acts of
Cornelius; we hear what he was in point of Prayer, we hear what he was in
point of Alms too: I perceive the time has deceived me, and therefore I will
but touch upon the third point: I crave your patience so long.

We have spoken of the things selves; here is yet something that would be said
of the Person, that is, Cornelius; he was a Gentile, and (as it should seem)
none of the best of the Gentiles neither, an Italian, his Name, his Band, and
his Host speak that way somewhat.

This Cornelius was also a Soldier, and amongst Soldiers an Officer; and yet
notwithstanding, you see, that he was a praying man, a very godly, a very
devout, a very merciful man.



That there is no outward disadvantages that can excuse us from Gods service,
or exempt us from Gods acceptance; we will put in both: He served God, and he
is accepted of God, notwithstanding his Country and his disadvantages; so that
let a man's Country be what it will, let his calling be what it will, let his
condition be what it will, if he serves God, God will accept of him, and of his
services. We note this the rather, because that Peter gives us the note in the
34. verse of this Chapter; I perceive indeed (says he) that God is no
respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted of God, let him be what he will: but I dare not
stand to prosecute this point.



First, it takes off that lazy excuse that is made by many men; they would
serve God, and they would pray, and they Time serves not, and the Place serves
not, and their Calling serves not; thus many exceptions they have against the
service and the worship of God. All these may be answered with one Cornelius,
besides others, if time would have given leave. We see that Noah and some
others, in the worst times, could find time to serve God: We see that some in
Nero's house, and so in the worst places, have found place for to serve God: We
see that some of those callings that seem to be farthest from Heaven and God,
some of those Callings have served God: Gajus, it seems, was an Innekeeper, yet
a faithful man; Cornelius a Soldier and a Commander, and yet a godly and a
religious man: So that there is no place, no time, no calling that can exempt
us this way.

But then secondly, we had thought to have said something accepted: and why not
accepted? Oh! their persons are so mean and poor, and their services are so
weak and so contemptible, and their sins so great and so enormious, that
sure God will not accept of them. It is answered, God is no respecter of
persons, in every Nation he is ready to hear every poor soul that seeks
unto him, and calls upon him.

can in your families, since that there is no man excluded from Gods acceptance,
or Gods service; therefore have respect to your servants, even to the very
Kitchin-boy; have respect to all that are within your compass, and within your
selves, do what you can to reclaim them from sin, to bring them up in the
knowledge and information of God: What know thou (says the Apostle)
believing man, but thou may convert thy unbeleeving wife? So say I to you,
what know you but that God may have pity upon thy poor slave, thy poor
apprentice, as well as upon thy self? Yea, what know you, but if you make a
good choice, and take a good course, and carry a good hand over them, but that
Soldiers and those that lie in Garrisons, and repair to your Forts, may be
godly men, religious men, as Cornelius was?

And for your selves, let me call upon every man this day, to hasten to Gods
service: You have all the advantages that may be; you live in a Land of
uprightness, in a Goshen of light; you are under a Constellation (as it were)
of ablest Magistrates, and of ablest Ministers; who shall serve God, if you
will not, that have all these helps, and these advantages? Therefore, art thou
called to repentance? Never say, I cannot, I have no leisure, and the like;
thou may have leisure and grace, God is able to break the hardest heart, he
is able to melt the frozenest heart, and to subdue the sturdiest spirit; and
therefore say not, thou can not: Are you called to duty and service? Say not,
I would pray, and I would hear, and I would do many duties to God, but I
cannot, I have not leisure, I have no time, my place will not bear it, my
occasions will not suffer it: Thou might if thou had a heart; other men in
the same circumstances, in as great difficulties, have served God, and waited
upon him: Daniel was a man full of State-businesse, yet he finds his time for
praying every day to God more then once or twice: Here is a Soldier in the
Text, he can fear God, he can look after his Family, and he can restrain his
Soldiers from pilfering, and plundering, and drinking, and swearing, he can
do it by Gods blessing upon his endeavors; and if he, why not others too?
therefore do not make any such lazy plea: Much less say, Oh, it will not be
accepted! it will be accepted: Give but what thou can give, God will accept
it; pray but as thou can pray, God will accept it; repent as thou art able to
repent, and call in Gods help and assistance, God will accept it: What shall I
say more to you? I am cut off, I am afraid to be too-to tedious to you: And
therefore I conclude abruptly; only I have propounded unto you one Example and
Pattern of mercy, presented unto you many Objects of mercy, and of compassion;
now let me present unto you some more, and these are known well to your
selves: Here is a true report, etc.

Here, according to the custom, a Catalogue was read of sundry Benefactors to
the several Hospitals, and such like Houses for charitable uses; and that
done, the conclusion was as follows: Thus you see (Beloved) here is work
enough for your charity to be employed about; here are many Objects of mercy,
many Arguments of mercy; here are Objects of all sorts: Old men and Babes,
Widows and Orphans, many poor persons that want stocks to set them on work,
that would feign be employed if they knew how: Here are also diverse others that
cry to you, that call upon you for mercy, and for relief: The Arguments you
have heard; Arguments from God; Arguments from Christ; Arguments from your
selves; Arguments from the times; Arguments from your Brethren; Let me say all
at once, God requires it, God eals for it, God commands it: God commanded once
the Clouds, and they gave bread; God once commanded the Rocks, and they gave
water; God once commanded a Raven for to carry meat to a Prophet, and the Raven
did it: Oh! for Christ's sake, let us not show our selves more ravenous then the
Raven, more reckie then Rocks themselves; and thus we leave our errand with
you; another Theme I confess would better have liked me, and perhaps more
reached you, but I have answered your desire in my choice, and, I confess, the
Subject is not unseasonable; the Lord go with it.

FINIS.
June 10. 1645. Imprimatur JOSEPH CARYL.


