INFANTS BAPTIZING Proved lawful by the SCRIPTVRES: Objections against it
resolved and removed.

MAT. 18. 6. Whosoever shall offend a little child which believes in me, it
were better for him that a mil-stone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the depth of the sea.

Aug. 24. 1644.

Imprimatur,

JOHN WHITE.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller dwelling in Blackfriars, 1644.

The Printer to the Reader.
Reader,
PErceiving some Pamphlets to be sent abroad, against Baptizing of Infants to
corrupt the people, I thought it my duty to the Church of God, to publish this
short discourse (which came to my hands) to give some check to the spreading of
Anabaptisticall fancies, until some Learned pen shall more fully and largely
evince the truth in this controversy; consider thou seriously what is said in
it, and be established in the present Truth, and not carried off from thy
steadfastness with every wind of Doctrine: show thy self to be sollid wheat,
and not slight chafe in the garner of God.

Farewell.
INFANTS BAPTIZING Proved lawful by the SCRIPTURES.
COnsidering the present strange and dangerous spreading of the old Error of
the Anabaptists; That children are not to be baptized, which in all ages of the
Church under the Gospel has been condemned, whenever it has been stirred,
and is now again revived and pressed by the workings of Satan, who has
prevailed to the infection of many therewith even among those that pretend unto
holiness, and have obtained a good degree in the Church of God; I could not be
satisfied in my self till I had searched into, first, the title and claim of
Infants unto this ordinance of Baptism, and then into the bars and pretenses
brought against it; and finding the claim of Infants to be by the Scriptures
strong and clear, and the batteries raised against it weak and slight, my
spirit was at rest and settled in the truth and justice of the constant and
general practices of all the Churches in it, and did not so much as think of
making any of my thoughts and meditations concerning these things legible, till
by occasion of some debate I had with some Ministers I reverenced, and of a
Letter sent unto me by one of them, I addressed my self to set down in
writing, solutions and answers to those things which I perceived to stick with
them, whereby it comes to pass, that in this following discourse, there is no
methodicall handling of the controversy (as it well deserves) but the stating
of the question and proof of Infants baptism, falls in by parcels as the
objections against it gave occasion. And whereas one basis upon which the
Infants right is founded, is suggested by the Anabaptists to be a promise
proper to Abraham, and not to extend to all professors of the Gospel, nor to
any of them: I begin with that, namely,

GENESIS 17. 7. I will be the God of thee, and of thy seed.

THis is a double Promise: First, I will be the God of thee; Secondly, I will
be the God of thy seed.

The first promise is no peculiar of Abraham's, but is common to every believer
under the Law and Gospel, a branch of the new Covenant, Jer. 31.33.

The second being the same Promise, signifying and carrying in it the same
things, and in terms the same, only varying the subject, extended to seed, his
seed, as related to him, must be of as large extent as the first, and common to
every believer with Abraham: and this is plain and manifest by the
Grammatical construction of this Promise.

Secondly, It is farther evidenced, by comparing this with other Scriptures,
Deuteronomy. 28.4. The righteous shall be blessed in the fruit of their bodies: where
blessedness is promised to their seed as theirs, in reference to them. Deuteronomy.
30.2, 6. God promises to the true penitent, to circumcise their heart, and the
heart of their seed, to love him, Isa. 44 3 I will power out my Spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring. Isa. 59.21. My Spirit and my words
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor of thy
seeds seed for even Mat. 19.14. and Luke 18.16. Jesus Christ declares his mind
concerning the children of the members of the Church, he would have them
brought to him, he blesses them and says, that of them is the Kingdom of God.
Acts 2.39. The Apostles speaking to converted Jews and Gentiles, penitent
believers, affirms, that the Promises belong to them and to their children.

Thirdly, That the said Promises were no peculiars of Abraham, appears by that
of the Apostle, Gal. 3.16. that the Promises made to Abraham, were made to
Christ, and so to Abraham as interessed in him, in whom Abraham and all the
nations of the earth are blessed. All promises of grace are made to Christ, and
to Abraham, and to believers under the Gospel in him, in respect of our
interest in him. In him are the promises yea and Amen unto us. Abraham was an
antecessor in the faith, whose steps the faithful follow, Romans 4 12. but
neither father of our persons nor of our faith. God honored him to be the
first to whom this promise was expressly made (after the same made in the
beginning to Jesus Christ the seed of the woman) and so he was a father, and
not otherwise, more then any other believer. There was also another speciality
in this Promise to him, that of his natural seed should proceed a people that
should have the honor, till Christ came, to be the only visible Church on
earth; but the Scriptures make this rather a peculiar of Isaac, then of
Abraham, and made to him in Isaac, and not generally, Genesis 17.19. Romans 9.7.
The Promise to Abraham comprehended Ishmael also, whereupon the seal of it was
given to him by Gods appointment; clearly declaring the extent of that Promise
to all in the visible Church, and so it belonged to Ishmael, till for his
mocking of Isaac (by which he forfeited it) he was justly excommunicate.

Fourthly, Another thing manifests this truth, namely that God gave Abraham the
seal of the Promise, not as Abraham, nor as a Jew, but for and in respect of
the righteousness of faith he had before circumcision instituted, in his
uncircumcision: by that it appeared he was in Christ, capable of the Promise,
and entitled unto it: and this is common to Christians of the uncircumcision
as well as to Abraham that received circumcision, Romans 4.11.

Fifthly, This further appears by the thing contained in this Promise, namely,
the appropriation of God to believers by a free Covenant of peculiar grace
above and before others, and this grace, (as believing) is either outward, for
and concerning visible Church privileges to be members of the visible Church,
partakers of Baptism The visible Church is called Christ, 1 Cor 1^. 12. And
the Kingdom of Christ, Mat. 13.
, etc. or inward and merely spiritual, which none but true Saints in whom the
new creature is formed have Covenant-right unto: Clearly all the natural seed
of Abraham while they continued members of the visible Church and were not
excommunicate, had Covenant-right to Church Priviledges for them and their
children, and though some of them had not true faith and so attained not an
interest in the invisible grace of the Covenant, yet that unbelief made not
the Covenant and faith of God without effect, Romans 3.1, 2, 3. So it is under
the Gospel; Vbi eadem ratio, idem ju^ and de similibus idem est judicium.

And lastly, This is further evinced by the whole tenor of the Scriptures in
the Contr^^iorum eadem est ratio.
contrary, which is the portion of the wicked and of their children that are
not in the Covenant of grace, or being once within the outward and visible
grace thereof, deprive themselves thereof by becoming degenerate and profane,
and are justly therefore excommunicate. The curse is always extended to their
seed as well as to them, Deuteronomy. 28. 18. Exodus 20.5. and though this be not
executed upon all their seed, but that free election manifested by their
regeneration restores them to be vessels of mercy, yet that makes not the curse
of God of no effect, neither does the general revealed will, hinder the
operation of the secret free grace of Gods election, or of reprobation.

Abraham's seed, Romans 4.16. is distinguished into the seed which is of the Law,
and the seed which is of faith; and neither excluded, but both included within
the Promise. And Romans 9.6. the distinction is between the natural and the
spiritual seed, among the natural as well as others, and none of them are
excluded from interest in the Covenant, but first all are included in the
outward grace of the Covenant, verse. 4. all Israelites, to whom pertained the
adoption and the glory and the Covenant and the Promises: Secondly, Some are
excluded the invisible grace of the Covenant by the secret counsel of divine
preterition, as others were included by election, verse. 6, 11. all which
further confirms and cleeres what I have said; and both parts of the Covenant
are free grace, even the outward, Psalm. 147.19, 20. God shows his word,
statutes and judgments to Israel, he has not dealt so with others.

Abraham, not as any believer, but as a person chosen by God freely.

Abraham as a believer, is common to all believers, because they all are
subjects capable of it, they all are persons chosen by God freely, and have the
same hand of faith to receive it; and there is no color to assert, that God is
not the God of every believer as well as of Abraham, or that the children of
every believer are not beloved for their fathers sake as well as Abraham: And
it is a Promise made, not to believers as a species, but to individuals,
believers as acted with faith. The Promises of God are not notions, nor
predicable of universals, but actual, but whatsoever general Promise is made
to any man as a believer, is made, intended and applicable to all, to every, to
any believer. That they are beloved for the fathers sake, is true of every
believers children as well as of Abraham's, for if the root be holy so are the
branches, Romans 11.16, 28. though some of them be broken off by personal
unbelief, as it was with Abraham's seed, verse. 17.

And that God does sometimes make particular promises of particular grace
(which is not applicable to all believers) to some persons that believe, is
nothing material or pertinent to this question, as the Promise to Phineas
concerning the Priesthood, Number. 25.13. and the Promise of the Keys to Peter,
Mat. 16.17, 18, 19. For first, the Promise to Phineas was not made to him as a
zealous man, for then it would have been common to all zelots (though God took
occasion from his zeal, and in reward thereof to make that Promise unto him)
but God made it unto him as a Priest, in which respect only he was capable of
it, and by the matter it self appears it was peculiar and not common; but to
be the God of his people, is common and communicable to all believers as our
Promise now in question; so far are these cases from similitude, as they have
no resemblance. And so the Promise to Peter is not of a thing common to all
believers, as the Promise in question, but of a matter entrusted unto the
Ministers of the Gospel, and made to Peter as such, not as a believer; and
though made to Peter, is applicable to all Ministers of the Gospel, and common
to the rest of the Apostles. And whether the inferring of such instances to
prove the promise in question to be a peculiar of Abraham's, be not cavilling
rather then candid arguing or seeking the truth, let the Reader judge.

And it is apparently a like mere cavil, to say that Isa. 59. 20, 21. is not
applicable to all believers, and all times, because the Apostle, Romans 11. 26.
applies it to the Jews; for by the context of the original place, it is a
general promise, made expressy and extended to all to whom the Redeemer shall
come, and the applying thereof to the Jews, a branch only of them to whom he
came, is so far from limiting it, as applying animal rationale to John to prove
him a man, limits it to him alone excluding all other men, when that instance
confirms it to all of like case and condition, and declares it appliable to
them also, and upon the same reason.

And Exodus 20 6. That God will show mercy to thousands of them that love him,
is clearly a Promise to the believer and his children, who though not
expressly, yet by the antithesis of the context comparing it with the former
verse, upon which it depends and is inferred, are necessarily included: and it
is a Promise to every believer (as general as the curse in the former verse,
which extends to all that hate God) extending to all that love him, and not
matter contingent but certain to them. And so Psalm. 112.2. The Promise that
the seed and generation of them that fear the Lord and delight in his
Commandments shall be blessed, is not made to John or Thomas only, but in
common to all that fear and delight in God, and both these Promises are as
large as blessedness, including Heaven as well as earth.

Psalm. 103.17, 18.

Isa. 54. 13. All thy children shall be taught of the Lord.
, undertakes their faith and obedience Isa 49.25. I will save thy children.
, without which they cannot be spiritually blessed; These two are some of the
good things included in the Promise and Covenant, and performances thereof, and
are implied as effects, not as motives or causes of the promise which is most
freely made by the Lord.

The revealed will of God in this Covenant concerning the good of my children,
is the rule to the Church and me, what to believe, hope and expect concerning
them, and what to do to and for them to prepare and enter them (as much as in
us lies) into and for the whole good of this Promise. The secret counsel of
God how my children shall prove in the end, belongs not to us, is no rule for
us to walk by toward them till it be revealed. And this Promise holds out unto
us; First, A ground comfortably to believe and hope that God will fulfill the
whole of the Covenant unto them, whence we have as clear a ground to expect
their spiritual as their temporal good, and upon this promise we may ground a
prayer of faith for both for the children. Secondly, This Promise binds us to
use in faith all means that the children are capable of for the interessing of
them in the good of this Covenant, and among other to baptize them. Infants are
capable of grace, to such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, and for ought we
know, the Spirit has sanctified the believers children, and from this promise
we have ground to hope that it is so, they being within it expressly; and this
Covenant gives them a right to the seal of it; and this revealed will is the
rule by which the Church and we are to judge, leaving secret things to God; and
therefore without incurring the guilt of infidelity, and breach of the command
included in this promise of using means, and without manifest injury to the
children, and contempt and slighting of this great mercy and kindness
expressed and assured in this Covenant to believers, neither the Church nor
they can withhold Baptism from their children.

Hence it appears, that this Objection is cast in impertinently, to trouble
the clear waters of this sweet Promise, and weaken our faith in it. What God
has undertaken (it being his work and not ours) we are to rest upon his truth
and faithfulness in accomplishing it, and not trouble our hearts or heads
about it, but doing our duties believe in his truth revealed, and submit to his
sovereignty (the exercise whereof is unknown unto us) when he shall reveal it.
It is true that the election only obtaines the invisible grace of this promise
(as the Apostle says of Abraham's seed) but what is that to us before God
manifests who are in his election and who not; It ought not (being secret) to
impeach our faith in this Promise, nor withhold us from using all means to our
children for the obtaining of that grace.



Spirit of God, and that that is done in the children of believers, we have
from this Covenant good ground to believe; or by the Church and parents in
bringing the children unto this ordinance in faith, which is done in the right
administration of it, or lastly by the children themselves, who being passive
in this ordinance, it is not necessary that at present they express the fruits
of it in any activity of theirs, no more then in circumcision; but this is to
be believed and expected, that God who has promised will produce it in time.
And though it fall out that some deny their Baptism afterward as some did
their circumcision, that is not material in this question, being secret and
therefore not considerable in the dispensation of the outward visible grace and
privileges of this Covenant which such children have Covenant-right unto;
Which also is by this further manifested, that though many of them that receive
Baptism, at full age after deny it, and declare by their apostasy that they
are in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity as Simon Magus, yet that
hinders not the Church to administer Baptism to others of full age, upon their
profession of faith and repentance. For we are to walk by the revealed will of
God, and not be hindered by future events, which being secret, are to be left
and referred to God. And we are encouraged so to do in the case in question,
not only from the Covenant of God, but also from the experience of his gracious
performance thereof, who has made good this promise to the children of
believers and professors in the uttermost extent of it, specially where there
has been no fault in the believers, either in not believing this gracious
promise, or not using the means sanctified for the obtaining of the
performance of it.



etc. but of the children of unbelievers, they speak no good, but contrarily
that they are cursed; God will visit the iniquities of their fathers Number.
14.18. Deuteronomy. ^.9. Ier. 32.18. Job ^^ 19.
upon them unto the third and fourth generation, that they are ^ Cor. 7. ^4.
unclean, the seed of the serpent: far from safety, Job 5.4. God will make
their plagues wonderful, Deuteronomy. 28.59, etc. And by this appears that there is
a broader difference between the children of believers and of unbeleevers, then
that believers have the means of knowledge for their children: Besides, many
unbeleevers, as Papists and open profane persons among us, have the means of
knowledge for their children, and so between them and the children of believers
is no difference, nor the condition of the children of believers better then of
unbeleevers: Into what a bottomless pit of absurd opinions does the spirit of
error hurry men that turn from the truth and forsake it?



the seal belongs They that have the th^^g signifi^^, may not be denied the
sign ^f capable of it, (...). 47. and A^t. ^.7 They hav^ng the lik^ (...) and
promise as we to deny them baptism is to withstand God.
, all Gods Covenants are sealed Covenants. Thirdly, The children of believers
are capable of this seal of the Covenant, being merely passive in the
administration of it, both in respect of the outward element and inward grace
of it, and it is a strong engagement of them to devote themselves unto God when
they attain discretion that from the beginning they are consecrated unto God,
and have such excellent promises 2 Cor. 7.1.
sealed unto them, and what then hinders them to be baptized?

It is yet further objected, That baptising of children has no foundation in
Scripture.

To which I answer, There is a twofold testimony of Scripture express in
terms, and that is not to be had for some principal truths: Secondly, by
necessary clear deduction from clear Scriptures; and such grounds Scripture
abound withal for Pedobaptisme, and some of them I have above opened and
cleared.

Infant baptism.
to infants, as John the Baptist and the Apostles did administer it.

drive the adversary of this truth out of all his coverts and seeming
strengths. I answer further, That in the administration of Baptism, according
to the institution of it, and the use of it by John and the Apostles, and
others recorded in Scriptures, there are some things essential and necessary
in all cases; and some things accidental that are not necessary nor useful in
all, but only in some cases. The essentials are three only, first a Minister of
the Gospel to administer it, Mat. 28.19. they only have commission and
authority for it. Secondly, A person that has right unto it, either by his own
personal profession of faith and repentance Mat. 3.6. Acts 8.37.
, or otherwise, upon whom it is to be conferred: Thirdly, To baptize in the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And that such personal confession is
not necessary, where it is otherwise apparent the person to receive it has
right unto it, is plain by John's baptising of Jesus Christ who had
Covenant-right unto it, and could not confess sin, Mark. 1.9. and by Ananias
baptising Paul without confession of sin or profession of faith, Acts 9.15,
18. God telling him he had a right unto it being his chosen vessel, and Peter's
baptizing the Centurions friends upon whom he saw the Holy Ghost in
extraordinary gifts to fall without their personal confessions, Acts 10.47.
and yet those extraordinary gifts were not certain evidences of election to
eternal life. And by Paul's baptising of all Lydias household Act 16 1^.
merely upon their submitting willingly unto it, without distinct personal
confessions, for ought appears, and so the Jaylors Act. 16.31, 33.
household, and Stephanas 1 Cor. 1.^6.
his household; and it cannot be reasonably imagined that there were no children
among them; And 1 Cor. 10.2. All the children of the Israelites (being within
the Covenant) were baptized in the cloud and in the sea as well as those that
were of full age.



Sacrament of regeneration) the receiver is passive both in the outward and
inward administrations thereof: But in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (the
Sacrament of corroboration and increase) the partaker of it must be active: An
infant cannot examine and judge himself, discern the Lords body, do it in
remembrance of Christ (all expressly required in the receiver of the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26, 28, 29, 31.) But an Infant can receive the sprinkling
of water, and is capable of the Spirit of life and grace, and if he be a child
of a believer and member of the visible Church, nothing in the institution of
Baptism excludes him, and the Covenant includes him expressly which is to be
sealed by it.

Some other arguments are brought against Pedobaptisme, but because they are
from humane testimony negatively, (a way of arguing exploded by all Logitians)
I will not mispend precious time in dealing with them, but leave them as of no
weight or value. But I shall subjoyne some few considerations of some further
absurdities and mistakes of the opinion of those that deny Baptism to the
children of believers, by which the truth in this question will more clearly
appear.

Besides that, by their opinion the children of believers under the Gospel are
in as bad a case as the children of infidels, strangers from the Promises and
Covenant of grace, strangers from the womb, which is the condition of the
wicked, Psalm. 58.3. so (as one observes) Gods holy lambs should live like
straies, not marked with his brand, ordained to distinguish his from those he
will not own; which is expressly against the Scriptures, as I have above
clearly evinced: But they be also in a worse case then the children of the
Jews under the law were, they were within the Covenant of grace, and had the
seal of Circumcision, a Sacrament, the same in substance with Baptism, of the
same spiritual use and end in the place and stead whereof Baptism succeeds:
which is also clearly against the Scriptures, which inform us that better
things are reserved for us under the Gospel, a better condition then they had
under the Law, Heb. 11 40. Yea the children of the Christian Jew, are by their
opinion put in a worse condition then the children of the Jew before Christ
were in, and yet they grant them to be within the said Promise made to Abraham
first abovementioned; The children of the circumcised Jew might have the
seal, but the children of the Christian Jew may not; whereby the coming of
Christ is made to turn to the disparagement of the children of the Christian
Jews, to depose them from the hereditary dignity they had under the Law,
contrary to the Scriptures, Heb. 7.19, 22. and ^.6. which testify, that Christ
Jesus has brought us a better hope, a better testament, and his Ministry to
be more excellent, and established upon better promises.

Secondly, These men would have the Church and the Ministers of Christ refuse,
and refuse to bless those whom Jesus Christ himself in person received,
embraced and blessed, as those to whom the Kingdom of Heaven belonged,
contrary to the Scriptures, Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye followers of God as dear
children; and the Scriptures call upon the children of the Church, even those
that suck the breasts to partake in the extraordinary duties of the Church,
namely fasts, Joel. 2.16. Ezra 10.1. for which they are more unfit then for
Baptism.

Thirdly, These men break the constant rule of right interpretation and
construction to support their fancy; The Scriptures are one entire body of
truth, Joh 17.17. Thy word is truth, and therefore construction must not be
made by fraction upon any part of it, touching any question raised out of it
alone, but upon all matters concerning it compared together, and therefore we
are to search the Scriptures, and compare spiritual things with spiritual
things. Take all the holy Scriptures together concerning Sacraments, and it
clearly appears that when God instituted them in his Church, he declared his
mind, that the children of the Church should be partakers of them, as Genesis
17.7, 10. of Circumcision, the Sacrament then of initiation and regeneration;
and of the Passover, Exodus 12.16, 47. the then Sacrament of edification, every
soul in the house, all the Congregation were to eat it. After by the Gospel
in the institution of Baptism, there is no change made, save only in the
outward element, water washing, for the fore-skins circumcising, no word of
altering the persons to partake in it, as appears expressly, Joh. 1.33. God
sent John to baptize with water; Here the element and outward matter of the
Sacrament of regeneration is altered, but no more by the institution, no word
of altering the persons, so as they remain as before, to be determined by the
general rule at first common to all Sacraments: But in the institution of the
Lords Supper, there is made not only a change of the outward matter, but also
an alteration and limitation of the persons, and children excluded, and all
that examine not and judge themselves, and discern not the Lords body;
Certainly if the Lord had intended any alteration or restraint of persons in
the institution of Baptism, he would have spoken it out, as he does in the
institution of the Lords Supper; and his silence therein may satisfy any sober
spirit that it never came into his mind.

But these men look only upon the actual dispensation of this Sacrament of
Baptism by the Baptist, and by the Apostles upon persons of full age expressly
recorded, and not upon the rules of the Scriptures compared as aforesaid, nor
do they consider the reason and rule of those practices. It appears expressly
that those recorded practices were upon proselites, new converts added to the
Church, and newly brought to the faith of the Gospel, and with them they
proceeded by the rule concerning proselites, set down Ezekiel. 47.22. they gave
them a portion in the inheritance of the Church, and made them partakers of the
privileges thereof; can any conclude hence, that they intended hereby to
disseise the children of the Church, and to disinherit them and divest them of
the Covenant or seal to which they were borne? Certainly no: There is enough
in the Covenant of grace and privileges of the Church for both, the natives
and the stranger, that by his profession and conversion is added to the Church:
To preach to infidels before they be baptized is necessary, because else a
seal is put to a blanck, but to baptize the infants of believers, is to put
the seal to the Covenant, as much as it is to baptize professors of full age,
such infants having the same right as professors. These men clearly err by
not observing the difference between natives of the Church, and those that are
forreiners and strangers to be received into the Church: and by not conferring
the whole body of the Scriptures concerning Sacraments, to find out the mind of
God in this business; what is the ground whereupon the Church under the
Gospel receives women to partake in the Supper of the Lord, for which they
have neither precept nor example in the new Testament, no more then we have for
Infant Baptism? Certainly none but that God commanded their partaking in the
Passover Exodus 12. ^^. ^^.
, and thereby declared them to be persons to whom he would have Sacraments
administered if they were capable thereof, and of this they are capable, and
nothing in the new institution and alteration induced by the Gospel excludes
them.

Mat. 28.19. G^^ teach all nations, baptising them, etc. from which they
infer, that none are to be baptized but those that are taught, and therefore
only persons of discretion.

Joh. 1. 33. God sent John the Baptist to baptize with water, and Jesus Christ
that gave this command, was himself before this baptized, Mat. 3. 16. and the
Apostles to whom he spoke this had baptized before, Joh. 4. 2. Secondly, It
cannot be intended that these two duties of the Ministerial office, preach and
baptize should be inseparable, in regard of the persons in whom they determine;
that the same persons that partake not in the one, should not be partakers of
the other, or that those that partake in the one, should necessarily partake in
the other. John baptized Jesus Christ though he did not preach unto him; and it
is apparently absurd, that Ministers must baptize all they preach unto whether
they receive their preaching or not; and it is as manifestly absurd, that
Ministers must deny baptism to them that by the word have right unto it,
because they have not preached unto them, for it is the right unto it, not
preaching to them, that determines to whom it is to be given, and such
exposition is to be made of Scripture, and of all writings as absurdity may be
avoided. Thirdly, The true sense and scope of this place of Scripture is
plainly no more, but first to enlarge the Apostles commission which was given
them before, Mat. 10.5. to all nations; at first limited to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel, and secondly to injoyne them to attend principally and
with great care and heed the two principal duties of their office, preaching
the word, and administering the Sacraments, and whosoever extends it further,
apparently wrongs and abuses it.

Mat. 28.19. where the Apostles are commanded to teach and baptize all nations,
in the original tongue import, that they were to baptize none but whom they
made disciples; and then Infants are excluded.

(...).
teach) which they would have to mean (make disciples) and pretend that it
ought to be so translated, and the other is (them) which is of the Masculine
gender, and cannot in Grammatical construction agree with the word Nations
going before, being of the Neuter gender, and therefore must refer to the word
disciples, implied in the Verb usually translated (teach:) In both which it
seems to me very evident, that they are greatly (if not wilfully) mistaken.

For though the word may signify to teach and to make disciples also, yet by
the subject matter which it is here taken and used to express, it must be here
taken for the first, and not for the other: because to make disciples was not
in the power of the Apostles (upon whom this command lay) it being the peculiar
of God Psalm. ^9. ^.
to frame the heart to submit unto, entertain and embrace the Apostles
teaching, and to cast them into the form and obedience of it, and so to make
them disciples, but to teach, and thereby endeavor as much as in them lay to
make disciples, was in their power and duty, and is all the whole of the
meaning of the word here, therefore properly and rightly rendered teach, and not
to make disciples. Semper f^nda interpretatio secundum subi^ctam ma^^riam.
It is evermore the safe way to make exposition of the words of the Scripture,
not according to our fancy, to wrest them to the opinion we take up, but
according to the matter and meaning of the Scriptures themselves, appearing in
the context thereof.

And for the word [Them.] though Nations in Grammatical construction (...).
cannot be the Substantive unto it, (the Evangelist in changing the gender
following, not the letter but the sense of the word nations) yet (...).
men (that were to be baptized) a word comprehensive of all ages and sexes, and
understood in the text, must be the Substantive unto it, rather then (...).
disciples, which is only of the Masculine gender in the original tongue, and
excludes women from Baptism contrary to the Scriptures, (which expressly
mention the baptizing of Lydia.)

By which appears, that this text according to the matter and true proper
meaning of it, is thus in substance: Go teach all nations, endeayour to make
them disciples, and baptize every man of what age or sex soever that have right
to that Sacrament.

The scope of the text, is to enlarge the Apostles commission, and therefore
the words of it are to be expounded in the most large, liberal and
comprehensive sense that the holy Scriptures concerning Sacraments taken
together will bear, and are not to be restrained to the objectors erroneous
conceit, which Psalm* 78.41.
limits the glorious grace of the holy one of Israel, and restraines it to the
great dishonor thereof, and prejudice of his people.

Lot in Abraham's time was a believer, and yet was not within the said Covenant
to Abraham nor circumcised.

Abraham, Genesis 17. The first, that he should be Father of many Nations, verse.
4* The seconnd, to be his God, etc. verse. 7. The third, to give him and his
seed the land of Canaan, verse, 8. The first Covenant is peculiar to Christ, and
Abraham as his Father, Gal. 3.8, 14, 16, 17. The second Promise is common to
all believers with Abraham (as I have proved) even to Lot. And the third
Promise was a peculiar of Abraham's natural seed, as appears in it self.

And for Circumcision, there was a special reason why Lot had it not, expressly
set forth in the text, namely for that it was restrained by God to Abraham and
his natural seed, and such as were among them, Genesis 17. 10. so as none were to
partake thereof but the Jews and such as did live among them and adjoyne unto
them, though they were believers: They being appointed to be the Church to whom
the oracles of God were committed, Romans 3.2. till the Messiah came, upon whose
breaking down of the partition wall, the said first Promise was accomplished,
and Abraham made heir of the world, Romans 4.13.

FINIS.

