Confidence questioned: OR, A Brief Examination Of some Doctrines delivered By
M. THOMAS WILLS of Bottolphs Billings-Gate, In a Sermon preached by him At
Margrets New-Fish-Street, the 7th of December. 1657.

ALSO, Some QUESTIONS touching his pretended Call and Authority to preach the
GOSPEL.

By Jeremiah Ives.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause, seems just; but his
neighbor comes and searches him.

Rev. 2.2. And have tried them, which say they are Apostles, and are not; and
have found them liars.

Act. 17.11. These were more noble then those of Thessalonica, in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind; and searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so.

LONDON: Printed for Daniel White, and are to be sold at the seven Stars in
Paul's Churchyard; or are to be had at the Author's House in Red-Cross-Street.
1685.

To the Impartial Reader.
Reader,
IT is matter of great admiration, to see men sacrificing their Reasons and
Judgments upon the Altar of blind Zeal and Devotion: it is also matter of
lamentation, to see men, who would be judged Christians, suck in Opinions, as
wild Asses do the Wind, without Trial and Examination; and so become impatient
of contradiction: and all this while, forget that blessed Rule, of trying the
Spirits, whether they be of God or no.

I shall therefore soberly propose some Questions for Conscience sake; which I
desire may be weighed and considered: some of which Questions, are those that I
had intended to have propounded to Mr. Wills in public, had I not been
prevented by a tumultuous Auditory: some, pulling and haling me; others
threatening to throw me over the Gallery. If this look like a Spirit of
Christianity, I confess my self to be very ignorant of a Christian Spirit: sure
this Spirit is more like the Spirit of the Primitive Persecutors, then the
Primitive Professors of Christ; and yet these are the Men that cry up a
Reformation, according to the Primitive Institution. If the Light of these
ensuing Questions, shall give Light to the Conscience of any, or their Answers
give Light to my own Conscience, I shall bless the Father of Lights, who has
not suffered me to labor in vain. That some such good, may be the product
hereof, is the desire of him, who is thine in the service of Christ,

Jer. Ives.

Confidence questioned.
Mr. Wills,
IT has always been the practice of Deceivers to sow their Tares among the
pure Wheat, and to blend their Errors with choice Truths: I shall not say, you
did any such thing, by design; but that you did it, the Light of these ensuing
Questions will manifest: and if you would have me be so charitable as to think
you did not project such a thing, I pray then do not refuse to come to the
Light that your deeds may be made manifest: and remember, That Truth seeks no
corners: and if therefore you are confident of the truth of what you have
delivered, fear not the face of opposition.

It is enough for Turks and Jews, Papists and Heretics, to assert that, which
they fear publicly to dispute; because they are conscious of the brittleness
of such Assertions, and therefore are loft to hazard them in the Fire of
Disputation. Let those then fear the Touchstone, whose Coin is counterfeit,
and not Men that are Gospel-Preachers, lest Men have occasion to call them
counterfeit-Silver.

I pray you therefore so far to honor that which you have publicly asserted,
(if it be Truth) as to answer these Questions that relate to those things which
you then delivered.

ONe thing asserted by you, was, That it was not lawful for any to preach
ordinarily and constantly, but such as were ordained, except it was for
approbation, or in cases of necessity, when such Ordination cannot be had.

The first Question that I desire to be resolved in, is,

Whether any thing can be charged as sin upon any, but what is against a Divine
Law? since the Apostle says, Romans 4.5. Where there is no Law, there is no
transgression. 1 John 3.4. Sin is the transgression of a Law.

2. Whether by any Law of God it is a sin for men that are gifted for the
Ministry, to preach the truth of Christ to the Edification of their Brethren,
although they were not put upon it by reason of your supposed necessity, or
though they should never be ordained to Office.

3. If there be any Law manifesting such a practice to be sinful, pray tell me
where that Law is written; that so I may see my error, and reform.

4. If there be a liberty for gifted men to preach in order to their
approbation for Office, as you confess, pray tell me whether they do not preach
in the capacity of gifted Brethren before their Ordination; since they cannot
preach by virtue of Office, while as yet they are not in it.

5. If they preach as gifted Brethren before their Ordination, then I quere,
How long they may thus preach till their preaching becomes sinful?

6. If you say, Till the Ministry or Presbyters approve them, and are very well
satisfied with their abilities and qualifications for that employment: then I
quere, How if this man whom they approve of, is unsatisfied with their power to
ordain him; is it then a sin for him to preach till he is satisfied with their
power?

7. How if a man be gifted and enabled to preach the Gospel to edification and
comfort, and yet finds himself very short of a power to rule the Church of God
as that Office requires, or it may be wants faithful Children, such as are not
accused of ryct; it may be he has not power over his passion, but may be soon
angry, etc. which are those qualifications that Paul tells Timothy and Titus
MUST be found in such officers: see 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. Titus 1.6, 7. I quere from
hence, Whether a man should sin to use those gifts (God has blessed him
withal) out of Office, because he has not all those qualifications that are
required, before he be admitted to Office.

And whereas you say it is a sin for people to hear such as are not ordained,
except as before excepted, I quere,

8. Whether there is any Law of God broken when I hear the truth of Christ
preached by any that are not ordained? if so, show me where that Law is to be
found.

9. Whether or no Apollos did not preach the Gospel, as is recorded, Act.
18.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. publicly and freequently; and whether he could be an
Officer of the Church at that time, seeing he knew ONLY the baptism of John,
or was not acquainted with the baptism of the Spirit? therefore pray show us
that he was at this time an Officer, or else that he preached for approbation
to it, or that he preached by virtue of any necessity. By virtue of necessity
he did not preach: for, there were able Christians before, such as the Text
says did instruct him. And if he preached at this time as an Officer, or for
approbation thereunto, pray show h^w that appears.

10. It is said, Mal. 3.16. that THEY that feared the Lord SPOKE OFTEN one to
another, etc. And Heb. 10 25. It is required that we should not forsake the
assembling of our selves together, but exhort one another daily, etc. whether
by the light of these Texts it does not appear, 1. That Gods people ought to
meet often together. 2. That they may and ought to exhort one another, being
thus assembled. 3. Whether by one another we are not to understand any one that
has a word or gift of Exhortation, as well such as are no Officers, as those
that are?

11. Is it not written, Romans 2.1, 2. Therefore thou art inexcuseable, Oman,
whosoever thou art that judge; for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self: for thou that judge do the same things. Verse. 3. And
think thou this, O man, that judge them that do such things, and do the
same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? Verse. 22. Thou that
abhorrest idols, do thou commit sacrilege?

Whether by the light of these Scriptures, your darkness is not discoverd, who
told the people how sinful and dangerous it was to hear such as Mr. Brooks;
when your self has heard him once and again? And whether all the excuses that
you have for such a practice, will not be arguments to justify others, as well
as you? And since you cried the hearing of such Men down, as a general evil,
without any exception; pray tell me, (let your pretense in hearing be what it
will) how can you do evil that good may come? And whether, by the same pretense
that you can make to hear Mr. Brooks, (if to hear him be sinful, which is not
yet proved) any man may not hear in an Idols Temple, or eat meat in an Idols
Temple, and so cause his weak brother to be emboldened in his way, and make him
to perish for whom Christ died, contrary to that in 1 Cor. 8.10, 11.

12. It is said, Heb. 5.12. That when for the time ye OUGHT to be teachers,
etc. I query from hence, Whether here is not a Duty required, and whether that
Duty be not Teaching? Again, whether the persons that the Text says, OUGHT to
teach, were not members out of Office? if so, then I query, whether that this
Teaching might not as lawfully have been performed in public Assemblies, as in
private Families: since neither this, nor any other text, makes the one any
more unlawful then the other: provided, they have abilities to the one as well
as to the other.

13. It is said, 1 Cor. 14.1. Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts;
but rather that ye may PROPHECY, etc. compare this Verse with the 24. but if
ALL prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, etc. and V. 31 Ye may
ALL prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted.

From these texts I query, whether that this was a prophesying by Gift or
Office? if it shall be said, It was by Offices; then I query, whether it was by
ordinary or extraordinary Office? If it shall be said, That it was by
extraordinary Office, then it follows, That the Apostle exhorted the whole
Church, to covet after extraordinary Offices, when he exhorted them to follow
after charity and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that THEY might PROPHECY,
v. 1.

14. If it shall be said, That Prophesying here, was an ordinary Office; than
it follows, That the whole Church are exhorted to covet to be ordinary
Officers: which would be, to make the whole Body of Christ monstrous. If it
shall be said, That they were not exhorted to Prophecy, as extraordinary, or
as ordinary Offices, then I query, whether they were not to do it as gifted
Brethren? since we never heard of any other way.

15. Whereas you say, That none ought to preach, but those that are ordained,
except as before excepted, I query: Among those several Ordinations that are in
Christendom, which of those, whether some one of them, or all of them, be that
which Christ approves of? If you say, All of them; and that the errors of the
Administrators in some Circumstances, does not make the Ordination a Nullity:
then I query,

16. Whether one may not by this Opinion, be lawfully ordained at Rome?

17. If you shall say, The Protestant-Ordination is lawful, and that only; then
I query, which of those, whether the Episcopal, Presbyterian or
Independent-Ordination, be that which is approved by Christ to empower the
Ministers to Preach? since all these are Protestants, and greatly differ in
this thing*

If you say, All of these are lawful; then were not the Ministers of the
Episcopal way greatly out, in crying up the Ordination by Bishops to be the
only Authoritative Ordination, in opposition to that of the Presbytery? And
that they did so, will appear, if you consult Dr. Jer. Tailor, Chaplain to the
late King, in his Book called Episcopacy asserted, page 120, 121, 122. It is
clear (says he) that Bishops were to do some acts which the Presbyters COULD
NOT do; one of which he calls Ordination by imposition of Hands, which he says
was not to be done by Presbyters. Again, the said Doctor says, That the
Apostles did impse Hands for confirmation, which (says he) was to continue in
the Church; and could not be done by the seventy, or any MERE Presbyter. And
for this he cites the constant practice of the Fathers, and the Opinions of
diverse Churches. Therefore pray tell me if this be that Ordination which a man
must have, without which his Preaching is sinful?

19. Again, if you say, All or any the forementioned Ordinations be lawful,
then how vain a thing was it for the Presbyterians, to throw down the
Government of Episcopacy? why did they not rather reform it then cashier it,
seeing it was a power by which Ministers might have been authorized to preach,
according to God's Ordinance?

20 If the Bishops, as Bishops, had this lawful Power, when did any Power from
Christ divest them?

21. If Episcopal Authority were of God, as the Bishops pretend, why may not a
man lawfully go still to them for Ordination, in case this Authority was never
taken from them in an Ecclesiastical way?

22. If you say, That both Presbyterian and Episcopal Ordination is lawful;
then I query, whether that Christ ever erected two ways of Ordination of
Ministers, one contrary to the other, and yet both lawful? for such is the
state of Episcopacie and Presbytery in England one says that the Presbytery
has no power to ordain, the other says they have.

23. If it is that Ordination that is among the Independents, then we have that
we run for: then if one have their suffrage and Ordination, and this be lawful,
(which I think you will not say) then wherein is Mr. Brooks in this to be
condemned?

24. Again, If you say, That Ordination by the Presbytery is the only
Ordination; then where was an Ordination to be had in England thirty years ago?

25. Is it not very strange that you should tell the people they sin, in
hearing those that are not ordained, when you never tell them, whether you mean
any Ordination may serve, nor what Ordination of those diverse kinds it is that
God approves of?

26. Since you say, That none ought to preach, but they must be ordained,
except as before excepted; then I query, whether your Ordination be derived
from the Line of Succession, or whether it had its Original from Necessity,
because such an Ordination by Succession could not be had? This Question is
grounded, partly upon what you preached, partly upon what you granted me at
your House, viz. That where it cannot be had from a lawful successi^^ power,
there a man may lawfully officiate in the Office of the Ministry without it,
and that because he is put upon it through necessity. Since therefore (you say)
there is but these two ways by which a man may be justified in preaching, or
the people in hearing; I query now (as I did at your House) by which of these
two ways came you into the Ministry? for you told us, That none could pretend
to Necessity, when it might be had by Succession.

27. If you say, By Succession; then surely you succeed from Rome: if so, then
I query, whether the Church of Rome was the Spouse of Christ, and her Ministry
and Ordinances the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ, when your Predecessors
received their Ordination from them? if so, then,

28. Whether the Church of Rome was not as good a Church when your Predecessors
left her, as she was when they received Ordination from her, which was but a
little before?

29. If you shall say, Here was a Succession of British Ministers in England
before the Papal Power had to do here, or before Gregory the Pope sent Austine
the Monk to convert the Saxons; then I query, whether all those Ministers were
not brought into subjection to the Papal Power, and so were swallowed up in the Sea of Rome? If not, then,

20. Whether there was any Succession of a true Church in England, who were
separated from the Church of Rome? if there was, show us where that Church was
all the time the Papal Power was exercised here, and who were they that
governed it; and also how your Ordination proceeded from this reformed, rather
then from the Papal Line?

31. If you say, It came from Rome, and not from that presupposed Succession;
then I query, if Rome was a little before Hen. 8 's time entrusted with the
Administration of Christ's Ordinances, as a Church of Christ, whether it was
not your sin to leave her as a cage of every unclean thing?

32. If you say truly of her, (as indeed you do) that she was the cage of every
unclean thing; how then could she dispense at that time so sacred an Ordinance
as Ordination of Gospel Ministers is by you judged to be?

33. If you (...) She had power as a Church, and you did separate because of
her corruptions, that you might serve the Lord with more purity; then I query,
whether you are not guilty of that evil your self, (if yet it be an evil) which
you charge upon Mr. Brooks in separating from the halt and maimed?

34. Whether it has not been common for those of your way, to separate from
the Papists, and yet take their Tithes, and (to use your own phrase) sheer
those lame and diseased Sheep, which you have denied to admit into the Fold
with you?

35. If you say, They might (if they would reform) have communion with you; I
query then, whether this very Objecti-that causes you to exclude Papists, be
not the reason why Mr. Brooks refuses scandalous Protestants and other
profane people, viz. because they do not reform?

36. If you shall deny this Succession, and say, That there was none, and that
it was lost; then I query, whether this be not a singular and private Opinion
of your own, differing from the rest of your Brethren?

37. If that Ordination from Rome, and receiving holy Orders from thence, was
thrown off upon a politic account, as doubtless it was at first, though since
we have declined it upon more religious considerations) then I query, how any
body could pretend to the Argument of Necessity to preach without Ordination?

38. Whether or no, when the Line of Succession was broke, it was not lawful
THEN for every one to preach that could; although it might not have been lawful
before? because Necessity puts one lawfully upon that work, where a successive
Ordination cannot be had, by your own Maxim.

39. If it were true (as you say) that none ought to preach while the
successive Ordination of Christ remains un-interrupted, but such as are
lawfully ordained, (which is the great thing in question) how does it become a
sin for men that are gifted to preach, since there is no such Ordination now on
foot, but that which men put themselves upon through necissity, and want of the
other by Succession?

40. Whereas you say, You can baptize the children of wicked Parents; I query,
what Ground you have in Scripture so to do?

41. Whether to baptize the children of wicked Parents, be not contrary to the
Opinion of those which your self calls the reformed Churches?

42. Whereas you said, That the Fifth-monarchy-men were as the smoke of the
bottomless pit, and that their Principles did raze the Foundation of Religion;
I query, whether they were not called Fifth-monarchy men, because they did
believe, that when the Caldean Monarchy, and the Monarchy of the Medes and
Persians, and the Grecian and Roman Monarchy should be wholly extirpated, that
then the Lord himself should set up a Fifth monarchy, which should succeed
these four, of whose kingdom there should be no end; according to that of Dan.
7.23, 24.

43. If this principle were grounded upon this and suchlike sayings in
Scripture, what reason had you to cry out against it?

44. If you say, It was because of the evil practice of some of them in these
later times; I do thereupon query, If this be a good Argument: Some of their
practices were bad; Ergo, their principle is bad. Whether a man might not have
said the same both of the Episcopal and Presbyterian way, since that some of
them were such as engaged the Nation in War and Blood, more then ever those
were like to do you call Fifth-monarchy-men? but this surely is un-man-like
reasoning.

45. Whereas you would seem to blame Mr. Brooks for harsh Judgment, I query,
whether your Judgment was charitable when you decried the Fifth-monarchy-men
as so many monstrous Heretics, that raze the Foundation, without any kind of
exception; especially considering what Ground there is for it in God's Word,
and also that it was the Opinion of many men both ancient and modern: for
Justin Martyr in his Apology to Antonius the Emperor, asserts the thousand
years Reign of Christ upon Earth: and he further says in his Dialogue against
Tryphon, that it was the belief OF ALL CHRISTIANS exactly Orthodox. And of
later times, we have Mr. Robert Matton, Mr. Archer, Mr. Mead, Doctor Twisse,
Mr. Ephraim Hewit, Mr. Parker of New England, Doctor Homes, Mr. Thomas Goodwin,
and Mr. Joseph Caryl, who upon his perusal of Doctor Homes his Book, says,
That it is Truth confirmed by Scripture, and the testimony of ancient and
modern Writers of all sorts.

46. And whereas you told me when I was at your House, you would stop my mouth;
I cannot think you meant to stop my mouth with sound Arguments; for that you
refuse to do, though I did desire it of you once and again: and if you meant to
do it, it must be either by a secular power, or animating the people to
rudeness; for I know no other way, seeing you refused the first: then I query,
whether in so doing (supposing me to have erred) you walk according to that
Rule that tells you, that with meekness you should instruct those that oppose
themselves, etc. 2 Timothy 2.24.

47. Does not the Scripture say, That the Minister of Christ must be an example
to a Believer in charity? 1 Timothy 4.12. I query then, whether backbiting,
tale-bearing, and taking up a reproach against your Neighbor, be not contrary
to the law of Charity: and whether you were not guilty of this, when you told a
Gentleman that lives at High-gate, who is ready to witness the Truth hereof,
That you were informed I was a Jesuit; and therefore told him he would do well
to apprehend me. Truly Sir, if you do not tell me who informed you, I shall
say it was a slander of your own devising, either thereby to take away my life;
for that is the punishment the Law has provided for Jesuits, by the Stat. of
Eliz. 27.2. or else (if that Gentleman would have been ruled by you that I
might have been laid in Goal right or wrong, to the undoing of my self and
Family, till I could have cleared my self of the supposed crime in open
Sessions. This must need be your design, otherwise why did you encourage him to
apprehend me as a Jesuit? but more of this in a more convenient place, where I
doubt not of reparation: only let me tell you, That if you could as easily
prove the Affirmative, viz. That you are sent of God to preach, and that all
you preach is true, as I can prove the Negative, that I am no Jesuit, the
controversy between us would soon be ended.

These things I leave to your consideration, and shall trust God with the
success; and subscribe my self,

London December. 16. 1657. Your Friend as far as you are the Truths, Jer. Ives.

Postscript.
LEst any should think, that I am against Government in the Church of God, and
that I am against the Ordination of Ministers, or the like: let me tell them
that so think, that they are mistaken: for God has ordained a Government, and
I know we must submit to them that labor among us, and are OVER us in the
Lord, and esteem them very highly for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. 1 Timothy 5.17. The elders that rule well are worthy of double honor.

And whereas some passages herein contained, do relate to somewhat that was
spoken by Mr. Wills at his House when I was with him in private; for the
Reader's further satisfaction therein, touching the Truth thereof, if he please
to call at my House in Red-Cross-street, I shall direct him to those who can
sufficiently inform him of the truth thereof, being there present at the same
time.

And whereas Mr. Wills did tell the people, that none could lawfully preach
but those that were ordained, unless it were such as were put upon that work by
necessity, where such Ordination could not be had; I thereupon went to his
House with some Friends, and did desire him in love to prove himself a Minister
of Christ, either by Ordination from a lawful Succession, or else that he was
put upon it by any necessity: and this I pressed upon him for an hour and half
together, and he refused (as diverse can witness) to prove himself a Minister
either one way or other. And I further desired him, that he would dispute those
things in public that he had so publicly asserted; but this he utterly
refused, though I promised him to dispute, according to the known Laws of
Disputation.

Vale.
FINIS.
Page 1. line 14. for loft, read 10th page 10. l. 9. r. of many good men.


