THE INDEPENDANTS Declaration DELIVERED IN TO THE ASSEMBLY. BY Thomas Goodwin,
William Greenhill, William Bridge, Philip Nie, Sydrach Simpson, and William
Carter. Declaring their Grounds and full RESOLUTIONS CONCERNING
Church Government.

LONDON, Printed for B. T. in the Year. 1647.

A Copy of the Independants Declaration to the Assembly of Divines.
TO make known what ever we hold, concerning Church Government, as we have had
public testimony in this Assembly, so we have manifold instances and
evidences of it; Witness that constant, free, and open expressing our selves
upon all occasions, and in all questions propounded to the debate, with offers
to give an open Account at any time, in what ever should be asked us by any
Brother. Our proffering diverse times to bring in Propositions, stated to our
sense for the dispute, and when we were made a Committee to that purpose, in
the point of Ordination, and did bring our Judgments concerning it for a
dispute, It was laid aside. And at another time, when we our selves brought in
Papers, giving the state of the question, about that extraordinary way of
Ordination, which were read, and returned back unto us, it being publicly
professed that that was not an allowed way and course of this Assembly, for any
of the Brethren to bring in papers, unless they were made a Committee by the
Assembly it self. And so we were prevented of doing the like for time to come.

Likewise our frequent complainings of the stating of questions, so that we
could not fully argue for our Judgments, we being bound up to the questions
as stated by you. The usual answer to our Complaints herein being, That the
Assembly sat not to argue the opinions of a few men, but if we had any thing
to say to the assertion brought in, we might.

As also our earnest contending to have some questions ( which you all know are
the greatest and most fundamental points) fairly disputed and debated, is a
sufficient testimony of this our willingness. As in the entrance into the
dispute of Government, the first day, we pressed the handling of this, That
there is a platform of Government for the Churches, under the Gospel, laid down
in the Scripture, and desired to have discussed, what are the sure and certain
ways, whereby we may judge what of Government is held forth Iure Divino
therein, which should have been fundamental to all the disputes that were to
follow: and this was professedly laid aside by you, which therefore in none of
the subsequent debates, we could renew, and thus Arguments were cut off, It
being that great and necessary Medium, by which the patticulars should be
confirmed, and in a manner the whole controversy decided; the greatest
difference that were likely to grow betwixt us, being this, That the forms of
Government, you pretend to, and we deny, are asserted to be Iure divino.

In like manner, that other next great question, about the entire power in
Congregations, that have a sufficient Presbytery for all Censures, which as it
is in order the first that presents it self for discussion (as was urged) so
also it is one of the greatest points in difference betwixt us and you: Yet the
debate of this was not only denied the first place in the dispute, but was to
this day declined by you; Although to have it argued was contended for by us*
and not by us only, but by many of those, that are for a subordinate government
thereof to Synods. And though earnest desires and motions for it were renewed
and inculcated, yet were they as often laid aside. Yea and this, although it
was once expressly commended by the grand Committee of the Hon. Members of both
Houses, joined with twelve Divines of the Assembly, to be next disputed, as the
best means, both of expedition, and of ending the Controversy.

And over and above all this, to argue this our willingness to dispute our
way, In the aforesaid Honorable Committeee appointed by an Order of the
Honorable House of Commons, to find out ways, of accommodating different
Judgments in the Assembly, the Sub-Committee of Divines, consisting of two of
us, and four others, appointed by that Honorable Committee to prepare ways
and Propositions of Accommodation, brought in the main and most of what
practically we desired, and we therein added, That if such a liberty shall seem
in the wisdom of this Honorable Committee, to be so prejudicical to the peace
of the Church as not to be permitted, we humbly desire, the doctrinall
principles wherein we differ about Church Government, may be taken into serious
consideration, and some other way of accommodation in practice thought upon, as
shall seem fit to this honorable Committee: and this was presented to that
honorable Committee and those twelve of the Assembly, to be transmitted,
whether to the honorable Houses, or the Assembly as they should think meet.

After this, when upon occasion of something brought in by one Brother, and
entertained, we took hold of that example, and one of us, with consent of the
rest, brought in 7 Propositions, which contained matter of difference betwixt
us, professing, That if this Reverend Assembly would debate them, or any one of
them, we would bring in more, until we had brought in all the Frame, and the
Assembly themselves should pick and choose what they would debate, and what not.
But these Propositions were rejected with a refusal to debate any one of them.

And after all this, though the main parts of a Presbyteriall government* had
been then voted by the Assembly, and sent up to the honorable Houses (as,
namely, that about Ordination, and the Presbyteriall government over many
Congregations, as also concerning the Subordination of National, Provincial
and Classical Assemblies) and there was not much remaining about
Church Government, to be concluded in this Assembly: yet this Reverend Assembly
requiring, (by occasion of a book published, that reflected on these
proceedings, that we had no hand in nor knowledge of) a whole Frame of
Government, with the grounds and reasons thereof, to be brought in by us, and
voted us hereto to be a Committee, we yielded our selves to be a Committee to
bring in part by part, in like manner as the Presbyteriall Government was
brought into the Assembly, and disputed: but that was not accepted. And then it
being said, that there was something in Church Government, remaining
undiscussed, and unresolved; and it being further alleged that the Assembly
had not sent up all that which they had concluded, but meant to present an
entire Frame and Body to the Honorable Houses: And that we might take away all
occasions of any such jealousies that we were unwilling to discover what we
held (which were commonly in men's mouths abroad) we yielded to be a Committee,
to bring in the whole to this Assembly, though upon all the forementioned
disadvantages, and were purposed and resolved amongst our selves so to do, and
that in as convenient a time as a work of such a compass could, (in such a
manner as was proposed by you) be dispatched by us. And as in the debate about
making us a Committee, the Assembly would not declare (though pressed by us)
what they would do with that Model, and those Reasons we should bring in; so
the voting of what yet remained in Church Government, was hastened by you.

And when not long after, upon occasion of the debate of one particular point,
in which we differed from this Assembly, we moved it might be deferred, because
we should present our Judgments and Reasons about it, with the rest, (for
therein lay that which we accounted the favor of being made a Committee by
you) it was publicly answered, that therefore the Assembly should the rather
go on to the concluding of it, because we intended to bring it in; and before
we could dispatch that Body we intended, so as to report it unto you according
to your order; (the collection of the materials whereof, spent us two or three
months, and we could not obtain the liberty to bring in any thing but the
whole) this Assembly had presented to the honorable Houses, as well what had
been sent up by pieces before, as what was since concluded, in one entire Frame.
By all which we perceived, that that which was the main end and use of
presenting such a Model to this Assembly, would be frustrated.

And furthermore, we having given in (as this Assembly knows) but two heads of
dissenting reasons: The one against the Presbyteriall government over many
Congregations: The other against the subordination of Synods. By the success
of the latter we see, that this Assembly can assume the liberty (if it so
please) to reserve those we shall now present, unanswered, as they have done
those our dissenting Reasons against subordination of Synods, although it
contain a great and main part of that wherein we differ, as also is of all
other, the greatest moment, both to this Church and State, and has been given
in to this Assembly ten months since, and their votes concerning these
Subordinations, as long since presented to the honorable Houses, but have not
been answered by any reply brought into this Assembly, and so not ready to have
been sent up to the Hon. Houses.

And if These we might now bring in, should be undertaken to be answered by
this Assembly, yet we still retain the sense of so much remediless prejudice,
by being bound from replying again, as does make us justly wary: we may for
ever lie under whatever mis-interpretations may happen, (suppose but through
mistake of yours, or imperfection of our expression) without clearing our
meaning, and we may be bound up from further urging or driving home that
wherein the strength of any argumenr lies, if the dint thereof should be
avoided by some specious diversion. And although our former Reasons given in
after dispute to both the honorable Houses, according to their Order, were
therefore not our own, but to be disposed of according to their appointment;
yet what we should now give in, we conceive to be in our own power.

Upon these considerations we think that this Assembly, has no cause now to
require a Report of us, nor will that our Report be of any use, seeing that
Reports are for Debates, and Debates are for Results to be sent up to the
Honorable Houses, who have already voted another form of Government then what
we shall present. However it may be of more use some other way, which by this
course may be prevented, And therefore we are resolved to wait for some further
opportunity to improve what we have prepared.

FINIS.

