Eighteen QUESTIONS PROPOUNDED, TO Put the great QUESTION between the ARMY and
their dissenting BRETHREN, out of Question, (Viz.)

Whether the best way to secure the GOVERNMENT of these Nations, in the way of
a FREE STATE, without a Single Person, King, or House of Lords; Together with
our Liberties, as Men and Christians; Be either to Choose a New and Free
PARLIAMENT, or else to Restore the last Long PARLIAMENT.

Published by JER* IVES.

9ber 21

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the Elephant and Castle near Temple Bar, 1659.

EIGHTEEN QUESTIONS PROPOUNDED, TO Put the great Question between the Army and
their dissenting Brethren, out of Question, etc.
READER,
IT cannot but affect the hearts of all those that are Lovers of Civil and
Religious Liberties, to see the great Assertors thereof fall out among
themselves, some pretending, that we cannot secure our Rights, either as Men or
Christians, but by a free and new Elected Parliament, and for this they are
ready to Engage unto Blood; Others they think, that the last long Parliament,
are the only Free Representatives of the People, and that no Force can dissolve
them, till they dissolve themselves, and for the restoring them to the exercise
of the Supreme Authority over these Nations, they are ready to Engage the
Nation in another War. For the satisfying those that dissent by reason of the
forementioned Persuasions, I shall offer these ensuing Questions.

Quest. I.

Quest. II.

Quest. III.

Quest. IV. Priests, Lawyers, and Cavileirs) How the ends of the good People
can be answered, by a Parliament so Elected and Empowered?

Quest. V.

Quest. VI. (viz.) the taking away King-ship, and Peerage, and declaring this
Nation a Free State, etc. were not rather the fruits and effects of that force,
which was put upon them when the Army garbled them, then the Votes and Results
of a Free Parliament?

Quest. VII.

Quest. VIII. Col. Rainsborough. Lieut. Col. Jo. Lylburn. Capt, Bray. Cornet
Joyce. Cornet Thomson. Mr. Rich. Overton. Mr. Will. Walwin, Tho. Prince. etc.
were accounted the great Assertors of their Countries Liberties, when they
refused to comply with the Votes of the then Free and Uninterupted Parliament?

Quest. IX.

Quest. X.

Quest. XI.

Quest. XII. England; I demand, if ever Sir. George Booth, and Major General
Brown, etc. had been Voted Traitors?

Quest. XIII. Little, and that they should not be dissolved till they dissolve
themselves, and therefore there being yet a Little, they are therefore a Free
Parliament; I demand, whether by this Argument, those which the Army secluded
when they came from Hounsloe Heath, may not as well call themselves a
Parliament, seeing they were a Little, and kept their places in the House when
the rest went away to the Army, and were as truly forced out then, as these
were afterward; and whether this very Argument would not make them a
Parliament, if another interest should prevail to take off that interruption.
Again, the intent of that Act was not, that any 40. whom, the Sword should
se^erate from the rest should make a Little, but rather if by degrees some
should die, and others by the consent of the Major part should be voted out, as
being incapable to Sit, or that others should be absent by reason of any
Emergencies, that then and in such cases 40 should make a Little, and this is
the reason why a fixed number are appointed a Little in all State Conventions;
therefore it remains, that the last Parliament were rather chosen and elected
by the Army in the capacity they stood since they were first garbled, then the
peoples free Representatives, because the Army might have elected that number
they forced out, as well as those they kept in, unto whom they might have
subscribed obedience?

Quest. XIV. Hosanna, to the last Assembly, as to a just and free Parliamentory
Authority, and endeavor to restore them to the exercise thereof, upon that
foot of account, unless they also endeavor to take off the first as well as
the last interruptions, which how safe that will be I leave others to Judge?

Quest. XV.

Quest. XVI.

Quest. XVII.

Quest. XVIII. England; I demand, whether some other number of honest men
chosen out to serve the present Exigency, may not be as lawfulll an Authority
as they, and sooner answer the desire of all good People?

THE END.

