To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
A second Remonstrance of James Ibeson. Humbly presented on the behalf of the
oppressed Inhabitants of the West Riding in the County of York, as appears by
a Certificate under the hands of above Two thousand persons, concerning the
intolerable Burden and Abuses committed by the Farmers and Officers of Excise.
With a Proposal to the State, for the advancement of their benefit, in case
the People may be eased.

FOr as much as the Lord has been pleased in his providence, to place your
Honors in this present Parliament. And that the Counties by whom you are
chosen, and for whom you sit; expect, and in all humility desire, that you
would redress their grievances, power being put into your hands to do good to
this Commonwealth, by taking away oppression and removing oppressors, and
laying no other or greater burden upon the people, then what public necessity
requires. And so to order the leavy, of what is imposed, that the rich may not
oppress the poor, but that all things may be tendered as little burdensome as
may be.

But when we feel the heavy burden of oppression over loading us, to what
humane authority should we seek for help or ease; but unto your honors, who
want no power if the Lord be pleased to stir up your hearts thereunto? And
because you cannot know and ease our grievances, unless they be manifested
unto you, we therefore with oppressed spirits complain.

That many idle persons of malignant spirits, are employed with Pistolls,
Swords and Staves, rooking up and down the Country, deceiving, and cheating
the people (especially those that have stood for the honor of the Parliament)
by forceable entries, seizing, driving, and bearing away the Goods and Chattels
of the Inhabitants, and that upon very slight or no occasion; unless upon
occasion of their own creating. The said Farmer allowing many of his servants
no wages (as his servants themselves have confessed) but what they can get by
catching, harrasing, and poleing the people; so that we are necessitated to
take up the complaint of the Prophet Isa. 56.11. They are as greedy dogs which
can never have enough, they all look to their own way, every one for his gain
from his quarter.

Servants are not only enforced to swear against Masters, and children against
parents, But the people are enforced to swear against themselves (else to
suffer) which is not only against the law of nature, but against the law of
God, and a means to increase unnatural affection, lying, and perjury.

The Clothiers are not permitted to send their goods to any Fair, before they
have made Entry in the Office of Excise, both of the number of the pieces, and
the value thereof.

Neither can they bring their goods back from the Market, before they can
procure license, or swear the same is neither bought nor sold.

Nor remove their own goods, much less deliver such goods as are sold without
license.

They have also caused goods that have been sold to be praised, and being sold
a good penniworth, they have seized the same, and have enforced the seller (for
fear) to let them have the goods at the price so entered, or fined,
disappointing such Chapmen as dealetherein.

The goods that have been ceized without cause, for which the people have not
only been fined, but are infortced to acknowledge in writing under their hands,
tha-they have committed a fault, otherwise they cannot be discharged, though no
offense at all was committed.

The people are also inslaved, and enforced by the Farmers at Kendal,
Manchester, and other places to pay Excise there, and are by the Farmer of
Excise of the West Riding aforesaid, enforced to pay again, all for one and
the same goods, and are enforced to attend the Officers at their pleasure,
without any cause at all.

They have enforced poor women being big with child, to lay their hands upon
the Bible, to swear against themselves, and such as have refused, have been
grievously by their threatenings affrighted, indangering their untimely travel.

And since I came to London, a complaint came unto me, of a woman that was not
above three pence at the most indebted for Excise, for which she had her goods
seized to the value of forty shillings, the poor woman seeing that, presently
fell distracted, and with a knife had cut her childrens throats, if she had
not by Gods mercy been prevented, and after slain her self, as she has since
confessed, remaining still, at times, distracted. I fear too many of these, or
of the like nature, are often committed.

But the said Farmer or his substitutes, for the carrying on of their irregular
and arbitrary proceedings, did illegally enforce the people to subscribe their
names unto a Certificate, and such as refused so to do, was by the Officers
detained as prisoners, and greivously threatened, they did also subscribe other
men's names thereunto without their consent or knowledge, beginning their
subscriptions at the bottom of the paper, writing upwards, leaving a distance
to write what they pleased above, and the said Officers showed the said
Certificate unto the Justices, but what was the effect; this Petitioner, nor
the people knows not. But your Petitioner has used his uttermost endeavor to
make proof of their illegal practices, and did in May or June last, make his
appeal to the said Justices (before whom the said Certificate was showed) and
produced many witnesses, but they did not only refuse to take cognizance
thereof, or to examine upon oath; but on the contrary, have (as your Petitioner
is informed) returned a Certificate in favor of the said Farmer, persuading
this Petitioner, that the extent of the Farmers Commission was so, that they
did not conceive how the Officers of Excise could offend: thereby endeavoring
to render them acquit of any matter or thing charged upon them, so that no
redress hitherto is had, for the good of the Country or Commonwealth.

So that the free people of England are by these abuses abridged of their
liberty, many of them enforced to give over their Trades, which have employed
many poor families, it being impossible for them to follow their Trades and
Callings, without the favor of the Farmer; to the great terror and grief of
the people, having their goods seized, their shops watched, their houses
searched, their packs in high ways or fields unpacked, rifled and spoiled,
their Markets and Fairs decayed: And not only the Commonwealth damnified, but
also the souls and consciences of the people (by swearing and lying)
grievously oppressed.

By all these, and many other insufferable abuses, Clothiers, and men of other
Callings, are not only discouraged, but many of them impoverished, the Country
being intollerably troubled, such vast sums of money by the Farmers collected
(for so small a benefit by them paid) so that it is conceived, and upon
examination will appear, that all the Excise of Inland goods whatsoever,
excepting Beer and Ale (yea I may add one half of the Excise of Beer and Ale
thereunto) brings not any benefit to the State, neither discharging the
Arreares of the Soldiers, nor stopping the gaps of the necessities of this
Commonwealth. But is wasted and consumed by the Farmers and their creatures;
which grieve the people, consuming the benefit of this Commonwealth, devouring
the peace of this Land, which if not speedily prevented, many thousand Families
must of necessity be impoverished, and not only disabled to releeve the poor,
but stand in need of being releived

So that if any evil design or invasion should happen, in, or against this
Nation, it is to be feared, that the generallity of the people (by their
discontents) would join not only against their own good, but against the good
of this Commonwealth, which I heartily desire may be prevented.

It is conceived that one half of the duty of Excise of Beer and Ale, will
clear the whole Excise thereof, and will also clear the whole Excise of all
other Inland goods whatsoever, and bring many thousand pound a year benefit to
the State, more then is now paid by the Farmers.

Therefore we humbly propose and desire your Honors will be pleased, so to
moderate the Excise, that one half of the Excise of Beer and Ale may be taken
away, with the whole Excise of all other Inland goods whatsoever (especially
old and new Drapery, which is the chief promoter and upholder of so many
hundred thousand families, and that every In holder, Victualler,
Alehouse-keeper, or Tipler, may be assessed according to their proportion, as
the Justices, or four honest men in every Weapon-take, Hundred, or Division,
shall think meet, for the advancement and benefit of this Commonwealth, and
to be paid into some public Treasury in the respective Counties, Cities, or
Liberties quarterly, upon forfeiture of their Licenses, and being disabled of
that privilege; by which means the Taxes of the said Inholders, Victuallers,
Alehouse keepers and Tiplers will be much abated, and the whole collections
will freely and clearly accrue to the Commonwealth.

And it will take away innumerated oppressions and oppressors, and in no way
lessen or impair the benefit of the State. But will add unto the same many
thousand pounds as aforesaid, permitting all Tradesmen and others to follow
their Callings, attend their Markets, and Faires quietly, and all Carriers and
others to travel upon their occasions without molestation or trouble, whereby
the people may be the better enabled to contribute unto the necessities of this
Commonwealth.

It will also acquit all common Brewers, which make sale by the Hogshead,
Barrel or Firkin, whereby the Excise of all private Families will be totally
taken away, to the infinite ease and satisfaction of the Country.

Lastly, It will gain such an engagement, and an acknowledgement of the love
and affections of the people, as by Gods assistance will be a strengthening of
the peace and safety of this Nation, so that the affections of the people may
continue in the love of the Parliament, and the Parliament in the love of the
people, for the peace and welfare of this Commonwealth.

And the inhabitants of the said Riding, for the liberty aforesaid, shall be
willing to give the Parliament such security for the performance hereof, as
they in their wisdoms shall think meet, which without doubt will be
performed throughout the whole Nation, for the good of this Commonwealth.

Subscribed on the behalf of the oppressed Inhabitants of the West Riding, in
the County of York, or elsewhere, for the good of the whole Commonwealth, By
me, JAMES IBESON,

FINIS.

