Confidence Encountered: OR, A VINDICATION OF THE Lawfulness of PREACHING
without Ordination.

In Answer to a Book published by N. E. a friend of Mr. Tho Wills, ENTITLED,
The confident Questionist Questioned.

Together with An Answer to a Letter of Mr. Tho. Wills, published in the said
Book.

BY WHICH The Lawfulness of Preaching without Ordination is cleared, and the
Ordination of the National Ministers proved to be a Nullity.

By JER. IVES.

How forcible are right words! but what do your arguings re^rove?

Job 6.25. As every one has received the gift, even so m^nister the same one
to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. If ANY MAN speak,
let him speak as the oracl^s of God

1 Pet. 4.^0, ^^. Printed at London; and are to be sold by Dan. White at the
seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard; or may be had at the Authors house in
Red-Cross-street. 1658.

To the READER.
Reader,
I Have for thy further information in the things of Christ, published an
Answer to some counter Queries, which were made by an unknown Author, in the
behalf of Mr. Tho. Wills his Doctrine concerning the sinfulness of Preaching
without Ordination; in which counter-Queries, thou may be acquainted with the
Author's Spirit, though by his concealing his Name, thou can not be
acquainted with his Person; and by a strict Observation of what he has writ,
thou may see that he has made good his own words, viz. That he had writ
enough to puzzle, See his book page 4.
rather then convince his Adversary; and that appears by his many
contradictions: one while he says, The Clergy is routed; and by and by tells
Mr. Wills, The Enemy is routed See his Epist. to the Reader, and compare it
with his Epistle Dedicatory.
: one while he demands, whether Apollos was not ordained Minister when he
preached publicly, Act. 18. and by and by he demands, if Apollos knew of any
such thing as Ordination from the Apostles, when he preached, Act. 18. one
while he demands, if there was a constituted original Church with Officers in
it at this time, when Apollos preached, See his book page 22, 23.
Act. 18. and by and by he says, That it is certain, Apollos was at this time
an Officer; and bids me prove, that he was ever made an Officer after his
preaching, Act. 18. Again, he says, If the Church of Rome was a true Church,
then her Ministers were true Ministers, when our Reformers were ordained by
her. And demands, why I did not disprove her to be a Church, page 41. and yet a
little before he says, That she was as bad when the Ministers did receive
Ordination from her, as she was when they left her; and yet he says, They left
her not as she was the Spouse of Christ, but as she was a Harlot, page 39. so
that he supposes Rome to be a Harlot, and Christ's Spouse at one and the same
time. Again, he says, page 37. That the corruptions of the corrupt Dispensers
of Ordinances cannot make them null; and yet he says, page 48. If it be true
as Mr. Brooks says, That the Ministers of England are Antichristian; then all
that they have baptized, must be baptized again. Is not this plain
contradiction?

As he abounds with Contradictions, so he does with Impertinencies, meddling
with the Trade that I follow, and my being a Soldier, and suchlike things,
that concern not the Question before him. Another while he blames me for that
he does himself, viz. of meddling with this Controversy, and taking it out of
Mr. Brooks his hand; when he undertook to answer a particular Paper, which was
proper for none else to answer but Mr. Wills.

Another while he blames me for that I did charge a thing upon Mr. Wills, that
I had but one witness for; and yet himself believes the Accused's bare Negation
without any witness: for at that time when Mr. VVilles desired a Gentleman to
apprehend me for a Jesuit, there was none present to witness besides the
Gentleman aforesaid, though at our first meeting there was diverse.

Again, one while he says, Rome had power to ordain Ministers as Christ's
Church; and by and by compares them to Thieves, and to Korah, at the time they
ordained the first Reformers.

Again, his Book is full of unman-like arguings, as appears by his frequent
begging the chief things in question; otherwhile, when I demand a proof of
those things that are so frequently affirmed by Mr. VVilles, he demands how I
prove they are not; and so turns the proof of the affirmation from himself, and
puts his Respondent to prove Negations. Surely, this is not to give a Reason of
our Hope to every one that asks, with Meekness and Fear.

Again, he tells his Reader, That the Anabaptists are bloody, page 31. and page
50. he says, he ghesses, that they are the men whose hands were most embrued
in the blood of the late Wars: When indeed, the Anabaptists were in no
capacity at the beginning of these Wars, to blow those sparks of contention
into a burning Flame, if they had had a mind to so bad a work.

Thus I have given thee a taste of that Spirit that inspired him in the writing
of his Book, to which I have given an Answer; and though I have not answered to
every word, yet I have answered every thing that has any show or color of
Reason in it, which I desire thee faithfully and impartially to consider,
trying all things, and holding fast that which is the best; and that thou may
so do, is the prayer and desire of

Thy Friend, Jer. Ives.

Confidence encountered, etc.
Mr. N. E.
ACcording to your desire, I have answered your Counter Queries you sent to me
with a Letter; and though you have meddled with a matter that concerns you not,
yet know, that it concerns me to answer you, lest you should be confirmed in
your folly: and though you contemn my Queries, as slight, and call me an
unworthy Enemy, yet I have learned to say,

Contemptum stulti contemnere maxima laus est;
Contemni a stulto dedecus esse nego.
To scorn a Fool's contempt, is praise; and I,
His scorn, to be disgrace, do quite deny.
And though you thought you had so routed me, that I would never appear again;
yet know, that this was nothing but the violent beatings of the Waves and
Billows of your ambition, which I thought necessary to put a check to, by this
ensuing Answer, lest you should be exalted above measure: for the prevention
whereof, I have published this Reply. And therein,

I Shall first begin with your Title, wherein you call me a Confident
Questionist: but if you had read my Epistle, you would have found, that I did
question, for Conscience sake, some things that Mr. Wills had delivered; and
withal, did propound to the Reader, that if the Answers thereunto did satisfy,
I should bless the Father of Lights that had not suffered me to labor in vain.
This was the greatest altitude of my Confidence, and the height of my Ambition
in that undertaking.

You proceed to an Epistle, where you tell your Reader, That if he be a Friend
to Truth, he probably has ere this been grieved to see the host of Israel
routed, etc. and the Ministry SO MUCH shattered, etc. why then do you glory
and cry victoria, if the Clergy, which you call the Host of Israel, be routed?
should not you mourn, as well as you would have your Reader? but in stead
thereof, you blame your Enemy for glorying, as though he had no occasion; and
wear the Laurel your self, wreathing it upon your own brows, as though you had
so routed your Enemy, that he would never rally: what need is there for the
Reader to grieve, if Mr. Wills has routed and shattered the choicest Ranks of
his Enemies? (unless you flatter Mr. Wills, and deal truly with your Reader)
for is not this strange, that you tell your Reader, See his Epistle to Mr.
Wills.
the Lords Host is routed; and yet flatter with Mr. Wills, and tell him, the
Enemy is routed? And by this you may see, that you are so unfit to be an
Armor-bearer in this Warfare, that you justly deserve to be chashiered the
Camp for your false Intelligence. For you tell Mr. Wills, the Enemy is
shattered; and yet tell your Reader the Ministry are shattered. But is the
Clergy shattered? no marvel then that the people are shattered: for, like
Priest, like People: a shattered Clergy must not look for any thing, but a
discomposed people. And truly, that is the greatest Truth in your Packet: for
how few of them agree in any thing save in the point of Tithes, common
experience can testify, if you had said nothing.

You go on still in your Epistle, and tell your Reader, That if he be shaken,
you have sent him some Counter-Queries, and bid him judge, and try; and then
(you say) you hope he will blush at his unconstancy, etc. So he may well, if
what you have writ should shake his understanding, then he must needs be one
that is carried about with every Airy notion.

You further tell your Reader, That if he be an enemy to truth, he has
triumphed before the victory, etc. How can that be? when you exhort to grieve,
because them that you call the Enemy, have routed the Host: what is that less
then Victory, if you speak Truth?

You go on, and tell your Reader, That if Mr. Brooks or his Church, invited me
to be the Patron of their cause, you might guess them to be miserably baffled,
etc. First, neither Mr. Brooks nor his Church ever invited me to do them this
service; but if they had, if their inviting me to be a Patron to the cause, had
argued them to be miserably baffled; how miserably baffled did you fear your
self should be in what you had writ, when you begged Mr. Wills to be your
Patron?

You tell your Reader, That he cannot expect Mr. Wills should hinder his more
serious discussion of this weighty point, to take notice of my slight Queries.
This, I confess, is an easy way to confute the strongest Arguments, for a man
that is contrary minded, to call them slight; and say, he is not at leisure to
answer them. If I had answered you thus, surely men would have judged, you had
more strength on your side, then you have.

You go on, and bid your Reader see, if here be not enough to puzzle me, etc.
You are now guilty of that which you blamed your Adversary for, but now, viz.
of triumphing before the Victory: but it seems then, the end of your writing
was to puzzle, and not to convince your Adversary.

I proceed now to take notice of your Epistle to Mr. Wills, in which you tell
him, my grounds are slight, etc. This triumphing of yours, is but like that
which Job speaks of, that is but for a moment, Job 20.5.

You demand of Mr. Wills, in what sense he asserted the baptizing the Children
of wicked Parents, etc. and you presume he means only such as are
Church Members, and are not cast out, etc. Truly, either your Church are all
good, or else you are partakers of their sins in not casting them out: for I
have not heard of one vile person, that the Presbyters have excluded.

There is another Question which you propound to Mr. Wills, viz What were his
own words concerning the Fifth-Monarchy-men. About Mr. Wills asserting those
words touching the Fifth-Monarchy-men, I have not wronged him, as hereafter
shall appear.

You further ask Mr. Wills, Whether he did positively assert me to be a
Jesuit, etc. Surely, you did not think Mr. Wills had so much to do as you
made your Reader believe even now, that you ask him so needless a Question: for
did I say or intimate that Mr. Wills did positively assert me to be a Jesuit?
why did you not ask him whether I had two hands or three? it had been as much
to your purpose. But to proceed.

You tell him, That if any thing appear in print in answer to the whole, it
will beg his patronage of its cause, etc. If he did not father it, it would be
an Orphan, since the true Father will not be known. But does not your Logic
teach me to believe you feared to be miserably baffled, since you thus beg for
his Patronage? Surely, you thought your Wine to be mixed with Water, that you
beg Mr. Wills his Bush to hang at your Door, that so it might sell the better,
and not be questioned.

The next thing that follows in your Book is Mr. Wills his Letter, wherein
he tells you, That the people were so rude that it might have proved to my
peril, if he had not pacified them, etc. This shows what Spirit your Churches
are filled withal, that it is perilous for a man to ask a Question among them,
though never so soberly: for no man in his wits will believe that they were of
Mr. Brooks his Church that were so much my Enemies, seeing (you say) I came to
be a Patron to their cause.

Mr. Wills tells you further, That he laid down two Principles, as the grounds
of my satisfaction:

1. That Ministers in an ordinary way were to be ordained by Ministers. 2. That
in case of necessity, where there was no Ministers to ordain, fit Persons might
become Ministers without Ordination, etc.
But he does not tell you, that I asked him by which of these ways he came into
the Ministry; and he would not tell me, though I pressed him once and again: for
though I grant these two ways of Admission, yet I denied that ever he came in
by either. Hereupon he told me, If there was but two ways of coming into a
House, and if he were in, I must conclude that he came in at one of them. But
is not this a shameful begging the Question? for though I granted these two
were to be the ways of entrance, yet I denied him to be come in by either. Now
what is it but to beg the Question, when he shall take it for granted he is in
by one of the aforesaid ways, when I denied him to be in by either? as himself
confesses in his Letter to you, page 7. later end: for he says, I opposed
both; meaning both his entrance by a lawful Ordination, or by necessity. So
then, this is your Champion's Argument, which is like Goliah's Sword in his
hand, the Proposition being, That he is no Minister of Christ, either by a
lawful Ordination, or by any pretended necessity: So that his great Argument
(if I may put it in form) is:

If I am a Minister by one of these ways, then I am a Minister by one of them:
But I am a Minister by one of them;
Ergo, I am a Minister by one of them.
Nothing else can be made of this that he propounds. Now this had been a
dilemma indeed, if I had granted him to be a true Minister, and had confessed
that a man cannot be a true Minister but by one of the ways aforesaid; then he
had reasoned like a man, if he had said, Since I grant him to be a Minister,
and withal grant, that none can enter but by the ways aforesaid, then he must
needs come in by one of them. But since I denied both, how wildly does he
reason?

Again, does not Christ say, That he that comes not in at the door, is a thief
and a robber? Now though I granted that there was no other lawful way of coming
into the Office, yet a man's being in, does not prove he came in any of these
lawful ways; because Christ supposes they may get in by climing up another way.

The next thing Mr. Wills takes notice of in his Answer to your Letter, is
that which he spoke about the baptizing the Children of wicked Parents, which
he says are such Children, whose Parents are not juridically ejected by
excommunication, etc.

His Reformation, as I have told, is so good, that none deserves
Excommunication; or else so bad, that he does not execute that Ordinance upon
them; or if he do, then all that he does excommunicate are childless; or else
he, contrarily to his Principles, baptizeth their Children; for he refuses to
baptize none. But if his Argument be good, That the Children of wicked Parents
are to be baptized, because sometimes God chooses them that are wicked Men's
Children, Does not this Argument plead as much for the Children of those that
are excommunicated? may not God choose the Children of such as well the Children
of others? and does not the Children of wicked excommunicated Parents, stand in
need of an Obligation to Holiness, as well as the Children of those wicked
Parents that are not excommunicated? and yet this man says, That wicked men's
Children, the worse their Parents are, the more need their Children have of
Baptism: and yet he denies it to the children of those who are excommunicated.
It seems then, you judge them you keep in the Church worse then they you cast
out, or else this cannot be a true Maxim, viz. The worse the Parents are, the
more need the Children have of Baptism: for if they you cast out are the worst,
then it follows, that their Children have the more need, by his Argument: if
so, why does he confine it to none but such as are within the Church?

Whoever desires further satisfaction in this point, touching the baptizing of
Infants. I shall refer them to my Book, entitled, Infants Baptism disproved;
by which you will see Mr. Wills his false Aspersion wiped away, viz. That I
sought to color my Opinion, which was against the Baptizing of any infants.
For not only my Book testifies my willingness to own my Opinion publicly, but
I did tell Mr. Wills to his Face, that I would prove it unlawful to baptize
any Infant; as many can witness.

Mr. Wills in his Letter further tells you, That he did decry the
Fifth-Monarchy-men among other Sects that cry down their Ministry, as the
smoke of the bottomless pit, smelling strong of the Brimstone of Hell: his
proof for this is so faint, that he suspects it himself; for he says, he
alluded in that speech to Rev. 9.2, 3. by which text (he says) such Sects are
meant, AS SOME DO INTERPRET. Is not this a brave stroke? do you reckon this one
of his fatal blows he has given the Adversary, by telling them their Breath is
as the smoke of the bottomless Pit? but it is but AS SOME DO INTERPRET.

Miraris Wilsum rixis implesse theatrum?
Ingenio Portae convenit ille suae.
No marvel Wills pulpit fills with railing and debate,
Since that we see it does agree with the genius of his Billings-gate.
gate.
The last thing of moment that Mr. Wills mentions in his Letter, is, That he
never affirmed upon any information that I was a Jesuit; and that he did never
instigate any to apprehend mt. For proof of this, I shall refer you to this
Gentleman, Mr. Vancourt for a Witness, who is ready to make Oath of the truth
thereof; by which Mr. Wills his untruths appear, together with his malice,
though he cries out of the malice of others.

This Gentleman is a man known for Piety, and to bear a good esteem in the
National Ministry; and also he is of good Credit in the World: and therefore
know, that it was more just for me to believe his Affirmation, then for you to
take the Accused's bare Negation. Therefore I judge, my life would lie at
stake, if Mr. Wills had as good proof to prove me a Jesuit, as I have to
prove that he did advertise this Gentleman to apprehend me for a Jesuit.

This shall suffice to this Letter, and to your observation thereon in the
later end of your Book.

I come now to your Epistle Dedicatory, wherein you do excuse your flattering
of Mr. Wills: but what do you else, when you tell him you presume to be his
Armor-Bearer? and in a Complement tell him, That you were a spectator of those
furious strokes, whereby he shattered the choicest Ranks of his Enemies, and
dealt about such fatal blows, that their choicest Champions fell before him,
etc.

Why did you not tell your Reader, if you do not flatter, where those blows
were given, and those battles fought? and when it was that this Victory was
obtained, that you so much glory in? and what the Names of those choice
Champions were, that fell by his fatal blows? Methinks, if you were a Spectator
(as you say you were) of these great Conflicts, you can resolve these
Questions, that so you may comfort your grieving Reader, who yet does believe
your first words that you told him, viz. That your Army was routed, which you
called the host of Israel.

Your presuming to bear Mr. Wills his Armor, shows how little you have of the
Armor of God in this Spiritual Conflict; and your fighting under his Shield,
shows how little you have of the Shield of Faith: but do you take Mr. Wills
his Armor, and fight under his Shield, because you so much desire it; and I
will take the Armor of God, and the Shield of Faith, to fight against you, and
shall leave the success of the Victory to God: and though you boast upon the
putting on of your Armor, as though you were so dreadful, that your Enemy would
flee when he heard of you, (for by concealing your Name, you thought I should
never see you) yet know, that it had been better and more modest for you to
have gloried when you had put your Armor off. But I am not fled yet; and if I
do flee, I may be easier found upon the flight, because my Name is known, then
you can be who conceal your Name and Place of abode, for no other reason that I
know of, but for fear lest you should be apprehended in your flight.

You now face about, and direct your speech to me; and tell me, That you hope
your rashness is not so great, as Eliabs was to David, 1 Samuel 17.18, 28. if you
say, that it is my business to carry Loaves and Cheese to the Camp, out of the
pride and naughtiness of my Heart, that I above all others should single out a
Champion to encounter with, etc. If your rashness be not so great as Eliabs to
David, it seems it is rashness, though not so great; as not only your words do
intimate, but the story you allude to, 1 Samuel 17.18, 28. by which your Reader
may see you compare your self to Eliab, and me to David, who carried Loaves and
Cheese to the Army; and the Army that you called the Host of Israel, you now
compare to the uncircumcised Philistines; and the Army that I carry relief to,
to the Israel of God, for such was the Army that David carried Loaves and
Cheese to; and Mr. Wills the Champion that you say I have singled out to
encounter, you very craftily compare him to Goliath: and by this you justify me
in my Encounter, and condemn your self of rashness in judging me, for that I
carried some small contribution to the Army of the Lord, as David did to
Israel. By this the Reader may see, that you had so great a stomach to be
nibling at the Bread and Cheese, that you had wholly forgot your cause.

You proceed and tell me, That either I uncivilly took Mr. Brooks his work out
of his hand, or else that I highly valued my self as one that could manage it
better.

First, was not all the audience concerned as well as Mr. Brooks, in what Mr.
Wills delivered? since he told them how dangerous it was to hear men that were
not ordained.

Secondly, did not Mr. Wills confess, that he invited all that had Objections,
to give them in either in word or in writing?

Thirdly, does not Mr. Brooks think so of men? if he does not, why should you?
seeing, if I have dealt uncivilly, he is the person offended.

Fourthly, is not the work still in Mr. Brooks his hands, for all that I have
said or done?

Fifthly, is it not greater incivility for you to take upon you to answer a
particular paper, which was particulary directed to Mr. Wills? This surely
savours more of arrogance then any thing that I have done.

You go on, and ask five Questions, and answer them your self; by which it
appears, you can answer Questions of your own making, easier then you can those
that are made by another. I shall take notice of none but the first and last,
seeing I have already upon some former occasion, taken notice of all the rest.

In the first Question you suppose me asking, who you are? Your answer is, That
truly you are Homo nullius Nominis: which being Englished, is, That you are a
Man of no Name.

Truly, Sir, I do not blame you for putting no Name to your Book, of you say
true, I had otherwise interpreted this phrase, had he put a name to his book
that you have no Name. But how was this oversight committed, that your
Godfathers and Godmothers did not give you one in your Baptism? or are you
not yet baptized? if you are not, was it because your Father was
excommunicated, or that he was no Christian; and therefore you had no right? if
so, you have done enough now to give Mr. Wills a Testimony of your
Christianity: therefore I doubt not but he will baptize you; and that you will
in your next be homo nominis.

Your last Question is, But why do you answer me in counter-Queries? Having
made this Question, you thus answer it your self, and tell me, That you answer
by counter-Queries, that I may see how easy it is for a fool to ask more
questions then a wise man can answer.

Truly Sir, I shall willingly become a Fool for Christ's sake, that I may be
wise; but it seems the foolish things of God has confounded the wise: for you
say, the fool has asked more Questions then the wise man can answer. Surely,
this indeed was the reason why you did not answer positively.

I come to your Queries. And first, you state the Question as I printed it, it
being that upon which many of my Questions are grounded. Herein you tell me, I
have dealt ingeniously with Mr. Wills, in the right stating of the difference;
and then you propound your first counter-Query, wherein you ask me,

Whether that is not a sin which is practiced as a Gospel-duty, and has no Law
or Foundation in the Gospel: who has required these things at your hands?

Wills, and you both, do err in laying men under sin for Preaching without
Ordination, and in baptizing Infants, and in giving the Lord's Supper to
profane and scandalous persons: who has required these (and Lay Elders, with
suchlike Innovations) at your hands?

Must not then unordained men's preaching be sinful, etc?

Mal. 3.16 Heb. 10.25. Heb. 5.12. 1 Cor. 14.13, 14. 1 Pet. 4.10.
to justify such a Practice; but you have none to justify those things that I
object against you in my Answer to your first: but to these Texts I shall say
more in due place, when I come to weigh your Queries concerning them.

If Titus 1.5. be not an Apostolical institution for ordaining Elders; and
whether public teaching be not an act of that Office, as well as baptism,
being both in the same commission, Mat. 28.19. etc. and whether unordained men
are not usurpers of that Office etc.

This is the sum of your Question:

Paul left Titus in Creete to ordain Elders in every City; therefore none must
preach but Elders? May not a man as well reason, That Titus was commanded to
ordain Elders in every City: Ergo, there must be none ordained in
Country-Villages?

Again, though Preaching be an act of Office as well as Baptizing, does it
therefore follow that none may Preach out of Office? May not a man as well say,
That visiting the sick, and praying, and reproving them that sin, and to exhort
in private, are acts of the Ministers Office as well as Baptizing? does it
therefore follow, that it is a sin to do these acts out of Office? So that it
is one thing to do these acts as Christian, and another thing to invade an
Office, that I may do them as an Officer: though the later of these be had, the
former is good. Do you not see your rashness now?

If there be not a third thing that I forget, viz. That Approbationers do not
preach as gifted brethren, nor as lawfully constituted Officers, but as having
consent of Ministers. This you would make out by the similitude of my Boys
selling Cheese. You say, If he be not my Apprentice, but is with me upon trial,
then he does not sell as he is fit; for then (you say) every one may sell my
Cheese that is so fitted: neither can he sell as an Apprentice, because he is
not bound, etc.

datur tertiam, he sells it as he has right. So may any Boy sell Cheese: and
any Man Preach, if his Heavenly Father has bestowed a Gift upon him.

Whether I am in office, and how I came to it, and by whom ordained, etc.



How can he preach by virtue of the Ministers consent, in relation to an
Office, that owns not their power to ordain him? etc. And how can I be
satisfied with the power of the Church to ordain? etc.

White Hall do daily approve of such men's preaching whom they know to be able
and fit; though they do scruple to be ordained, and do refuse to be ordained,
yet they do approve of them; and not suspend them upon that score, if they
judge them godly and Orthodox: and they seldom ask them that question.

some law that a man may exercise part of that Office he is not invested in,
etc. because I query whether a man should sin to preach out of Office, because
he wants some, or has not all those required qualifications, viz. it may be he
wants faithful Children, or it may be he may be soon angry, etc. You seem to
counterbalance this query of mine, by saying, There is the same weight in your
allegation, as, why may not a man preach that is a drunkard, or has many
wives, etc. and why does his Highness turn such men out? etc.

White Hall keep men out that are gifted, nor turn men out that are gifted,
though they have not the later qualifications, viz. faithful Children, or so
good a command of their passion as they ought: yet they do keep out, and turn
out them that are guilty of drunkenness, and plurality of wives; though their
Gifts be never so great. So that by the Judgment of his Highness to whom you
refer me, and the Ministers at White Hall, there is much more reason why a man
able and godly, may preach that is not ordained, and shall refuse to be
ordained, because he thinks he ought first to obtain some further mastery of
his passion, or ought to wait till his Children be reformed, etc. then there is
why a scandalous man should preach unordained, though he have never so great
parts; nay, I shall presume that his Highness and those Ministers at
White Hall, had much rather hear an able unordained Man preach, then a profane
Man that is ordained, though otherwise of great abilities: and yet you tell
your Reader, That there is as much weight in yours, Why may not a man preach
that is profane? as there is in my Query, viz., Why may not a man that is
gifted to preach the Gospel to Edification and Comfort, preach out of Office;
because he finds himself short of that power to rule the Church of God which
that Office requires, or it may be wants faithful Children, or it may be he is
soon angry, or the like; and therefore is not free to take that Office upon
him. I therefore ask, why this good man may not exercise these Gifts out of
Office: and you say, that there is the same foundation for your Why may not a
profane person preach? etc.

This is the sum of my Query, and the substance of your Counter-query upon it,
as the Reader may see by comparing Book to Book.

If he that preaches sins in usurping that act of the ministerial Office, then
do not they sin that shall wittingly and willingly submit to this usurpation in
hearing? if he have no lawful call to preach, Romans 10.15. can they have a
lawful call to hear? is not the Receiver as bad as the Thief?

The Receiver is as bad as the Thief; and that because it is as bad in me to
hear one that is not ordained, as it is in such a one that is not ordained to
preach. The truth is, if one of these be as bad as you make it, the other must
needs be as bad also.

Now pray consider, That to relieve the poor is an act of the Deacons Office,
does it therefore follow, that none but Officers may relieve the poor? should I
sin to minister to the poor out of Office? and is he that receives an Alms as
bad as a Thief, if he knows he that gives it be out of Office? and yet this is
your arguing.

But it may be you will say, That for a man out of Office to distribute the
Churches stock is sinful, if they do not license him so to do; and then it
would be a sin to receive from such a man the stock of the Church.

I answer, That it is most true: but therefore may he not give of his own,
because he cannot as an Officer give of the Churches? So because I may not
preach from another Man's stock, may I not preach from my own, and administer
according as I have received from God? though I may not administer of that
which I have not, according to that 1 Pet. 4.10. Let every man as he has
RECEIVED the gift, minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God. And he subjoyneth in the next Verse, If any man speak,
let him speak as the oracles of God, Ver. 11. So that by comparing these Verses
together, you will find, that a man may as lawfully preach, if he have
received a Gift to enable him, as he may distribute this Worlds Goods: but he
ought not to do the one or the other, unless he have received a Gift from God
to enable him thereto.

Apollos did not preach the Gospel, as is recorded Act. 18.24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
etc. you reply by asking me, Whether I ought not to have answered Doctor
Seamore and others.

To this I answer That if I had received satisfaction from them, I should have
made no further question. But ought not you by the same rule, to have answered
all Books extant against Ordination by Presbyters, before you ask me any more
questions in the behalf of it? And if these men you speak of have writ so
satisfactorily, why do you trouble your self any further?

You proceed, and tell me, page 22. That Apollos taught where (you say) we read
but of two Christians, Aquila and Priscilla, and those Paul brought with him,
etc.

I answer, That our Question is not how few or how many Christians were Apollos
Auditors; but, Whether he did not preach publicly and constantly without
Ordination. However, you grant that there was Aquila and Priscilla, and those
Christians that Paul brought with him which he preached to, which were enough
to make a Christian Congregation, as vain as you seem to make the consequence.
Therefore if he did preach to the people aforesaid, ( viz. Aquila and
Priscilla, and those Christians that Paul brought with him) publicly and
constantly, then he did preach publicly and constantly to a
Christian-Congregation: but the former is true by your own confession; Ergo,
the later follows.

But you proceed, and ask me, If a particular example of a Church not
constituted, be a rule for ordinary practice in a Church that is, etc. And
further you ask, If Apollos was not in Office, and therefore called a Minister,
1 Cor. 3.5. and how do I prove he was not?

I answer, First, where do you read of a Christian-Church not constituted?

Secondly, Do you not say, That Apollos was an Officer? what then did hinder
them from being a constituted Church? The Scriptures say, Christ's Church is his
Body: and I never read of a Body constituted, and another unconstituted. And
for your saying, Apollos was in Office, 1 Cor. 3.5. does this prove he was then
in Office? Act 18.

You go on, and ask me all these negative Questions, viz. How I prove he was
not in Office? and how I prove he was no Priest, and that John did not
anthorize him? and ought I not to prove that he was not in Office thus? and
ought I not to prove there was no necessity? and how do I prove he was not
called, or in Office? etc.

To which I answer, That you are an excellent Armor-bearer: Is this your
Armor of proof? when a man demands of you how you prove that such a thing was,
you answer by asking your Respondent how he proves it was not. Truly, you have
more need go to School then write Books. But let us hear what you say for the
Affirmative since you say, page 23. That it is certain he was in Office.

Your first Reason is, He watered the Churches that Paul had planted, 1 Cor.
3.6. 1 Cor. 16.12.

Let Us try this Argument, and put it into a form, and then it will be thus: viz.

Apollos did the work of an Evangelist, 1 Cor. 3.6.

Ergo, it is certain he was in Office at the time Aquila and Priscilla taught
him, Act. 18.

May not a man as well reason thus:

Mr. Wills preaches at Botolphs Billings-gate as an Officer, (if you will
believe it:)

Ergo, it is certain he was an Officer when he was instructed into Religion.

You go on, and ask me, If Apollo 's worth and name was not the head of a
Faction, 1 Cor. 1.12.

This is your second Argument to prove that certainly he was in Office.

Is this a good Argument, Apollos was the Head of a Faction for his worth and
name: Ergo, he was an Officer in the Church? will not this prove Mr. Brooks to
be an Officer when future times shall read the History of his Life; seeing that
he preaches Christ, and is esteemed for his worth and name, and (as your selves
say) he is the Head of a Faction? how dare you deny Mr. Brooks to be an
Officer, if this be good Logic?

Your third Reason is, He is called (you say) in express terms a Minister, in
the sense that Paul was, 1 Cor. 3.5. He was an Officer (you say) then sure.

I have answered this already, by showing, that though he might be an Officer
then, yet he was not in Office, Acts 18. and you must prove, and not beg.

You go on, and bid me prove that Apollos was ordained after he preached Act.
18.

What if I cannot? does this prove he was ordained at that time? do not you
prove it for me, when you suppose in the later end of page 20. That he might
preach by necessity; and that there was no Organical constituted Church at this
time, and Officers to preach in it? and do you not ask me, Whether the
Apostolical Institution was practiced at that time? or, Whether Apollos knew of
such a thing as Ordination to be had from the Apostles? And do you not further
say, Here was evident necessity?

Now for all these questions that your self make, to manifest he was not
ordained as Paul was, yet you do presently conclude, that he was ordained a
Minister in the same sense as Paul was, at the time that he preached in the
Synagogue, Act. 18. and bid me show if he was not then ordained, and where was
he ordained afterward? when you say your self, There was no constituted Church
to ordain; and yet conclude he was ordained at this time. Are not these the
Questions you told the Reader would puzzle me? I think it will puzzle you to
reconcile them, they are so contradictions.

To your three last Proposals touching Apollos, where you urge the preaching of
Apollos, rather then Aquila and the Brethrens receiving him, Act. 18.27. and
his helping them through grace that believed, etc.

These, you say, prove that he was in Office: but it is but your say so. For
does not the Apostle say, Romans 16. That Aquila and Priscilla were his helpers
in Christ? May I not as well conclude, that both these were Officers, because
they were helpers in Christ, as you may conclude Apollos was an Officer,
because he helped them that did believe? Is not this wild reasoning? and does
the Brethrens receiving Apollos, prove therefore that he was an Officer? then
if you should have occasion to go to Geneva, and should be received upon Wills
his Letter of Recommendation; it seems this would prove you to be an Officer:
you say, it was such a receiving as is spoken of, Mat. 10.40. where it is said,
He that receives the Disciples of Christ, receives Christ. I answer, That it
is also said, Luke 9.48. That he that receives a little child in Christ's name
receives Christ. May I not then as well conclude from he same Scriptures, That
every righteous Man, and every Child that shall be received in Christ's Name,
is an Officer in the Church, as you may conclude Apollos was received,
according to Mat. 10.40. Ergo, Apollos was an Officer? are these your
puzzelling Proposals?

But (say you) why did not Aquila preach rather then Apollos?

I demand, whether the mentioning the one does in reason exclude the other, any
more then the Scriptures saying, That he, viz. Apollos, helped them that
believed, does exclude Aquila from this service?

Whether those texts proposed in my tenth Query, Mat. 3.6. Heb. 10.25 prove an
authoritative act of preaching?

I answer, That this is a needless Question, seeing you say there is no
preaching without Authority: and you confess, That according to these Texts,
Christians ought to meet together and exhort one another. Then I demand,
whether Christians met together do not make a Church, if they meet to worship
God? if so, then you have given away your cause, by telling of us, that they
may exhort one another when they are thus met, which is an act of the Ministers
Office: so that then it seems unordained Christians may do acts that are acts
of the Ministers Office, by your own confession; so that it be done according
to rule, which I think ought to be observed in that and all Christian Duties.

Wills sin in hearing Mr. Brooks, which he says is not ordained.

And this you do by asking me, Whether that Mr. Wills may not be called to
correct him that is not called to preach? etc.

Here you beg two things: the one is, That Mr. Brook^s is not called to preach;
and the other is, That Mr. Wills is called to correct: both which are the main
things in question. But where is your Text that gives M. Wills a toleration to
hear M. Brooks, if to hear him be sinful? And for your similitudes which you
bring in stead of a proof, do not they in the first place take that for granted
which you are to prove, viz. That M. Wills is a Captain, and a Shepherd, and a
Physician? etc From which you infer, that the Capt the Shepherd, and the
Physician may do that which is not lawful for every body, Ergo Mr. Wills may.
. But suppose we pity the poor, and give you that you beg for, viz. that he is
a Captain; I demand whether a Captain, though he may view the Enemy, whether he
may treat with the Enemy; and whether he is not an Offender, if he shall run
into the Enemies quarters without leave from his General? and by the Generals
leave a Soldier may go as well as he: and if he shall ride from his Troop or
Regiment to view the Enemy, is he not a Transgressor?

And for your saying, The Shepherd may withstand the Wolf, though the Sheep
ought to run.

Do you not by this make all the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days to be guilty of
their own Blood, in that they chose rather to burn then run? were not most of
those that opposed the Wolf at that time, Sheep and not Shepherds? for, to
their shame be it spoken, the poor Sheep stood by it when most of the Shepherds
entered a League with the Wolf?

And for your similitude of a Physician, do you not say, That a Physician may
visit one sick of the plague, but another man may not? etc.

Does Christ charge it as a sin upon the Physicians only, that he was sick,
and they did not visit him? or does he not charge it upon the people in general?

Sir, do you think, that this will excuse you at the day of Christ, that you
did not visit his members, because they were sick of the Plague? By this Rule,
it would be a sin in Mr. Wills, to visit any of his Parish that should be sick
of the Plague, because he is no Physician. For ought that I know, this is the
reason of the device of Lay Elders, that so when any is sick, they may send
them, and stay at home themselves.

Heb 5.12. you demand, Whether that Text has the least ground for gifted
Brethrens teaching? And all you say first and last amounts but to this, Whether
it is understood of actual teaching? etc.

To which I answer, that these Queries grounded upon my twelfth Question, do
come so far short of an Answer, that it does not counter-query the things that
I have proposed: for is actual teaching (to use your unknown phrase) any part
of our Question? sure there is not such a word from one end to the other.
Methinks you speak now like one that is PUZZELED.

But yet for all this, you say, It may be understood of Masters that ought to
teach their Families.

I pray, ought not Masters teaching their Families to be actual teaching? and
yet you bid me prove it to be of actual teaching.

But you say, They were not Stewards to provide.

Pray, does not a Master in a Family teach as a Steward? and is not every good
Christian to give an account of his Stewardship? and does not the Apostle Peter
say, 1 Pet. 4.10. of every good Christian, That he is to minister as a good
Steward of the manifold grace of God? and yet you are so ignorant as to tell
us, That the Apostle exhorts to teach, but not as Stewards.

And for your saying, That this Text is spoken in general terms, viz. ye ought
to teach, and that therefore it may respect women's teaching in the Church as
well as men:

I answer, so it might, if the Scripture had not said, The Women must keep
silence in the Churches, 1 Cor. 14.34. And this he calls a part of their
subjection to the Law, which the Hebrew Women were always instructed in; and
therefore there was no need of a particular exception in this exhortation.

Cor. 14.1, 24, 31. Why I did not consult the London- Ministers, etc. saying,
That it is vainglory in me to make the world believe that these men have done
nothing worthy my regard. etc.

I answer as formerly, If they have done enough, what needs this waste that you
make by writing more? could you not in a few lines have referred your Reader to
them for the solutions of my Questions, without any more ado?

But further, you ask, If the gifts that these men had, 1 Cor. 14. were not
extraordinary?

I answer, What is this to the purpose? for it is no part of my Question, to
know whether they preached by Gifts extraordinary or ordinary; but, whether
they preached as gifted or by Office, let the Gifts be what they will: for
surely, the greatness of their Gifts could not tolerate them to Preach contrary
to a Divine Institution, seeing there was no necessity, it being a constituted
Church (as you call it) that had Officers in it.

You go on, and say, That they were Prophets, which (you say) is an Office pro
tempore, improperly so called.

Then any one that can prophecy now adays, may preach, by this Argument. But
if it be an Office improperly so called, then they that prophesied are
improperly called Officers: so that then to speak properly, they did speak to
edification and comfort out of Office, and as gifted Brethren.

And for your similitude of a Judge his place, you say, If such a place fall,
all the Sergeants about the Town may seek, for it.

Which implies, That there was some great Benefice vacant, and that the Apostle
would have all the Church to gape for it, when he bids them covet to prophecy;
surely, the simile can hold forth little else.

But pray Sir, though all the Sergeants about the Town may lawfully seek for
such a place, may all the people about the Town seek lawfully for a Judges
place when it falls? for this is the case; all the Church are exhorted to covet
Prophesying, and not some particular persons: and therefore you see that the
simile is besides the matter, since that all a Church may lawfully covet to
Prophecy; but all the people in a Commonwealth cannot lawfully covet the place
of a Judge.

My fourteenth Query is worth nothing, only (you say) why may not our whole
Church covet as well to be ordinary Officers as to be preaching gifted
Brethren? and if because it is monstrous to have so many ruling Heads, is it
not (say you) as monstrous to have as many speaking Tongues?

My fourteenth Query is worth nothing: Truly, I might have answered all yours
at this rate, had it not been that I feared you would have been wise in your
own conceit.

But further, you say nothing, indeed, to that which is demanded; but ask,
Whether for all men to covet to speak be not to make the Body as monstrous as
if they did all covet to be Officers?

To which I answer, That though they are not all to covet to speak as Officers;
yet it does not follow, but they may all covet to speak as God has enabled
them, to the edification of the Body, without making the Body monstrous: for if
all were to speak at once, indeed, this were to make the Body of Christ
monstrous; but to speak one after another as they are exhorted, to edification
and comfort, has not any thing in it of a monstrous nature.

Wills told the people, That it is a sin for any to preach that are not
ordained, etc. which of those several Ordinations in Christendom, it is that
Christ approves of. Hereupon, after some Questions made touching the business
of Ordination, which is not at all to the Question before you, you demand of
me, Whether you may not say, That all Ordinations in Christendom are approved
by Christ, that differ but thus circumst antially? etc.

I answer, Why did you not say so then, That all the Ordinations in
Christendom are accepted by Christ, without asking my leave? But then you must
know. That the Church of Rome either err in the essentials of this Ordinance,
or in circumstance: if in essentials, then she cannot or^^in at all; if but in
circumstance, then if you dare speak out, does not Christ approve of her
Administration of it at this day, by what you say in the later end of this
Query? But to proceed to the next, in which,

Rome? And thereupon you query, Whether I dare say that Rome observes that
Gospel purity in this Ordinance?

To which I answer, That this was no part of my Question, viz. Whether it was
as purely; but, whether it may lawfully be obtained there?

But you go on, and say, That the substance may be there, viz. at Rome.

Then, Sir, by your own Maxim it is approved by Christ, since in this
Ordinance they do err but circumstantially.

But you go on, and say, That three things only excuse in errors
circumstantial.

The first is, when the error is slight, etc. The second (you say) is a sincere
a^m at the glory of God. The third is in case of nocessity, etc. you say, is
this our case now? and can we not have it with more purity then at Rome? etc.
Sir, I am not about to ask you, Whether it may not more purely be had; but,
whether it may be had lawfully?

But to proceed, It seems then by your Query, if a man does not think the
Church of Rome erres in any thing (as those do that go thither for Ordination)
then he being ignorant of their errors, may lawfully be ordained there, and
that Christ will accept of it: for you say, That a sincere aim at the
substance, with ignorance of the errors in circumstance, will excuse.

So that all that you have said, though it will not justify a man's going to
Rome for Ordination, that knows their errors, and knows there is no necessity
to go thither, yet it does justify all that are otherwise minded, and are
still ignorant, by your own confession: for you confess, that Christ accepts of
all Ordinations that differ but in circumstance: are you not indulging the
Church of Rome? But to proceed.

etc. Thereupon you query, Whether you may not say, All are approved by Christ?

But does all you have said signify Christ's approbation of all these? have
you urged any thing but that which is as disputable as the thing in question;
and so endeavor to prove one doubtful thing by another? for you ask me, If
that I do not easily see all these, viz. the Episcopal, Presbyterian, and the
most sober Independents, own the essence of Ordination, that is, (say you) a
setting apart men to the Ministry by Ministers, and that they do practice the
purity of that Ordinance by setting apart fit men in a Gospel-way, for those
ends a Ministry is appointed, without superstitious intermixtures.

Sir, when you have proved this which you ask me, If I do not easily see, to be
in all the Ordinations before mentioned, then I shall grant your consequence,
viz. That Christ approves all these Ordinations: but in the mean while I deny
the Antecedent; for all you say, I might easily see it: but if it was so easy
for me to see, why was it not as easy for you to have proved it? is this to
reason rationally? or is it not that which a Scholar, that values either credit
or conscience, would scorn, viz. to take it for granted all these Ministers are
such, and that all their Ordinations are lawful; and then conclude, that Christ
owns them all, and give us no Text to prove any thing you say, though the
stress of the Controversy depends upon it.

etc. were lawful, (as you confess) then why were these Ordinations opposed one
to the other, by the several Patrons of them? This was the substance of that
Query. You thereupon ask me, If I am not uncharitable to charge the error of
one man (meaning, Dr. Tailor, who opposed the Presbyters, as Men that had no
power to ordain) upon the rest of the Episcopal way? etc.

To which I answer, That though I cited him for brevity sake, yet I did refer
the Reader to his Book called, Episcopacie asserted, where he cites the
Fathers, and the constant Opinion of the Churches, for the proof of what he
says against Ordination by Presbyters; to which you have said nothing, but
tell us a story at the third hand of what Bishop Usher told the King of the
practice of one particular Church, viz. of Alexandria; and of what the Rubric
says, and of what Dr. Pride. says. But to these I may answer, That it is
nothing to the Opinion of most of the Bishops way, and that not only in
England, but wherever that Government is practiced.

And for your citing the London-Ministers, are not they like to be good
Witnesses, seeing they are parties that would fain make all Antiquity speak for
the things they profess, that the novelty of them may not be suspected?

If I do still go on in my unchristian charges, whereby you tell me I do not
only lay injustice, but blood upon the head of Presbyterians, etc.

But wherein do I speak any thing unlike a Christian? if that be true as you
say, viz. That Episcopal Ordination was good, and that they did practice it in
the purity of it, without superstitious mixture, as you confess in your
seventeenth Query, then how do I exhibit an unchristian charge against them, by
asking why they did not reform the Government, rather then cashier it? etc.

You go on, and further demand, Whether I dare assert, that the Presbyterians
did throw down the Government of Episcopacy, merely for this error in
Ordination? etc.

I answer as before, If they did err in other things, why were not those
reformed, and Ordination by Bishops still preserved, seeing (you say) that
their Ordination was in purity?

But further, how comes this to pass, that in your seventeenth Query you say,
That Episcopal Ordination was in purity; and yet ask me, Whether that
Government was thrown down merely for the error in Ordination? how can it be in
purity, if it had errors?

And for your saying, That the Anabaptistical Spirits are bloody, witness those
in Germany, etc.

I answer, This is an unchristian Charge indeed, and therefore you thought you
would cry out first, That others were guilty, that your self might not be
suspected: for, what if that story of Germany were true, (which is doubtful in
many things) does not this show what Spirit you are of, laying the cause of the
late Wars, at the Anabaptists Doors? have they not been as serviceable to their
Power, to free their Country from slavery, as any, both in Purse and Person?
were they the cause of the first and second War in Scotland, and the second War
in England? was any of them you call Anabaptists in the treasonable Engagement?
who of them did join to bring in King Charles again, into Scotland first, and
afterward into England? was it the Anabaptist, or who was it, pray speak out,
that made all these Uproars both in City and Country?

But lest you should err for want of Information, let me show you, That the
Presbyters have been inspired with a worse Spirit, to carry on their
Presbyterian-Usurpation, then ever the Anabaptists were in Germany; nay, I am
sure I should not be rash, if I should say, The same Spirit which they have
cried down in their Adversaries the Jesuits, has been found breathing in them.

And for proof hereof, I shall refer the Reader to the Histories and Writings
that have been writ by great Patrons of the Presbyterian way. I shall begin
with Mr. Knox, who in his History of the Reformation of the Church of Scotland,
says, That without the Reformation which they desired, they(meaning the
Covenanters) would never be subject to any mortal man. See Knox History of the
Church of Scotland, first Impression in Octavo, page 265.

They, viz. the Presbyterians, took away the Queens Coining, Irons by force and
arms, and did justify the same, Knox Hist, page 308.

Again, they say, The Commonalty ought to reform Religion, if the King will
not. See Knox to the Commonalty, page 49, 50. And, That if Princes be Tyrants
against God and the truth, their Subjects are freed from their Oaths of
Allegiance. Knox to England and Scotland, fol. 78.

This they learned from Geneva: for when Farellus Viretus, and others, first
preached, the Bishop of Geneva was Lord of the City, and had power as a civil
Migistrate, as Calvin in his Letter to Cardinal Sadolete writes, Jus gladii
alias civilis jurisdictionis parts, etc. And yet without any Honor or
Respect, (which they as Christians were bound to give him as their civil
Magistrate) they called him a Thief and an Usurper; and so of themselves, with
such assistance as they could get, threw him out of his civil jurisdiction:
since which time it has been a principle among the Presbyters, as appears by
Whittingam in his Preface to Goodman's Book, where he says, That if Kings and
Princes refuse to reform Religion, the inferior Magistrates or People, by the
direction of the Ministry, might lawfully, and ought (if need require) even by
force and arms to reform it themselves. Accordingly they proceeded in Scotland,
as you have heard out of Knox, who was one of the Presbyterian Reformers.

I shall in the next place, cite some of Buchanan his Presbyterian-Maximes, out
of his Book, entitled, De Jure Regni, page 61. he says, Populus Rege est
praestantior and melior: The People are better then the King, and of greater
Authority.

Again, he says, Populo jus est, ut imperium cui velit deferat, page 13. De
Jure Regni: The People have right to bestow the Crown at their pleasure.

Again, page 25. he says, Penes populum est ut leges ferat, sunt Reges veluti
tabulariorum Cestodes: The making of Laws does belong to the People, and Kings
are but as Masters of the Rolls.

Again, page 58. he says, The people have the same power over the King, that
the King has over any one person. And page 40. It were good (says he) that
rewards were appointed by the People, for such as should kill Tyrants, as
commonly there is for those, Qui Lupos aut Ursos occiderunt, ant Catulos eorum
deprehenderunt: that have killed either Wolves or Bears, or taken their Whelps.

This Spirit our old Presbyterians in England were inspired with about the same
time, as the Author of the Book of Obedience, (but rather of Rebellion) does
manifest, page 215. in these words, saying, If neither the Magistrate nor the
greatest part of the People will do their Offices, in punishing, deposing or
killing of Princes, (meaning such as should be against the
Presbyterian-Reformation, so much then sought after by Calvin) then (says he)
the Minister may excommunicate such a Prince, page 186. And in page 110. of the
said Book, the Author says, That in case of defection a private man may kill a
Tyrant as Moses did the Egyptian, if he have any special inward motion;
otherwise, (he says) a private man may do it, if he be but permitted by the
Commonwealth.

Goodman (who also was in that time as great a stickler for the
Presbyterian-Reformation as the rest) says in his Book, p. 190. Subjects do
promise obedience, that the Magistrate may help them; which if they do not,
they are discharged of their Obedience. And in page 180, 184, 185. he has many
passages to the like purpose; among which, this is observable, The people
(says he) in Numb.25. did hang up certain of their Heads, etc. which ought
(says he) to be perpetual example of their duty, (meaning the common people)
in the like defection from God, to hang up such Rulers as shall draw them from
him.

This Doctrine (of killing and deposing Magistrates by a private person, of the
common people, when Magistrates do not reform according to their humors, says
Whittingam in his Preface to Goodmans Book) was approved by the best learned in
Geneva; meaning Calvin and the rest of the Genevians, together with some
British Patrons of that way: for besides Goodman and Whittingam, there was
Anthony Gibly, Miles Coverdale, David Whitehead, and sundry others, who did
desire that Goodman's Book might be printed, to which Whittingam made a
Preface, greatly commending the aforesaid bloody Doctrine.

Now whoever shall compare these passages with the practice of Presbytery ever
since, both in Scotland and Englend, shall find, that they have thoroughly
studied this point, viz. of imbruing Nations in Blood, and setting up and
throwing down Magistrates, according as they judge them fit or unfit for their
pretended Reformations. Has not England and Scotland, to their great grief,
found this to be true, by woeful experience? And yet the Anabaptists and
Fifth-Monarchy-men, are decried by you and Mr. Wills, as the only
State-Hereticks and Incendiaries, as though they were the only men that are
against Magistracy; but whoever shall consider of these forecited passages, may
conclude, that there was little reason why the Presbyterians should complain of
the Jesuits Principles, unless their own were better: for, if that be true
which Dr. White says is their special vow, which he mentions in page 573. of
his Reply to the Church of Rome, and page 577. and page 579. where he says,
That the vows of the Jesuits are to execute the Popes pleasure in killing the
King: and what safety can they have that rely upon such Servants? etc. Which
Vow he inserts in Latin in his Margent, out of the Bull of confirmation of the
Jesuits, by Pope Paul the third; which is thus much in English: We judge it
expedient for the great Devotion to the Sea Apostolic, and more full
abnegation of our own Wills and Pleasures, that the professed of this society,
besides the common bond of three vows, be further tied by special vow: so that
whatsoever the Roman Bishop for the time being shall command pertinent unto the
salvation of men's souls, and propagation of the Faith, they shall be bound to
execute the same presently, without tergiversation and excuse, whether they
shall be sent unto Turks, or unto Infidels, even unto those that are commonly
called the Indies, or unto Heretics or Schismatics, etc. Which Vow, though it
be bad enough, and not to be approved, yet it has not more of a bloody Nature
then is contained in the forecited passages out of Presbyterian Authors.

By this you may see, that Mr. Wills and you had so little reason to cry out
against the Anabaptists, for being bloody, and against Magistrates, that you
and those of your way, had need wash your own hands, before you can with
confidence justly cry down the Jesuits, since your Principles are as bad as
theirs in this particular.

And therefore Lysimachus Nicanor, a Jesuit, has writ a congratulatory
Epistle to the Covenanters in Scotland, printed in the year 1640. where, in
page 1 he says, He heartily does congratulate with them, and does rejoice at
their begun-return to their Mother the Church of Rome, in that they have
forsaken the erroneous Opinion of the Protestants, concerning the civil
Magistrate, and have happily (in that particular) joined with the Church of
Rome.

And in the same page he says, That they, viz, the Presbyterians, have so well
begun at the Head, the civil Magistrate, that they trust they will embrace the
other members of the Roman Doctrine.

By which the Reader may see that the Presbyters have sought to climb into
their Authority, by the Jesuits steps, though now they cry out against the
same things: which makes me remember an old saying, which is verified in the
Presbyters, though it has been applied to Princes.

Presbyters enthroned, when once their turns are ended,
Throw down those stairs by which themselves ascended.
Bishops did not ordain as Bishops, but as Ministers: in answer to my twentieth
Query.

But how do you prove they did not ordain as Bishops? This is a figment of your
own brain: for if they did it as Ministers, why then might not any Minister
have ordained, as well as they? but they never suffered any such thing among
them.

And for your saying, That they were lawful Ministers of Christ, and therefore
you do not distrust his promise of being with them.

What an Argument is this? may not any body by this Argument cry up themselves
for Ministers, (as too many now adays do) and say, That Christ will be with
them to the end of the Would?

Therefore before you go to prove that which I deny not, prove that which is
denied, that they are Christ's Ministers: but if they be your Brethren, the
Presbyterians have done very ill to throw them out of their Livings, and expose
their Wives and Children to penury and want, while they enjoy their Places and
Revenues. Did ever Christ's Ministers turn any out of their places, that they
judged Christ's Ministers? or did ever any of them come to take the profits of
another's living without his consent which was the incumbent, then they judged
the incumbent Christ's Minister? and yet these things have been done without
blushing. So that though you say, Christ has not divested them of their power,
sure some body has divested them of their profits.

taken from them in an Ecclesiastical way? which is the sum of this Question:
whereupon you query, What I mean by taking away Authority.

I answer, When they shall be divested thereof, by the Church, for scandalous
and enormous crimes.

You ask, If Episcopal Authority of ordaining as Ministers, is not founded upon
Gods word?

I answer, first, If Episcopal Authority to ordain as Ministers be absurd, then
it cannot be grounded upon the Word of God; and that it is so, appears: for is
it not absurd for you to say, That the Bishops Authority is of God to ordain
Ministers; and yet say, That they must not ordain as Bishops, but as Ministers?
for if Episcopal Authority be of God, then they may lawfully ordain as Bishops:
for all will confess, That a man may lawfully exercise any Authority that comes
from God.

Therefore, how ridiculous are you to confess, That Episcopal Authority is of
God; and yet say, they must not ordain as Bishops, but as Ministers?

And to the later part of your Counter-Query, about the purity of Ordination, I
have already answered, by showing you how shamefully you beg the Question, by
taking it for granted, that your Presbyterian-Ordination is a purer Ordination
then any other, when for the proof thereof, you have not alleged one Text nor
Argument, through your whole Book.

For the third particular in this Question, I shall answer that when I come to
speak to the twenty seventh Query.



In your counter-Query to this, you talk of Logic, and indeed you do but talk
of it: for had you observed the Rules of Logic, you would never have begged
Questions in stead of answering and proving them.

But how does it appear, that I say any thing that is illogical in the last
Question, if I do say, The Episcopal and Presbyterian Ordinations cannot be
both of Christ's appointment, since they contradict one another? But you think
to salve this sore by telling us, That they are not contradictious, since they
both agree in an Ordination by Ministers, and differ but in circumstances, etc.

To this I answer, That they so differ, that where any has been ordained by
mere Presbyters, it has (in most parts of the Christian World) been esteemed
as a rullity: and where Presbyterian Ordination has been allowed, it has been
but in case of necessity, as appears by the English Bishops Confession to the
Bishops of Scotland.

That it has been adjudged a nullity, viz. Ordination by Presbyters, I prove,
first, from the testimony of Hierom: What (says he) does a Bishop, that a
Priest does not, Epist. ad Evagrium, Hom. 11. in 1. ad Timot. initio.
EXCEPT ORDINATION? Chrysostom says the same: A Bishop (says he) exceeds a
Priest ONLY IN ORDINATION. Athanasius, speaking of Ischyras, who professed to be
a Priest, says, That he did but boast himself to be one: Apolog. 2. Epist.
Presbyt. ad flavi.
for (says he) he is in no sort to be approved of, seeing he was not ordained
by a Bishop, but by Coluthius, a Presbyter.

And the Council of Alexandria, speaking of the same Coluthius, says, That he
died in the SIMPLE DEGREE OF A PRESBYTER; and therefore all the impositions of
hands exercised by him were null; and that all those that were ordained by him
were but lay Persons; and under that name and title of lay-Persons, they were
admitted to the Holy Communion.

Again, Epiphanius reckons Ordination by Presbyters as an Arrian Heresy, Her.
75. in as much as Arrius held, That the Presbyters might ordain as well as
Bishops, etc.

And further he says, That the Episcopal Order is to beget Fathers to the
Church; whereas the Priestly (or Presbyterian) Order is to beget Children by
the Laver of Regeneration: and therefore (says he) they (meaning the
Presbyters) cannot ordain nor beget Fathers and Doctors to the Church, etc.

Augustine, Haeres. 53. blames the Arrians for that they had learned of one
Arrius, to confound the Order of Priest and Bishop.

Is it not plain then, that you endeavor to delude your Reader, by saying,
That there was no contradiction touching this matter, and that it was the error
of one man, meaning Dr. Tailor? when, indeed, your ignorance is very great, if
you say, He was alone in this matter. By this the Reader may see, That former
times did not esteem both Ordinations lawful, viz That that was done by
Bishops, and that that was done by Presbyters; but looked upon the one as a
mere nullity: so that whatever you say, there has been a manifest
contradiction; and that the difference was not circumstantial, as you vainly
tell your Reader, but essential: for not only the Fathers, but Councels,
judged Ordination by Presbyters a mere nullity, and that Episcopal Ordination
was essential to the being of the Ministers Office.

So that the thing you so much talk of, viz. That both these Ordinations are of
God, is a mere fiction. But more of this anon.

Brooks to be condemned, if he preach according to the Independent-Ordination?
You hereupon tell your old tale, viz That you cannot believe by what I have
urged, any Ordination to be according to Rule, but what is done by Ministers.

To which I answer, That this was no part of my business in the Questions
proposed, from first to last: for all my business was to show by the light of
those Queries, That it was not sinful to preach without Ordination, and that
Mr. Wills his Ordination was a mere nullity that he so much glories in, and
that it is not that which Christ approves of, and for your slanders, in saying,
That I appear for Independency as a cloak for Anabaptism, etc. Did you not
blush when you writ this horrid untruth? Have I not, your own confession,
appeared as publicly for that which you call Anabaptism? Do you not tell your
Reader, That I did publicly appear at the Disputation held at Clements,
without Temple Bar, which was against Infant Baptism? And have I not published
my Opinion in print touching this Controversy? and yet you are so impudent as
to tell your Reader, I appeared for Independency as a cloak, that my design
might be the more plausible. It Is no wonder that you conceal your Name, since
you can write at this rate.

England thirty years ago?

Your Query thereupon is nothing, but to enquire, Whether Presbyterian and
Episcopal-Ordination might not both be lawful? and bid me prove by the next,
That Bishops COULD NOT ordain then, and that Presbyters CANNOT ordain mow.

Oh shameless Disputant! I told you you could talk of Logic; but how little
you use, let the Reader judge. My main design in proposing my Questions, was to
put some one or other upon the proof of that which was so frequently asserted,
viz. That the Ordination by Bishops or by Presbyters, is of God; (meaning that
which is practiced by the National Ministers.) And you come forth, and bid me
prove, That the Bishops could not, and that the Presbyters cannot. If you can
dispute no better, you shall never commence Master of Arts.

Sir, is it not a sad thing, for you to tell your Reader in your Epistle to
him, That this Doctrine of Ordination that is now contended for, is a
foundation-Doctrine? And when you are demanded a proof of it, you shamefully
shuffle, and bid me prove in my next, That it is not, and that they had not
power to ordain; or if the Bishops and Presbyters did not ordain true
Ministers. Therefore take an Answer: I say, They did not; and charge you in
your next to reason like a man, and prove they did.

Wills did not tell his Hearers, which of those diverse kinds of Ordination it
is that God approves of? This was the sum of this Query.

To which you reply, and the sum of all you say, is, That if I have heard Mr.
Wills in all his Sermons upon this Subject, I might had understood, that he
was not rigid for Episcopacy, Presbytery, nor Independency; but for a
Moderation, etc. and that Ordination any of these ways was good, seeing the
difference was but in circumstance etc.

I have answered to this already over and over, that these by your own
confession, must all of them be proved to be Christ's Ministers, before their
Ordination must be valued; and also you must prove, That Christ ever did allow
of Ordinations so palpably contradictious, (as these are, which will further
appear in my following Answers) before there be any weight in what you or M.
Wills has said to this Question.

However, if Mr. Wills does well in being indifferent in this matter, how
evilly has the generality of our Presbyterians spent their time about such
trifling circumstances, while the more weighty matters have been neglected? for
how furiously have they opposed the Episcopal and Independent Government and
Governors, though they have been such, which you say are Christ's Ministers,
and that the differences are but circumstantial?

For the proof of this, I shall refer the Reader to Mr. Edwards his Gangraena,
wherein he as much condemns ordained Ministers in the Independent way, as any
other Sect whatever; and this was generally approved of by most of the
Presbyterian Race, as appears by the several Letters sent to encourage Mr.
Edwards, which he has printed in his Book, which (he says) he received from
godly Presbyterian-Ministers.

Nay, is not the noise of this hot difference fresh in the ears of all
intelligent Men? which you must needs say was to little purpose, if what you
say of all these sorts of Ordinations be true.

Wills his Ordination be from the Line of Succession? or whether it was from
any necessity? etc.

And you ask me, Whether I do not grant that a true succession makes true
Ministers? and whether there is not a case of necessity when the succession in
broke off? and whether such a necessity does not make true Ministers?

This is that you call unanswerable. This you challenge me to answer; and
therefore I shall soon dismount your confidence, by telling you, That by this
Argument I am a true Minister: for either I am one by succession or necessity;
if the Line of Succession was broke, then I am a Minister by necessity. Would
not this Argument justify all Sects that schismed from Rome, as well as you?
And did not all the Sects that departed from Rome into other novel and strange
Opinions, worse then those they left, reason thus, That they either had some
men which were in religious Orders, that separated with them, and so they
pretended that they had a successive Authority; or else they will tell you,
That they were the first Reformers; and therefore positive Laws must give place
to necessity, and therefore all that succeed from them are a true Ministry?

I challenge you to answer, Why this is not as good an Argument to prove any
company of men that shall depart from Rome to be a true Ministry, as well as
any that you plead for? though they should run from the errors of Rome, into
other errors that were as bad or worse.

But I therefore answer further, That though a man cannot be a true Minister
but by one of these ways, it does not therefore follow, (as I have already
showed in my Answer to Mr. Wills his Letter, at the beginning of this Book)
that Mr. Wills is a Minister either of these ways. For though I grant these
two to be the ways of admission into the Ministry, yet I do deny him to be
entered by either of them, though he succeed from those you call our first
Reformers: for I do deny, that they were true Ministers of Christ either way,
or that they had either a lawful Succession or necessity to authorize them. But
of this more anon.

Wills be a Minister by succession, whether he did not succeed from Rome?

You thereupon demand, Why there may not be a lawful succession from the
Apostles by Rome?

Your first Reason is, Because the corruptions of the first Receivers could not
null this Ordinance, etc.

To which I answer, What if that be granted? That the corruption of Receivers
could not null an Ordinance, this does not prove that corrupt Receivers of the
Ordinance of Baptism can administer Baptism, or that corrupt Receivers of the
Lord's Supper can administer it lawfully, after they have been separated from
for their corruptions.

But your second Reason says, That the corruption of the Dispensers, could not
make the succession cease.

And this you would prove by many similitudes: you say, The Law does not lose
its force, if it be pronounced by a wicked Judge, etc.

I answer, If this Judge be lawfully turned out of his place for wickedness,
then though the Law does not lose its force, yet this Judge has no power to
administer it: so I say of your Ordination, That if you had justly ejected the
Pope, he had after this no power to administer the Laws of Christ, no more then
a Judge that is thrown out has power to administer the Law of the Land. Thus
your simile makes against you.

And for your simile of Judas and a hypocrite, whence you would infer, That
their heart-corruption does not null God's Ordinances that are administered by
them.

I answer, That it is true, That so long as their sins are like your Name,
unknown, if they do administer Ordinances they may be valued; but what if their
sins are known, and that they shall be rejected as Heretics or as scandalous
Persons, have they then any power to administer sacred things?

This Answer will serve for all the rest of your similitudes.

But further, If the Church of Rome was Apostates and Heretics, and the Church
of England had ejected her, and separated from her, and judged the Pope to be
the great Antichrist, as indeed they did, then it follows from Scripture,
That it is a sin to receive Ordination from them: for the Scripture says,
Matthew. 18. If that any refuse to hear the Church, he should be esteemed as a
heathen and a publican.

Now then, if the Church of England did reject Rome for her sin and Idolatry,
it was then as lawful for me to go to any Fellow under a Hedge, and be ordained
by him; as it is to go to any ejected of excommunicated Persons for it: and if
the Church of Rome be not cut off from being a Church, then are you very
wicked, in that you have not communion with them while they are of the Body; if
they are not of the Body, then any of the Body has as much power to administer
Ordination as they.

And this is not my single Opinion, but it has been the Opinion of former
times: for Athanasius says, in Epist. de Conciliis, By what right can any be
Bishops, that do receive their Ordination from Heretics?

And further he says, That it is impossible that Ordinations made by Secundus,
being an Arrian, could have any force in the Church of God.

And further, If the Pope be rejected as that great Antichrist, it cannot be
imagined, that he whom all the Protestants judge to be Christ's greatest Enemy
should so far serve the great designs of Christ's Glory, as lawfully to ordain
and empower men to preach Christ. So that either you did not leave the Church
of Rome, and reject them as Heretics; or if you did, you ought not to be
beholding to them for your Ordination.

And further, the Protestant Calvinists in France, say, in the Confession of
their Faith, Confess. Art. 21. That their Calling is extraordinary; and do
confirm the same by their practice, in that they ordain anew, such Priests as
revolt from Rome: but if the corruption of the Dispensers did not make their
Ordination a nullity, then there was no reason for such a practice in a
reformed Church.

And Mr. Whitaker is of this mind: for says he, We would not have you think,
that we make such reckoning of your Orders, as to hold our Vocation unlawful
without them.

And Mr. Fulk, that famous Opposer of Rome, tells them, That they are deceived
highly if they think we esteem of their offices of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons-better then Laymen. See his Answer to a counterfeit Catholic, p. 50
And further, Mr. Fulk says, That with all our heart we (meaning the
Protestants) abhor and detest all your stinking greasy Antichristian Orders.
And yet other of you glory in your succession.

See the contradictions among your selves! who of you shall a man believe?

So that if I say, You cannot have a lawful Ordination from Rome, seeing they
were by you judged Heretics, and such as were deservedly excluded; I have the
Scripture of my side that says, You should esteem such as Heathens. I have
several eminent Lights that shined in the Church of old. I have some of the
reformed Churches, and therein many very famous both at home and abroad, which
are of my mind.

Your last Argument you bring to this Point is, That Christianity was professed,
and therefore you ask me, If I will say there was not a company of true
Believers all the time the Pope ruled here, etc.

Whence you infer, If they were true believers, then there was a Church; and if
a Church, then there must be a Ministry, because (you say) Christ promised,
Ephesians.4.11, 12, 13. That the Saints should have such a Ministry till they come
to be a perfect man, etc.

If this be a good Argument, why do you rail against the Anabaptists? For dare
you say, There is not true believers among them? if there be, then by your
Logic they are a Church; and if a Church, then they must have Christ's promise
fulfilled, and they then must have a true Ministry, till they come to be a
perfect man.

By this Rule, Mr. Brooks his people are a true Church, and must have a true
Ministry, or else you must say, The people that walk with him are all
Unbelievers.

Rome was not as good a Church when your Predecessors left her, as when they
received their Ordination from her, etc.

To this you answer, That she was as good when you left her, as she was when
Ordination was received from her. And further you say, You did not forsake her
as she was a Spouse of Christ, but as she was an HARLOT etc.

Sir, I see now you are puzzeled, indeed; for you grant she was as good when
you left her, as she was when your Predecessors were ordained by her.

And after you say, She was not forsaken as Christ's Spouse, but as a Whore or
Harlot.

So then it appears by your own grant, That she was none of Christ's Spouse or
Church at the time she did ordain your Predecessors: for you say, She was a
Harlot when you left her; and then you say, She was as honest as when your
Predecessors were ordained by her.

Is it not a shame then, that you should say, That you are Legitimate? when
afer you have taken pains to prove it, you face about, as though it were too
hard a Task for you, and in words at length call your Mother a Where: for what
do you less, when you call her a Harlot? in page 39. at the beginning of it. Is
not this madness to a great degree, that you should say, Rome was none of
Christ's Spouse, but a Harlot; and yet labor to prove, (if you could) That at
this time in the midst of her Whoredoms, she had power to ordain Ministers to
preach Christ? Pray tell me, why any man might not have taken upon him to
ordain, as well as Rome, if this be true that you say. Did ever our Lord Christ
give the power of Ordination of Ministers to any but his Spouse or Church,
whereof he is the Head? and whenever she shall turn Whore, and prostitute her
self to other Lovers, has she not lost this Power and Authority? is she not
then like unsavory Salt, fit for nothing? and yet by your Logic, she has
Authority from Christ to ordain Ministers to preach the Gospel.

This very saying of yours, viz. That your Mother, the Church of Rome, was a
Whore at the time your Predecessors were ordained by her, confutes all your
conceits of a lawful Succession.

England before Austin the Monk, were not brought into communion with the
Roman-Church? And this was the sum of that Question.

To which you make no answer; but in effect ask me the same thing over again,
viz. Whether Gildas does not report of a Ministry in England, before Austin
the Monk? etc. and Whether there might not remain thousands that had not bowed
their knee to Baal, and we not know of it?

To this I answer, That then your Ministry could not be derived from the
British Succession, if you did not know whether they did bow their knee or no.
But if what you said before was true, That the Church of Rome had a power to
ordain in the midst of their pollutions, then it is no great matter whether
they did bow to Baal or no, as to the matter in question, seeing that if they
had, by your Logic, it could not have hindered your lawful Succession, from
them.

England a Succession of a true Church, separated from Rome, all the time the
Papal Power was exercised here? and how it did appear, That the Succession of
the Ministry of England, was from this reformed, rather then the Papal Line?

You answer as before, That there might be a Succession, though we know not of
it, etc.

This being the same with the former, let the same Answer suffice; only let me
tell you, That it is very improbable, that a Church should remain in England in
opposition to Rome, all the time the Papal Power was here, Witness those that
were slain at Bangor.
since Austin the Monk by force and arms was restless in subjecting the
Britains in all parts to the Sea of Rome.

Rome as a Cage of every unclean thing, if she was entrusted with the
Administration of Christ's Ordinances, as a Church, etc. This was the substance
of the Question.

Upon which you query, Whether she may not be a Cage of every unclean thing,
and yet have Gods sacred Ordinances among them?

This is the sum of your Question, unto which you would give light by several
similitudes: one is, That if a Thief have a Bible in his pocket, he is
notwithstanding a Thief, Hence you would infer, That Rome may be possessed with
Gods Ordinances, though they are Thieves.

But have you forgot your self? did not you say, That the receiver was as bad
as the thief? page 21. Now then, if this be true, do you not very craftily call
the Clergy Thieves? for they all (you say) did receive their Ordination from
them.

You further say, That the censers Corah burned incense in, were the Lords, etc.

Hence you would innfer, That Ordination is Gods Ordinance, though it be in the
hands of unholy persons, etc.

To which I answer, That the Ordinances are God's, as the Censers were; but as
Korah did wickedly in using them, so did the Company that partook with him; and
it was not their crying out, That the censers were holy, that would excuse
them: so it is not your saying, That Ordination of Ministers is a holy
Ordinance, that will excuse Apostates in administering of it, or you in
receiving such Administration.

Remember therefore this example of Korah, and do not you partake of Korah's
sin; for though the Censers were holy, he had no right to use them: see
therefore how this similitude makes against you, and fully shows your vanity,
that all you glory in, is but what you have received from a Korah, a Thief, a
Harlot, which had no more right to administer it, then a Thief has to
distribute stolen Goods.

Rome being the Cage of every unclean thing, could administer so sacred an
Ordinance, as ordaining Gospel Ministers? etc.

You say nothing in your Counter-Query, but what has been said before; only
you urge a fresh similitude that is nothing to your purpose, viz. That if my
Accounts that be in my Book be just and right, they ought not to be nulled,
because my boy has naughtily written them, etc.

Hence you would infer, That Ordination is Gods Ordinance, though it has been
defaced by the Church of Romes uncleanness, etc.

Which is not any part of my Question: for though my Accounts are not to be
disowned because my boy has blotted them, yet my boy has not power to dispose
of them acording to his invention: neither is it lawful for you, if I shall
declare him to be a Thief, to receive any of my money from him, or take any
discharge or acquittance for any debt that you owe me, at his hand. In like
manner is it sinful to receive Ordination from Rome: if they have turned
Thieves and Robbers, as you say they are, then the Receiver is as bad as the
Thief. So that I shall need no other weapon to fight with you then your own.
But to proceed, I come now,

Rome had power as a Church, and you did separate because of her corruptions,
why then was Mr. Brooks to be blamed in separating from the corruption of the
Church of England? etc.

In your many-headed Counter-Query, you say nothing that concerns me to answer;
but this, viz, That because I say, If Rome was a true Church, etc. Hence you
glory, and say, I yield up my weapons, by saying, IF Rome was a true Church.

You demand then, To what end was all my other Questions? etc.

I answer, That you had need go to School to learn to distinguish between an
Hypothetical and a Categorical Proposition: for is it not one thing to say, The
Church of Rome IS a true Church; and another thing to say, IF she be a true
Church? Might you not as well have told your Reader, That David said, He COULD
take the Wings of the Morning, and fly, because he said, IF I take the wings
of the morning, etc.

This is the ground of your triumph; because I say, If Rome was a true Church;
you conclude I said, She was a ture Church. O brave Logician! I see now there
was a reason why you concealed your Name.

And for those other questions that you ask me concerning Mr. Brooks his
separation, in p. 41, 42. I shall refer you to him, who very likely can give
you a better Answer then you have given to my Queries.



In your Reply, you say little that concerns me to answer; only, That the
Church has debarred Papists from communion.

And thereupon you demand, Whether it be not reason then, that they should pay
their tithes? etc.

To this I answer, That there is little reason why any body should pay; but
there is less reason why one that is put out of the Fold should pay, then any:
nay, there is no color of reason, why any that are cast out of the Church
should be forced to maintain the Minister. Should not you have done well to
have proved this, before you went further? viz. That Christ would have men pay
tithes to a Minister when they are thrust out of their stock, and are put out
of communion?

The rest of this Question which you ask, relates to Mr. Brooks his practice,
of which I have not so particular an information, as an answer to it requires;
and therefore I shall refer you to him for an Answer.

Brooks excludes scandalous persons, viz. because they do not reform? etc.

Your Answer hereunto, (as far as it does concern me) is, That Mr. Brooks keeps
people out of his Church, because they do not own his Church, and disown their
own.

To this I answer, That this is the reason why you reject Papists: for many of
them are such, whose lives are without reproof; so that you keep them out,
because they will not own your Church, and disown their own.

Wills his Letter, in the beginning of this Book, and also in my Reply to the
twenty sixth Counter-Query.

Rome was thrown off upon a politic account, what ground the Ministers of the
Nation have to plead a necessity to preach without Ordination.

The substance of your Counter-Query to this, as it relates to your Succession,
is answered already in the thirty sixth Query: and for that part of your
question that relates to necessity, I answer,

First, That there was no need of our first Reformers pleading necessity; for
they were as idolatrous when they first rent from Rome, as they were when they
were in communion with her.

Secondly, If they had separated from the Church of Rome, because of her
uncleanness, then there was no need for them to plead necessity for their
preaching without Ordination, since they might have been ordained by the
reformed Churches in other Countries, which had forsaken Rome before them.

And thirdly, if Necessity may be a Warrant to them at that time, it was as
good a Warrant to other Sects that revolted from Rome, as well as it was for
those you call our first Reformers. So that then, if any Arrians or Socinians,
etc. should have Rent from Rome, and gathered into a Congregation, they might
have pleaded that they had a lawful Ministry, either by Succession, in that
some of them had been Priests before they revolted; or else by virtue of a
Necessity, since a positive Law gives place to necessity. Would not you answer
these men, that they are Ministers by neither of these ways? and so do I answer
you, as I have already done once and again.

And therefore, when Mr. Wills has proved himself a lawful Minister, then I
shall say, He came in by one of these ways: but till then, let me tell him, and
you too, That any Sect that will take it for granted, that they have Ministers
among them, may as well justify their Ministers Authority, as Mr. Wills can
do his, by taking it for granted he is a Minister of Christ, which he is never
able to prove.

then every one might not preach that were able, although it might not have
been lawful before? etc.

This was the sum of this Question.

To which you say nothing but what has been already answered over and over;
only you ask me, Whether a case of necessity makes any Ministers but those
that are fittest, and undertake the charge.

To which I answer, That if the Men that preach shall be their own Judges, who
will not think that he is fit and able?

And was it not so with those you call our first Reformers? were they not
Judges of their own abilities, and so made themselves Ministers of their own
heads? and by the same Rule, others may depart from them, as they departed from
Rome; and take upon them to be Heads or Guides of a Congregation of people;
especially, if they can object considerable errors both in their Lives and
Doctrines.

etc.

This is the substance of the question.

To which you say nothing, but what has been said and answered; only you
demand, Whether there may not be a lawful succession from those that first took
upon them this Office by Necessity? and whether any in an ordinary lawful way
can be in office, but those that have it from that succession? etc.

To this I answer, That if what you here suppose be true, then why did not our
first Reformers go to the Ministers of other reformed Churches for Ordination,
rather then take it from Mr. Scory, and that Faction? since there was diverse
reformed Churches where they might have been ordained without receiving it from
Rome, or without putting themselves into the Office upon a pretended necessity.

So that if what you say be true, That there may be a lawful succession from
those, who first became Officers by virtue of a necessity, and that it is
sinful to pretend to necessity afterward; then our first Reformers cannot
plead Not Guilty, since (as I have said) there was no necessity for them to own
an Ordination from Rome, because they might have have had it in more purity
from those you call the reformed Churches, which had separated from the Church
of Rome before England.

And secondly, There was no necessity for them to become Officers whithout
Ordination, no more then there is now, because there were many reformed
Churches in being, to which they might have applied themselves for Ordination,
as in France and Germany, etc.

Lastly, if there was no true Church in the world that had power to ordain our
new Bishops; but they must make use of that which they received from Rome, and
that this be a lawful Ordination, as you confess; then you must needs say, That
the Churches of France, Germany, Geneva, Scotland, etc. were no true Churches,
and had no true and lawful succession; or if they had been true reformed
Churches, either by succession or necessity, why then did not our first
Reformers go to some of these to be ordained? and since they did not, does it
not manifestly appear, that they were not true Ministers by succession, because
they received Ordination from Rome, whom you call a Harlot, when they might
have had it from the Ministers of the reformed Churches then in being? and
because there was reformed Churches in being, where they might have been
ordained, they had no reason to plead to any necessity then of preaching
without Ordination, any more then Mr. Brooks and others have, whom Mr. Wills
and you condemn.

Wills had to baptize the children of wicked parents? etc. And to this you say
nothing but what I have answered already; only you beg a question, viz. That
children have a right to be members of a visible Church. Which when you have
proved it, viz. That infants, while they are in infancy, have an immediate
right to be members of a Church in the new Testament, I shall confess they may
be baptized; but till then, I shall be against the baptizing any infant, for
all you think I would conceal my Opinion in this matter.

in the sense M. Wills does assert the baptizing of the children of wicked
parents, it is lawful. To which I answer, That I have replied to Mr. Wills his
sense about the baptizing the children of wicked parents, in my Answer to his
Letter, at the beginning of this Book. All that you say to this question,
besides what I have answered, does appertain to some practices of Mr. Brooks,
which I shall not meddle with, because I am not acquainted with them, only I
take notice, that in p. 48. of your Book, before you end this question, you
say, That if the Ministry of England be Antichristian, then it will follow,
that those that they have baptized are unlawfully baptized, etc. How shamefully
do you contradict your self? did you not say before, That the corruptions of
the dispensers of Ordinances could not make the Ordinances a nullity, though
the Administrator was Antichristian? And do you not now in effect say, That
baptism is a nullity, if the Administrator be Antichristian? for you say, If
the National Ministry be Antichristian, ( as Mr. Brooks says) it will follow,
that it is unlawful. Do you not now justify all that I have said, viz. If the
first Reformers were ordained by Antichristian Ministers, that then it
follows, that their Ordination is a nullity; and that till they are ordained
again, they all of them preach without Ordination from Christ? Thus the Reader
may see, that rather then you would want an arrow to shoot at M. Brooks, you
would borrow one out of my quiver; and you do as good as confess as much, when
you conclude, and say, That your heart trembles, and you heartily wish, that
you could not plead so strongly, to sadden honest hearts, to please me, and
such as I am. It seems then, your conscience told you, That you had given away
your cause to the grief of your self and others, because you could not help it;
and therefore you wish heartily, that you COULD not plead so much, to please
such as I am. So that it seems, you are now forced to yield to your own grief
and others of your friends, which you call honest hearts, etc. it seems then,
the truth is too strong for you. But to proceed.

You come now to make Counter-queries, upon my 42, 43, 44, and 45 Queries that
are grounded upon Mr. Wills his decrying the Fifth-Monarchy-Men, as the smoke
of the bottomless pit: to this I have already given answer. And to the
Counter-queries you propound upon my 46 question, touching Mr. Wills his
Discourse with me in private, I have already answered in my Reply to M. Wills
his Letter.

And for your Counter-query that you make upon my 47 question about Mr. Wills
his persuading a Gentleman to apprehend me for a Jesuit, though you say, I am
too blame to receive an information from one man, etc. Sure you are more too
blame to believe the Accused's bare negation: but for the truth of what I
object against M. Wills, viz. That he did desire a Gentleman to apprehend me
for a Jesuit; I shall refer the Reader to the Gentleman aforenamed, who is
ready to make oath for his further satisfaction.

And for your saying, That I did live a concealed life about London for many
years; and therefore there might be some ground for people to suspect me.
Truly, I think there is more reason why I should suspect you, who are so
concealed, as that you refuse to let your Name or place of abode be known; I am
sure, this I never did upon any occasion in all my life.

I come now to take notice of your Postscript, wherein you tell your Reader of
some things you have to advertise him.

The first (you say) is, That it is a great sign of truth, when men of corrupt
minds are enraged against it. Truly, then it is a sign that we are in the
truth; for men of corrupt minds are against us, witness the rude behavior of
those that threatened to throw me over the Gallery for asking M. Wills a
question; and not only those, but such as make a gain of godliness, leaping
from one benefice to another, where they can get the best fleece, and most
profit; and that without they can have their own demands of their Parish, they
will leave them, and go to another. I say, these are the men that cry down that
which we profess, as the smoke of the bottomless pit, and would have men
apprehended as Jesuits, or any how, so that they can be revenged upon them for
not being of their Opinion: I say then, That if this may be called a good
Argument, the Truth is of our side: but this is no infallible way of reasoning.
In the second place, you tell your Reader, That those that have designs against
the truth, have usually some plausible pretense to carry them on, etc. To this
I answer, That you are none of those that have plausible designs against the
truth; though you have a great many, you have scarce one that is plausible: for
if you had, you would never have discovered to the world so much contradiction
and folly, as you have done in your Book; neither would you have declared, That
your Mother, the Church of Rome, was a Harlot at the time that your
Predecessors received Ordination from her; neither would you have compared her
to Korah, and to a Thief, as you have done; and yet justify her ordaining
Ministers to preach the Gospel. Would you have had your designs plausible, you
should never have discovered the Pedigree of your Clergy, by calling their
Progenitors Thieves and Harlots: sure this will not be plausible to any that
shall hear it, when they come to know, that your glorious succession you so
much boast of, came from such infamous Predecessors. The third thing you inform
your Reader in, is, That those that design the propagating of errors, will for
the most part oppose, but seldom assert, etc. To this I reply, That this is the
reason you answered by counter-queries; and that rather then you would assert
any thing positively, you put your respondent to prove negations; when the
contrary was found in me: for I offered to assert and prove against M. Wills,
and he refused it. The last thing you inform your Reader, is, That this Book is
your first, etc. This you use as an argument why he should excuse your
mistakes, etc. and truly, Sir, you had need of a pardon: and if you did not
hope for it, you might fear to be corrected by a more severe hand then mine,
for those many impertinencies, slanders and contradictions that your Book is
fraught withal; which I pray God help you to consider of, that you may do
nothing against the truth, but for it; which is the desire of,

Sir, your Friend as far as you are the truth's, JER. IVES.

AN APPENDIX.
Reader,
I Have for thy further satisfaction published some Observations that I have
collected, touching the Ordination of the National Ministry, since their
revolt from Rome in the time of Hen. 8.

And first, it is observable, That the Church of England in the time of Hen. 8.
did not separate from Rome for conscience, but for base ends, and for filthy
lucre sake, as appears by their retaining all the superstitious customs of the
Roman Church, and their persecuting to death those that did out of a good
conscience oppose them. The truth hereof is plentifully manifested in the
Histories of that time.

Secondly, in the beginning of Edw. 6. his Reign, it is observable, that the
whole frame of Religion was altered, and such a Reformation begun, as did agree
with the wills of a Committee of twelve Men; and what form of worship should be
agreed upon by any seven of these, was to be observed by the whole Nation. This
was such great presumption, that the like cannot be paralleled in any
Ecclesiastical story; and yet now the Anabaptists are cried down, as Men full
of presumption, and such as swerve from the steps of Tradition.

Thirdly, it is observable, That in the time of Queen Mary, the Roman Religion
was by her restored, and the Land was overspread with Popery; and Popish
Bishops and Priests were set up in all parts of this Realm, and their Religion
confirmed by Act of Parliament: and Cardinal Pool, the Pope's Legite, absolved
the Kingdom from the Excommunication, which the Pope had pronounced against the
Land.

Fourthly, it is observable, That when Queen Elizabeth began to Reign, the
whole Nation being overspread with Popery; insomuch, that all Bishops that
would not take the Oath of Supremacy, were turned out of their Bishoprics; so
that by this means, there was a want of Bishops to supply the places of those
which the Queen had ejected for Popery: so that from that time to this, our
Clergy have been at a loss, touching their Ordination, as appears,

First, because they sometimes plead an Ordination by succession; and
sometimes, they leave succession, and plead to necessity, and an extraordinary
Call.

Now, if they plead they have their Ordination by succession from Rome, then
they must justify Rome to be a true Church of Christ; and so are guilty of
Schism, in renting, since they say, She was as good when they left her, as she
was when they were ordained by her. Again, if that Rome was not a Church of
Christ when they were ordained by her, then they are at a loss on the other
hand, because that they cannot prove a power of ordaining Ministers, given to
any out of the Church So that if their Ordination from Rome by succession be
valued, Rome must be justified to be a true Church.

Again, if they shall plead to necessity and an extraordinary Call, here they
are at a loss again; because, first there were many reformed Churches in the
World, from whom they might have been ordained, without receiving Orders from
Rome: and also, they had no reason to plead necessity of Preaching without
Ordination, since they might have had it from those Churches that were reformed
before them. Lastly, they fear to plead this Argument of necessity, lest they
should justify their Adversaries the Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, which
have more reason to plead necessity then themselves. This appears by M. Wills
his refusal to resolve me, when I was at his House, Whether he was a Minister
by a lawful succession, or necessity, because he knew not whether I was a
Jesuit or an Anabaptist: for it is usual for them to plead their Ordination by
succession, when they would oppose the Anabaptists, and to take up the
Anabaptists Argument of necessity when they oppose the Papists: and therefore
Dr. Fulk and Whittingam, and diverse others when they have had to do with
Papists, have inveighed against Ordination from them, as a stinking filthy
thing, as I have already observed. So that the great loss they are at among
themselves, touching the Derivation of their Authority, is one Reason why it
may be questioned, Whether they have any or no?

The second Reason is their unwillingness to answer those Objections, that
their Adversaries the Papists, objected against their Ordination; which is a
shrewd sign, they feared it would not abide the trial.

As, 1. they objected, That the English Reformers in Queen Elizabeth 's time,
went to a Popish Irish Bishop that was then Prisoner in the Tower, and promised
him his liberty and a sum of money, if he would ordain them Bishops; but he
refused.

2. It is objected by their Adversaries the Papists, That they sought to be
ordained by the Bishop of Landaff but he refused it.

3. It is further objected, That Parker, and others of the Queens new Bishops,
were ordained by one Scory a Priest, at a meeting which they had for this
purpose, at the Nags-head-Tavern in Cheap Side.

To these Objections no Answer was given till Bishop Masons time, which was
nigh fifty years after when most of the men were dead that were the chief
Witnesses to these things, though the Answer at that time much concerned them,
these Objections being then the common talk of their Adversaries.

A third Reason, why they are to be questioned, appears in the Case of the
new-made Bishop of Winchester, who indicted Bishop Bonner; to which Bonner
pleaded, That Winchester was no Bishop according to any Law; and the Judges in
Queen Elizabeth's time did resolve, That Bonner's Plea should be received: See
the Abridgement of Diers Reports, 7 Eliz. 234. And that they were at this time
no Bishops, neither by Statute Law or Canon Law, appears by the great industry
and care that the new Bishops took to get themselves confirmed by Act of
Parliament; the words of the Act are these, All Acts and things heretofore made
and done, about the consecration of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, etc. by
virtue of the Queens Letters Patents, since the beginning of her Reign, be and
shall be, by Authority of this Parliament, declared and judged good and
perfect, etc. And a little after in the same Act it follows, That all
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, etc. be declared in very deed, by the Authority
aforesaid, and enacted to be Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, etc. and rightly
made, ordered and consecrated: any Statute Law, Canon Law, or other thing to
the contrary notwithstanding, 8 Eliz. 1. So that you may see that the Clergy of
England were no lawful ordained Ministers, neither by Statute nor Canon Law,
till the 8 of Eliz. in the Opinion of the Judges in the Case of Bonner and Horn
before mentioned: which I desire may be considered by all judicious Christians;
and then I question not but they will see, that the Clergy of England have
little reason to glory in their Apostolical succession, and to cry down others
that stand upon a more religious foot of account then themselves.

POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
WHereas Mr. Wills in the forementioned-Letter, tells a story of a man that
was in company with me at his house, as though he should say, He had rather
hear the Devil then an ordained Minister; Give me leave to tell thee, That this
scandal carries enough in the mouth of it, to discover the untruth thereof to
all sober and intelligent men: for I think no man in his wits, but had rather
hear the worst of men then the Devil himself. And if the Gentleman be points
at, be Mr. Vancourt, as I know not who else he should mean, I must tell thee,
That his daily hearing such as are ordained in the sense that Mr. Wills calls
Ordination, is to all that know him, a sufficient justification. And though Mr.
Wills would have put such a sense upon some words that sell from this
Gentleman; yet Mr. Wills cannot but remember, that the Gentleman was offended
at him, for that he misrepresented him to the company then present; and
thereupon Mr. Wills was desired not to misconstrue these words: and he
promised that he would not, though since he has done it, contrary to the
Gentleman's then-declared meaning, and his own promise.

Vale.
Thou art desired to take notice of these two errors viz. in the Epist read
organical for original. page 20. lin. 20. for Mat road Mal.

There is an excellent piece lately published, entitled, Gospel Worship no
work for infants; clearly proving, the folly, vanity and deceit of infants
Baptism: and that the true Worshippers of God are believing men and women,
converted by the preaching of the word, not infants. By H. Haggar.

Sound Doctrine, or the Doctrine of the Gospel about the extent of Christ's
death: with a brief compendium of Doctrine of the holy Scriptures; clearing up
the riches of God's love to all mankind, and his desires to save them that yet
wilfully perish. By William Pedelsden.

Both to be sold by Dan. White at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard.

FINIS.

