THE INDEPENDENT CATECHISM

PSALM. 11. Verse 105. Thy word is a Lamp unto my feet and a light unto my
Paths.

ROMANS 8. Verse 13.14: For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, but if
ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

For as many as are led by the Spirit of God they are the Sons of God.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Burton 1647:

THE INDEPENDENT CATECHISM.
WHat is God?

A. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and
in truth.

Q. Is the spirit of God limited?

A. No, for the Appostle says his spirit. shall descend upon all flesh.

Q. Where was the spirit of God first seen?

A. To move on the face of the waters.

It seems that the Church of God had a small beginning?

A. Yea, when there was but eight persons living and not all of them Righteous.

Q. When began the Gospel to be so fully preached?

A. It began first to be preached by John Baptist, and afterward by our
gracious Redeemer Christ Jesus, and then by his Disciples sent out by him, but
more abundantly by the Apostles after the death, resurrection and asscention of
Christ. Mat. 28.

Q. What became of Christ after the Jews had put him to death?

A. He was buried. John 19.

Q By whom was he buried?

A. By Joseph of Aramathea. Who went to Pilate and begged the Body of Jesus,
and said it in a new Sepulcher which he had hewne out for himself, John 19.3^.

Q Did he continue long in the Grave?

A. He rose again the third day. Mat 28.6. Corinthians 15.4. Matthew 29.21.

Q Wherefore did Christ rise again?

A. To show us that he has overcome all the powerrs of the Devil, Hell,
Death, and the Grave, for our Justification and Salvation. Romans 5.25.

Q To whom did our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus first show himself after his
Glorious tesurrection?

A. First to Mary Magdalen, and to the other Mary. Math 16.9. Secondly, to his
two Disciples as they went from Jerusalem to Emaus. Mark 16.12 Luk 24.13.
Thirdly to the eleven Apostles, as they sat^ together. John 20.19. Fifthly and
lastly, To more then five hundred Brethren at once, and also at sundry times he
showed himself unto them alive after his passion by many infallible proofs
and testimonies. Acts 1.


Q How long did he remain with them after his glorious resurrection?

A. He was seen of them after his Resurrection by the space of forty days.
Acts 3.

Q What did he with them all that time?

A. He spoke unto them of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts 3.

Q What special promise did he make unto them before his departure?

A. Christ answered and said, that they should be baptized with the Holy
Ghost. Acts 1.5.

Q What became of him after he had spoken unto them of these things?

A. He was taken up into Heaven out of their sight, and a Cloud received him.
Acts 9.

Q What appeared unto them as they looked after him?

A. He was taken up into Heaven out of their sight, and a Cloud received him.
Acts 9.

Q What appeared unto them as they looked after him?

A. Two men appeared in white apparel, telling them that the same Jesus which
was taken up from them should so come, in like manner as they had seen him go
into Heaven. Acts 1.11.

Q What became of the Disciples after his Asscention into Heaven?

A. They returned to Jerusalem from the Mount called Olivet. Acts 1.12.

Q What did they when they came to Jerusalem?

A. They continued together with one accord in supplication and prayer, and did
choose another Apostle. Acts 1.14.

Q How did they choose him?

A. They appointed Joseph called Barnabas, who was surnamed Instus and
Matthias, and when they had prayed, they cast Lots, and the Lot fell upon
Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles. acts 1.23.24.25.26.

Q When did Christ perform that promise which he made unto them, namely that
they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost?

A. At the feast of Penticost which was in few days after his ascension. acts.
2.

Q In what manner was it performed?

A. They all being met together in one place, there came a sound from Heaven
and filled all the house, and there appeared unto them Cloven tongues, like as
of fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues as the spirit gave them utterance.
acts 2.12.3.4.

Q What happened thereupon?

A. Many were amazed and wondered at that great work, and others mocking said
they were full of new Wine. acts 12.13.

Q How did the Apostles clear themselves of that false accusation?

A. Peter stood up with the eleven, prooving that they could not be drunk,
because it was the 3d. hour of the day, and also that this was but the
fulfiilling a promise which the Lord had made by the mouth of the Prophet
Ioell. acts 2.16. Joel 2.25.

Q What did the Apostles after they had thus cleared themselves from that false
accusation?

A. Peter preached unto them the death, and resurrection of Christ Jesus,
telling them that they had taken him, and by wicked hands had Crucified and
stain him. acts 2.23.

Q What followed thereupon?

A. They were pricked in their hearts, and cried out to Peter and the rest of
the Apostles, Men and Brethren what shall we do? acts 2.^7.

Q What Counsel did they give them?

A. They exhorted them to repent and be baptized in the man of Jesus Christ for
the remission of sins.

Q What follows upon this exhortation?

A. They that gladly received the word were Baptized, and the same day there
were ad^ed to them above three thousand souls, and ^hey continued in the
Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of Bread and Prayers. acts
2.41.42:

Q What followed upon the great work wrought upon those men?

A. Fear came upon every soul, and they that believed sold their
possessions, parted their Goods to all men, as every man had need. acts 2:44:45:

Q Were any great works done by the Apostles?

A. Yea many wonders, signs, and miracles were done by them: acts 5.12.

Q What was the principal end of those miracles?

A. God did thereby witness to their Doctrine that it was his which they did
preach, by giving them power to work such miracles: Hebrews 2:4:

Q Were the people moved by those miracles to receive their Doctrine?

A. Yea very many were moved therewith, and wondering at their Miracles believed
their Doctrine even as many as were ordained to eternal life.

Q Were none moved by their preaching to believe their Doctrine, but such as
were ordained to eternal life?

A: Yes certainly, such was the power of their ministry that many others
believed the truth of their Doctrine and were baptized, as Simon Magus, and
doubtless many others which never received the spiritual benefit of the
Gospel which they preached, acts 8:13: Math. 13.

Q Do not many of them go on very far in the profession of their faith, and in
preaching the Gospel?

A. Yea doubtless, many are greatly enlightened by it and retain it with Joy,
and go on Ioying and rejoicing in it, and do taste of the heavenly Guirt, and of
the powers of the World to come, and are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and
sanctified by the blood of the Covenant. Math: 13.20 21: Hebrews 5:6.4.6. Heb:
10.29.

Q Lastly I pray thee tell me what is faith?

A. I must be hold to answer in the Apostls words, that without faith it is
unpossible to please God, and that the grounds of faith is a Confidence of
things not seen, no not for flesh and blood, Dust and Ashes to comprehend, only
what Abraham, and Abell, and Enoch, and Jacob, and Moses, and others did
believe only by faith. Hebrews 11:

Q What is the utmost extent of your faith?

I believe that neither height nor depth, nor principalities nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor life, nor death is able to separate me
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus.

Q What great things has the Scriptures foretold us, that are yet
un-fullfilled, the performance whereof we are to expect in these latter days?

A. The destruction of Antechrist, that man of sin, the restoring of the truth
from those errors abroad in the world, the coming down of the spirit upon
Christians, and the coming of the Lord unto Judgment. 2 These. 28. Revel. 11.11.

Q Is the time of the destruction of Antichrist laid down in the Scriptures?

A. Yes certainly.

Q But is it possible to find out the time of his destruction?

A. Yes assuredly, for the Lord has caused it to be written for that end, that
the Church of God might know it, and might reap the greater comfort thereby, in
not only knowing that he shall be destroyed, but also in knowing the year of
his destruction, they may have their mind settled of that promise concerning
his destruction.

Q. But are not times and seasons only known unto the Lord?

A Times and seasons are known also to the Church, when it pleases God to
reveal them for the comfort of his people as we may see, that the time of
deliverance of Israel out of the Captivity in Babylon was revealed and made
known to Daniel, which he found out by the books that were written.

Q.In what place of the Scripture is the time of Antichrists destruction laid
down?

A In the book of Revelation, and the eleventh Chapter, where he is limited to
reign forty two Months, which is month of years, which amounts to 1260.
years, the end of which time shall be in the year 1666. ^s appears in the
last verse of the 13. Chapter, where the very period, and final determination
of Antichrist is laid down, in which year the ddstruction denounced against
him shall fall on him.

Q Shall there not be a restoration of the truth till the destruction of
Antichrist?

A The truth has begun to appear already, and still shall more and more, and
the full restoration thereof shall not be, till all the darkness of Antichrist
be removed, and his destruction accomplished, Revel. 11:11:

Q Is not the truth fully known, published, preached, and professed now at this
time, in those Kingdoms where Antichrists power is abolished?

A No certainly, much darkness still remains even amongst them, and great
confusion, which shall at that time be more fully discovered, and the truth
made known, and Errors and Heresies abolisht by such whom the Lord shall raise
up, in and about that time, and for that end.

Q Are we not to expect the truth to be more fully discovered, then now it is,
before the destruction of Antichrist?

A. Yes assuredly, for it is the light of the truth maintained by the saints,
which shall in a special manner abolish Antichrists darkness, and also shall
be the greatest means of his destruction, for the people of God shall by the
light of the truth more fully discover his abominations, and cause the Princes
of the earth to see how grossly they have been deluded and abused by him, and so
they shall with one consent, set themselves against this great enemy of Christ
to root him out, and to execute the Judgment that the Lord has denounced
sgainst him. Revel: 19:11:12:13:15: Revel: 17:16:

Q. Shall the Church of God enjoy any great prosperity after the destruction of
Antichrist?

A. Yea truly, for then they shall be treed from their great and violent
oppressions, and have free liberty to Profess and practice the holy will of
God, and enjoy the Communion and Fellowship one of another: Their inward graces
shall be great and excellent, their love shall abound one toward another,
continually rejoicing in the hope of that Crown which is laid up for them in
Heaven: Es^^as 4:11:46: Chap. 12:34: 2. Tim: 4:8: Revelations 19:1:2:3:4:5:6:7.

FINIS.

