Alimony Arraigned, OR THE REMONSTRANCE AND HUMBLE APPEAL OF THOMAS IVY Esquire
From the High Court of CHANCERY, To His HIGHNESS the LORD PROTECTOR of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. WHEREIN Are set forth the
unheard of Practices and Villainies of Lewd and Defamed Women, in Order to
separate Man and Wife.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1654.

The humble Appeal and Remonstrance of Thomas Ivy, Esquire. To His Highness the
Lord Protector, etc.
HAd it not pleased the Lord to bear up my fainting spirit, with more than an
ordinary Confidence that the Deliverance of his People was nigh at hand, and
that he would put a stop to the Violent Passions of Oppressing Men, I had
undoubtedly sunck under those abominable Scandals and Aspersions, which have
been cast, like dirt about the streets, upon me, by my Wife and her Abettors.

But certainly the Day of our Deliverance is already dawned; And we are in some
measure assured, that Justice and Righteousness is already broke sorth, and
that the Abominations of the Wicked shall be no more clothed with Authority;
but whatsoever is a Lie shall be made manisest, and confounded.

As our Eyes are therefore on the Lord, as the supreme Fountain of all
Goodness, so we trust that the Declaration of his Will shall be made out by
Your Highness, being chosen by Himself in an extraordinary manner, and by a
wonderful series of Providence, to this very end, to execute Righteousness
and Judgment for his People that are oppressed amongst us: and that your
Highness will put on bowels of Compassion for the Afflictions of Men in Misery,
who pour out their Complaints and Grievances before you.

With this Confidence I appeal from the Chancery unto your Highness (being
unable to endure any longer, either the Expenses or Delays of that Court; or
indeed the Justice, which is there distributed) For besides the hazarding of
that which is better than a precious Ointment, much of my Estate has been
consumed, and great Debts contracted, by reason of my attendance upon these
unnatural Differences, (which have been fomented between my self and my seduced
Wife) much of it torn away by Violence under a Pretense of Alimony for her, to
whom I never denied or refused any thing whatsoever.

And that which remains is daily so molested with Creditors, that I now may
most truly take upon me the Expression of Job, I once had Riches, but now have
none: And unless it will please your Highness to afford a speedy Redress, I
shall hardly enjoy long my Liberty also.

I will not say any thing of those sad and dismal Thoughts which have been
conninually in my Mind, those hideous Temptations, which have been hourly
grating and gnawing my very soul.

During this sad Condition, it is the Voice of the Lord only can speak Peace unto
my Spirit, (whose Name be blessed for those sweet and refreshing Experiences,
with which he has supported me in this fiery trial) but I shall open unto your
Highness, as unto a good Samaritan, the wounds of my Body and Fortune; (and
briefly present a Narrative of the whole Matter concerning my self, and wife,
and how it has been transacted in the Chancery) That so I may with the more
confidence expect a Cure proportionable to my Disease; and that your Highness
Judgment may be as well grounded upon Knowledge, as my Suffering upon
Experience.

Having faithfully discharged the Trust that was reposed in me by the
honorable East India Company (as their chief Agent at Madrassopotan, where I
had not only the Command of the persons of Thousands of People, but also the
Fort of St. George, and Town of Madrassopotan;) And having made a thorough
Reformation of the grand Abuses which had crept into those parts, to the great
Injury of the Trade; and erected them a Town by my own pains and Industry, even
out of the Sea it self, for the better advantage and security of it; I resolved
with my self, (though I was often persuaded by the said Company to continue
longer my Charge) to return into my Country, where I had left the near relation
of a Wife behind me: And by how much the more that Reciprocal happiness (which
we enjoyed together) did revive, the more enflamed were my Desires for a Return.

But I had no sooner arrived in England, but the first News almost that was
brought me, was the Death of my Wife, in her very Journey to meet me.

This was the first Trial which the Lord laid upon me: But as he corrected, so
he gave me Patience and Submission to his Will in it; neither were friends
wanting to endeavor a Belief in me, that as the Lord had taken one Wife from
my Bosom, so he could bestow another.

After many several Days and Months thus spent in Melancholy, and willing to
inure my self to the Condition I enjoyed when I left England, I was persuaded
to address my self to one Mrs. Garret, a Widow, and Daughter of Mr. Stepkins,
who was represented unto me to be as beautiful in mind as in person; And
though her Husband had left her nothing, yet was I not deterred by this to
forbear my suit, supposing what was wanting in Fortune, would be made up in
Affection and and Sweetness toward me.

Hereupon, in short, about October. 1649. a Marriage* was had and concluded
between us; and, that I might give the best demonstration what a high value I
put upon her, I settled for her Jointure 1000 l. per ann. and Covenanted with
her Trustees to leave her at the time of my Death 1000l. also in ready money.

Her Father (now taking notice of this cordial and affectionate dealing of mine
with his Daughter) made in short this Proposition unto me, That if I would give
him the said Stepkins 1000l. more, and deliver forthwith unto his said
Daughter, as many Jewels as might be worth at least 1200l. that then he would
settle his Estate at Wapping (being 240l. per An.) upon me for my life, and
after my decease to my Wife; And in case we had Issue, then to them; and in
case we had no issue, then to the Heirs general* of the said Stepkins, or such
as he the said Stepkins should limit and appoint.

To which I returned as short an answer, and told him, I would immediately
perform his demand. Whereupon I did disposite 1000 l. in money, and 1200l in
Jewels, and all the aforesaid agreements and Settlements were Indented in
Parchment, and legally executed accordingly (as may appear from the Deeds
themselves, proved by two Testimonies in Chancery, to which I refer my self.)

I make no mention what Presents, nor of what value they were, (though
considerable) I sent her before Marriage, (because they were purely Gifts) but
the other upon the most real and highest consideration of Marriage.

I suppose its already evident, that had I now found the affection which I
promised my self, it might be very well said to be rather purchased than
gained; for although there was 240l. per ann. settled upon the Considerations
aforesaid, yet was it a dear bargain unto me, only for my Life, to lay down for
it 2200 l. Neither was I to enjoy this until the said Stepkins should decease;
which (if the contingencie of his Death, and the Interest of the Money had been
considered) it was more than ten years purchase, for one life.

Nevertheless, had there been a Return but of common Gratitude, (much less of a
conjugal Affection) I should scarcely have entertained a Thought of Penitency
for so large a Joynter, which I had settled.

But certainly the Anger of the Lord began now to be kindled against us, and
whether 'twas for her sins as well as mine own, and particularly for being
instrumental to the Disheriting of the eldest Son and Heir of the said Stepkins
(who never had demerited it in the least measure from the Father) I know not,
the Lord discover it unto us both in his due time: But certain it is, that she
could not long continue herself from discovering, that 'twas rather my Fortune
than my Person, which she had wedded; rather embracing Advantages of expressing
Kindness to others, than her Husband.

Notwithstanding many of these inconveniences did I pass over (though 'twas
very grievous to be thus used so soon after our Marriage, within less than six
months, and still persevere (if with Prudence I may speak it) with more than
usual fondness) she could no sooner propose any thing, which my Purse or
Industry could procure, but 'twas immediately provided; nothing which might be
either for Necessity or Ornament (though never so costly) but she had it,
though I borrowed money to provide it.

I could here tell your Highness in what Plenty I maintained her, with what
sums of Money in her Purse, with her Coach and Horses, Sadle-Horses, and rich
Furniture, rich Clothes, Beds, Linen, etc. but that I should discover too
much of my Folly in it, as well as her Unworthiness.

But I am confident, (and it is proved by sufficient Witnesses in Chancery) that
in eighteen months after our Marriage, she had spent for her Accommodations
above 3000 l. whereof 600 l. was in Apparel only, 500 l. in ready money.

But all this could not prevail, the Multiplicity of Courtesies and Endearments
toward her on my part, was but the increasing of her frowns and slightings
toward me; and being unsatisfied with what I voluntarily bestowed upon her,
she took all opportunity (in my absence from home) to imbezele what goods
soever she could come at; and at one time (when I was at the Court of Aldermen)
she took from my House 300 pounds at least of rich East India Stuffs, and Plate.

The Company she resorted unto (were no less offensive unto me than her
actions) being either Persons of very low Condition, or Desperate Fortune,
whose Necessities and Debaucheries still prompted her to further Inconveniences.

It being now evident unto me, and all our Acquaintance besides, That a sudden
Ruin could not but be near to our Estates, and unhappiness to our Persons, I
entered upon a serious Resolution to withdraw for a while to my Country house
at Malmsburby in Wiltshire, and persuaded my Wife to a compliance herein; This
I did, that I might pay those Debts, which I had contracted by her means, and
take her from the Occasions and the Persons which had enticed her to such
pernicious courses.

But they (finding if their Diana should leave London, the silver shrine would
be also removed) were too too prevalent with her to retard her Journey; Nay in
conclusion she absolutely refused to go with me.

Notwithstanding I did not forbear all the Arguments, which either Prudence or
Necessity could dictate: And that I might not neglect any Motive, which I
thought might conduce to this end, I gave 100 l. to two of her Familiar
acquaintance (whom I thought most prevalent with her) to persuade her to
accompany me into the Country.

But no Charms of Persuasions had any Influence, nor Reason (though very urgent
and manifest) but was slighted.

Nevertheless before I went out of Town, I writ this Paper, and left it with
her.

Sweetheart,
THe Reasons wheresore I am at present forced to leave London, is in regard of
the following particulars.

1. Because my House, Family, Goods and Estate in the Country goes much to
Ruin, for want of my Presence.

2. Because my Engagements in London are great, viz. 1146l.

3. Because of these great Engagements, my Credit, which has been of value,
(but now through some Disparagements and evil practices,) is lost in London,
that I cannot borrow any more money to supply yours and my present wants: And
now, when I thought all things had been forgotten, I heard abroad by my
Friends; that by certain Warrants issued out by the States for your self, and
others to appear before them, that I am ashamed to walk London streets; and I
much fear, that if I continue in London, you will in short time both ruin your
self and me.

4. You are so transported by the Persuasions, and practices of your Aunt and
Others, that I, nor no Friend of yours, can entreat you to leave their Company
and evil counsel, which daily breeds Debates and Strifes between us,
Notwithstanding, they have been by their ill Counsel and evil Actions, the
chief Occasion of all, which has brought us to this sad Condition and Shame
that we are now in: So that I may now say with Job, I had once Riches, but they
are now wasted, and once* I had a Wife, but now she will be no longer mine.

5. I have no employment nor Calling in London; which disgraceful and unquiet
life, is hateful unto me, and most disadvantagious; for I find not this Town
good for my health, (by reason of my continual trouble) my expenses are
insupportable: And I protest before the great God of Heaven, my only Joy and
Comfort should have been, and shall be (if I can any way find your Affections
reciprocal, and your Compliance equal) to support your Honor and Fortune
beyond my Own: But if we continue in London, I find all will be quickly
confounded and destroyed.

Therefore, Dear Heart, take the premises into good, religious, and serious
consideration, and go with me unto our habitation in the Country, by which
means, all things that are past, will be forgotten, whereby we shall be both
happy; for my intents are only and really to make you a happy Woman: For I
protest before God, when you come into the Country, I shall render my self and
Estate to your Disposure, to come and go when and where you please, which shall
be faithfully and lovingly performed by me, but if not, be pleased to take this
as a sad Farewell, from thy

Most affectioned Husband, Thomas Ivy.
London 17 March 1650.

And immediately after my Arrival at Malmsbury, as soon as I had accommodated
my house; I sent her this Letter.

Most dear Heart,
YOu cannot but be sensible of my sad condition and necessity at London, by
reason of my Discontents and great sums of money which I do owe, and have
not wherewithal to satisfy my Creditors, for had I stayed longer, I must of
necessity have been carried to Prison, or at least to my Grave; For I was so
much troubled and grieved in mind at your unkindness, and want of money, that I
thought my heart would have broken, which so transported me, that I knew not
what I did, when I left you: Yet notwithstanding your unkindness to me (if you
can borrow 30 l. of any Friend of ours to supply your present occasions) I will
see it satisfied; if not, I shall willingly consent, that you pawn some of your
Jewels for so much money; and when the India ships come home (God willing) I
shall redeem them for you again; and when I have paid my Debts, you shall
command me and my Estate, which shall be at your disposure. I should rejoice to
see you and my Father Stepkins here; Therefore, Dear Heart, When you have a
mind to come unto me, advise me, and I shall wait upon you, to bring you down;
And when you are weary of my Company and Entertainment in the Country, (where
my self, and all that I have, shall be at your Disposure) I shall (when you
please*) return again with you to London, and ever remain

Your most affectioned Husband, Thomas Ivy.
Malmsbury 24 March, 1650.

Instead of a Complying answer, which I expected (for We cannot easily despair
of Things We passionately desire) I received this Summons from the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal, to appear before them.

WHereas Theodosia your Wife has on this present day preferred her humble
Petition unto us the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of England, Thereby
praying Allowance of Alimony, as by her said Petition remaining with us does
appear, We do at her instance give you Notice thereof, Requiring you hereby to
make your personal appearance before Us, on the thirtieth day of this Instant,
to speak with Us about the same.

Richard Keeble,
John Lisle.
Middle Temple the 11 day of April, 1651.
Immediately, (laying aside all my Business) as fast as Passions and Spurs
could quicken, I repaired to the Chancery, where I found (to my great
astonishent) this false and scandalous Libel, under the Title of a Petition for
Alimony preferred against me.

The humble Petition of Theodosia Ivy, Plaintiff, Wife of Thomas Ivy,
Defendant.
THat She being the Daughter of John Stepkins Esquire and married to the Defendant,
who has (without any cause given him) not only deserted her Company, but left
her destitute of all manner of Means for her Livelihood and Subsistence; And
that during the time she cohabited with him, she has not only been in great
Danger of her Life, by bis Cruel Vsages, and unjust contrivances, but by some
means occasioned by the Defendant, she has been very Weak and Infirm; And has
received from him such Infirmities, (not becoming a Husband to conferr on his
Wife;) And that by reason of his said cruelties, and the peril of receiving
from him Diseases of Dangerous consequence, she could not cohabite with him as
his Wife, without eminent peril of her Life; And the Defendant was not only
departed from her, but utterly denied to allow her any convenient Support; And
that for mere necessity she had contracted some small debts; And therefore she
prayed the speedy Aid of the Court; And that They would summon the Defendant
before Them, that upon hearing her just complaints, she might be relieved, and
have such fitting Allowance by way of Alimony granted to her, as to the Court
should seem meet; And that for the present, she may have some convenient
Allowance for Expenses in this Suit, she being otherwise unable to proceed
therein.

To which (having sought Patience from above) I returned this answer.

That it is true, he Married the Plaintiff, and has ever since used her with
the Respects of an affectionate Husband to a loving Wife, and neither has, nor
did intend to desert her* Company, but much desires it, if he may find
respectfull carriage from her; and is so far from leaving her destitute of all
means, that since his Marriage, which was not then above eighteen Months, he
had furnished her with Jewels and Pearl, to the value of 1200 l. besides
Apparel, which cost him above 200 l. All which Pearl and Jewels she had in her
Possession in March then last past, when the Defendant went to his
dwelling house in Wiltshire, at which time, he not only solicited her to go
and dwell with him, but promised her (upon the Enjoyment of her in the Country)
to resign both himself and his Estate to her Commands and Disposal.

That he has likewise paid her Father 1000 l. for which he should have settled
upon the Defendant some Estate of Inheritance for her Portion, which is all the
Fortune he ever expected with her, whereof he has not received the value of
one penny.

That he allowed her for Clothes money, and otherwife for her use, above 800 l.
And during the time he has lived with her, he has spent in Housholdstuff,
House-rent, and Housekeeping, 2870 l. so that in eighteen Months, he has
spent with her 6000 l. And this he mentions not, as if he repented of his
Kindness to her, but to evidence to their Lordships that there is no just cause
of Complaint against him, for not allowing her Maintenance.

That he never acted any thing of Danger or Cruelty, or that might occasion any
infirmity to her; nor was there ever any Disagreement, or any Cause why she
should separate from him; But her desire was to live in London, a place neither
agreeable to the Defendants health, or Estate; He having already (by reason
thereof) contracted many. Debts: And confesses, that having (by consent of her
Father and her self) bought an Estate in Wiltshire, situate in a healthful
air, and a place of much convenience, delight and profit, He has many times by
Letters, in Person, and by Friends, earnestly desired her to live with him at
his said house in the Country, where she shall want for nothing in his power,
for her use and convenience, and care shall be taken for her accommodation for
her Journey, wherein he hopes yet to prevail, that they may mutually enjoy the
Comfort of each other, which he much thirsts after, and is not a little
grieved there should be any Question of it.

That he took such Order (presently after his going into the Country) whereby
the Plaintiff was supplied with moneys for her present occasions, and presumes
the foul scandals suggested in the Petition, are well known to the Plaintiff to
have so little color of Truth in them, as he hopes the same were put into the
Petition, as words of Course, rather than by her Direction: And he utterly
denies the same; and therefore he hopes, he shall not be ordered to make
Allowance to the Petitioner, (as in the Petition) she demands.

Could ever any Man suspect to be thus dealt withal by a Woman, that had
plighted her faith in Marriage to one, who had settled so great a Jointure,
given her so many Gifts, so much Money, Jewels, and all other accommodations
whatsoever in the greatest Plenty, for the Consideration of Nothing? Certainly
amongst the Indians themselves have I not seen so great perfidiousness.

Now had I just Reason to suspect, 'twas not only the malicious Counsels of her
wicked Abettors, was the cause of her inhumanity toward me; but that she had
in her own Breast a Principle of Enmiry and dissatisfaction, even to the
Relation of being my Wife.

Nay seeing the Scene appears, it is too easy to understand what Plot is laid
and concluded; If she can survive me (which she thinks very probable) and has
no issue of our two bodies (which she is resolved never to have) by keeping her
self from me, Then will she be a Fortune indeed, and her Widdowhood be worth
its weight in Gold. And if in the mean time (during my life) she can have from
the Lords Commissioners (by way of Alimony) 300 per annum, she will think her
self in a better condition, than her father, who had but 240 l. per annum, both
for himself and his whole Family: And to prosecute the Suit, she has 1200l.
worth of Jewels already, and 500l. in ready Cash advanced, and her Husband much
in debt, so that peradventure she may outspend him also even at Law.

But to obtain this glorious design, many difficulties are to be passed
through; And though she herself has resolved to calumniate vehemently
(presuming that somewhat will gain a Belief amongst many) yet will not this be
enough; and therefore, Witnesses must be prepared of as large Consciences as
Foreheads: And for their better encouragement, They shall participate in the
Gain and Advantage: Welcome Expressions and Opportunities to such Persons,
whose defamed Lives, and necessitous Fortunes, rendered them, neither in a
Capacity to live, or converse with People of any Honesty or Reputation.

As for her part, her suggestions and insinuations were high indeed; much fear
she pretended (for had it been more than a Pretense, all had been accomplished,
and my life lost) lest she should participate of the Sins and Punishments of
Sodom and Gomorrah: And as for her body she durst not trust that with me lest
(at any time being Morose and Choleric) I should injure her by Blows; or if
kind, I should infect her with unclean diseases.

To enforce these Motives upon the Minds of all People, who now took notice of
these distractions, Never was there a more exquisite Vizard of Modesty put on
by a Woman: Never were Expressions of Religion more distorted to an ill end; no
Projects and Practices of Obscenity and Murder it self, were wanting to color
these malicious devices against me; Nay, so grossly infatuated was she in her
scandal, that she represented my person to be more like to a Monsters than a
Man's.

Her Abettors are not wanting in acting their parts also; What she insinuated
they converted into clamours; neither stuck to depose any thing, what possibly
could be believed to be sworn by them, without any apparent contradiction.

Having thus prepossessed the Ears of as many Persons of Quality as she could,
and framed a Harmony of Testimonies (as well as of Witnesses) with as much Art
and Cunning, as her own Wit, or her Abettors, (or the matter it self could
supply) she took out with much eagerness a Commission out of the Court, to
make what proof she could of her Petition.

Notwithstanding this further provocation also, my Lips were locked up with
silence, as well as my Heart with sorrow, not retaliating Evil for Evil in the
least measure; or so much as intimating unto her, of her first Follies (which
if they were published by me) might have raised a great Cloud upon her
Reputation: Neither was I content to be totally Passive of what injuries had
passed, but was resolved not to leave any means unattempted to reclaim her from
these extravagancies.

And thereupon went unto her in Person, with Mr. Escot, Sergeant Middleton, and
Mr. Booth, at Mr. Zancheys house (he himself being present) and with as much
Rhetoric as my real affection to her could dictate did passionately move her
to a Reconciliation* showing what Scandal and dishonor would follow such
differences, and promising withal, a perfect Oblivion of whatsoever had been
acted against me; And to fortify my arguments the better, I desired all those
Gentlemen there present, to do the office of Christian Moderators, and to
endeavor to stop the Breaches between us, which were too wide already.

Nevertheless, by how much the more weight she perceived in our Reasons, the
more obstinacy she discovered in her returns, utterly rejecting any agreement,
upon what terms soever.

Hereupon suspecting in her the apparent Symptoms of a seared Conscience; and
how that by my silence, the World began to infer a main Guilt of those
Aspersions which had been divulged against me, Upon the serious advice of my
Counsel (though I cannot but acknowledge a very great Reluctance thereunto) I
was persuaded to examine Witnesses also, both to vindicate my own integrity,
and to discover unto the world the Grand Cheat that was contrived to gain my
Estate (which could no otherwise be accomplished) without defaming my Person
(and if it were possible) to take away my life also: which shall evidently
appear anon.

But before I shall give an Account of the proofs which were made on my behalf,
I shall according to her own forwardness and Method give your Highness a short
view, what was attested for her.

One swore, That he saw me squieze her (at eleven a clock) one night, as She
was going down stairs.

Another that she heard my Wife complain of ill usage (but though she lived in
house with us) never heard me give an ill word to her.

Another heard her cry out, Help, Help, Murder, Murder; and saw me take her by
the Throat: Though I refer my self to my Affidavit on Oath, yet when I shall
manifest it, (That this Woman who swore this, was brought in that very night,
and next morning conveyed away) I suppose 'twill be no difficult thing to
persuade any one to believe, that this Creature was brought in on purpose to be
a Witness against me.

The Woman that swore this was brought in that very night, on purpose to be a
Witness, and the next morning went away again.

One Measter (a pretended French Physician) swore that she was ill; and that
there was a suspicion of Poison: but this was five months after she left me;
and was commonly reported to have the Pox, (which being a Venomous Disease) the
Frenchman might safely swear (with a mental Reservation, the frequent Practice
of his Countrymen) there was a suspicion of Poison.

This is the substance of what was sworn against Me, (and should I name the
Persons of the Witnesses) they were more mean than their Testimonies; The Chief
of them was her Aunt Mistress Williamson; of whom I shall say no other, but
that her Way and Living is after the rate of 300, or 400l. per annum, though it
be well known, That neither her Husband, nor her self, have any Profession to
live by, or any visible Estate, nor worth a Penny; but are so nearly poor, That
he or she dares not appear in public, lest they be carried away by Bailiffs
for the Multitude of Debts he owes.

This is that ungodly Wretch, who too visibly has been the Ruin, both of my
self and Wife, as will appear from the Depositions themselves.

One Person there was produced on her behalf (whose Name has a Reputation in
the World, viz. Sir John Brampston;) yet all that he can depose for Her, is
nothing which is material, but that he never knew her defamed, but in this
Business, and that she was bred up amongst his Children; and that he often
endeavored a Reconciliation between us: Whether he did it, or no, I cannot
affirm, but when I was told by him lately, and never heretofore, That he had a
Pre-Morgage of the Estate of 240 l. per annum (made unto him by Stepkins) which
was settled on Me for the Consideration aforesaid, I hope, that I shall not be
condemned, as too jealous without a Ground, That he is fishing for his own
Interest in our troubled waters.

Were there ought else considerable deposed against me, I should deal so
ingenuously as to relate it, being very confident, that at the hearing of my
Cause before any in Authority, there will not be wanting Agents enough for her,
to lay open the worst against me.

One thing therefore more (and that which they think most considerable against
me, not in order to justify her Complaint, but to take off a Belies, from what
she knew I could prove against her and her said Aunt Williamson) was briefly
this, That I endeavored to suborn one Holdsworth (a poor fellow about the
Town) to swear point blanck* That my Wife was a Whore, and her Aunt Williamson
a Bawd.

That I may be impartial in this Narration, I shall cite the very words
themselves of this Deposition, which are these.

That in April and May was: twelve-moneth, He ( viz. this Deponent) came to the
Defendant, ( viz. to my self) for Money for one Nicholas; and the Defendant
said, He could prove Mistress Williamson a Bawd, and would have had him sworn
it; and offered the Deponent money to swear the Plaintiff (meaning Mrs. Ivy)
was a Whore.

That he had made the Commissioners for him; and said, That Stepkins and all
his Family were Base People, and often offered him money to swear; and said, he
had two Witnesses more, if he would make up the third.

How much Indiscretion, as well as Falsehood, was in this Deponent, and both in
them, who employed this inferior Person, and who too probably practiced that
infamous Act of Creating Knights of the Post (which seems to appear, even from
the Oath it self) For certainly, had I been provided with two Witnesses (as he
said I told him) which Number the Law admits even in the highest Cases) it had
not only been an impertinent losing of my Money, but my Honesty also, to no
purpose: Besides there are scarce any so ignorant, but understand how difficult
a thing it is to prove even a Whore, a Whore.

'Twas against the Advice of my Counsel, and my own Inclination also, to
examine any VVitness of so mean a Quality in such Differences, (as these are
between my self and my Wife) lest the contemptibleness of the Evidence, might
derogate from the Truth of the thing: Most of those (whom I produced to give
Testimony on my behalf) were persons of fair Estates, many hundreds per annum,
and such, who for many years past, have been Justices of the Peace in their
Country, etc. But more (of this Nature) I omit: For (without Doubt) Poverty and
Honesty are not inconsistent: The most precious Saints of God, are more
frequently found clothed with Rags, than in a Kings house: Job himself was
more acceptable to the Lord on the Dunghill, than in his costly Palaces: But
withal there must be a Poverty in Spirit, as well as in Estate; otherwise,
they will forfeit both their Religion to God, and their Credit amongst Men: For
certainly a poor Man (being notoriously vicious and scandalous) is to be
reputed rather a Vermin in Nature, than a Member of Christian Society, whose
Testimonies stink in their own Nostrils, and their Memory shall perish with
them.

That your Highness may the more knowingly judge and determine, both of this
and other Proofs against me, I humbly beg leave to lay before your Highness
the Manifestation of my Answer which I returned to my Wifes Petition, and what
Evidences I produced to the clearing of it.

1. To the first Charge in the Petition; That I left her destitute of all
manner of Livelihood and Subsistence.

'Twas Deposed,

(Besides her having of 1200l. worth of Jewels in her Custody) That I
maintained her with meat, drink, and clothes, and all Conveniences in a very
plentiful high way, l. A. fol. 19. f. 40, 47. l. 3. f. 3, 4, 49.

That she had the Disposal of all things in his house, f. 7.

That he spent Twenty shillings a day in meat, besides Spice, Sugar, Wine,
Beer, etc. fol. 8. f. 55, 56, 57.

That he importuned her to go live with him into Wiltshire, l. A. f. 4. l. 13.
f. 9, 10, 11.

That she was richly clothed, fol. 60. Had a Coach and Horse for her use. f.
67. Besides a Coach, he provided for her Journey a single horse, worth 45 l. f.
68. and a Riding Suit worth 40 l. and horse furniture, worth 40l. more. l. B.
f. 68.

That she absolutely refused to keep me Company into the Country, but would
rather stay with her Aunt Williamson, l. C. fol. 13.

That I gave 100 l. to Sergeant Middleton, the Sergeant to the Lords
Commissioners, and Mr. Pauncefoot, a Clerk to several Committees, to persuade
her to go with me, l. A. f. 8.

That she refused notwitstanding, l. A. f. C.

And for her Reception, I immediately declared in my answer, my Willingness to
receive her, and cohabite with her, and provide her all necessaries, and
conveniences whatsoever.

To the Objection which follows in the Petition, That my Usage was Cruel.

'Twas deposed,

That I ever expressed much Love toward her, and was an Indulgent Husband, l.
A. f. 18. 39. fol. 2. l. B. f. 3. f. 48. l. C. f. 10, 12, 19.

That I ever showed a Willingness to pleasure her in any thing, l. B. f. 63.

That the squeezing her by the arms, was but the holding of her, when she
attempted to run from me, entreating her with all fair words to stay, l. B. f.
82.

To the third Charge, That I had given her foul Diseases, (meaning the Pox)
'twas not only Deposed, that I was then free, but upon the Search of my Body,
(which I voluntarily did desire might be done by able and honest Physicians)
but there was not the least Sign or Symptom, that I ever had that fowl
Disease. l. B. f. 35, 36. l. C. f. 4. And at that time that this was reported,
she her self was free from it, l. B. f. 37.

And for my further Vindication herein, I beseech your Highness to read, but
these two Certificates under Oath of three eminent Doctors, and one Surgeon;
the President of the College of London, Dr. Pruiean, Dr. Wedderburn, Dr. Nurse,
and Mr. Boon.

WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, do certify, That Thomas Ivy Esquire
(upon a scaudalous Petition exhibited against him by Theodosia his wife) that
he had infected her With that foul Disease of the Pox (as the said Mr. Ivy
informed Us) did desire Us, and voluntarily offer himself to be searched by Us
concerning the same. Whereupon, upon search, and view, had of his naked body;
We find, That Mr. Ivy is not only free from the said disease, but so free from
it, that we cannot perceive, that he was ever tainted therewith: Witness our
hands.

Francis Pruiean President of the Coll. of Physicians in London.
Thomas Nurse M. D.
Hen. Boon Surgeon.
London 30 May, 1651.
WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, do certify, That about the month of
June last 1650. Upon the scandalous report published of Thomas Ivy Esquire who
lately before had married Theodosia, Daughter of John Stepkins Esquire, that he had
the foul Disease of the Pox, and had given it unto his Wife, That at the
request of the said Mr. Ivy, by Examinations and Answers given by him, and
others having interest, we did find that the said Mr. Ivy was clear of the
same Disease, and had no Symptom or Token thereof: Also we (upon examination of
the said Mr. Ivy) did find him to be clear of the said Disease at that time,
Witness our hands.

London 30 May, 1651. Thomas Nurse M. D.
Jo. Wedderburne M. D.
Hen. Boon Surgeon.

Besides all this (that there might be nothing wanting to make out the
Integrity of my Soul, and the Cleernesse of my Conscience, before all the
World) I did voluntarily (for the Court compels none in these Cases to return
an answer upon Oath) make this Affidavit before a master in Chancery, and at
the next opportunity of participating of the Sacrament, immediately before I
touched those sacred Elements, did declare and avouch the Oath, which I had
taken, to be unfeignedly true, without any Equivocation, or mental Reservation
whatsoever; and did thereupon print and publish it to the World, as follows.

Thomas Ivy of Malmsbury in the County of Wilts, Esquire, and Husband to
Theodosia Ivy, late Widow of George Garret deceased, and Daughter of John
Stepkins Esquire deceased, makes Oath, etc.
HAving often with grief and anguish of mind considered those many scandals and
aspersions which have been laid upon me by my own wife, from whom my Soul once
expected as much happiness, as could be hoped for in a Conjugal Estate; and
finding how easy the minds of many Persons, and those of quality too, have
been, not only to give an Ear, but a Faith also, to those abominable Reports,
which She and her Abettors have raised and fomented, utterly to abolish (if in
their power) my Reputation, either as a Gentlemen, or a Christian; both which,
(I trust) have been honorably preserved with much Constancy and Fidelity
amongst thousands of Persons in those places where I have had long abode; lest
I might be adjudged guilty in those things, which are only private to our
selves, and which cannot admit of any proof or witness on either side, her
personal and single Affirmation, being the only argument to induce the world to
the belief of so vile, and inhumane actions; I have thought it most necessary,
besides these Proofs which are taken in Chancery, to vindicate my innocence,
not only with a bare negation, but with such a one as is ratified with the
solemnity of an Oath: This I do the rather, because in these unhappy Cases
between the Husband and the Wife, the Answers which are returned to the
Petition, are not deposed to, as in other Proceedings in Chancery, neither can
I content my self to stop here, but am willing to give the highest satisfaction
that a Christian can expect on Earth, and shall therefore chose such a time as
the receiving of the most precious Body and Blood of my Savior, Jesus Christ
(of which with all humility this day, having strictly examined my own heart, I
intend to participate) as to declare my innocence thereupon to those principal
points which are objected unto me by my Wife: were there any other waters of
Trial under the Gospel, as there was under the Law, I could most safely
adventure the drinking of them to clear my self before the World: But this, I
hope will give a plenary satisfaction to all Godly and Conscientious Persons,
who (if ever) will give Credit to the words of an afflicted Spirit, will now
do it, after such a solmn sort.

And I do first upon my Oath say and affirm, that I have been so far from
Acting and Committing that foul Sin of Sodomy upon her Body, that I never had
within my breast the least inclination or desire to so vile and abominable a
thing; neither did I ever attempt to persuade her by fair Words and
Inticements, or to move her by threats, or ever used the least force or
struggling with her to compass any such Base or Heathenish Design, as she most
falsely and opprobriously charged me with.

And moreover, whereas on a certain night she was necessitated, in preservation
of her life, as she had suggested to the Lords Commissioners, and several
others, to leap out of the Bed from me, to cry out, Murder, Murder; alleging,
that I offered violence unto her by pinching, beating, and striking: Now I do
protest and depose before Almighty God, that this was done without any such
provocation, even in the least measure; Nay at the same time, while she was
attempting to leave my house, and running to her Fathers, I used all the
friendly and kind Persuasions which I could express to detain her, and only
holding her by the arm, without the least hurt as I believe, I often repeated
my hearty Solicitations unto her to remain with me: But I do really believe,
upon the consideration of several Circumstances and Passages since that time,
that both her Outcry, and her Subsequent Behavior was designed before that
night. If any thing at that time might be looked on as a shadow to justify her
proceedings, it was this, That a little before she leaped out of the Bed
(amongst other Discourses) I intimated a Dislike of her Carriage, which was
observed by others, toward one who pretended to be her Physician; This, and
this only, was all the Cause and Occasion (if this be any) of her forsaking me
at that time. And for all other times whatsoever, I do affirm upon Oath, that I
never gave her the least stroke in my life, or ever did so much as pinch her in
Jest, to the best of my Remembrance, or did ever directly or indirectly, let
fall from my mouth any kinds of Threats whatsoever.

And I do further swear, That until such time as she exhibited that foul and
scandalous Petition to the Lords Commissioners, that I loved her unfeignedly,
respected and esteemed her above all Creatures in the World; and as I laid down
my Fortune at her feet when I first married her, so would I have laid down my
Life too, for her good and preservation. Nay, I do allege further upon my Oath,
that notwithstanding that scandalous and false Petition exhibited against me in
pursuance of her malicious designs, she had examined Witnesses to defame me;
yet out of Christian and tender Consideration of the Relation wherein I stood
toward her, as a Husband, I was willing from my heart, and did endeavor (by
the several means of Persons of Quality, allied both to my Self and Her) to
compose all differences, that We might for the future Cohabit together in Peace
and Content; and not to regard any Aspersions which she and all her Witnesses,
being there examined, had cast upon me, not to retaliate in the least measure,
still deferring the Examination of my Witnesses against her, and attending
whether it would please the Lord to give her a sight of the Error of her way,
and to return her home to her Husband, who was most willing to receive her.

As to that Aspersion cast upon me, That I committed folly with her Servant
Jane Gilbert, though I need not say much to it, the Maid her self, and other
credible Witnesses having cleared me in that point, both in Court, and on her
Deathbed; and convinced the World of the horrid and unheard of Practices of
her and her Abettors, in abusing and exposing the body of the said Jane to the
View and Search of several men, and suborning her to give in Testimony against
me; yet that the World may know the Integrity of my Soul in this also, I do
further swear, That I never entertained within me the least thought of
corrupting her Chastity, or did ever commit any unlawful or dishonest action
with her, from the time I knew her to this day.

And lastly, whereas I am charged by my Wife to have suborned several
Witnesses against her, and particularly one Holdsworth; I call the Lord to bear
me Record in this also, and do upon my Oath affirm, That I did never directly
or indirectly procure any Witnesses against her to testify farther than the
truth of the thing, what he or she would knowingly and safely, without breach
of Faith or good Conscience, Depose.

True it is, that Holdsworth being employed as a Bailiff to arrest me at the
Suit of my Wifes Tailor, for a considerable sum of money, which she her self
was indebted for, and behaving himself civilly toward me, I gave him five
shillings, and for no other end or purpose; And upon my Oath, I protest, that I
never had any such Communication or Discourse with the said Holdsworth, to any
such intent or purpose, as he has most maliciously deposed against me.

Thomas Ivy.
Sworn August the 4th 1652. Thomas Benet.
WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, do Certify that this is a true Copy
of the Oath, which Mr. Thomas Ivy did take before Doctor Benet, a Master in
Chancery, which also he avouched to be truth before and after his receiving of
the Sacrament, which he received since his last dangerous sickness:

As witness our hands the 6th. of. August, 1652. Nic. Bernard Doctor of
Divinity.
John Baber, Doctor of Physic.



Thus much, (and I think more cannot be expected or done by a man) was offered
for my personal Vindication; and that it may be visible unto your Highness,
with what Persons I have dealt withal: I shall summarily recite the heads of
those Proofs, which were made concerning this Wife who begged Alimony; and show
your Highness the blazing Star, which enlightn'd her in these destructive ways
to both our ruins (I mean her Aunt Williamson) concerning whom, 'twas sworn,

That Mrs. Williamson did ever abuse Mr. Ivy, and was an Incendiary between
him and his Wife, and the chief Causer and Promoter of the Differences and
Breaches between them, l. A. f. C. l. f. 79. l. C. f. 18. f. 19. 27, 38.

That Mrs. Williamson persuaded Mrs. Ivy not to go into the Country with her
Husband, l. A. f. 60.

That Mrs. Williamson several times spoke soandalous, opprobrious, and
disdainful speeches (against Mr. Ivy) to his Wife, l. A. f. 51. l. B. f. 12.

That Mrs. Williamson said Mr. Ivy had the Pox, and had given his Wife the
Pox, l. A. f. 52. l. 3. f. 13, 14.

That Mrs. Williamson reported that Mr. Ivy had bugger'd his Wife, l. A. f. 52.

That Mrs. Williamson reported, that he had got Jane Gilbert (his Wifes
Servant) with Child, ib.

That Mrs. Williamson told Mr. Ivy (who by reason of her ill name had forbid
his Wife to keep her company) that she would keep his Wife company in spite of
his Teeth, l. A. f. 60 59.

That Mrs. Williamson told Mrs. Ivy, that if she would separate from her
Husband, she would enforce Alimony from her Husband for her, l. A. f. 61.

That Mrs. Williamson told Mrs. Ivy, that when she was separated from her
Husband, they would live together, l. A. f. 62.

That Mrs. Williamson brought to Mrs. Ivy, a lock of Snellings hair, l. B.
fol. 27 of which she made a Bracelet, set it with Ribbans, and wore it on her
wrist, l. C. f. 29.

That Mrs. Williamson bid her wear it next her heart, l. B. f. 30.

That Mrs. Williamson encouraged Mrs. Ivy to give her Husband base language,
l. C. f. 31. and told her, she did well therein, l. C. f. 32.

That Mrs. Ivy relating, how She had given her Husband ill words, Mrs.
Williamson runn unto her, and told her 'twas well done, l. C. f. 33.

That Mrs. Williamson received the Goods, which were embezelled from Mr. Ivy
by his Wife, l. B. f. 40.

That Mrs. Williamson solicited Mrs. Ivy, to let Snelling lie down with her
on a bed; (and when she had effected it) went out of the Chamber; and left M.
Wheatly to keep the door, l. C. f. 43, 44, 45.

That Mrs. Williamson encouraged Mrs. Ivy, not to give any Acounts of moneys
which She had received from her Husband; Telling her, what was her Husbands,
was her own, and why should she account for her own, l. c. f. 58. l. A. f. 61.

That Mrs. Williamson lived in a house of ill fame in a little blind Alley, l.
C. f. 72.

That Mrs. Williamson seldom lives with her own Husband, l. C. f. 79.

That Mrs. Williamson made Snelling a Favorite of Mrs. Ivies; and that she not
only persuaded Mrs. Ivy, but cried out unto her to lie down on bed with the
said Snelling, l. C. f. 80.

That Mrs. Williamson called Mr. Ivy Clown, and Fool; and advised Mrs. Ivy
not to go with him into the Country, l. C. f. 13. And that he was an ugly
fellow, l. C. f. 20.

That Mrs. Williamson carried Letters for Mrs. Ivy to her Gallants, l. C. f.
16.

That Mrs. Williamson said, She hated Mr. Ivies child, because 'twas his, l. C.
f. 21.

That Mrs. Williamson brought Mr. Snelling to Mr. Ivies house, after he had
forbid him, l. C: f. 21.

That Mrs. Williamson (the very next day after Mr. Ivy married his said Wife)
made horns and mouths at him behind his back, l. C. f. 21.

That Mrs. Williamson reported that Mr. Ivy had a Whore, and it being replied,
that 'twas hard to prove any such thing; she answered, that she would hire a
Whore to lie with him, and take him in the fact, and so obtain Alimony for Mrs.
Ivy, l. C. f. 26, 38.

That when Mrs. Ivy said, she should love her Husband very well; Mrs.
Williamson replied, that if she should love her Husband so well, they should be
all undone, l. C. f. 26.

That a Fortune-woman looking in Mrs. Ivies hand, and telling her, that she and
her Husband should live long together, immediately thereupon Mrs. Williamson
wished her hanged for her news, l. C. f. 25.

That Mrs. Ivy telling Mrs. Williamson, that her Husband gave her so good
words, that she knew not what to do, (meaning, whether she should proceed in
the plot against him) at which Mrs. Williamson answered, Hang him Rogue, Damn
him Rogue, l. A. f. 52.

How horrid the actions of this Person have been, in some measure is laid open;
But how contagious the conversation (of this monstrous and unchristian wretch)
is, willbe too sadly and experimentally demonstrated by these following
Depositions concerning my Wife and her self; about whom 'twas sworn,

That notwithstanding the great Estate I had settled upon her, and the vast
sums of money I had expended for her use and ornament, which any one would
think, (had been enough to have purchased a common Gratitude and Civility to a
Husband) she immediately after our marriage slighted me to my face, never
returned, in the least measure, any reciprocal affection, l. A. f. 39.

1. That immediately after our marriage, she held correspondency with Sir
William Killegrews Son, under the name of Ornaldo, called her self Callis, l.
C. f. 15.

2. That the said Killigrew confessed upon his own Oath four Letters that he
had sent her, and always writ himself Ornaldo, and her Callis, Kill: own
Deposit.

3. That she admitted both Sir William Killigrew and his Son her Corrivals;
and that young Killigrew threatened to kill his Father, and her Husband also, l.
c. f. 15.

4. That Sir William Killigrew chid Mrs. Williamson for suffering his Son to be
so familiar with Mrs. Ivy, l. C. f. 15.

5. That Mrs. Ivy (under the name of Callis) promised to Ornaldo a Courtesy,
l. C. f. 15.

6. That Mrs. Williamson was used to carry Letters between them, l. C. f. 16.

7. That if Mr. Ivy did carry her into the Country without her consent,
Ornaldo would pistol him, l. C. f. 16.

8. That she received Letters, and held Correspondency with one Mr. Snelling,
whom Mr. Ivy had forbid his Wifes Company and house, and sorbad her likewise
to receive him, l. C. f. 15.

9. That Mrs. Williamson brought in Mr. Snelling to Mr. Ivies house, after that
he had forbad them both) and Mrs. Ivy received them, l. C. f. 21. f. 18. l. B.
79.

10. That Mrs. Ivy went abroad after her Husband was in bed, to meet with
Snelling at Mrs: VVilliamsons house; and both Mr. Snelling, and Mrs.
Williamson brought her home to her Husbands door, which was about 12 a clock
at night, l. C. f. 27.

11. That Mrs. Ivy going out of her Bedchamber after Mr. Ivy was in bed, and
being asked by him, whither she was going? replied, that she was retiring to
her devotion, but went to Mrs. Williamson, l. C. f. 25.

12. That she was with Mrs. Williamson and Snelling, (who lay there by the
name of Clerck) a whole day, at the Sugar Loaf in Long-Acre, (a suspected
house,) l. C. f. 11. l. C. f. 25.

13. That she was frequently conversant with Snelling, l. C. f. 74. f. 22.

14. That Mrs. Ivy met with Snelling at a Cooks house of ill Report in a blind
Alley in St. Martins Lane, l. C. f. 76.

15. That Mrs. Ivy lodged and abode there, out of her Husbands house, many
days and nights together, l. C. f. 72.

16. That she refused to return to her Husband, when he sent for her, l. C. f.
73.

17. That she being asked by her Husband at any time (when she returned home)
where she had been, refused to answer, l. C. f. 77.

18. That Snelling had spent a 1000 l. on Mrs. Ivy, and Mrs. Williamson, B. f.
26.

19. That Snelling came up into Mr. Ivies Bedchamber with a Pistol in his
Pocket, and questioned him (before his Wife) for forbidding him his House, l.
C. f. 23.

That Snelling would defend her with Pen and Sword, l. C. f. 23.

20. That Snelling came often to Mrs. Ivy, when her Husband was out of Town,
l. C. f. 22.

21. That Snelling was frequently private with her in her Bedchamber, l. C. f.
23.

22. That she lay out of her House, when her Husband was out of Town, l. A. f.
40.

23. That when her Husband was out of Town, she made a great Feast for Mr.
Snelling, Mrs. Williamson, Mrs. Wheatly, Mrs. Nowell; All three notoriously
known to be -- l. A. f. 42. At this time the Plot for Alimony, and the
practices upon Jane Gilbert (which cost her, her life) were in probability
contrived.

24. That Mrs. Ivy sent to Lilly, who (amongst other things) returned this
Caution to beware of two Women, describing Mrs. Williamsom, and her Companion
Mrs. Wheatly, l. A. f. 57.

25. That she o ten sent to Fortune Tellers, and particularly to one Mrs.
Nowell a soresaid (lately Cook maid to my Lady Cunny) l. A. f. 58. l. C. f. 33.
34. 35.

All that she enquired of these Wizards, was to know how long I should live.

26. That when Mrs. Ivy was separated from her Husband, then she and Mrs.
Williamson would live together, l. A. f. 62.

27. That Mrs. Ivy her self laid Copper^s in the Window, and gave out in
speeches that her Husband had laid Poison there, l. A. f. 53.

28. That her Surgeon, (being asked how she did, after he had visited her)
said that her hair came off, and shook his head; And that he had made her an
Issue, l. A. f. 62. 63.

This was above six months after she had left me.

29. That she immodestly said before two, viz. Snelling and Killigrew, that her
first Husband had done the part of a man, twelve times the marriage night, But
that this Husband had done but eight.

30. That she was too familier with her own Father, his hands were seen under
her Coats, l. C. f. 18.

31. That Mrs. Ivies Father was often in bed with her, l. C. f. 20.

32. That she gave 100 l. to her Brother, and promised to keep his Wife, in
case he would murder her Husband; and procured from the Council of State a
Pass to carry him beyond Seas, after the murder was executed.

This was proved in the upper Bench the Term, before my Lord Chief Justice
Roles; and she was bound over to the good Behavior: The Pass was there
produced, and is now in my Custody.

Besides these short intimations, many foul and horrid stories (could I have
produced) of Designs for my Destruction: but because I was not able to make out
clear and evident proofs of them, I was unwilling either to trouble the Court,
or disturb my own Thoughts, with any thing less than Realities and
Demonstrations.

One History. or rather a Dismal Tragedy, acted by my Wife; Mrs. Williamson,
and their conspiracy, was with all its Circumstarces, so clearly delineated in
the Depositions, that I should wrong my Cause, should I not relate this also:
and perhaps few Romance's or Gusman himself can parallel it.

It being resolved at the Feast, (which was held at my house, when I was in the
Country) by my Wife, Mrs. Williamson, Mrs. Wheatly, and Mrs. Nowells (being the
Persons) for whom that Treatment was provided; That though the Scandals of
Sodom were sufficiently high, which had been divulged against me; and would
render me odious to the World: Yet seeing 'twas but a matter of Fact between us
two in private, which could not be proved more, than by her single affirmation;
and that her own Midwife (having searched her for that very purpose) had so
straight a Conscience, that she would not swear, that my Wife had been injured
in those parts; Did thereupon conclude, that some other way must be found out,
which might admit of Testimonies; otherwise, they suspected, my Wife could
hardly obtain Alimony, or procure a separation from me.

Hereupon it seems, This Plot was afterward put in execution upon Jane
Gilbert: Its proved, l. C. f. 115.

This Wench they picht upon to be the Instrument of their Design, because she
being actually a Servant in my House, it might be thought very easy for me to
find an opportunity to lie with her; and being also of a sickly disposition, it
would be no difficult thing to raise a suspicion, that she might possibly be
with Child, especially, being not well recovered of the Dreggs of the Small
Pox, which she had had a little before.

Hereupon Mrs. Williamson (that she might the better color her Intention
privately) carried this Maids water unto one, whom they call Trigg, a
Shoo-maker (as I have heard) by Trade, and enquired of him, whether the Party
that made this water, were not with Child?

Trigg (having good Instructions, and doubtless a large Fee) Ordered Mrs.
Williamson to bring the said Jane Gilbert unto him, and he would search her.

At her return home to my Wife, there was a new consult, how they might carry
the Maid to Trigg, and make her willing to be searched? leave that to me, (said
my Wife) and immediately went unto Jane Gilbert, and said, Jenny, my Father has
sent for my Aunt Williamson and me to Breakfast to morrow morning, and has
commanded me to bring thee with us, because he has provided a Dish of Milk and
Eggs, that which he knows thou do dearly love: The Maid (little suspecting
any mischies, couched under this pretended Kindness) thanked her Mistress; but
by reason of the many clothes she had to steel and starch against the morrow,
(being Sabbath Day) was willing to be excused: Nay Jenny, replied my Wife, you
must and shall go; for I know my Father will be angry, if we bring you not.

So a Coach being called, my Wife, Mrs. Williamson, and the Maid went to Mr.
Stepkins house, but neither found him, nor the Milk and E^gs: Ah, quoth Mrs.
Williamson, are we served so? we will make a mornings work of it, now we are
out; methinks I have a rumbling in my Guts, pray let us go to Doctor Trigg;
Agreed, said my Wife; And as they were passing from Mr. Stepkins to Triggs
house, my Wife and Mrs. Williamson (being very frolic) began to jest with the
said Jane Gilbert, and persuaded her to make Trigg believe, she was a new
married Woman, and so that would put a Trick upon the Doctor his skill.

After they were all arrived in the Doctors presence, Mrs. Williamson made a
private address unto him, and pretended to have acquainted him with the pain in
her Guts. But having ended her Tale in private, What think you, said she, of
yonder new married Wife? Trigg (having felt her pulse, and bid her spit once or
twice) told her, she was Splenetick; Like enough that, quoth Mrs. Williamson;
But is she not breeding Doctor? Yes, I warrant you, said he; so the wench
turning about, and smiling, was bid go out by Mrs. VVillamson, (that she and
her Mistress might have some private Discourse with Trigg, about the Drink
which they had given her) which she did accordingly, whilst her Mistress, Mrs.
Williamson and Trigg held a long Conference together; when this Scene was
over, All returned home.

About three or four days after the said Jane Gilbert, having been promised
leave by my Wife to go visit her friends in the Country, for the Recovery of
her health, my Wife took her into a Chamber, and said, Ah Jenny, But I have
somewhat more to tell you, (and thereupon shut the Chamber door, none being
present but them two, and Mrs Williamson,) It Is commonly reported, Jenny,
quoth my Wife, that you are with child, and it is my desire to have it cleared:
Tush, said Mrs. Williamson, if it be so, I warrant you it is by the Best in the
house; (meaning my self) Let us know it, for we can, and will conceal it, and
so dispose things, that it shall never be a discredit, or disgrace unto her;
Nay, if she will confess that she was with Child, they would provide for her;
But, said they, if you will refuse to let us know it, and go into the Country,
we will Report, that you are gone to take some Physic to destroy the Child.

The Maid now considering what snare they had brought her into, by going to
Trigg, (as aforesaid) being persuaded to act the part of a new married woman,
was astonished at this Surprizal, and cried out, The Lord protect me, for I am
very innocent from any such thing; and withal my heart, said she, will I do
any thing, that may give you satisfaction, or clear my self from this Scandal.

Look here, said my Wife to her, my Father has sent me a Letter, where he
says, That Doctor Trigg says that you are certainly with Child; and if you
will not confess, you must be whipped in Bridewell.

As they were thus Discoursing, (often intimating that 'twas their Design to
make this Maid confess her self with Child by me) in came Mrs. Sessions, my
Wifes Midwife, whom she persuaded to search Jane Gilbert, which she willingly
submitted unto; and the midwife (in their presence) acquitted her from being
with Child.

Hereupon, my Wife commanding some tears from her Eyes, wept passionately (as
she seemed) and breaking into great Passion, said, Ah Jenny, have I loved and
entertained thee thus long, been as kind to thee, and as tender of thy good, as
if thou were my own Child, and can thou conceal any thing from me? Doubtless
thou art with Child: and therefore come, put on your mask, for you shall once
more to Doctor Trigg, who understands these things better than any midwife; and
he will prove you to be with Child: And that you may not think I have any Plot
upon you, (that Objection was very strong within her) put on your mask, (that
the Doctor may not know your face again) and fetch your Water; and Mrs.
Sessions shall go with you.

The Maid being perplexed in mind, and far from any of her Friends, knew not
what to do in this condition: But being urged by her Mistress went again with
the Midwife.

After the Midwife had given Trigg her Water, and discourst with him privately;
He called to Jane Gilbert, and bid her go up stairs with him: But the poor
Wench (not knowing which to prefer, her Modesty or Innocence) refused to go
with him; until at length (being clamoured at, and absolutely forced up to his
Chamber) she was necessitated to follow him: Where Trigg began to acquaint
her, that her mistress Mrs. Ivy, had told him, that she had been too familiar
with her Master, and therefore he must search her: And did thereupon (in a most
rude and violent manner) force his hands under her Coats, to her naked Body;
and did use her in a most abominable way, etc.

And when he had effected his business, he told the Midwife that she was with
Child; though the Maid absolutely and earnestly denied the same.

Hereupon they left Trigg, and returned to my Wife, who having heard the
Relation from Mrs. Sessions, what had been done (being totally unsatisfied)
caused her to be carried to another Physician, Dr. Hinchley, and showed him the
Water; and desired him also to search her in like manner: But his Verdict was
unlike that of the ( Mountebanck) Trigg; for he peremptorily avouch'd she was
not with Child.

Notwithstanding all this could not satisfy the aim of my Wife, and Mrs.
Williamson: But once more she must expose her nakedness to a search of another
Doctor, a Man-midwife, Dr. Hinton, who in like manner, as Dr. Hinchley
(notwithstanding Mrs. Williamson and my Wife did earnestly solicit him to
attest that she was with Child) acquitted her from being with Child; and would
justify her to be a Virgin.

These two Testimonies did no way forward their Design, for by this means, all
the pains in Threatenings and Persuasions, (to acknowledge her self with Child
by me) began to be undervalued, by how much the more the said Jane Gilbert had
been acquitted by the two Doctors and Midwife, and accused only by that
Ignorant Quack Trigg.

And therefore seeing the VVench was so obstinate that she would not comply
with them, (and least at my return she might discover this unto me) a new
Project was set on foot, so to terrify the Wench, that she might leave London
immediately.

And thereupon they came unto her, and told her, that Mr. Stepkins, my Wifes
Father, would do her a notorious Mischief if she would not acknowledge her
self with Child: Mrs. Williamson advised the Maid to go for a while into the
Country, until Mr. Stepkins his Anger was over.

Upon this account she was sent away to her Fathers house in Hertfordshire,
where immediately after her arrival, she received a Letter from my Wife; that
her Father Stepkins was so incensed against her, that he would not suffer her
any longer to live with my Wife.

Notwithstanding the great love she bore, she would not leave her destitute of
a service, but would provide a convenient Place for her,

Scarce eight days had passed, but down comes Mrs. Williamson to her
(pretending she had been at Cambridge) and came out of her way on purpose to
see her; Though 'twas evident she came directly from London to the said Jane
Gilbert.

Insomuch that the Maid suspected some farther ill toward her; (having been
formerly so abused) But parling together, about former Passages, The Maid asked
Mrs. Williamson; what Ill she had deserved from her Mistress, that she should
be so disgraced, as she had been; and though she found her guiltless, she
should now be put away? Well, quoth the Maid, by Gods help, I will be to morrow
in London, and will endeavor to right my self from these Aspersions.

Whereupon she found the end of Mrs Williamsons Journey (was to hinder the Maid
from coming to London) (because I was the day before arrived out of the
Country) lest she should see me, and discover what had been done unto her; in
order to make her confess that I lay with her, and that she was with Child by
me.

Mrs. Williamson now perceiving, that the said Jane Gilbert was resolved to
make a stir in this soul business, returned with all speed to my Wife; and
wished her to think of a way, how to hinder her from speaking with me.

The next Day, as soon as the said Jane Gilbert came to my house, my Wife met
her at the Door, and giving her many good words, persuaded her to take a
Lodging near that place, (and change her name) and that she would pay for it.

The Maid (very much troubled at this usage) was very pressing to know what
offense she had ever given her; Truly, quoth my Wife, Sweet Jenny, I love thee
most dearly; But the Truth of all is, my Husband and his friends give out, that
it is unfit for me to keep a Gentlewoman to wait upon me, besides common
Servants; and that 'twas their envy toward her, and therefore she must be
gone: but withal assured her, that she would provide a convenient place for
her.

My Wife now thought, that she had (by this Trick) made the Maid believe me to
be the sole cause of her turning away, and sufficiently exasperated her against
me; yet did not despair of a compliance from her, and therefore said, For my
part, I am content you stay this night, (that she might farther try her) and to
morrow thou shall have another Lodging looked out for thee.

But my Wife understanding the next morning, that I began to parle with the
Maid about the passages aforesaid, (which indeed were communicated to me in the
Country) knocked very furiously for her to come up into her Chamber; and
commanded her immediately to leave the house, and would not suffer her to speak
any more to me.

Whereupon she went to one Mr. Prices house, a Brother of one of her fellow
servants, and lay there privately, (as she thought) but 'twas made known to my
Wife; who immediately sent a Maid to sound of what temper she was, and how she
stood affected toward her: and it being returned, that she was full of Disdain
and Passion, by reason of the aforesaid practices against her; and that she
would forthwith send for her Trunks, they were immediately seized upon by my
Wife, and looked up in her Closet.

Notwithstanding, upon this Report, the maid did not send, but came her self to
demand her Trunks; and I seeing of her in the house, began to ask again, why
she went away, and upon what occasion that Searching of her (by men, and women)
were? But her Mistr ess calling her Queen for acquainting me with it, and
threatening to strike her for it, denied her the Trunks, and caused her
forthwith to be sent away: And the very next Day Mrs. Williamson and my Wife
gave out in Speeches, (amongst my Family, and Neighbors) that they had broke
open the Trunks, and had found that she had been a Baggage, and a notorious
Thief, and stolen her Goods.

And thereupon (the better to secure the Wench, either for complaining of these
Abuses, or telling me the Truth of her Usage) they procured a Warrant from my
Lord Chief Justice Roles to apprehend the Maid for her Life, (having charged
her with Felony.) But finding that the Maid kept in, and that by virtue of the
said Warrant, they could not enter any house to take her forth, they entered
into a new Project, how the Wench might be secured (both Tongue and Person) and
also, that they might seize on her, wheresoever she was.

To this end, Mr. Pauncesoot was looked on as a fit Instrument (having Relation
to the Lord President Bradshaw) and was desired to procure them a Warrant from
the Council of State, upon Pretense, that this poor VVench held Correspondency
(with the Enemies of the Commonwealth) beyond Seas, and so apprehend her: By
virtue of which VVarrant she was seized on accordingly; and kept Close Prisoner
18 days together with great hardships.

During this Imprisonment, a Gentleman came to this VVench from my Wife,
advising her to humble her self to her Mistress, and to confess her self
Guilty, and much to that purpose, but she (being innocent) utterly refused any
such Acknowledgement.

During this Imprisonment, many Petitions (for to be heard at the Council) did
she attempt to present, but were still kept off by the means of the said
Pauncesoot, neither could she ever be heard.

At length my Wife and Mrs. Williamson finding nothing could prevail (after
sorrow and grief (in this lamentable condition) had almost killed her, they had
contrived a meeting for the Wench (by the permission of her Keeper) in
Moor-fields; where, as soon as my Wife saw her, she fell into a deep fit of
weeping to the Wench, and told her how dearly she loved her, and that she was
in perfect friendship with her, and earnestly desired that all things (which
had passed) might be forgotten; promising withal, (that in a very short time)
she would abundantly express, how sensible she had been of her late Sufferings.

Hereupon my Wife, without ever acquainting or procuring their Order for her
freedom, (only giving the Messenger of the Council of State 20 l.) caused the
Maid by her own Power (by which it seems she stood committed) to be set at
liberty.

But very suddenly after enlargement (her body being quite spent, and her mind
almost distracted with grief and melancholy) She died; and in her Death bed
professed solemnly (that by reason of those Cruelties, which had been practiced
upon her, by Mrs. Williamson, and Mrs. Ivy; and especially by the operation of
a Potion given her by them, (which upon the words of a dying woman) she
believed to be poison) That they had been the cause of her death; and that she
doubted not but that the Almighty God would require her Blood at their hands.

After these things were laid open to the Lords Commissioners for the great
Seal; I little expected that Vices should be received for Reasons; that such
abominations should have been thought worthy the protection, not to say the
encouragement of such eminent Judges; but with grief of heart, and empty Purse,
may I say, that I found experimentally there Chancery rather a Court of
oppression, than good Conscience; nay, I have this peculiar in my Case (that
after all VVitnesses on both sides were examined) they never afforded me that
favor (which they omitted to none) as to command me and my Wife in Person to
attend them, and to endeavor a Reconciliation between us.

This I thought hard measure, because I was informed all others had
participated of that Civility from them; and the more hard, in regard my Wife
had frequent and private addresses unto them, and I was never admitted any.

The consideration of this, not only astonished me, but gave me a strong Alarm
also to be very Circumspect, lest I might have as little Justice in their
Sentence, as I had favor in their proceedings.

And that on the other side, when I remembered, they openly declared before my
Council, that nothing should be concluded without sending for both parties, and
also their parties; and also their Order of the 27 of October 1651. that they
had denied her any expenses of the Suit, in regard the merits of the Cause
should be speedily heard; I could not conclude within my self, but that I
should be dealt withal according to their own Rules, and practice of all the of
England; and that a Summons (upon a day of hearing should be first sent) ere
any Sentence pronounced, or Decree made in the Cause.

But what I often suspected, and was intimated unto me by others, I had now too
much reason to believe.

For after eight months (having all that while never received any command to
wait upon their Lordships) when all my Counsel was out of Town, July 24 1652:
(Her Counsel Mr. Vincent, and Lieut. Col. Zanchey, her Solicitor, with a Sword
by his side) presented unto the Lords Commissioners, a final Decree ready
drawn; (it not being first perused by Counsel of my side, as by the Rules of
the Court it ought to have been) for no less than 300l. per annum, (a fair sum,
and enough to tempt a good Woman to be bad:) The Draught of the Order is thus.

Lords Commissioners. Saturday 24 of July 1652. Between Theodosia Ivy
Plaintiff, and Thomas Ivy her Husband, Defendant.
WHereas the Plaintiff having exhibited her Petition (against the Defendant her
Husband) to be relieved for Alimony, unto which the Defendant having put in his
Answer, diverse Witnesses were examined by Commission, and other were (by their
Lordships directions) also examined by the Register, in the presence of Counsel
on both sides; And for the better clearing of the Matters, and Satisfaction of
their Lordships therein, their Lordships were also pleased themselves to
examine several Witnesses, viva voce; And the Cause having taken up many days
in hearing, (after much Debate and Pains spent herein; And upon full and
deliberate hearing of what could be offered on both sides: And upon reading of
the said Depositions, and of the Indenture made upon the Marriage; whereby the
Estate of the Plaintiffs Father, is settled upon Sir John Brampston, Knight, and
William Booth, Esquire, to the uses in the said Indenture declared:) Their
Lordships were fully satisfied, that there is good cause to give allowance for
Alimony to the Plaintiff; And do Order, and Decree, that the Plaintiff have
paid unto her, the sum of 300 l. by the year, which their Lordships intend to
be had and raised, out of the Plaintiffs Fathers Estate, so settled in the said
Trustees, as aforesaid, until farther order: And do therefore Order, that the
said Defendant, and the said Trustees, shall authorize, or permit and suffer
the Plaintiff, or whom she shall nominate and appoint, from time to time,
quietly, and without interruption, to receive the Rents and Profits of the said
Lands: And the several Tenants of the premises are hereby ordered to pay the
same accordingly, from our Lady day last; And the said Trustees, and the said
Tenants, in so doing, are to be saved harmless by the Decree of the Court. But
in case the said Lands are in a greater yearly value than the said 300 l. per
annum, And that the said Defendant shall at any time signify so much unto
their Lordships, And undertake and sufficiently secure the payment of 300 l.
per annum, (quarterly unto the said Plaintiff) by equal portions, to be begin
from our Lady day last, then the said Defendant is hereby decreed to pay unto
the said Plaintiff, the said yearly sum of 300 l. accordingly, until further
Order, as aforesaid: And that the said Trustees are in such Case to permit and
suffer the said Defendant, and his Assigns, to receive and enjoy the Rents and
Profits of the said Fathers Estate, (any thing herein contained to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding.)

Rob: Dod, Deput. Regist.

Being advertized by a Friend of these irregular Proceedings, and perceiving
what a Considerable part of my Estate was aimed at, I addressed my self
immediately with this Petition to the Lords Commissioners, August 19.

To the Right Honorable, etc.
The humble Petition of Thomas Ivy Defendant, Husband to Theodosia Ivy,
Plaintiff.
Shows,
THat several Papers have been brought to your Petitioner, entitled as Orders
from your Lordships, but without any Subscription of the Register, or his
Deputy.

That at the end of one of the said Papers it is mentioned, that unless cause
(at the next Privy Seal) be shown to this Court to the contrary by the
Defendant, That 300 l. per annum, therein mentioned, shall be decreed: But on
what day the next Privy Seal will be, or in what place, is not expressed in the
said Paper; Neither can your Petitioner (by all possible means and industry)
find when and where he may attend your Lordships.

Insomuch, that your Petitioner has just Ground to fear (if any such Order be)
either he may be surpised, or a Decree might pass against him, without his
Knowledge of the time, wherein he might make his just Defense, especially all
his Papers being at present in the custody of his Solicitor, Mr. Cox, who is
not in Town.

In tender Consideration whereof, May it please your Honors to declare,
whether any such Order was made by the Court; and at what time and place your
Lordships have or will be pleased, peremptorily to appoint, to hear the Defense
of your Petitioner, who with all humility and willingness, will attend your
Lordships; Hoping by Gods assistance, to give a full Demonstration of his
Innocence and Integrity; and to wipe off all the foul Aspersions whatsoever,
which have been cast upon him, to ruin both his Person and Estate.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

All the Return (that I could obtain from the Lords Commissioners) unto the
said Petition, was this; Let Mr. Ivy attend us, to show us Cause, according to
the last Order, on Tuesday next. 19th of August 1652.

B. Whitlock,
R. Keeble,
J. Lisle.



On the Tuesday following I did attend in Person, but without any Counsel; all
being in the Circuits with the Judges: And if I could have found any, it had
been almost impossible to have fully instructed them in the Cause, there being
so many Depositions, and those of so great Length.

Whereupon I renewed my humble and earnest Request unto them, with all the
Vehemence I could express, That they would make no Decree, before they had
heard the merits of the Cause on both sides.

Notwithstanding, I found 'twas their Resolution to sign that irregular Paper,
and to declare beforehand, that they had found just Cause for Alimony; The
Preamble of the Decree being full of Reflections, and containing several
Insinuations against me: all that they thought fit to add, was this Clause, [
Until further Order.] A dear Expression in Chancery, and as costly as the
other, [ Unless He show Cause.]

Now, and not before, was the Order, (which they commonly call the Decree,
having put the Great Seal unto it) delivered unto the Register to enter, which
first ought to have been drawn by him, and then perused by Counsel on both
sides.

Had any one but heard, what smooth words the Lords Commissioners gave me at
this time, telling me, That it should not be prejudicial unto me, and that they
would hear my Counsel at any time, come when I would, and that 'twas but a
Temporary thing, and that they would deal tenderly with me, in so tender a
Case, as between man and Wife, one would have almost been persuaded, that it
had been my duty to have given my consent also: But though there was Honey in
their Mouths, yet was there too too much Gall in their Ink, and Wormwood in
their Decree.

Had they but considered the Deed of Covenant which (they professed) they had
perused, 'twould have appeared very evident, that there was no shadow for so
great allowance, as 300 l. per annum: When her Father himself, and my Wife also
made to me a Proposition, of giving her the liberty of living where she would,
and setting out for her fit allowance, they themselves did desire, no more but
120 l. per annum, Depos. l.

Besides of the Articles (in my custody) which they caused to be drawn to the
same Purpose.

But I suppose the Lords Commissioners were so far from considering what they
signed, that they never read the Deed, which they mention; nay, I think, I may
safely say; They did not, or would not consider the Act it self, for Alimony.

For that Act impowers them, to give only such Alimony, as is proportionable to
the Fortune which the Woman brought; and that also to be raised out of the
Husband Estate. Whereas the truth is, she has not (in all her Proofs) proved,
that she had been, or in probability could ever be worth a Penny to Me.

And as for that Estate, which the Lords Commissioners did decree unto her,
it is true, I had an equitable Title unto it; but it really did belong to the
Heir, at Law, until such time as I had performed some small Covenant.

Insomuch that Mr. Stepkins, his Son and Heir, also was injured by these
proceedings of the Lords Commissioners; for which he has often made his
Complaint, as well, as his just Title in Law, though to little purpose.

I know full well, what shadow the Commissioners put on this dealing; but
whether it be just and righteous, I submit to your Breast, and that is thus.

That although it was Covenanted, between Mr. Stepkins and my Trustees, that in
case I did not perform all the Covenants (to which I had obliged my self) then
was the said Estate of 240 l. to go to the use of the right Heirs of the said
Stepkins, until such time as I should perform: By virtue of this Clause, did
young Stepkins, lay claim to the said Estate. Yet say the Commissioners, that
Mr. Stepkins the Father (Who had reserved unto himself the Remainder of the
said Limitation, to me and my Wife) made a Will; and by that Will had
acquitted me from any further Performance; insomuch that the Estate was now
totally belonging unto me.

This I believe my Wife told them; and peradventure showed them such a Will;
and this is their Ground: But by their leave, I cannot think, till such a Will
be legally proved, That it can be any Ground for them, to give away the Estate
in such manner, as they have; upon a bare suggestion of one Party, for whose
interest and profit it was.

Certainly had they been as conscientious Judges (as they are Judges of
Conscience) they would have first caused her to prove the said Will, (which
then had cleared the Estate from the claim of my Brother Stepkins, and saved me
the expenses of some Suits in Chancery, for no other end than to get the Will
produced, which to this day, I am not able to do; Notwithstanding I have a
Bill of Complaint depending before them for that purpose)

Nevertheless all these discouragements, it pleased the Lord to give me a
proportionable measure of Patience, to submit unto his correcting hand; and in
the most sore Afflictions (which I have undergone) he has not withheld his
loving kindnesses from me, nor the sweetnesses of his refreshing Spirit; though
many Oppressions and Grievances were daily multiplied, and many new Suits at
Law were set on foot against me by my Wifes means, who now seemed justified by
them; and my self vilified and undervalued.

Yet was I not clamorous at their Bar, neither was I ever admitted to any
private Speeches with them: or indeed did ever seek it (being confident) that
my cause wanted the Protection of Justice only, and not favor; but waited,
still expecting when they would put their good Promise in Execution, and send
for us, and endeavor a cordial Reconciliation between us.

But after two months were expired, and hearing nothing from them to that
purpose (though many several Friends of Quality had moved them thereunto) I
addressed my self with an humble Petition for a hearing.

After it was read, they appointed a day (though it was somewhat far of) yet it
did abundantly revive me, hoping that that day would be the end of my trouble;
and that then, my reputation and estate, might be repaired; my Person freed
from the continual molestation of Catchpoles; And my Wife her self (whom I had
perfectly forgiven) restored unto my Bosom.

The Order which the Lords made in Answer to my Petition, was this.

Saturday 29 of April, 1653.
Between Theodosia Ivy, Plaintiff, Wife of Thomas Ivy, Defendant.
Upon the Defendants humble Petition, (this day preferred to the Right
Honorable the Lords Commissioners for the Great Seal of England) showing, That
in the unhappy difference fomented by evil persons between the said Parties;
and the said Plaintiff has petitioned their Lordships for Alimony, (being
separated from her Husband) without his Consent; Thereby intending to live
apart by her self, (contrary to the Marriage Stipulation) to the destruction
of the mutual happy Comfort, (that might, and ought to be between parties so
nearly joined) pending with Suit; Their Lordships (as Judges of good
Conscience) did often move her to Conformity and Reconcilement, chiefly desired
by the said Defendant, but the Plaintiff refused, And by an Order of the 24 of
July last, their Lordships were pleased to appoint her 300 l. per annnm out of
her Fathers Estate, until further Order; And the said Defendant (being daily
arrested and troubled for the said Plaintiffs Debis) cannot walk the streets,
without molestation, by the Officers and Bailiffs; It was prayed, That some day
(as soon as to their Honors should seem meet) may be appointed to hear the
Defendants Reasons, and the merits of the Cause, why the said Order should be
nulled; To command the Defendant and his wife to be personally before their
Lordships at the same time; so that there might be a final Conclusion of these
unhappy and unnatural Differences, under which the Defendant has long groaned,
to his utter Ruin: Their Lordships do thereupon Order, that Counsel on both
sides be heard in the Business the first Day of Causes in Trinity Term next.

John Sandford, Deput. Regist.

My Hopes and Expectations being now raised from the Dust, I considered with my
self, how I might represent the Case between me and my Wife, with the least
prejudice to her: for upon some Debatings about the Witnesses I had examined
against her, I found the Breach still made wider, by her Lawyers aggravations,
than it was really in it self; what was but a scar, they would tear open into a
wound; nay, they preferred a seeming Rhetoric so far before a Christianity,
that rather than they would exasperate, they would speak Point Blank, to the
very Papers they held in their hands.

And therefore, to prevent the like Inconveniences, and aiming at a perfect
Reconciliation, I drew up all (that Counsel could be instructed in, or could
offer at the Bar) into writing, and for each Commissioner had a Paper ready to
be presented, as follows.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for the Custody of the Great
Seal of England.
WHereas the Draught of an Order was on Friday August the 13th made, and
presented unto your Honors by the Counsel of the Plaintiff, and Mr. Zanchie
her Solicitor, not entered into the Registers Book, or drawn up by him from
any Notes taken in Court, or was ever perused by the Defendants Counsel before
it was signed, according to the Rules of the Court; in which Order it was
mentioned, that 300l. per annum should be raised out of the Fathers Estate,
which was selled at the Marriage upon Sir John Brampston Knight, Orlando
Bridgman Esquire and William Booth, to uses, etc. and upon the reading of it, it
was Ordered by your Lordships at the same time, that unless the Defendant
should show cause at the next Privy Seal, a Decree should pass accordingly; And
whereas it was ordered by another of August the 19th, That on Tuesday following
the Defendant should attend, and show Cause why the said 300l. per annum should
not be decreed; May it therefore please your Honors to consider these
following Considerations, which are all proved upon Oath, and good Evidence;
wherein he hops it is sufficiently cleared, that the Plaintiff neither ought
to have any Alimony out of that which was her Fathers Estate, or out of her
Husbands.

Mrs. Ivy, the Wife of Thomas Ivy, suggesteth by her Petition to the Lords
Commissioners, That her Husband has deserted her, and left her no means to
live; That during her Cohabitation with him, she was in danger of her life, and
became very weak, and for peril of receiving from him diseases of dangerons
conseqnence, she cannot Cohabite with him, and prays Relief.

The Question is, Whether in this Case she ought to have Alimony.

In which it will be pertinent, to consider the near conjunction that is
between Man and Wife, and whether they be of equal Authority, or there be a
Superior, and in whom that Superiority rests.

1. The Original female Ancestor was taken out of Man, and by the Marriage-bond
were made one flesh, though several Individuals, like the Celestial Gemini,
that makes but one Constellation; but the Government was placed upon the Man by
God himself, who gave the Law in Paradise, saying, Thy desire shall be to thy
Husband, and he shall rule over thee, Genesis 3. v. 16. 1 Cor. 14. 5: 34. and by
the Apostle remembered, That Women are commanded to be under obedience; so says
the Law; and that they submit themselves unto their Husbands, as to the Lord
that is supreme, 5 Ephesians. v. 22. Thus far for the Divine Law.

2. The common Law says, that a Woman that is married is not sui Juris, but sub
potestate Viri, has no Will but her Husbands, though she may have a Stomach;
therefore the Civil Acts she does are void in common Law; she can neither take
nor give any thing without her Husbands consent; She can have no reparation for
any wrong done unto her Person by her self, without her Husband, and the
damages that shall be recovered, shall go to the Husband and not to the Wife;
And it is further to be considered the extension of that word Potestas; It is
of a great latitude, for Sovereign Princes and Governors, though they have
rule and power of the People; Yet they cannot beat, wound, or kill the People
under them, nor do any thing to their Persons corporally; but according to
their Laws, by Sentence or Judgment: But the Husband has power of Correction
upon the body of his Wife, and Servant, according to his own Judgment, so as
he does not wound nor kill, and is not prohibited by any Law.

3. The Civil Law (as I take it) agrees with the Common Law; then it must
follow by necessary consequence, that a married Woman without leave cannot
depart from her Husband, which she must evidence by proof, no more than a
Servant from his Master, a Subject from his Sovereign into foreign parts, who
by his Missives is to return upon forfeit of his Estate; which makes good what
was said before, that she is not sui Juris, and in some sort expounds and
explicates the potestatem Viri in Vxorem; for the master may seize and carry
away his Servant, if he find him, or implead him that shall keep him, and
recover damages for the time he keeps him; so may the Husband by his Wife;
which shows the propriety and interest which the Husbaud has in his Wife, and
for loss of her society and company (though no other harm be done) he shall
recover damages against the detainer.

Nay the Husband could not repudiate his Wife, but in case of Adultery, for
that the Bill of divorce spoken of in the old Law, was not given by God, but
permitted by Moses, to prevent a greater mischief; for the Jews are cruel men
to their Wives, and to prevent Vxoricidium, he gave way to it, Sed non fuit
sic ab initio.

The Case thus stated upon the impotencies and non-ability of the will of the
Wife, and the just Rule and Power of the Husband over her will and Person; it is
considerable, whether by Law or Reason, a Wife departing without leave, shall
have allowance to live separate, which is called Alimony.

Alimony is a Thing not known at the Common or Civil Law, but indulged, and
brought in by the Pope and his Canons, and very much put in Use by the late
High Commission and Prerogative Court of Canterbury, wherein, upon Sentence of
Separation from Bed and Board given by that Court, the Husband was enjoined to
make allowance to the Wife, and the Husband enforcd to give security for the
payment, and many times imprisoned upon failer of performance; yet in those
cases, both of Bonds and Imprisonments, the Husband upon Habeas Corpus
returnable in the uper Bench, where by Judgment of that Court, discharged of
both, if the Husband cohabit, because the Law says, Quos Deus conjunxit, nemo
separet. So as without the Husbands consent no separation could be made, and if
no separation, no Alimony.

Nor were personal Infirmities or diseases contracted after Marriage sufficient
cause of such separation, because she may board though not bed with such a
Husband; but where the temper of the Husband was more severe and violent then
discreet, That Court by the wisdom of prevention, which is better then the
wisdom of remedies, did use by way of caution to take bond for the Husbands
orderly usage of his Wife, to prevent the cruelty whereof they had no
Jurisdiction, but only in causes and salute Animae, and not pro reformatione
Morum, which belongs to the Common Law, and where upon complaint by the Wife in
that kind the Common Law will enforce the Husband to give bond to secure both
life and member of his Wife from maim and death.

And certainly Reason is against it.

1 Reason commands obedience to Superiors, generally the Apostle puts it
further for conscience sake, and disobedience is not cherished by any Reason.

2 One end of Marriage is Mutual society and comfort, would be avoided by the
Act of the Wife, which is not to be admitted upon the petulant Allegation of
difference betwixt her and her Husband upon personal Infirmities.

3 Marriage it self, and all the Laws of the Wife's subjection and capacity by
so long time pronounced and received, by this means would be avoided.

4 If God himself was pleased to say, it was not good for a Man to be alone,
then surely we may safely say, it is not good for a Woman to be alone; for
though they are the weaker Vessel, and have the lesser Reason, yet they have
the stronger Passions, and more violent Desires, and so more subject to
Temptation and Sin.

5 Lastly, for the inevitable Danger of illegitimate Bastards, and Clandestine
Issues (where the Wife is separate) who concealed til the Husbands death, are
yet inheritable to his Land (though never begotten by him;) This Inconvenience
sadly weighed, and how Epidemically it may run to all Families of this Nation,
is of it self a sufficient convincing Reason, to bridle the rash hot appetit of
inconsiderable women, and avoid all Alimony. But on the other side, If any
Husband shall be so unjust to his Wife, and unkind to his own flesh, whom he
is bound by Law to maintain, as to separate from her, and will not cohabite
with her, Nisi propter Adulterium, or will consent to separate, it is most
reasonable he should allow her convenient maintenance; else he should take
advantage of his own wrong and humor, and Women should be in worse case and
condition than Servants, who during their contract must have their wages, which
between Husband and Wife ends not till death. And it is conceived the Act of
Parliament, which impowreth the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal to allow
Alimony, chiefly and naturally intends Relief, where the Husband does
repudiate, and not the Wife; the words being upon consideration as well of the
Portion or Estate that has been paid, or come to the Husband by such Wife as
shall pray Relief.

And therefore in this particular Case, it may be very justly insisted, even
from the sense and letter of the Act; as also that 'twas Mrs. Ivy separated
her self from her Husband, 'twas not her Husband left her; Nay, after she was
gone, he used all affectionated and prudential means to bring her home to
Cohabit with him, neither does he desist in the prosecution of it, but has
several ways attempted it, even until this day, and does still declare and
protest his willingness to receive her, whenever she will Return, and give
security for his well Usage of her.

That she wanted nothing before her departure, but was indeed maintained far
above her quality, is most clear from the Depositions, and it is clear also
from the Depositions, that there was no deserting of her by her Husband, but
that her departure was absolutely upon Advice and consideration designed by her
self and her Abettots, especially if your Lordships please to remember those
unhandsome correspondencies held by her with Gentlemen under feigned names; her
frequenting and meeting them in scandalous houses in Long-Acre and other
places, at unseasonable times of the night, under the pretense of withdrawing
from her Husbaud (being a Bed) to her Devotion; Those horrrid and detestable
plots upon Jane Gilbert, even to the losing of her life; Her charging her
Husband with foul diseases, of which he was cleared upon Oath by the President
of the College and other learned Physicians, And also her Contrivancies and
Solicitations to her Brother John Stepkins to murder her Husband, which
appears by the Oath of the said Stepkins.

Moreover seeing that there is a Caution in the Act, that the allowance to the
repudiated Wife ought to be proportionable to the Fortune she brought her
Husband: May it therefore please your Honors to understand,

1. That he never received any penny portion as yet, and has great reason to
doubt whether ever he shall.

2. Because the Estate of her Father is at present in the aforesaid Trustees,
and not in the Defendant, nay it is so settled on them, that unless I can raise
and secure 4000 l. more, besides 7000 l. already laid out, they are not
oblighed, neither will they, nor can they, convay it to the Defendant, as
appears by the Indenture of settlement.

3. In case they should convay and setle on the Defendant the said Estate, it is
only for his life, and no longer; for which Estate, being only 240 l. per
annum, He has disbursed and laid out far more money than it is worth; this
appears from the Indenture ( viz.) a 1000 l. to Mr. Stepkins in ready money, to
free the Estate from encumbrances three years since.

The Interest whereof comes to 200 l. In Jewels, Pearls, Ambergreeze, Bezoar,
etc. to the value of 1200 l. There was also spent in Law to enforce the
Trustees, who were kept back and hindered by Mr. Stepkins her father, to settle
the Estate according to the Covenants, and for the fine and recovery 200 l.
more at least, which makes 2600 l.

That notwithstanding all the aforesaid sums of money have been laid out by the
Defendant, the Trustees do still refuse to convey the Estate to the Defendant,
and the Plaintiffs brother (as Heir at Law) has since the death of his Father
got the possession of the Estate, and receives the Rents, Issues and profits
thereof: Insomuch that the Defendant has been necessitated to expend great
sums of money to maintain several Suits at Law, both against the Trustees and
Heir at Law, in preservation of his Estate for life, which he has so dearly
bought as aforesaid.

That by the Plaintiffs means there has been consumed and wasted of his Estate
4000 l. ( viz) 3000 l. since marriage spent on her, 500 l. given in money, 100
l. given to Gentlemen of her familiar acquaintance to persuade her to go into
the Country, 300 l. taken in Silks and Plate from the Defendant, whilst that he
was at the Court of Aldermen: He has also contracted several great debts to the
value of 3000 l. besides 1000 l. spent in this unhappy Suit, and must therefore
necessarily (in case 3000 l. per annum be taken from him) be cast into prison
the most part of his life (he having but 632 l. per annum of his own Estate)
and that for his life only, both to pay all his debts aforesaid, and to live on
beside.

Excepting the 240 l. per annum, which if it be recovered from the Heir of
Stepkins, and recovered by the Trustees, all which will yield but a scant and
bare maintenance for himself, Wife and Family, to raise out of it 3000 l. for
the Creditors, and 4000 l. more according to the Indenture of settlement,
unless the Defendant be acquitted and discharged of the said 4000 l. by the
last Will and Testament of the Plaintiffs Father, in whom the remainder of the
Estate was, in case the Defendant should have no Issue, or not perform the
Covenants which he stands obliged to perform in the said Deed: And though the
Defendant is credibly informed, that the said remainder is disposed of to the
said Plaintiff, and the Defendant is also acquitted from all performance of any
Covenants expressed in the said Deed of Settlement; Yet so it is, that the
Plaintiff having got possession of the said Will, and by combination with Sir
John Brampston Knight, etc. his Son, the sole Executor of it, still keeps and
detaines the said Will from being legally proved: Insomuch that the Defendant
cannot make any benefit of the said Estare, nor by Law enforce the Plaintiff to
produce the Will (she being his Wife.) That this is not a bare suggestion, I
doubt not but is very evident to your Lordships, she and her Solicitor Zanchey
having often avouch'd in your Lordships presence, that both there is such a
Will, and that your Lordships have seen it: This is also very well known unto
her Counsel Mr. Maynard, who caused to be delivered unto Sir W. Row a true Copy
of the said Will taken from the Original, which was long in his Custody. But
such is the Plaintiffs malice to the Defendants Person and Estate, that she
still suppresses and hinders the proving of it, which is the sole cause of the
continuance of many great Suits and vast expenses to the Defendant, both with
the Heirs at Law, the Executors of the said Will, and Trustees of the said
Estate; That both the Defendant and Plaintiff must necessarily be defeated of
all hopes of ever enjoying the Fathers Estate for the future, unless the 4000
l. aforesaid be raised and disposed of, according as is limited and appointed
in the Deed of Settlement, or the said Will proved, for in Default thereof,
the Trustees are obliged by the said Indenture to settle the said Estate on the
Plaintiffs Father, and his Heirs for ever.

And the Estate is not as yet recovered by the Defendant, but is still invested
in the Trustees, (who are no parties to these proceedings) and in the
possession of the Heir at Law; Insomuch that no Alimony, as the Defendant is
advised by his Counsel, can be ordered from hence, because the Ordinance of
Parliament impowreth the Lords Commissioners to allow the maintenence out of
the Husbands Estate, not out of any others whatsoever. And the Plaintiff has
or ought to have in her custody 1200 l. worth of Jewels, which were delivered
her according to the Indenture of Settlement at the Inter-marriage: And in case
the Defendant survive her, ought to be restored to the Desendant, who has too
great reason to suspect that they are wasted and embezelled; and therefore the
Defendant humbly beseeches your Lordships, that instead of giving her Alimony,
you will be pleased to enforce her to give good security unto the Defendant, or
bring the Jewels into Court, that so he may not be cheated of 1200 l. by the
Plaintiff and her Abettors; and unless your Honors yield to secure the said
jewels whilst this cause depends before you, he does not conceive where or how
he can be redressed from any Court of England.

That about the beginning of these unhappy differences, it was proposed both by
the Plaintiff and her Father, that in case she mighthave her liberty to live
where she would, that she would accept of 120 l. per annum for her maintenance,
and look on it as a very good provision, which accordingly was agreed upon, and
drawn into writing, and engrossed, by and with the consent of Sir John
Brampstone her Uncle, and Orlando Bridgeman Esquire, two of her Trustees; her
Father also promising that his Estate should be settled according to the
Covenants on the Defendant, without further Suit of Law; but the said Defendant
was unwilling to seal it, being very tender to Act any thing that might
separate him from the continual enjoyment and society of his Wife; so that 300
l. per annum, is more than her self, Father, Trustees and friends did think
fitting by 180 l. per annum.

That the Petition it self is both false and scandalous, and has been
disproved by several Witnesses; nay the contrary also proved by Persons of
Quality, that she lived very plentifully in great abundance, rather beyond,
than under her Quality in every respect, as the Defendant hops is most
visible to your Honors.

That notwithstanding such vast sums have been expended on her by her means,
and that the said Defendant is to pay to Creditors 3000 l. and to raise 4000 l.
more to be secured unto the Trustees as aforesaid; And that in case he recover
the Plaintiffs Fathers Estate, 'twill not with his own, make above 872 l. per
annum, out of which all these moneys must be raised; and in case 300 l. per
annum of this shall be taken away out of the Plaintiffs Fathers Estate, which
he has dearly bought, and purchased; That 'twill be impossible for the
Defendant to avoid perpetual Imprisonment, but must be kept in Jail, and the
Creditors defrauded, and must there perish, and himself be cheated also of 1200
l. worth of Jewels; yet he is most willing to receive her, and take her again,
and forget all former Passages whatsoever, that so they may for the future lead
a peaceable and godly Life together.

Counsel also I did retain, very many, and great ones; That in Case the Lords
should refuse the Papers, and would not hear the Merits of the Cause in
Public, (in regard I might not be wanting, to lose the opportunity of that
Time which they had ordered for me) I drew up also to be tendered at the same
time (that (if it had been possible) I might have prevented both Reading and
Arguing too) this short Petition following.

Theodosia Ivy Plaintiff, Thomas Ivy Defendant.
To the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for the Custody of the Great
Seal of England,
The humble Petition of Thomas Ivy, Defendant,
Shows,
THat your Petitioner (with much Horror and Amazement) does consider the great
unhappiness of his future life, if your Lordships shall both separate him from
the Society of his Wife, and take from him so great a part of his Estate,
having such great debts to pay, as have been made appear to your Lordships.

That he cannot Despair in the infinite Mercy of God, in whose hands are the
hearts and desires of all Mankind, But that his Wife (notwithstanding such vast
sums of Money have been wasted, and such odious aspersions cast on him) may yet
return, and take Comfort from her Husband (being passionately desirous to
receive her) if all Christian and prudent means, may be applied.

That for your Petitioners part, he does (as in the presence of God) forgive
her from the bottom of his Soul, and is most willing to Cohabite with her, so
long as he lives on Earth.

That he has often desired to express unto her, and used all the Iudustry (as
Man can imagine) but once to speak with her (even before any of her friends, to
let her know so much) but could never obtain any such meeting from her.

In Order hereunto, he is very willing that a Godly and Conscientious Divine,
(may be received to live in house with your Petitioner and his Wife,) both to
exhort and instruct them in their Duties toward God, and one another; and to
perform all Gospel, and Family Duties amongst them: for certainly the Lord will
not deny a Blessing on those means which he has ordained; and which is
unfeignedly sought after by a broken and contrite Spirit. And your Petitioner
will oblige himself to allow any such Minister 50 l. per annum, besides all
other conveniences whatsoever.

May it therefore please your Lordships, not to pronounce any such hard
Sentence (as Separation) but rather enjoin your Petitioner and his Wife to live
together; and to appoint any honest and religious Divine to live with them, who
may ever be at hand to pray with them, and for them, and to keep up their
Spirits in Peace and Unity together. And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
Thomas Ivy.
August 24th 1652.
When the Day came, and the Counsel began to speak, my hopes were quickly
commanded to vanish, and the Counsel to hold their Peace; for they suddenly
declared, That they would not hear the Merits of the Cause.

With much pressing, Mr. Lisle read the Petition; And though they took evident
notice of it, yet would they not return any Answer to it; or so much as demand
of my Wife, (who stood there laughing in their Presence) whether she would
return to me, or no; Only they were pleased to find fault with that word [
Separation;] And told my Counsel, That they neither had, or could separate our
Persons.

These words they had no sooner spoke, but (I confess) I laid hold on; though I
had been most hardly and severely dealt withal, in the judgment of those that
were present.

Insomuch, That now I did despair, ever to find amongst them, and indeed, did
determine to commit my Cause unto God, until (in his due time) he should raise
up Judges in our Israel, who should execute Righteons Judgment, even upon
those Judges themselves.

But in the mean time, I was advised (which was very agreeable unto my own
Disposition, not to leave any thing unattempted, which might be thought
advantageous to a Union of Us,) but to go personally to my Wife, and persuade
her my self, to leave those Persons who aimed at both our Ruins, And to return
to me, (passionately willing to receive her.

And if she should, (notwithstanding) refuse to speak, or go with me, then to
demand her of those Persons who received her into their houses.

Accordinly, (taking two civil Gentlemen) I went to her Lodging, but received a
Repulse from her, instead of Compliance; and then, seeing Mr. Williamson (who
kept the house) I required from him the person of my Wife, who refusing her,
was sued by me.

And upon the Trial before my Lord Chief Justice Roles (a renowned Person) had
a Verdict, Judgment and Execution of 100 l. against the said Williamson, for
detaining my Wife from me.

Many Counsels there were to argue the Case; and the Decree itself (under the
great Seal of England) was opened, read, and showed the Jury: But my Lord Roles
quickly stated the resolution of the Case in my behalf, and the Jury gave me
100 l. damages.

Williamson (now finding himself in a great Dilemma) either to deliver up my
Wife, or himself, to ruin; and my Wife in so bad a condition, (notwithstanding
her glorious Decree) that although she had 300 l. per annum, yet if she could
not take the liberty of her old Companions, or any new one (wheresoever she
should be entertained) for fear of Judgment and Executions; began to take new
Counsel, how to free Mr. Williamson and her self from this bondage of living
under the Roof of a Husbands House; and the truth is, solicited it to the
purpose (amongst her old Patrons) the Lords Commissioners.

For with all speed, Williamson prefers a Bill in Chancery to be releeved
against my Execution. And after he had preferted his Bill (though my Answer was
so clear, as it could not admit of one exception) moved for an Injunction
(after Judgment and Execution granted at Law) and to protect him for keeping
away my Wife; which was granted in these words, (as fully as he could desire)
being engrossed in Parchment and sealed.

THe Keepers of the Liberty of England, by Authority of Parliamemt; To Thomas
Ivy Esquire, and to his Counselors, Agents, and Sollicitors, and every of
them, Greeting. It was informed in our Court of Chancery 10 November instant,
in the behalf of George Williamson, Pl. against you the said Thomas, that the
Pls. Bill is to be relieved against an Action and Judgment, thereupon obtained
against the Pl. upon pretense of the said Pls. detaining of your (the said
Defendants Wife) from you; and it appearing in a Cause of Alimony, between you,
the said Defendant, and your Wife, that their Lordships decreed her Alimony,
during Separacion; In which time, she ought to have a Habitation apart from you
the said Defendant, as well as a separate maintenance, or else, the Decree were
groundless: And we conceiving the doings of you (the said Defendant) to be
altogether unjust, Do command, and by these presents strictly enjoin you the
above named Thomas Ivy, and you his said Counselors, Attorneys, Agents,
Sollicitors, and every of you, under the pain of 500 l. to be levied of your
Lands, Goods and Chattels to our use, That you, and every of you, (do from
benceforth) surcease and forbear all further Proceedings (at the common Law)
against the Plaintiff upon the said Action and Judgment thereupon, until the
said cause shall be finally heard and determined before us in our said Court;
And this you, nor any of you, may omit in any wise (under the penalty
aforesaid, Witness, our hands, at Westminster 10 November, 1653.

Vera Copia ex May.

This Injunction (being now granted, Signed and Sealed, with the Commissioners
hands under the great Seal of England) is the Accomplishment of all their
Designs; and the completing of my Misery; though the Courts of Law, both could
and have (in some measure) relieved me; yet is the power of it restrained by
this Injunction; which indeed I suppose can be called nothing else, than a
perfect Separation and Divorce: whether the Chancery (being styled the high
Court) ever receives from any Parliaments, such an unlimited power as this, It
behooves them to make out unto your Highness.

It Is the opinion, both of the greatest and honestest Counsel of England; That
no parallel for this Case, no President of the like Nature, is to be found on
Record; Nay, they are not backward to aver, That it is as contrary to the Word
of God, the Law of the Nations, the Civil Law, the Law of our own Country, as
well as the Practice of the Chancery it self.

Once did that Court (by its own Authority) issue out a Sequestrat^on upon a
Gentleman's Estate, and it was by very many Persons admired, and murmured at;
but never could I near, that they ever sequestered Women from their Husbands.

Were there not a superior Jurisdict on over this Court, (whose Determinations
seems too too Arbitrary,) being grounded solely upon the Opinions (not to say
the Passions or Affections) of two or three Erring men, what a miserable
Bondage and Slavery were this Nation in? what Benefit could we expect from all
the good Laws of former Ages, if their power may be qu^^^'d, or suppressed at the
pleasure of the Chancery? They might have (for ought I know) made an Injunction
also, that I should never complain; and if I had attempted to have made known
my Case, to have aid me by the heels.

But blessed be the name of our God Jehovah, whose extraordinary Providence
has been visible in this Land, that he has raised up and settled your Highness
to be next under himself the Supreme Dispenser of Justice and Righteousness to
these Nations, which the Lord has happily placed under your Highness
Government. By which means we have a just confidence to be assured, having had
many Experiences already of your Highnesses singular piety and justice in those
several stations where the Lord has formerly placed you, That there shall be
no more complainings made, either in our streets, or in the very corners of our
Country, but shall be heard, and relieved even against the Great Ones amongst
us.

It Is your Highness power therefore which I implore; it is only your power can
free me from those Fetters which are laid upon me by the Lords Commissioners;
only your power that can repair me for the Injuries done, (both to my Person
and Estate, which I have undergon) by Reason of my seduced Wife; It Is you alone,
that can restore me the Benefit of the Law, against those that have been
Incendiaries and Abettors of these unnatural differences between us: That so my
Reputation (which has been a long time clouded) may be made clear; my Person
(which has continually been molested with Catchpoles by my Wifes means) may be
at length free; And that I may be in a condition to satisfy my Creditors
(their just debts) whose Purses have supported me; and that a final end may be
put to these unnatural differences, concerning my Wife, as in Justice and
Conscience shall seem meet unto your Highness.

In order to this, I have delivered in my Petition, and the state of my Case,
to Mr. Sadler, and Mr. Long, to be delivered unto your Highness. In these words.

To the Parliament for the Commonwealth of England.
The humble Petition of Thomas Ivy Esquire,
Shows,
THat your Petitioners Wife very suddenly after her Intermarriage with him,
having got from him a Jointure of 1000 l. per annum, with 1000 l. in ready
money to be left her at the time of his death, and 1200 l. in Jewels, 600l.
worth of Clothes, 500 l. in ready money, and accommodation to the value of 3000
l. in less than 18 months time, (and all this without one penny portion with
her) has not only deserted his Company, but has preferred a scandalous
Petition to the Lords Commissioners for the Great Seal against him, yet nothing
material proved.

That by these unnatural Courses, she has caused him to spend 3000l. in this
and Twelve other Suits at Law; by which means aforesaid, your Petitioner is
become indebted at this present time 3000l. more at least.

That he has often tendered unto the said Commissioners his Willingness to
receive her, and to give any security which they can require, to use her with
all loving Respects becoming a good Husband.

Notwithstanding the said Commissioners have allowed her 300 l. per an.
Alimony; and refused to hear the Merits of the Cause, though they had ordered
it under their hands; and have also granted an Injunction to protect such (who
keep the Person of his Wife from him) contrary to Law.

Insomuch, that your Petitioner has no Remedy left in Law or Equity (All which
more clearly appears by the State of his Case and Narrative hereunto annexed.)

May it therefore please your Honors to commiserate his sad condition; and (in
regard she obstinately refuses to Cohabit with him in the Quality of a Wife)
to vacate the said Order of 300 l. per annum; and to null the said Jointure of
1000 l. per annum, and 1000 l. in ready money; and to enforce her to return the
1200 l. in Jewels, whereby your Petitioner may be enabled to satisfy his
Creditors their just debts; and that Reparation and Satisfaction may be made,
both to his Reputation and Estate, as shall seem meet to your Honors Wisdoms
and Justice. And your Petitioner, etc.

To the Parliament for the Commonwealth of England.
The State of the Case of Thomas Ivy Esquire.
THat Mr. Ivy about October 1649. took to Wife Theodosia Garret Widow,
Daughter of John Stepkins Esquire on whom, by reason of the great affection, which
he bore unto her, he settled 1000l. per an. oynture, and gave also security to
leave her 1000 l. in ready money at the time of his death, and this without any
consideration of a Portion from her Father, or any Estate left her by her
former Husband, who not only left her without a Jointure, but in debt also.

That the said Stepkins perceiving how really Mr. Ivy stood affected to his
said Danghter, and with what cheerfulness and willingness he was resolved to
settle all his Estate for the good and preferment of his said Daughter; was
content, that if Mr. Ivy would free his the said Stepkins Estate, which was
240 l. per annum then encumbred with several debts, or pay a 1000 l. toward
the same, and deliver into the hands of the said Daughter 1200 l. in Jewels
that then it should be settled on Mr. Ivy for his life, and afterward to the
use of his Daughter for her life; And in case, he had no Issue by her, then to
the Heirs general of the said Stepkins, or such as the said Stepkins should
limit and appoint.

Whereupon Mr. Ivy did deliver unto the said Theodosia rich Jewels to the
value of 1200 l. in ready money to the said Stepkins to free his Estate
accordingly.

That Mr. Ivy then expected a reciprocal return of his affection, which he had
so cordially demonstrated: But when the said 1000 l. was paid, and a firm and
legal settlement of the Jointure made, and the Jewels delivered to his said
Wife, He found great reason to uspect, that 'twas rather his Fortune than
himself, which she had wedded: For she not only sought all means to avoid ^is
Company, but chose out those as she thought might be most offensive to him, and
such (whom by reason of the scandal they lay under) he had prohibited her to
converse with.

Notwithstanding, seeing it was the pleasure of the Lord to unite them in so
near a union; Mr. Ivy was resolved not to leave any fair and honest motives
(either of Purle or Persuasion) unattempted, which might incline her affection
toward him; and in order hereunto (there was nothing which she ever proposed,
which might be for her content) that he did deny unto her: And in less than
fourteen Months, she expended in apparel, 600 l. in ready money 500l. and for
other Accommodations about 2800 l. besides the 1200 l. in Jewels, and 1000 l.
in moan* aforesaid; which amounts to 6100 l. Nay, the Gifts were so great he
bestowed on her, That he supposes, she was even ashamed to request any more
from him.

Nevertheles she, by the evil counsel of her Confederates (while he was at the
Court of Aldermen) did convey out of his house Plate, and rich East India
stuffs, to the value of 300 l. and diverse other goods, which were by her and
her Confederates carried away and imbezelled.

That Mr. Ivy now finding his own Estate, as well as his Wifes Affection, too
too visibly declining; and that nothing could attend such an unhappy condition,
but Ruin and Dishonor, to prevent both, persuaded his said Wife to retire
with him for a while to his Estate in the Country; thinking thereby to take her
off from the Temptations of those seducing Persons, who engaged her in such
pernicious courses.

But instead of a compliance, he found a greater Obstinacy than ever; neither
could her own friends, (who then persuaded her to leave the City for a while)
prevail with her. And that there might be no Industry wanting to persuade her,
he gave 100 l. to two Persons of her familiar Acquaintance, to be urgent and
sollicitous to endeavor the Accomplishment of his desire.

But by the Practices of the said Confederates, she was seduced to the
preferring of a vile, scandalous, and false Petition to the Lords Commissioners
against Mr. Ivy for obtaining Alimony; but not one syllable of her suggestions
proved against him: Nay, the contrary proved by Mr. Ivy, by the several
Testimonies of many Persons of good Quality and Reputation, as appears by the
Depositions themselves, besides his own Oath which he made in answer to the
scandalous aspersions cast upon him.

Notwithstanding this Vindication, after two years dependence in the Chancery,
and the Expenses of almost 3000 l. in this unnatural, and twelve other Suits at
Law, (which were commenced against him, by the means of this Suit) she obtained
from the Lords Commissioners an Order in private for 300 l. per ann. Alimony.

(Notwithstanding Mr. Ivy was always ready to receive her, and use her in a^l
Respects according to her Quality neither, Mr. Ivy) nor his Counsel being
present, Notwithstanding they declared, That they would send for Mr. Ivy, ^
they would give Judgment in the Case; But never as yet did, nor ever yet heard
the Merits of the Cause; which (in respect of the proceedings) was contrary to
the Rules of the Court; and in respect of the Allowance (in case Mr. Ivy had
been guilty of the Complaint) contrary to the Act of Parliament.

Having thus Affliction added to Affliction, and being in Debt by the means of
his said Wife above 3000 l. And having not wherewithal to sell to pay his
Creditors, (And in regard the Reversion of his Estate is settled on his said
Wife) he attended almost a year upon the Lords Commissioners for his Relief,
that they would be pleased but to grant him a fair hearing upon the Merits of
the Cause, in presence of both parties, with their Counsel; which was by their
Order accordingly granted, and a Day by them appointed.

But when the Day came, and Mr. Ivy had retained to his great charge, many
great Counsel, the Lords Commissioners absolutely refused to hear the said
Cause; which has exposed the said Mr. Ivy and his Wife to all manner of
Temptations, and their Persons and Estates to utter Ruin.

And although at the same time Mr. Ivy did Request the said Lords
Commissioners to recommend any godly Minister, whom they themselves should
choose to live in house with him and his Wife (as an Expedient to a Peace and
Reconciliation between them) for which he obliged himself to allow any such
Minister 50 l. per annum, besides all other fitting Accommodations whatsoever;
yet was this Proposal flighted by them, and laughed at by his said Wife, even
in the presence of their Lordships.

And since that time Mr. Ivy having sued those (who received her, and denied
her unto him) and obtained by just proceedings in Law, a Judgment and
Execution against such Persons, The Lords Commissioners have notwithstanding
granted their Injunction for their Protection.

Insomuch, that they have now effected an absolute Separation; which is
contrary to the Law of the Nation, and the Act of Parliament for Alimony it
self; which was declared by my Lord Chief Justice Roles upon Reading the Decree
for Alimony.

FINIS.

