THE Independents Dream, OF A New-Nothing, CALLED A Church, without either
Government, Doctrine or Manners, suitable to the Gospel of Jesus Christ:
Zealously interpreted, by a Christian Brother, who is a professed enemy to
confusion.

Showing how the Independent-dreaming Teachers, through the spectacles of
fantasy, discover strange New-Lights, and newborn Truths, wherewith they
delude the hearts of the simple, and allure them into the Labyrinth of their
innovated traditionall form of godliness.

1 TIMOTHY 4. 1. In the latter days some shall depart from the faith, giving heed
to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils. Printed in the Year 1647.

The INDEPENDENTS Dream of a New-Nothing, called, a Church without either
Government, Doctrine or Manners, suitable to the Gospel of Jesus Christ:
Zealously interpreted by a Christian Brother, who is a professed enemy to
confusion.
THat the Spirit has revealed in these latter days in the Church of England
such strange new lights, that the Saints and godly of the Land, as they call
them, can clearly see to distinguish themselves from the enemies of Jesus
Christ, and separate their sanctified members into new molded Congregations in
purity to enjoy their newborn truths, with a supposed imitation of the Church
of Jerusalem, Act. 1. 15. where the number of names were 120. from thence
gathering, that every particular Independent Church must have the same
authority that Assembly had, and none to be capable of their membership,
until they have had sufficient trial of their conversation, and have heard
the confession of their faith, and the evidences of of the truth of their
conversion, and until they have entered into a solemn Covenant, and have the
joint consent of the whole Congregation, proclaiming all that are not molded
up after their new model, to be people out of Covenant, and to have no right
to the new Covenant, neither they nor their children, though believers time was
when the old way, and the good way leading to eternal life was carefully and
constantly walked in by all those who were Saints indeed, to just^fie their
public profession of the faith in Jesus Christ: But in these last and
perilous days, such braine-sick humors have possessed the spirits of many
men, that they are carried away with every wind of Doctrine, and like mere
naturalists, are ever thirsting after some newborn truth, though the
tradition of a mortal man, to tickle their itching ears, disobeying the
commands of their Lord and Master specified in the Law and Gospel, which ought
to be their rule of righteousness, and the perfect path to everlasting
happiness.

The Devil has power to transform himself into an Angel of light, and
being the God of this world blinding men's eyes, the Prince of the air ruling
in the hearts of the children of disobedience, we may probably conjecture from
whence the Independent seducing Teachers have their new lights, even from the
father of lies, who was a liar from the beginning, he has possessed their
wavering and unstable thoughts with an Ignis fatuus, or a prodigious Comet,
which presageth ruin to the Church and State: maintaining a faction clean
contrary to the League and Covenant, which by Ordinance of Parliament has been
generally entered into: Good warrant have the Magistrates of England to
suppress any innovated faction, from the practice of the Prophets and Elders
of Israel, prescribed in holy Writ for their imitations who in all ages had the
sword of justice in their hands to punish all seducers, as appears Deuteronomy. 13.
1, 2, 3 4, 5. 1 Kings 18. 21. Judges 6. 30. 31.

For their Church* Government after their separation into new-moulded
Congregations, the better to imitate the whole College of Apostles and
Presbyters they would grace every sucking Church of theirs with all ^he
authority the grand Presbytery at Jerusalem could challenge to themselves, and
additionall innovations, more then they ever practiced, as evidently appears,
when contrary to the Scriptures they give authority to silly women to have
voices in admitting members into their solely sanctified societies.

But alas! in this they make themselves a derision to all intelligent people,
who are well versed in the ways of godliness because they know by the
testimony of holy Scriptures, that as at first our Grandmother Eve brought
confusion upon all mankind, even so it would be now in our destracted Church
and State, may their Hermophradite counsels be continued contrary to the
Covenant: The great emoluments which do redound unto their seducing Teachers
may move them in private to plead for this form of Government: Yet it being
contrary to the express Word of God 1 Cor. 14. 34. 35. 36. 1 Timothy 2. 9. 12.
there is neither sense or reason why such distructive practices should be
tolerated. What more uncharitable, and nnchristian-like scribbling was ever
produced, then the pens of these men have in frequent editions manifested. As
that the Minsters of the Church of England, that are not of their fraternity,
do deny, disclaim and preach against Christ's Kingly Government over men's
consciences and Churches, and that all the people under their Ministry are men
unconverted, or at least converted but in part, wanting the main things, to wit
Christ's Kingly office: men visibly out of the Covenant of grace, who have not
so much as an outward profession of faith, who deny Christ to be their King, to
whose persons and infants, the very Sacraments, and Seals of grace which all
Church Communion may and ought to be denied.

In the foregoing words, our brethren the Independent Ministers, deserting the
way, the truth, and the life, like the juggling Jesuits bring in their own
traditions and inventions as newborn truths, never heard of before these
distracted times: and under the notion of strange Revelations for their own
profit and repute, this heresy both in pulpit and in press has been
published, though there is no president in sacred authority for their practice,
nor have they the least color for it in Christ's Commission: But because some
illeterate mechanics are exalted with a style of state, as learned
Interpreters of the Scriptures, who have learned a flattering faculty to
magnify their own Churches as the only Saints upon earth: And by this
delusion are blind guides leading them to the pit of perdition, which clearly
shows that the Independent Teachers generally resemble those the Apostle S.
Jude mentions in the 10. and 19. Verses, They speak evil of those things they
know not, who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.

S. Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians, Gal. 1. 8, 9. he charge them
(though the Apostles themselves or an Angel from heaven should preach unto
them otherwise then they had received) they should account him accursed,
intimating unto them, that they must contain themselves within the limits and
bounds of that Doctrine and manner of preaching prescribed and set down in the
Word of God.

How ridiculous then do the seduced Independents make themselves? who
forgetting to search the Scriptures, as the Bereans did, do embrace with great
applause, the innovation of braine-sick fantasies, when in the whole current
of the Scriptures there is no warrant, that after men believe and are baptized,
they should walk with them some time, for a sufficient trial of their
conversations, and make a public confession of their faith and produce
evidences for the truth of their conversion, enter into a solemn Covenant, and
have the joynt-consent of the whole Congregation before they can be admitted
Members of their Church; had these circumstances been necessary, Christ would
have put them into the Apostles Commission, and the Holy Ghost Act. 1. would
have suggested all these things into their memories: the new way, the newborn
truth the new light, that they might have been recorded.

But the Eunuch no sooner desires Baptism of Philip, that is admission into the
Church, but Philip granted it, no mention made of the Churches approbation: the
like admission you may find by Paul and Silas, Act. 16. 31, 32, 33. without the
foregoing innovated formallity.

Therefore St. Paul's caution is seasonable, to take heed of false Teachers,
whatsoever show of seeming Sanctity they make, abusing the simplicity of the
people for their own advantage. And make their own traditions joined Members,
with the Gospel, as if they had a more fine weal and elegant way of gathering
Churches and admitting Members then Paul, and the other Apostles, having new
and better lights revealed unto them.

But that all real Saints on earth may still hear the voice of Christ, and
persevers in the old and good way leading to eternal life. The same Apostles
advice is like apples of gold in pictures of silver, Phil. 3. 17. Brethren be
followers of me, and mark them which walk so as you have us for an example,
for our conversation is in heaven: And in the 4. Chapter, Verse 8. He says,
Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, do, and the God of
peace shall be with you.

FINIS.

