Medicina Magnetica: OR, The rare and wonderful Art Of Curing by SYMPATHY: Laid
open in APHORISMS; Proved in CONCLUSIONS; And digested into an easy Method
drawn from both: Wherein the Connection of the Causes and Effects of these
strange Operations, are more fully discovered than heretofore.

All cleared and confirmed, by pithy Reasons, true Experiments, and pleasant
Relations.

Preserved and Published, As a MASTERPIECE in this SKILL.

By C. de Iryngio, Chirurgo-Medcine in the Army.

Nullum numen abest. Printed in the Year, 1656.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GENERAL GEORGE MONCK, Commander in Chief of all the
Forces in SCOTLAND; And one of his Highness Council, for the Government of
that Nation.
My LORD,
IT is the Law of this and other Nations, that whatsoever treasure is found,
straight to be carried to the Supreme of that People. Wherefore falling on
this, no little (in my opinion, which is the only Law that puts value on any
thing to me) treasure, that I might not be guilty of concealment, I present it
to your Lordship, being Chief-Captain of those Forces amongst whom for diverse
years I have served, and prospered. The bulk of the Book can crave none of
those few moments snatched from weighty business and letten fall on
recreations; the rareness of the subject and handling of this Magical-Medicine
may sometimes commend it to your pastimes. They that are grown big, rather with
Authority than Reason, will, I know, condemn me of confidence, for bringing so
small an Offering to the Altar of thankefulnes, where they, may be to avoid
superstition, do seldom worship. But History tells me, that the greatest
Monarchs have cheerfully accepted the mean Gifts of their Soldiers and
Subjects; And as Your Lordship in real Valor and Piety represents that noble
Emperor; so in that wherein he exceeded all other, You are no whit short of
Him; that is, You never suffered any Petitioner to depart sad from Your sight;
and (which is more) never forsook them whom once You befriended: This is
observed by all, this has been my experience so often as I had need of favor
and protection. This, and this chiefly has made me approach that Presence, who
by his Prudence has relieved his fainting Forces, and made his stoutest
Enemies fall in their Armies and Navies: both Elements errect Trophies to Your
Conduct and Courage; And this Nation acknowledge your goodness, which being
ready to break in pieces by its own envy and divisions, You walked so wisely
before, and amongst them, that You forced them to continue a Society and
People, leaving that knotty work easy for the next Laborers. Posterity, the
best Judge of Virtue, shall reward Your Achievements with honorable Monuments,
the present Age (though ever envious, yet) entertain Your Fame with prosperous
Acclamations; And that Your full Happiness may not have the least stain or
blemish, Your Health is the affectionate desire of,

MY LORD, Your humble Servant, C. IRVINE.
EDINBURGH, June 3. 1656.
THE INDEX Of all the CHAPTERS, contained in this BOOK.
The first BOOK. AN hundred Aphorisms: containing all the whole body of
Natural-Magick: being the Key to open that which follows in
Sympathetick-Medicine, Page 1 The second BOOK. TWelve Conclusions; which are
proved and explained: And are as so many firm columns, to support the Noble
frame of Magical-Medicine. CONCLUSION I. The Soul is not only in his proper
visible body, but also without it; neither is it circumscribed in an organical
body, Page 14 CONCLUSION II. The Soul works without, or beyond its proper
body, commonly so called, Page 17 CONCLUSION III. From every body flow corporal
beams, by which the Soul works by its presence, and gives them energie and
power of working: And these Beams are not only corporeal, but of diverse parts
also, Page 19 CONCLUSION IV. The beams sent out of the bodies of Wights, have
and enjoy vital spirit, by which the operations of the Soul are dispensed, Page
22 CONCLUSION V. That the Excrements of the bodies of living creatures, retain
a portion of vital spirits: and therefore we must not deny them life: And the
life is of the same species the life of the wight is of, and propagated from
the same, Page 25 CONCLUSION VI. Between the body and excrements proceeding
from it, there is a certain concatenation of spirits or beams, though they be
never so far asunder: The like is also between the blood, and any other part of
the body separated from the body at any distance, Page 28 CONCLUSION VII. The
vitality or liveliness lasts, till the excrements, blood or separated parts be
changed into another thing of a diverse species, Page 32 CONCLUSION VIII. One
part of the body being affected or ill-disposed, by hurting the spirits, all
the other parts do suffer with it, Page 33 CONCLUSION IX. If the vital spirit
be fortified in any one part, it is fortified by that occasion in the whole
body, Page 34 CONCLUSION X. Where the spirit is most bare and naked, there it
is soonest affected, Page 35 CONCLUSION XI. In the excrements, blood, and
separated parts, the spirits are not so deep drowned as in the body; and
therefore in them it is sooner infected, Page 37 CONCLUSION XII. The mixture of
spirits makes compassion, from that compassion Love takes its original. Page 39
The third Book. THE Method of Curing by Sympathy. CHAP. 1. Of the things
necessary for a Physician before he undertake the Practice of Magical-Physick,
Page 42 CHAP. 2. Of Purges and Purging, Page 44 CHAP. 3. Of Phlebotomie, Page
50 CHAP. 4. Of Cauteries, Page 56 CHAP. 5. Of Confortative Medicines, Page 57
CHAP. 6. Of those Medicines that are to be chosen in this Art, Page 64 CHAP. 7.
Of the time as well of Gathering, as of Application of these Medicines, Page 66
CHAP. 8. Of the means whereby this Art applies the Medicines to bring health
into the diseased body, Page 68 CHAP. 9. Of Transplantation, and of the diverse
manners by which it is done, Page 70 CHAP. 10. Of the means by which
Application is done, Page 76 CHAP. 11. Of the Magnet necessary in this Art, and
diverse descriptions thereof, hitherto known by very few, Page 78 CHAP. 12. Of
the use of the Magnet in this Art, Page 80 CHAP. 13. Of the means wherewith
cure may be done in this Art, without a Magnet, Page 81 CHAP. 14. Of the
Excrements of the Backdoor, Page 82 CHAP. 15. Of Urine, Page 83 CHAP. 16. Of
Sweat, and insensible-transpiration, Page 84 CHAP. 17. Of the Hairs, Page 87
CHAP. 18. Of the pairing of the Nails, and of the Teeth, Page 88 CHAP. 19. Of
the Spittle, and excrements of the Nose, Page 89 CHAP. 20. Of Blood and Matter,
Page 90
An APPENDIX. Containing diverse Practices and Operations, necessary to be
known in this Art. To the Reader an Epistle, Page 95 The Magnetic Cure of
Diseases by Transplantation, done by the true Mummy of Paracelsus, Page 97 The
Lamp of Life, Page 98 The Powder of Sympathy, for curing of Wounds. The simple
Powder, Page 99 The compound Powder, Page 100 The Virtue, Page ibid. The Use
and Application, Page ibid.
The Weapon-salve, according to the description of of the Noble Chemist, Oswald
Crollius, Page 102 The Virtue of this Ointment, Page 103 The Use, in diverse
Observations, ibid. The Magnetic Cure of the Yellow Jaundise, By Application,
Page 105 The Magnetic Transplantation of the Gout, ibid The Magnetic Cure of
Ulcers, ibid The Magnetisme of Asarabacca, Page 106 Magnetismes in Nature. The
first, Of the Vine, ibid The second, Magnetic Impressions of the breeding
Mother upon the Embrio, ibid The third, A Magical Magnetisme, out of the famous
Van Helmont, Page 107 The fourth, Of the Magical Magnetisme of the Tarantula,
ibid The fifth, The Magnetisme of the Magnes it self, Page 109


THE FIRST BOOK.
AN HUNDRED APHORISMS: CONTAINING The whole Body of NATURAL MAGIC, being the
Key to open that which follows in SYMPATHICK MEDCINE.
Aphorism 1. THe whole World is animated with the first supreme and
intellectual Soul, possessing in it self the seminary reasons of all things;
which proceeding from the brightness of the Idea's of the first Intellect, is,
as it were, the Instrument by which this great Body is governed, and is the
link of the Golden Chain of Providence.

Aph. 2. While the operations of the Soul are terminated or bounded, the Body
is generated, or produced out of the bounds of the Soul; and is diversely
formed, according to the Imagination thereof; hence it has the dominating
power over the Body, which it could not have, unless the Body did fully and
wholly depend upon it.

Aph. 3. In the production, while the Soul fashioneth to it self a Body, there
is some third thing, the mean between them both; by which the Soul is more
inwardly joined to the Body; and by which the operation of natural things are
dispensed, and this is called the Vital spirit.

Aph. 4. The operations of natural things are dispensed from this Spirit by
proper Organs, according to the disposition of the Organs.

Aph. 5. The disposition of the Organ depends, first and principally upon the
Intellect; which disposes all things: Secondly, upon the soul of the World
that formed it self a body, according to the semenary reason of things: Thirdly
upon the spirit of the Universe, that continues things in such a disposition.

Aph. 6. No bodily thing has any energie or operation in it self, saving so
far forth, as it is sharer of the same spirit, or informed by it: For that
which is merely corporal, is merely passive.

Aph. 7. He that will work great things, must take away as much as is possible
corporeity from things; or else he must add spirit to the body; or else awaken
the sleepy spirit: Unless he do some of these things, or know how to join his
imagination to the imagination of the soul of the World, he will never do any
great thing.

Aph. 8. It is impossible to take all this spirit from any thing whatsoever:
for, by this bond, a thing is holden back, from falling to the first matter, or
nothing.

Aph. 9. This spirit is somewhere, or rather everywhere found, (as it were)
free from the body; and he that knows to join it with a body agreeable,
possesses a treasure unestimable.

Aph. 10. This spirit is reparated as much as may be, either by means of
fermentation, or drawn by his brother which is at liberty.

Aph. 11. The Organs, by which the spirit works, are the qualities of things;
which merely and purely considered, are able to do no more, than the Eye can
see without life, as being nothing else but modifications of the matter or body:

Aph. 12. All things operating do it to this only purpose, to make things upon
which they work, like themselves.

Aph. 13. The subject of the vital spirit is the body; in it is received, and
by it works; neither is it ever so pure, but that it is joined with its
Mercurial humor.

Aph. 14. The humor does not specify the spirit; because it is the common
matter of things, apt to be made any thing: neither is it seen with the eyes;
because it is pure, unless it be first terminated in a more solid body.

Aph. 15. Neither souls, nor pure spirits, nor intelligences can work upon
bodies, but by means of the spirit: for two extremes cannot be joined together,
without a mean; therefore, Demons appear not but after sacrifices used.

Aph. 16. If the spirits or Intelligences wonted, go to the vital spirits
specified, which is either discipated by the contrary, or changed into another
thing, they cease to work there any longer: and as they are allured by the
vital spirits of living creatures, so they are put to flight, or rather do
cease to work upon bodies, when sharp and venomous things are used.

Aph. 17. The Stars do tie the vital spirits to the body disposed, by light
and heat; and by the same means do they infuse is into the body.

Aph. 18. In generation the spirit is mixed with the body, and directs the
intention of nature to its end.

Aph. 19. The seeds of things are known to contain more plenty of these
spirits, than any thing else.

Aph. 20. The seeds do not contain such plenty, as is required to the perfect
production of a thing; but the internal spirit, alluring the external coming
down from Heaven, unites it to its self; and being fortified therewith, at
length it begets its like.

Aph. 21. Before the seed do germinate, or bud, it is fermented, and by
fermentation disposed to alteration.

Aph. 22. If the fermentation could be hindered in the advancement of attraction
and assimulation; then a thing might be brought at length, from its seeds to
the species of it in a moment.

Aph. 23. That which is more universal does more further attraction, and more
dispose the seed to attraction: as Saltpeter in vegitables.

Aph. 24. Every family of things has somewhat universal annexed to it, whereby
the seed is disposed to attraction and made fruitful.

Aph. 25. He that knows how to join the universal artificially to the seed of
the animal family, may produce, even living wights beside the termination,
matrix or womb, at least formally; and the like reason is also for the other
thing.

Aph. 26. He that can join light with darkness, may multiply things in their
own kinds, and change the nature of them.

Aph. 27. The universal vital spirit coming down from Heaven, pure, clear, and
uncontaminate, is the father of the particular vital spirit, which is in every
thing: for, it procreates and multiplies in it the body; from whence bodies
borrow the power of multiplying themselves.

Aph. 28. As the first vital spirit lies hid in the mercurial humor that is
common and free. So the vital spirit of particular things lies in that
mercurial humor, imbrued with the virtue of that body whose it is, which they
call radical moisture.

Aph. 29. He that can join a spirit impregnat with the virtue of one body with
another, that is now disposed to change, may produce many miracles, and
monsters.

Aph. 30. The first variety of the disposition of bodies, proceed from the
various concoction of waters.

Aph. 31. The second from the various mixture of the three principles, Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury.

Aph. 32. These dispositions flow from the position of the Stars, especially of
the Sun.

Aph. 33. Every thing has so much vitality, as is required to produce the
natural Actions of that species.

Aph. 34. Nothing begins to be made, that does not receive some vitallity
from Heaven, by which it can work somewhere.

Aph. 35. He that knows how to infuse the propitious Heavens or Sun into
things, or into the mixture of things, may perform wonders; and hereupon
depends all magic operations.

Aph. 36. By how much the dispositions, or the subjects are more formal, so
much more of this life they receive, and so much more powerfully they do work.

Aph. 37. As in the eye, the operations are more noble than in the foot,
although they both proceed from the same soul; because of the purity of this
Organ, apt to receive a greater proportion of life: so the Constellate
carracters, because of their formality, receive a great proportion of spirit
from Heaven, and produce nobler actions.

Aph. 38. The spirit flows continually from Heaven, and back again to Heaven,
and in the flowing is found pure and unmixt, and therefore may by a skillful
workman, by wonderful means be joined to any thing, and increase the virtues of
it according to the disposition of the subject.

Aph. 39. The heart of Heaven is the Sun, and by light distributeh all things,
as well to the Stars, as to the Earth.

Aph. 40. Opacum is nothing else, but a Body either wanting light, or having
the light asleep in it.

Aph. 41. He that can by light draw light out of things, or multiply light with
light, he knows how to add the universal spirit of life to the particular
spirit of life, and by this addition do wonders.

Aph. 42. So much light as is added, so much life; and so much of the one as is
lost, so much is lost of the other.

Aph. 43. This spirit after the first period of maturation, strongly begins
by little and little to vanish.

Aph. 44. Maturation is nothing else but, the operation of the radicated
moisture to the perfection of the Individuum, so far forth as it may be
perfected, proceeding according to the semenary reasons, propounded or purposed
by Nature or the Soul. Or, it is an actuation of the internal spirit, so far as
it may be actuated. Or, it is the greatest Illumination of the matter that can
possibly be done by such light.

Aph. 45. The spirit is discipated when it stirs to act upon a matter too
rebellious: or, when the natural mixture, or Crasis of a thing is altered by
the Stars, sometimes too much excited, it breaks forth; or being called forth
by its brother spirit it goes away to it.

Aph. 46. The matter is rebellious, when by reason of a contrary Crasis, or
temperature, it cannot be overcome and altered by the spirit: Or, when it is in
the last period, beyond which it cannot go, nor the spirit convoy it any
further: for only so much spirit is given as serves every thing to the due
perfection of it.

Aph. 47. The temperature of a thing is altered by the Stars, when the
Horiscope of the Nativity comes to the degree of apposition of the Planets
that be contrary to the beginning of the life.

Aph. 48. The spirit is too much excited by fermentation, or immoderate
agitation: for moderate agitation is necessary to vital operation.

Aph. 49. The spirit is called out by its brother spirit, when it is too much
exposed to it.

Aph. 50. In certain things it cannot be called out by its brother spirit,
because of its strait-society with the body; but it allureth his brother to
him, and is strongly fortified thereby.

Aph. 51. Fermentation is the action of heat upon moisture, by which the
moisture is heated and made subject to the spirit, circulating it self in the
body, which cannot remain in the same estate, by means of the fluxibility of
the body.

Aph. 52. He that by means and use of the universal spirit, can excite the
particular of any to a natural fermentation; and then appease and settle
Natures tumults by repeating the operation, may miraculously increase things in
virtue, and power, the highest secrets of Philosophy.

Aph. 53. Every man knows that by means of fermentation the spirit is as pure
as it possibly may be drawn: but almost all of them do want the fruit of
multiplication; because they know not how to join one brother with another.

Aph. 54. Every thing fermented works more strongly; because in things
fermented the spirits are more free.

Aph. 55. Things do abide in the same state of nature, so long as they possess
so much spirit as is sufficient to perform the due execution thereof.

Aph. 56. Hence is manifest the cause of natural death and destruction of
things. Every thing tends to maturation, as to the perfection thereof: and when
it is ripe, the spirit begins to show its forces, and so by acting it is
discipated and vanishes, which, at length, is the cause of destruction.

Aph. 57. He that could lay hold on the vanishing spirit, and apply it to the
body from whence it slipped, or to another of the same species, may thereby do
wonders.

Aph. 58. From this fountain all natural Philosophy does flow: For, easily may
the spirit imbrued with the qualities of another body, procreate in bodies of
the same kind a similtude; which is the violent cause of love.

Aph. 59. These things are aptest to intercept this particular spirit, which
have the greater similitude of most natural conjunction with the parts: or
which being applied to a vegetous body, are by such a contract made more
flourishing. These things are to be understood of the bodies of wights,
especially of man, where Philosophers are of more power.

Aph. 60. This spirit, where it finds a little matter disposed, according to
that likeness, it makes and seats the compound produced.

Aph. 61. Where the spirit of one body, being married to the qualities of that
body, is communicated to another body, there is generated a certain compassion;
because of the natural flux and reflux of the spirits to their proper bodies:
Which compassion or sympathy is not easily dissolved, as that which is done by
imagination.

Aph. 62. There can neither love nor compassion be generated without the
commixture of spirits.

Aph. 63. This commixture is sometimes done by natural or material application:
sometime by imagination, and not seldom by the disposition of the stars.

Aph. 64. By natural application it is done, when the spirit of one body is
implanted in another, by means of those things which are apt to intercept the
spirit, and to communicate it to another; and they are known by their
signature; and by the Ancients called Amatoria, or such things as love one
another.

Aph. 65. By imagination love is produced; when the exalted imagination of one
does predominate over the imagination of another, and fashioneth and seals
it. And this may easily be done, because of the volubility of the imagination.
Hence all Incantations get efficacy: for although, peradventure, they have some
efficacy in themselves, yet the virtue cannot be distributed, because of the
universality thereof*

Aph. 66. From the stars, love takes its beginning, either when the disposition
of the heavens, is alike at the time of nativity, as Astrologers do abundantly
teach, and this is most firm, and most to be desired: Or when the beneficial
beam of the stars, being apt for that purpose, are at a fit time received into
matter disposed, and in a due manner brought into act; as Natural Magic more
fully teaches.

Aph. 67. He, that can do these manner of doings, with the universal spirit,
may do wonders.

Aph. 68. Thou may call the universal spirit to thy help, if thou use
instruments impregnate with this spirit; the great secret of Magicians.

Aph. 69. He that knows how to make a particular vital spirit, may cure the
particular body, whose spirit is at any distance, always imploring the help of
the universal spirit.

Aph. 70. He that can fortify the particular spirit with the universal, may
prolong his life very long: unless the stars be against it; yet he may by
these means lengthen his life, and health; and somewhat a bate the malice of
the stars, as he must confess, that does know the habitation of this spirit.

Aph. 71. Nothing can be putrified, unless it feels first fermentation; but
nothing comes naturally to declination, but by stat.

Aph. 72. Putrefaction is the symptom of declining nature; or of the spirits
flying away.

Aph. 73. There is nothing putrified that has not great store of the volative
spirit.

Aph. 74. All heat proceeds from the vital spirit, and is said of motion;
neither can that spirit either subsist without heat, or at least cannot be
mingled with bodies.

Aph. 75. Every thing that is putrified, has less heat in it, than it had
before its putrefaction: and therefore it is false, that things putrefying do
grow whole.

Aph. 76. As much spirit, so much heat is gotten; and of the one is lost so
much, as of the other.

Aph. 77. Heat can neither be stirred up by nature, nor art, but by the means
of light, either external or internal.

Aph. 78. He that can call light, the spirit of the universe, shall
peradventure not far miss the truth: for it is either light, or has his
dwelling or habitation in the light.

Aph. 79. He that can destroy bodies without putrefaction, and in that very
destruction can join spirit in spirit by the means of heat, possesses the
principal secret in natural Magic.

Aph. 80. The external heateth, by bringing in a new heat, and by actuating its
own heat, whether it be by being light determinat, or indeterminat.

Aph. 81. The light terminate, produces a destroying heat, and such a one as
burns all things. So it is compactly actuated as a fire.

Aph. 82. Indeterminate light gives light, and never hurts any but by
accident.

Aph. 83. He that knows how to make light determinate of light indeterminate,
not changing the species, nor receiving it otherwise, than in a common medium,
knows exceedingly well how to purge minerals, and all hard bodies, without
the loss of a radical moisture.

Aph. 84. The light which we call indeterminate, and which has in it the life
of things, being the carriage of the universal soul, lies hid in the
darkness; neither is it seen but by Philosophy, into whom the center of things
is apparently discerned.

Aph. 85. The internal heat is raised, by reason of the agitation of the
internal spirit, whose it is.

Aph. 86. The spirit is agitated by fermentation, or motion: sometimes they
concur both together to agitation.

Aph. 87. There is a secret mean of agitation, known to Philosophers, which is
perceived by them in regeneration and generation.

Aph. 88. When fermentation is distinguished from motion, understand local
progressive motion, which comes from imagination directing the vital spirit to
motion.

Aph. 89. All fermentation finished before due time, is a sign of immoderate
putrefaction succeeding.

Aph. 90. He that knows how to hasten fermentation, and hinder putrefaction,
by having the spirit of the universe propitious, does understand Philosophers
contrition; and can by means thereof do wonders.

Aph. 91. Putrefaction has not its original from the body, but from the
spirit, and therefore it wars contrary to the spirit.

Aph. 92. He that knows the spirit of the universe, and the use thereof, may
hinder all corruptions; and give the particular spirit the dominion over the
body. How much this would avail to the cure of all diseases, let Physicians
consider.

Aph. 93. That there may an universe medicine be given, is now agreed on on all
hands: because, if the particular spirit get strength, it can of it self cure
all diseases, as is known by common experience; for, there is no disease that
has not at some time been cured by the vital spirit, without the Physicians
help.

Aph. 94. The universal Medicine is nothing else, but the spirit multiplied
upon a due subject.

Aph. 95. He that seeks this Medicine elsewhere, than in the tops of the
highest mountains, shall find nothing but sorrow and loss for the reward of
his pains.

Aph. 96. The Philosophers who say it is to be sought in the corners of the
earth, mean the earth of the living.

Aph. 97. They, who hope to find it in the furnace of the Chemists, are
desperately deceived, for they know not the fire.

Aph. 98. Nothing has from the first intention of nature, more spirit, than is
sufficient of it self for the conservation of its proper species, yet out of
every thing (nature playing the Midwife for him) the Philosopher can produce a
son nobler than the father.

Aph. 99. The first and the last colors of things are yellow; because the Sun
and the Stars are yellow. Those things that are of a looser temperature, as
Plants appear green after they have touched the air, which air being naturally
and more highlyer cerulious or blue, and working upon them, makes yellow
things green; but being made harder, resisting the impression of the air, they
put on again their first and native color. Out of these things that have been
said, thou may pick great mysteries.

Aph. 100. The air is blue, and the horizon appears blue to us in a clear day;
and the air, because of the thinness, is not apt to terminate the strong,
vegetous, vital beams, until they languish and grow weak by distance, but then
the terminated beams show the native color of the air. And thus much to have
said at this time, by way of Aphorism, if you make not very much account of it,
is too much.

The Second Book.
CONTAINING XII. CONCLUSIONS, which are proved and explained: And are as so
many firm Columns, to support the Noble frame of Magical-Medicine.
CONCLUSION I. The soul is not only in its proper visible body, but also
without it; neither is it circumscribed in an Organical body.
The Proof and Explaination.
NO true Philosopher will deny this: The Platonists place not the soul in the
body, but the body in the soul: And the Peripateticks themselves do with
Aristotle confess, That the soul does execute some action without the body:
Nay, it seems very absurd, to shut up so noble an Essence, in so narrow and
strait a Prison; Neither were there wanting some Divines who attributed acerta
in ubiquity to the soul; affirming it to be there where it works: for what
can be devised more unlikely, than to conclude that most noble Essence, as
bounded and comprehended in this so exceeding small a prison. The common
dictate of Reason proves, That the thing comprehended, so far forth as it is
comprehended, is more base and ignoble, than the thing comprehending: And it is
manifest to him, who considers the nature of things, That the thing
comprehending, so far forth as it comprehends, is more excellent in operation
and power than the thing comprehended. That the Imagination works without it,
and beyond its own body, I take it to be manifest, and if any man doubt of it,
he will be convinced by experience: for it works in the Embrio: Neither can
fascinations be otherwise performed. But is not the Imagination the hand of the
soul, by which it works without the help of the body? and yet these
operations conduce not to our purpose: Therefore we must show more clearly what
we mean by this Conclusion. We do then under it and by it, mean nothing else
but that the soul must necessarily be, wheresoever the vital spirit is found;
for the vital spirit is the bond by which the soul is tied to the body: or
rather it is the undivided companion of the soul, brought by the soul from
heaven, by which the soul joined it self with the body; by means and mediation
whereof, it gives the form of the body; and if by the frown of the destinies it
be forsaken by the particular soul, it returns to its common country: but is
never extended further than the soul it self, without which the spirit cannot
subsist: Then, if a man's body work something without it self, surely it works
as informed by the soul, and shall it not then work vitally, and produce vital
actions; But how I pray you shall it produce them? without doubt in and by the
virtue and power of the form, that is, the soul. But (except I be deceived)
there can nothing work by the power of another, and not be partaker of it:
Therefore the active beams that produce such effects without the body, must
needs be partaker of the soul, by which they work. And I think no man can be so
senseless to deny actions extrinsecal, or without the body, to Man, the most
noble compound, and grant them to Plants and Stones: but that operations depend
on forms, it always seemed true to the most Learned. The seed does (as some
would have it) beget the Embrio in the mother; which it could not do, were it
not upholden and furnished with the presence of the fathers soul. But I hear
some whisper, that this opinion can be no way consonant to truth: because that
then, if the father should dye as soon as he has begotten the child, his soul
being free from the bonds of the body, goes to its appointed place, And how
then can it work in the Embrio? But to him that considers the matter well,
this will appear of no great difficulty; whether we say, That the soul is not
utterly and absolutely free as long as any vital spirit remains any where
safe and untoucht; for it there sticks and abides as long, and until its
subject be quite turned into an other thing; but because it wants organs (as in
an appoplexy) it cannot perform any sencelike actions; Or whether we will say
rather, The soul is necessarily present at these operations, by a certain
presence; and yet not hindered, but that in another place it may perform other
works: for seeing that the soul does by wonderful and strange means, produce
many things in the body, and is after diverse manners in diverse places, Why
shall it not, when it is free from the body, do the same things, or the like,
so it wants not its Instruments of its proper natural heat, which only is fit
to produce such an effect? But of what has been said the cause is plain, why
about the Graves of them that die a violent death there are apparitions seen:
for the vital heat and natural moisture being not quite dissolved, the soul
sticks, and gives sometimes in these exhallations, impregnated with the spirit,
the shape and form of a man: And the same may be the reason, why sometimes in
Churchyards such things appear: and from the same head it is, that the slain
Corpse bleedeth at the presence or touch of the Murderer: for, the soul being
yet present, does by the dispensation of Providence, work such things. But for
the better confirmation of this Conclusion, there is enough said in this place,
others from these grounds, will invent and find out things which will be far
more sublime and high.

CONCLUSION II. The Soul works without, or beyond its proper body, commonly
so called.
The Proof and Explanation of this.
THis Second Conclusion has nothing which is not manifest in the former, and
of it self is clear, and confessed by all men. For, if the soul be without the
body, it can and shall without doubt work there: for, the soul in its essence
includes Act, being (as one says, and very well) an Essential Act proceeding
temporally: It works therefore according to the Organs informed, or, according
to the manner of information, seeing it communicates a form to the subject;
for, peradventure it were more agreeable to simple and pure truth, to call the
soul, not the form, but rather, the giver of the form: yet, so giving forms,
that both in their beings and operations they shall depend upon it, and
whatsoever is, is dispensed and given by it. Plato seems to have placed in men
a threefold distinct form, yet depending on the common soul. It is true, that
to these Inferior forms, the name of form is sometimes given; but how truly
and properly, let them look to it, that accustomed to speculations, have
learned to separate Vital Actions from the soul, which proceed only from it.
But we, omitting all these difficulties, will be content to use the common
means, which will also peradventure serve our turns.

Some men will say, If the soul be and work without the body, or besides it, by
informing the natural heat that proceeds without it, and is inherent in his
beams, they must needs be men, consisting of a soul and of a body. When I first
began this Work, I had thought to have passed over such Objections as
ridiculous; but this being one, that may seem of some moment to them that are
less perspicacious, I am content to answer; And first I say, it is as absurd,
for ought I said, to call the beams, men, as it is to call the feet and hands,
men. Secondly, Every bare information does not make man, for it is required,
that a reasonable soul do inform an organical body; and thus; by means of the
form, be made fit for organical operations; but, if the soul inform any
Compound only vegetably, or some inferior way unknown to us, it cannot be
forthwith called, a Man: for, the soul informs according to the merit of the
matter, say the Platonists, or more clearly, it informs according to the
Portion of the vital spirit that is present: for, every proportion of this, is
not fit for every operation. Hence it appears, that though the soul do for
sometime inform a Corpse with a certain form: for, we see in dead Carcases, the
vegetative faculty does for a time exercise its power, which cannot be done
without the soul, yet it cannot be called, a Man; for, being deprived of sense
and reason, it falls from that dignity; But it is most certain, that the soul
being there present, only according to the vegetable power, may work
elsewhere: for, when it was tied to the body, according to all the ways of
vitality, it did form many other operations; why then when it is altogether
free from those bonds, or else tied with them, it should not work things proper
to it self, there can no reason be given; nor can any man in judgment
understand. It may then, according to the will of God, either enjoy pleasure,
or suffer pain, although it be tied to the dead Corpse in that manner, seeing
that in the vegetative faculty it shall suffer nothing, till it be again
reunited to an organical body. But in what things, and how the soul does
suffer, when it is loosed from the bonds of the body, we leave to Divines, as
too far from our purpose.

CONCLUSION III. From every body flow Corporal beams, by which the soul
works by its presence, and gives them energie and power of working, and
these beams are not only Corporal, but of diverse parts.
The Proof, etc.
THE first part of this Conclusion will easily be evicted; for, there is no man
that can deny it that considers the operations of natural things, and the
hindrances of those operations: For, what reason is there, why things more
hard and solid, than the nature of the thing requires, work not so freely; is
it not because the Pores of the body being shut, the Corporal beams cannot
find a due egresse? Now, unless they were Corporal, no affection that is
merely corporal could hinder them, and nothing but the change of the forms,
could destroy the faculties of things: But when we see that the form remains,
the operations are hindered, we wonder then if we be forced to consider and
resolve of such beams. Moreover, unless those Active beams were corporal,
their operation would proceed to any distance, and not be hindered by bodies.
If you say, it is but an Accident by which things work at distance; yet an
Accident must needs be in a subject, and must needs work by the virtue of that
subject in which it is; for, I take it to be certain, that no Accident, barely
considered in it self, can have any Activity: Therefore, except such beams be
granted, nothing can work at distance by any means; Therefore, these Accidents
are displayed in Corporal beams, possessing all the manners of the body, whence
they proceed, yet I would not have you take me for a maintainer of Accidents,
who could never hitherto see any thing in nature but substance, unless any man
could make the positions and manner of things something real distinct from the
bodies: but here I speak out of supposition, granting peradventure what some
man might ask at my hands.

Besides what has been said for our beams, you may add, that adventitious heat
does promote the operations of things; but how could it do this, but by
stirring up more plentiful beams to bring them out? We see how Amber, being
made hot with rubbing, draws the Chaff to it more stronglier; and many other
will not work unless they be hot; by which making them hot, the Corporal beams
are more plentifully drawn out, and so work more powerfully. Moreover,
closeness would not long keep the natural power of things unhurt, but that it
hinders the dissipations and spending of the beams: besides, unless beams were
Corporal things, they would penetrate though the most compact bodies, the
contrary whereof, experience bears witness unto: though it be true, that some
Compound bodies send out beams so thin and subtle, that they can pierce the
pores of all bodies; as does appear in the Loadstone.

But, wherefore did Nature ordain Pores in bodies, but that they may be doors,
by which these beams might pass in and out: again, the senses would never
perceive sensible things, but that there proceeds beams from the bodies,
affecting the senses, as appears in smelling; for odor perishes with age, and
yet for no other cause, then that the beams perish which bring the odor to our
nostrils; so from all bodies there goes subtle thin beams, bringing with them
the shapes of things, which is possible to demonstrate to the eyes in a dark
place, by mean of a translucide unequal -- glass: but unless these beams were
Corporal, let any man tell me, how they could affect the senses: rather I have
often wondered, how being mingled with so great confusion, in passing through
the glass, they can severally explicate themselves. But let us come to another
stronger argument, and more agreeing to our purposes, to prove what we
principally intend; And namely, that such beams do in a continual motion, go
out of the bodies of wights, which we shall easily do, if we first, consider
the common natures of all wights: for, every wight, that it may live any space,
must necessarily be nourished with food, neither can it live without it,
because of the continual going out of the beams; the body from its natural
disposition, can endure no more vacuity and emptiness, than nature has
appointed for such a body: That which in food is dry, does restore and refresh
the solid parts; and that which is moist, the humors: And why this? but,
because every day, nay, every moment, the beams, and those most plenteously, do
go out from bodies, and those corporal; yea, and from every part of the body;
for, were not this so, living wights would grow to monstrous and enormous
greatness. And this is the reason, why wights fall to destruction, and are not
so long-lived as Stones; nay, not as some of the more compact sort of Trees;
for, the vital spirit, and natural heat being in wights freer, and more at
liberty, work more powerfully, and produce more plenteous exhalations; whence
it comes to pass, that they are propagated to the greatest distances, the soul
all the while knitting them together, lest they should be altogether
dissipated: for, they could not else hold the specifical virtue of the body;
neither could they work, except the soul informed them; for, that has in it
the natural heat, as we shall show in the Chapter following, which produces a
sufficient disposition to receive information from the souls, as we said in the
Chapter foregoing. But, that those beams are of parts, is clearer than the Sun
at noon day; for, that which proceeds from diverse and heterogeneous parts,
conveying also with it self, something from all, even the smallest parts,
cannot choose but be of diverse parts: for, from the bones, flesh, nerves,
there do flow continually certain particles, of which those beams consist:
these carry with them the disposition of the body; and according to that
disposition, taken from the body, work more powerfully than the body it self:
Hereupon a wise man will take special heed of living and conversing with sick
people, the rather if he feel himself disposed to such a disease; for, a body
so disposed, does more greedily draw to it self those beams, and is sooner
changed: And note, that bodies in whom there is a likeness of nature and
complexion do sooner sympathize with one another; as brothers, sisters, and do
sooner take infectious diseases one of another; because of the radical
likeness, the infected beams are more drawn, and the body more speedily
changed. Another necessary caution does by this occasion come into my mind,
That great care must be taken to avoid these places where the excrements of
diseased persons are laid: both for the reasons aforesaid, and for a more
proper and particular cause, it shall be expressed in what follows.

CONCLUSION IV. The beams sent out of the bodies of wights, have and enjoy a
vital spirit, by which the operations of the soul are dispensed.
The Proof and Explanation, etc.
EVery compound consisting of matter and form, has its own proper natural
heat, which is derived and propagated, not from the Elements, but from Heaven,
and particularly from the Sun the heat of Heaven, seeing that by the departure
of it, all things grow sad and torpid, and by the return of it are cheared and
refreshed; for, it is the fountain and original of life, making all things
fruitful by its heat, multiplying and preserving them in their own being.
Whence it follows, that nothing can exist without some manner of heat, it
being the bond whereby the form is tied to the matter, and which, lying hid in
them in a viscous Mercury, a moisture brought with it from Heaven, gives
increase of seed to every body. It is also the instrument which the form uses
to produce actions: and it is the immediate cause of the aforesaid beams, which
beams it never forsakes, but accompanies them in their journey. Blessed, and
thrice blessed is he, which can Multiply it in a fit subject, under the favor
of the Sun and Heaven. This said heat, if it decrease, the body tends to
destruction, the beams being fewer and weaker: Furthermore, though the form be
not united to the matter, but by a certain mean of this heat, which is so
required as proper to all things, yet it varieth in every spirit of things, yet
it has in every spirit some latitude; so that you shall find in the
individuals, that which is altogether the same; because the heat sometimes is
more, and sometimes less, which may be the cause of variety of operations, not
only in these of the same species, but even in the same individual: it is
after changed, till at last by corruption, it end in that which is altogether
another latitude; for, the matter is not tenacious enough, nor holds the heat
fast enough, but lets it (being volatile) wander abroad, which according to the
impressions of Heaven, applies it self variously to the matter; whence depends
the whole oeconomie, and every change in sublunary things. But it is now time to
retire our selves, and descend to the body of man, the proper subject of this
work. And first, it shall not be amiss to explicate our selves, what we mean
by the vital spirit in this Conclusion; whether after the manner of other
Physicians, that which the Schools call by this name; or, some other thing of
far another nature: surely, although we think that received opinion of the
spirits animal, vital, and natural (as they call them) not altogether
consonant to truth, yet being besides our purpose, we mean not to meddle with
it here; and therefore, of other manner of spirits. But what new spirit is this
brought in into Physic, or, by what Authority came it in? Truly, I am so
supercilious as to affirm this done by my Authority: Let it not be brought in
at all; I only require, that I may be spared the use of that name, to express
the natural heat and radical moisture both together; and the reason is,
because they are never actually separated: And to call them spirits, because of
all Corporal things, they come nearest to the nature of spirits, both in their
original and power. It is called vital, because by mediation of it, life
flows, and is propagated into the body; and therefore, wheresoever you find
in this Treatise the name of spirit, understand it as is said. Now then, that
this spirit flourishes in the foresaid beams, I think it appears from hence;
This spirit also flows from the body, and this no wise man will deny; for, if
it flow not from the body, the body would last for ever: Consequently, the
things that can most fix these spirits, have great power to prolong the life of
man: for, it is volatile, and every moment some portion of it goes out with
the parts of the body, resolved into beams: for why it should leave the beams
going out, and insinuate it self into bodies indisposed, there can be no reason
given, nay, it seems utterly impossible; and that the beams have a disposition
to hold it: for, with them it goes out in the plague, because the beams (as is
observed) retain the disposition of the body from whence they go: yea, if the
spirit were not there, the beams could not do as they do, nor work in the power
of the soul; for, of it this spirit is the Instrument. Either therefore the
bodies of men shall work at no distance at all; or, if at distance whatsoever,
this spirit must needs reach, and proceed to it: and by virtue of a more potent
soul, in the very beginning and principal of life, the body of man (as of all
other wights) is ordinated to natural actions, as other natural bodies are, by
the seminary virtues, which are in their forms; nay, more powerful than these
are, this spirit that accompanies the beams, dispenses their Actions, which
are far propagated; and when they grow faint, they are supplied by and from the
bodies.

CONCLUSION V. That the Excrements of the bodies of living Creatures, retain a
portion of vital spirits: and therefore we must not deny them life; and the
life is of the same species that the life of the Wight is of, and propagated
from the same.
The Proof and Explanation of it, etc.
THat the Excrements of the bodies of Wights, retain some portion of the vital
spirit, it appears; for having lurked long in the body, they imbibe the spirit,
and join it to themselves, intercepting the beams issuing from the noblest
parts of the body: yea, having at the least some digestion, they are made like
the bodies in which they were concocted; and therefore do more greedily attract
the beams with the spirits, and the spirits do much more willingly insinuate
themselves into them, than into any other body, not partaker of the same; or a
greater digestion and likeness. It is likewise evinced by common experience;
for, does not the too much flowing of any excrement, produce grievous symptoms,
weakness, and in the end death; and that not so much by cutting off the
nourishment, as by exhausting the spirits: or else in the Dropsy, how could the
overmuch flowing of the water out of the wound, cause death, but that the
water being impregnant with these spirits, carries more of them out with it,
than the body can bear in so short a time? So, in all inward Abscesses, when
great store of purulent matter has filled the hollow of the breast, if by the
negligence or ignorance of the Surgeon, it be too much and suddenly emptied,
it is for the same reason, followed with death or dangerous weakness: for, the
body, unless it be everywhere according to the proportion requisite, stored
with these spirits, cannot long subsist. This spirit, as long as the body
continues in its due Symetrie, is nourished from Heaven, by the mediation of
the Air, and by the vital spirit of the Aliment. All things therefore that
proceed from the bodies of man or beast, after what manner soever, whether
naturally, or by the force of disease, are impregnated with the same vital
spirit the body has: and therefore because they are liker the bodies whence
they came, than those things that never were in the body, they quickly imprint
the qualities drawn from the bodies, upon another like body, which ought to
occasion great care, that excrement matter, corruption, nor any of those things
that come from infected persons be left unburied; for, great mischief may come
by them, either by Nature, or by Art, if peradventure they come into the hands
of some skillful, but ill-disposed men. But if the burning of Dead Carcases,
after the manner of the Ancients, be not permitted, the Magistrates ought to
take care, that they be soon, and very deep buried, and that in moist places,
if it may be, and far remote from the feeding of Beasts: for, from shallow
superficial Gravels, there arise unspeakable mischiefs; And I think this is
one of the greatest natural causes, why the Plague does so furiously rage in
diverse places: for, I am afraid, that they to whom the charge of burying is
committed, are still too negligent and careless. I would here take occasion to
commend, and that upon good grounds, the funeral fires of the Ancients; But
another custom having now prevailed, I am sure my words will not alter it. It
is known that Witches cannot hurt, without the parts of dead bodies, and the
Excrements of him that they desire to mischieve; as therefore Magistrates ought
to have a care of burials, so every man, if he have Enemies, ought to have a
care of his Excrements. But now let us return to the Conclusion, which
affirmed, That these Excrements do also live, which though at first do seem a
little hard, yet indeed to him that will consider it, it is so far from being
either hard or unreasonable, that it is impossible it should be otherwise;
nay, what if I should say, the hair and nails do live a certain life,
propagated from the soul. It may be thou will say, For they are as certain
parts of the body, they live with the same soul they did before, thou would
think that more strange; and yet thou can not give a reason why thou
should think so: Well, this only I will say of Excrements, that unless they
live with the same life that wights do after a manner, certainly they would
want the vital spirit, of which we spoke before, and which we have above
proved; and will not all this clearly demonstrate, that they have and do
plentifully enjoy it? Moreover, who can deny that the nails and hairs have
life, that have observed in them an augmentative or assimulative faculty? at
least who can deny it so long as they remain fastened to the body, though they
want sense, as the bones and other necessary parts of the Organical body do?
Now, if they live when they remain joined to the body, these shall likewayes
live when they are separated from the body, as long as they are nails and
hairs, having still the same form as they had before: Witness the Accidents or
the substantial moods, which abiding still the same, depend of the same
fountains from whence they flowed: but no man can deny, that the very form, or
figure, or mood flowed from the soul, draws thence its life, which is
propagated by the presence of the soul, by the mediation of the vital spirit.
In conclusion, a man may thus argue for any Excrement: All Excrements of the
body, by means of some manner of Digestion, have changed the form they had
before that Digestion, and put on another, as may be known by their operations
and faculties, which are altogether changed. As for example; The Excrements of
a Dog heals the diseases of the Pallet and Throat, which flesh and bones
howsoever prepared, could not do, especially if they had been stinking and
corrupt; and this form by which they work such things, they got from the soul
of the Dog; and therefore being introduced and brought in by it, it depends
wholly of the soul, and consequently cannot want vitality, which vitality or
liveliness is obscure and unperceivable to them which know not the centers of
things, which it shall better become a Philopher to search after, than suffer
himself to be transported with a desire of contradiction.

CONCLUSION VI. Between the Body and the Excrements proceeding from it, there
is a certain Concatenation of Spirits or beams, though they be never so far
asunder: The like is also between the blood and any other part of the body,
separated from the Body at any distance.
The Proof and Explanation of it, etc.
IF we confirm and demonstrate this Conclusion, the greatest part of the
business is done: for, this being established here, is laid a firm foundation
of this Act, whereupon all the precepts thereof may be built: yet, if what we
have said already, abide unshaken, the future difficulty will not be great: But
first, it would be known, what concatenation we do here intend, when we affirm
a concatenation of spirits or beams between the body and the Excrements
thereof; we understand thereby, a perpetual flux of beams, proceeding after a
peculiar manner from the body, and terminated as in a body, after a sort in
kin, and like unto it; as also reciprocally flowing from the Excrements of
the body. That there is such reciprocal emanations, is easily showed: for, if
you once grant the flux of beams, and Impregnation of the Excrements by the
vital spirits, it will necessarily follow, that both the beams of the
Excrements and the body, as not differing in nature and qualities, are so
terminated one upon another by the aforesaid means, rather than by any other:
yea, if the form both of the body and of the Excrements do depend in the same
soul, it will be amiss to call them Excrements, until they have utterly lost
their form they got in the body; rather a part of the body, or something
subordinate to the body, and therefore the vital spirit being affected in the
Excrements, is also affected in the body, which cannot be done without such a
concatenation: But this general rule is to be observed, namely, That the
Excrements of any parts, are peculiarly allied and tied to the Part whose
Excrements they were; and that the beams that interchangeably flow from these,
do by a peculiar love, embrace these that flow from the part whose Excrement it
is, and vice versa; for, out of that part it has drawn more plenteous spirits,
and therefore has greater affinity with it; which may be perceived by manifold
experiences: for, if you put any uscerating thing into the Excrements, the
Pudding will be affected with great grief and pain: For example, Put Pease in a
firing-Pan, till they be very hot, and put them into hot odure, and how many
Pease, so many Pustules will be on the fundament. So the Aculeus Pastenacae
Marinae, stuck in the place where one has lately Pist, restrains it, till you
have pulled it out again. You will find more Experiments of this kind in the
process of this Work. It is not therefore to be doubted, but that the
Excrements are by reciprocal beams concatenated with the bodies, especially
with those parts out of which they last proceeded; Thence arise several
considerations, whereof we will take notice hereafter; only take notice of
this, That upon this concatenation, depends all Magnetical Physic, and
therefore mark it well, that if any thing in the practice shall seem obscure,
that thou may address thy self to this place, and better consider that which
is already said: It is added in the Conclusion, that the furthest distance does
not break this concatenation, which is so true, that the virtue of the soul
extends it self so largely, that it is scarcely contained in place: for, the
concatenation depending on the soul, must needs be extended according to the
virtue of the soul; besides, the other reason (which we infinuated above) of
this extention where we said, there do most plentiful spirits flow from
wights, by reason of the great plenty of vital spirits, which appear to the
senses, in that they need so great store of Aliment, to the end that what was
spent in propagating beams, might by the conduct of the dispensing spirit, be
renewed in the body the fountain of them: There is therefore no small store of
those beams, because being thin, subtle, and easily dissipated, they need
continual food for the reparation of them; They extend themselves likewise very
far, and work diversely (we not knowing of it:) and as diversely are we affected
in the hurting of them, when we are fully ignorant of the causes of our
diseases: And therefore in all sicknesses the said spirit is to be rectified,
comforted and multiplied; and so may all diseases be easily cured; which we
propound especially, for Phisicians to note and consider. Now there is no man
will deny but that which we have said of the Excrements, does also agree to the
parts separated from the body, as also to the blood; for, there is the same
reason in all: in blood it appears most evident, because in Holy Writ it is
called the seat of the soul or life, as having greatest store of vital spirits,
and hurting more easily, by the too much flux of it. Amongst all those things
confirm this concatenation, that most famous Sympathetical Ointment commonly
called, the Weapon-salve, and our Sympathetical Water, do by manifest
experience clearly prove it, in despite of the vain and obstreperous noise that
some ignorant Divines make against it, proclaiming it diabolical and
superstitious; whom many others, and especially the learned Helmont has put to
everlasting silence. Nor did the wrangling Libavius (though he proudly railed
after his manner) write better against this, than he did of and for the
Philosophers Stone, how ignorantly and audaciously he carried himself in both,
to the infinite prejudice of the Hermetical Commonwealth, is known too well to
them that have learned the true knowledge of things from the things themselves:
but of this enough. Of the parts of the body separated from it, he that
doubts may find in the same Helmount, a strange story: I will give you his
own words. A certain man of Bruxels being at Bolonia, did in a fray lose his
Nose; he went to Tagliacorzo a Surgeon, living there, to consult how he
might have a new Nose; and fearing the cutting of his own Arm, hired a Porter,
that for a great sum of money, was content to let him have a Nose cut out of
his Arm (as the manner is:) he did so, and the Cure well performed, the man of
Bruxels returned home into his own Country: But about thirteen months after
his return home, he felt his Nose suddenly grow cold, and within a few days
after it rotted and fell quite off: And where many wondered of this strange
change, he inquired into the cause, and it was found, that just at the same
instant when the Nose grew cold, the Porter at Bolonia died: And (says
Helmount) there are many yet living in Bruxels that can testify the truth
thereof: Thus far he. The like I have heard from a Doctor of Physic, a friend
of mine, who did swear deeply, that himself was an eyewitness of it. Is not
all our Doctrine here confirmed clearer than the light? Was not the inscitious
nose, as animated at the first, so still informed with the soul of the Porter?
neither had it any from the man, whose Nose now it was made, but only
nourishment, the power of the assimulation, which it has from its proper form,
it took it not from him, but from the Porter, of whom it was yet truly a part;
and who dying, the Nose became a dead Nose, and did immediately tend to
corruption: But who does not here see most openly and evidently a
concatenation? otherwise, how could the Nose of one that was at Bolonia, enform
the Nose of one that was at Bruxels, but by means of a concatenation? Our
assertion therefore is confirmed by true and undoubted experience; from whence,
as from a plenteous spring, diverse fair rivelets do flow. Hence arose that
glorious Miracle of Nature, whereby a man may at distance, and in an instant
open his mind to his friend, though they be ten thousand miles asunder, by
means of a little blood, flesh, and spirit, a secret not to be revealed to the
unworthy multitude. Hence that Lamp of life, which at any distance shows by
its light the Disposition of the Body, and by its voluntary going out, the
death of the Body whence it was taken. Hence also proceeds that salt of blood,
which by its color shows the same things, that the Lamp did by its light: of
which more hereafter. And hence also arose all natural Philosophy, by means
whereof the affections are moved and after a manner tied nearly and only
naturally: But of this enough.

CONCLUSION VII. The vivallity or liveliness lasts, till the excrements, blood,
or separated parts be changed into another thing, of a diverse species.
The Proof and Explanation' of it.
ALL things which have their original from the Elements, after they are come to
perfection, do straightway go back again to their principals, from whence they
took their beginning; for so it is established by Providence, that what is
begun by motion, shall never be partaker of state or rest. Yet does not the
thing immediately cease to be in that spirit, wherein it is, until another
form be introduced into the matter, which also brings with it new moods, and
new operations. I speak not here of subordinate forms, which are known to be
common to many spirits, the change whereof is not always required in the
change, or corruptions of the presence, or absence of forms; we can no way
judge but by the moods and faculties of the subject. We say therefore, that
vitality does so long last in the excrements, blood, and other separated parts,
as they are not changed into other things of a diverse species: which being
clear of it self, and by that which is abovesaid, needs no other proof; yet
this is to be noted, First, That things have more virtue and energie in their
state, than in their declinations, and the nearer they are to their absolute
change, the less they work. Secondly, That every change of the substance does
not change the form; for in things, where only the superfluities are taken
away, leaving the essences which work in a sufficient matter well disposed and
digested, and are full of the vital spirit of things, there the form, is not
only not changed, but more free than it was, and works more powerfully;
Moreover, we see that some corruptions are necessary to the furtherances of
some operations, though this kind of corruption, if we give it the true name,
is rather to be called fermentation; for by it the spirits are stirred up, and
made more able to show their power; but there is a mean in things, and certain
bounds, beyond which the truth cannot consist: therefore we must proceed very
warily, lest while we strive to stir up the spirits, we dissipate them; which I
have seen happen to many men both in this Art, and in Alchymle.

CONCLUSION VIII. One part of the body being affected or ill disposed, by
hurting the spirits, all the other parts do suffer with it.
The Proof and Explanation, etc.
I Conceive, that this so common and received an Opinion, by all Phisicians
allowed and confessed to be true, needs little proof: therefore we only say
this, That the cause of this compassion flows neither from the body, nor from
the particular form of the part, nor from the likeness, nor less likeness, if
it be considered only so far forth, as the cause of likeness is considered
which flows from the same, or the like proportion of spirit; but from the
vital spirit, which goes through the whole body, and is resident in every part
thereof: for, a disease terminatively is not of the body, but of the spirit:
for there is no disease of the body however it comes, which happens not by
the weakness of the spirit, neither can any distemper of the body last long,
where the spirit (by which all evils are amended) flowrisheth and is strong.
This spirit is that nature, whereof Phisicians ought to be helpers (upon them
the Universal Medicine is built) whereas unhappy are those Phisicians, and
unhappily they speed, who either neglecting or wronging this spirit, destroy
all things by their violence, while they think so to cure the disease, which by
opening a vein, do exhaust this spirit, and by purging the body from hurtful
humors by rank poison, that kill this spirit, thrust with those humors the
soul out of the body: And these are they which by their villainy and ignorance
have dimn'd the glory of Physic, which being given over to vain, contentious,
and unprofitable disputes, have erred from the simplicity of Nature, which,
though they be honored by the hair-brained multitude, because of their rich
clothes, coaches, and the like; yet by the sons of Art, who with great labor
prying into the Centers of things, have found that nothing is to be attempted
against Natures will: they are esteemed no better, than as their excrements of
Physic, and so to be cast into the vaults of perpetual infamy; but the World
is full of Fools; We returning to our purpose, do say, That not only the other
parts do suffer with the part diseased, but that if any disease, of whatsoever
part do last long, the whole body will be at last affected, or else, how could
death follow upon a particular disease: The vital spirit is but one, so
continuate through the whole body, and propagated through every part of it,
that if it be hurt in any one part of it, it is hurt in the whole, as the
following Conclusions will more clearly show.

CONCLUSION IX. If the vital spirit be fortified in any one part, it is
fortified by that occasion in the whole body.
The Proof and Explanation of it, etc.
THat which in the foregoing Chapter we said of Diseases, we say now of Cures;
for there is the like reason of both. And this Conclusion is put for no other
reason, than to show (caeteris paribus) there is no great odds, whether you
apply the Medicine to the part affected, or to an other part; provided that by
this Medicine thy intent be, to fortify the vital spirit: for, if this spirit
be fortified in one part, the whole spirit is fortified; because being of a
heavenly and fiery nature, that strengthening is quickly found in the whole
latitude thereof; for it is impossible, that so subtle, active, spiritual,
clear and aetherial a thing, should suffer any thing in any part, which it
shall not very shortly suffer in the whole. The Experiment whereof we see in
outward poison, which infecting the nearest, the spirit straight-wayes, unless
the spirit be fortified, does infect the whole spirit in the body: not that the
venom goes through the whole body; for it is impossible that by the sting of a
Scorpion in the foot, the substance of the venom should, as some dream, come to
the heart, but because one part of the spirit being powerfully infected, the
infection of the whole must needs speedily follow: so by Inflammation, there
immediately follows a Fever, though the part that that is inflamed be never
so far from the heart. As of Diseases, so we may conclude of Remedies: but that
Remedies applied to the parts affected, do more and more speedily help, it is
by frequent egression of spirits from the part, the cause whereof look for in
the following Conclusion: It is very necessary therefore, that thou choose a
part fit for thy purpose; for, except thou do so, thou will be deceived and
ashamed; for thou will not work every where alike, therefore mark the
Conclusion following.

CONCLUSION X. Where the spirit is most bare and naked, there it is soonest
affected.
The Proof and Explanation, etc.
THis Conclusion being most necessary for practice, is of it self manifest, and
follows upon the premises; for doubtless, the more intimately and nearly any
agent is joined with a Patient, the operation is both more speedy, and better:
for what can hinder action but undue approximation, which impediment we here
study to avoid, seeking the vital spirit in its nakedness that it may be the
sooner affected, by a due and convenient application, and may be the more
speedily freed from things hurtful and extraneous, and so quickly change and
rectify the body slipped into a distemper: for, if where it is most naked, it
being there free from extraneous things, because it is not so fettered and
cloyed with evils, then certainly there (if one know the right subject, and use
the right Instrument) it may be made to free the body sooner from diseases: for
being fortified in one place, it will straight-wayes be fortified throughout:
for, as a disease is never truly, but when the whole spirit is infected with a
sickly disposition; for till that time it is but, as some speak, in fieri;
which disposition at the beginning affected but one part, and that affected not
hindered, corrupted the whole; so must we also philosophize concerning the
recovery of health; but there are two things here requisite: First, That thou
cease not the application, until the disease be fully cured: for, if thou leave
off before that time, the part that is yet infected, will (if the infection be
strong) again corrupt and infect the part, thou had made whole, and so leave
thee to begin the same labor again. Secondly, That one part answer another;
for he that will happily cure diseases, must begin at the root, and if the root
of the disease be in the head, then cure the vital spirit proper to the head:
if in the stomach, to the stomach; for though the vital spirits considered in
themselves, have no heterogenical parts, but be every where, and wholly as the
light like it self; yet as it is in the body, by certain adjuncts very
considerable; And therefore the beams proceeding from the head, do in that
disposition contain the spirit, as the head does; as from the things already
said may easily be gathered: The naked spirit thereof affected with the
dispositions of the head (if the root of the disease be in the head) is to be
taken, and remedies applied to that, before we proceed to other things. It will
not be a miss to confirm the truth of this Conclusion by experience; There Is no
man doubts, but that in the blood the spirit is most naked; for, if it were
more naked, than for fear of death, if it could, it would fly and get it gone to
its own country: Therefore Phisicians know that the naked spirit in the blood
is sooner infected with poison, than the spirit of any other part; for, venom
being put into a vein, does sooner dissolve and loose the whole form of the
body, than twice so much taken in meat or drink inwardly, although it be taken
fasting, or without any other vehiculum; which confirms the truth of our
Conclusion. I will not encourage thee to ill: if out of these, or any other
Writings of mine, thou can draw any evil consequence: If thou be a good
man, thou will not so read them; if otherwise, know assuredly that if thou do
any evil, God will here, even in this life, take vengeance of thee. So we
proceed.

CONCLUSION XI. In the Excrements, Blood, and separated parts, the Spirit is
not so deeply drowned, as in the Body; And therefore in them it is sooner
infected.
The Proof and Explanation, etc.
UPon this Conclusion the whole Art is grounded, and this being false all
fails; therefore muse well in thy mind of what has been said, and what shall
be said; for he that well understands this Conclusion, will find no difficulty
in the whole Art; therefore it had need to be confirmed with some Reasons: the
first whereof is this, The spirit is not so deeply drowned in the excrements,
blood and separated parts, as in the body; because in them it ranges abroad, as
more at liberty, in that it does not so much attend Organical operations, that
do violently snatch the spirit inward, that being congregated it may work more
powerfully in secesse; but all organical operation being far from the Blood and
Excrements, there is no need the Spirit should drown it self so far and so
inwardly: Moreover, the beams coming from excrements, blood without the veins,
and parts separated stick about the surface and outside, and are not allured
and drawn internally; because that is tending to destruction, the spirit
retires it self, and makes some stay in the superfices, where also the beams
join themselves to their fellow -beams, and there rest, until at last the
excrements, blood and separated parts becoming clean another thing, are apt
either to receive these beams, and the spirit that accompanies them, or to
return them when they have received them. Again, the spirits are more naked in
these, especially in the blood, because that when it was in the body, it had
the spirits more naked, and scarce tied to the body, as appears evidently in
blood. But some may ask how this reason agrees to parts cut off, for what
privilege have they above parts of the same kind? I answer, It is to be
considered, That now the door is open, by which a more free egresse is granted
to the spirits, which now having broken the fetters, begin to wander abroad
more at liberty. Again, some will object, That if this were true, then by
applying things to a wound, we might cure internal diseases. To satisfy this
objection, we must consider these things; and first, That in every wound there
is not only solutio continui, but also the part wounded, there is in a part
exotic and a strange quality introduced, by means whereof the vital spirit is
hurt. Secondly, Those things that are applied to the wound, have no power to
change the vital spirit, laboring of another evil disposition; yea, the
Phisician's expectation is satisfied, if one thing do but perform operation;
and therefore they are content with the cure of the wound. Thirdly, If a thing
good for another disease, whereof peradventure the Patient is sick, should be
applied to the wound, it perhaps will hurt this more, than it would help that:
Now reason persuades, we should first succor that which most urges. From
these things the Answer to the Objection is manifest; for the spirit then
laboring of a double distemper, Art commands to cure that which most urges;
therefore we principally attend the wound, lest syderation should follow, or
something else bringing assured destruction; And for the same reason we apply
not to it things good for the other disease; yet this I will here add, That it
is manifest by experience, that many men by wounds have been freed from many
other diseases, and so, that they never relapsed into them afterward; namely
when the part affected being wounded, the things proper to the disease could
also perform the cure of the wound: as if the head laboring of a cronical
disease, should be wounded, and the wound could be cured with Betony and Sage,
there is no doubt but the spirit being naked, and now being refreshed and
cherished with these remedies, would perfectly heal both the head, and the
whole body. Here also is this to be noted, That they who dig the body with
Cauteries, and keep the wounds open a long time for the purulent matter to run,
are ill advised, they do not apply to the wound remedies proper for that
disease, for which they made the Issue; for this being done, the Patients would
in short time feel very great ease, if that wound were made upon the part
principally infected; especially if all the other things were accordingly done
diastatically, and the matter also that issues out, used as Art commands. By
these means it is certain, and found by experience, that the Gout in the hands,
feet, and other parts, may most happily and easily be cured. But returning
again to the excrements, blood, and separated parts, we say, That this Art
uses those rather and with better success than the whole body that is hurt:
because the vital spirit being free and naked, easily receives impressions,
especially from things agreeing with it: Therefore the Inventers of this Art,
mingle such things (though taken from other bodies) with the Medicines, as in
the common Weapon-salve it is to be seen, where they mingle with the Ointment,
the flesh, blood and fat of men for no other cause; that being endued with
these Medicaments and qualities of Medicaments, they might the more easily help
the heart, spirits; for, by their likeness, they do the more easily draw the
spirits, and being drawn, do the more easily change them, according to the
qualities acquired; but it is not always necessary, that the Medicines be
mingled with those things that are taken from the body; for, we see, that the
sympathetical water alone, and simple without any mixture, will cure all wounds
by means of the blood of the wound: but especial care must be taken, that you
make choice of those things that do cure, not by qualities, but by their whole
substances, as they use to speak, that is, by their signatures from Heaven; or
else ordained to such affections by the seminary reason of the soul, otherwise
they may easily miss the mark: for, the similitude dispensed from Heaven,
because it passes the like spirits, does much advance the effects; nay,
without this thou will scarce do any good, as by daily experience we may see
made manifest.

CONCLUSION XII. The mixture of Spirits makes Compassion, from that
Compassion, Love takes its Original.
The Proof and Explanation, etc.
THis 12. Conclusion does of it self a little or nothing avail to the curing of
diseases, being rather directed to endure Diseases, and procure Love; it is
also the foundation of all Implantations: for, where commixtion and compassion
is, there is that which is sound, drawing unto it self that which hurts
another; without question that from whence the thing hurtful was drawn, will
be helped and cured with the loss and prejudice of that thing, that so
attracteth and draws it: And this Conclusion, besides that it needs no long
proof and explanation, being clear of it self, it is likewayes not safe to use
many words about it, because of the danger that may arise probably from hence;
for, from this fountain flows transplantation of Diseases from one man to
another, and from the dead to the living; it may also do harm, in giving cause
of much exorbitant lust, and the means to satisfy it; Nay, if this Conclusion
were too clearly known, Fathers (which God forbid) could not be safe from their
Daughters, Husbands from their Wives; nay, nor Women from one another: for,
they would be turned up-side down with Philosophy; and therefore I shall speak
no more of them in this place; for, to them that are curious and diligent
searchers of Nature, that which has and shall be said hereafter, is
sufficient: But before I come to handle the Precepts of this Art, let me (as an
Epilogue to these Conclusions, and for the better understanding of what
follows) advance one Proposition more, and that is this; The vital spirit is
more powerfully drawn out of the whole body, and partaketh of the whole body,
by those things that either have the signatures of the whole body, or have a
substance like the sulpher of man's body; so from a part, for a particular
operation, those things do more vehemently draw, sooner communicate the spirit
to another, which have the evident signature of it, this I say to the end. And
by thine own industry thou may find Magnets; for every particular operation,
by means of this general rule. This further I think good to gratify thee
withal, of all things proceeding from the body, the blood and the sweat are
most stufft with vital spirits; for, of the seed I will say nothing, for,
without great incivility it cannot be had: but of one thing take especial
heed, that as soon as they proceed from their body, they be committed to their
proper Magnets: for, as the common Lodestone is fortified, and after a certain
manner fed with Iron, so are these Magnets, which apprehend and keep the Vital
spirit, until they commit the care of them to another thing: for, if thou
strive to keep without their proper and due Magnet, two inconveniences will
follow: first, they cannot endure any considerable time in their esse; because
every moment they lose somewhat of their vital spirits: secondly, that without
a Magnet they do not work so mightily: because, for the most part, the Magnets
do conduce to transplantation and communication (as we know by certain
experience) for Philosophers they will do little or no good without a Magnet;
Except peradventure somewhat may be done by the fermentation of the blood and
seed; and each is to other in stead of a Magnet: but in other things, though
happily thou may find some virtue, yet thou will never find so powerful
operations, as if in thy works thou use Magnets; choose them then convenient,
and apply them the right way, and thou shall perform wonders. Mundus regitur
opinionibus.

The Third BOOK. CONTAINING The Method of Curing by SYMPATHY.
CHAPTER I. Of the things necessary for a Physician, before he under-take the
Practice of Magical Physic.
THere are many things necessary for him, that thinks to understand the
practice of this Art, and do any good by it. First, he must know diseases, for
else how can he cure them. It is true, that ignorance of the diseases is not
here dangerous as in common Physic, because here we use external Medicines,
always comforting the internal, and for the most part void of poison: but
though it be not dangerous to the patient, yet it shall be a shame to the
Physician, as shall hereafter appear. He that is now well seen in the knowledge
of diseases, let him next seek the part first and principally affected; for, if
this be unknown, he shall never do any thing to the purpose. He must likewayes
have absolute knowledge of simples, and know as well the internal as external
signature of things, whereby the simples are signed, as well to the parts of
the body, as to the diseases: for, we use none but signed things in this Art.
But signature being double, to wit, internal and external, we will use those
things that are externally signed, as being most known to us, except experience
(which is always to be obeyed) be to the contrary. He that knows the nature
of simples, cannot be ignorant of the times for the sowing and gathering of
them; but this Science cannot be thought sufficient without Astrology: our
Physician therefore must be skilled in the Planetary diseases and Plants, that
so he appease these: yet so that to diseases, whether strong or remiss, he be
sure to appose a plant of a superior degree. In a word, he must understand the
secret natures of both men and simples. I do not deny, but that this Art one
day will be very easy, but as yet it is in the Cradle, lies lurking in the
secret desks of some few men: And therefore, he that will attempt it, must from
the foresaid Conclusions, draw some particulars. Yet here I would advise (by
the way) all men, that in the Interim, they would minister things comforting,
proper for the disease, that so the Cure may the more soon, more safely, more
plentifully be performed: yea if peradventure in some diseases, sometimes there
are more violent things to be given (which we must ever avoid all we can) yet,
this comfort we have from this Art, that by it, nature is strengthened and kept
from being overthrown by violent things; which, consider with thy self how much
it concerns. Moreover I would persuade, that until easier Purgatives be found
in this Art, thou would be content to use these purges following, or the
like, as the disease requires: for, those do not much trouble the vital spirit,
and work without nauceousnesse, griping, or trouble. I have ever kept secret,
but am now content to communicate them unto thee, that nothing may be wanting
in this Art.

CHAP. II. Of Purges and Purging.
IN as much as the vital spirit being fortified, can by its own power free the
body from hurtful humors; It may be doubted, whether in Cures done by this
Art, Purgation be to be promised: And true it is indeed, that the spirit can by
its power, expel hurtful things out of the body: But, if any would quickly,
safely and pleasantly cure diseases by this Art, it is fit to begin with
Purgation; for so, the oppressed spirit is relieved, and is made fitter, being
helped by our Medicine to do the other things, and when it is free, it is more
easily changed and reduced to its former estate: for, there are some of the
Philosophers, before they give a Dose of a great Elixer, first think fit, (that
the Cure may be more easily wrought) to free the Body by Purgation. How much
rather then in this Art now, whether it is best to do it, may be doubted. And
first, it is to be considered, That there be very few simples, violently
purging, that do not hurt the vital spirit by their great proportion of
venenosity. Secondly, there is not yet any Medicine purging Magnetically found
out, (except some certain ointments commonly known) which utterly wants all
venomous qualities. And therefore, I would have them quite forborne, because
they may be the cause of more mischief, than if they were given inwardly: But
Magnets and Oils may be commodiously used, if the disease be in the Stomach,
Intestines, or Mesaricks: I will give this example of one that does gently
loose the Belly; In other Writers thou may find more, or may make them
according to thine own intention. R. Aloes hepat lib. 1. Myrrhae unc. 1. pour
upon it the Gall of Bull lib. ss. draw of the oil in a retore, which thou
may use either by it self, or in form of an Unguent, anointing the Stomach,
and all about the Navell with it, and afterward cover it with a sponge, wet
with the oil, or in the ointment, thou shall see the desired effect, namely a
benign and harmless Purgation, which works without all nauceousnesse or
griping. There are many things spoken of an Herb in the West parts of Ireland,
called by the Natives, Mackanbuy; which if any carry about him, it purges
without griping; but that it does not this by corroborating the spirits, it
appears: for, if one carry it about him too long, it brings a dangerous flux.
Some ascribe the like virtue to Tobacco, tied to the Flank; So the milky juice
of Tithimal, mixed with salt, and put it into the new Excrements of the belly,
does violently loosen, but not without pain; yet these things must be warily
used; neither is it safe to apply any medicine that purges violently to the
vital spirit nakedly, either by excrement, blood, or any other means; we will
therefore prescribe some things to be taken inwardly, which are benign, and
agreeable to Nature, and which thou may use, until by experience there be
more healthsome Purges found out, examined according to the Precepts of this
Art: And the first shall be the specifical. Purge of Paracelsus, which is good
almost in every disease, whether the operation be after Crollius, or no, thou
may in a disease use Mercurius vitae (if thou would purge by vomit)
precipitate by the powder of Tarter, and after precipitation, wash it very
well. If afterward it be sprinkled with the oil of common salt, and so left in
digestion three or four days, and then washed one or two times, it purges
gently and universally, which is an high secret in the Dropsy. Moreover, if
Mercur. vitae be well ground with common salt decrepitate and again washed, and
this work be thrice repeated, it leaves much of its violence. Also Mercur.
specificus purgans of our own Invention, is of no small moment; for it draws
the humors sweetly out of the whole body, without violence, and opens
obstructions. Angelus Sala his Crystallum Lunae, freeth the body benignely from
all waterish humors, and wonderfully helps the Dropsy. Our Mercurius
Coelestis, of all Minerals, most benignely purges the body, it is fit for
every age, it opens obstructions, it frees the head from humors, it strengthens
the stomach: neither are there any symptoms to be feared from it, as there are
exceedingly in all others Mercurials: The Precipitation hereof is after this
manner; Take of common Mercury precipitate white sweetened with many washings,
and dried as much as thou will, oil of vitriol q. S. to make a paste of it; put
it into a glass, and set it in the Sun fourteen days; then take it out, and
dry it again, doing as before the third time, then wash it to a pleasant
tartness, dry it, and keep it for thy use. The Dose is from Six Gr. to Ten,
according to the age, disease, and habitude of the body: it purges only by
siege, neither is there any fear of salivation, or of fluxing, though necessity
force thee to use it many times. The glass of Antimonie, purging only by
stool, is a most noble remedy in all melancholy diseases and affects of the
head, neither is it far from a special purger; and therefore thou may easily
use it in every disease that requires evacuation; It is made of the powder of
Antimonie made by it self, by irroration of the oil of vitriol, even almost as
Mercurius Coelestis was. Prepare it after this manner; Take of the powder of
Antimonie unc. 1. of oil of vitriol as much, mix them well together in a glass
mortar, and dry them by the fire, this do VII. times, each time drying them
well; at last, the powder being now dry, have in a readiness the spirit of
Wine thus made; Take Mastick unc. 1. very good spirit of Wine XI. digest them
together four days, then decant the spirit of Wine, and Macerate the prepared
powder of Antimonie in it three days, then put altogether into an earthen Pot,
make it hot, and kindle the S. V. ever stirring it with a slice, till the flame
cease; dry well the powder that remains, the Dose from four Grains, to six. But
the desire to do good constrains me to open unto thee the best Preparation of
Stibium that ever was, it is an universal Medicine, curing all diseases; and
if any thing can stand in stead of potable Gold, this may, though it be of
weaker force: I have written it in dark words, lest it should be known to the
unworthy: it is made of Hungarian Stibium, by the multiplied fire of nature,
calcined into most fine white powder, take heed of the fume, which will be
much: but if by this calcination thou do not find the weight increased, thou
have erred; therefore put it into fire again until the weight be increased,
then is the calcination done; Take of this powder unc. 1. mix them and digest
them twenty days, or a month, decant the Liquor, the Dose is from drach. 2.
to ounces S S. this is a great secret in all diseases. If thou have a mind to
make use of the powder remaining, calcine it as before, the calcination is
sooner done, and the powder will be increased both in power and weight; so have
thou a most perfect Mineral of health. I have said much if thou understand me,
neither can I speak more plain; use thou it to the benefit of the poor, and be
thankful to me, who if thou understandest the sense rather than the syllable,
I have showed thee the way to great matters: but to others thou may use our
Minerals Pancy-Magoger in all Obstructions, Dropsies, and like affections: It
is made of Mercur. vitae, glass of Antimony prepared as before, * a scr. ij.
Mercur. Coelestis scr. iiij. let them be well mingled, and then with spirit of
common salt saturate with Gold, let there be made a paste; which dry, sprinkle
again with the spirit of salt; do this thrice, at last infuse this powder in
the S. V. digesting it three or four days, then heat it so, as the spirit may
take fire, and stir it with a spatula till the flame cease: then dry the
matter, and pour more S. V. and do as before three times, then dry the Powder
and keep it: The Dose is from vj. gr. to X. as seems good to the Physician; In
some Diseases it may be mixed with the Resina scammonii, so will it neatly purge
all the humors of the body, etc. Those things have we hither to taken out of
the Family of Minerals, than which there can be no better given out of the
Vegetable family; Many things may be taken, which are everywhere extant. These
are those that follow, which I chiefly use: I can never enough commend the
Resina Scammonii, whether it be taken by it self, or with Tartar vitriolate, or
Crystalline in convenient Dose, or whether you add unto it Antimony purging
downward; but then you must use less of the Crystal of Tartar: As for example,
In an intermitting Tertian fever, the body being indifferently disposed to
purgation, give of the Resina Scamonii, Gr. 22. of glass of Antimony purging
downwards, Gr. ij. or iiij, of Crystal of Tartar. Gr. vi. and thou shall surely
cure all Fevers; but this Medicine must be given before the Fits ensue that
Nature and the Physic may work together, and if need be let it be repeated:
besides, thou may vary the Dose according to thy judgment. This does
likewayes cure continual burning fevers, if it be given the first or second
day, while the Patient is yet strong: Thou may if thou will afterward, give
some Diaphoretick, especially of those who procure sweat, not by prolatation,
but confortation, and the abovesaid preparation of Antimony.

Out of what has been said, thou may learn to make Panchimagogon, if thou
know how to vary the Dose of the Ingredients, according to the variety of
humors, thou may likewayes use the extract of black Hellebor, made by white
Wine, to all melancholy diseases with good success, especially in the
suppressing menstruous, and all diseases arising from thence; but thou may
add to these, Resina Scamonii, so shall thou best hasten the operation, and
take away the nauceousnesse which often proceeds from the operation of
Hellebor, that which is by Rulandus called, The golden spirit of Life, is good
for many diseases, it is made with strong S. V. drawn from the Trochisci
Alhandal, or the tincture, the Dose of the tinctured liquor, is Ounce SS. to
Ounce 1. Thou may also in all diseases of the liver, and the meseraicks use
with good success, an extract of Rhubarb, it is made with water of Cichory,
whereunto is added, the oil rectified from its salt, together with the salt
thereof all put in digestion till they be united, it is given in water
distilled from the extract, or in the water of Cichroy to the quantity of
scrup. ij. or drach. i. Also our Spirit of health helps many diseases,
especially in obstructions of the spleen, in the hypocondriack passion, in all
melancholic diseases, windiness, as well of the stomach as of the intestines,
and in diseases of the mother, I have used it with success; and is thus made:
Take of the strongest S V. xi. unc. of the leaves of Senna elect. drach. iij.
of black Helebor prepared according to Hartman, drach. vi. of oil of Fennel, of
Aniseeds some few drops: let the Senna and the Hellebor be bruised and
maserated in the S. V. putting often upon them the oils for fourteen days
space; Then take them out and press them, and put as much of the new species
as thou did at first, doing all things as before after the last expression:
keep the spirit for thy use: The dose is from unc. i. S. to unc. ij.

I have moreover often used Cariocostinum prepared chymically very happily,
which do you consider of, for I have said enough at this time. For vomitings I
do use them also, but common ones, as thou may, when necessity forces thee;
yet I prefer before all others, that truly so called Aqua benedicta Ruland,
described by Hartman in his Chymia practica, and is made of Antimony and Vitrio
lana, and twice or thrice so much salt niter into a Corpus metallorum, which
being exquisitely sweetened, is given by infusion in unc. i. or more of white
Wine as the disease requires, The Vomitorium Conradi of Crollius is not to be
despised. The Coagulum Assari described by Hartman, in diseases of the stomach
and mesaraicks, where there is need of vomiting, is very good. The cold purger
of Angelus Sala in continual burning fevers, is an excellent remedy. Merc.
vitae both vomiting and purging in rebellious diseases, whiles the Patient is
strong, gives no place to any medicine. Likewise the extract of white Helebor,
given in a convenient dose, cures all pains in the head, arising from the
stomach or lower parts. Thy self may find out more, these are enough for us
that are in have.

CHAP. III. Of PHLEBOTOMIE.
BEfore we go any further, something must be said of Phlebotomie, and whether
it be here to be admitted or no; and if so, then when and in what cases it may
be used; And first it is generally to be known, That every Medicine that may be
used in other Physic, may be also used here. Briefly then let us enquire into
Phlebotomie in general, and first to them that contemplate the depth of Nature,
and behold the uncuest frequent causes of things, it may seem strange how so
many lettings of blood came into use amongst Physicians, especially if the
opinion of them be true, both in reason and experience: for, if blood corrupted
cease to be blood and degenerateth into unnatural humors, which are to be
purged, not by letting blood, but by sweat and purgation, as the matter
requires. Or will they say, They do it to loose the body; surely it is scarce
agreeable to reason, That blood should be the cause of a feverish or
praeternatural heat; unless peradventure the spirits that have their seat in
the blood, be stirred up by fermentation, which is seldom done, nor lasts
it, except choler be joined therewith; which being purged away, the motion and
heat are presently quieted and allayed: or may be caused sometimes when too
much blood grieveth the body, and begets fevers. But to that perhaps they
will answer, That such are not to be cured but by Phlebotomie; because a
Physician must follow Nature, and never stray from her Laws: but Nature has
showed another, and most natural way, that does not trouble the body like
Phlebotomie, and that is nourishment; for while the body is nourished, the
blood is consumed, if it be not repaired by aliment; therefore take away
aliment for the time, and nature will consume the blood without troubling the
humors or the body; and therefore Hippocrates prescribes to such, a slender
diet. But if thou say the body cannot now be nourished, because of the
malignant humors that infect the blood, thou say nothing; for, why do
thou not throw them out by purgation? Thou will peradventure say, there is no
concoction; yet Hippocrates purges the turgid and swelling humors in fevers,
which if I affirm with Paracelsus, there can be no fevers at all without the
fermentation of humors, which is as it were the soul of concoction, do not I
speak reason? for, what else but fermentation could brook such a heat, and stir
such troubles in the body? Choler, if it be a humor, yet it cannot grow hot,
but either by external heat, or fermentation: They prattle that speak, that
putrefaction can stir up heat; who ever heard such trifles from so great men,
let them tell me how putrefaction, which is a certain corruption, can cause
heat, and let them tell me if this effect agree to all putrefaction: They dare
not say so, for some would convince them; for it agrees only with moist
things, whom they putrify, and, yet not by reason of putrefaction, neither is
it the adequat cause; for fermentation causes heat: for, look how much it
putrifieth, so much heat decreaseth, as it is plainly seen in all moist things
putrefying; and the reason is, because, look how much corruption prevails, so
much fermentation evanisheth.

But let us hear these men's distinctions of putrefaction; It is, say they, the
corruption of the proper and natural heat in every moist thing, by a strange
heat, by the Ancients or according to Galen, it is a change of the whole
substance of the body, putrefying to corruption by external heat: The first
supposes that the proper heat of a thing can be dissipated, by an external
heat: but first let them tell me how heat, as heat, can work upon heat, if it
do first dissipate natural heat, before it consume radical moisture* for the
property of heat is not to work upon heat, but upon moisture: it dries up;
drying hinders putrefaction. Again, if it first work upon that which is moist,
proportionably with the moisture, it consumes the heat; therefore there is so
much heat left, as the moisture left requires: Therefore it seems that
external heat is not the cause of putrefaction. Look upon other things that
putrify, Does not heat by drying hinder putrefaction? Does not external cold
sometimes advance it? But surely it ought to cause it, if it consist in the
corruption of heat, and that in moisture; for, what can destroy heat in a moist
body, where there is nothing left but moisture, except cold? Moreover, it
seems, That putrefaction, if it cannot proceed from the corruption of proper
heat: for, if this were so, then the more the proper heat should decrease, the
more putrefaction would prevail, and then be perfected, when the heat were
driven quite away: But who sees not the contrary, that putrefaction cease
when heat is clean gone; do not those things that have the best portion of this
heat, last longest without putrefaction? But that we may come to that heat that
takes its original from putrefaction (as these men would have it) of which is
all the controversy, let any may tell me, how external heat can stir up a
greater and more intense heat? How do dunghils putrify (I speak after their
manner) in the winter time, and have more heat than either the proper heat
declining, or the Ambient can stir up; nay, they putrify sooner in the winter,
than in the summer, if they be laid in great heaps. Whence is that great
inflammation in fevers, not from the internal heat, says Galen, but from a
strange adventitious heat? But whence it comes, or what brings the heat into
the putrid matter, neither he, nor any man else knows, or can tell: but from
the definition it is clear, That putrefaction cannot be the cause of heat,
because it destroys heat, and is introduced from an external heat; that which
is putrid, is only the subject of the heat, not the cause: which heat is only
possessed according to the intention and remission of the Introducer: neither
lasts it longer than the cause is present; and how these things can agree,
let them look. As to Galen's definition, I wonder why he so unadvisedly and
ridiculously, made the body putrefying, to be the subject of putrefaction;
whether in bringing in of all putrifactions, is there a putrefying body
necessarily prae-required; and therefore that which is once sound, is for ever
free from putrefaction: but external heat is by him called, the cause of
putrefaction; and therefore it shall be the cause of heat in that which
putrifieth; but putrification it self cannot be called, the cause of heat; yet
I would fain have some of them tell me, how moist things can putrify without
fermentation going before? and where shall the putrefaction of humors at length
stay it self but in corruption, and therefore that which is truly putrified, is
not the same which it was before putrefaction be finished, but is changed into
another thing of inferior order; because of the heat that is gone: Choler
putrified, is not now Choler, but another thing colder than it; and therefore
cannot cause a Tertian fever, which depends of Choler, as appears by the
excrements: Besides, putrefaction is always accompanied with stinking: (by
stink I do not understand that Odor which is unpleasant to us, but that which
agrees not with things in their proper state) but who ever saw stinking choler
voided in fevers, except it were mixed with some things that did truly
putrify; whereas the Excrements of the belly, though they had an odious smell
before, yet being putrified, they have a most pleasant odor, as experience
shows. Therefore the putrefaction of humors is not the cause of Fevers, but
Fermentation: which being the height of concoction, does always (other things
requisite being present) unite to purgation in summer. I would ask those
supercilious Masters one thing, What concoction they accept in a putrid humor?
can Nature bring back a thing from corruption? can it ever be in a better state
than now it is if it be putrified? It is Nature's duty to perfect the work
begun: unless her Intention be led aside, or be hindered. The truth is, those
men are too subtle to see the simplicity of Nature; but, how if all the strife
be only about the name? how if fermentation be by them called putrefaction? I
will not stand upon this, so be they confess that concoction in fevers needs
not to be expected; and that by a timely purgation they provide for the life of
the Patient; which is often lost by needless letting blood.

But of Fevers we shall speak more in our Practice; now therefore let us
return to Phlebotomie, from which we degressed, Against which some do further
urge, that considering the whole latitude of Nature, they find no medicine
that draws blood: But if Blood-letting had been necessary, provident Nature
would have provided some medicine to that purpose, who rather labors to keep
that Cataract of life within the body; Moreover they ask, how any dare be so
bold as to draw blood from a Cacochymick body, seeing themselves (and that
truly) say, that blood is the bridle of the humors. They will say, that Nature
being disburdened, will the readier arise up against the humors: but foolishly;
for, if one should take away a Soldiers weapons, and then bid him set upon the
Enemies, promising himself by this means the victory, would you not think him
mad? How much less is he who robbing Nature of her Arms, bids her make head
against the Enemy; yea, but many have mended by letting blood; I deny it not,
but neither was then blood-letting the cause of the recovery: but natural heat,
or the vital heat stirred up by motion, set upon, and conquered the diseases;
which heat by another motion, had been better stirred up, especially by
Purgation at the beginning, whilst there was strength; by which means there is
not only endured a motion exciting the spirits, but also the cause of the
disease being partly taken away, the Patient is much relieved. Thus you see the
boldness and madness of them that are so forward upon every occasion, time
and age, to let them blood; whereupon how many dangers follow, I appeal to
experience. This is the true cause why Fevers are so seldom cured. I would
such Physicians would one day repent, and take Nature for their guide.

But is Phlebotomie wholly to be condemned? Is it in some cases lawful for a
Physician that follows Nature, seeing that she in some cases, as by bleeding
at the Nose, avoiding evil blood that is troublesome. So it is at sometimes,
and upon some occasion needful: but these conditions must be observed, which
are by experience fetched out of the Cabinet of Nature.

First, that it be never done but in a sanguine body, not too much filled with
preter-naturall humors.

2. That it be done whilst the strength is constant; under which conditions
are comprehended the age, sex, and times of the disease, and of the year, which
when they weaken, forbid it.

3. Phlebotomie, is never to be done successively (viz.) two days together;
let Avicen say what he will: for, a double commotion is too great, and does too
violently, especially in fevers, trouble Nature.

4. In particular Irruptions, either in their making, or already made you may
do it more freely.

5. If diversion of the disease require it.

6. If Fevers, when Nature shows the way by bleeding at the Nose, or other
passages: Provided, that she do not evacuate enough of her own accord.

7. If the natural flux of women be stopped, it is permitted, until nature can
by fit medicines, be brought to her wonted course, for the avoiding of
diseases: but there must be great care taken to open the passages; for, nature
knows how better to govern her self than we do. And in these cases, and with
these conditions, it is permitted: But except in a Case where a particular
Irruption urges, as sometimes in a Plurisie, and in a Squinancy, I would
always prefer Fasting before Phlebotomie: yet before this if the Indication
command, I would free the body from the humors: for so Nature would naturally
be eased, I would have the Physicians, the ministers of Nature, to follow
Nature everywhere, plain and simple, and leave their strife and contentions;
What have we, (that should follow simple Nature) to do with Sects? that one
should swear himself a slave to Galen, another to Avicen, another to
Paracelsus; these were great men, but when these gave themselves to contentious
disputes to defend their own opinions, they much erred many times from the
truth. This much is sufficient to be said of Phlebotomie in fevers, we shall
speak more large in our Practice, where also we shall speak of Refrigeration,
or cooling of hot bodies.

CHAP. IV. Of CAUTERIES.
CAuteries are used by many that either know not, nor understand not why they
use them: And this manner of evacuation, of all these now in use among
Physicians, is the least material, especially when it is used by way of
derivation: for, they weaken the member, they open a way to the vital spirits
to go out: they alter the whole body, by wasting the natural heat, so that
almost all that use them, either are of short life, or else growing fat, and
disable for the duties of life, fall sooner than they should, into old age;
for, whereas nature thought good at first to make so many Evacuations to the
body of man, these by making more, stir her up too much: Has not GOD given
Medicine to purge the ^ocent humors by natural emunctories, and to make others
for our selves? is this to follow Nature, or to go quite contrary to her? Thou will say, they do it to evacuate humors, which else would cause a Disease; and
have we not other means in imitation of Nature to do that? But, if they be once
evacuated, they will come again. They will indeed, if thou know not how to
fortify nature with nature; they are fools, that intending to cure a Disease,
are enforced to make one: for my part, I never knew any by this means soundly
cured, I have seen many weakened. But are Fontenels (as they call them) to be
utterly rejected? Surely, if the humors be in part of a member, notextreamly
weakened, I should admit them, likewayes to intercept a humor coming to a weak
part, until the part be fortified also. In diversion thou may use them for
a time, but warily: and if thou would altogether forbear them, it were the
better: But, if thou have a mind to follow these trivial ways, yet do it not
in a weak body, nor in a Child (except for a very short time) nor in a body
exreamly Cacochymicall: the reasons of these observations are manifest from
things aforesaid. At the least if yet thou will use them, then handle the
purulent matter according to this Art, and apply to the wound these things that
are specifically proper to the Disease, and doubtless thou shall do wonders.
The same is to be understood of blood that is drawn by Phlebotomie, by means
whereof thou may perform great matters, as shall be said in the Chapter of
Blood.

CHAP. V. Of Comfortative Medicines.
IT is a goodly thing to proceed to a work with all the consent of Nature,
which that we may do in this our medicine; We have briefly spoken of the famous
evacuations: Now we must treat of Comfortatives to be taken Inwardly: which,
because they conduce most to our purpose, it being not possible but the disease
should be cured, if the vital spirit be duly fortified as well within, as
without. We will for the common good, lay open some most secret and universal
things. And first I cannot but admire the true Bezoar, which without any
preparation, yields a singular cordial, comforting the Heart and principal
Members; yet experience shows that it is much better when it is reduced to a
Magisterium. The Dose is from gr. iiij. to scr. Ss. The same judgment is to be
given of the natural white Balsome of Peru: of which Monardus has discoursed
at large, whom thou may safely follow. The not vulgar preparation of Coral
and Pearls, we will give hereafter; for the present take some Compounds, and
the first shall be a Diathenate, called commonly by the Inventers name,
Gascones powder; which secret he sold to the Bishop of Worcester for 300 lib. I
give it thee freely: Take the black toes of Sea-Crabbs boiled, beat them to
powder, which must be done, Venus joined with Luna, being in Cancer: of this
powder take, for example, unc. j. Magestery of Coral and Pearls a*a unc. ij. of
the true Bezoar, unc. j. make rolls of the gelly of Viper skins, or, if thou will, of the flesh of the whole Viper, which is good; and being dried, let them
be made up again, and dried with the same gelly, and the oftener they be
repeated, the better it will be. The use of it is, to beat it into powder, and
give of it from scrup. j. to s. ij. in almost any disease, repeating it often
against poison. But if thou had learned to calcine the Crabbs claws, Corral,
Pearl and Beozar, with the fire of Nature, it would be an admirable Alexiterion
indeed, and more precious than all Gold preparations.

The second Compound shall be our most precious Diarhodon: Take of pale
Rose-leaves as much as thou will, bruise them well in a Mortar till they be an
Mass; to every ounce whereof put of the extract of Cinnamon, made with
Rose Water, of the Extract of Cloves and Mace, made by the same Waters a*a unc.
1. of the extract of Musk and Amber made together, see that the Amber be three
times as much as the Musk scrup. ij. this extract is made by means of a very
strong spirit of Wine, drawn off in a gentle bath to the consistance of the oil
of Salt; of Corral and Pearl a*a scrup. iiij. Aquae magnanimitatis drach. SS.
the burning spirit of Roses drach. SS. let them all be well mingled, and
enclosed in a vessel of glass, well stopped, all the rest of the summer: about
the end of September, put them in a Balneo for a Month, then separate the
foeces as thou know, and thou have a kingly Medicine: The Dose is from
scrup. SS. to scrup. j. It does miraculously comfort and strengthen all the
Bowels, defends the health, strengthens the seminall powers, and brings to a
fruitful disposition. But let us proceed to other things from the flowers of
Caltha hortensis (Marigolds) and the duskish red Clove-gilliflowers, there is
made a specificall Cordial extract, especially if you add the third part of
the extract of Saffron: let them be all drawn by the spirit of Wine according
to Art.

Paracelsus has a great Confortative, good against most Diseases, it is found
described by Crollius, with a long relation of the virtue of it. The
preparation of Queen Elizabeth's rectified Amber is this: Take the best
Ambergreese drach. viij. chosen Musk that is not sophisticated, drach. j. of
white Sugar drach. S S. pulverize them according to Art, imbibe them with the
burning spirit of Roses, and beat them well together till they be brought into
a reasonable soft paste, put them into a vessel well shut, set to digest in
the Sun till it be dry, then imbibe it as before, and again dry it; the oftener
this process be repeated, the better and stronger will the Medicine be: The
Dose is the quantity of a great Pease, in distilled water of Satyrion
impregnate with its own salt. It comfort all the Inward parts, it moystneth
the body, by increasing the radical moisture, and increases the power of
generation, and cures them that are barren of either Sex. The spirit of Soot
is of great force, as no man will deny that has once used it prepared: The
manner of working it is extant in Hartman, where he speaks of Confortatives in
his Chymica practica, about the beginning. Though the power of these things be
not so great, as that they deserve the title of an universal medicine, yet
experience shows, that the powerof them is great, and that they are always
used with good success.

But we, that we may enrich this new Art, with the addition of an invaluable
treasure, will teach the true calcination or dissolution of Herbs, Stones,
Minerals, and Metals; whereby every thing may, according to his nature, become
an universal medicine, and being exalted, work according to his subject; so
that no man shall deny them equal to the true Aurum potabile; which, as shall
appear, sprung from the said root. Here the Reader must know, our words are not
to be interpreted otherwise than out of the book of genuine Philosophers, and
we are not of the number of common men, how great soever, nor like Quercetan,
though otherwise a great Scholar, who, speaking of Therica in Pharmacopaea
dogmatica restituta, calls the spirit of Wine the fire of Nature; and the
salt of the Earth, the salt and sulphur of Nature; as if Nature did use the
spirit of Wine to the generation of all things, and play the Chymick in the
salt of the earth. I do not deny but the whole earth, and principally the salt
is the receiver of the sulphur and mercury of Nature, yet has it no more than
is sufficient for it self, and as soon as it has it, immediately gives it to
others: We have nothing to do with the salt of the earth, the spirit of wine,
or any other salts or spirits whatsoever vulgarly known; it is far another
matter, which the blind, who are hindered by multitude of operations, cannot
see: but how the Calcination works miracles, harken, I will tell thee; When I
labored about the calcination of Corrals in naked fire, in a strong one,
continuing four days and nights, I could by no means get it to be red, I gave
it to the Glass-makers to keep it some days in their fire, but when I had
tried that four days more, I found it only a little yellowish on the outside,
having in taste a little saltish sweetness; while I was troubled at this,
comes to me a most learned and noble Gentleman: when I complained to him of my
Corral, he told me that in eight hours space he had calcined Corral into a
redish color, with putting the spirit of Wine to it, it yielded a yellow
tincture; whereas mine would yield no tincture at all: which when I heard, I
told him the secret was better than Aurum potabile, as being so quickly
dispatched; whereas the other required so long time: from thence forwards we
gave our selves to natural Calcination, trying the several families of things,
and learned to multiply the fire by Art; whereas before we had only known (and
that not long) the calcination of natural Gold: so by trying all things,
experience taught us one thing after another: therefore work wonders if you
know Nature, I mean naked, as I have often to my great content seen her; yet I
dare not be so Irreligious toward her, as to expose her to the view of the
ignorant and unworthy, an offense never to be expiated: but to the Judicious
and lovers of Truth I will show a spectacle, that shall not like Diana change
Men into Hearts, but into Angels. Two things I must only suppose as fore-known,
namely the Philosophers fire of Nature, and water of life, which yet to the
punctual followers of Nature, will show themselves out of the context. Then to
understand the natural abreviated Calcination, two things, or instruments, are
necessary for thee, if thou will gain time; the first is a great pair of
bellows: if thou know the fire, thou can not (except thou be very dull) be
ignorant of the bellows, by which thou may extremely increase the fire: The
second is a Collateral vessel made of the Osbestos: if you know not this, you
may in many things work without it: but in the second preparation of salts of
Herbs, by which the likeness of them appears in a glass, thou can not be
without it; as also in the whole preparation of Plants, and in the calcination
of Gold thou must use it, if ever thou desire to see a good end. Now we come to
the practice, beginning with Plants; and because they are all prepared after
one manner, we will be content with one example. Thus thou shall then make a
truly noble Confortative of Roses: Take Roses gathered in their blossoming
time, bruised, or not bruised, it makes no matter; put them into a Collateral
vessel that is hermetically shut with a knot, first have them three months in
a digesting fire, with bellows thou may shorten the time, but take heed that
thou spoil not the callitore vessel with too much fire; after the third month
bury it in the belly of a great Horse for six months space; afterward put it
again into the fire till the gross and impure be separated from the pure; then
have thou a royal Cordial indeed, whose virtue yet thou may, if thou
please, thus augment: Take a great quantity of Roses dry at our fire, at
length increase the fire with thy bellows, until they be burned to most white
ashes; then with simple water extract the salt, vapor the water away, and put
the salt into a Collitore vessel, whose mouth must be well stopped with a knot,
there let it be three months; then, as thou did the Roses themselves, bury
it in a dunghill for six months; then take it out, put it again in the fire,
till the species begin to appear in the glass, then take it from the fire, and
mix a sufficient quantity of this with the true clismes of Roses, so shall thou
have a more mighty Cordial than before, exceeding good in all hot diseases and
restoring the radical moisture. And by this means thou may make the true
Clissus of all Herbs, according to the true doctrine of the Ancients and
Paracelsus: each shall work according to the intention of the Herb, from whence
it is taken: though the virtue be from the fire of Nature, and freedom from
their foeces, wonderfully multiplied and enabled: nor are they cleansed from
their original impurity by any water, but by fire. But come we now to Stones
and middle-minerals, and because they are all done after one manner, let us
take Coral for an example.

Take therefore as much Coral as thou please, sprinkle it upon a calcinatory
vessel, to the thickness of a straw; put it to our fire, stir it up with thy
bellows as thou can, and so multiply the fire till thou see the color
changed: but see the surface equal, the Calcination will be soon done, that
thou will wonder, and therefore I would advise thee to do it three or four
times, until it let go its tincture into the Wine, which when it has given,
if it can give no more, repeat the Calcination before, and with a new spirit
draw out the tincture, or with the same, till it be extremely red, then mix all
the spirit of Wine wherewith thou have drawn out the tincture together, and
draw it off to the consistance of Oil. So must thou draw the tincture of all
Stones, middle-Minerals and Salts, infinititly increased in strength; so that
Pearls thus calcined, will truly cure Hecticks. Now let us proceed to Metals,
and for an example let us propound, with envy that much talked of it, Aurum
potabile, and to them that do understand, clearly, though briefly: Put your
foliated Gold into the calatory vessel, the mouth well shut with our knot, put
it to the fire till it be calcined into ashes, and then sublimed into
whiteness, leaving the black terra damnata in the bottom; then let that which
is sublimed be with the same degree of fire united to the caput mortuum, that
it may be revived by it, that so they may be all brought into an Unguent, which
is called the Oil of Gold: the Dose is gr. ij. or iij. Out of this Oil or
Mercury of Gold, thou may extract a high redness by the spirit of Wine,
which contains the perfect cure of all diseases curable: the true Aurum
potabile of the Philosophers, if thou attempt by any other means, thou will
never bring thy purpose to pass; and when thou shall see by this means, that
thou can make any other metal potable, thou will laugh at the vain devices
of others, and confess that I have told the truth: I have spoken (I assure
thee) more plainly than ever any man did, and if thou understand not what has
been said, thou art utterly ignorant of Nature; and therefore study her better:
and if thy intent be pure, to see in these things the wonderful, strange, and
praiseworthy works of thy Creator, God bless and prosper thee: otherwise, I
beseech Him keep thee far from the understanding of my words. Concerning
Laudanum there is no great need to say any thing; many forms of it are every
where extant: in Hartman there is an express description of Laudanum opiate. A
learned Physician can vary the proportion of things according to his own
intent, and the nature of the disease: so all things be magnetically done: But
he that knows how to calcine the things to be calcined by the fire of nature,
may doubtless do strange things. Wherefore hasting to other things, we leave
this to the judgment of the Physician, meaning one day to speak more hereof, if
God shall so please.

CHAP. VI. Of those Medicines that are to be chosen in this Art.
HAving sufficiently spoken of helps taken from elsewhere, we now come to the
Art it self; and in this Chapter we shall enquire what medicines are chiefly to
be chosen in this our Art, that we may know the matter of our Physic. We said
in the first Chapter of this Book that these things were principally to be
taken, that bear the signature of the disease, and of the part principally
affected: but because we shall be here often to seek; therefore, for their
sakes that are unpractized, we have added Notes out of Crollius his Book of
signatures. But what is to be done in the mean time, surely if thou know the
specificals, though the signature do not appear, yet thou need not doubt of
them: for they have either such an external signature as we do not perceive,
lying hid perchance in their motion, number, or somewhere: or else an internal,
unknown to thee; because thou art ignorant of the Anatomy of them: If thou
therefore know among the Plants any specificals contrary to any disease,
apply them diligently according to this Art, to the diseases in which they are
proper, in manner as shall be said. These that help by any known quality, are
not so much worth as to be taken into this Art; for the matter of our medicine,
unless it be when they have a sagacity (mark well what I said, for these
things ought to be precious to thee) for then if any external quality hurt the
body or the spirit most violently, thou must use these sagacious plants, endued
with a contrary quality which have more spirit.

These Herbs or Plants I call sagacious, which know how to chase their enemies,
and embrace their friends. And those Plants (said I) have a signature against
diseases, which have some property contrary to them, so the Salix or Willow is
signed to a dry bectick: for it has the power to grow apace, and though torn
or cut from the Trunk, if it be but pricked into the Earth it dies not, but
grows presently into a Tree, and gets roots of its own. So an Oak dies not
in a long time, and therefore use that when and where diurnity or length of
time is required; and so of the rest. But of these more at large in our Notes
of Crollius, whereunto we will adjoyn a small Treatise of sagacious Herbs, that
the Work may be perfected. At the beginning it was told thee, That such an Herb
or Plant is to be chosen, as has in it the signature both of the member and
the disease; but because it is an hard thing to find a Plant with both the
signatures, thou may take two of diverse species, so thou shall do as much as
if thou had taken one with the signature of both, if thou be cunning to
the application: This one thing I would especially commend unto thee, as the
greatest secret in this whole Art, (viz.) That medicines from men's bodies, if
they be rightly used, can do the greatest matters in this Art; and therefore
with great diligence, enquire what parts or excrements of the body conduce to
what disease, the Catalogue whereof the Treatise of sagacious Herbs, toward
the end of it, shall give thee; yet know, that to use these simply will not
much advantage thee, for they must have a due composition, if thou will do any
good with them. Take example by the Weapon-salve; These Compositions I will set
down afterward, by means whereof there are wonders performed in Chyrurgery, if
thou know the Composition thereof, and can mix together such, or the like
Ingredients, fitting other effects, thou will be glad to see the operation
thereof.

CHAP. VII. Of the time as well of the gathering, as of the application of
these medicines.
I Will not enter in general any disputation against them, who in dispute of
experiences, deny all Astrological elections, it is enough at present to
suppose them profitable; for that which is confirmed by authority of so many
learned men, needs not our Arguments: for indeed Herbs do not at all times
possess the same qualities or virtues; for sometimes more, sometimes nothing
at all: The most profitable of all are they, which having a signature, are then
gathered when the signature is most apparent; and the moon in such a sign as
governs the members signed, especially the planet that is Lord of the plants
being in his essential dignities, and beholding them more favorably, and let
the moon and the Lord of the Plant be both free; the Moon having the dominion
of the plant, or the sixth house; and take heed the Moon be not joined to any
ill planets that are retrograde. Those things that have their signature in the
root, must be gathered in Autumn, but if they have the signature of the
disease, they must be gathered when the Planet, Lord of the disease, is weak in
a cadent house, and the Lord of the Plant fortified: The Medicines taken from
men, gather as soon as they come out of the living body, and keep them in a
vessel well shut, till time require: But yet if thou can fit the Moon and the
Planet that is Lord of the part, if thou intend not for a particular operation,
but for a general, make the fortunate ascendant, and in the sixth house; if you
cannot, at the least let him be a friend by aspect to the house, especially he
must always be taken, that whether they be excrements, or blood, or ought
else, they be not corrupted before they be used: yet do not so take me, as that
I should dislike fermentation, which in this Art is most necessary, and which
some call corruption, though falsely. But if at any time thou will use Mummy in
this Art, take it possibly from a body living, or next to life, (otherwise it
will not do so much good as the warm blood) and set it to dry in the shade:
however, amongst the Mummy put warm blood, and set it to dry in the shade; but
be sure it do not corrupt before the drying, to avoid which, it is best to cut
it small into little square pieces, like Dice, for so it will be soonest dry,
and better serve the operations required. If thou can not have it from a
living, or from a warm body, it either must be often anointed with warm blood,
or steeped in it, and left there for a time, and cautiously dried; for so it is
fortified with the spirits, drawn from the blood. If at any time you intend to
work by fermentation, as soon as the blood, excrements, etc. are out of the
body, put them out into a close vessel shut, and mingle with them such things
as are to be mingled, if there be an addition of any thing required, as in some
excrements there are, and thou set them to digest in a gentle heat, not passing
the heat of the body whence they came.

Note also, That not always the same vessels are to be used, but sometimes
glasses, sometimes some things taken from living creatures; as for example: If
thou would digest ones excrement to stay a flux, an earthen vessel: if thou
would stay vomiting, the stomach of a Swine is the best; and so of the rest:
but when thou intendest implantation in all putrifactions, to this purpose
glassevessels are best; though I would use an egg in some cases, as in
digesting blood by it self, or mixed with sweat, etc.

Now if you seek the time of application generally, take it thus; All
application of these remedies, be it implantation, or simple application of
things convenient, ought to be done, the Moon being in a sign conveniently
fortunate, if it may be in the tenth house, and the Lord of the Plant of the
medicine exalted above the Lord of the disease: But of these we will give
precepts in every likenesie. And this by the way; Though all things do not
agree exactly, yet do not thou forsake or procrastinate the cure, fit those
things that thou can fit, as if when the rest agreed, thou would begin
anew; for, if there be a due application of things, although the stars do not
so exactly accord, the cure may be prolonged, but the effect will not be
altogether frustrate, if thou learn well to observe the times to come; this
thou shall do, if the time be observed in the progress of the cure: then do as
it were set upon the Disease a-fresh, applying new Instruments of health; A
thing well to be noted; for* here is the wisdom of a Physician most required.

CHAP. VIII. Of the means whereby this Art applies the Medicines, to bring
health into the diseased body.
THere are many means whereby this Art applies medicines to the vital spirits:
but for methods sake we will contract them into two in general: the one we
will call transplantation; the other naked application. Transplantation is,
when by means of a Magnetic, we put the Disease into a plant, or another
living creature, the Patient being fully and wholly cured; for, when the Plant,
or the Wight has drawn to its self the ill complexion (troubling the vital
spirit) the spirit is thereby freed, and made able and fit to exercise its due
function; but the Wight into which the Disease is transplanted, languisheth,
and at length (unless it be cured) dies. Yet this caution is to be observed,
that we strive not in vain to transplant the Disease into another Wight, which
has too strong a spirit; for, the vital spirits, being sometime very strong,
resist vehemently, and then all this preparation avails nothing. But into
plants never strive for to transplant the Disease, unless it be in some
property, contrary to the Disease, especially take heed lest it have a quality
contrary to the nature of man, or lest by its too much violence, after it has
attracted the Disease and evil quality, and as it were digested it, it attract
more than it should do; for, by transplantation, not only the evil, but the
good is sometimes attracted and communicated to another. Hence it is, that they
which transplant hair into a Willow, to make it grow, and leave it there longer
than they should do, do make the head weak, and the sight dim; for, the willow
draws the spirit of the head too violently: from hence it comes, that by
transplantation, a man may get himself the strength of a Horse or a Bull, if it
be rightly done. This transplantation is twofold (viz.) immediate and mediate;
Immediate is, that which is done to any living Creatures by mummiall things;
for, so the thing, whereunto it is applied, appropriates unto it self, and
draws to its own nature, the good or evil quality of the Mummey; and either
frees the spirit from such a quality, if it be evil; or appropriates to its
self the spirit, if it be hurt by no ill quality, and fortifies it self by this
spirit, by means whereof, it can bring in the qualities and temper of the body
into the thing, whereunto it is applied, and that things, by means of these
qualities, unites the spirit unto it, and by that, and in the virtue of it can
work many things. And lest thou be deceived by the word we call Mummey, It
signifies those things or parts of Wights which exhibit the spirit nakedly, as
thou may learn out of the First Chapter. Mediate transplantation, is that
which is done by mediate means; as if any quality being transplanted into an
Herb, will be transplanted into the Animal to whom it is given, and by this
means wonders may be done; take thou heed thou do not evil here. Note, that
due putrefaction does excellently prepare the aforesaid Mummy, that any quality
may be introduced into an Animal; but it is found by experience, that blood
does best admit of such putrefaction. Now, let us come to the other part of the
Art, which we called Application, which we must know is nothing else, than the
application of those things to the Mummy, which can either correct the evil
quality, or can draw the vital spirit out of it; by which last means also,
mediate application is done, as in some Amatories it is very manifest. In this
application, these things are further to be noted, first, That nothing endued
with any venomous quality, be applied to the Mummy, being hurt by that means,
for it easily communicates his hurt to the whole. But if you follow the former
Doctrine, concerning signatures, thou shall not easily err from the mark.
Moreover, take heed that by evil diet in the time of application thou
overthrow not the whole business, which is also religiously to be observed in
transplantation. And of these things here is enough said at this time.

CHAP. IX. Of transplantation, and the diverse manners by which it is done.
IN the former Chapter, we have said what we meant by transplantation; now it
follows, how many ways it may be done. There be Six manner of
transplantations, viz. Insemination, Implantation, Imposition, Irroration,
Inescation, and Appromination. We will speak in order of them all. Insemination
is, when a Magnet impregnate with Mummey is mingled with fat earth, wherein the
seed of herbs agreeing with that disease, are sown; for, the earth being
sifted, and mixed with Mummey, is put into an earthen pot, and the seeds are
sown therein, and watered with the washing of the diseased member, or of the
whole body, if it be affected, so in time, all the Diseases, are transplanted
into those seeds proper to the Disease: if the time require it, they are
watered every day with the washings of the part, as is aforesaid: This done,
expect till the herbs begin to sprout, and when it is time, transplant them
into the like earth, and so thou shall see, that as the Herbs increase the
Disease will wear away, and at length be cured. There be, that when the Herbs
be ripe, pull them up, and dry them in the smoke, or throws them into a running
water, or use them some other way, as best agreeing with experience. And if the
Mummey wherewith the Magnet is impregnate, be not diseased, then the Plant will
be impregnate with the vital spirit of him whose Mummey it was; wherewith thou
may do strange things. So then, understand well what I have said: But choose
you Herbs fit for the purpose, and be not deceived, for every thing is not good
for every thing: but they dispense their spirits every thing according to its
proper gifts; for otherwise works the spirit joined to Vervine, and
otherwise to Carduus or Angelica.

2. Implantation is almost done as Insemination is, but here the herbs are to
be taken with their roots alone, and implanted in the like earth, as is said;
so prepared, and so ordered and watered; nay, in this case it is best, if the
herbs have no other water at all; for so they will be as it were constrained to
receive and appropriate the Mummey with the greater violence, which is also
good in semination, except the too much tenderness, and loose softness of the
seed command the contrary, which here you need not fear; but in all things take
experience to thy help. One thing is to be noted in them both, that if the
Plant die, having attracted some ill quality before the Disease be fully cured,
then another of the same kind must be implanted in the same, or rather the like
Earth.

3. Imposition must be thus done; Take the Mummey of the diseased members, or
the Excrements, or both, (take as many as thou can get) put them into a Tree
or an Herb, between the bark and the wood; or else put them into a hole, stop
it with a pin made of the same wood, and put upon it clammy earth: if thou put
the Mummey, or the Excrements, between the bark and the wood, cover the Wound
with the bark again, and with Earth, as they do in Inoculation, and leave the
Mummey there, and if thou work well, thou will quickly see the effect. Yet thou
must know, that some Diseases are sooner cured by Insemination, and some by
Imposition; namely, the fixed by this, and the volatile by that: but if I might
persuade thee, thou should in every Disease do all things; for, Nature is
not burdened with these, and consider what shall be said in the practice: for
there we are resolved to set down nothing, but what we have proved. Moreover,
some there are, that to very good purpose have used Imposition. There is to be
noted, that where thou desire a lasting effect, you use long-lived Trees; and
where a speedy effect, them that grow apace. Remember the Caution given in the
last Chapter, As soon as thou have thy will, take out all that thou did put
in, lest too much attraction of the spirit, do hurt the Patient.

4. Irroration must be done, that by it, transplantation might be perfected.
Thou shall water convenient herbs, or a Tree (and that every day till the
Disease be cured) with Urine, Sweat, Dung, or the washings of the members, or
of the whole body (as the Disease requires) either severally, or all mixed
together: though no man will deny, but the mixture is better: But this way I
would rather use as one help to the other, than alone: howsoever thou do, yet
this always observe, That as soon as Irroration is done, thou cover all the
Irrorated Earth with new Earth, lest the Air dissipate the mummiall virtue in
the things, before the Plants can draw it.

5. Inescation is, when the Mummie is given to a Wight for food; for, then the
vital heat of the Wight unites the Mummie to its self: And the only quality
by which the spirit was diseased, and so restores to health the body whence the
Mummie was taken; the vital spirit of the Patient being by this means cleansed
by the operation of the spirit of the beast: but this especially is here to be
noted, that as soon as the beast is fully and wholly infected with the disease,
it be then killed, lest it do again begin to hurt that body from whence the
Mummie was taken; afterward if the body be not thoroughly cured, when that
beast is infected and killed; give another beast a portion of the like Mummie,
and reiterate the operation until the Patient be whole, and in this case,
blood rightly putrified, or to speak more truly, fermented, is especially to be
used; and yet there is no doubt, but the same cures may be done with the Mummie
extracted by the Magnet. There are likewayes some, that with good success do
give the blood yet warm from the vein, to a Dog or a Swine, which though
peradventure they be not infected with the Disease, (for the spirit is here too
fast fettered) yet experience confirms, that it much furthers the Cure. By this
operation natural Philters are done, though we find by proof, that love may be
procured by more applications: but although natural Philters may to good men
work good effects; yet here I will say no more, because of those wicked men,
that use to pervert the best things to the worst uses.

6. Lastly, By Approximation, Transplantation is done, if to the sick body
these things be applied, which can attract the vital spirit, and the Active
beams, and having attracted them, unite them to themselves, and correct them:
And this is done either by application of Plants, and their parts, or of
beasts: as if you would lay Cucumbers by an Infant that has a fever, when he
is asleep; the Cucumbers will wither, and the Child be cured. Some lay young
whelps to the feet of young Children in their Cradles, and so are often
recovered. After the same sort Doves cloven in the midst, and applied hot to
the soals of the feet, do by attraction, rectify the praeternaturall heat,
diffused through all the body, and remove all pains, being after the same
manner applied to the several parts: So the Arse of a Hen plucked bare, and
applied to the biting of a viper, freeth the body from venom, and the Hen
swells, and if not cured, dies sooner than if she had been struck with the
viper. All which things can be done by no other means, but by Magnetisme.

Moreover, we see that some Diseases infect by Approximation: for, the spirit
insinuating it self into the body, communicates an evil disposition to his
brother -spirits; and who sees not, that Love also is begotten by
Approximation, especially between them who by sweat communicate their spirits,
and being in the same bed, by a long Circulation as it were of spirits, lead
almost the same life: but that this does not always happen, is long of the
reasonable soul, which commands the affections, as superior to them, yet does
not this overthrow the Art; for, Nature cannot force the Will, being most free.

Now I foresee an Objection of some moment: For, it will be said, If diseases
may be thus cured by approximation, how happens it, that he who gives the
infection to another, is not cured himself? To which I answer; It is first to
be considered what, and what manner of diseases those be that be most
communicated to men by infection: Neither would I here say, that every Disease
may by approximation be communicated unto every beast. I would but search here,
what Disease of themselves, and by their own nature are fittest for it, and
commonly so called. Such Diseases are of three kinds: The first consists in a
supernatural heat not venomous, which when it can quickly and suddenly
insinuate it self into bodies, in the least space of time, it alters the body,
and gives it an evil complexion: (These properties are here ascribed to heat,
in respect of the subject in which it lies hid) but this carrying the heat of
the vital spirit, because of the sudden alteration, is not strongly freed, as
shall be said hereafter. The second kind indeed consists in preternaturall
heat, but are such as lie hid in subtle venomous breaths, and more vehemently
infect, as we see in the Plague. The third kind does not consist in a mere
quality, nor in the mere fluctuating humors, nor lurketh in any particular
part, but it changes all the habit of the body, subverts all the operations,
or at least disposes them otherwise than man's nature requires: And this
kind does therefore infect, because it sends forth a habitous, or breathing
altogether infected, and in no part sound, which insinuating themselves into
another body, do at length overthrow the temperature thereof: Of this sort are
the Leprosies, and the French Pox.

Now, having laid the grounds, I say, that in the two first kinds, why the
body, infecting another, is not thereby released, is, because the infection
suddenly communicated, does in an instant change the body receiving it, and
then going immediately through it, when it is wholly infected, it cannot correct
another, it rather hurts it: And therefore we see, that when any are sick of
the Plague in one house, scarce one escapes; for, the disease is strengthened,
being circulated from one to another; whereby, if there be but one infected,
there is more hope of his recovery; and therefore their care and custom is to
be commended, which do allot a several house, to every particular person
infected. Next, as I said above, it is required, that as soon as the beast is
infected wholly, it be killed; but who dares be so impious as to kill men being
infected; then it is necessary, to put another beast in his place, and again,
till the cure be perfected: But in fevers, where there is not so great
violence, we have observed, that if one be infected by another, the Infector is
often straight freed; and so sometimes it goes successively clear through
houses, till it come to the last, who either scapes not at all, or very hardly.
This observation does exceedingly confirm this Doctrine; and this happens where
the weak body falls sick first: As to the third kind, the reason why the body
infecting, is not always cured; Besides what has been said, is this, because
these confirmed diseases, have so changed the whole habit of the body, that it
is almost impossible to restore it, especially, where the condition above
required, is wanting: but in the beginning that some (though wickedly) have
been cured from these diseases, it is known by experience: for, he that has
transplanted them by lying with many Women, has been cured, as I have heard it
credibly reported, to have happened in the French Pox: but these are detestable
things, and worthy of grievous punishment; yet they confirm our Doctrine. One
thing I will add more worthy of observation; If a weak body be infected, there
is small hope of recovery: but if a strong body be infected, because there is a
greater power of rectifying, there is some hopes, and many times the body
infecting is freed from the Disease.

CHAP. X. Of the means by which application is done.
NAked application is done two ways, either by Imposition, or Application.
Imposition, is, where something agreeing to thine intention either in quality
or signature, is put into the Excrements, Blood, etc. or when they themselves
are put in some agreeable composition, and there left, until thou have thy
desire: that such impositions ought to be done in a fit vessel, I have already
observed and taught the manner of choosing them, which is needless hereto be
repeated. But if the Mummeal thing be put in some convenient composition, an
earthen vessel will serve. Whereas if thou will put something in the
Excrements, blood, etc. then observe the reason abovesaid, or taught; neither
need you any other caution; but if they be liquid, or be mingled otherwise, it
is enough, that the things to be put in, be stuck in it. The Weapon-salve gives
thee an example of this for unguents: and for liquid things, our sympathetical
water is sufficient; the Composition whereof, we will hereafter communicate to
the World, a secret which most men have hitherto kept exceeding secret.

Application strictly taken, is, when signed things are outwardly applied to
the body, or to the part affected, or when the cure is intended to be done by
Physical appensions, or wearing things about one; for, there is one and the
same reason of both; and whether they be hung about one, ground or whole, it
little makes in some things, which have copious and large spirits; but in
others are necessary contaction, fermentation, commixtion, and the like in
things complying with the work-mans desire, in the sympathetical Medicine, as
in the diseases of the bladder in our Practice, for the good of the
Commonwealth, shall be exemplified. Medicines of the second condition, are
everywhere extant among the Professors of ordinary Physic, though being
ignorant of the causes of the same, they know only the first and second
qualities, never seeking further: As we in our Practice will give some selected
and choice examples of it: But now the time of gathering, and of applying of
them, is necessary to be observed; because experience shows, that there is much
virtue in that, as we may see in Vervin for the headache: But of the manner of
gathering them, can scarce be any certain rule given; only I will add this;
If thou will gather herbs for pains or Diseases of the head, thou may gather
them as I will teach thee to gather Vervin in my Practice in the Chapter of the
headache. But if for Lower plants, gather them in a contrary manner, or so as
thou do Asarum to make a Purgative; howsoever much must be left to
experience.

Note moreover, That if one would cure by Magnetic opposition, it will be in
vain, except he first let the magnetic herbs putrify in the ground; for so
the virtue is more free, being loose from the bounds thereof. In operation
never use any dry herbs, if thou can get green ones, remember to macerate and
soften them in their own water before application; and further observe, it is
not always necessary to make application to the part affected, but sometimes
near it, especially, if the part be pained either by consent, or contagion of
another part; As if the stomach because of pain in the head by sending noisome
fumes or vapors up to it, then thou shall hang the medieine about thy neck; but
if it be a disease, and affected of it self, then it is but making application
to the part it self: and this will suffice to have spoken of naked application,
the thing it self not being of so great subtilty or difficulty, but that it may
easily be understood by any man.

CHAP. XI. Of the Magnet necessary in this Art, and diverse descriptions
thereof, hitherto known but by very few.
NOw come I to discover the high secrets of this Art (studiously concealed by
many) for the common good, whereto I have dedicated my self and all my labors.
I am not ignorant that there may be diverse Magnets, all aiming at one work;
the two chief that have come to my hand I will set down, adding a third most
consonant to reason, and a fourth formed out by my own experience. Use thou
which thou will, for thou shall have no scarcity. Aurelius out of some words of
Paracelsus, has made him one not altogether contemptible; thus he proceeded:
He took the dung of a sound man, and let it be dried in a shady place, for so
it lost the stink and the excrementitious moisture; a portion of the spirit
abovesaid being left, which he by a word significant, and apt enough, calls
Sulphur, which being dried, he uses after the manner anon to be told. We
neither disallow the preparation nor matter; because experience shows, that a
Magnet so prepared, will copiously attract the spirits; neither will we upon
the transport of Envy, that incurable disease, deter any man from the practice
of it, because it is not of our invention, but proceed we to the second. When
about two years ago, I, with my ever honored Friend, being at his house,
there grew some discourse upon the Argument among us; my friend (as he was
wont) spoke many things very accutely, but covertly, of this Art, and amongst
the rest, of this Magnet, which I knew before, but had never tried it, saying,
That it was of so vigorous attraction, that being applied to the region of the
heart, it would so violently draw, that he could not suffer it long. But when I
asked him the use of this Magnet, he suddenly held his peace, repenting he said
so much. How art thou so much beholden to me, to impart that to thee, my friend
would not communicate to me, who, as thou see, knew something in this Art?
But to the point. This Magnet is nothing else, but dried man's flesh, which is
certain, has a mighty attractive power; but it must be taken, if it be
possible, from the body of a man that dies a violent death, and yet while it is
warm: But if we were tied to this Magnet, every man sees how extremely we
should suffer for the want of it: If we will therefore hearken to reason, I will
before I come to my Magnet, conform both to reason and experience, show you a
better Magnet, and not gotten with so much cruelty. Take therefore the blood of
a sound young man, drawn in the spring (there are every where fools enough) as
much as thou can get, it is no matter whether it be drawn altogether or not,
this blood suffered to congeal, pour off the water swimming aloft, and keep it
while it is cold, dry it in the shade, and then moist^n it with the water
poured off, and dry it again; repeating this so often, till the earth has drunk
up all its water; then dry it, and keep it for thy use. But at length let us
come to our Magnet, which does as it were by epitome, comprehend all the body
of man in it.

Take therefore a great quantity of man's dung (but of a sound man) mix it with
Wine to the consistance of a Pultis, add to it as much sweat as thou can get,
this may be with linen Cloth taken from sound bodies, put them all together,
and in a clean place, in the shade, till they be dry; then add as much fresh
blood to them, incorporate them altogether, and so let them dry again; and if
any water swim again on the top, decant it, but keep it in a vessel very close,
and being dry imbibe it again with the decanted water, and dry it, and so till
the mass has drunk up all the water. This Magnet, thus prepared, keep in a
vessel very well shut; for so thou have prepared a Magnet, the compendium of
all man's body, gotten without any horror or cruelty, which we altogether
detest; yet he that will follow other men's devices, may let us proceed.

CHAP. XII. Of the use of the Magnet in this Art.
IF thou have never so good a Magnet, and know not the use of it, thou
bestowest thy labor in vain. We shall therefore add the use of it, that
nothing may be wanting in this Art; And about it, being most needful, and
asking little labor, there needs but few words: yet one thing is to be noted
in the way; namely, That although the aforesaid beams do always flow from the
body, yet there are some parts out of which they flow more copiously: in one
word, they are the Emmunctories by which the body is as it were cleansed, and
the spirit does accompany the superfluities; because these parts are more
porous and spungie, it wandreth out more freely, finding a larger egresse.

Now come we to the use of the Magnet: Apply the Magnet to the emmunctory of
the part grieved, and procuring the patient to sweat, which is best done by
some Cordial Diaphoretick fitting the disease, leave there the Magnet until it
be impregnate with the vital spirit, then remove it, and immediately use it
according to the precepts given in the Chapter of Transplantation: but take
heed it be speedily done, for fear the spirit be dissipated by some external
more powerful cause; for then Transplantation will be in vain attempted: if the
patient be not cured at the first, do it again, and thou shall see the desired
effect.

And not only diseases are cured this way, but strange things, even all that
are done by transplantation, are this way effected: although transplantation
may be done by other means, as shall be showed by and by. But if thou desire by
this means to transplant diseases, read diligently the Chapter of
Transplantation, and observe well the precepts there given, lest if things
shall happen not to hit thy desire, thy ignorance do return to the reproach of
this Art.

CHAP. XIII. Of the means whereby cures may be done in this Art, without a
Magnet.
BY other means also are strange and admirable cures wrought in this Art,
without a Magnet; yea, and sometimes with better success than with a Magnet;
viz. When the thing it self that carries the spirit nakedly, is applied to
another thing disposed to receive it: but this must be strictly regulated
according to the precept above given; and for the most part, here is required
fermentation, that by means thereof, the spirit being freed and loosed from the
bonds, may more easily insinuate it self* and be sooner partaker: And by this
means for the most part, particular diseases are more happily cured; because
active beams do more partake of the part from whence they proceed; as also the
excrements after the same manner, and for the same cause of the parts whence
they are excerned: Experience confirms it, That blood, because it is the seat
of the vital spirit, if it be rightly applied, cures the greatest, and almost
all diseases of the body, by the excremen^^ of the belly; thereby are all
diseases of the intestines cured: by the vein those of the bladder and the
reins; and sometimes all diseases, because of the affinity it has with the
veins, liver and stomach. By spittle, that is coughed up, the diseases of the
lungs. By sweat, the parts are cured whence it proceeded. By the nails, the
diseases of the hands and feet. By the hair, the diseases of the parts whence
they are taken: And finally, by the blood, as is abovesaid, all the diseases of
the body are cured. Here is to be noted, That if all things that belong to any
part be taken, the cure will be the sooner and more easily done. We have
determined to speak of them severally. Yet we shall be so far from condemning
any combination, or joining two or more of them together, that we rather
persuade it, as being most beneficial, if the Rules of Art be duly observed.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Excrements of the Backdoor.
BY these Excrements, as we said even now, are cured all the diseases of the
Intestines; the body is purged, and brought into flux; the diseases of the
fundament are both procured and cured, and many things else are done, which
thou may learn by thy own experience, if thou be diligent: when they are
applied they cure old ulcers, Carcinomata, and Fistulaes; yea, which some
commend as a great secret, they supply the place of the Weaponsalve, without
any further preparation; but they must be chosen of a sound man, and a strong
body, lest the preparation hurt them that are weak. By the Odor mixed with
wholesome Herbs, much good may be wrought by transplantation: and this I judge
among many others, to be the cause why Rusticks, and such as live in the
Country, are sound, and live longer than Noblemen and Citizens: for these
suffer their seiges to rot in stools, or else to be cast into some unholsom
places: but the other committing them to the earth nigh wholesome herbs, by means
of transplantation, lead their lives for the most part free from diseases. We
have above in general bidden to beware of Excrements of the diseased people.
But here we will give a more particular advice, namely, That thou never ease
thy self where diseased folks have; for much mischief has come of it: for, we
have known some hurt by the smell; that doing their easement where one had done
it that had a flux, themselves got the flux without a procatartick cause
preceding. The reason of which so strange a matter, is to be taken from that
which has been said, and shall not be here repeated. Furthermore, take heed
lest at any time you do your easement upon herbs, that are either malignant,
exulcerating, or violently purging; for hence many times when the cause is
unknown, proceeds dangerous disenteries, which, until those herbs be quite
putrified, will not yield to any medicine. Finally, It is not safe to leave
these Excrements in places where thine Enemies can come; for it is easy to
know what violent pains are procured by a kindled coal with spirit of Wine or
Aquavitae put into those Excrements. I would have thee to persuade thy self,
that if these things were ordinarily known, they be worse and more dangerous
matters, than these known to some others; therefore look wisely to thy self.
But of these Excrements enough, so far as they pertain to this Art in the
general: the particular ways of working with them, we will describe in our
practice.

CHAP. XV. Of URINE.
URINE is an excrement of the second concoction, done in the liver, or rather
in the reins; from whence by the emulgent veins, it is sent to the reins mixed
with blood, out of which it is by the Uriteres, as it were, percolated or
strained, and so sent to the bladder, where it also abides a while, and then it
is by the passage of the urine cast out. Hence it appears, That the Urin has a
great communion with most parts of the body, for it has great affinity with
the liver, reins and bladder; for by these parts it passes, and therefore the
Physicians judge of the disease of these parts by urine: But it has moreover
no obscure consent with the whole body, having been once joined with the blood;
by it therefore are cured the diseases of the liver, reins, bladder, ureters
and passages of the urine, besides the bectick fever (a most grievous disease,
of the whole body) is no way better cured, than by the urine; as shall be
showed in the Chapter of the Hectic Fevers. Whatsoever diseases are usually
cured by this Art, are all cured by the urine; though it be better there be
other preparations, as is to be seen in my Practice. Now, as in the Chapter of
the Excrements by seige, here it shall not be amiss to put some Cautions: The
first whereof is, To take heed that children piss not in the fire; for it is
the constant opinion of many, that by such means they get Nephritick diseases,
the stone, or gravel, and other great diseases: Then that men never piss upon
sharp venomous herbs, and such as by their venomous quality do violently
provoke urine: for from hence proceeds the ulceration of the reins and bladder:
nor would I willingly make water in a chamber pot where any man infected of any
stinking disease of these parts had pissed, nor give my urine to fermentation
with his; for it cannot be, but to a weak body much evil should come by this
means, though to the sick man by that means might come good: Nay, hence with
specificals added against the disease, might his cure be done, with the
addition of fermentation, which ought to be done in a bladder of a beast of the
same kind, adding those things that have the signature both of the disease and
the member, as shall be said more at large in my Practice; where you shall have
Medicines fetched from urine, whose forms if you follow, thou may invent
others of thy self.

CHAP. XVI. Of Sweat and insensible Transpiration.
SWEAT is not only an Excrement of the third concoction, but it may also be, as
it were, the melting of the whole body; for, no otherwise does the body come to
destruction, than by resolution procured by Nature, or some adventitious heat;
for, except every part should lose something of his substance and greatness,
the bodies of living wights would grow infinitely, if by continual nourishment
there were always added something unto them: Nay, if this resolution were not,
wights would not desire nourishment at all: Sweat therefore, and that which is
by Physicians called insensible transpiration, are not only excrementitious,
but (as it is above proved) carries off with them of the resolved particles of
the body: Hence it is, that in Magnetic or Diastatick Physic they are of
exceeding great use; for, by them innumerable wounders are done, whilst
diseases are as well cured, as caused; Passions both of the mind, and of the
body are violently procured, and changed: By these a wise Physician may do much
good; and by these a prying Wissard may do much harm, and cause death,
madness, anger, and overthrow all the goods of the mind. This is the Devil, or
familiar spirit by which they are thought to have done wonders. Hence it is
that they, (as appears by their own Confessions) without these, could never
hurt the bodies of men: for, the Devil himself cannot constrain Nature; who (if
he do any miracles) does them only by application of actives to passives, as
some, too vainly credulous, scarce believe: for, these poor wretches, defiled
with superstition, fain many things, and mix much follies and lies with the
truth, which was done by the Ancients, whence they took their tradition, That
because of the opinion of a Deity present, their Imaginations might work
violently, and also all natures conspiring, the effect might be produced: which
I leave to thy consideration, whether thou can get any good from these few
words: Yet whatsoever they do, they do it naturally; But let us go to these
things that are to our purpose. By sweat, or insensible transplantation, first
in a body, or in a subject fitting, all diseases being in the habit of the body
are cured, whether they be fixed; as the Leprosy, Gout, Frenchpox, etc. or
whether they be volatile, as the Scab, Morphew, Scurf, or the like skin-deep
sicknesses, and of the utmost parts: yea, without these it is scarce possible
to do any thing in this Art. By the impregnation of these thy Magnets are
specified, by which all manner of transplantations are done: by means of these
the Hectic is cured, the body is long preserved strong and able; and the
passions of the mind are stirred up. Of all which we will discourse at large in
our Practice. Now as a wise Physician can by these means, do all these and
greater matters; so there is no doubt, but by the abuse of them, as much
mischief may be done; And therefore take these cautions and premonitions. It is
not unknown, That almost all Infusion flows from the said insensible
transpiration and sweat; for being impregnate with much spirit, and holding it
fast, according to the disposition thereof, they work violently; therefore take
heed we be not partakers of the sweat, or exhalation of an unsound body: that
we touch not the sheets so impregnate, nor put on the shoes or stockings, or
gloves, or the like: but in a special manner, that we be no bedfellows with
them. Hence on the otherside, was the health and long-life of our first parents
who slept upon Herbs (wholesome) and from them drew no small part of their
long-life, as we may probably conjecture: for it is certainly very wholesome in
summer time to sleep upon Chamomile, Rosemary, washed Sage, Betony, Balm, and
the like: and of the same Herbs to make beds for sick folks, according to their
diseases; and I would likewise advise thee to sleep without thy garments in the
summer time, covered over with wholesome herbs; and thou shall draw from thence
an excellent Comfortative. It is good also for a weak body, to use the company
and garments of strong and sound men; for from thence he may draw such spirits
as will fortify weak nature: We hold it a commendable custom for such people,
to have their garments and linen worn by them that are lusty and healthful,
before they put them on; but this is safest done by them that are very strong,
lest evil come to him that first put them on: Therefore also we must take heed,
that we suffer not our garments to be worn by them that are diseased; and that
we cast not our clothes, impregnate with our sweat and transpiration in
stinking and unwholsom places: And above all take heed, that they come not into
the hands of evil men; for there is a great deal of invisible mummy lies hid
in them, of which Paracelsus (though obscurely) makes often mention; from
whence, if that thou do but understand it well, and consider what is
abovesaid, thou may of thy self find out many more things. But I sweat and
insensibly transpire. Thus much for this Chapter, and for this time shall
suffice.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Hairs.
OUt of almost all the Parts of the Body, do Hairs grow, and they are made not
only of visciditie of the Excrements of the fourth concoction, growing in the
pores which by addition of new matter, grow in length (as some do falsely
imagine,) but they take also not the least part of their matter from the
resolved parts of the body, as appears by this Experiment: for, if by
Diastatick Art thou would increase hair, by means of a Willow tree (as shall
be taught in the Practice) and if thou continue the medicine longer than it is
fit, thou will assuredly bring a weakness upon the part, which can be by no
other means, but because by the violence of the medicine, the parts being
resolved further than Nature does suffer, are lost. And for the confirmation of
this Truth, hairs are seen to grow long after Death, whereas there is no
concoction. So, as there can be no Excrements of the fourth concoction; and
therefore, they must needs come from the body resolved; which resolution is
added to the hairs by the vital spirit, which is still there remaining: For, by
any other means this addition cannot be: whence also our assertion of the
remaining spirit is confirmed. Hence appears how great agreement hairs have
with the body, and whereupon we use them as Instruments in this Art. It is well
known what strange things the Ancient Magi did by hairs; and why the like may
not be done, I see no reason. It is also a thing well known by hearsay, how
love has been procured by means of hair burned in a Candle, Astrologically
made; which though it be not (as no reason it should) ordinarily known to the
vulgar, yet to some it is: and though it be mingled with filthy superstitions,
yet I, that am wont to reduce all operatious to the possibility of nature,
never thought them absolutely and precisely necessary to the producing of the
effect. So likewayes we have known many diseases, otherwise incurable, cured
by hatrs, especially taken from the part affected, if being duly putrified and
mixed with things signed, they be implanted into plants, as every man may prove
according to our doctrine. So if hairs be taken from the four principal
Emunctories, no doubt, but well prepared, they will cure all diseases. I would
counsel the Readers, that in consideration hereof, they do not so carelessly
scatter their hairs up and down, which may be the cause of much mischief; nor
yet burn them, for (that) as-experience shows, hinders the growth of them, but
bury them in some wholesome ground, adding unto them things to strengthen the
head, which will much conduce to your health.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the pairings of the Nails and the Teeth.
THe Nails as well as the hairs have their original from the excrements of the
fourth concoction, separated from the nourishment of the bones and the harder
parts, and get thence their hardness which we see, and grow in the outmost
extremities: for, the body does not very plentifully exhale such matter as
proceeds not but from the whole compacted parts: therefore the Ancients used
the pairing of nails against some most rebellious diseases: because it cannot
be denied, but fixed diseases lurk in the fixed parts of the body: and
therefore most Antiquity used these: and we also prescribe them against
Quartans, Leprosies, Gouts in the feet and hands, and the like diseases; but we
have something altered the manner of proceeding; for they tied them about
fishes, or other beasts, and so let them go alive; which preparation seems too
rare, to have any transplantation done by it, but in a very long time, and many
things agreeing thereto: and therefore we, not omitting them, add some
specific by way of fermentation, which will attempt both sooner, and more
certainly. Of the Teeth you may (for the Art) say as of the Nails; but because
they do not always grow in bigness, they rather seem meet to prevent, than
cure: for, they are made of a most fixed and strong substance, as we may see by
them who have been long buried, whose Teeth are sounder than any other Bones:
therefore they send out but few spirits, and scarce multiplicable by Art; yet
because they last long sound, and send always out some portion of the spirit,
they are fit for such curable effects as require no great plenty of spirits:
and such precaution especially is required; but the place shows thee diseases
of the mouth: how therefore by means of these thou may prevent diseases of
the Teeth, it shall be spoken of in the Practice: The rest we leave to thy
consideration.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Spittle and Excrements of the Nose.
THere is a threefold spittle: for, it either falls by distillation from the
head to the Pallat; or is brought up by coughing from the Lungs; or by
nouceousnesse from the stomach, which is spit out of the mouth: but that which
is Domited up, deserves not the name of spittle. That which comes from the
Lungs, has almost always the original from the head, and by distillation
slides into that part, and there digested a while, is spit out. I am not
ignorant, that from the Lungs sometimes there proceeds blood, and purulent
matter: but these are to be referred to blood and matter. We in the mean time
will speak of spittle, which is nothing else, but the crudest part of the meat
and drink, which nature cannot digest and concoct into good nourishment, sent
first from the stomach to the head by vapors, and then distilling again from
the head to the inferior parts, then sent out by the mouth, is called spittle.
Sometimes there comes a waterish and indigested matter (which is sometimes
sour) immediately from the stomach to the mouth, which contains sour parts of
a corrupted nutriment, being otherwise inspired, and has the name of spittle;
These all, because they have made some stay in the body, do according to the
former doctrine, carry some vital spirit with them: therefore we may use them
in some lighter diseases, according to the portion of spirit which they hold.

Of the Excrements of the Nose, as much may be said: but this must always be
remembered, That you use them to the Diseases of the parts whence they proceeded
only: this I will tell thee, there is nothing comes from the body weaker, or
of a less spirit, than those which praecede, partly for the little stay that
they have made in the body; partly from the few places they have gone through;
and partly from their indigestion: yet I would have thee take heed of them,
especially if they be new voyded, and the Disease be in these parts whence they
proceed, lest thou should repent thy carelessness, especially take heed of
the foam coming from the mouth of Epilepticks; and of the froth of a mad dog,
or one bitten with one; for, here, by the violence of the Disease, the humors
are thrust out impregnate with the infected vital spirit: by which means thou
may overcome that so rebellious a Disease: The rest I leave to thy
consideration.

CHAP. XX. Of Blood and Matter.
OMitting those many Disputes concerning Blood, which makes not to our purpose:
as of the original organ, Circulation, and the like. So far forth as concerns
our Art, I do briefly say, That first, the Scriptures say, and teach us, that
blood is the principal Chariot of the spirits, by placing the soul in the
blood: but, if the spirit is the bond, by which the soul is tied to the body,
then where the spirit most resideth, there shall the soul most powerfully work.
The blood then, which so plentifully possesses the spirits, and communicates
them to the body, is surely the fittest Instrument to cure Diseases, and do all
the other things which the Art requires and promises: for, here the spirit is
free and not bound up, as elsewhere. Therefore in the blood, the spirit is
soonest affected, because there it is naked, as is aforesaid. Yet we must not
immediately conclude, that it may be taken and used presently, without any
fermentation or putrefaction: for, they are both useful here, as in the
Practice shall be showen: only take heed that thou corrupt not the blood with
too much fermentation; for then the spirit is driven away so, that peradventure
it will do nothing. But that thou may know the fit time of fermentation,
I Will teach thee a secret; Let the blood with the most excellent parcel of the
whole body, be joined in a true proportion, by the best way possible, and put
them into a natural vessel, well shut up, and set under a hen to hatch, and in
the product thou will find a thing performing many miracles, coagulated in the
shape of a man: and the oil or liquor swimming about it, with the proper sweat
mixed, does change man's minds with the touch of it. Many things more may be
done by blood, which are better concealed, than spoken: But if thou perfectly
understand the things aforesaid, and can diligently search Nature, thou may
by thine own industry attain unto them. We will in the mean time give thee some
cautions: After the blood is drawn, thou must take heed how thou usest it; for
thereby may be done both good and hurt. There be some that put the blood into
the ground, which I counsel may be done in a clean place, mixed with wholesome
herbs; for if it should be buried in a stinking or infected place, it might
hurt the body whence it was taken: There are others that give it to dogs and
whelps to eat, which I like best of all: for, so it may happen to transplant
the disease, and so cure it wholly, or at least help the Physician; but it
would do a great deal better, if it were given the dog either warm, or
putrified in a close vessel with a temperate heat. But here I cannot but tax
the villainy of some, who with an execrable boldness, dare give the blood, yea
Monthly Flours, for a Philter, not considering the mischief issuing from
thence: for blood, though never so pure, is an enemy to the stomach, and before
it will be digested, is corrupted and turned into matter, and what effect will
it then work? Besides, here lies not the loving force which they seek; but
there must be another manner of preparation, before thou come to that: for, it
must be loosed before, that the spirit may work more freely and busily to
incline minds: because of the will ruling, there is required a greater force,
and the conspiring of many causes: which because the multitude knows not, it
can never attain the truth, but calumniates the certainty of these things,
calling them either false or devilish. For although blood, of all things in the
body, contain the loosest spirits, yet will it work more mightily, being
digested, as the former Considerations, and Experience it self teaches: and
therefore they are surely to be punished, that work so infernally. But, I
foresee an Objection; for, if the power of love rest in the blood, then how
happens it that ravenous beasts, that do so greedily drink blood, and so well
digest it, are not to be brought to be in love with those things that they eat,
being the reason of the Individualls, and the species, etc? I answer, first, In
particular operations of the whole species to the individuum, or of one
individuum to another, there is not the same reason. Secondly, That they eat
unprepared blood, which is not so powerful as to change nature: for, by it
duly fermented, one individuum may be reconciled to another, though it be a
Dog to a Hare. Thirdly, flesh and blood filled with the Commotion of an angry
spirit, and retaining still a portion of it, does rather whet ravenous beasts
into rage, and make them seek the destruction of others the like. And hence
thou may learn, that it is impossible by any means or preparations to cause
Love, by blood violently shed; but it is more likely to cause hatred. Therefore
the Ancients never drank the blood of one another forehead vein, before
perfect reconciliation. Before I go any further, I will add one Parergon: The
salt of blood, if it be dissolved in the menstruum of the World and
Philosophers, is the excellentest remedy of all others; and by this means the
salts of Herbs, will show the species of the herbs whence they are taken, in a
glass: So the salt of blood, will by the help of the Beasts heat, show the
shape of a man in a glass: And this I believe was Paracelsus his Homuncio: But
of Medicines taken from blood, I will give examples in my Practice; therefore
here this shall suffice.

Of Matter, (which is nothing else but blood putrified without the veins, or
Flesh loosed with rottenness) a man may philosophize as of blood; if he speak
of it as a means to cure Diseases, saving that it has lost much of the
spirits, which are in the sound blood, by corruption: yet by means of it,
ulcers and old sores may be cured by the Sympathetick water, or ointment,
whether they be inward or outward. There are that an oint the inside of a Nut
shell with the Balsom, then put the Pus or matter into it, and then hang it up
in the dry Air, or Mundum Coelum, and by this Medicine cure all Ulcers. Yet
this is to be noted, that Pus or matter may be two ways considered, according
to which consideration it is sound in the body: for, it either simply arises
from blood, by means of putrefaction, corrupting without the veins; or, it
arises from some venomous quality in some foul disease, as in the French Pox;
or, it is infected with some simple diseased quality, as in Pthisis. And from
the touch of all these, experience shows, that much harm may come. But if thou will, by thy sympathetical either water or ointment, cure any such Ulcers, the
extraneous qualities shows, that there must be some Alexipharmaca, or
specific to that Disease added: for, it is manifest, that the qualities must
be taken away, before the Ulcers can be cured.

Of those things that are cast up by vomit, it boots not to speak much; for, we
may think of them as of other Excrements, using always the same Cautions: but,
if the vomit be by Nature, not by Physic, it will be fitter for our purpose,
as we may think of other things. But yet if they be procured by Physic, they
are not altogether unprofitable; but, the quality of the Vomitorie would be
known; which if it be contrary to the Disease, must be corrected; and things
signed, added unto it, to correct it. And this much is enough for us, that make
so great haste to the Practice.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX: CONTAINING Diverse PRACTICES and OBSERVATIONS, Necessary to be
known in this ART.
To the READER.
THat not any thing might be deficient in so noble an Art as this, I have
unfolded diverse of the most famous Magnetick-Medicines and Cures that are
known this day in the World. I intended to have gone through every Disease; but
being called upon necessary occasions to Ireland, I am forced to break off this
Work, and only to give these as a Mercuriall Statue, to direct thee into the
right way of Practice; And shall be willing, when occasion does offer it self,
to serve thee according to my abilities in this Art hereafter. Accept therefore
of my good will and pains, and make not thy self by ingratitude, incapable of
other favors. Speak of this Book, as the great Philosopher did of another's
Work: Those things I understand, are good; and I believe, those things I
understand not, are also such. If thou use it otherwise, I care not for thy
kindness; for, I live not by thy esteem or opinion; neither did thou ever put
such a favor on me, as should oblige me to dance attendance to thy humor. If
thou be candid, I am glad to serve thee, and am confident, in these Books thou
shall find things both rare and delectable: But if thy nature or principle
make thee froward, Tecum habita, enjoy thy self, and provide such Kick-shows as
will fit thy Pallat: For Christie has served up this dish only for his own
fancy, and his friends recreation. Neither does he fear the clouds (may be the
natural ornament) of thy countenance: Though a little more of black bile, or
wind, than ordinary, haerbour under the sinister part of thy Diaphragme: He
thinks he ought to be allowed his folly, as well thou art permitted gravely,
insanire cum ratione. But enough of this. I proceed to my purpose.

THE MAGNETIC CURE OF DISEASES, BY TRANSPLANTATION; Done by the true Mumia of
PARACELS US.
ANY that is sick of the Jandise, Hydropsie, Leprosy, or of any such kind of
Disease, let him in the Month of May, open, be sure the Median Vein in the
right Arm, and receive into a glassvial with a stroop, so much blood as will
fill the shells of two Hen Eggs emptied, and whilst it is yet hot, put it into
the empty shells of the Eggs, thus prepared: Take two or three new laid hens
eggs, make a small hole in both the ends of each Egg, empty them both of white
and yolk, then close up one of the holes in the ends with the striffin of the
yolk or white, with glue, or some tenacious matter; then let it dry, and after
make it fully up with chalk, mixed with the white of an egg, and let it dry
again. Into the shells thus prepared, the blood warm as it flows from the Arm
being put, is to be suffered to stand a little: Then the hole which remains in
each Egg is to be shut up after the same manner, as before it was in the other
end, and let it dry. Then two or three of these Eggs full of the sick-mans
blood, and thus shut up, are to be put under a hen that brings forth young
ones* either with other Eggs that are to be hatched; or with Eggs full of other
sick-mens blood, prepared as before, which will have the same effect. The hen
having sitten upon them fourteen or twenty days, according to the custom;
Take out from under the Hen, the Magnetic Eggs, lay them apart for a day; then
open them, and thou shall find the blood of the sick-man by that digestion
become monstrous, and of a most vile smell: mix this with new bread, or other
meat, and give it to a Sow, or a Dog to be eaten, which has been kept up from
meat two or three days. Then thou shall perceive sensibly the Disease to leave
the man, and infect the beast: Which beast, after it has been kept secure some
weeks, is to be killed, lest if it get loose, it hurt other men. By this true
Mumia of Paracelsus, may be cured Leprosies, Jaundise, Gouts, Hydropsies,
Consumptions, Cancers, and other Diseases: and it will work other great
effects; which for fear of the ill, I shall be loath to discover in this
Treatise; sed verbum sapienti sat est. Only take notice, that putrefaction, or
rather fermentation, is here, as it were, the Key in the hand of Nature, to
open the Circumference, that is, the ports of their destinat Mumie to forms,
which before lay shut up, and hid in the Center of quietness.

The Lamp of Life.
TAke of man's blood warm as it flows from the vain* and the like quantity of
the vegetable-dew of the Ampbibious Jupiter, being purified, put it in a
Pelican placed in the belly Balnei, suffer it to rise till the third part of
the Pelican fill the whole Pelican: for man's blood in the philosophical
preparation thereof, is ever dilated in quantity, though not in weight. This
Digestion is accomplished in, or about forty days time; in which, that which
is precious goes apart from that which is vile: for, you shall see that which
is white, phlegmatic and unprofitable, swimming above; but a golden substance
in the bottom. So soon as it comes to this pass, rectify it in Balneo; by
this means the phlegm shall withdraw it self, and the mysterious substance
shall remain in the bottom. This being done, thou shall by degrees raise it to
its own exaltation, nine times, in retorts fit for the quantity of the matter,
and sealed Hermetically: Then make of it a Lamp, which cannot be extinguished.
This must be fired with the fire of Nature, and not the fire of Vulcan; which
is the great mystery in this matter.

This Lamp burns so long as he lives of whose blood it is made, and expireth
with him. If it burn clearly and quietly, it shows his condition to be such;
if sparkling, dim, and cloudie, it shows his griefs and languishings.

The Powder of Sympathy, for curing of Wounds.
The simple Powder.
TAke what quantity you think fit of Alcaleadis Romani, and after first
dissolution in clear Spring Water, then filtration through gray paper, with
evaporation on a clear fire, and coagulation in a fit place: And all these
operations so often reiterated, till being purged from its dross, its clear
greenness bear witness of its purity: beat this into gross powder, and
expose it to Sun beams, the Sun being in Leo, for the space of three hundred
and sixty hours; that is, as some believe, for the space of fifteen or eighteen
days, till it be calcined into a fine white powder, which is the surest mark of
its right preparation; and therefore is to be kept in the Sun, till it come to
this smalnesse and color; though it be longer than the time appointed. The Sun
enters Leo about the twenty fifth day of July, it is better to begin your
operation two or three days after, that you may be sure the Sun is in the
right Sign. Expose it only to the Sun in clear and dry days; lest if the day
be moist or misty, it spoil the Medicine with humidity: Nevertheless, if after
it is fully prepared, it by mischance become moist or liquid, you are with a
gentle heat, to reduce it again to its own form. This Powder, being kept in a
dry place, endures many years in its full force and virtue.

The Compounded Powder,
IS made of the simple Powder, and Gum Tragacant, subtly pulverized, and mixed
with it almost in the same quantity. Some Artists mix also the powder of
Comfory dried in the shade: but of this, consult experience.

The virtue.
THe simple Powder cures all wounds whatsomever, yea, of Gunshot it self: And
those wounds that have been esteemed deadly, have been cured by it, as wounds
of the Guts, Bladder, etc.

The Compound Powder cures wounds that have joined with them the fracture or
fissure of a bone.

The use and application.
TAke a piece of Linen cloth, or any other cloth, and in necessity, take any
stick, stone, etc. And dip in the blood as it flows out, if the wound be
external; But, where the wound is internal, put it into the wound, that it
may touch each part thereof: then sprinkle the cloth, or other water besmeered
with the blood of the wound, with the Sympathick Powder, then lap up the said
cloth thus dressed, into another clean cloth, and keep it in a temperate
place, as near or far from the Patient as you please; but a moderate distance
is best. Wash the wound immediately with warm wine, or with the Patients own
Urine; then apply clean clothes to the wound each other day, or oftener, as the
flowing of the matter requires; and keep all the clothes that are fouled with
the matter, lapped up together in a place likewayes of good temperature.

If the wound be become ulcerous before the Artist see it, he is to follow the
same method with the Pus or matter that flows out of the wound, that is
appointed in a recent wound.

If the wound be with a fractured bone; if any place thereof be bared of the
periost, he must remove it. After having besprinkled a cloth dipped in the
blood with the Compound-pouder, and having lap'd it up, as aforesaid, he must
set the bones, and use the apparel fit for fractures.

If the wound be inflamed with a hot temperature, you must put the clothes that
are infected with the blood or matter of the wound, into a cold place, as under
the earth, or into a peuter-box set in cold water, till the wound come to its
own habit again: But, if the wound be of a cold temperature, you must put it in
an hot place, etc.

If the wound be very sordid, you must mix greater quantity of the Sympathick
powder, than of the Gum: But if it smart, you must mix more of the Gum than of
the Powder.

Some hold the powder may be calcined by fire; but I have not seen it to do
good.

Others, and with more reason, hold, it may with good success be calcined with
the heat of a man's body, by carrying it in his pocket, etc.

But I leave these to every man's experience, having set down faithfully and
fully this receipt, which used to be sold for twenty pounds. I know some will
envy to see their secret laid open: but I esteem more of the Public good, than
any private interest.

The WEAPON-SALVE; According to the true Description of the Noble Chemist,
OSWALD CROLLIUS.
TAke of the fat of a Wild-Bore: Of the fat of a Bear, of each four ounces: The
older the beasts are, so they be within seven years, the better the fat is. Let
both of these fats boil in Claret for the space of half an hour on a gentle
fire, then pour out the fats upon cold water; gather that with a spoon, which
swimmeth above, but what goes to the bottom, is not at all to be used.
Afterward, Take of Red-Worms, gathered after rain, (which are of great use in
the affections of the Nerves) washed in wine or water lib. ij. let them be
dried in an earthen pot in a Bakers Oven, but beware they burn not; afterward
reduce them to powder. Then

Take the Brain of a Wild-bore, first macerate a little in his own bladder and
urine, and afterward dried:

Take of this powder:

Of sweet smelling Yellow-Sanders,

Of Mumie of Egypt,

Of Boodstone, of each one Ounce. Lastly take

Of Usn^a, or the Moss which grows on the scull of a man that has died a
violent death (he that is hanged is best.) This Moss must be gathered in the
waxing of the Moon, and when she is in a good House, viz. if possible, in
Venus, not in Saturn or Mars, of this one dram.

Of all these, being beat and mixed with the fats, an ointment is to be made
according to Art: which is to be kept in a close Glass or Box for your use.

If, through process of time, the ointment become dry, it is again to be
relaxed with the foresaid fat, or Virgin honey.

The ointment must be prepared while the Sun is in Libra, that is, in the
Harvest-time.

The virtues of this Ointment.
THis Ointment cures all wounds whatsomever, whether by thrust, stroke,
gunshot, or whatsomever way else they be got; If you can but get the weapon
that gave the wound, though the wounded person be many miles distant from the
Artist. And because this ointment is of a conglutinative, suppurative, and
incarnative faculty, It hinders any hurtful symptom to arise, if it be
rightly applied.

The Use in diverse Observations.
FIrst, anoint every day once, the weapon wherewith the Party is wounded, if
necessity requires it, and the greatness of the wound: otherwise, it will be
enough to have anointed it each second or third day: keep it in a clean linen
cloth, or allumed goats-leather, keep it in a warm place, but not over hot,
neither ugly, lest it hurt the Patient: Also have a care that no dust fall on
the weapon, nor that the wind blow thereon in a cold place, otherwise the
Patient will be much troubled.

Secondly, If the wound be made by a thrust, anoint the weapon, beginning at
the point, and proceeding to the handle, otherwise the Patient will suffer:
But if the wound be by a cut, the weapon is to be anointed from the edge to the
back.

3. Anoint the part of the weapon that entered the wound; If thou know not
this, for more security, anoint it all.

4. It is not needful to sew up the wound, as Barbitonsors do, It is enough
every day to tie it up in clean linen, moistened in the Patients Urine, or in
warm wine or water.

5. Let both Artist and Patient abstain from Venery, that day the weapon is
anointed.

6. The blood in the wound is to be stopped, before the weapon be anointed.

7. In a Compound-wound with fractures or fissures of the bone, you must add
to the ointment, either some of the powder of Comfry, or Osteocoll, or of the
roots of black Hellebor.

8. To know if the Patient will die or live: Upon clear Coals warm the weapon,
so, that thou may hold it in thy hand, then besprinkle it with the subtle
powder of sandals, and of a boodstone: If it sweat drops of blood, he will
surely die: if not, he will escape.

9. If the Patient keep not a good diet in his Cure, spots of blood will appear
on the weapon; if they appear not, he observes your precepts.

If you cannot get the Weapon wherewith the Wound was made:

1. Then, put a sallow stick in the wound; which being imbrued in the blood
thereof, let it dry of it self, without the help of the Sun or Fire: Then stick
it in a Box of this ointment, and let it remain there until the wound be fully
cured.

2. The stick once dipped in the blood will suffice: If the wound be big, it
must each day be dressed with clean linen.

3. One stick will suffice but for one wound: Each new wound must have a new
stick.

4. If the wound will not bleed, scarifie it with the stick till it bleed.

5. In the Toothache, scarifie the gum of the pained Tooth till it bleed; then
let the blood dry on the fleme with which you scarifie, and after anoint it
with your ointment, and it shall cure the pain.

6. If a horse be pricked in the quick, draw out the nails, anoint it, and the
horses foot shall be quickly cured, without coming to suppuration. After the
same manner may all other wights be cured, that consist of flesh and blood.

Take Notice.
1. This ointment is of no efficacy, except it have the Moss of his scull
mixed with it, that is violently put to death.

2. Except the weapon be besmeared with the blood of the wound dried on it, the
operation is in vain.

3. The Artist at his pleasure, may put ease or pain upon the Patient, by the
weapon.

4. Fractures and fissures are not well cured, except the powder of Comfry or
Osteocoll be mixed with the ointment.

5. The weapon is diversely to be anointed in thrusts and cutts.

6. The intemperance of the Patient is discovered by the Artist in the weapon.

The Magnetic Cure of the Yellow Jandise by Application.
TAke of the Urine of the Patient, as much as thou will, mix it with the ashes
of an ash-tree, bake it into dough, and make little Cakes thereof; Then make a
little hole in each Cake, and put therein a little saffron, with a little of
the Patients Urine; let it evaporate at the fire; and as the Urine consumes,
the disease shall evanish.

A Magnetic transplantation of the Gout.
TAke of the hairs, and the pairings of the nails on the feet and hands of the
Patient; bore a hole in an oketree to the pith; put them therein, and closing
up the hole, cover it round about with Cow Dung, and within three months the
Disease shall evanish.

The Magnetic Cure of Ulcers.
TAke either Arsmart, or Comfrey, or Flix-weed, etc, dip them in cold water,
and apply them cold to the ulcer, till they become warm; then bury them in a
clayish ground, as they rot, the ulcer cures.

The Magnetisme of Asarabacca.
IF a man pull the leaves of Asarabacca upward, it will cause the person to
whom he gives it, to vomit: But if he pull them downward, it will only cause
him to purge by the siege. This same Magnetisme is found in the tops of the
Alder or Boor-tree*

This far have I set down some Magnetic Cures, which may serve to direct thee
in the rest, I have not touched: Now I shall set down some of the most common
Magnetismes in Nature, which every man may put to trial, and find out the
truth thereof, if he will but allow a little cost and labor.

The first, of the Vine.
It Is well known by the Vintners of France and other places* That when the Vine
begins to put forth her flowrs, all that time the wines in the hogs-heads
are troubled: And as the flowrs are earlier or later, according to the
diversity of the Climates, so this troubling of the wine observes their
seasons: and, which is most wonderful of all, in Countries where Vines grow
not, the wine is not at all troubled. The same comes to pass in Ale, when the
Barley flourishes.

The second, Magnetic impressions of the breedingmother upon the Embrio.
WOmen, having strong affections, whether of desire or fear, give frequently
impressions to the Child in the womb; whereof I will tell you two Magnetic
Historeis. A Belgic Woman being big-bellyed, had a desire to a Cherry which
another was eating; and in time of her greatest longing, she touched her brow
with her finger; the Child being come to age, retained the impression of the
Cherry on his forehead. This kept such a Magnetic harmony with Cherries, that
it was greenish, whitish, yellowish, and red, as the Cherries chang^d their
season and colors: And, which is most admirable and Magnetic, In Spain, where
the Cherries sooner ripen than in Flanders, it sooner became red than at home,
still observing a sympathy with Cherries of the Country where he was.

The second is this; When in the last Northern Scots Expedition, in my
Employment I attended that virtuous and valiant Gentleman, Colonel William
Mitchel; In a Village within three miles of Rothymay, I found one Henderson,
whose mother being big of him, was affrighted at the sudden shining of the Moon
into a dark room where she was; and he thereby received an impression of a Moon
on his thigh, which does not only change with the Moon its figure, but with
the weather his color. A day before wind it becomes reddish; before rain,
pale; and in fair-weather, it keeps its own color. And this, the next
adjacent Farmers observe, as a certain Prognostication, how to dispose of their
future Labors.

The third, A Magical Magnetisme, out of the famous Van Helmont.
TAke the Heart of a Horse, which is by a Witch killed; Take it hot out of him,
and strike a nail thorough it; then broil it on the Coals, or on a Spit roast
it: And the heart of the Witch shall be so tormented with heat and pain, that
she will come in all haste to the fire, and use all means to take away the
heart.

The fourth, Of the Musical Magnetisme of the Tarantula.
THe Tarantula is a kind of Spider found in Apulia in Italy; They are of
diverse dies, spotted and waved with diverse Colors: These by their bites,
cause the person whom they wound, to affect those Colors, which are most seen
in the wounding Tarantula: Yea, the Patients are so taken up with a cloth of
that dye, that they have often been seen to embrace it, to kiss, to flatter it,
lay their face, their cheeks, and body to it, not omitting any mimick gesture
that is used by those that are lovefrantick. And, as one poisoned by a
Tarantula, cannot be cured but by Music; so, each Instrument of that Art, and
each Lesson does not please them: but analogous to the nature of the Spider
that bit them, the Music and tone must be: And, which is very admirable, one
Lesson scarce ever cures the bites of two of these Spiders; As was seen at
Tarentum in a Spaniard, who not believing this, caused himself to be bit by two
Tarantula's; and having called the Musicians, could not at all be recovered:
for, when that tone that agreed with the nature of the one was played, he would
move his head and arms, and endeavor to raise his body, till the poison of the
other did check this motion, and cause him suddenly fall down; And though all
Music and means had been used, he perished miserably: for, the poisons of the
two Tarantula's, being (as themselves) of contrary qualities, were only to be
cured by contrary tunes, which was not possible. They that are venomed by the
bite of a Tarantula, at first think it no more than the bite of an ordinary
fly; but in procesle of time, their infection produce diverse diseases; as
loss of appetite, burning fevers, pain of the joints, and a color like the
Jandise over the whole body; and the next Summer after the bite, some of them
that are poisoned, become stupid; others frantic; some always weep, some
laugh; some sleep, some wake, etc. and in a word, there is no gesture used by
fools or madmen, but some or other of the diseased are infected with it. In the
Cure (wherein the Magnetisme is most seen) they thus proceed: They call
Musicians, who tuning up their Instruments, play diverse tunes; at which the
Patient sits as he were a statue, or immovable: but, if once that tune be hit,
which sympathiseth with the nature of his infection, he begins to move his
head, feet and hands, and on a sudden falls a-dancing, till with motion and
sweat he fall down wearied: And thus they proceed at sundry times, till the
poison be evaporated. If the Musician play false, or alter the Magnetic tune,
the diseased by gestures, show both pains and dislike: And it has been
observed, the Spider will dance to his Magnetic tune.

The fifth, The Magnetisme of the Magnes it self.
THis Art is called Magnetic from the Magnes, (the Load stone) so called from
the sheep-herd, that found it out first in the Mount Ida, by seeing his
sheep-hook armed with iron, stick fast to the Magnetic stones. This is a
Mineral stone, endued by. Nature with determinate points of its virtues,
whereby it both draws Iron to it; and disposes the situation of the Iron,
according to its own situation, that is, makes the situation thereof Polar:
Its two great Magnetisms then, are, first to draw Iron at a distance from it,
to it self: And secondly, to direct the situation of this Iron to be Polar: So,
it operateth without an immediate Physical contaction, by a certain hidden
virtue therein; which cannot be found out, nor performed by Elementary
qualities. And for this reason, we call those Motions in Nature, Magnetic:
which by a hidden consent, move locally one toward the other, or remove from
the other. And after this manner of speaking, all Sympathies and Antipathies
are called Magnetic motions. This is wonderful in the Load stone, that it
draws hot Iron as well as cold, and does not only communicate his virtue to
Iron to draw other Iron; as you may see a Needle taken up by the Magnes, to
take up an other at its point, and so to proceed in others, till it represent a
Chain: But also has a spiritual force, which never fails; which is in every
part thereof: for, it being broke, each part has the same virtue with the
whole; which penetrateth all things, not hurting any; for, nor any thing
hinders its operations, though placed betwixt it and its object; which
works at distance, as is said, and that without a mean or meddle; for, it
moves all things distant from it, though not troubling what is intermediate:
Yea, it gives that to another it has not it self; for, it gives virtue to
the Needle in the Compass to move to the Pole, which it cannot do it self.

This is that Miracle of Nature, that has defatigated the Bravest Wits: This
is that, that directs the tallest Ships in their greatest deviations or
darkness: This is that, that has been discovered in so many Learned Volums.
And, to conclude, This is that, that vindicates our Noble Art from the
blemishes of vanity or superstition; and patronizeth this singular gift of the
first Intellect, from the calumnies of the ignorant and malignant, who should
not contemn, but be thankful for the revelation of great and useful
Mysteries; Sed,

Suum cuique ordini vulgus est, and semper optima paucissimis placuerunt. FINIS.

