AN ENQUIRY After further satisfaction concerning obeying a change of
Government believed to be unlawful.

Tendered to the Presbyterian Proposer, by way of Reply to his Book Entitled;
The lawfulness of obeying the present Government. By a dissenting Brother

ROMANS 14.23. He that doubts, is damned if he eat, because not of faith: for
whatsoever is not faith, is sin. LONDON, Printed for G. T. Anno Dom. 1649.

To the Author of a Book entitled, The lawfulness of obeying the present
GOVERNMENT
Honored Sir,
HAving seen your treatise, and being in the number of those to whom your
discourse is directed, I do in my own and others behalfs return you thanks,
for your offer and endeavor to hold forth somewhat for the satisfaction of
those who desire to walk by rule, and cannot comply with alterations, great,
sudden, and of public concernment upon such grounds, as peradventure take with
some others.

In the argument you express your self thus, a declaration has been lately
published, wherein the grounds are expressed of se^ling the present government,
with which if any be not so far satisfied as to think that settlement lawful,
yet even to such is this discourse directed, which proposes proofs, that
though the change of a government were believed not to be lawful, yet it may
lawfully be obeyed.

I hope you will not take offense, if I (having many times read over, and as I
was able weighed your treatise) do acknowledge, that I am not yet satisfied in
that which is made the business of your book. I suppose also that J shall not in
this writing giv^ offense to any of different Judgment, and J am apt to
believe that those that are true to the principles of Liberty of Conscience,
will not take offense at me for proposing in a peaceable way the grounds of my
scruples, to such a casuist, as if the work it self be feasible, may be a
probable instrument of clearing that case wherein he has appeared, and therein
both satisfy the spirits of many that truly fear the Lord, and be serviceable
to the establishing of the new fabric, in a more honorable and lasting way,
than the greatest penaltyes can enc^mpasse. For my self I shall only add thus
much, that I am persuaded; if you knew, how much unbeleef lodges in my heart,
and how great inconveniencyes I must wrestle with, in case my scruples be not
satisfied; you would not much doubt, but that I would be as willing to receive
satisfaction, as you have expressed your self to give it. Thus leaving the
following lines to your consideration I rest,

SJR, Yours obliged and to be obliged.

An Enquiry after further satisfaction concerning obeying a change of
government believed to be unlawful.
THe Question is this, whether though the change of a Government were believed
not to be lawful, yet it may lawfully be obeyed?

A late Treatise proposes proofs for the affirmative; which before we come to
examine, it will not be amiss to consider some things by way of premise
toward the clearing of the point in question.

And here in the first place let it be considered, whence it is, that this or
that particular person, comes to be a Subject to this or that particular
Government or Governor? and this may be four ways.

1. In regard of original or natural descent and inferiority. Thus in the
first age of the World, Cain, Abel, Seth, and the rest of Adams Children and
their Offspring, were under the government of Adam by natural right; and this
is founded upon the primitive terms of the 5th. Commandment, Honor thy
Father.

And to this head we may refer the subjection of the younger Brother to the
elder as being in ordinary course the Heir of his Fathers government. And thus,
with Chrysostom, Musculus, and others, I understand that as spoken by God, to
Cain the elder Brother, concerning Abel. Genesis 4.7. Unto thee shall be his
desire and thou shall rule over him. The like Phrases are used in the 3d.
chapter v. 16. concerning the subjection of the Wife to the government of the
Husband.

2. In regard of some special precept or institution of God. So whenever God
does expressly assign a person to government over a Kingdom, the Subjects of
that Kingdom are thereupon bound to obey that person. So David was taken from
feeding of Sheep to be Ruler over Israel. 1 Samuel 16.1. The Lord said unto
Samuel, fill thine Horn with Oil, and go, I, will send thee to Jesse the
Bethlemit: for I have provided me a King among his Sons. The like we read
concerning Jesus, who was in particular appointed by God to be King over
Israel. These cases are extraordinary, and the ground of obeying in these
cases, is, that Sovereignty of God whereby he bestows authority on whom he
pleases; expressed by some special word, whereby in such cases the title of
government may be known to be by divine donation. Jer. 27 5.6. I have made the
Earth, the man and the beast that are upon the ground, by my great power, and
by my outstretched Arm; and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me;
and now have I given all these Lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezer the King of
Babylon my servant.

3. In regard of place. Suppose a man, with his family, g^^^ into some place
which has neither owner nor Inhabitant: he pla^^^ and p^ssesses that place,
and has by right of primitive possession, au^^ority to govern in that place;
and if afterward any other come to dwell within compass of that Plantation he
ought to be subject to the Governor and government of the place; and so
ordinarily, whatsoever Kingdom a man comes into; he is during his abode there
subject to the authority of the place; and here is the proper room for that
saying, persona sequitur locum. And upon this account it is, that the fourth
Commandment enjoynes the governor of a Family or City, to see that the
Sabbath be not profaned by the stranger that is within their gates; for whilst
he is within their bounds, he is within their jurisdiction; and thus the
patriarks by soj^urning in Egypt, became subjects to Pharaoh.

4. ^n regard of consent. When those that are free to dispose of themselves or
others under a Government or Governor, do by such consent constitute or lay a
foundation for Government. Thus was the origin^ll of the Romans under Romulus,
^s the learned Author of the Treatise; de juro Magistratum in subditos informs
us. A Romulo populus Romanus creatus fuisse dicitur, quia prius originalis
populus non fuerit sed multitudo quaedam ex varijs gentibus and populis
tollecta. Romulus in has gentes collectitias, non nisi ex ipsarum consensu
dominatus est. The Scripture gives many instances of the right of government
founded in consent or agreement: amongst others the case of Iepthath is clear.
Judge. 11.8.11. The Elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah go with us and fight
against the Children of Ammon, and be our head over all the Inhabitants of
Gilead, and the people made him head and Captain over them.

Again it is considerable, in what respect the change of a Government is
believed to be unlawful, whether it be.

1. Only in regard of the end, that those aim at, which do alter the
government. And in this case I conceive, if there be nothing to vitiate the
change but a bad end in the changers, this does not make it unlawful to be
obeyed.

Or 2. In regard of the comparative badnesse of the Government brought in by
change. As if instead of a well regulated monarchy, a more turbulent democrasie
were brought in. In this case I conceive, if there be no exception against the
change, but the bringing in of a less commendable government, this does not
make it unlawful to obey it.

Or 3 in regard of the Commission that those have that do alter the Government.
For, if they be not plenipotentiaryes as to such an act of instituting a new
government; that new fabric will want authority which is the soul of
government, and therefore I do not ^^e how it may be obeyed.

As put case, in Eutopia the Majestas or supreme authority lies in 3. Estates;
a Prince, Nobles, and Representers of the Communalty in Senate assembled, if
these by their joint authority do make very considerable alterations in
erecting or abolishing Courts, enlarging or restraining power of
state-Officers. I make no question but in this case the Eutopians may as well
without scruple comply with these acts, as with the other Statute-laws of that
Kingdom; because these alterations are acts within the compass of the supreme
authority.

Again put case: these 3 Estates in Eutopia undertake to overthrow the
Fundamental government, and set up one of those 3 to be the supreme and
instead of the whole fundamental government, if the question were put whether
the inhabitants of Eutopia might obey that single estate as the sole supreme,
upon a Declaration or act of the 3. estates to that effect: this I conceive a
very diffi^ult case: and the clear stating of it will require a man welg^^s^^ed
in the history of the Eutopian Government, and well studied in that grand
question in Politics, an jura Majestatis sint communicabilia?

But put case, one of those 3. Estates in Eutopia will undertake to exclude the
other 2 and to set up it self solely as supreme; and to Null laws made by all 3
estates: of one that is not able to comprehend how this act is within compass
of the commission of that one estate* does thereupon believe that change of
Government not to be lawful. If the Question be put, whether one so believing
may obey that change, I must confess I am not satisfied in the Affirmative,
and my reason is this; Because if that change be not an act of authority it may
not be obeyed, and that it is not an act of authority, seems to me rational
upon obvious inferences from these grounds. Pa^ inp^rem non habet authoritatem.
Totum aggregatum est mains qualib^t sui part. Ejusdem est leges abol^re cuius
est condere. The English of all which may be summed up in this: a lesser
authority has no authority over a greater.

Again put case, that estate in Eutopia was under a force when it did decree
that change of Government: by reason of which force many Members were kept
away: and one that does not question the ordinary power of that estate, does
yet believe that the change being made by that Estate, under that disadvantage
of force, is not lawful. If the question be put, whether in this case, he that
so believes the unlawfullnesse of that change, may, till he be otherwise
informed, obey that change: I say as in the former case, I am not satisfied in
the Affirmative. I shall illustrate this case by a supposition hearer home,
there is in the first leaf of the B^eif Memento, the copy of an ordinance,
wherein is expressed, That all Votes, Orders, Ordinances passed in either or both
houses of Parliament, between the 26 of July and the 6 of August 1647. were
null and void at the making thereof, the Parliament being under a force and not
free. Now suppose that in this space of time there had passed, in either or
both houses of Parliament, a decree for the chang of Government: suppose
further that one that truly honors the Parliament, and is of the same
judgment with that Ordinance of the 20 of AUGUST 1647. and knew of the force
mentioned therein; does thereupon believe that change of government to be
unlawful, if it be asked whether he, so believing, may lawfully obey that
change of government, I would answer, no. And my reason is this; positive
precepts do imply negative duty: I mean thus; that command that says Honor thy
Father and thy Mother, does as well forbid obeying that which is not authority,
as command obeying that which is authority: now that chang of Government (being
(according to the supposition) decreed, the Parliament being under a force)
ha^h nothing at all of authority in it: because the decree is null and void at
the time of the making thereof.

Now Reader take the right state of the question along with you. the question
is not concerning the Forbearing of resistance, or concerning some kind of
occasional compliance, but only concerning obedience which is a duty of the 5
Commandment. Nor is the question in general whether a change of Government may
be obeyed, but whether it may be obeyed by one that believes the unlawfulness
of the change, nor shall it be questioned for me, whether though a change of
government were believed to be in some respect not lawful, it may yet lawfully
be obeyed, but that which I hold is this, that if the change of a government be
believed not to be lawful, for want of sufficient authority in that change,
then he that so believes may not lawfully obey it. For this I could produce
proofs; But I wave them; and come now to consider, what the presbyterian
proposer offers by way of proof.

And in the first place that Scripture Romans 13. is alleged Which Scripture if
dearly opend, and rightly applied, would state the present and many other
controversies. And here I grant that Scripture requires subjection both to
authority, and to persons clothed with that authority. Neither do I deny, but
that Scripture proves subjection due to Claudius and Nero when they were
invested in authority. But here the proposer queries the lawfulness of their
coming to be invested in their authority, and says, that the Soldiery was the
foundation of Claudiuse's and of Neroes empire: and here I grant that the
Soldiery was the occasion or means by which they came to be Emperors. But I
deny that they received authority from the soldiery; they received it from the
people or Senate; and they had power to give it I touched before the original of
the Roman Power. Romulus was the first King, and he reigned by consent of those
who had power to give up their consent. This Romulus did institute as the great
council a Senate consisting of 100 men; Which number afterward increased. The
power of the Senate to confirm a supreme Governor, may be proved out of
Livius and other authors. And that Nero had the consent of the Senate is
clear, by what the proposer p. 3. cites out of Tacitus, in these words. The
Sentence of the Soldiers was followed with the consent of the Senate, and then
it was not scrupl^d in the provinces. And that Claudius had also the consent of
the Senate, may be gathered out of approved authors, and is not denied by the
proposer. I say then that, though the Soldiers could not give them a legal
title, yet the Senate both could and did. That an unlawful means and a legal
title may meet together, I shall illustrate by a similitude in an other kind.
The Usurer lends a man 100 pound, and has his bond for the principal and 8
pound interest; the borrower dies; the Executor may pay that 8 pound above the
principal: because though the Usurer has not a moral right to that 8 l. by
lending upon usury, yet he has a legal title to it by the bond of the
deceased. So he that by usurpation encroaches upon a Crown; if besides this*
he gains also a legal title; may be obayed upon that legal title, though not
upon the ground of Usurpation. To this purpose is that De jure Magistratuum p.
22. vitium quod ab initio usurpationi inerat petest postea emendari: adeo ut
qui ab initio tyrannus fuit, possit legitimus et inviolabilis magistratus
effici, si videlicet postea liber et legitimus accesserit little consensus, qui
verum et legitimum magistratum creare et constituere possunt. she like answer
to what I have given to that text Rom 13 does Mr. Buroughs give to Dr. Fern,
his words are these p. 7. The apostle requires them not to resist their power,
their (...) he does not charge them not to resist their Tyranny. Certainly they
could have no power but that which was given them by some agreement; if they
challengd further it was no authority at all. And afterward p. 8. what they got
and held merely by for^e without any consent or agreement, was no power, no
authority at all but might be resisted notwithstanding that prohibition.

From the Scripture argument the proposer passes to historical observesions
about the inter uption of lineall succession to the Crown in England.

To which I might Answer that, a facto ad jus non valet argumentum. Whatsoever
title others have had in former ages, if the title since be clear, we need
not trouble our selves with those observations, which the proposer says,
Learned men and statesmen have been ignorant of. I shall therefore here only
cite some passages out of a parliamentary acknowledgment. Anno 1. Jacobi Regis.
Your most humble and loyal Subjects, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, in most humble and lowly
manner do beseechy ur most Excellent Majesty, that (as a memorial to all
posterities, amongst the records of your high court of Parliament for ever to
endure, of our loyalty, obedience, and hearty humble affection) it may be
published and declared in this high court of Parliament, and enacted by
authority of the same, that we (being bounden thereunto both by the laws of
God and Man) do recognize and acknowledge, that immediately upon the
dissolution and decease of Elizabeth late Queen of England, the imperial
Crown of the realm of England, and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and rights
belonging to the same, did by inherent birthright and lawful and undoubted
succession, descend and come to your most Excellent Majesty, as being lineally,
justly, and lawfully, next and sole heir of the blood royal of this realm, as
is aforesaid, and that by the goodness of God almighty and lawful right of
descent, under one imperial Crown, your Majesty is of the Kingdoms of
England etc. King -- And thereunto we most humbly and faithfully do submit, and
obleige our selves our heirs, and posterities for ever, until the last drop of
our blonds be spent. And do beseech your Majesty to accept the same, as the
first fruits in this high court of Parliament, of our loyalty and faith to
your Majesty, and your Royal Progeny, and Posterity for ever.

The Proposer likewise cites the judgment of a few divines and casuists for
obeying the commands of an Usurper. And I believe those that abound with books
may meet with far more of the contrary judgment. But because our faith must
not stand in the wisdom of men; and we are upon a case of conscience, wherein
the opinions of men are of small weight; I judge it superfluous to multiply
Authors: take therefore only 2. for a taste, Mr. Buroughs answer to Dr. Fern.
p. 7. there is no body here that yet has attempted to take any power away from
the King that law has given him. Howsoever the point of inheritance or
conquest can not hinder; for first, none inherits but that which his
Progenitors had, and his Progenitors had no more originally then by consent was
given them; therefore the difference between Kings by Inheritance, and Kings by
election, in this case is not much. And for conquest, that only settles former
right, or makes way to some farther agreement, to add to what was former; the
right comes not from power to conquer, or act of conquering, but from some
agreement, precedent, or consequent. de jure Magistratuum p. 27 is qui alienos
invadit nullo modo sibi subditos, et si cupiat just et ex bono et equo
dominari (ficut de Pisistrato et Demetrio Phalaraeo apud Athenienses legimus)
potest tamen jure impediri, etiam armata manu, et a quibusvis vel infimae sort
is, quibus vim infer voluerit quum nusto jure illi obstringantur.

From the alleging of Authors the Proposer comes again to arguing, and urging
the former Scripture, tells us, it speaks not of obeying those that shall be
powers, but the powers that are, and those that are in authority.

I grant it is spoken of the present powers: but who are those? surely those
which are constituted powers, not those which are pretenders to power.
Whatsoever force rises up to hinder the Parliament, yet the Parliament is a
power in being, because it has a legal being. To this purpose is that which we
read in Mr. Buroughs book, entitled The glorious Name of God the Lord of
Hosts, which book was printed by order from a Committee of the House of
Commons. In that book p. 47 he tells us, the Kingdom has a Parliament in
being, until both Houses have agreed to disolve it. And in his answer to
Doctor Fern p. 3 He plates the Emphasis upon the word power; for thus he
writes; We distinguish between the man that has the power, and the power of
that man, and say although the power must not be resisted according to the
letter and sense of the Text, yet the illegal will and ways of the Man, may be
resisted without the least offending against the Text.

To what the proposer demands concerning the covenant, I will on only tell you
what is lately publish: by Mr. Can a great patron of the late proceedings, in
his book against the Covenant p. 7. his words are these. It is not possible
that ever this Common wealth should be settled according to what the Parliament
has lately declared, and the Covenant duly observed; so incompatible is the
one with the other.

To the proposers passage concerning heirs and successors in the Oath of
allegiance. I say (with submission to better information) whereas the office of
a King may outlive the race of a King, there are therefore mentioned not only
heirs but successors; that in case heirs fail, yet Kingship might not die, and
therefore heirs is set first, and successors after. But of this enough, and it
may be also this may seem superfluous; for if the proposed alteration go on,
it will exclude both heirs and successors.

To the last Quere of the proposer (if I understand the meaning of it) there
may be a sufficient answer picked out of the last passage which I cited out of
Mr Barroughs.

I shall therefore here conclude with the council of the most wise God, given
by the wisest of Men. prove. 24.21.22. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the
King: and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their calamity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both.

FINIS

