AN EXAMINATION OF A PRINTED PAMPHLET; ENTITLED, A Narration of the Siege of
the Town of Leicester ( the last of May 1645.) By the Kings Forces.

WITH A more perfect and exact Relation, of the Taking the said Town and
Garrison.

ALSO, The true Copy of a Letter sent from Leicester to the Lord Gray.

LONDON, Printed for THOMAS VVALKLEY. 1465.

An Examination of a printed Pamphlet, Entitled; A Narration of the Siege of
the Town of Leicester, by the Kings Forces.
THough the late taking of Leicester by the Enemy, did too sadly prove, that
the complaints heretofore made by some Honorable personages against that
Committee, were no ground^esse accusations, or splenitive aspersions cast upon
them, but the just fears of provident men: ^et because that Committee have
since, in a Printed Narrative, gone about to justify their whole proceedings;
it may concern the other, not so much in vindication of their own honor, as
for redeeming the truth, to examine the particulars of that Narration. Those
Gentlemen of quality, who at the beginning of this sad War, had, with the
hazard of their lives and fortunes, put the Town of Leicester into a posture of
defense, could not choose afterward (out of zeal to the public) but continue
their care for the suppression of it; though the full managing of that Affair
were since taken out of their hands, and committed to others of Meaner rank,
and such men, who had not at first joined in the hazard with them, nor
appeared, until danger did seem to be blown over. Nor could they better
express that public care which they had to Preserve the Country, then by a
serious observing, and timely complaining of such faults or Errors as that
Committee were guilty of. Some of those faults, how well soever that Committee
have endeavored to blanch them over, Will plainly appear in searching out the
truth of their own Narration. In which it is not our meaning to pick needless
quarrels against all that they say: But to insist only upon such things, as
without too much injury to truth, cannot be let pass. That discourse
concerning Master Purif^y, which they begin with, it is let pass, as a thing
improper to give answer to; seeing he gave in his Testimony to that
Committee, which the House appointed for examining the particulars concerning
Leicester. But to an higher concern, which presently follows in their
Narration, as namely where the Committee say, that the works were amended
where they were any ways defective, and that they were well made up in all
places; To this is answered, that they had left all places of advantage to the
Enemy undemolished, as namely, Master Chapmans Houses near Belgrave Gate,
Greenes houses near Humberstone Gate; Widow Swannes house, and the Grange
near unto Southgate; diverse Houses at the West bridge, and many near to
Saint Sundaies Bridge. From which place Major Innes with a Party of his own
men, allighted from their Horses, with Carabines in their hands, Sallied out at
Sundaies bridge, beat off the Kings Forces, and fired those houses (the Foot
of the Town refusing to go upon the Service) All which places left thus,
undemolished, were within sixescore Paces of the Works, and most of them
within Pistol shot. It will be further proved that the Committee were
unprovided of diverse materials, necessary for defense of the Garrison, as
Spades Shovells, and Mattocks to make up the breaches, the Works altogether
naked, there being neither Cannon nor Musket Baskets to Shelter the Soldiers.
Besides all this, that place in the Newarke, where the breach was made, the
Committee would never suffer to be Fortifyed, because Master Wadland Clarke to
the Committee, and a powerful man with them, had a parcel of ground lying
there, which he was unwilling should be cut up. In the next place, whereas they
say, That the line was near three miles about, and made by the Lord Gray; It
is answered, that the Lord Gray could never prevail with the Committee to pull
down those Houses before mentioned, much less to contract the Line to a more
narrow circumference, and this unwillingnesse of theirs is most apparent, in
regard that they suffered the said Houses to stand, and the Kings forces to
take possession of them, though they had timely intelligence of the Kings
approach. And whereas they say, That the Kings coming to Ashby was so
sudden, that they had not time to call away their men from Colearton, and
bring off their Cannon; To that we answer; Sir John Gell by Letters advertised
the Committee, three days before the King came to Ashby, that in all
probability the Kings design was for Leicester. So that they had time enough
to call in their out Garrisons, being (as they say) 350. Horse and Foot at
Colearton, and 160 Horse and Foot at Kirby, in all 510. besides those at
Bagworth. Wheareas they say, that when the Town was Summoned, only Sir Robert
Pie, and Major Innes seemed to question whether their number were sufficient to
make resista^ce against such an Army; They answer, that being Strangers they
enquired what their Strength was; the Committee having formerly related to
them, that they had 1500. fighting men in the Town (wherewith no doubt but the
Town might easily have been defended) But upon view at the several Posts they
found not above 450. Soldiers, a very insufficient numb^r to Manne the
Circumference of so vast a Line. Besides Sir Robert Pie (...) the Committee to
take Order that there might be Teames and D^^^ght Horses for the removing of
the Cannon from place to place, as occasion should require. But not an Horse
nor Teame was to be seen in readiness for that service. And whereas the
Committee promised Sir R^bert Pie, that there should be 300. Men upon the
maine Guard constantly, there were not seen above twenty men; Notwithstanding
all these things, Sir Robert Pie, and Major Innes, declared that they would
c^ntribute their best endeavors to the maintenance of the Town, which they
fu^ly performed; and when several other Officers did quit their Post, Major
Innes maintained his; and it is evidently known, that the Enemy never entered
at his Post.

Whereas the Committee say, That they disposed themselves to several pa^ts of
the Town, to supply what was wanting in Ammunition, and otherwise
distributing of Money to the Soldiers that stood at the Line; It is answered,
We heard the Soldiers at several Posts complain, that in twenty four hours
they had no relief in meat, drink, or money; and that the Committee very
seldom appeared at the Works. Whereas they attribute the maintining of that
breach in the Newarke to Captain Hacker and Captain Babbington; We say that
Captain Babbington was never, during the Storm, nearer to the breach then the
Westbridge, which was assigned for his Post. And this breach was maintained by
Major Innes; and after that all the Officers and Soldiers (properly belonging
to the Garrison) had deserted that place, Major Innes with his Troops repulsed
them five several times. After which repulses, the Enemy falling on at other
Places, Captain Hacker made his escape through that Breach, and was taken near
Humberston; the same Captain Hacker, who when Colonel Rocciter was engaged
with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, near unto Milton Mowbray, failed to join with
him, which did extremely prejudice that service. And being then Governor of
the Garrison at Kerby, fled to Leicester; first setting fire on the Barnes and
Stables there; according to the information of an honest man, who was then at
Kerby Garrison, when the Kings Forces came by Melton. Who says that there were
no Scouts sent out that day from the Garrison of Kerby Beler. And further faith
that one Captain Gollifon, coming from Melton, told Captain Hacker that
Colonel Rossiters Forces were Routed, upon which information Captain Hacker
Commanded that all his Soldiers, who had the weakest Horses, should with all
speed march away to Leicester; and those, who had the best Horses, should go
into the Garrison, and set fire on it. The Soldiers obeying his command, set
fire on a great Barn of eleven bays of Building; the greatest p^rt of the
said Barn having been newly made a stable to hold 250 Horses, and some Bays
left to lay in Hay. All which were burnt, and about ten or twelve Bays more,
and then the said Captain Hacker marched away, leaving behind him provisions
of Victual, ammunition, and other necessaries for the Garrison; in which also
he left six Prisoners, who ra^ away. Some other Soldiers report that by
Captain Hackers command they Carried into the Hall, Hay, Straw, and Firres, to
have fired the House. Whereas they write that Colonel Gray, of whose Valor
they had former experience, was sore wounded, and led off the place; It will
be proved that he suffered Sir Barnard Ashlie his whole brigade of Foot to
scale with three laddders, and enter the works, without discharging a Musket;
and running from his Poast, was wounded in the back, one of his Enemies
saying, that he would give him the mark of a Coward; and that formerly he
declared to us his ignorance, and want of experience to perform the duty of a
Governor. Where they say also that Captain Hurst was slain, it is like to the
rest in their Narration; for he was not so much as wounded. Besides this, it is
most certain that the Committee were so possessed with fear, that they told His
Majesty they would have delivered the Town at first upon the summons, had not
Sir Robert Pie, and Major Innes dsswaded them from it. Sir Henry Skipwith
likewise, and Sir John Pate two notorious Delinquents, and powerful with His
Majesty, declared at Leicester, in the presence of many honest men, that the
greatest motive which drew the King to Leicester, was the certain Intelligence,
that he had of the weakness of that Committee, and their want of experience in
Military affairs. Concerning the fortifying of the Newark, which they say was
intended by them; But that, upon a Letter from Colonel Booth to the Lord Gray,
the Committee of both Kingdoms did command the contrary: We will leave it to
the judgment of all the World, how great a discouragement that had been both
to Town and Country, and of what small advantage to the public. Since it was
impossible that the Newark could receive the persons, much less the goods and
estates of all the well-affected. Insomuch as that if it had been fortified
(which could not be effected to any purpose, unless they would resolve to pull
down hundreds of houses) we conceive that both the Persons and Estates of the
aforesaid well-affected persons, had been subject to as much misery and
plunder, as they have since undergone. And for Colonel Booth, we are so well
assured of his good intentions, in that dissuading Letter (as they say) that
malice it self can gather nothing of it, but a cordial desire to prevent the
misery, that was like to befall that place, both for want of able soldiers to
manage the Militia, and strength enough to man the Works. We therefore, as not
unwilling that further notice may be taken of his Letter, have caused it to be
reprinted. Concerning the taxation of the Country, we conceive nothing could
breed more coffeehouse, then that inequality, which the Committee used in
taxing the several Towns, which Taxations (had they been equally laid
according to the proportion of some Towns) had amounted to a far greater
sum ^hen is appointed by the Ordinance of Parliament. And it is verily
besee^^^ that, ^a^ the moneys collected Weekly been converted to no other use,
then for the service and maintenance of their Garrisons, Leicester had been
better provided for a Siege, then (as appears) it now was. And yet
notwithstanding the Committee did, over and above those great Taxes, charge the
Country with all kind of Provisions for their Garrisons, and with Horses to
mount their men. Where they affirm, that they receive not any pay; We are
credibly informed that very few, or not one of them but is chargeable with
moneys raised in the Country for the public service. And how they have
disposed of it, we must leave to the Examination of those who are employed for
that purpose. This we know, that many of them were Captains, and received great
sums of money; yet seldom or never went out with their Troops for defense
of the Country. Whereby there was an unjust and unnecessarie charge, which
might have otherwise been employed upon able soldiers. Instead of which they
cashiered old Officers, and able men, advancing in their places raw soldiers,
to the great prejudice of the business. And whereas they affirm, that they
undertook the Work, when others of greater Estates deserted it, and justify
themselves in that point through the whole Narration; it is well remembered that
Captain Temple, late Governor of Coleotton, when the Lord Gray began to
fortify Leicester, upon intelligence given of the Enemies advance out of
Worcestershire toward Ashby, repaired at Midnight to the Lord Greys Chamber,
earnestly persuading him at that instant to remove to Rockingham with his
Forces, Canon, and Cariages. And indeed many times since has he expressed that
fearful disposition. For in time of danger (pretending business) he usually
hastens to London; witness the last journey that he made up thither, upon the
approach of the Kings Army into those parts. And for the rest of those that now
sit in the Committee, not above two or three of them did appear, and join in
the service with those Gentlemen, that hazarded their lives and fortunes for
the Public at the beginning, and are now out of the Ordinance for the Militia;
neither did they appear until Leicester was nigh fortified, and both Town and
Country in a good posture of defense. Whereas they say that Sir Edward Hartop,
Sir Thomas Hartop, Sir Roger Smith, John St. John, and Thomas Brudenell
Esquires, were but commanded down to sit as Committees, they would give more
satisfaction to the Country, and do the Parliament better service, then those
that are of less estates and esteem, possibly can do; The Committee well know
that all, or most of those Gentlemen before mentioned, by reason of their age
and other infirmities (without prejudice to their health) cannot attend to do
service, as otherwise they willingly would. And it is most evident how
earnestly the Country petitio- for an addition to the Committee, of Gentlemen
of known integrity and abilities, who suffered both in their Persons and
Estates for their affections to the public; namely William Quarles, Thomas
Beaumont, William Danvers, George Pochin, Thomas Pochin, Thomas Cotton Esquire,
and William Sherman Gent. with diverse others, some of which, during the time
of the Siege, were thought worthy and invited to sit, and advise with the
Committee; yet the Committee would not give way to an addition: But did, as
much as in them lay, render those Gentlemen odious to the Parliament. It is
true that the Lord Gray gave a Commission to Theophilus Gray Esquire, then
eldest Captain of his Lordships Regiment (the superior Officers of the Garrison
being drawn out upon service) to command in Leicester for some few days, when
there was no danger of an Enemy. Upon these considerations; How much those
Gentlemen of the Committee, who have had the power of the Militia in their
hands these ten months last past, deserve to be rewarded for their service let
the world judge. Nor can we fear that this frivolous Apology of their (which
they have printed under the name of a Narration, stuffed with apparent and
detected falsehoods) should so far prevail with wise men, as to acquit them of
such heinous essences against the State^ or much less have power to transmit
the blemish from themselves to their just accusers. Such Apologies, as they
imply some faults committed, are themselves sometimes greater faults, then
those which they labor to excuse. Since it is a greater crime purposely to
deceive a State by misunderstanding, then to trespass against it by ignorance,
or weakness. Howsoever, no fear of prejudice can discourage men of Honor, who
are ashamed of nothing but ignoble actions, to aver and maintain a clear
truth against any persons, especially where the satisfaction of the State, more
then the vindication of their own Honors, does engage them to it.

JAMES INNES.

A Coppie of a Letter sent from Leicester to my Lord Gray.
BEing arrived at this place, which by reason of your public and private
interest in it, lays claim to your utmost endeavors for the preservation of
it. I shall make bold to present your Lordship with the weak condition it is
in, most obvious to the unobserving eye, by all men's account there are not
above 200 Soldiers in the Town, and those as peremptory against discipline
as their Governors are ignorant of it. I am most confident nay durst hazard my
self and fortune upon it, that 500. resolute well managed Soldiers, at any
time night or day, would make themselves Masters of this Town, which if lost,
will take away all Commerce from all the Northwest of England; And I can assure
you its Gods providence alone in keeping it from the Enemies knowledge, and
suppressing their courage, that is this Towns defense, but when we neglect to
serve God in his Providence by the adhibition of second means, it is just with
God to leave us to our own strength which is nothing but weakness. The grand
Masters most sensible of Danger, and careful of their own security, have all
of them got houses i^ a place of this Town called the Newarke, where they are
fortifying themselves as strong as may be, which will prove as I fear of most
dangerous consequence; For I perceive the Townsemen much discontented,
conceiving themselves destined by the Committee for the Enemies mercy. I assure
you my Lord, I epsy discontent dispiersing it self very fast abroad in this
Town, and if your Lordships care prevent nor, I expect very shortly to hear ill
news from this place. Pardon my boldness, excuse my haste, and accept of my
profession of being,

Leicester, Apr. 12. 1645. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, GEORGE
BOOTH.

FINIS.

