MORE VICTORIES Lately obtained In IRELAND.

THE Successful and victorious Proceedings of the noble and faithful Lord
INCHIQUIN, Lord President of Munster, against the Rebels there.

Certified IN THREE LETTERS: Two of them under his Lordships own hand, directed
to the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons: The third to an Honorable Member of the said House, from an eminent
Officer in the ARMY.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock at the Kings Head in Paul's Churchyard.
1647.

A Letter from the Lord of Inchiquin Lord President of Munster, directed to
William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
Sir,
BEing constrained by diverse necessities of the soldiers to retire about five
weeks sithence out of the field, where I had been in the Rebels quarters of the
County of Limerick, before I could look into the County of Tipperary, I did
after some short refreshment, and the best (though but mean) provision wihch I
could make for the soldier, apply my self and this Army forthwith again into
the field; and being for want of Oxen and other carriages unable to draw forth
any Artillery, or to carry any larger proportion of bread then what the
soldiers knapsacks would contain, I marched with the Army into this County,
which I entered upon on Saturday the third of this instant; and having taken
several Castles therein, to the number of ten or twelve, putting to the sword
the warders of such places as stood in opposition to the Army, I passed over
the River Shewer not far from the Castle of Cahir, an ancient and eminet hold
of the Rebels, environed with two branches of that River, which was observed to
be, in all appearance, of that strength, as it was both by them, and by the
Officers of this Army esteemed impregnable: notwithstanding which, the
importance of the place being seriously considered by us, we were occasioned to
make an attempt upon it by this accident; One of our horsemen being plundering
near the Town, was by some of the Rebels wounded, and carried a prisoner into
the Castle, from whence he was admitted to send for a Surgeon into our
Quarters to dress his wounds, of which we made this use; One Colonel James
Heppesly, who had formerly served the King, and was (upon some assurance given
me by a friend, of his doing service) admitted to come into our Quarters, being
an ingenuous person skilled in Surgery, and in Fortifications, took upon him
to go under a disguise into the Castle, and to dress the wounded Trooper;
which accordingly he did with so great caution and circumspection, as that he
discovered perfectly the condition of the Castle in each respect, the weakness
of the Ward, and especially some defects in the wall of the outward Bawne,
which rendered it assiultable by our men, the taking whereof would probably
induce the surrender of the Castle, which he collected from the observed
timorousness of the Warders; which sorted to so good purpose, as that falling
on the place defective with a party led on by Colonel Heppesly himself, we
carried that outward Bawne, and some out-Turrets by storm, and within a few
hours after had the Castle surrendered unto us on quarter only for life,
though upon entry of it we found that the same was by no force of ours to be
reduced, if the defendants had not been by divine providence deprived of any
courage to oppose us.

The place is justly looked upon by this Army as the most important in the
whole Province, being of that strength as not to be taken from us so long as we
have victual to support a Garrison therein, whereby a pass is kept open for us
to make daily incursions into this Country, which has been a principal
contributary to the Rebels Army.

To the performance of which Service the Soldier was enabled with no other
food then the roots under, and corn above the ground (all their cattle being
driven away before us out of our reach) of the later whereof we had great and
abundant store, so as we have burned in this County above 20000 pounds worth,
whereof there could be no use-made through want of hand-mils, (for which I have
often and earnestly written) the water-mils being for the most part either
burned or deserted.

From Cahir we marched this instant to the City of Cashell, formerly the
Metropolitan Sea of this Province, where the Citizens and Inhabitants amazed at
the reducing of Cahir, left open the gates, and fled to the Cathedral, a large
and spacious Pile seated upon a Rock near the walls of the Town, and of late
very much fortified, and at present fully manned with diverse Companies of the
Rebels, which will render any attempts we shall make upon it very difficult;
not withstanding which, we determine, by Gods assistance, to leave no meant
unassayed for the reducing thereof: after which we design (...) upon the Town
of Fethard, an eminent walled Town; and from thence to march unto Clonmel, to
reduce which we have yet no great hopes, in regard we understand that place
to be very regularly fortified, and strongly manned, so as without Artillery
there can be no seizable attempt made upon it. But if it shall please God to
bless us with success on that place, we may confidently assert the
Parliaments interests in this Province to be high, and the Rebels mean and
inconsiderable. Sir, The Gentry of this County by the reducing of these places,
and the burning of their corn, begin to make sure that they may be admitted to
a Contribution; which shall be embraced, so far as may conduce to the better
carrying on of the War, and supporting this Army, and advancing (as my zeal
and duty obliges me) of the Parliament Service, for which I have no other means
then this of keeping the Field; from whence if I shall be driven to our
Garrisons by the violence of the weather, or by an overpowerfull Army, I am
utterly ignorant how the Army now abroad, or the sick men and others in
Garrison may be preserved from starving, without seasonable supplies from the
Honorable Houses, to whose Service I have faithfully devoted my self, remaining

SIR, Your humble Servant INCHIQUIN.
Cashell 12 September. 1647.
Another Letter of his Lordships, of the same date.
SIR,
THe Occurrences here are seldom worthy to be a trouble to you: And though you
perceive by those that accompany this Letter, that the Lord has been pleased
to go along with our proceedings in an extraordinary manner this Summer, yet
certainly if our want of means and Carriages were considered, there would in
reason have been but a slender expectation of our endeavors; and now the
nakedness of the Soldiers grows so powerful and assistance to our other
wants, that we shall suddenly be disabled to contend with them, if clothes be
not speedily sent thence for our relief: And therefore I am to request your
favor in the behalf of this Army (that have undergone much hardship, and are
most willing to sacrifice their lives in the Parliaments service) now destitute
of Clothes and Shoes, insomuch as within these few nights of cold weather some
of the Soldiers have died of cold, which must needs be a great discouragement
to the rest. And as I take it to be my part humbly to represent it to that
honorable House, so I am confident that by your good means the same may the
more seasonably be removed; wherein your assistance may contribute much to the
service of the State, and shall much oblige

SIR, Your very humble servant, INCHIQUIN.
Cashell, 12 Sept. 1647.
A Letter from an Officer of quality in the Parliaments Army in Munster, to a
worthy Member of the House of Commons.
SIR,
FRom Castlegrace I gave you an account of the proceedings of the Army since my
Lord of Inchiquin's last march abroad into the Field, where he has been very
active and successeful, blessed be God. He burnt the Country round about, and
afterward fell on the out-wall or Bawne of the Castle of Cahir, upon some
intelligence that his Lordship gained of a defect in some part of it: in the
gaining whereof, Colonel Courteney, Colonel Heppesley, and diverse others,
behaved themselves gallantly, so as with the loss of one Captain Basse, and
three or four Soldiers, we got the Bawne, and made our approaches under the
Castle-gates, and within a few hours after, got the Castle upon quarter for
life only, upon a Parley by them desired. This Castle was heretofore besieged
twelve weeks by the old Earl of Essex, then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, with
the Queens Army in those Wars, and is conceived to be one of the strongest
Holds in all Munster, being also seated on an Island on the River Shewer, upon
which River the strong walled town of Clo^^el, and many other strong Castles
are situated; and it opens a passage to the County of Kilkenny and those parts.
My Lord has placed in Garrison the Regiment of Colonel Francis Roe, which was
sent over by the Parliament with the Lord Lisle, at Cahir. From hence my Lord
commanded us to march immediately to the City of Cashel, six large miles
distant, where the supreme Council of the Rebels lately held their meetings;
and found that the sudden and unexpected taking of Gahir Castle, and the
burning of the Country, had so affrighted the soldiers and inhabitants, that
the soldiers had quitted the City, left open the gates, and were gotten into
the Cathedral Church standing on a high Rock next the City, which they had
fortified formerly; in all, six entire Companies, and about two hundred
Townsmen, and some women; who being summoned by my Lord the first night, stood
upon high terms: the next day his Lordship offered them to march with their
Arms, which they refused, but afterward would have accepted of it; but my Lord
having drawn out the men ready, and conceiving the work to feasible, commanded
the men to fall on, which they did resolutely and bravely, and in little more
then an hours time the Church was taken, and all the men put to the sword,
except the Governor (Lieutenant. Col. Butler) who is dangerously wounded;
Major Butler, who was Mayor of the Town, his son, and some few others who were
taken prisoners. Those slain were above four hundred: and such was the
goodness of God to us, that we lost but one Captain and eight men in this
service; but indeed we have near an hundred hurt. The Rebels are in a cruel
fright, whereof my Lord intends to make the best use he can, and is now sending
to summon Fitherd, a strong walled Town five or six miles hence, and within
fourteen miles of the City of Kilkenny, which has been the nest and magazine
of the chiefest of the Rebels. Blessed be the Lord for this good success on
this noble Lord and this Army, who are very entire, and very ready to do as
much as men in their case can do for the service of the Parliament.

I thought good hereby to give you notice of what has past since my Lord made
his dispatch, being now three days ago, and withal to let you know that we have
now received notice that the Lord Taaff with about five thousand Rebels (who
dare not give us battle) have done us some mischief about Cork in our absence,
in burning the houses and corn about Garrigroghan, from whence they went to
Awneboy. six miles westward, and burnt also there, and got some money to spare
other parts; and now they lie about Bandon, and threaten it. What my Lord and
the Council will do hereupon, is not yet known to us; but without doubt they
will do what they conceive best for the Service, as far forth as God shall
enable them: And if we be so happy as to overtake them, I trust I shall send
you a further Relation by the next, which you will have cause to bless God
for. And so I rest,

Cashel, 15 Sept. 1647. Your humble servant, R.C.

FINIS.

