NEVVES OVT OF SPAIN Of infinite concernment to ENGLAND, IN TWO LETTERS From
Mr Brian I:anson a son of the Church in Spain, to his father Sr BRIAN
I:ANSON, and brother D.HEN. I:ANSON of the Church of ROME in England, both now
in the Kings Army, there to promote the Rightes and Liberties of the same Holy
Church.

Published, thereby to give clearer intimation to all the Inhabitants of
England, 1. What that Church is, and the sons thereof? 2. What is the But and
White there, whereto the Papists hands, heads, and hearts stand ready bent now?
3. What their Religion is, what their devotions are? for know one Papist, and
know all: The mind of all Papists is seen, clearly read and understood by the
mind of one.


I Have perused these two Letters from a son in Spain to a Father and brother
in England. I find them of public concernment, as the Publisher of them has
amply, and usefully showed; besides, A divine Providence has appointed it so;
Therefore I cannot but affixe unto these Letters, and the Publishers
Observations my Imprimatur, Ia. Cranford. Aug. 12.

LONDON, Printed by G. Miller in the year 1644.

The Publisher of these Letters, bespeaketh the Reader, and greets him in these
words.
Understand, Good Reader, That these Letters were caughtup by the way betwixt
Calize in Spain, and Bristoll in England: then sent unto me by a precious and
honorable Friend, a Minister M. Will. Addert^y.
in the Ship, wherein he has a Captain like himself, one, I hope, that fears
GOD above many Captain Rob. Moulion.
. I received these with this injunction, To make them public and as useful
as I could. By Gods help I will endeavor it; Because God commands it so, To
learn wisdom from the unjust; and in imitation of my precious Friend, whom
God has taught this Art, To turn poison into an Antidote. It is easily
learnt, when God will reach it; and very Nature shall help us here, for the
greatest Balsomes do lie enveloped in the Bodies of powerful Corrisives: And
poisons, as a great Physician says, contain within themselves their own
Antidote. In the head of a Toad, some tell us, is a precious stone: but who
found it there, I cannot tell. This I can tell, That it is our wisdom, and it
should be our work, To gain instruction from every thing. Now Reader, this
must be the work at this time; whereunto I will be as helpefull unto thee as I
can, That thou may inform thy judgment, and understanding from these
Letters, touching grave and weighty questions; and be able to give short but
clear resolutions thereunto. Then thou shall see what use to make of all this
in the close.

For the informing of thy judgment, this is the first question, Concerning the
Church of Rome or of Spain (both are one and the same.) Q. What Church is it?
A. A malignant Church; wasting and destruction are in their paths: the ways of
peace they have not known.

Q. What her sons and daughters are? A. As their Mother always has been, and
now is (but now more enraged then ever, like a she-beare robbed of her whespes)
mad upon their idols evermore, and now mad with rage, and drunk with the blood
of Gods faithful ones.

Q. How do their hands, and heads, and hearts stand bent now? A. To destroy a
Mother Church in England; nay, all over the world.

Q. What is their Religion? A. More brutish then the Pagans is now adays; They
have many petty-gods, but I do not know, That they have one Goddess among
them all.

Q. Who is the father of their Religion? A. The Pope.

Q. Who their Godfather? A The stock, when they have lavished gold upon it;
he undertakes for them sure as their surety, for to it they bow, we see; and
ask blessing, I think.

Qu. Whom do they conceive is the hearer of Prayers; and giver of all
Blessings? A. Queen Mary, the Queen of Heaven.

Q. What is the scope of their devout Prayers? A. It is double, from a double
eye, and a cloven heart: 1. That they may rise at Court, grow rich, great and
high in the world. 2. And, that their Country may fall into ruins: And Gods
Servants all into their own blood, and wallow therein: so they pray.


Q. By what means will they compass all this? A. By the mediation of the
Queen of the earth; and by the sole intercession of the Queen of Heaven; into
whose hands the matter is referred; for the transacts all their affairs in
Heaven and earth.

Q. What way do they take for the effecting of all this? A. The old path, the
path of the Destroyer, wherein they have stood these 1000. years up to the
knees in blood; where you must note all along, That they make lies their refuge
too; under falsehood they will hide themselves, horrible lies they will tell for
advantage, so to promote their suit with the Queen on earth, and Queen in
heaven.

Q. Who are the most bloody and implacable enemies to our Church and Kingdom?
A. They that were friends once, and are Apostates now; who had the form of
Godliness only, and cared for no more; These are the most implacable
adversaries against God and good men, as it is at this day; where we should
note, That the most horrible impieties, iniquities, outrages, all these will
stand with the form of Godliness, as is most legible, 2 Timothy 3. from the
first verse to the 6.

Q. What counsel give they to their Prince? A The very same which Athaliab
gave to her son Abaziah; To do wickedly, so to hasten the destruction of his
own house, and of his Kingdom, whereby it appears, That their Lord and
master has the worst servants of any lord in the world, for their work is, To
make themselves miserable, and their Lord, as he was, whom Seracides calls the
foolishness or shame of the people. Eccles. 47.23.


Q. What subjects are they? A. The Devil has no better in the world, no more
right-handed men; or, to speak in two words, as he does, KINGS-MEN, says he,
DIVELS-MEN, say I, for they will spend their blood for their King, so be he
will has his sword in Heaven (The true Church) make it drunk with the blood
of Gods precious ones. Now, Reader, proceed to the Letters, and hear what the
man says, when thou have so done, thou shall thereby see, That the Questions
and Answers before cited, are all the result from the Letters, and having
observed that, thou shall hear more from me.

IHS. Cadize, the 12. of April, 1644. Dear Father,
MY last unto you was about a month past by a Bristow ship under covert of me
to Colonel Collon, which I hope is come in sa^ety to your hands, wherein I
advised you of the receipt of three from you, and one from my brother Henry. I
could not then procure, etc. I sent it (meaning his Tobacco) to Colonel Co^^n,
desiriar, him to send unto Oxford by the first safe conveyance. The joy I
received by yours to bear of his Majesty's prosperous and victorious
proceedings, was not greater then the sorrow and grief received since
(although I do not believe one word that they say, being all or the most part
of our nation that live here most damnable traitors and rebels) they have
reported that the Scots have taken New Castle, and York, and are masters of
the North; that my Lord of New Castle is retired to Oxford, that Sr William
Waller has given my Lord Hopton a great overthrow, and beat him into
Salisbury; and that this Summer they will pluck the Crown from his Majesty's
brows, which God defend. I admire that his Majesty does not prevail with the
King of Spain, to seize upon all these accursed Rebels estates and ships. He
undertake that if the King of England could procure so much favor of his
brother the King of Spain this next vintage (for that is the best time to
seize upon all such ships and estates as do belong to any Rebels,) he might
thereby furnish himself with a brave fleet, and money to set it out. I would I
were in Commission against them, first to show my zeal and great desire to
serve my Sovereigne, and secondly, to chastise such base ill-borne villains
that dare open their mouths, and much more take up arms against their
natural King, and so good and virtuous a Prince, and that has so many years
protected them in such great prosperity, but this is my passion and folly to
give counsel to them that are able to give it to the whole Universe, and since
it has been my ill fortune not to serve him with my blood, I have and still
shall assist him with my prayers.

I advised you in my last Letters of the small hopes of gain, and the great
adventure and peril of the trade to Bristow in wines, I have a far better
trade here to the Indies, and hope thereby to raise my self to an estate; I
wrote you likewise in my last giving you light of a way to raise me to great
preferment and honor in this Country, which I trust, if you received my
Letter, you have put in execution. I hope there will be no delay in a business
of so great importance, and where there will be no other expense, but of time
and solicitude. The business is this, That you and my brother Henry use all
diligence by friends and favor [and lying] to procure from the Queen of
England a Letter of favor to her sister the Queen of Spain in this manner.
That Don Briano I:anson the bearer of this, is son to a noble Gentleman, and
servant of hers, who by reason of the great persecutions in England of the
Roman Catholics [an horrible untruth] travailed into Spain, and there
married a Gentlewoman natural in Cadiz. And that all his parents and kindred
have, and still do preserve themselves in the Catholic faith: [An horrible
lie, and more horrible it is, because he belies the dead, his own dear Mother
in the grave; he knows, and all that knew her, That she detested Popery, and
died a faithful servant of the Lord Jesus Christ: And for his Father, and
Brother, they were Protestants too (at large) and so they would be accounted
still. They never turned themselves to the Church of Rome; till the King turned
his hand and sword there, against the Church of England. And for his Uncle M.
John J:anson, his Fathers eldest Brother, he abhors Popery, and detesteth
his brothers and Nephews ways. And therefore the younger Brother, the Knight,
has begged the lands of his eldest Brother the Gentleman, as I am informed,
And the King has given all his Right to him against law. But M. John J:anson,
holds his Right still by the Tenor of the law, and that is a strong hold.
But this is enough to inform all, that will be informed, The manner of
Papists, they will blaspheme their dearest friends for advantage; and to
promote their Catholic Faith;] In conclusion, desire the Queen her sister to
favor me as a servant of hers, and that I being a younger brother have but
small means, and in that regard desire ber Majesty of Spain first to honor
me with a habit without any costs or charges (which are great) and secondly to
bestow some office upon me, whereby to maintain my self, and I make no
question but by this means to raise my self to good preferment. Let the
Letter be sent directly to me ly some good ship, and if you can conveniently
procure a Letter from my Lord Hopton, to his brother my Lord Ambassador in
Madrid Observe: we have an Hopton in Spain soliciting the cause there, as well
as an Hopton in England fighting here; True Spanish both.
to favor and assist me to his power upon any occasion, it would not do
amiss: but the chief matter is Her Majesty's Letter, which being penned in
the manner that I have advised will questionless stand me in great stead. I
hope that my former Letter came to your hands, and that you have put in action
this my desire, and that with all brevitie I shall hear from you as also of
the health of all my brothers and Sisters, for whom with your self, my prayers
shall never be wanting. So at present I commit you to God; and rest

Your obedient and dutiful son, BRIAN I:ANSON.

IHS. Cadiz the 12. April, 1644. Dearest Brother;
I Wrote to you by the way of Bristow about a month past, which I trust you
have received, because it does very much import me, which if you received, I
make no question but you have with my Father put in action the procuring of the
Queens Letters of favor in my behalf to the Queen of Spain her sister,
that thereby I may raise our Name in this Country to honor and means: for
unless I may freely enjoy the Roman Catholic Religion without any danger of
my person or estate, there is no reason I should leave a place where I enjoy
liberty of conscience and live in very good esteem. But I make no question,
but after the King has subdued his rebels, be will at least give freedom of
conscience to the Roman Catholics that maintain the Religion of all our
Ancestors, as well as he does and has done to so many sorts and Sects as are
this day in England, brought up and invented by particular modern and
light-pated Apostates: But I trust in God that these wars will redound to his
honor, and to the Observe with all observation what the Papists now so
furiously drive after, The Settling, etc. I had enlarged upon their Trust, and
set the Churches Trust against it, but there was no place for it.
setting once again of the true Catholic and Apostolic faith in that
blessed Country, that deserved (for the great devotion of the inhabitants once
to the Mother of God) the name of the Dowry of the blessed Virgin, Queen of
Angels; and I trust in God to be an eye witness of so great a blessing, and to
lay my bones in my native Country; however and in the mean time it is very
convenient to procure honor and preferment in this Country He would lay down
his body here, but he would be raised in Spain first. You well observe who
rules the Scepter in Spain.
, which I find no other way of possibility, but this that I have formerly
advised my Father and your self, and now again do desire, which is the
procuring of her Majesty's Letters of favor to her sister the Queen of
Spain, WHO GOVERNS ^ERE MORE THEN THE KING. Let the Letter be to this effect,
but better indicted; Don Briano I:anson the bearer hereof, is the son of a noble
Gentleman and servant of her Majesty's; who by reason of the persecution of the
Roman Catholics in England, and being a younger brother, with small hopes of
any estate, traveled into Spain, where he married a Gentlewoman natural of
Cadiz; and that all my Parents, Kindred and Allies, have and still do continue
firm Roman Catholics, and that they have suffered much in their temporal
estates only for the maintenance of the Catholic faith: This point I pray let
it be amply set down, for it will much import me in my pretenses Observe how
be would have his lie enlarged and insisted upon for advantage.
, and that in this regard her Catholic Majesty (for that is her Title) will be
pleased for her Majesty's of Great Britains sake, to take notice of me and
honor me with an habit of Calatrana or Alcantra, without costs and charges
(which are great, and my ability weak,) and that her Majesty would bestow upon
me some Office, either in Court or elsewhere, assuring her Majesty that I shall
always a^complish my obligation, for the which her Majesty of England does
pause her royal word; send the Letter with all possible security to my hands
in Cadiz, and from hence I will go to Madrid, and I commit the success of
this, and also of all other matters touching me or mine, to the advocation of
the blessed Virgin Mary, Queen of Angels and mother of God, of whom When you
have read this then read 2 These. 2.11, 12.
I am confident she will desire the good success of these my endeavors, if
these may redound to the honor of God and salvation of my soul, and to whose
blessed advocation I do likewise ^^^^y commend my Father, your self, and all
the rest of my brothers, and sisters, and friends, and the whole Kingdom in
general, beseeching her Majesty that as she is the FOVNTAINE of GRACE, as we
are assured by the salutation of the Angel, Ave Maria gr^t^a plena, dominus
^ecu^, benedicta tu in mulie^^us, and benedictus tructus ventris tui Jesus; so
she will be pleased to communicate to me and all my kindred in particular, part
of that grace, that thereby we may attain to glory. Good Brother forget not to
write to me by all conveyances, advising me of the happy proceedings of the
King, for I must confess I would not willingly so much as hear any thing to
the contrary, although it be false; and pray use your friends and endeavors
for the procuring of this Letter, for I trust thereby to be raised, Mr Richard
Archdale goes now in this Fleet for London, and from thence he says be will
go for Oxford, he is a true KINGS-MAN, and there are but very few in these
parts, I would I had the tampering of them.

I have nothing else at present to advice you, only desire you to be persuaded,
that there is nothing in this world more dear to me then the remembrance of
you my dearest brother; whom I pray God prosper in all your proceedings, and
let me have the happiness to see you

Your Brother and friend, BRIAN J:ANSON.

The Publisher to the Reader.
NOw, Reader, I believe thou art persuaded, that this man has sent over his
heart unto us; for which we have little cause to thank him, because it was
quite from the purpose of his heart so to do, that we should understand his
affections toward us. But a Gracious Providence has so disposed it, that we
do understand his mind perfectly, and can raise all these questions forecited
from his Text, and give Resolution from thence thereunto; All which his own
hand has made legible. But thou may make some question here, whether,
knowing the heart of this man, how it stands bent, thou may make judgment,
what is the mind of all the Papists in the world, in relation to GOD, the LORD
CHRIST, and the rights of his Kingdom? Whereunto I answer from the clearest
grounds (which I have neither time nor place to set down,) That, look what
way this man bends his tongue, his heart and his head, all the Papists in the
world, at this day, stand, like a bow, so bent; As face in water answers face,
so does the heart of one Papist answer another, They are all for the raising
themselves in the world; And for the casting of the Church of God, and their
rights and privileges out of the world. All these bloody characters are
stamped: All these lines are drawn in the hearts of all the Papists in the
world; from that Center they put forth into the Circumference of the whole
Universe. There is the Answer for that. Now make some use of thy knowledge.
Learn 1. Who is the fountain of Grace in the Papists account? The Virgin Mary
they say. An horrible blasphemy. She is but a vessel filled brim-full from that
fountain, the Lord Christ her Savior. Therefore though this Papist has put up
a prayer for his Country, regard it not, no more then his curse; nor the one
nor the other can do any hurt, it is not in the hand of a mediator. Be
assured now, that their prayer is a curse to themselves: and their curse is a
blessing to us and our Land. 2. Thou have learnt, That the Lord Christ, blessed
for ever, is the fountain of grace; From Him is every good and perfect gift:
Therefore renounce gifts, graces, duties, all; and let thy soul run-out all to
that fountain the Lord Christ, Him alone, and none with Him. 3. Thank God,
that thou had thy birth and breeding in a Land o'visions. A mercy! Thou must
thank God for it; but it is no singular mercy: For the Scribe, who wrote these
letters, was borne in the same Land, and had his breeding there in this very
City; Yet he is what he is, and what he is thou understandest by his letters;
Be thou thankful for the place of thy habitation, and that thou art not, as he
is. 4. Labor after the power of godliness, drink in the Principles of GODS
Truth; Let them sink down into thine heart; they shine with their own light;
pray to GOD to shine upon thine heart; to give thee an eye wherewith to see; and
an care, wherewith to hear; both these are from the Lord. This man had
Principles too (upon my knowledge) at his tongues end; they did not sink down:
So had his brother; his Father also; these were well principled; they had the
form of godliness, that they had; I know it, no man better: And for the
first, the second brother the Scribe, he went into Spain because of
persecution, says he; an abominable lie say I; but after the manner; This is a
truth, that thither he went; and there sold his Birthright, (I mean the true
Religion, the Crown, and diadem of a person and people) this he sold for a
wise, he thought good of the price, and they gave him the price; like to that,
which is meant, by Thirty pieces of silver. Zech. 11.
And the Lord of glory took it so ill now, as once he did, because He is dealt
with so unworthily, so ingloriously, that he commanded now as once he did, cast
it to the potter; let him make earthen gods of it: And so God has left him to
his own hardness. It is so with the Father the Knight, and his eldest son the
Doctor: They went for true Protestants, and held on their profession, until
they went to the King, to serve him* And now, if we may believe the Letter,
they are as the younger brother is, who has the Pope for his Father, his
Church for his Mother; The stock on earth, and the Queen of Heaven, for his
Godfather, and Godmother, these must undertake for him; therefore he asks the
stock blessing, worshipping it: and he expects all good from the Queen of
Heaven, she is his God-mother sure. Therefore fifthly, Ask thy soul this
question, What love have thou to the Truth? A weak, faint, waterish love, God
knows: Look to it, to strengthen it, else it will never carry thee-up to the
work of Christ, nor can it keep thy heart close to it, so as to fulfill all
His wills Acts 13.38. (...).
. This is an hot service thou art engaged upon now, it will put thee to cost:
but if thy love be not strong, as strong as death, (and that overcommeth all)
thou will never be at cost about it. That thou may not faint in thy mind,
Look to that Affection, it is the great Centurion, the commander in the soul;
Ask thy soul inrice over, Do thou love Christ? And cease not, till thou
can in uprightness* of neart, appeal unto Him as Peter did; LORD Thou
know that I love Thee: Then certain it is, nothing will be too hard to do;
nothing too much to suffer for Him; but if this be wanting, all is wanting. I
knew the^^^ne when the forementioned, made profession that they loved Christ;
they did not; they hated Him; for remiss love is called hatred, and as it is
called, so it is, and accounted: And now it is so with them; the wages of
iniquity was tendered to their eye; they embraced it, and have blundered-on as
Balaam did, against the drawn sword, And so read the judgment; they a^e
delivered up to believe lies, and to a sense reprobate; Let the Word of GOD,
and then the love of God, dwell richly in you, Amen.

In the last place, that it may be first and last remembered, I will put to thee
and my own soul, these two questions, and let us labor to put both out of
question.

1. Do I put forth my self? does my soul run-out in as earnest desire and
pursuit, to rise in Gods favor, as the men of the world do, to rise in the
favor of the world? O let us labor to put this out of question; And to help
our consideration, and that we may do as aforesaid, let us compare favor
with favor; preferment with preferment; the favor of a man, with the favor
of a God; preferment in the Court of Kings, with that in Heaven, to be there,
as the Lord Christ is, in glory: And let us remember with-all, or else all is
nothing, 2 Cor 59. (...).
that the favor of God, (that is) to be accepted of Him, is the greatest
preferment; But it must be labored for with the same labor of love, as men
have had, who have labored after a Bishopric; or if you will, a Crown of
gold. (...), Clem. Al. Stro. 1.7. p. ^00.
A Crown of Glory must be so labored after: The Kingdom of God also suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force; let us put this out of question.

2. Do I put forth my self? am I as active for GOD, for CHRIST and His cause,
as are the enemies of all Righteousness, active for Antichrist, the promoting
his cause? If we are but as active, it suffices; And then our hands, heads,
hearts will be all a work for God: only this we must not do, not lie for God,
not do wickedly for God; we must do as they do, with the same activity of
spirit, for CHRIST, as they for Antichrist. We are for God, we must work as
God does, in our measure, holily, righteously, there is no unrighteousness in
Him. Work so, and work on; Let head work, and tongue work, and hand work,
heart, soul and spirit work, it is for our Master in Heaven, and His Cause, a
good Master and as good a Cause, He will plentifully reward the work is done
for Him, seven fold into our bosom. Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the works of the Lord, forasmuch as
you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

