INCESTUOUS MARRIAGES, OR, Relations of Consanguinity and Affinity hindering
and dissolving Marriage, as making all Marriages within such Relations to be
Incestuous, and all Children begotten of such Marriages to be Illegitimate, or
Bastards to all intents and purposes.
I. CONSANGVINITY.
COnsanguinity, Kindred, or Blood, hinders and dissolves Marriage between
three; or (taking two of them double) five Relations.

1. Where one of the persons is descended from the other, that is, Parents and
Children, viz. Father and Daughter. Mother and Son.


2. Where both persons are descended immediately from a third, that is, --
Brother and Sister.

3. Where one of the persons is descended from the Brother or Sister of the
other: For these are Loco Parentum and Liberorum, in place of Parents and
Children, viz. -- Uncle and Niece. Aunt and Nephew.


Hence, by reason of Consanguinity, no Man may marry his own Mother, Daughter,
Sister, Aunt, or Niece. And, by the same reason, no Woman may marry her own
Father, Son, Brother, Uncle, or Nephew.

II. AFFINITY,
AFfinity depends upon Consanguinity, and so in like manner hinders and
dissolves Marriage, viz.

In what Relation a Man may not marry his own Kinswoman, in the same he may not
marry his Wifes Kinswoman, or his Kinsmans Wife. And by the same reason,

In what Relation a Woman may not marry her own Kinsman, in the same she may
not marry her Husbands Kinsman, or her Kinswomans Husband. The reason of both
is, because Husband and Wife are one Flesh, Genesis 2. 24.

Hence, by reason of Affinity, no Man may marry his Wifes Mother, or his
Fathers Wife: his Wifes Daughter, or his Sons Wife: his Wifes Sister, or his
Brothers Wife: his Wifes Aunt, or his Uncles Wife: his Wifes Niece, or his
Nephews Wife.

And by the same reason, no Woman may marry her Husbands Father, or her Mothers
Husband: her Husbands Son, or her Daughters Husband: her Husbands Brother, or
her Sisters Husband: her Husbands Uncle, or her Aunts Husband: her Husbands
Nephew, or her Neeces Husband.

Where 1. Under the names of Father, Mother, Son, Daughter, Uncle, Aunt,
Nephew, and Niece, are comprehended and understood, not only they who are such
in the immediate or next Degree, but also they who are such in any Degree
whatsoever: that is to say, Grandfather, Grandmother, Grand-sonne,
Granddaughter, Great Uncle, Great Aunt, Great Nephew, Great Niece, etc. upward
and downward in infinitum.

2. Under the names of Brother, Sister, Uncle, Aunt, Nephew and Niece, are
comprehended and understood, not only they who are such by whole Blood, that
is, both by Father and Mother, but also they who are such by half-blood, that
is, either by Father or Mother.

All these Prohibitions are briefly set forth to the Eye in this following
Table.
CONSANGVINITY. AFFINITY. A No Man may marry his own
1 Mother, Grandmother, etc. 2 Daughter, Granddaughter, etc. 3 Sister. 4
Aunt, Great Aunt, etc. 5 Niece, Great Niece, etc.
C No Man may marry his Wifes
1 Mother, Grandmother, etc. 2 Daughter, Granddaughter, etc. 3 Sister. 4
Aunt, Great Aunt, etc. 5 Niece, Great Niece, etc.
E No Man may marry the Wife of his
1 Father, Grandfather, etc. 2 Son, Grand-sonne, etc. 3 Brother. 4 Uncle,
Great Uncle, etc. 5 Nephew, Great Nephew, etc.
B No Woman may marry her own
1 Father, Grandfather, etc. 2 Son, Grand-sonne, etc. 3 Brother. 4 Uncle,
Great Uncle, etc. 5 Nephew, Great Nephew, etc.
D No Woman may marry her Husbands
1 Father, Grandfather, etc. 2 Son, Grand-sonne, etc. 3 Brother. 4 Uncle,
Great Uncle, etc. 5 Nephew, Great Nephew, etc.
F No Woman may marry the Husband of her
1 Mother, Grandmother, etc. 2 Daughter, Granddaughter, etc. 3 Sister. 4
Aunt, Great Aunt, etc. 5 Niece, Great Niece, etc.


All these Relations of Consanguinity and Affinity are prohibited Marriage
1. By the Leviticall Law, or Law of God, either in express terms, or (which
is all one) by diverse necessary consequences, from likeness, parity, or
majority of Reason: which is as much as a man is forbidden to marry his own
Grandmother, or his own Daughter. For neither of these is there forbidden in
express terms, but both evidently by diverse necessary Consequences.

2. By the Civil or Imperial Law, in diverse express Texts of the Digest, Code,
and Institutes.

3. By the Canon Law.

4. By the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of England in all Ages:
Particularly, since the Reformation, in the Table set forth by Authority, 1563.
confirmed and commanded to be set up in all Churches by the 99th Canon 1603.

5. By several Statutes or Acts of Parliament in this case provided:
Particularly, by that very Statute 32 H. 8. Cap. 38. which is the only Statute
objected against us; and by that very Clause of that Statute, which is chiefly
insisted upon, viz. [ That no reservation or prohibition, Gods Law except,
shall trouble or impeach any Marriage Without the Levitical Degrees.] Which
plainly imports, that all Marriages Within the Leviticall Degrees (as all these
are) shall be troubled and impeached, though there were no exception against
them by any other Law of God.

6. By the Laws of all other Churches in the Christian World, of what
Country, Government, or Persuasion in Religion soever they be.

Lastly, whereas this whole Table consists of 30 Prohibitions, distinguished
into six Classes by A. B. for Consanguinity, C. D. E. F. for Affinity, and
every Class into five Prohibitions, by 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. They are so ordered and
disposed, that they mutually explain and infer one another above 100 ways: So
that grant any one of them, and grant all; Deny one, and deny all.

Imprimatur,

Jan. xxii. 1677/8. H. LONDON.

London, Printed for Robert Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery Lane, 1677/8.


