It is conceived by the judgment of many that if the Courtiers, Nobility and
Gentry who are now in rebellion should but be made (as in Justice they ought)
to pay their just debts, that before this war, and sithence, in a just way
they are engaged to the Citizens and Inhabitants in and about this Citte, and
other places, these ensuing effects would be produced:
FIrst, The Parliaments Cause will be thereby much advanced.

Secondly, the contrary Parties much weakened, if not ruined.

There are, as it is conceived, 3. things which advance the Parliaments Cause,
namely, Men, Money, and Execution of Justice, which is an Obligation upon men's
affections.

This way will turn the Malignant round, and engage, as also encourage him to
fight for his own propriety, and so cause an union both in London, and
associated Counties, that (if need be) they shall rise all as one man.

2. It will advance in probability at least 3. or 4. hundred thousand pounds
speedily.

3. It will stop the mouths of the Delinquents, and of their posterity; as
also of the Nations round about, who shall adjudge these men's perdition to be
of themselves, and render the Parliament righteous, because their estates are
condemned to pay their just debts at a full value, which may be a means to
prevent discords and insurrections, which otherwise might in after ages arise.

4. It will diminish their great means and revenues, with which they now wage
war, which in a just way will be conferred on the Parliaments friends, and
enable them for ever to keep the other under.

Whosoever has a head, a hand, or a purse against the Parliament, is conceived
to be a Delinquent.

All those who are with the King are Delinquents under one of these notions.

If the debts of those men now owing to London, and the well-affected, be paid
(it is conceived) the Delinquent will be left worth little or nothing; and so
whatsoever, as aforesaid, does enable the Parliaments friends, will dis-inable
the contrary Party, his credit and friends lost besides; the divisi^ns which
may arise by declaring some of them Bankrupts, and others insolvent or little
worth their debt being paid.

If this way will not advance moneys enough to do the work, there are 3. or
4. more which will thrice as much, in as just, honorable, and well-pleasing a
way.

The debts to be secured are either sperate or desperate.

Of sperate debts there are two sorts, such as are owing either upon Bill or
Bond, for which Interest is desired, and so 10. l. in the hundred propounded:
Or else Book debts, for which no Interest is propounded, and therefore the
rate of them is to be considered of now.

Desperate debts are of two sorts:

Either such as in probability may produce 10. s. in the pound more or less,
or such as will produce nothing.

For such as will produce in probability 10. s. in the pound more or less,
respect must be had to the Creditors, that they bring in a proportion of money
answerable to the visible means of satisfaction.

To deal with a multitude is endless.

It is therefore thought fit that some Persons of trust and quality may be
selected to consider of propositions in general, and to present them to the
City, to be by them handed to the Parliament for confirmation.

And that Moneys may be raised for the Parliament with more ease to the
Credit^rs

It is thought fit that every man bring in to the Persons so chosen a
particular of their sums owing by any persons who are with the King, that so
Provision being made ^or 50000. l. (of which there is present necessity) the
overplus of moneys which in this way may be raised be so proportioned for time
and quantity, as shall be deemed answerable to the States occasions, and the
Creditors abilities respectively.

The Propositions under correction and addition may be as follows.

That an Ordinance of both Houses be passed for the confirmation (if it shall
be so thought fit) of whatsoever shall be petitioned for in this nature.

Our desires are as follows.

1. That a Committee be speedily appointed to examine and try just debts upon
Oath; which Committee may consist of a certain number of Lawyers, and others
of the House of Commons, with a proportionable number of able Citizens to be
joined with them.

And that if any man be found fraudulent to be liable to some corporal
punishment; besides the penalty of paying three times the value of the debt
sought for.

2. If any man shall bring in a greater proportion of money then his debts
shall be adjudged to be, the Treasurers to be appointed to receive the moneys
may have power upon certificate from the Committee to repay him the overplus.

3. If any man bring in a proportion of money for a good debt, which shall not
prove so; he paying as is provided for a desperate debt, may be repaid the
overplus upon good Certificate to be approved on by the Committee.

4. That those who are willing to secure their debts, and are not sufficiently
able, respect be had to them upon Certificate in that behalf to be produced
under the Aldermans hand of the Ward where he lives (in case it be in London)
and the hand of his Deputy and Majority of the Common Council of the same
Ward. And in case it be in the Country then by the Majoritie of the Deputy
Lievtenants of the County where he lives.

5. That whosoever does not bring in his proportion of money within a certain
time to be limited (respect being had to remote parts) be debarred of this
provision, and the Creditors bringing in their money to have the benefit of
such debts toward their fuller satisfaction where the estate of the Delinquent
Debtour will not fully answer his honest Engagements.

6. That of the estates of Delinquent Debtors, which are now within the
Parliaments quarters such a proportion thereof may with as much speed as a
Committee for that purpose chosen, or to be chosen, can provide and fit the
same; be made over to such Creditors as shall bring in their moneys
proportionably to their debts, at (...) years purchase, respect being had to
the goodness, Situation, and several Tenures thereof.

7. That in case there be not sufficient of the Delinquent Debtors estate
within the Parliaments quarters to pay the Creditors, as aforesaid; That then
accordingly as the Parliament shall enlarge their quarters, addition be made,
till full satisfaction be given.

8. That satisfaction be made for such Delinquent Debtors estate, either real
or personal, as has been converted to the use of the public, where there is
no other visible means left for satisfaction of the Creditors so bringing in
their moneys.

9. That there be a certain time limited for the withdrawing sequestrations
and giving possession as aforesaid (in case no accommodation happen in the
Interim.)

10. That if Accommodation happen, provision be made for the repayment of the
Moneys to be brought in for securing of debts, with the Charges thereof.

11. That those who are not able to secure their debts, as others be, do bring
it in, according as they shall be able.

12. That every Creditor bringing in his money, may have the public faith for
it, with interest to be allowed and made good out of the Overplus of his
Delinquent Debtors estate (in case any be) if not, then out of some others.

13. That every man proportionably as he is reimbursed his principal with
Interest and Charges of securing, do lend the like proportion as formerly
which is conceived to be but reasonable, the better to enable the Parliament to
recover and secure the other C^editors debts, whose Delinquent Debtors estates
are not as yet within their Quarters.

Quaeres.
1. Who shall pay the charge of the Committees and others to be employed in the
business?

2. In case there be two or more bound in a Bond or Obligation, and one or more
of them is resident within the Parliaments quarters, whether he or they that
are resident shall not pay the charge of securing the debt (if able) and if
not, whether the Creditors shall not be assistant?

3. Whether such debts as are owing upon Statutes, Judgments, Recognizances or
Mortgages shall not be brought in, in respect they shall have their Lands and
estates preserved and assigned them by power of Parliament, in manner as
abovesaid: And what respect shall be had to the payment of the Bonds etc.
before Bills and book debts etc.

4. Whether such as have possession of delinquents estates by Mortgages or
otherwise shall not restore the overplus, and be assigned and confirmed by
power of Parliament, in his just value and proportion, and whether any thing or
what shallbe brought in by the Creditor in the hundred for such assurance?

The Names of such persons who are willing to spend their time and endeavors,
to consider of this business, and thereupon to contrive Propositions to the
Parliament for advance of Moneys, in reference to the late Order of the
Honorable House of Commons upon the City Petition for provision of just debts;
And for that purpose have appointed to meet at Drapers Hall every Saturday,
between 8. and 9. in the morning, and every Tuesday and Thursday between 2.
and 3. in the afternoon, are as follows.
Sir John Cordell. Sir John Gayer. Sir Jacob Garret. Sir George Garrett.
Alderman Atkins. Alderman Addams. Sir George Cl^rke. Alderman Langham. Alderman
Kendrick. Alderman Cullum. Sir John Nulls. Deputy Methold. Deputy Avery. Deputy
Moss. M. Edward Cropley. M. Tho. Smith. M. Peter Bultell. M. Adam Lawrence. M.
Richard Bateman. M. Gilbert Moorewood. M. Churchman. M. Tho. Hodges. M. William
Christmas. M. Nathan Wright. M. Charles Snelling. M. Jacques Oils. M. Peter
Jones. M. Shallcrosse, Scriveners. M. Smither, Scriveners. M. Holeman,
Scriveners. M. Colburne, Scriveners. M. Abraham Chamberlain. M. Tho. Hutchins.
M. Tho. Andrewe. Capt. John Brett. Capt. Richard Venners. M. William Toombes.
M. John Hatt. M. John Roberts. M. Ieffery Howland. M. Francis Lenthall. M.
Oliver Clobery. M. William Perkins. M. Bracy. Assistants. M. Sergeant Feasant.
M. Sergeant Green. M. William Steel. M. John Bradshawe.
Whereof any seven with an Assistant to be a complete number.

Agreed upon as abovesaid, at a general meeting about this business, at
Marchant-Tailers Hall on Wednesday last being the 21. of August, 1644.

Attendant. Jonathan Blackwell.

Observable.
THe unhappy division of London, is conceived to be a great means of dividing
the Kingdom, a reuniting thereof, which is so much desired and principally
aimed at, may be (by the blessing of God) as great a means to draw home his
Majesty and those honest Gentlemen (if any be) that are about him, and that no
more true loyal and Protestant blood be spilt, through the cunning,
Jesuiticall, diabolical insinuations of those blood-thirsty Jesuits and
Papists, working upon the weak judgments of many well minded men toward GOD,
their KING, PARLIAMENT and Country.

Glory be to GOD.

