J marry Sir, here is News indeed.

BEING The Copy of a Letter which the DEVIL sent to the POPE of ROME, And kept
in the Conclave of CARDINALS ever since the year 1623. and now published for
the help and comfort of all Romish Catholics in this time of their great
necessity, to encourage them.

Brought over from ROME by CHARON the Ferr iman the last
Jesuiticall-Spring-tide of all their Hellish practices to confound this
Kingdom of ENGLAND.

depiction of a pope being de-crowned by a unicorn

Printed in the year of the brave Cavaliere. 1642. December: 5th.

TO The most pious, virtuous, and Religious Primate of all Christendom, URBANE
the 8. Pope of Rome, and my Vicegerent here upon Earth, Lucifer God of this
world, Lord of Gehenna, King of Tartarus, Prince of Abissus, and Commander of
the Infernal Furies, sends Greeting.
MOst Reverend and dear Son) whose Holiness I reverence, whose Person I
adore, whose Wisdom I muse at, whose Policy I wonder at, whose Strength I
admire at, and at whose invincible Army I stand amazed at: I can but extol,
applaud and commend thee my Dear (Son) for this thy extraordinary and great
pains, cost and Charge in the preparation of thy Forces against the Rebellious
Heretics of the Romish Catholic Religion; J mean the Brittanish, Jrish,
Danish, and Flemish Heretics: The particulars of which force I shall not need
to repeat, for I have them in writing, and I hear say, that they are also
published to the whole world, therefore follow it with all celeritie and
expedition, now are the days to Conquer, now is the time to strike, for their
God has forsaken them, their land is impoverished, their Ships are tottered,
their State weakened, their Parliament is ended and nothing amended, the Nobles
disquieted, the Gentry discouraged the Commons discontented, the Kingdom
divided, and the Roman Catholics in England stand gasping and gaping for
your daily arrival, therefore now strike or for ever hold thy hands, for by
this means thou shall bridle and confound all malicious, turbulent and
ill-affected Spirits, against the Sea of Rome. There are but few Nations in the
world that thou need to fear, vidilizet. The King of Great Britain, the
King of Denmark, the King of Sweden, and the Palsgrave falsely usurping the
title of the King of Bohemia, and the Rebellious Hollander, but what are these
against so many but even molehils to mountains, and no more in our hands then
a Lamb in the paws of a Lion yet it were not amiss to practice some deadly
stratagem, secretly by my servants your Seminaries and Jesuits, by powder,
poison or some other means, especial^y against the King of Great Britain, and
the Pa^av^s Children those young warlike Impes and King Henry-faced, and D.
Elizabeth-hearted-apes; for if they be not now cut off in the blossom but
continue until they be ripe fruit, It is to be feared they will do much hurt
and mischief, and move Terri^o^ies against the Sea of Rome.

I conf^sse indeed your Armies are of great force, and you have more then a
sufficient number of Foot and horse, only I fear you shall want Asses, to
carry your provision when you be Landed, therefore I suppose you might have
forborne two t^ousand Horses and have leavyed three or four thousand Asses
more, for horses, you know must be highly kept, with Pease, Beans, and oats,
and you Asses will live and fair hardly with thistles, and nettles, Now
because I hear a great muttering and complaint of victuals for your
soldiers, therefore I will send you five thousand barrells of the best fresh
Lobcocks that can be taken in my River of Styx, and Acharon, and I will send
you by my servant Charon, four thousand Tunns of large Canniballs heads sodden
in plum Broth, five thousand quarters of Tartarian wheat, every Cornell as big
as a man's head: and an Iron mill to grind it, whose stones shall be five miles
about in compass, and a great Brazen Oven to bake it in, which shall hold
three hundred quarters at a batch, and will also send you live thousand Friars
Cowles well lined with Fox-fur: to keep your Soldiers from the cold, and five
hundred firkins of Crocotia powder to put in little linen bags to hang about
the necks of your Soldiers to keep them from Lice and vermin: and a so I
will send you six thousand handkerchiffes made of Nuns Skins perfumed with
Musk and Amber-greese to wipe the sweat away from your brows in the Battle:
and five thousand Targets made of Cardinals Caps Armor of prooffe tried by Hell
fire: and five thousand else of fine Cambrick charmed, a piece whereof being
laid to any mortal wound, shall immediately heal it, and least your Soldiers
should want Courage to fight against those Heriticks, (as I fear they do) for
J heard say that an English heritick incountred the other day with a Spanish
Knight on horse back and conquered him and after that sought with three valiant
Spaniards at once, and killed two of them ou^ of hand, and made the third run
away, therefore I will sent you five thousand Barrells of Lions hearts, boiled
in boiling lead which shall last and wear like iron, and I will also send you
an hundred empty hogsheads, to put the blood of these Brittanish and Flemish
Rebels into, to be convayed into Rome and Spain.

And to strengthen your Knavie the more, I will send you two hundred gallant
Asses and every one of them shall have sixty whores on a side, punkes five
hundred, and strumpets to encourage your Soldiers five thousand; blame me not
I pray you though I write false Arthograthy, for I am not so frequent in the
English as I am in the Roman, Spanish and Italian Tongues, and I will send you
a thousand legion of my Angels to pitch their tents about you to bring the
souls of my Slain servants to me, for I have prepared a fitting place upon
purpose for them, therefore fear nothing for I never failed any of my
servants, much less my dear and beloved Children, therefore make have strike
now the Iron is hot you are sure you have men enough, horse enough, Ships
enough Ordinance enough, Powder and shot enough, Pikes and Muskets enough,
munition enough, and water enough, and rather then you shall want wind, I will
send you my greatest pair of Bellows that I have in Hell, and five thousand
of my strongest infernal Furyes to blow them.

And thus my most dear Son, I power my blessings upon thee in more
plentiful manner then the drops of Rain descend upon the Earth. And also upon
my two dear Grandchildren the Emperor of Rome, and King of Spain, not
forgetting the King of Poland, The Archduke Leopold, The Elector of Cullen,
The Elector of Mentz, the Elector of Trever, The Duke of Baviere. The Duke of
Saxon. The Archbishop of Strasburg. The Duke of Newburg. The great Duke of
Florence. The Duke of Parma. The Duke of Mantua, the Duke of Medina, the State
of Genoa, the State of Lucas, and the Canton Catholic of the Switzers, as
also my good friend Tyrone, and the Earl of Argile, the Duke of Savoy, Sir
Robert Dudley, Sir Griffin Marckham, Sir William Stanley, and my faithful
revolted friend J. Nevill, styled the Earl of Westmorland, and not forgetting
the Spanish and Italian leaders principal Ass-cistants in this Catholic and
holy League. And further J entreat that you would remember my Love to my trusty
servant Spinola, who has spent the quintessence of his wits, the marrow of his
bones, and the sweat of his brames, in the besiedge of Breda, and other warlike
exployts and martial affairs. And who has been both a true and trusty
friend, and as just to my handmaid the Arch-Dutchesse, as ever her own Husband
was, and who through his great wisdom and policy has procured my Grandchild
the King of Spain, to grant Letters of Mart, and proclaim open Wars against
the King of great Britain, and the rebellious Hollanders, by which means it
is now come to pass, that neither English Mouse, nor Flemmish Frog, can no
sooner peep out of a Hole, or a Bogge, but the (Spanish Kite) I mean the
Dunkirkes devours them up; and one principal reason you know is this, you have
many good friends and favorites in England, great men in great Authority, who
although they have a tongue for their King, yet they have a heart for the Pope,
who see, and will not see, hear and will not hear, can, but will not resist,
partly for their own private commodities, and partly for the affection and
love, they bear to the Romish Religion; and further I hear say, my servant
Spinola has received my Sacrament, and kissed the Pax, and has made a most
sollemne vow to Saint James, and sworn by his Agnus dei, that he will spend his
blood in England, against those Heriticks, and revolters from the Catholic
Church of Rome.

Therefore if cruel Fate and Fortune so conspire to effect that bloody
stratagem, then my desire is that his Heart may be baked in a pasty, and sent
to my dear Virgins and Daughters, the Nuns in Saint Lucas, and his Bones to
the Cathedral Church in Civil, there to remain for ever for a Relic of
that holy Saint: and his Stones to be conveyed to my Handmaid the
Arch-dutchesse, for a token of his love, and I would have an extraordinary
Monument. made for him of Brass, and some pretty Epi-knave upon his death.
Remember my love also to my Nephew the Infunta-Bona-Maria, who is to marry with
my Grandchilds eldest Son, the Emperor of Rome, and tell her that although I
cannot be there in person my self, (by reason of other extraordinary
business) yet my Secretary Beelzebub, and a Legion of my Angels shall attend at
her Nuptials. And I cannot be forgetful of my most worthy and beloved Servant
and Statesman Gondamor, and his great pains that he took in England, when he
was there Ambassador, in groaping in the night, and diving in the day, into
the very intrailes (J mean the privy Chamber of their State, and Kingdom)
and ever since going about to make use of it, and to put that which he has
learned in practice, and also who did encourage my Children the Romish
Catholics in England (being your Sub-jackes) to persevere in the Catholic
Religion, and to be patient for a time, for there would come a day shortly
wherein they should have free Liberty to use their Consciences: and I have sent
him a Box of precious ointment to heal his Fistula in his Posteriorums, least
it should creep into his Priorums, and by that means the Commonwealth of
Spain, should be utterly deprived of so excellent a member. I doubt not but
that you have Cannonized my worthy Servant T. R. for a Saint, who killed that
filthy Heretic, Thomas Scot, Preacher at Vtrecht, who has always been a
pestilent Enemy to me, and our States; Therefore I charge you upon my blessing
that he be Cannonized with Garnet, Tunstell, Digby, Winter, Grant, Ruckwood,
Caies, Bates, and Faulks, and the rest of the Saints, for I have his Soul
already: And although the last Fleet against the Heritique Q. Elizabeth, in 8^.
took not good effect, and success, by reason of misfortune and privy
conspiracy of that filthy (Which) Furbusher, and that Conjurer Drake and
likewise the Gunpowder Treason, Anno 1605. against King James and his
Posterity, (by reason of the miscariage of an unfortunate Letter) yet let us
not be dismayed, but practice continually, Vi et armis ingenitsque, to work
some rare exploit, my helping hand shall not be wanting; for surely some
Lime-twigs being set, it is a hundred to ten but one will take: they lying so
se^tely, and never seeking to prevent any danger in time. Therefore remember me
kindly to my servants the Seminaries and Jesuits, for they must be the
principal instruments to put that in practice which we have invented; And this
admirable invincible Army which we have now prepared, shall be called Colla
Jugo, or the thunderbolt of the World; because it shall not only make the
Britanish, Irish, Danish, and Flemish Heritiques and Rebels quake, but the very
Turk himself stand upon his guard. Now to conclude with weeping eyes, one
thing grieves me to the heart, I understood the other day that an English
Heritique should send word to my youngest son, the King of Spain, that his
Soldiers should bring no wildfire with them, for fear of indangering their
Ships and that they would save them that labor, for if your forces did land in
England, they would make them shit wildfire before they went away, (oh) this
has cut me to the soul, and I can speak no more,

Vale from my great Court in Tartarus, this first of Iulibus, Anno Millimo
Sillimo Vicessimo Sexto. Pater tuus Amantissimus Luciferus Rex Tartari, and
Dominus hujus Mundi,

Translated out of the Dutch Copy into English, by me George Wolley, now
resident in Rotterdam.
FINIS.

