THE DECLARATION AND PROTESTATION OF THE LORD JNCHIQUIN, And all The Officers
under his Command, voluntarily taken and subscribed by his Council of War,
That they will maintain the honor of the King, and the Privilege and
Freedom of Parliament, according to his solemn Engagement, against all
opposers, and other his great discouragements.

Printed in the Year 1648.

The Lord Inchiquins Protestation Sexto Maii 1648. at a Council of War.
ORdered this day (nemine contradicente) that the ensuing Protestation be
tendered to all the Officers of this Army, for their consents thereunto; and for
the further satisfaction of the people therein, That the same, with the Preface
thereto, be read in all several Churches of the several Protestant Garrisons
in this Province, by the respective Ministers thereof, on the next Sabbath day
after the recint of a Copy hereof.

WHereas certain Officers of this Army, of a long time filled with prejudicacy
and disaffection of the public service, in Compliance with such of our private
adversaries in the Kingdom of England, as labored the obstructing of all
relief to this miserable Province, have taken occasion upon a public
Declaration, made in the head of this Army at Mallo, of our real intentions
and resolutions, to add here unto those obligations, which are upon us to the
King, and Parliament of England, by our National oath, and to oppose and
decline all persons acting contrary to our public and solemn engagement; to
misrepresent the Cordial passages and expressions of that Declaration, in such
a false and scandalous recital thereof, as to those that understand not the
Candor of our resolutions, may seem to carry off our contriving some design
inconsistent with our former principles and professions, laboring thereby to
beget a dis-opinion of our proceedings, as savouring of defection from the
Parliament of England, or of propension to the Irish action; For the
vindicating of our integrity from which foul aspersion, and for the
undeceiving of al^ these good and well affected persons, who desire a right
understanding of all transactions, we do make this ensuing. Protestation,
without compulsion or mental reservaon, That

We shall acoording to our Covenant, to the utmost of our power, endeavor the
establishment of the Protestant Religion, according to the best reformed
Churches, and to restore his Majesty to his just Rights, Power and prerogative,
the Parliament of England to their freedom, and Subjects to their Liberty. And
because we find the power of England (or rather the Independent party in
England now too prevalent) privately and publicly endeavor to take off all
the Presbiterian party, both in that and this Kingdom, from their Commands, as
men not fit to be trusted, because faithful not factious, and for no other
reason; We profess to oppose the said party, and to adhere in all things to
our Declaration: And to admit of no for^es either from England, or elsewhere,
without consent of the General, or major part of the superior Officers of
this Army. And if any person shall be found amongst us who shall endeavor to
seduce our soldiers, or refuse to join with us in this business, to proceed
against him as an enemy to the Protestant party in this Kingdom. We are
further resolved to use all means possible, to preserve the Interest of England
in this Province. And although the designs of the Independents have obtruded a
necessity upon us (by refusing to send us necessary supplies) to get our
maintenance in this Kingdom; yet we shall never condescend to any thing which
shall not be consonant to a good conscience, our honor, and former Engagements.

Ordered likewise, that Whereas the Army in this Province, according to their
duty, Oaths, and former professions, have unanimously resolved to maintain
the Protestant Religion, his Majesty's Rights, the freedom of the Parliament,
and Liberty of subject; It is Ordered, that if any Officers shall raise any
dispute or discourse about the difference which has been betwixt his Majesty
and the Presbyterian party, the said Officers shall be incapable of any Office
or command in the Army. And if any Officers shall fight about any such dispute,
they and every of them shall for the same offense suffer death without mercy.
And if any private soldier shall offend in this kind, he shall for the first
offense pass the courtlope, and for the second suffer death. And if any person
shall offend therein, he shall for the first offense pay five pounds, and for
the second have his estate sequestered, and suffer Imprisonment during the Lord
Presidents pleasure; and that this Order be published in the head of every
Regiment, and a Copy thereof fixed on the gates of the City.

FINIS.

