A perfect NARRATIVE OF The proceedings of the Army under the Command of Col.
Michael Jones Commander in Chief of the Forces in the Province of Leymster IN
Their last advance from Dublin; with the taking of the strong Castles and Forts
of Ballysonan, All^n, Black-hall, Raville, and Granye, in the said PROVINCE.

Sent in a Letter to some persons of quality at Westminster.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings head in the old Bayley. October.
17. 1648.

A relation of the passages in Lemyster from September the sixteenth, to the
twenty seventh, 1648.
SIR:
I Make bold to present this enclosed Narrative to your view, wherein you may
observe the goodness of our God to us in this last expedition against the
Rebels; our valiant Governor commanded in chief himself, and all his
Officers and Soldiers are ready to venture with him upon all occasions, as in
this you may see an instance; and truly the Lord has blessed their undertakings
in reducing the Forts and Castles herein mentioned, so that now we h^ve liberty
forty miles about Dublin; the particulars I must refer you to the enclosed,
and rest

Dublin, 2 October. 1648. Yours to command T. I.


ON Satterday the 16. of September, 1648. Col. Jenas, our Commander in chief
and Govern our of Dublin marched forth of Dublin (...) about 2500 foot and 300.
Horse, one Demi-canon, two Culverings, and one Morter-peece, the rest of our
Forces from the-out Garrisons being to meet at the Randezvouz, that night we
quartered at Rascoole, six miles from Dublin.

September. 17. we quartered near Duddings-town in the County of Kildare, short
of the river of Liffy, whither came Sir Thomas Arme-strong with his Troop, Sir
Patrick Wemis, Lievt. Col Yarner, and Captain Fisher with their Troops, and
some Troops of Colonel Cootes Regiment.

Sept. the 18 we passed the Liffy, and sat down before Ballisonan, whither
the rest of our Forces being come from Drogeda, Prim, Athboy Kildare, and other
Garrisons, our Army was about 4000. Foot, and 1000 Horse; of all the enemies
Garrisons in Lemyster this of Ballisonan lay most to the annoyance of our
quarters, and stood as a maine stop to the proceedings of our Army, or any
out-designes toward Satherlagh, Kilkenny, and other the enemies principal
holds, of all which this of Ballisonan was held for strength most considerable,
and was known by the name of the Maiden Garrison, as having never been by our
Forces attempted since the beginning of the Rebellion; whilst our Armies
marched further off, and by it to Castledermot, Catherlogh, and Rossy, this
being still passed over as impregnable; this place had been mainely fortified
by Pierce Fitz Gerrard, (commonly known by the name of Mac Thomas) Lievt. Genesis
of the Rebels Horse in Lemyster, and proprietor of the place.

It had a large out-line of good defense, and a strong Castle on the West of
it, as part of the work and first to be attempted, as commanding all approaches
to the main work; within this out-line was cast up a great ditch running East
and West with a return to the Church answering to the Castle, and the maine
work whereunto that Line and the Church served as a second Out-work, and very
defencible; within which second Line was an high Mount over-looking all, having
on the top a round Brest-worke open to the house, and principal works,
whither was from the Mount a narrow way leading on either side pallizadoed.

Thence by a Draw bridge was entrance into that called the Fort of Ballisonan,
compassed with an out Moat or Ditch, with water about twenty foot over, and
very deep, regularly flancked, where by another Drawbridge was entrance into
the innermost works over another large Moat, with water more then twenty foot
over, and of a very great depth; within was a stone wall well and strongly
flancked, and within that the house, a place of good strength, double roofed,
and having at the West end of it a small round Garret. Besides, a Foot Company,
the ordinary Terret of the place there had been (on the noise of our
approaching) two other select Companies drawn thither with all necessaries,
and the command of all given to one Captain St. Leiger. There was also in the
place Mistress Fitz Gerrald, Wife to Mac Thomas, a Gentlewoman of a masculine
spirit; as for Mac Thomas, he would not be shut up there, having thereby
opportunity for soliciting Preston and his confederates in Munster and
Connaught, as also Owen Roe with his Forces, for releeving a place to all of
them of so general concernment.

Until the 19. we did but look on (our blindes cast behind us in our march,
not coming up to us until two of the Clock in the afternoon; the Governor
had a little before summoned the place, and Sir Theophilu^ ^f^ (who had been at
B^s^an a Prisoner and there found civil respects) labored by Letters to
facilitate the business, by dealing with Mistress Fitz-Gerr^rd for the
surrendering the place, offering himself (in way of gratitude) to mediate with
the Governor for bettering her conditions if then yielding, unto all which
there were returns given full of resolution for holding out to the last. That
night was spent in setting up the blindes and preparing the battery, with our
three Guns against the Castle part of the out-worke.

September 20, our Ordinance began to play, after a while one of our Culverings
was rendered unserviceable, failing in her carriage, so as the battery was
maintained by the Demi canon and one Culvering only, our Morrer piece being
there, and at that distance of no use; About ten of the Clock, and after
thirty six great shot one side of the Castle fell, in all which time the
Defendants shot at us, holding out with an undaunted resolution, until our men
entered the Breach; whereupon the enemy in the Castle retired to the Fort of
Ballisonan, yet with some loss being overtaken, and the Officer commanding in
that Castle slain in the going off.

Being so possessed of the Castle, the Out-workes with the Church became ours,
whence the enemy had been beaten, and retired into the Fort not far from
them; then was the Mount gallantly stormed by our men, and resolutely
maintained for some time by the enemy, wherein we lost three or four (which
was all that was lost in that whole service) some we had wounded, among whom
Sir Theophilus Jones forcing the Mount, he being shot in the neck, the Bullet
at quarter Musket shot) entering into the color, and by a strange providence
graysing only on the flesh.

The Mount thus gained that thereof open to the House, and inner works was by
us suddenly made up, and it with the Castle and Church manned, out of all
which our Musketeers played on the Enemy in the maine works; ther^ had been
five Shot made at the House from the first battery, but being at that distance
it did no hurt; The Governor therefore commanded the Gunnes to be drawn
without the out-line, and making use of the second out-line for a blind as
present, th^re were thence made five Shot at the round Terret at the end of the
House, whereon had been bung out a Flag of defiance, which at the first Shot
was beat down, with part of the Terret, the Morter-Piece planted also near
the Church began to play, and did great execution on the House to the great
terror of the defendants; this night were the blinds set up, and the battery
settled as the Church against the House and Inner works.

September 21. Upon fight of our Gunnes so planted the Enemy beat a Parle, St.
Leiger commanding in the place desiring time until three or four of the clock
in the afternoon, for resolving on further answer to the summons sent him,
adding that he was limited to a time for holding out, and could not till then
give any positive answer, whereby and by other advertisements given; the
Governor found this to be intended only as delatory for hindering us in our
work, and for gaining time until the Enemy might draw toward (...) for
relieving the place which was expected of the besieged, and probably believed
of us, the consequence of the place considered with the nearness of Preston
about twelve or thirteen miles from us, and Mac Thomas showing himself with
some Horse within less then two miles of our Camp.

Wherefore our Governor i^ ^eturne would but afford them one half houre^ tim^
only to consider of their course, which not ^ed, our Battery began to play at
the works and flan^ers ^^d our Morter-Piece at the House, so continuing until
two in the afternoon, having in that time made sixteen great Shot* and six out
of the Morter-Piece, the latter was of the gre^^^st t^rror, and loss to the
defendants, especially to the women, of whom were about ^00 in the place, by
whose out (...) and the not appearing of the expected and promised supplies,
and by the resolution of our men (more then men) the ^nem^ did again come to a
Pailey, and about four of the clock was concluded that Captain Sir Lerger
Governor of the place, with all the rest of the Soldiers should by twelve of
the clock the next day, march our with their Arms, bag and baggage, and that
in the mean time 200 of our men should be admitted for possessing the place for
us, which was done accordingly.

September 22. According to the articles of surrender, there marched away three
Companies of the Rebels, many of their wounded being left in the place to be
sent for

Colonel Fenwick was appointed to the guard of the place with 200 Foot, and
two Proopes o Horse; The gaming of the place in so short a time was strange to
all, knowing the strength of it, the Enemy believing it would hold us so many
Months rather then days, occasioning their not yet appearing to the relief
of it, which otherwise they would doubtless have attempted, if any danger of
carrying it had been but suspected; The place also being gained and better
viewed by us, it seemed to us, yet more strange to them particulary, who until
then little valued the work, conceiving it to be more feaziable then it how
appeared, which before considered of by our Governor, and that the storming of
that place might be the lost of five hundred men's lives, and yet not carry it,
that loss of time might be dangerous, there being so many and so great parties
in the field, as Preston with his Army, with in one mile of Casterl^gh,
Owen-Roe with his Army in the Queens County, and Inchiquin at Aghoboe,
earnestly solicited by Preston, and Mac Thomas against us, who yet refused to
join with them against the English, whereunto was added the falling short of
our provisions, and particularly our Powder and Ammunition, whereof at the last
Parley was found left but two Barrels, only besides the convenience of the
place for a fixed Magazine on further undertakings, and for a present Garrison,
to our Quarters, of exceeding great concernment, the conveniently whereof had
been lost if the Battery had continued, the House being already much defaced;
in all which considerations, our Governor conceived it necessary to lay hold
on all occasions, to entertain any reasonable propositions, whereby the place
might be in our power without further dispute; The strong Castle of Blackball
near Bollyson^n a piece of great consequence lying on a pass, and a place of
great strength, nothing short of the Castle of Iron-hill, the only Battered
Castle in our last going out and Ra^^^le in the County of Catherlagh, and G^any
in the County of Wickloe (all following the fortune of Ballysonan) submitted to
us.

23 Order was given for making up the breaches at Ballysonan, and for
fortifying the Mount with a new work, then a convay of 150 Horse were sent to
secure our provisions from Dublin to the Camp at Ballis^nan, which for want of
a convenient number of carriages brought us not provisions for half a week,
this shortness of carriages being found the great obstruction to all our great
undertakings, so that without them nothing of consequence can be attempted,
more then twenty miles from Dublin* whence we are all to be supplied.

Therefore our Governor was enforced to work nearer home, and the ^4 to march
back toward the Island of Alton, the next most consider able place possessed
by the Enemy, to the great annoyance of our Quarters, this being within us a
very receptacle and den of thieves whence were made daily incursions even to
the very gates of Dublin; The Island of Allon being a near and safe retreat
for them, It is called an Island being encompassed with a Bogg to horse in
accessible and not to be passed by foot, but by blin^ and dangerous wai^s, and
easi^y defended by a fe^ against thousands. This Island is about seven or eight
miles compass, having in it sixteen Villages and some Castles, among others
the principal and of grea^^^ strength is that of Kil^ma^ge two miles within
the Island, possessed by M^rris Fitz Gerrara of All^n, it is ^^ted well and
d^eply, having a draw bridge, (...) Iron Grate, and out works very defensible*
having also two companies for the guard of it, command^^ by Captain B^r^^all.
Into this Boggy Island was b^t one common passage called the ^^acka^^ch, being
a ca^sey made through the Bogg* almost a quarter of a mile in leng^h, this the
Rebel^ had cast through in (...) several places more then twenty Foot over and
to cast it up ridgeway almost throughout, that where it was not cut but for one
Footman to stand upon, without Ordinance was not the Castle to be forced, and
this way only was Ordinance to be brought, the ^^ting whereof would have been
a work very diff^rent (were there) thereunto no opposition given; but for
hindering any such design, the Rebels had toward the further end of that
causey, made a round Fort of Sod with a great Moat, and water twenty Foot over,
and a pick length in depth, over which was a passage by plankes, only drawn
into the Fort in nature of a drawbridge and put forth as occasion acquired; the
passage into the first was so low that without stooping almost knee low there
was no entrance the top of this work was rounded with Musket Baskets,
artificially made and orderly placed with advantage to the defendants, within
were huts and room for forty men, and the Fort it self so placed that our
Ordnance could not command it at such distance, the Guard whereof was committed
to a Sergeant and twelve Musketeers.

For gaining this passage, and if it were possible the Fort also, our Governor
sent out five hundred commanded Foot, with about one hundred Horse. This night
the Army passing by the Li^ q^artered at a place called A^ris-T^wn, about one
(...) short of the pass, that resolute commanded Party of Foot had with much
danger gained a passage through the bogg, sideling of that broken Cawsey; and
having surrounded the Fort threatened the casting in of Grenades, which could
not have been no other then Bugbeares had not God himself in (...), as in all
other things done his own work by (...) taking from the Rebels their
resolutions, they after some little dispute desiring quarter, and that they
might retire into the Castle of Kilm^^g^ in the Island, adding, that they saw
all given to us* and that there was no resisting us; there was a Guard of ours
placed the rest of that commanded Party of Foot, went into the Island, and
quartered that night-short of the Castle of Kilmaoge.

September the 25. Orders were given for cutting down Trees for making the way
passable for Ordnance, and many hands employed in the work, which was found a
work^ of time beyond what we first imagined, most of this day being spent on it
with little advantage; our Governor having with some difficulty and hazard
passed the Boggs into the Island, and appearing before the Castle with that
small Party before mentioned, and summoning the place the Defendants came to a
Parley, and that night admitted of a Garrison of fourscore men into the Castle,
the Rebels being the next day to march out.

September. 26. Captain White, of Colonel Kinnistons Regiment with one hundred
men was appointed for the defense of the Castle and Fort of the enemy, having
marched away according to agreement. This day upon intelligence given of
Prestons and Taa^^es preparations for attempting something against Ball^son^^,
^^ders were given for drawing in thither some oth^^ Companie^ if cause so
required, as also for streng^^ having the Garrisons of Kildare, Naray, and ^ron
(...) This day the Army passing the Liffy marched hom^wards, quartered that
night at Kill, two miles ne^^^ Dublin.

September 27. our Parties called from the out quarters for this service, being
sent back to their res^^^ctive homes, the Governor with the rest of the (...)
my returned un^^ Dublin, having in this march very much enlarged and secured
all, and almost locked up our quarters from incursions by the enemy whereu^to we
were formerly laid open.

FINIS.

