THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND, Established by PARLIAMENT against
Disobedience and wilful Rebellion.

Published by G. I. for satisfaction to his Parishioners of WATTON in the
County of Hartford.

Printed for William Sheares at the sign of the Bible in Coven. Garden, 1642.

TO His loving Neighbors of WATTON, in the County of Hartford.
Brethren,
BE loved in the blood of JESUS: for preaching obedience to God and the King: I
am, and have been more then a mouth a prisoner, and cannot get my liberty,
unless I would promise to forbear preaching to you, as I have done, and yet I
have promised to preach nothing to you, but what I shall prove plainly from
the word of God, the doctrine of the Church of England, the oath of Supremacy,
the oath of Allegiance, and our late Protestation; all which I have published
for your satisfaction: If you will read those oaths, and these Sermons in my
absence; you shall find that I have dealt faithfully with you; and am ready to
seal my doctrine. with my dearest blood* if God shall call so great a sinner
to so great an honor. Neither Living, nor Liberty, nor Life is precious to
me, when I should sacrifice them all to the glory of my great good God, the
service of my gracious Sovereign, and the discharge of a good conscience
toward my self and you: I told you before how sensible I was of danger for
this my fidelity, but for Zions sake I could not, I cannot hold my peace, God
will imprison me to Hell, if I imprison his truths, Fear God, Honor the
King, is both Law and Gospel; and my prayer is, that you all may live and dye
good Christians, and good Subjects: and as the Church prayed for Saint Peter in
prison, so do you for

your affectionate Pastor, in prison for his God, his King, his Conscience,
regulated by the word of God, the Doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND, and his
Oaths. G. I.
December. 3. 1642.
A SERMON against Disobedience and wilful Rebellion.
The first SERMON.
AS GOD the Creator and Lord of all things, appointed his Angels, and Heavenly
Creatures: in all obedience to serve and honor his Majesty: so was it his will
that man, his chief creature upon the earth, should live under the obedience
of his Creator and Lord. And for that cause, God, as soon as he had created
man, give unto him a certain Precept, and Law, which he (being yet in the
state of innocence, and remaining in Paradise) should observe as a pledge, and
token of his due and bounden obedlence, which denunciation of death, if he did
transgress, and break the said Law and Commandment. And as God would have
man to be his obedient subject; so did he make all earthly creatures subject
unto man; who kept their due obedience unto man, so long as man remained in his
obedience unto God: in which obedience if man had continued still, there had
been no poverty, no diseases, no sickness, no death, nor other miseries,
where with mankind is now infinitely, and most miserably, afflicted and
oppressed: so here appears the original Kingdom of God over Angels, and
Man, and universally over all things; and of Man over earthly Creatures, which
God had made subject unto him, and withal, all, the felicity and blessed
estate, which Angels, Man, and Creatures had remained in, had they continued in
due obedience unto God their King. For as long as in this first Kingdom, the
Subjects continued in due obedience to God their King, so long did God embrace
all his Subjects: with his love, favor and grace, which to enjoy is perfect
felicity; whereby it is evident, that obedience is the principal virtue of all
virtues, and indeed the very Root of all virtues, and the cause of all
felicity. But as all felicity and blessedness, should have continued with the
continuance of obedience, so with the breach of obedience and breaking in of
rebellion, all vices and miseries did withal break in, and over-whelme the
World. The first Author of which rebellion, the Root of all vices, and Mother
of all mischeifes was Lucifer: First, Gods most excellent creature, and most
bounden subject, who by rebelling against the Majesty of God, of the Brightest,
and most glorious Angel, is become the blackest and most foul fiend, and
Devil: and from the height of Heaven, is fallen into the pit and bottom of
Hell.

Here you may see the first author and founder of rebellion, and the reward
thereof. Here you may see the grand Captain and Father of rebels, who
persuading the following of his rebellion against God their Creator, and Lord,
unto our first Parents Adam and Eve, brought them in high displeasure with God,
wrought their exile and banishment out of Paradise, a place of all pleasure and
goodness, into this wretched earth and vale of misery: procured unto them
sorrows of minds, mischeifes; sickness, diseases, death of their bodies, and
which is far more horrible, then all worldly and bodily mischiefs; he had
wrought thereby their eternal and everlasting death and damnation; had not God
by the obedience of his Son JESUS CHRIST repaired that, which man by
disobedience and rebellion had destroyed, and so of his mercy had pardoned and
forgiven him, of which all, and singular the premises, the Holy Scriptures do
bear record in sundry places.

Thus do you see, that neither Heaven nor Paradise could suffer any rebellion
in them; neither be places for any Rebels to remain in. Thus became rebellion
as you see both the first, and the greatest, and the very root of all other
sins, and the first and principal cause both of all worldly and bodily
miseries, sorrows, diseases, sicknesses, and deaths. And which is infinitely
worse then all these, as is said, the very cause of death and damnation
eternal also. After this breach of obedience to God, and rebellion against his
Majesty, all mischeifes and miseries breaking in therewith, and overslowing the
World; least all things should come to confusion and utter ruin. God forthwith
by laws given to mankind, repaired again the rule, and order of obedience;
thus by rebellion overthrown, and besides the obedience due to his Majesty,
he not only ordained, that in Families and Househoulds, the Wife should be
obedient to her Husband, the Children unto their Parents, the Servants unto
their Masters: but also when mankind inceased and spread it self more largely
over the World, he by his holy word did constitute and ordain in Cities and
Countries several and special Governors and Rulers, unto whom the residue of
his people should be obedient.

As in reading of holy Scriptures, we shall find in very many, and almost
infinite places, as well of the old Testament, as of the new, that Kings, and
Princes, as well the evil as the good, do reign by Gods ordinance, and that
Subjects are bounden to obey them: that God does give Princes wisdom, great
power and authority: that God defends them against their enemies, and
destroys their enemies horribly: that the anger and displeasure of the
Prince, is as the roaring of a Lion, and the very messenger of death: and that
the subject that provokes him to displeasure, sins against his own soul:
with many other things concerning both the authority of Princes, and the duty
of Subjects; but here let us rehearse two especial places out of the new
Testament, which may stand in stead of all other. The first out of Saint Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, and the 13. Chapter, Romans 13.
where he writes thus unto all Subjects; Let every soul be subject unto the
higher powers, for, there is no power but of God, and the powers that be are
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.
For Princes are not to be feared for good works but for evil. Will thou then
be without fear of the power? Do well, so shall thou have praise of the
same: for he is the Minister of God for thy wealth: but if thou do evil,
fear: for he bears not the sword for naught, for he is the Minister of
God, to take vengeance upon him that does evil: Wherefore yet must be
subject, not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake; for, for
this cause ye pay also tribute: for they are Gods Ministers serving for the
same purpose. Give to every man therefore his due; tribute to whom tribute
belongs: Custom to whom custom is due, fear to whom fear belongs,
honor to whom ye owe honor. Thus far are Saint Paul's words. The second
place is in Saint Peter's Epistle and the second Chapter, whose words are these:
Submit your selves unto all manner of ordinances of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto the King, as unto the chief head, either unto the ruler,
as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers, but for
the cherishing of them that do well. For so is the will of God, that with well
doing ye may stop the mouths of ignorant and foolish men: as free, and not as
having the liberty for a cloak of maliciousness; but even as the servants of
God. Honor all men, love brotherly fellowship, fear God, honor the King.
Servants obey your Masters with fear; not only if they be good and
courteous, but also though they be froward: Thus far out of Saint Peter.

By these two places of holy Scripture, it is most evident, that Kings,
Queens, and other Princes, (for he speaks of authority, and power, be it
in men or women) are ordained of God, and to be honored, and obeyed of their
subjects: that such subjects as are disobedient or rebellious against their
Princes, disobey God, and procure their own damnation. That the Government of
Princes, is a great blessing of God, given for the Commonwealth, especially
for the good and Godly: for the comforting and cherishing of whom God gives
and sets up Princes: And on the contrary part, to the fear, and for the
punishment of the evil and wicked. Finally, that if servants ought to obey
their Masters, not only being gentle, but such as be froward: as well and
much more, ought subjects to be obedient, not only to their good and
courteous, but also to their sharp and rigorous Princes. It comes therefore
neither of chance and fortune, (as they termo it,) nor of the ambition of
mortal men and women, climbing up of their own accord to Dominion, that there
be Kings, Queens, Princes, and other Governors over men being their
subjects: but all Kings, Queens, and other Governors, are especially
appointed by the ordinance of God: And as God himself being of an infinite
Majesty, Power, Psalm. 1.6.16. and 45* 6. etc. and 47.2.
and Wisdom, rules and governs all things in Heaven and Earth, as the
universal Monarch, and only King and Emperor over all, as being only able
to take and bear charge of all; Eccles. 17.
so has he constituted, ordained, and set earthly Princes, over particular
Kingdoms, and Dominions in earth; both for the avoiding of all confusion,
which else would be in the World, if it should be without Governors; and for
the great quiet and benefit of earthly men their subjects, and also that the
Princes themselves in authority, power, wisdom, providence, and
righteousness, in government of people and Countries committed to their
charge, should resemble his heavenly governance, as the Majesty of heavenly
things may be the baseness of earthly things be shadowed and resembled; and
for that similitude that is between the heavenly Monarchy, PLACE="marg" Matthew.
18.23. and 22.12.
and earthly Kingdoms well governed; our Savior CHRIST in sundry parables,
says, that the Kingdom of Heaven is resembled unto a man, a King: Psalm.
10.16. and 45. and 47.2. etc.
and as the name of a King is very often given and attributed unto God in the
holy Scriptures: so does God himself sometime vouchsafe to communicate his
name with earthly Princes, terming them Gods, Matthew. 22.13 and 25.34.
doublesse for that similitude of government, which they have, or should have,
not unlike unto God their King; Psalm. 82.6.
unto which similitude of heavenly government, the nearer and nearer that an
earthly Prince does come in his regiment, the greater blessing of Gods mercy is
he unto that Country and people, over whom he reigns; And the further and
further that an earthly Prince does swarve from the example of heavenly
government, the greater plague is he of Gods wrath and punishment, by Gods
justice unto that Country and people, over whom God for their sins have
placed such a Prince and Governor. For it is indeed evident, both by
Scriptures and by daily experience, that the maintenance of all virtue and
Godliness, and consequently of the wealth and prosperity of a Kingdom, and
people, does stand and rest more in a wise and good Prince on the one part,
then in great multitudes of other men being subjects; and on the contrary part,
the overthrow of all virtue and godliness, and consequently the decay and
utter ruin of a Realm and people, does grow and come more by an undiscreet
and evil Governor, then by many thousands of other men being subjects. Thus
says the holy Scripture. Eccles. 10.16. Prove. 16. and 29. Eccles. 10. Isay. 2.
Well is thee, O thou Land (says the Preacher) whose King is come of Nobles,
and whose Princes eat in due season, for necessity, and not for lust. Again, a
wise and righteous King makes his Realm, and people wealthy: And a good,
merciful, and gracious Prince is a shadow in heat, as a defense in storms, as
deaw, as sweet showers, as fresh water springs in great drought.

Again, the Scriptures, of undiscreet, and evil Princes, speak thus, Eccles.
10.16.
Woe be to thee (O thou Land,) whose King is but a Child, and whose Princes
are early at their Bankquets. Again, when the wicked do reign, then men go
to ruin. And again, Prove. 28. and 29.
a foolish Prince destroys the people, and a covetous King undoeth his
Subjects. Thus speak the Scriptures; and thus experience testisieth of good
and evil Princes.

What shall Subjects do then? shall they obey valiant, stout, wise, and good
Princes, and condemn, disobey and rebel against Children, being their
Princes, or against undiscreet, and evil Governors? God forbid; For first,
what a perilous thing were it to commit unto Subjects, the Judgment, which
Prince is wise, and godly, and his government good, and which is otherwise; as
though the foot must judge of the head: and enterprise very heinous, and must
needs breed rebellion. For who else be they that are most inclined to
rebellion, but such haughty Spirits? from whom springs such foul ruin of
Realms? Is not rebellion the greatest of all mischeifes? And who are most
ready to the greatest mischeifes, but the worst men? rebels therefore, the
worst of all Subjects, are most ready to rebellion: as being the worst of all
vices and furthest from the duty of a good Subject: as on the contrary part,
the best Subjects are most firm and constant in obedience, as in the special
and peculiar virtue of good Subjects: what an unworthy matter were in then to
make the naughtiest Subjects, and most enclining to rebellion, and all evil.
Judges over their Princes, over their Government, and over their Conunsellours,
to determine which of them be good or tolerable, and which be evil, and so
intolerable, that they must needs be removed by rebels; being ever ready as
the naughriest Subjects, soonest to rebel against the best Princes:
especially, if they be young in age, women in sex, or gentle and courteous in
government; as trusting by their wicked boldness, easily to overthrow their
weakness, and gentleness, or at least, so to fear the minds of such Princes
that they may have impunity of their mischeivous doings.

But whereas indeed a Rebel is worse then the worst Prince, and rebellion
worse than the worst government of the worst Prince that hitherto has been:
both Rebels are unmeete Ministers, and rebellion an unfit and unwholesome
medicine to reform any small lacks in a Prince, or to cure any little greifes
in government, such lewd remedies being far worse then any other maladies and
disorders that can be in the body of a Commonwealth. But whatsoever the
Prince be, or his government, it is evident that for the most part those
Princes, whom some Subjects, do think to be very godly, and under whose
government they rejoice to live: some other Subjects do take the same to be
evil, and ungodly, and do wish for a change. If therefore all Subjects that
mislike of their Prince, should rebel, no Realm should ever be without
rebellion. It were more meet that Rebels should hear the advice of wise men,
and give place unto their Judgment, and follow the example of obedient
Subjects; as reason is, that they whose understanding is blinded with so evil
an affection, should give place to them that be of sound Judgment, and that
the worst should give place to the better. And so might the Realms continue in
long obedience, peace, and quietness. But what if the Prince be undiscreet
and evil indeed, and it be also evident to all men's eyes that he is so? I
ask again, What if it be long of the wickedness of the Subjects that the
Prince is undiscreet or evil? shall the Subjects both by their wickedness
provoke God for their deserved punishment, to give them an undiscreet or evil
Prince, and also rebel against him, and withal against God, who for the
punishment of their sins did give them such a Prince? will you hear the
Scriptures concerning this point? God, Job 34. 10. Hosea. 13.
(says the holy Scriptures) makes a wicked man to reign for the sins of
the people. Again, God gives a Prince in his anger, meaning an evil one, and
takes away a Prince in his displeasure; meaning especially, when he takes
away a good Prince for the sins of the people: as in our memory, he took
away our good Josiah, King Edward in his young and good years for our
wickedness. And contrary, the Scriptures do teach, that God gives wisdom
unto Princes, and makes a wise and a good King to reign over that people whom
he loves, 2 Samuel 2.9.
and who loves him. And again, if the people obey God, both they and their
King shall prosper and be safe: Prove. 16.
else both shall perish, 1 King. 12.
as God says by the mouth of Samuel.

Here you see, that God places as well evil Princes as good, and for what
cause he does both. If we therefore will have a good Prince, either to be
given us, or to continue: Now we have such a one, let us by our obedience to
God, and to our Prince move God thereunto: if we will have an evil Prince,
(when God shall send such a one) taken away, and a good in his place, let us
take away our wickedness, which provokes God to place such a one over us; and
God will either displace him, or of an evil Prince make him a good Prince: so
that we will first change our evil into good. Prove. 21.
For will you hear the Scriptures? The heart of the Prince is in Gods hand,
which way so ever it pleases him, he turns it. Thus says the Scriptures.
Wherefore let us turn from our sins unto the Lord with our hearts, and he
will turn the heart of the Prince to quiet and wealth; else for subjects to
deserve to have an evil Prince, through their sins, and then to rebel
against him, were a double and a treble evil, by provoking God more to plague
them. Nay, let us either deserve to have a good Prince, or let us patiently
suffer, and obey such as we deserve. And whether the Prince be good or evil,
let us according to the counsel of the holy Scriptures pray for the Prince,
for his continuance and increase in goodness, if he be good; and for his
amendment if he be evil.

Well, you hear the Scriptures concerning this most necessary point. 1 Timothy 2.
I exhort therefore (says Saint Paul) that above all things, prayers,
supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks be had for all men, for
Kings, and all that are in authority, that we may live a quiet and peaceable
life withal Godliness: for that is good and acceptable in the sight of God
our Savior, etc. This is Saint Paul's counsel. And who, I pray you, was the
Prince over the most part of the Christians, when Gods holy Spirit by Saint
Paul's pen gave them this lesson? for sooth, Caligula Claudius, or Nero: who
were not only no Christians, but Pagans; and also either foolish Rulers, or
most cruel Tyrants. Will you yet hear the word of God to the Jews, when they
were prisoners under Nabuchodonosor, King of Babylon, after he had slain
their King, Nobles, Parents, Children and Kinsfolks, burned their Country,
Cities, yea Jerusalem it self, and the holy Temple, and had carried the
residue remaining alive captives with him unto Babylon? Will you hear yet what
the Prophet Baruch says unto Gods people being in this captivity? Bar. 1.11.
Pray you, says the Prophet, for the life of Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon,
and for the life of Balthazar his Son, that their days may be as the days
of Heaven upon the Earth, that God also may give us strength and lighten our
eyes, that we may live under the defense of Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon,
and under the protection of Balthazar his Son, that we may long do them
service, and find favor in their sight. Pray for us also unto the Lord our
God, for we have sinned against the Lord our God.

Thus far the Prophet Baruch his words: which are spoken by him unto the
people of God, of that King who was an Heathen, a Tyrant, and cruel Oppressor
of them, and had been a Murderer of many thousands of their Nation, and a
Destroyer of their Country, with a confession that their sins had deserved
such a Prince to reign over them. And shall the old Christians by Saint Paul's
exhortation, pray for Caligula, Claudius, or Nero? Shall the Jews pray for
Nabuchodonosor? these Emperors, and Kings being strangers to them, being
Pagans, and Infidels, being Murderers, Tyrants, and cruel Oppressors of
them, and Destroyers of their Country, Contrymen, and Kinsmen, the Burners
of their Villages, Towns, Cities, and Temples? And shall not we pray for the
long, prosperous, and godly reign, of our natural Prince? No stranger (which
is observed as a great blessing in the Scriptures) of our Christian, our most
gracious Sovereign, no Heathen, nor Pagan Prince? Shall we not pray for the
health of our most merciful, most loving Sovereign, the Preserver of us, and
our Country, in so long peace, quietness, and security, no cruel person, no
tyrant, no spoyler of our goods, no sheeder of bloods, no burner and destroyer
of our Towns, Cities, and Countries, as were those, for whom yet, as ye have
heard, Christians being their subjects ought to pray? Let us not commit so
great ingratitude against God, and our Sovereign, as not continually to thank
God for his Government, and for his great, and continual benefits and
blessings powered upon us by such government. Let us not commit so great a sin
against God, against our selves, against our Country, as not to pray
continually unto God for the long continuance of so gracious a Ruler unto us,
and our Country. Else shall we be unworthy any longer to enjoy those
benefits and blessings of God, which hitherto we have had by him, shall be
most worthy to fall into all those mischiefs, and miseries, which we, and our
Country have by Gods grace through his government hitherto escaped.

What shall we say of those Subjects? may we call them by the name of
subjects? who neither be thankful, nor make any prayer to God for so
gracious a Sovereign: but also themselves take armor wickedly, assemble
companies, and bands of Rebels, to break the public peace so long continued,
and to make not war, but rebellion, to endanger the person of such a gracious
Sovereign, to hazard the estate of their Country, (for whose defense they
should be ready to spend their lives) and being Englishmen, to rob, spoil,
destroy, and burn in England Englishmen, to kill and murder their own
Neighbors, and kinsfolks, their own Contrymen, to do all evil, and
mischeife, yea, and more too then foreign enemies would, or could do? What
shall we say of these men, who use themselves thus rebelliously against their
gracious Sovereign? who if God for their wickedness had given them an heathen
Tyrant to reign over them, were by Gods word bound to obey him, and to pray
for him? What may be spoken of them? so far does their unkindnesse,
unnaturalness, wickedness, mischievousnesse in their doings, pass, and
excel, any thing, and all things that can be expressed, and uttered by words.
Only let us wish unto all such most speedy repentance, and with so grievous
sorrow of heart, as such so horrible sins against the Majesty of God do
require, who in most extreme unthankfulness do rise, not only against their
gracious Prince, against their natural Country, but against all their
Countrymen, Women, and Children, against themselves, their Wives, Children,
and Kinsfolks, and by so wicked an example against all Christendom, and
against whole mankind of all manner of people, throughout the wide World; such
repentance, I say, such sorrow of heart God grant unto all such, whosoever rise
of private, and malicious purpose, as is meet for such mischeifes attempted,
and wrought by them. And unto us, and all other subjects, God of his mercy
grant, that we may be most unlike to all such, and most like to good, loving,
natural, and obedient subjects: nay, that we may be such indeed: not only
showing all obedience our selves, but as many of us as be able, to the utmost
of our power, ability, and understanding, to stay and repress, all Rebels, and
rebellions against God, our gracious Prince, and natural Country, at every
occasion that is offered unto us. And that which we all are able to do,
unless we do it, we shall be most wicked, and most worthy to feel in the
end such extreme plagus, as God has ever powered upon Rebels.

Let us make continual prayers unto Almighty God, even from the bottom of our
hearts, that he will give his grace, power, and strength unto our gracious
King Charles to vanquish, and subdue all, as well Rebels at home as foreign
enemies, that all domestical rebellions being suppressed, and pacified, and
all outward invasions repulsed and abandoned, we may not only be sure, and
long continue in all obedience to our gracious Sovereign, and in that
peaceable, and quiet life which hitherto we have led under his Majesty, with
all security, but also that both our gracious King Charles, and we his
subjects, may all together in all obedience unto God, the King of Kings, and
unto his holy Laws, load our lives so in this World, in all virtue, and
godliness, that in the World to come, we may enjoy his everlasting Kingdom:
which I beseech God to grant, as well to our gracious Sovereign, as unto us
all, for his Son our Savior JESUS CHRIST sake: to whom with the Father, and
the Holy Ghost, one God, and King immortal, be all glory, praise, and thanks
giving, World without end, Amen.

The second SERMON.
AS in the first Sermon of this Treaty of obedience of subjects to their
Princes, and against disobedience, and rebellion, I have alleged diverse
sentences out of the holy Scriptures for proof: so shall it be good for the
better declaration, and confirmation of the said wholesome doctrine, to allege
one example or two out of the holy Scriptures of the obedience of subjects, not
only unto their good, and gracious Governors, but also to their evil and
unkind Princes. As King Saul was not of the best, but rather of the worst sort
of Princes, as being out of Gods favor for his disobedience against God, in
sparing (in a wrong pity) the King Agag, whom Almighty God commanded to be
slain, according to the Justice of God against his sworn enemy: and although
Saul of a devotion meant to sacrifice such things as he spared of the
Amalekites, to the honor, and service of God: yet Saul was reproved for his
wrong mercy, and devotion, and was told that obedience would more have pleased
him then such lenity: which sinful humanity (says holy Chrysostom) is more
cruel before God, then any murder or shedding of blood when it is commanded
of God. But yet how evil soever Saul the King was, and out of Gods favor, yet
was he obeyed of his subject David, the very best of all subjects, and the most
valiant in the service of his Prince, and Country, in the wars, the most
obedient, and loving in peace, and always most true, and faithful to his
Sovereign, and Lord, and farthest off from all manner of rebellion. For which
his most painful, true, and faithful service, King Saul yet rewarded him not
only with great unkindnesse, but also sought his destruction and death, by all
means possible: so that David was feign to save his life, not by rebellion,
nor any resistance, but by slight, and hiding himself from the Kings sight.
Which notwithstanding when King Saul upon a time came alone into the Cave where
David was, so that David might easily have slain him, yet would he neither
hurt him himself, neither suffer any of his men to lay hands upon him. Another
time also David entering by night with one Abisai, a valiant and feirce man,
into the Tent where King Saul did lie asleep, where also, he might yet more
easily have slain him, yet would he neither hurt him himself, nor suffer
Abisai (who was willing and ready to slay King Saul) once to touch him. Thus
did David deal with Saul his Prince, notwithstanding that King Saul
continually sought his death and destruction. It shall not be amiss unto these
deeds of David, to add his words, and to show you what he spoke unto such as
encouraged him to take his opportunity, 1 King. 24.7.
and advantage to slay King Saul as his mortal enemy, when he might. The Lord
keep me, says David, from doing that thing, 1 King 26.9.
and from laying hands upon my Lord Gods anointed. For who can lay his hand
upon the Lords aunointed, and be guiltless? As truly as the Lord lives,
except that the Lord do smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or that he
go down to the war, and be slain in battle: the Lord be merciful unto
me, that I lay not my hand upon the Lords anointed.

These be David's words spoken at sundry times to diverse of his servants
provoking him to slay King Saul, when opportunity served him thereunto. Neither
is it to be omitted, and left out, how when an Amalekite had slain King Saul,
even at Saul's own bidding and commandment, 1 King. 24.
(for he would live no longer now, for that he had lost the field against his
enemies the Philistines) the said Amalekite making great have to bring first
word and news thereof unto David, as joyous unto him for the death of his
mortal enemy, bringing withal the Crown that was upon King Saul's head, and
the bracelet that was about his arm, both as a proof of the truth of his
news, and also as fit, and pleasant presents unto David, 2 King. 1.12.
being by God appointed to be King Saul his Successor in the Kingdom. Yet was
that faithful, and godly David, so far from rejoicing at these news, that
he rent his clothes, wept, and mourned, and fasted: and so far off from
thanks giving to the messenger, either for his deed in killing the King,
though his deadly enemy, 2 King. 1.4.
or for his message, and news, or for his presents that he brought, that he
said unto him, How happened it that thou wast not afraid to lay hands upon the
Lords anointed, to kill him? whereupon immediately he commanded one of his
servants to kill the messenger, and said, Thy blood be upon thine own head,
for thine own mouth has witnessed against thy self, in confessing that thou
have slain the Lords anointed.

This example, dearly beloved, is notable, and the circumstances thereof are
well to be considered, for the better instruction of all subjects in their
bounden duty of obedience, and perpetual fearing of them from attempting of
any rebellion, or hurt against their Prince. On the one part, David was not
only a good, and true subject, but also such a subject, as both in peace, and
war, had served, 1 King. 8.18.
and saved his Princes honor, and life, and delivered his Country and
Countrymen, from great danger of Infidels, foreign, and most cruel enemies,
horribly invading the King, and his Country: for which David was in singular
favor withal the people, so that he might have had great numbers of them at
his commandment, 1 King. 16.
if he would have attempted any thing. Besides this, David was no common or
absolute subject, but heir apparent to the Crown, and Kingdom, by God
appointed to reign after Saul: which as it increased the favor of the people
that knew it, toward David: so did it make David's cause, and case much
differing from the case of common and absolute subjects. And which is most of
all, David was highly and singularly in the favor of God: 2 King. 15.11.
On the contrary part, King Saul was out of Gods favor, (for that cause which
is before rehearsed) and he as it were Gods enemy, 1 King. 18.10.
and therefore like in war, and peace to be hurtful, and pernicious unto the
Commonwealth: and that was known to many of his subjects, for that he was
openly rebuked of Samuel for his disobedience unto God, which might make the
people less to esteem him. King Saul was also unto David a mortal, and
deadly enemy, 1 King. 15. and 22. and 26.
though without David's deserving, who by his faithful, painful, profitable,
yea most necessary service, had well deserved, as of his Country, so of his
Prince. But King Saul far otherwise; the more was his unkindnesse, hatred, and
cruelty, toward such a good subject, both odious, and detestable. Yet would
David neither himself slay nor hurt such an enemy, for that he was his Prince,
and Lord, nor would suster any other to kill, hurt, or lay hand upon him, when
he might have been slain without any stir, tumult, or danger of any man's
life. Now let David answer to such demands, The Demand.
as men desirous of rebellion, do use to make. Shall not we, especially being
so good men as we are, rise, and rebel against a Prince hated of God, and Gods
enemy, and therefore not like to prosper either in war, or peace, but to be
hurtful and pernicious to the Commonwealth? The Answer.
No, says good and godly, David, Gods, and such a Kings faithful subject, and
so convicting such subjects as attempt any rebellion against such a King, The
Demand.
to be neither good subjects, nor good men. But say they, shall we not rise
and rebel against so unkind a Prince, nothing considering, or regarding our
true, faithful, and painful service, or the safeguard of our posterity? No
says good David, The Answer.
whom no such unkindnesse could cause to forsake his due obedience to his
Sovereign. Shall we not, say they, The Demand.
rise and rebel against our known, mortal, and deadly enemy, that seeks
our lives? No says godly David who had learned the lesson, The Answer.
that our Savior afterward plainly taught; that we should do no hurt, to
our fellow subjects, though they hate us, and our enemies: muchlesse unto our
Prince, though he were our enemy. The Demand.
Shall we not assemble an Army of such good fellows as we are, and by
hazzarding of our lives, and the lives of such as shall withstand us; and
withal, hazzarding the whole estate of our Country, remove so naughty a
Prince? No, says godly David, The Answer.
for I when I might without assembling force or number of men; without tumult,
or hazard of any man's life, or shedding of any drop of blood, have delivered
my self and my Country of an evil Prince, yet would I not do it. Are not
they (say some) lusty, The Demand.
and courageous Captains, valiant men of stomach, and good men's bodies, that
do venture by force to kill and depose their King, being a naughty Prince,
and their mortal enemy? The Answer.
They may be as lusty, and courageous as they list: yet says godly David, they
can be no good nor godly men that so do: for I not only rebuked, but
commanded him to be slain as a wicked man which slew King Saul mine enemy.
Though he being weary of his life, for the loss of the victory against his
enemies, desired that man to slay him. What shall we do then to an evil, The
Demand.
to an unkind Prince, an enemy to us, hated of God, hurtful to the
Commonwealth, etc? The Answer.
Lay no violent hand upon him says good David, but let him live until God
appoint, and work his end, either by natural death, or in wary by lawful
enemies, not by traiterous subjects.

Thus would godly David make answer, and Saint Paul as ye have heard before,
wills us also to pray for such a Prince, if King David would make these
answers, as by his deeds and words, recorded in the holy Scriptures. Indeed
he does make unto all such demands, concerning Rebelling against evil Princes,
unkind Princes, cruel Princes, Princes that be to their good subjects mortal
enemies, Princes that are out of Gods favor; and so hurtful, or like to be
hurtful, to the Commonwealth: what answer, think you, would he make to those
that demand whether they (being naughty and unkind subjects) may not to the
great hazard of the life of many thousands, An unnatural and wicked question.
and the utter danger of the state of the Commonwealth, and the whole Realm.
Assemble a sort of Rebels either to depose, to put in fear, or to destroy
their natural and loving Prince, enemy to none, good to all, even to them the
worst of all other, the maintainer of perpetual peace, quietness, and
security, most beneficial to the Commonwealth, most necessary for the
safeguard of the whole Realm? What answer would David make to their demand,
whether they may not attempt cruelly and unnaturally to destroy so peaceable
and merciful a Prince? What I say, would David, so reverently speaking of
Saul, and so patiently suffering so evil a King; what would he answer, and say
to such demands? What would he say, nay, what would he do to such high
attempters, who so said and did, as you before have heard, unto him that slew
the King his Master, though a most wicked Prince? If he punished with death, as
a wicked doer, such a man: with what reproaches of words would he revile such:
yea with what torments of most shameful deaths would he destroy such hell
hounds, rather then evil men; such Rebels I mean, as I last spoke of? For if
they who so disobey an evil and unkind Prince be most unlike to David that
good subject; what be they who most unnaturally do Rebel against a most
natural, loving, and kind Prince? And if David being so good a subject that
he obeyed so evil a King was worthy of a subject to be made a King himself:
what be they who are so evil subjects, that they will rebel against their
gracious Prince worthy of? Surely, no mortal man can express with words, nor
conceive in mind the horrible and most dreadful damnation that such be worthy
of: who disdaining to be the quiet and happy subjects of their good Prince,
are most worthy to be the miserable captives, and vile slaves of that infernal
Tyrant Satan, with him to suffer eternal slavery and torments. This one
example of the good subject David, out of the old Testament, may suffice, and
for the notablenesse of it serve for all.

In the New Testament, the excellent example of the blessed Virgin Mary, Luke
2.1.
the Mother of our Savior Christ, does at the first offer it selse, when
Proclamation or commandment was sent into Jury from Augustus, the Emperor of
Rome, that the people there should repair unto their own Cities, and dwelling
places, there to be taxed: neither did the blessed Virgin, though both highly
in Gods favor, and also being of the Royal blood of the Ancient natural
Kings of Jury, disdain to obey the commandment of an heathen, and foreign
Prince, when God had placed such a one over them: neither did she all eadge for
an excuse, that she was great with child, and most near her time of
deliverance: neither grudged she at the length, and tedious journey from
Nazareth to Bethelem, from whence, and whither she must go to be taxed;
neither repined she at the sharpness of the dead time of winter, being the
latter end of December, an unfit time to travel in, specially a long journey,
for a woman being in her case: but all excuses set apart, she obeyed, and came
to the appointed place, where at her coming she found suchgreat resort, and
throng of people, that finding no place in any Inn; Luke 2.7.
she was feign after a long, painful, and tedious journey, to take up her
lodging in a stable, where also she was delivered of her blessed child: and
this also declares how near her time she took that journey. This obedience
of this most Noble and most Virtuous Lady, to a foreign and Pagan Prince,
does well teach us, (who in comparison of her are most base and vile) what
ready obedience we do owe to our natural and most gracious Sovereign,
howbeit in this cause the obedience of the whole Jewish Nation (being otherwise
a stubborn people) unto the Commandment of the same foreign heathen Prince,
Luke 23.
does prove, that such Christians as do not most readily obey their natural
and gracious sovereign, are far worse then the stubborn Jews, whom we yet
account the worst of all people. But no example ought to be of more force with
us Christians, Mat. 17.2.
then the example of Christ our Master, and Savior, who though he were the
Son of God: yet did always behave himself most reverently to such men as
were in Authority in the world in his time: and he not rebelliously behaved
himself, but openly did teach the Jews to pay tribute unto the Roman
Emperor, though a foreign and Pagan Prince; yea, himself with his Apostles
paid tribute unto him; and finally, being brought before Pontius Pilate, a
stranger born, and an heathen man, being Lord President of Jury, he
acknowledged his authority and power to be given him from God, and obeyed
patiently the sentence, of most painful and shameful death, which the said
Judge pronounced and gave most unjustly against him, without any grudge,
murmuring, or evil word once giving.

There be many and diverse other examples of the obedience to Princes, even such
as be evil, in the New Testament, to the utter confusion of disobedient, and
rebellious people: but this one may be an eternal example, which the Son of
God, and so the Lord of all, Jesus Christ, has given unto us Christians, and
servants, and such as may serve for all, to teach us to obey Princes, though
strangers, wicked, and wrongfuli, when God for our sins shall place such over
us. Whereby it follows unavoydably that such as do disobey, or rebel
against their own natural and gracious Sovereigns, how soever they call
themselves, or be named of others, yet are they indeed no true Christians, but
worse then Jews, worse then heathens, and such as shall never enjoy the
Kingdom of heaven, which Christ by his obedience purchased for true Christians
being obedient to him, the King of all Kings, and to their Prince whom he has
placed over them: to the which Kingdom, the peculier place of all such
obedient subjects, I beseech God our heavenly Father for his Son Jesus sake
to grant unto us.

The Third SERMON.
AS I have in the first Sermon of this Treatise showed unto you the Doctrine of
the holy Scriptures, as concerning the obedience of true subjects to their
Princes; even as well to such as be evil as unto the good, and in the second
Sermon of the same Treatise confirmed the same Doctrine by notable examples,
likewise taken out of the holy Scriptures: so remains it now that I partly do
declare unto you in this third Sermon, what an abominable sin against God and
man, rebellion is, and how dreadfully the wrath of God is kindled an inflamed
against all Rebels, and what horrible plagues, punishments, and deaths, and
finally eternal damnation does hang over their heads. As how on the contrary
part, good and obedient subjects are in Gods favor, and be pertakers of peace,
quietness, and security, with other Gods manifold blessings in this world,
and by his mercies through our savior Christ, of life everlasting also in the
world to come. How horrible a sin against God and man, rebellion is, cannot
possibly be expressed according to the greatness thereof. For he that names
Rebellion, names not a singular, or one only sin, as is thest, robbery,
murder, and such like; but he names the whole puddle and sink of all sins,
against God and man, against his Prince, his Country, his Contrymen, his
parents, his children, his kinsfolks, his friends, and against all men
universally: all sins, I say, against God and all men, heapeth he together
that names rebellion. For concerning the offense of Gods Majesty, who sees
not that Rebellion rises first by contempt of God, and of his holy Ordinances
and Laws, wherein he so straightly commands obedience, forbids
dis-obedience and rebellion. And besides the dishonor done by Rebels, unto
Gods holy Name, by their breaking of their oath made to their Prince, with the
attestation of Gods Name, and calling of his Majesty to witness; who hears
not the horrible oaths and blasphemies of Gods holy Name, that are used daily
amongst Rebels, that in either amongst them, or hears the truth of their
behavior* Who knows not that Rebels do not only themselves leave all
works necessary to be done upon work days, undone, whilst they accomplish
their abominable work of Rebellion, and do compel others that would gladly
be well occupied, to do the same: but also how Rebels do not only leave the
Sabbath day of the Lord unsanctified, the Temple and Church of the Lord
unresorted unto, but also do by their works of wickedness most horribly
profane, and polute the Sabbath day; serving Satan, and by doing of his
work, making it the devils day, in stead of the Lords day? besides that they
compel good men that would gladly serve the Lord, assembling in his Temple and
Church upon his day, as becomes the Lords Servants, to assemble and meet
Armed in the field, to resist the fury of such Rebels: yea and many Rebels,
least they should leave any part of Gods Commandments in the first Table of
his Law unbroken, or any sin against God undone, do make Rebellion for the
maintenance of their Images, and Idols, and of their Idolatry committed, or to
be committed by them: and in despite of God, cut and tear in sunder his holy
Word, and tread it under their feet, as of late ye know was done.

As concerning the second table of Gods Law, and all sins that may be
committed against man, who feeth not that they be contained in Rebellion? The
fist Commandment.
For first the Rebels do not only dishonor their Prince, the Parent of
their Country, but also do dishonor and shame their natural parents, if
they have any; do shame their kindred and friends, do dis-inherit and undo
for ever their children and heirs. The sixth and eight Commandments.
Thefts, robberies, and murders, which of all sins are most loathed, of most
men, are in no men so much, nor so pernitiously and mischievously as in
rebels; for the most arrant thieves, cruellest murderers that ever were, so
long as they refraiue from rebellion, as they are not many in number, so
spreads their wickednesses, and damnation unto a few, they spoil but a few,
they shed the blood but of a few, in comparison. But rebels are the cause of
infinite robberies, and murders of great multitudes, and of those also whom
they should defend from the spoil and violence of others: and as rebels are
many in number, so does their wickedness and damnation spread it self unto
many. The seventh Commandment
And if whoredom and adultery amongst such persons, as are agreeable to such
wickedness, are (as indeed they be) most damnable: what are the forceable
oppressions of matrons, and men's wives, and the violating and deflowring of
Virgins and maids, which are most rife with rebels? How horrible and damnable
think you are they? Now besides that, rebels by breach of their faith given,
and the oath made to their Prince, The ninth Commandment.
be guilty of most damnable perjurie. It is wonderful to see what false
colors, and feighned causes, by slanderous lies made upon their Prince, and
the Counselors, rebels will devise, to cloak their rebellion withal, which
is the worst and most damnable of all false witnesse-bearing that may be
possible. The tenth Commandment.
For what should I speak of coveting or desiring other men's wives, houses,
lands, goods, and servants, in rebels; who by their wills would leave unto no
man any thing of his own?

Thus you see that good laws are by rebels violated and broken, and that all
sins possible to be committed against God or man be contained in rebellion:
which sins, if a man list to name, by the accustomed names of the seven
capital or deadly sins, as Pride, Envy, Wrath, Covetousness, Sloth,
Gluttony, and Lechery, he shall find them all in rebellion, and amongst
rebels. For first, as ambition, and desire to be aloft, which is the
property of pride, stirs up many men's minds to rebellion: it comes of a
Luciferian pride, and presumption, that a few rebellious subjects should set
themselves up against the Majesty of their Prince, against the wise-dome of
Counselors, against the power and force of all Nobility, and the faithful
subjects and people of the whole Realm. As for envy, wrath, murder, and
desire of blood, and covetousness of other men's goods, lands, and livings,
they are the inseparable accidents of all rebels, and peculiar properties that
do usually stir up wicked men unto rebellion.

Now, such as by riotousnesse, gluttony, drunkenesse, excess of apparel and
unthriftie games, have wasted their own goods unthriftily, the same are most
apt unto, and most desirous of rebellion, whereby they trust to come by other
men's goods unlawfully and violently. And where other gluttons, and drunkards,
take too much of such meats and drinks as are served to tables, rebels wast
and consume in short space, all corn in barnes, fields, and else where; whole
garners, whole storehouses, whole cellers, devour whole flocks of sheep,
whole droves of Oxen and Kine. And as rebels that are married, leaving their
own wives at home, do most ungraciously: so much more do unmarried men,
worse then any stallions or horses (being now by rebellion set at liberty,
from correction of laws which bridled them before) abuse by force other men's
wives, and daughters, and ravish virgins and maidens most shamefully,
abominably, and damnably.

Thus all sins, by all names that sins may be named, and by all means that
sins may be committed, and wrought, do all wholly upon heaps follow
rebellion, 2 King, 14.
and are to be found altogether amongst rebels. Now whereas pestilence, famine,
and war, are by holy Scriptures declared to be the greatest worldly plagues and
miseries that likely can be, it is evident, that all the miseries that all
these plagues have in them, do wholly altogether follow rebellion, wherein as
all their miseries be, so is there much more mischief than in them all.

For it is known that in the resorting of great companies of men together,
which in rebellion happens, both upon the part of true subjects, and of the
Rebels, by their close lying together, and corruption of the air, and place
where they do lie, with ordure, and much filth, in the hot weather, and by
unwholesome lodging, and lying often upon the ground, especially in cold
weather in Winter, by their unwholesome diet, and feeding at all times, and
often by famine, and lack of meat and drink, in due time, and again by
taking too much at other times: It is well known, I say, that as well plagues,
and pestilences, as all other kinds of sicknesses, and maladies by these means
grow up, and spring amongst men, whereby more men are consumed at length, then
are by dint of sword suddenly slain in the field. So that not only
pestilences, but also all other sicknesses, diseases, and maladies, do follow
rebellion, which are much more horrible then plagues, pestilences, and
diseases, sent directly from God, as hereafter shall appear more plainly.

And as for hunger, and famine, they are the peculiar companions of rebellion:
for while Rebels do in a short time, spoil, and consume all corn, and
necessary provision, which men with their labors had gotten, and appointed
upon, for their finding the whole year after, and also do let all other men,
husbandmen, and others from their husbandry, and other necessary works, whereby
provision should be made for times to come, who sees not that extreme
famine, and hunger must needs shortly ensue, 1 King. 24.
and follow rebellion? Now whereas the wise King, and godly Prophet David,
judged war to be worse then either famine or pestilence, for that these two
are often suffered by God, for man's amendment, and be not sins of
themselves: but wars have always, the sins and mischeifes of men, upon the
one side or other joined with them, and therefore is war the greatest of all
worldly mischeifes: but of all wars, civil war is the worst: and far
more abominable yet is rebellion then any civil war, being unworthy the name
of any war: so far it exceeds all wars in all naughtiness, in all
mischeife, and in all abomination. Math. 32.
And therefore our Savior CHRIST denounces desolation, and destruction to
that Realm, that by sedition, and rebellion is divided in it self.

Now as I have showed before, that pestilence, and famine, so is it yet more
evident, that all the calamities, miseries, and mischiefs of war be more
grievous, and do more follow rebellion, than any other war, as being far
worse than all other wars. For not only those ordinary and usual
mischeifes, and miseries of other wars, do follow rebellion, as corn and
other things necessary to man's use to be spoiled, Houses, Villages, Towns,
Cities, to be taken, sacked, burned, and destroyed, not only many very
wealthy men, but whole Countries to be impoverished, and utterly beggered,
many thousands of men to be slain, and murdered, women and maids to be
violated, and deslowred: which things when they are done by foreign enemies,
we do much mourn, as we have great cause; yet are all these miseries,
without any wickedness wrought by any of our own Contrymen. But when these
mischiefs are wrought in rebellion by them that should be friends, by
Contrymen, by Kinsmen, by those that should defend their Country and
Contrymen from such miseries, the misery is nothing so great, as is the
mischief, and wickedness, when the subjects unnaturally do rebel against
their Prince, whose honor, and life they should defend, though it were with
the loss of their own lives: Contrymen to disturb the public peace, and
quietness of their Country, for defense of whose quietness they should spend
their lives: the brother to seek, and often to work the death of his brother,
the son of the father, the father to seek or procure the death of his son
being at man's age, and by their faults to disinherit their innocent children,
and kinsmen, their heirs for ever, for whom they might purchase livings, and
lands, as natural Parents do take care, and pains; and to be at great cost,
and charges; and universally instead of all quietness, joy, and felicity,
which do follow blessed peace, and due obedience, to bring in all trouble,
sorrow, disquietnesse of minds, and bodies, and all mischief, and calamity, to
turn all good order upside down, to bring all good laws in contempt, and to
tread them under feet, to oppress all virtue, and honesty, and all virtuous,
and honest persons, and to set all vice, and wickedness, and all vicious, and
wicked men at liberty, to work their wicked wills, which were before bridled by
wholesome laws, to weaken, to overthrow, and to consume the strength of the
Realm, their natural Country, as well by the spending, and wasting of money,
and treasure of the Prince, and Realm, as by murdering the people of the
same, their own Contrymen, who should defend the honor of their Prince,
Prove. 14.
and liberty of their Country, against the invasion of foreign enemies: and
so finally, to make their Country thus by their mischief weakened, ready to
be a prey, and spoil to all outward enemies that will invade it, to the
utter, and perpetual captivity, slavery, and destruction of all their
Contrymen, their children, their friends, their kinsfolks left alive, whom
by their wicked rebellion they procure to be delivered into the hands of the
foreign enemies, as much as in them does lie.

In foreign wars, our Contrymen in obtaining the victory, win the
praise of valiantness, yea, and though they were overcome, and slain, yet
win they an honest commendation in this World, and dye in a good conscience
for serving God, their Prince, and their Country, and be children of eternal
salvation: But the Rebels, how desperate, and strong soever they be, yet win
they shame here in fighting against God, their Prince, and Country, and
therefore justly do fall headlong into Hell if they dye, and live in shame,
and with a fearful conscience, though they escape.

But commonly they be rewarded with shameful deaths, their hands, and
carcasses set upon poles, and hanged in chains, eaten with Kites, and Crows,
judged unworthy the honor of burial, and so their souls if they repent not
(as commonly they do not) the Devil hurrieth them into Hell, in the midst
of their mischief. Romans 13.
For which dreadful execution, Saint Paul shows the cause of obedience, not
only for fear of death, but also in conscience to Godward, for fear of
eternal damnation in the World to come.

Wherefore good people, let us as the children of obedience, fear the
dreadful execution of God, and live in quiet obedience, to be the children of
everlasting Salvation. For as Heaven is a place of good obedient subjects and
Hell the prison and dungeon of Rebels against God, and their Prince: so is that
Realm happy, where most obedience of subjects does appear, being the very
figure of Heaven: and contrariwise where most rebellions, and Rebels be, there
is the express similitude of Hell, and the Rebels themselves are the very
figures of fiends, and Devils, and their Captain the ungracious pattern of
Lucifer, and Satan, the Prince of darkness; of whose rebellion as they be
followers, so shall they of his damnation in Hell undoubtedly be partakers;
and as undoubtedly shall the Children of peace be Inheritours of Heaven with
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost: To whom be all honor,
and glory, for ever, and ever, Amen.

The fourth SERMON.
FOr your further instruction (good people) to show unto you, how much Almighty
God does abhor disobedience and wilful rebellion, specially when Rebels
advance themselves so high, that they arm themselves with weapons, and stand
in the field to fight against God, their Prince, and their Country: it shall
not be out of the way, to show some examples set out in Scriptures, written
for our eternal erudition. We may soon know (good people) how heinous an
oftence the treachery of rebellion is, if we call to remembrance the heavy
wrath and dreadful indignation of Almighty God against subjects, as do only
but inwardly grudge, mutter and murmur against their Governors, though their
inward treason, so privily hatched in their breasts, come not to open
declaration of their doings; as hard it is, whom the Devil has so far
entised against Gods word to keep themselves there: No he means still to
blow the coal, to kindle their rebellious hearts, to flame into open deeds, if
he be not with grace speedily withstood.

Some of the children of Israel, being murmurers against their Magistrates
appointed over them by God, were stricken with foul leprosy: many were burnt
up with fire suddenly sent from the Lord: sometime a great sort of thousands
were consumed with the pestilence: sometime they were stinged to death with a
strange kind of fiery Serpents: and (which is most horrible) some of the
Captains with their band of murmurers, not dying by any usual or natural
death of men, but the carth opening, they with their wives, children, and
families, were swallowed quick down into Hell. Which horrible destructions of
such Israelites as were murmurers against Moses, appointed by God to be their
head, and chief Magistrate, are recorded in the book of Numbers, and other
places of the Scriptures, for perpetual memory, and warning to all subjects,
how highly God is displeased with the murmuring, and evil speaking of subjects
against their Princes, for that as the Scripture records, their murmr was
not against their Prince only, being a mortal creature, but against God
himself also. Now if such strange, and horrible plagues did fall upon such
subjects, as did only murmr, and speak evil against their heads: what
shall become of those most wicked impes of the Devil, that do conspire, arm
themselves, assemble great numbers of armed Rebels, and lead them with them
against their Prince, and Country, spoiling, and robbing, killing, and
murdering all good subjects that do withstand them, as many as they may
prevail against? But those examples are written to stay us, not only from
such mischiefs, but also from murmuring, and speaking once an evil word
against our Prince, which though any should do never so secretly, yet do the
holy Scriptures show, that the very birds of the air will bewray them: and
those so many examples before noted out of the holy Scriptures do declare,
that they shall not escape horrible punishment therefore. Now concerning
actual rebellion, amongst many examples thereof set forth in the holy
Scriptures, the example of Absalom is notable: who entering into conspiracy
against King David his Father, both used the advice of very witty men, and
assembled a very great, and huge company of Rebels: the which Absalom, though
he were most goodly of Person, of great Nobility, being the Kings Son, in
great favor of the people, and so dearly beloved of the King himself, so
much that he gave commandment that (notwithstanding his rebellion) his life
should be saved: when for these considerations, most men were afraid to lay
hands upon him, a great Tree stretching out his arm, as it were for that
purpose, caught him by the great, and long bush of his goodly hair, lapping
about it as he fled hastily bare-headed under the said Tree, and so hanged him
up by the hair of his head in the air, to give an eternal document that
neither comeliness of personage, neither nobility, nor favor of the people,
no nor, the favor of the King himself, can save a Rebel from due punishment:
God the King of all Kings being so offended with him, that rather than he
should lack due execution for his treason, every Tree by the way will be a
gallows or gibbet unto him, and the hair of his own head will unto him be in
stead of a halter to hang him up with, rather then he should lack one. A
fearful example of Gods punishment (good people) to consider. Now Achitophel,
though otherwise an exceeding wise man, yet the mischievous Counselor of
Absalom, in this wicked rebellion, for lack of an hangman, a convenient
servitour for such a Traitor, went and hanged up himself. A worthy end of all
false Rebels, who rather than they should lack due execution, will by Gods just
judgment, become hangmen unto themselves. Thus happened it unto the Captains
of that rebellion: besides forty thousand of Rascals, Rebels, slain in the
field, and in the chase.

Likewise is it to be seen in the holy Scriptures, how that great rebellion
which the Traitor Seba moved in Israel, was suddenly appeased, the head of the
Captaine-traytour (by the means of a silly woman) being cut off. And as the
holy Scriptures do show, so does daily experience prove, that the counsels,
conspiracies, and attempts of Rebels, never took effect, neither came to good,
but to a most horrible end. For though God does oftentimes prosper just, and
lawful enemies, which be no subjects, against their foreign enemies: yet
did he never long prosper rebellious subjects against their Prince, were they
never so great in authority, or so many in number. Geno^. 1^
Five Princes or Kings (for so the Scripture terms them) with all their
multitudes, could not prevail against Chedorlaomer, unto whom they had
promised loyalty, and obedience, and had continued in the same certain years,
but they were all overthrown, and taken prisoners by him; but Abraham with his
family, and kinsfolks, an handful of men in respect, owing no subjection unto
Chodorlaomer, overthrew him, and all his host in battle, and recovered the
prisoners, and delivered them. So that though War be so dreadful, and
cruel a thing, as it is, yet does God often prosper a few in lawful wars
with foreign enemies against many thousands; but never yet prospered the
subjects being Rebels against their natural Sovereign, were they never so
great or noble, so many, so stout, so witty, and politic, but always they
came by the overthrow, and to a shameful end: so much does God abhor
rebellion more then other wars, though otherwise being so dreadful, and so
great a destruction of mankind. Though not only great multitudes of the rude,
and rascal Commons: but sometime also men of great wit, nobility, and
authority, have moved rebellions against their lawful Princes (whereas true
Nobility should most abhor such villainy, and true wisdom should most detest
such frantic rebellion) though they should pretend sundry causes, as the
redress of the Commonwealth (which rebellion of all other mischiefs does
most destroy) or reformation of Religion (whereas rebellion is most against all
true Religion, though they have made a great show of holy meaning by beginning
their rebellions with a counterfeit service of God, (as wicked Absolon did
begin his rebellion with sacrificing unto God) though they display, 1 King.
15.
and bear about Ensigns, and Banners, which are acceptable unto the rude
ignorant Common people, great multitudes of whom by such false pretenses, and
shows, they do deceive and draw unto them, yet were the multitudes of the
Rebels never so huge and great, the Captains never so Noble, politic, and
witty, the pretenses fained to be never so good and holy: yet the speedy
overthrow of all Rebels, of what number, state, or condition soever they were,
or what color or cause soever they pretended, is, and ever has been such,
that God thereby does show that he allowed the dignity of any person, nor the
multitude of any people, nor the weight of any cause as sufficient, for the
which the subjects may move rebellion against their Princes.

Turn over, and read the Histories of all Nations, look over the Chronicles
of our own Country, call to mind so many rebellions of old time, and some yet
fresh in memory, ye shall not find that God ever prospered any rebellion
against their natural and lawful Prince, but contrariwise that the Rebels
were overthrown, and slain, and such as were taken prisoners, dreadfully
executed. Consider the great, and Noble families of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
and other Lords whose names ye shall read in our Chronicles, now clean
extinguished and gone; and seek out the causes of the decay, you shall find
that not lack of issue, and heirs male, has so much wrought that decay and
waste of Noble bloods and houses, as has Rebellion.

And for as much as the redress of the Commonwealth has of old been the
usual and fained pretense of Rebels, and religion now of late begins to be
a color of rebellion: let all godly and discreet subjects consider well of
both; and first concerning religion: if peaceable King Solomon was judged of
God to be more meet to build his Temple, (whereby the ordering of religion is
meant) then his Father King David, though otherwise a most godly King, for that
David was a great warrier and had shed much blood, though it were in his wars
against the enemies of God, of this may all godly and reasonable subjects
consider, that a peaceable Prince, especially our most peaceable and merciful
King who has hitherto shed no blood at all, no not of his most deadly enemies,
is more like and far meeter, to set up, or to maintain true religion, then
are bloody rebels, who have not shed the blood of Gods enemies, as King David
had done, but do seek to shed the blood of Gods friends, and of their own
Contrymen, and of their own most denre friends and kinsfolks, yea the
destruction of their most gracious Prince, and natural Country, for defense
of whom they ought to be ready to shed their blood, if need should so
require. What a religion is it, that such men, by such means, would restore,
may easily be judged: even as good a religion surely, as rebels be good men,
and obedient subjects, and as rebellion is a good mean of redress and
reformation, being in it self the greatest deformation of all that may
possible be: but as the truth of the Gospel of our Savior Christ; being
quietly and soberly taught, though it do cost them their lives that do teach
it, is able to maintain the true religion: so has a frantic religion need
of such furious maintenances as is rebellion, and of such Patrons as are
rebels, being ready not to dye for the true religion, but to kill all that
shall, or dare, speak against their false superstition and wicked Idolatry.
Now concerning pretenses of any redress of the Commonwealth, made by rebels,
every man that has but half an eye may see how vain they be, Rebellion being
as I have before declared, the greatest ruin and destruction of all
Commonwealths that may be possible, and who so looks on the one part, upon
the persons and government of the Kings most honorable Counselors, by the
experiment of so many years; proved honorable to his Majesty, and
beneficial to our country and contrymen: And on the other part considers
the persons, state, and condition of the rebels themselves, the reformers, as
they take upon them, of the present government, he shall find that the most
rash and haire-brained men, the greatest unthrifts that have most lewdly wasted
their own goods and lands, those that are over the ears in debt, and such as
for their thefts, robberies, and murders dare not in any well governed
Commonwealth, where good laws are in force, show their faces; such as are of
most lewd and wicked behavior and life, and all such as will not or cannot
live in peace, are always most ready to move rebellion, or take part with
rebels, and are not these meet men, trow you, to restore the Commonwealth
decayed, who have so spoiled and consumed all their own wealth, and thrift? and
very like to amend other men's manners, who have so vile vices, and abominable
conditions themselves? Surely, that which they falsely call Reformation, is
indeed not only a defacing, or a deformation, but also an utter destruction of
all Commonwealths, as would well appear, might the rebels have their wills,
and does right well, and too well appear by their doing in such places of the
Country, where rebels do rout, where though they tarry but a very little
while, they make such reformation that they destroy all places, and undo all
men where they come, that the child yet unborne may rue it, and shall many
years hereafter curse them.

Let no good and discreet subjects therefore follow the flagge or banner
disployed to rebellion, and borne by Rebels, though it have the Image of the
plough painted therein, with God Speed the Plough, written under in great
letters: knowing that none hinder the Plough more then rebels, who will
neither go to the Plough themselves, nor suffer others that would go unto it.
And though some rebels bear the picture of the five wounds painted, against
those who put their only hope in the wounds of Christ, not those wounds who
are painted in a clout by some lewd painter, but in those wounds which Christ
himself bore in his precious body: though they little knowing what the cross
of Christ means; which neither Carver nor Painter can make, do bear the
Image of the cross painted in a ragge against those that have the cross of
Christ painted in their hearts: yea though they paint withal in their flagges
Hoc signo vinces, by this sign thou shall get the victory, by a most fond
imitation of the Poesy of Constantinus Magnus, that Noble Christian Emperor,
and great conqueror of Gods enemies, a most unmeete ensign for rebels, the
enemies of God, their Prince, and Country: or what other banner soever they
shall bear: yet let no good and godly subject, upon any hope of victory or
good success, follow such standard bearers of rebellion. For as examples of
such practices are to be found, as well in the histories of old, as also of
later rebellions in our fathers, and our fresh memory: so notwithstanding these
pretenses made, and banners borne, are recorded withal to perpetual memory,
the great and horrible murders of infinite multitudes, and thousands of the
Common people slain in rebellion; the dreadful executions of the Authors and
Captains, the pitiful undoing of their wives and children, and
dis-inheriting of the heirs of rebels forever, the spoiling, wasting, and
destruction of the people and country where rebellion first began; that the
children then, and yet unborne, might rue and lament it, with the final
overthrow and shameful deaths of all rebels, set forth as well in the
histories of foreign Nations, as in the Chronicles of our own Country, some
thereof being yet fresh in memory, which if they were collected together, would
make many volumes and books: but on the Contrary part, all good luck,
success and prosperity that ever happened unto any rebels of any age, time,
or Country, may be contained in a very few lines or words. Wherefore to
conclude, let all good subjects, considering how horrible a sin against God,
their Prince, their country and contrymen, against all Gods, and man's
laws, rebellion is; being indeed not one several sin, but all sins
against God and man heaped together, considering the mischievous life and
deeds, and the shameful ends and deaths of all rebels hitherto, and the
pitiful undoing of their wives, children, and families, and dis-inheriting of
their heirs for ever, and above all things, considering the eternal damnation
that is prepared for all impenitent rebels in hell, with Satan the first
founder of rebellion, and grand Captain of all rebels, let all good subjects
I say, considering these things, avoid and flee all rebellion, as the greatest
of all mischefes and embrace due obedience to God and our Prince, as the
greatest of all virtues, that we may both escape all evils, and miseries that
do follow rebellion, in this world, and eternal damnation in the world to
come, and enjoy peace, quietness, and security, with all other Gods benefits
and blessings which follow obedience in this life, and finally may enjoy the
kingdom of heaven, the peculiar place of all obedient subjects to God and
their Prince, in the world to come, which I beseech God, the King of Kings,
grant unto us for the obedience of his Son our Savior Jesus Christ, unto
whom with the Father, etc.

The Fifth SERMON.
Whereas after both Doctrine and examples of due obedience of subjects to
their Princes. I declared lastly unto you, what an abominable sin against God
and man Rebellion is, and what horrible plagues, punishments, and deaths, with
death everlasting, finally, does hang over the heads of all rebels, it shall
not be either impertinent, or unprofitable now to declare, who they be, whom
the devil, the first author and founder of rebellion, does chiefly use, to
the stirring up of subjects to rebel against their damnable suggestions, avoid
all rebellion, and so escape the horrible Plagues, and dreadful death and
damnation eternal, finally due to all Rebels.

Though many causes of rebellion may be reckoned, and almost as many as there
be vices in men and women, as has been before noted, yet in this place I will
only touch the principal and most usual causes, as specially ambition and
ignorance; by ambition, I mean the unlawful and restless desire in men, to
be of an higher estate then God has given or appointed unto them: by
ignorance, I mean no unskilfullnesse in Arts or Sciences, but the lack of the
knowledge of Gods blessed will declared in his holy Word, which teaches both
extremely to abhor all rebellion, as being the root of all mischief, and
specially to delight in obedience, as the beginning and foundation of all
goodness, as has been also before specified. And as these are the two chief
causes of rebellion, so are there specially two sorts of men in whom these
vices do reign, by whom the devil, the author of all evil, does chiefly
stir up all disobedience and Rebellion.

The restless ambitions, having once determined by one means or other to
atchieve to their intended purpose, when they cannot by lawful and peaceable
means clime so high as they do desire, they attempt the same by force and
violence, wherein when they cannot prevail against the ordinary authority, and
power, of lawful Princes, and governors; themselves alone, they do seek the
aid and help of the ignorant multitude, abusing them to their wicked purpose
wherefore seeing a few ambitious and malicious are the authors, and heads, and
multitudes of ignorant men, are the ministers and furtherers of rebellion, the
chief point of this Sermon shall be as well to notify to the simple and
ignorant men, who they be that have been, and be usual authors of rebellion,
that they may know them, and also to admonish them to be ware of the subtle
sugestions of such restless ambitious persons, and so to flee them. That
rebellions (though attempted by a few ambitious) through lack of maintenance
by any multitudes, may speedily, and easily, without any great labor, danger,
or damage, be repressed and clearly extinguished.

It is well known, as well by all histories, as by daily experience, that none
have either more ambitiously aspired, above Emperors, Kings, and Princes: nor
have more pernitiously moved the ignorant people to rebellion against their
Princes, then certain persons, which falsely challenge to themselves, to be
only counted and called spiritual. I must therefore here yet once again
briefly (good people) put you in remembrance, out of Gods holy Word, how our
Savior Jesus Christ, and his holy Apostles, the heads and chief of all true
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical men, behaved themselves toward the Princes, and
Rulers of their time, though not the best governors that ever were, that you
be not ignorant whether they be the true Disciples, and followers of Christ and
his Apostles, and so spirltuall men, that either by ambition do so highly
aspire, or maliciously teach, or most pernitiously do execute rebellion
against their lawful Prince, being the worst of all carnal works and
mischievous deeds.

The holy Scriptures do teach most expressly, that our Savior Christ
himself, and his Apostles, Saint Paul, Saint Peter, with others, were unto the
Magistrates, and higher powers, which ruled at their being upon the earth, both
obedient themselves, and did also diligently and earnestly persuade all other
Christians, to the like obedience unto their Princes and governors, whereby it
is evident, that men of the Clergy, and Ecclesiastical Ministers, as their
successors, ought both themselves specially, and before others, to be obedient
unto their Priuces, as also to exhort all others to the same. Our Savior
Christ likewise teaching by his Doctrine, that his Kingdom was not of this
world did by his example in fleeing from those that would have made him King,
confirm the same expressly; also forbidding his Apostles, and by them the
whole Clergy, all princely dominion over people and Nations, and he and his
holy Apostles likewise, namely Peter and Paul, did forbid unto all
Ecclesiastical Ministers dominion over the Church of Christ. And indeed
whiles the Ecclesiastical ministers continued in Christ's Church in that order
that is in Christ's Word prescribed unto them; and in Christian Kingdoms, kept
themselves obedient to their own Princes, as the holy Scriptures does teach
them: both was Christ's Church more clear from ambitions, emulations, and
contentions, and the state of Christian kingdoms, less subject unto tumults
and rebellions, but after that ambition and desire of Dominion entered once into
Ecclesiastical Ministers, whose greatness after the doctrine and example of
our Savior should chiefly stand in humbling themselves, and that the Bishop
of Rome, being by the order of Gods Word, none other than the Bishop of that
one See, and Diocese, and never yet well able to govern the same, did by
intolerable ambition, challenge, not only to be the head of all the Church
dispersed throughout the world, but also to be Lord of all the Kingdoms of the
world, Qex decr. l. 3. tit. 16. c. unic. and l. ^. tit. 9 c. 5. un glessa.
as is expressly set forth in his own Cannon Laws, most contrary to the
doctrine and example of our Savior Christ, whose Vicar, and of his Apostles
namely Peter, whose successor he pretends to be* after his ambition entered,
and this challenge once made by the Bishop of Rome, he became at once the
spoyler and destroyer, both of the Church which is the Kingdom of our Savior
Christ, and of the whole Christian Empire, and all Christian Kingdoms, as an
universal tyrant over all.

And whereas before that challenge made, there was great, amity and love,
amongst the Christians of all Countries, hereupon began emulation and much
hatred, between the Bishop at Rome, and his Clergy, and friends on the one
part, and the Grecian Clergy, and Christians of the East on the other part,
for that they refused to acknowledge any such supreme authority of the Bishop
of Rome over them: the Bishop of Rome for this cause amongst other, not only
naming them, and taking them for Shismatickes, but also never ceasing
opersecute them; and the Emperors who had their See and continuance in Greece,
by stirring of the Subjects to rebellion against their Sovereign Lords; and by
raising most deadly hatred, und cruel wars between them, and other
Christian Princes. And when the Bishops of Rome had translated the title of the
Emperor, and as much as in them did lie the Empire it self, from their Lord
the Emperor of Greece, and of Rome also by right unto the Christian Princes of
the West, they became in a short spare no better unto the West Emperors, then
they were before to the Emperors of Greece: for the usual discharging of
su^jects from their oath of fidelity made unto the Emperors of the West,
their Sovereign Lord, by the Bishops of Rome: the unnatural stirring up of
the subjects unto rebellion against their Princes, yea of the son against the
father, by the Bishop or Rome; the most cruel and bloody wars raised amongst
Christian Princes of all Kingdoms; the horrible murders of infinite thousands
of Christian men being slain by Christians: And which ensued thereupon the
pitiful losses of so many godly Cities, Countries, Dominions, and Kingdoms,
sometime possessed by Christians in Asia, Africa, Europe; the miserable fall of
the Empire and Church of Greece, sometime the most flowrishing part of
Christiand^me, into the hands of the Turks: The lamentable deminishing, decay,
and ruin of Christian religion* the dreadful increase of Paganism, and power
of the Infidells and miscroants, and all by the practice and procurement of the
Bishop of Rome chiefly, as in the Histories and Chronicles written by the
Bishop of Romes own favorers and friends, is to be seen, and as well known
unto all such as are acquainted with the said Histories. The ambituous intents
and most subtle drifts of the Bishops of Rome in these their practices,
appeared evidently by their bold attempts in spoiling and robbing the Emperors
of their Towns, Cities, Dominions, and Kingdoms, in Italy, Lombardie, and
Cisily, of ancient right belonging unto the Empire, and by joining of them unto
their Bishopric of Rome, or else giving them unto strangers, to hold them of
the Church and Bishop of Rome as in Capito, and as of the chief Lords thereof,
in which tenure they hold the most part thereof, even at this day: by these
ambitious, and indeed traiterous means, and spoiling of their Sovereign
Lords, the Bishops of Rome, of Priests, and none other by right then the
Bishops of one City and Diocese, are by false usurpation become great Lord, of
many Dominions, mighty Princes, yea or Emperors rather; as claiming to have
diverse Princes and Kings, to be their vassalls, leigemen, and subjects: as in
the same Histories, written by their own Familiars and Courtiers is to be
seen. And indeed since the time that the Bishops of Rome by ambition,
treason, and usurpation, archieved and attained to this height, and greatness;
they behaved themselves more like Princes, Kings and Emperors, in all things,
then remained like Priests, Bishops, and Ecclesiastical, or (as they would be
called) spiritual persons, in any one thing at all. For after this rate they
have handled other Kings, and Princes of other Realms, throughout
Christendom, as well as their Sovereign Lords, the Emperors, usually
discharging their subjects of their oath of fidelity, and so stirring them up
to Rebellion, against their natural Prince, whereof some examples shall in the
last part hereof be notified unto you.

Wherefore let all good subjects, knowing these the special instruments and
ministers of the devil, to the stirring up of all rebellions, avoid and flee
them, and the pestilent sugestions of such foreign usurpers, and their
adherents, and embrace all obedience to God, and their natural Princes, and
Sovereigns, that they may enjoy Gods blessing, and their Princes favor, all
peace, quietness, and security in this World, and finally attain, through
CHRIST our Savior, life everlasting in the World to come: Which God the Father
for the same our Savior JESUS CHRIST his sake grant unto us all: to whom with
the holy Ghost, be all honor, and glory World without end, Amen.

The sixth SERMON.
NOw whereas the injuries, oppressions, raveny, and tyranny of the Bishops of
Rome, usurping as well against their natural Lords the Emperors, as against
all other Christian Kings, and Kingdoms, and their continual stirring of
subjects unto rebellions against their Sovereign Lords, whereof I have partly
admonished you before, were intolerable: and it may seem more than marvel,
that any subjects would after such sort hold with unnatural foreign usurpers
against their own Sovereign Lords, and natural Country: It remains that I
do declare the means whereby they compassed these matters, and so conclude
this whole Treaty of due obedience, and against disobedience, and wilful
Rebellion. You shall understand, that by ignorance of Gods word, wherein they
kept all men, specially the common people, they wrought, and brought to pass
all these things, making them believe that all that they said, was true: all
that they did was good, and godly and that to hold with them in all things,
against Father, Mother, Prince, Country, and all men, was most meritorious.
And indeed, what mischief will not blind ignorance lead simple men unto?

By ignorance the Jewish Clergy induced the common people to ask the delivery
of Barrabas the seditious murderer, and to sue for the cruel crucifying of
our Savior CHRST, for that he rebuked the ambition, superstition, and other
vices of the High Priests, and Clergy. For as our Savior CHRIST testified,
that those who crucified him, wist not what they did: so does the holy Apostle
Saint Paul say, If they had known, if they had not been ignorant, they would
never have crucified the Lord of glory: but they knew not what they did. Our
Savior CHRIST himself also foreshewed that it should come to pass by
ignorance, that those who should persecute, and murder his true Apostles, and
Disciples, should think they did God acceptable sacrifice, and good service:
as it al o is verified even at this day.

And in this ignorance have the Bishops of Rome kept the people of God,
specially the common sort, by no means so much as by withdrawing of the word
of God from them, and by keeping it under the veil of an unknown strange
tongue. For, as it served the ambitious humor of the Bishops of Rome, to
compel all Nations to use the natural language of the City of Rome where they
were Bishops, which showed a certain acknowledging of subjection unto them: so
yet served it much more their crafty purpose, thereby to keep all people so
blind, that they not knowing what they prayed what they believed, what they
were commanded by God, might take all their commandments for Gods. For as they
would not suffer the holy Scriptures of Church Service to be used, or had in
any other language then the Latin: so were very few, eyes of the most simple
people, taught the Lords prayer, the articles of the faith, and the ten
Commandments, otherwise then in Latin, which they understood not: by which
universal ignorance, all men were ready to believe whatsoever they said, and
to do whatsoever they commanded.

For to imitate the Apostles phrase: If the Emperors sub^ects had known out
of Gods word their duty to their Prince, they would not have suffered the
Bishop of Rome to persuade them to forsake their Sovereign Lord the Emperor
against their oath of fidelity, and to rebel against him: only for that he
cast Images (unto the which Idolatry was committed) out of the Churches, which
the Bishop of Rome bare them in band to be heresy. If they had known of Gods
word but as much as the ten Commandments, they should have found, that the
Bishop of Rome was not only a Traitor to the Emperor his liege Lord, but to
God also, and an horrible blasphemer of his Majesty, in calling his Holy word
and Commandment heresy: and that which the Bishop of Rom^ took for a just
cause to rebel against his lawful Prince, they might have known to be a
doubling and trebling of his most heinous wickedness, heaped with horrible
impiety, and blasphemy.

But lest the poor people should know too much, he would not let them have as
much of Gods word, as the ten Commandments wholly, and perfectly, withdrawing
from them the second Commandment, that bewrays his impiety, by a subtle
sacrilege. Had the Emporours subjects like wise known, and been of any
understanding in Gods word, would they at other times have rebelled against
their Sovereign Lord, and by their rebellion have helped to depose him, only
for that the Bishop of Rome did bear them in hand, that it was simony, and
heresy too, for the Emperor to give any Ecclesiastical dignities, or
promotions to his learned Chaplains, or other of his learned Clergy, which all
Christian Emperors before him had done without any controulement? would they.
I say for that the Bishop of Rome bare them so in hand, have rebelled by the
space of more then forty years together against him with so much shedding of
Christian blood, and murder of so many thousands of Christians, and finally,
have deposed their Sovereign Lord, had they known, and had in Gods word any
understanding at all? Specially had they known that they did all this to pluck
from their Sovereign Lord, and his Successors for ever their ancient right of
the Empire, to give it unto the Romish Clergy, and to the Bishop of Rome, that
he might for the confirmation of one Archbishop, and for the Romish ragge,
which he called Paul, scarce worth twelve pence, receive many thousand crowns
of gold, and of other Bishops likewise, great sums of money for their Bulls,
which is simony indeed? Would I say, Christian men, and subjects by rebellion
have spent so much Christian blood and have deposed their natural, most noble,
and most valiant Prince, to bring the matter finally to this pass, had they
known what they did, or had any understanding in Gods word at all? And as
these ambitious usurpers, the Bishops of Rome have overflowed all Italy, and
Germany, with streams of Christian blood, shed by the rebellions of ignorant
subjects against their natural Lords, and Emperors, whom they have stirred
thereunto by such false pretenses; so is there no Country in Christendom,
which by their like means, and false pretenses, has not been over sprinkled
with the blood of subjects by rebellion against their natural Sovereigns,
stirred by the same Bishops of Rome.

And to use one example of our own Country; The Bishop King John.
of Rome did pick a quarrel with King John of England, about the election of
Steven Langton to the Bishopric of Canterbury, wherein the King had ancient
right, being used by his Progenitors, all Christian Kings of England before
him, the Bishops of Rome having no right, but had begun then to usurp upon
the Kings of England, and all other Christian Kings, as they had before done
against their Sovereign Lords the Emperors: proceeding even by the same
ways, and means, and likewise cursing King John, and discharging his subjects
of their oath of fidelity unto their Sovereign Lord. Now had Englishmen at
that time known their duty to their Prince set forth in Gods word, would a
great many of Nobles, and other Englishmen natural subjects, for this
foreign, Innocentius 2.
and unnatural usurper, his vain curse of the King, and for his feigned
discharging of them of their oath and fidelity, to their natural Lord, upon so
slender, or no ground at all, have rebelled against their Sovereign Lord the
King? Would English subjects have taken part against the King of England, and
against Englishmen with the French King, and Frenchmen, being incensed
against this Realm, by the Bishop of Rome? Would they have sent for, Phillip
the French King, Lew is Dolphin of France.
and received the Dolphin of France with a great Army of Frenchmen into the
Realm of England? Would they have sworn fidelity to the Dolphin of France,
breaking their oath of fidelity to their natural Lord the King of England, and
have stood under the Dolphins banner displayed against the King of England?
Would they have expelled their Sovereign Lord the King of England out of
London, the chief City of England, and out of the greatest part of England,
upon the South Side of Trent, even unto Lincoln, and out of Lincoln it self
also, and have delivered the possession thereof unto the Dolphin of France,
whereof he kept the possession a great while? Would they being Englishmen,
have procured so great shedding of English blood, and other infinite
mischiefs, and miseries unto England their natural Country, as did follow
those cruel wars, and traiterous rebellion, the fruits of the Bishop of
Romes blessings? Would they have driven their natural Sovereign Lord the King
of England to such extremity, that he was enforced to submit himself unto
that foreign false usurper, the Bishop of Rome, who compelled him to
surrender up the Crown of England into the hands of his Legate, who in token of
possession kept it in his hands diverse days, and then delivered livered it
again to King John, upon that condition that the King, and his Successors,
Kings of England, should hold the Crown, and Kingdom of England, of the
Bishop of Rome and his Successors, as the Vassals of the said Bishops of Rome
for ever: in token whereof, the Kings of England should pay a yearly tribute
to the said Bishop of Rome as his Vassals, and Liege-men? Would Englishmen
have brought their Sovereign Lord, and natural Country into this thraldom,
and subjection to a false foreign usurper, had they known, and had they any
understanding in Gods word at all? Out of the which most lamentable case, and
miserable tyranny, raveny, and spoil of the most greedy Romish Wolves ensuing
hereupon, the Kings, and Realm of England could not rid themselves by the
space of many years after: the Bishop of Rome by his Ministers continually,
not only spoiling the Realm, and Kings of England of infinite treasure, but
also with the same money hyring, and maintaining foreign enemies against the
Realm, and Kings of England, to keep them in such his subjection, that they
should not refuse to pay whatsoever those unsatiable Wolves did greedily gape
for, and suffer whatsoever those most cruel Tyrants would lay upon them. Would
Englishmen have suffered this? Would they by rebellion have caused this, trow
you, and all for the Bishop of Romes causeless curse, had they in those days
known, and understood, that God does curse the blessings, and bless the
cursings of such wicked usurping Bishops, and Tyrants: as it appears
afterward in King Henry the eighth his days, and King Edward the sixth, and in
our gracious Sovereigns days that now is, where neither the Popes curses, nor
Gods manifold blessings are wanting. But in King John's time, the Bishop of Rome
understanding the brute blindness, ignorance of Gods word, superstition of
Englishmen, and how much they were inclined to worship the Babylonicall beast
of Rome, and to fear all his threatenings, and causeless curses, he abused
them thus, and by their rebellion brought this noble Realm, and Kings of
England under his most cruel tyranny, and to be a spoil of his most vile and
unsatiable covetousness, and raveny, for a long, and a great deal too long a
time. And to join unto the reports of Histories, matters of latter memory,
Could the Bishop of Rome have raised the late rebellions in the North, and West
Countries in the times of King Henry, and Edward, our gracious Sovereigns in
their time, but by abusing of the ignorant people? Or is it not most evident
that the Bishop of Rome has of late attempted by his Irish Patriarchs, and
Bishops sent from Rome with his Bulls, (whereof some were apprehended) to break
down the bars, and hedges of the public peace in Ireland; only upon
confidence, easily to abuse the ignorance of the wild Irishmen? Or who sees
not, that upon like confidence, yet more lately he has likewise procured the
breach of the public peace in England, (with the long, and blessed
continuance whereof he is sore grieved) by the ministry of his disguised
Chaplains, creeping in Lay men's apparel into their houses, and whispering in
the ears of certain Northern borderers, being then most ignorant of their
duty to God, and to their Prince, of all people of the Realm, whom therefore
as most meet, and ready to execute his intended purpose, he has by the said
ignorant Mass Priests, as blind guides, leading the blind, brought those silly
blind subjects into the deep ditch of horrible rebellion, damnable to
themselves, and very dangerous to the state of the Realm, had not God of his
mercy miraculously calmed that raging tempest, not only without any shipwreck
of the Commonwealth, but almost without any shedding of Christian, and English
blood at all.

And it is yet much more to be lamented, that not only common people, but
some other youthful, or unskilful Princes also, suffer themselves to be
abused by the Bishop of Rome, his Cardinals, and Bishops, to oppressing of
Christian men their faithful subjects, either themselves, or else by procuring
the force, and strength of Christian men, to be conveyed out of one Country,
to oppress true Christians in another Country, and by these means open an
entry unto Moors, and Infidels, into the possession of Christian Realms and
Countries: other Christian Princes in the mean time, by the Bishop of Romes
procuring also, being so occupied in civil wars, or troubled with
rebellions, that they have neither leisure nor ability to confer their common
forces, to the defense of their fellow Christians, against such invasions of
the common enemies of Christendom, the Infidels, and miscreants, Would to God
we might only read, and hear out of the histories of old, and not also see
and feel these new and present oppressions of Christians, rebellions of
subjects, effusion of Christian blood, destruction of Christian men, decay, and
ruin of Christendom, increase of paganism, most lamentable, and pitiful to
behold, being procured in these our days, as well as in times past, by the
Bishop of Rome, and his Ministers, abusing the ignorance of Gods Word, yet
remaining in some Christian Princes, and people?

By which sorrow and bitter fruits of ignorance, all men ought to be moved to
give care and credit unto Gods Word, showing as most truly, so most plainly,
how great a mischefe ignorance is; and again, how great, and how good a gift
of God, knowledge in Gods Word is. And to begin with the Romish Clergy, who
though they do brag now, as did sometimes the Jewish Clergy, that they
cannot lack knowledge: yet does God by his holy Prophets both charge them with
ignorance, and threaten them also for that they have repelled the knowledge of
Gods word and law, from themselves, and from his people, that he will repel
them, that they shall be no more his Priests. God likewise chargerh Princes as
well shall be no more his Priests. God likewise charge Princes as well as
Priests, that they should endeavor themselves to get understanding and
knowledge in his Word, threatening his heavy wrath and destruction to them; if
they fail thereof. And the wise man says to all men universally, Princes,
Priests, and people: where is no knowledge, there is no good, nor health to the
soul; and that all men be vain, in whom is not the knowledge of God, and his
holy Word: that they who walk in darkness, wot not whither they go, and
that the people that will not learn, shall fall into great mischefes, as did
the people of Israel, who for their ignorance in Gods Word, were first led into
captivity; and when by ignorance afterward they would not know the time of
their visitation, but crucified Christ our Savior, persecuted his holy
Apostles, and were so ignorant and blind, that when they did most wickedly and
cruelly, they thought they did God good and acceptable Service, (as do many by
ignorance think even at this day:) finally, through their ignorance and
blindness, their Country, Towns, Cities, Jerusalem it self, and the Temple
of God, were all most horribly destroyed, the chiefest part of their people
slain, and the rest led into most miserable captivity; for he that made them
had no pity upon them, neither would spare them, and all for their ignorance.

And the holy Scriptures do teach, that the people that will not see with
their eyes, nor hear with their ears, to learn and to understand with their
hearts, cannot be coverted and saved. And the wicked themselves, being damned
in hell, shall confess ignorance in Gods Word, to have brought them thereto,
saying, we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness
has not shined unto us, and the Sun of understanding has not risen unto us;
we have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and perdition, and have
walked cumbrous and crooked ways; but the way of the Lord have we not known.

And as well our Savior himself, as his Apostle Saint Paul, does teach, that
the ignorance of Gods Word comes of the devil, is the cause of all error,
and mis-judging, (as falls out with ignorant subjects, who can rather epsy a
little moate in the eye of the Prince, or a counselor, then a great beam in
their own) and universally it is the cause of all evil, and finally of
eternal damnation; Gods judgment being severe toward those, who when the
light of Christ's Gospel is come into the world, do delight more in darkness
of ignorance, then in the light of knowledge in Gods Word. For all are
commanded to read, or hear, to search, and studdy the holy Scriptures, and are
promised understanding to be given them from God, if they so do: all are
charged not to believe any dead man, nor if an Angel should speak from
heaven, much lest if the Pope do speak from Rome, against, or contrary to the
Word of God, from the which we may not decline, neither to the right hand, nor
to the left.

In Gods Word, Princes must learn how to obey God, and to govern men: in Gods
Word, subjects must learn obedience both to God and their Princes; old men,
and young, rich and poor, all men and women, all States, sexes, and ages, are
taught their several duties in the Word of God. For the Word of God is bright,
giving light unto all men's eyes, the shining lamp, directing all men's paths
and steps: let us therefore a wake from the sleep and darkness of ignorance,
and openour eyes that we may see the light: let us rise from the works of
darkness, that we may escape eternal darkness, the due reward thereof; and
let us walk in the light of Gods Word, whilst we have light, as becomes the
children of light, so directing the steps of our lives, in that way which
leads to light, and life everlasting, that we may finally obtain and enjoy
the same which God the Father of lights, who dwells in the light
incomprehensible and inaccessible, grant unto us, through the light of the
world, our Savior Jesus Christ, unto whom with the holy Ghost, one most
glorious God, be all honor, praise, and thankesgiving, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Prayer.
O Most mighty God, the Lord of Hosts, the governor of all creatures, the
only giver of all victories, who alone art able to strengthen the weak
against the mighty, and to vanquish infinite multitudes of thine enemies, with
the countenance of a few of thy servants calling upon thy Name, and trusting in
thee: defend, O Lord, thy servant, and our governor under thee, our King
Charles, and all thy people committed to his charge. O Lord withstand the
cruelty of all those which be common enemies, as well to the truth of thy
eternal Word, as to their own Natural Prince, and Country, and manifestly
to this Crown and Realm of England, which thou have of thy divine Providence
assigned, in these our days to the government of thy servant our Sovereign
and gracious King. O most merciful Father (if it be thy holy will) make soft
and tender the stony hearts of all those that do exalt themselves against thy
truth; and seek either to trouble the quiet of this Realm of England, or to
oppress the crown of the same, and convert them to the knowledge of thy Son
the only Savior of the world, Jesus Christ, that we, and they, may jointly
glorify thy mercies. Lighten (we beseech thee) their ignorant hearts, to
embrace the truth of thy Word, or else so abate their cruelty (O most mighty
Lord) that this our Christian Realm, with others that confess thy holy
Gospel, may obtain by thine aid and strength, surety from all enemies,
without shedding of Christian blood, whereby all they which be oppressed with
their tyranny, may be releived, and they which be in fear of their cruelty,
may be comforted; and finally, that all Christian Realms, and specially this
Realm of England, may by thy defense and protection, continue in the truth of
the Gospel: and enjoy perfect peace, quietness, and security: and that we
for these thy mercies, jointly altogether with one consonant heart and voice
may thankefully render to thee all Laud and praise, that we knit in one godly
concord, and unity amongst our selves, may continually magnify thy glorious
Name, who with thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost, art one
eternal, Almighty and most merciful God: to whom be all Laud and praise:
world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

