The Copy of A LETTER Sent from a person of much Honor and Reason,
accidentally present at that hot encounter betwixt the Forces under the Command
of the Lord Goring, Earl of Norwich, and Sir Charles Lucas of the ROYAL Party,

And those under the command of the Lord Fairfax of the Parliaments party, on
the 13. of June, in the Suburbs of COLCHESTER.

Printed in the year, 1648.

The Copy of a Letter sent from a person of much Honor and Reason,
accidentally present at that hot encounter betwixt the Forces under the command
of the Lord Goring, Earl of Norwich, and Sir Charles Lucas, of the Royal
party, and those under the command of the Lord Fairfax, of the Parliaments
party, on the 1, of June, in the Suburbs of Colchester.
SIR,
THough I ever found a strong aversion in my genius from becoming a mandrake,
and groaning blood, ruin and death; and have been so happily exempted from
this heavy storm of calamity and desolation, which this our bloody intestine
war has showred down upon three Kingdoms, that I have hithert^ lived safe
both in the Protection of my solitude and neutrality; yet being by the fortune
of some business with the Lord Fairfax at that instant, an eye witness of the
most remarkable passages in the hot and bloody encounter betwixt the Forces of
the Lord Goring, Sir Charles Lucas Sir William Compton, Sir George Lisle, and
others of the Royal party, and of the Lord Fairfax, I conceived my self
obliged by the duty of friendship, to give you a short but faithful account of
my observation, assuring my self, that by how much the less interest I have
in eithers engagement or success, the more credit you cannot but in justice
give to my relation.

On Tuesday the 13. of June in the afternoon, the Lord Fairfax being marched
near to Colchester, sat down with all his field Officers at a Council of War,
within half a mile of the town: what their determination was though I was
removed at too great a distance to hear the Vote, yet the issue encourages my
conjecture, that it was to fall on that evening. For immediately the Army was
drawn out into a spacious Campania enriched with a luxurious crop of wheat.
Here^ stood divided betwixt the pleasure of so gallant an object as an Army
complete both in persons and discipline, and the sorrow of beholding the spoil
of that rich blessing which is so essential to the life of man, that the same
bounty that gave it, is pleased to call the staff of bread.

No sooner was the Army thus in a full body, but there followed so deep and
unbroken a silence for the space of half an hour, that midnight seems thunder
if compared to it, there appearing no noise, but what every man heard from the
violent motion of his own heart. Had some augur been there, he might have
safely foretold, that many of them should ere many minutes be received into an
eternal silence. This ^alme dissolved, some officers of the Army were sent to
survey the Suburbs; among these Col. Bakster returning, told the General, that
if he would be pleased to let him have a party of 500 commanded men, he would
attempt the great street in the Suburbs, which on reason he conceived
saul^able. This motion was embraced, seconded, and put in execution, but with
so fatal a destruction of the greatest number of the assistants; the
Defendants (which were men whose Martial education and experience ennobles
them as much as their high births and plentiful fortunes) at the same moment
pouring in whole vollies of cannon and musket shot so level in the face of
the enemy, that there seemed to follow as many wounds as shots, and as many
deaths as wounds. However, the design was pursued with 500. more, who
receiving the same welcome their bold fellows had, were put not only to a
stand, but some confused retreat, or repulse, call it which you please: which
the General perceiving, drew the whole Army to engage in the action, driving on
the foot with the Horse so violently, that I never read of any president that
may parallel him, but the furious Bajazet the Second, who used to force on his
soldiers on their enemies swords, valuing men no better then stones to dead
the shot, and blocks to fill up ditches for the living to pass over. Had the
great masters of valor, the Romans been spectators of this action, they would
have frowned on the Commanders, and called them rather rash then valiant. The
town husbanding this opportunity, discharged such thick peales of great and
small shot on them, that I beheld amongst them that horrid slaughter of men and
horse, which in my melancholy lecture of bloody battles I saw in fancy, with so
much compassion, that could not but drop some tears to embalm the slain. But
how pensive this black sight made me, I shall leave your reason to judge, when
you have considered the horror of blood spent in fury, and the melancholy
complexion of my mind inclined to hold a sypathy with all sorrow that my senses
communicate to me. Notwitstanding this confusion and butchery of the common
soldiers, who had some Officers fell with them to conduct them into the other
world, the General constant to his purpose, and more in love with his former
good fortun, then present safety, goaded up his men on the mouth of the Canon
with such fury (pardon me if I call it not valor since it wanted wisdom) that
the Defendants were forced to desert the Suburbs, and Retreat speedily into the
City, leaving without the gates about 350 of their choicest men, whose habit
and gallant deportment in their diftresse and imprisonment spoke them Gentlemen
to the most enraged and malicious of their Enemies. For according to the
custom of War, being examined by the General concerning the number,
strength, resolution and defenses of their friends within the Town, they
scorned to return any other Answer, but that, though being Prisoners and at
mercy, they would soo^er embrace the worst of deaths, the anger and wit of
their Foes could contrive, then reveal a title of any thing that might
prejudice their friends, or secure their Adversaries. Thus long Victory stood
hovering unresolved on whose head to place her Garland. The General thus
possessed of the Suburbs, the gallant prisoners were made a prey to the common
Soldiers, who exchanged their Habits, but could not so disguise them, but the
bravery of their minds was plainly legible to every eye, that was acquainted
with the characters of virtue. The next business was the placing of Guards on
either part; the Parliament Porces in that Street they had so dearly won, the
Royal in the Town they had so bravely defended; for the darkness of night
forbad any further Action for the present. But this remora was soon removed by
an accident (for whether it was design or fortune is yet to me uncertain) the
firing of two or three houses in the Suburbs. For by the light of the flames,
the Town discovering where and in what Posture the Enemy lay, let fly their
Cannon and Musket upon them with such well directed fury, that I may boldly
affirm, that among such a number of men and horse, there never was so bloody an
Execution: Here you might have seen the limbs of men, horses, arms, fire, and
dust confused together in one horrid Chaos. The Lord Fairfax so far engaged
himself both to encourage and relieve his men in this distress, that a Cannon
shot from the Town strock him blind with the dust it raised, for half an hour.

The Horse thus brought on in the mouth of destruction by the example more then
the command of their General rusht on so far, that three whole Troops
brought beyond all possibility of Retreat, were all taken Prisoners, and the
rest so shattered, that in a great consusion they shogd of to the same place,
where this fatal design was concluded on by the Council of War. And thus
was this violent Fever for the present cured by the most prodigal effusion of
blood, that ever History tells us was drawn forth betwixt such small Parties in
so few minutes. For on an exact survey of the slain on ^oth sides, my
Arithmetic accounted no less then 1500 dead bodies. The rehearsal of some of
the premises, will satisfy your curiosity of knowing on which side the
greatest number fell; for the nature of the action tells us that the Assailants
could not but loose ten for one. Besides this irrepatable loss of stout and
experienced Soldiers (whose lives providently spent on a Foreign Enemy might
have revived the Ancient glory of our Nation) and some faithful Officers
instructed in the principles and Discipline of their General, I cannot but
discover my observation of some cloud that from hence is risen to eclipse the
glory of the Lord Fairfax, it being the first remarkable check his fortune ever
received. Thus Sir, you have a true and impartial draught of this action
according to the best observaton of

Your humble Servant, C.I.
Chenceford the 15. of June, 1648.
FINIS.

