Innocence above Impudency: OR, The strength of Righteousness exalted, ABOVE
The Quakers Weakness and Wickedness; IN A REPLY To a Lying PAMPHLET, called
Weakness above Wickedness: Published by J. Nayler, in Answer to a Book,
Entitled, The Quakers quaking. By which his notorious Lies are made manifest,
and the Truth of the said Book justified:

By JEREMIAH IVES.

Job 11.3. Should thy lies make men hold their peace?

Isa. 9.15. The Prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail.

Zech. 3.13. Thou speak lies in the Name of the Lord.

1 Timothy 4.2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy.

LONDON, Printed by J. Cottrel for R. Moon, at the Seven Stars in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1656.

To the READER.
READER,
THese Lines are sent out after a lying Pamphlet, published by the Quakers, who
are indeed quaking, or else they would never tell so many notorious Lies, as I
shall show thee they have told in their late Book, called Weakness above
Wickedness; wherein thou will find, that they have made Lies their refuge,
though they call themselves, The Seed of God, and The Generation of the Just:
for, did ever the Seed of God, or the Generation of the Just, say, That a man
has not done that which he did do, or that a man has done that which he never
did? Nay, it is rare to find any of the Seed of the Devil grown up to that
degree of Impudence, as to charge a man with publishing that which he never
published, and with concealing that which is published to the world in print,
as these men have done by me: But surely they think that no man will take pains
to compare book to book, but will believe all that they say; but sure the wise
have learned otherwise, though the simple believe every thing. I shall
therefore desire thee to compare their Answer to my Book, with the Book, and
both with this Reply, and see if ever any men have lied with that stock of
Impudence, as these men have done. Indeed I am no Prophet, nor the Son of a
Prophet; but sure I am, that these men are filling up the measure of their
Iniquity, and that very greedily, as though their hearts were hardened from
fear, and as though they had made a league with Death, and with Hell were at an
agreement; otherwise the fear of either would have taught them to have laid
aside their wickedness, which they still enlarge the borders of, till such time
wrath comes upon them to the uttermost, and the Lord say of them, That they
shall be called the border of wickedness, and the pecple against whom he has
indignation for ever. Oh therefore, that while God gives them space to repent,
they may repent (if there be any place for repentance for them) before the Lord
give them over to the plagues of their own hearts, as I fear he has done many
of them already.

These are the desires of my Soul, in the behalf of those of them who have not
sinned unto death; and I hope shall be, whatever they say of me, while I am

JER: IVES.

Innocence above Impudency: OR, The strength of Righteousness exalted, Above
the QVAKERS Weakness and Wickedness.
THe Apostle in his Catalogue of the evils of the latter times, 1 Timothy 4.2.
reckons up such as speak lies in hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared
with a hot iron, to be none of the least, who by a show of Selfdenial in
Marriage and Meats, etc. should introduce (by their heeding seducing spirits)
Doctrines of Devils; and surely this Prophecy aimed much at the men called
Quakers; which I shall make appear (God assisting me) by what follows, in
answer to their Book, called Weakness above Wickedness.

And for the more orderly proceeding herein, I shall first speak to the
Title Page of it, where they are pleased to call their book, THE QUAKERS
DEFENSE, etc. Here I do observe one thing, That my book has made these men own
themselves Quakers; for they were ashamed of their Names before, and usually
called themselves, Such as were NICKNAMED Quakers; yet now they call their
book, The QUAKERS Defense. So that here they did tell a notorious Lie, His
first LIE.
in saying, The WORLD did Nickname them Quakers, when they give that Name to
themselves.

I now come to the book it self, where he begins, and says, page 1. That the
Apostle well knew what he said, when he desired the Saints prayers, That he
might be delivered from men without faith, etc.

Truly, the Devil speaks truth sometimes, and so do you, in saying, The Apostle
well knew what he said; but surely, you are no Apostles, that speak things you
know not, and are vainly puffed up with a fleshly mind, as appears by what I
have said in my last, and shall yet further make manifelt in due place.

Thou tellest me, His 2. LIE.
That I deny the Faith of God, which is the gift of God in his Saints, etc.
This I never did, either by word or writing: And though he ought to have
proved, that I denied the Faith, being he charge it upon me, yet he brings no
proof at all, but his bare assertion. I shall therefore give the Reader some
sayings of mine, and leave him to judge, whether they look like the words of a
man that did deny the Faith of God, and set up a Faith of his own, as he falsely
accuses me. As first, in my Epistle to the Churches, I call upon them, to take
heed that they were not spoiled of their joy and confidence they had in CHRIST
JESUS; and, that they would let none of the words of OUR LORD JESUS slip out of
their mind; and, that they would have high and honorable thoughts of the
SCRIPTURES; and, that they would prize the Ordinances of GOD; and page 16. of
my book, I do exhort, that men would take heed of turning the Truth of GOD into
a Lie: Nay, does not he tell me, That I did confess, that Christ lights every
man that comes into the world, in his answer, page 5? And do not I all along
through my book, profess Christ to be the SAVIOR OF THE WORLD, and JUDGE of
the World? and is not this the Faith of God? and yet this man says, I deny the
Faith of God.

In the second page he insists upon some things, which (he says) I spoke at
Gerrard Roberts house, which I shall take notice of hereafter; because he is so
full of Tautalogies, and speaks very often in his book, of something relating
thereto, and therefore it will be lost labor to speak to any thing, till I
come to speak to the whole. The rest of the second page has little besides,
but a pack of swelling words of vanity; as Vain Philosophy, Deceitful Craft,
Unreasonable blasphemous Doctrines, Cursed Art, charging me with setting up the
spirit of the Devil; and, that I had mustered up a heap of Lies, and a heap of
Subtilty, etc. Let me tell thee, James, these words had done well, when thou
had proved me so; and then they would better have become the Conclusion, then
the Preface of thy book.

Thou go on, and say, in the latter end of p. 2. that thou will not
trouble thy self to answer every particular of my vain stories, etc. Truly, I
do believe, that thou would be as much troubled to answer to them, and prove
them so, as ever thou wast in thy life; and therefore it was cunningly thought
on by thee, to ease thy self of the trouble, and call them Lies, vain stories,
and slanders: Here thou have done like thy self.

Thou go on, and quarrelst with my Epistle to the Churches, and say, If
my brethren, with me, have denied the Faith of Christ, and set up a Faith of
their own, it is like my work will be welcome. To this I have answered already
in my Reply to thy first Page: and because I will not call this another Lie, I
shall only say it is the former Lie reiterated the second time.

Thou leapest over my Epistle to the Reader, and say nothing to it, though
therein thou wast more concerned, then in the Epistle to the Churches: and from
thence come to speak a little, to little purpose, in page 3. of thy book, and
that is, That you shall not contend whether the world call you that which is
true, or that which is false, when they call you Quakers. If so, then why have
thou troubled thy self so far, as to call them Ishmaels Brood, that call you
so? Your juggling and lying at this turn, which I charge you with in the second
and third pages of my book, thou say nothing to, but that thou will not
trouble thy self whether the world truly or falsely call you so. Oh shameless
wretch! do thou say thou art Nicknamed, when thou art called Quaker? And
when I have used arguments to prove thee a Liar, in saying, The world
Nicknames thee, because thou namest thy self so; thou shakest all off with
this, that thou will not contend whether they called thee truly or falsely. His
3. LIE.
But by the way, if they did call thee truly, then thou art a Liar, in saying
they Nicknamed thee.

Thou go on, and in page 3. of thy book, thou tellest me, that I lied, in
saying you foamed at the mouth in your tremblings, etc. But James, remember,
that it is not thy bare saying I lie, that proves it so: and thou do pretend
(that so I may repent) to inform me better. But am I better informed that you
did not foam, because you say I lie, in charging you with foaming? Read, and
judge: and yet this is all you bring to inform me better. And whereas you say.
That though it was cast upon you in the Westmerland Petition, and you did not
answer to it; it does not follow (you say) that the Charge was therefore true.
To this I reply, That if you had overlooked those passages in the Charge, then
indeed there might be somewhat in what you say: But you printed those
particular passages, how that you were charged with swellings and foamings, and
that in young children, and yet say nothing to the untruth of them. And though
I have again urged the same things, yet you say nothing to your swelling and
roaring, though it be charged to be in young children.

And whereas in your Answer you deny foamings, yet you do not deny any other
part of my Charge. By this the world may see thy wickedness, that thou wavest
the most material things, and say nothing to them.

And whereas thou say, I lied, and the Petitioners lied, in saying, you
foamed: I demand, why both my self and the Petitioners have not better ground
to say thou lie, in denying it, seeing thou have waved answering to it, both
when your selves did print the Charge, and also when I did charge you with it
afresh in my book? But I do think, that this was one thing that James was not
willing to TROUBLE himself with answering: for I perceive, and so may the
Reader, if he minds my book and his Answer, That he could not tell how to deny
what I and the Petitioners of Westmerland did charge against them.

You now proceed, and in the latter end of page 3. and page 4. you say, that I
can find nothing of the TRUTH you preach that I dare accuse you of. Well said,
James, thou will speak Truth sometimes, though it be against thy Father the
Devils will: for tou say, That I can find nothing of the TRUTH you preach
that I dare to accuse you of. Indeed that is true; for I dare not accuse any for
holding Truth: But then it seems, if I have accused you of any thing that you
preach, it is of the Lies you preach. This must needs follow; for if (as thou
say) I dare not accuse thee of the Truths you preach, and yet do accuse you
of many things that you preach, as my book declares at large; then it follows,
that all that I accuse you with, is of the Lies you preach; for you have
justified me, that I did not dare to accuse you of the TRUTHS you preach.

But in the 3 and 4 pages of thy book, thou say, That I do accuse you of
somewhat that you never preached; viz. That you say, Nothing must be called
Gods Word, but Christ: This (you say) is none of your Doctrine. His 4. LIE.
But I wonder who has ever heard you (unless it be such as are deeply drenched
in hypocrisy, and have learned your art of Equivocation, but will say the same
thing that I say of you.)

You say also, That I lie, in saying you deny the Scriptures to be the Word of
God, His 5. LIE.
etc. But have not I proved it from your own writings, page 6. of my book? And
do you not reprove in many places of your books the People and Priest, for
calling the Writings The Word. Oh shameless man! to call me a Liar, for saying
nothing of them, but what I have under their own hands. And where my arguments
against thee are of that force, that thou know not how to answer them; Thou
tellest the Reader, That it is false in my sense, to say thou deniest the
Scriptures to be the Word of God. James, do not juggle; for I did not say you
denied the Scriptures to be the Word of God in my sense, but in your own words,
that may be found in the books I have cited, and which are owned by you.

But to proceed: James jumps through the 7 and 8 pages of my book, where I make
it appear, That they give those Titles to their own Pamphlets, that they will
not give to the Scriptures; and thereupon do demand a question: To all which
James answers not a word. Reader, remember what James said at first, namely,
That he would not trouble himself to answer all; and by this he frees himself
very cunningly from answering to the most material things I urge against him.

He comes now to speak to the third Error I charge them with, and that is, That
they preach they are infallibly sent, and cannot prove it. To this he makes his
Defense, by saying, If he had come in his own name, I would have received him.
But how does this appear true? His 6. LIE.
for what though I will not believe a man that comes in Gods name, when God
never sent him; does it therefore follow, that I must needs believe one that
comes in his own name?

And whereas he says in this fourth page of his book, That it is plainly seen
of what spirit I am of, because I set it down as an Error, that he preaches,
viz. That they are sent immediately of God: Now here he plays the Serpents
part, for he leaves out that which is most material: for I never said it was an
Error for men to say they were sent of God, if they could prove it; but, that
it was Error and Presumption for one to say it that could not prove it: which
words, AND COULD NOT PROVE IT, though that be the scope of the Charge, as any
one may see, that reads the Conferences contained in the 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15 and 16 pages of my book: For I never denied, but a man that could prove
his sending, might say God sent him; but the thing I denied, was, That it was
Error and Presumption to say it, when it could not be proved, as I have largely
declared in the last forecited pages, which James leaps over, and says
nothing to, though therein the two chiefest of our Conferences are published,
with the Arguments and Answers, to which he says nothing.

He now comes to tell us, That the Apostles said they were sent of God, who did
not work Miracles in the sight of all they preached to, page. 4. See this man's
deceit: I challenge him to tell us he did a Miracle at any time for to prove
his Ministry, and he answers, That the Apostles did not work Miracles before
ALL they preached to. But James, can thou prove thou have wrought a Miracle
before ANY thou have preached to? Now I see thou art put to thy shifts: for
thou did say in thy Letter to me, and also in thy Conference at Beech-lane,
That there were many sent immediately of God, that did no Miracle. And now my
book has put thee upon saying, that they that were sent immediately of God,
did not do Miracles at all times, before all they preached to. But how does
this justify thee, who can not say thou have done a Miracle at any time?

Thou go on still in page 4. and say, That I call that an Error, which
all the Ministers of Christ did own, p. 4. and thou also say, That that which
I call Error, thou ownest: and yet but a little before, thou say, That I can
find nothing of the Truth you preach, that I dare accuse you of, page 3. Now
if I dare not (as you say) accuse you of any Truth you preach; then it must
needs follow, that thou art an Heretic condemned in thy self, and that those
are Errors that I charge upon thee; for I dare not (thou say) accuse any of
the Truth you preach.

You go on, and say, page 4. That you make proof of your Ministry as the
Apostles did, in partience, in affliction, His 7. LIE.
and necessities, etc. For shame, James, hold thy tongue at this turn, and let
somebody else speak: for, where is thy patience, who fil'st thy mouth with
great swelling words of vanity against all that oppose thee? when the Saints
did not give railing for railing, but (like Christ) they when they were
reviled, reviled not again: But I am sure, for railing, thou exceedest any of
the Society of Billingsgate, and art fitter to converse with Oyster-women, then
about the things of God: For Fool, and Sor, and Devil, and Trash, are thy
frequent language to any that oppose thee. And though you say, You are
persecuted; I do challenge thee to show me any that have opened their mouths
against you in print, that have given you worse language then you have given
them; and yet you brag of your patience: for it is no better then bragging,
when your persecutors (as you call them) have better words in their mouths
then your selves.

But further, you tell us, That you make proof of your Ministry by afflitions
and necessities, etc. I pray what affliction have you suffered, but others,
whom you cry down, have shared in, as deep, if not more deep then your selves?
But as for your necessities, surely thou lie at this turn; for thou did
never go so well when thou followedst the Plough (in point of Apparel) as thou
do since: and it is believed (and that upon good ground) that thy
necessities were more before thou wast a Quaker, then they have been since.

You go on, and spend the most part of the fifth page, to recite some things
that thou say I left out at a Meeting at Gerrard Roberts, His 8. LIE.
and this thou call'st, A diminishing Truth to cover Lies. If this be true that
thou say, then thou art fearfully guilty of diminishing Truth to cover thy
Lies with: For pray consider, if I had printed any part of the Conference at
Gerrard Roberts, and had left out other part of it, that had made most against
me; then he might have had a ground of complaint: but I printed not a word of
it. And must a man every time he prints, print every Conference he has been
at, or else if he leaves out one, and makes no mention of it, be counted a man
that diminishes Truth to cover Lies? See the wickedness of this man! when
himself undertakes to answer my book, he leaves out whole pages, and many
Arguments of great importance, together with many things that passed at our
several Conferences, that were of most weight; but this must not be called a
diminishing of Truth to cover Lies: but he excuses himself (as I have told
you) by saying he would not trouble himself with them.

Again, the things which himself said at that Meeting, he has left out, and
spoke not a word to the chief thing in controversy, and upon which the Meeting
was occasioned, to wit, about Water Baptism; and yet this man says, That I
leave out Truth to cover Lies, when he has left out the whole business of that
Conference, and picked up somewhat that he thinks makes against me, and
charge me with other things that I never said, as shall appear in due place.

He goes on in this 5 page of his book, and repeats some things which (he
says) I said at that Meeting. About this he spends a great part of this page;
and yet for all that (as though he thought he could not repeat his Lies fast
enough) he spends three pages more to repeat the same things, which he says he
sent in a Letter to me; as any one may see, that shall compare the 5 page with
the 6 and 7 of his book. And though in his Letter, he says something about
Water Baptism; yet that Letter was not the Conference, but a Letter sent after
the Conference; and that appears, because he mentions not one Argument brought
by me at that time in favor to it, but in stead thereof charges me with
something that I never said: Whereas if that Letter were the sum of the
Conference, as possibly he may make some believe, why then did not he write the
Arguments I brought for the proof of what I then said, and his Answers to them,
which the Letter speaks nothing of?

And as touching the particulars charged in his Letter, and so often repeated
by him, as though he wanted matter; I shall first speak to the first, and that
is, That I said a man might understand the Scriptures without the Spirit of
God. To this I answer, and that as I then told him, That though all the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God and Christ could not be understood without Gods
Spirit, which the Scripture says shall lead into all truth; yet much of the
Scripture might be understood by men that had not the Spirit; as, Thou shall
not kill; and, Thou shall not steal, and the like: and the Scribes and Priests,
Mat. 2.4. understood by the Scripture, that Christ should be born in Bethlehem,
as it was written by the Prophet, though they had not the Spirit: and surely
they understood that Scripture right; for accordingly he was born in the same
place. This I did answer at that time, though he has left it out; and yet
omission of any thing that he says, is counted an evil.

The next thing is, that I said, The Faith by which a man is saved, is not the
gift of God. To this I did answer then, and so I do now, That it is not so the
gift of God, as you imagine by your Enthusiastical dotages; as, That men should
meet together, and neither say nor do toward the work of Faith, till they are
immediately inspired with your quaking dotages: in this sense I do still deny
Faith to be Gods gift; yet in the sense that all those Scriptures say Faith is
the gift of God, I do freely own it, as my book does declare, page 37. wherein
I have these words, That men have nothing but what they have received,
especially any light or knowledge of Jesus Christ, according to 1 Cor. 4.7.

The next is, that I said, The obedience of Believers was not the gift of God.
To this I answer, as before, That we being at that time discoursing about the
point of Baptism, and I then asserting, That God was to be obeyed in that, as
well as others of his Commands: Thou did answer, That they must wait till
obedience was given them. To which I did reply, That God did not give obedience
to his people, in the way that thou did expect it, as to sit still and do
nothing, till men were immediately inspired to it: And in this sense I do still
deny, That obedience is the gift of God; though I do believe (and am generally
known to teach) that to him that has improved his talent, God will give more;
and that he that does his will, shall know of his Doctrine. And in this sense I
do believe obedience to be the gift of God, according to those Scriptures by
you alleged; and yet I say, None of those Scriptures prove your obedient
actions (which you so call) to be Gods gift.

You go on, and say that I said, Whosoever speaks that which men understand
not, is a Fool, and a Barbarian. His 9. LIE.
These were not the words, James: but indeed, when thou had spoke a great
while to us, and then at last, when I made some Reply upon thy words, thou
did answer, That thou spakest in a language that I could not understand; and
so thou said upon the like occasion, at our Meeting in Beech-lane, before
many witnesses, as I have showed in page 10. of my book, called Quakers
quaking: Hereupon I did answer, according to that of the Apostle, That he that
speaks in an unknown tongue, is a Barbarian; and if I said a Fool, I think I
might (...) prove it: Not but that I did then, and do still believe, That
Christ spoke many things, and so did his Apostles, that the world could not
understand, because of their hardness of heart.

You charge me further with saying, That none was baptized with the holy Ghost,
but they wrought Miracles. I said not so, but that none were baptized with the
holy Ghost but they COULD work Miracles; His 10. LIE.
and so I do say still, till thou can prove it: for not one Text by thee
alleged proves the contrary.

You tell me that I said, His 11. LIE.
All good was not of God. This is another of thy Lies, and I leave it to thee
to prove: Though it may be I might say, That All the good you glory in, is not
of God; and so I say still: For you are of the Generation that call good evil,
and evil good; but otherwise, I believe with all my heart, that God is the
Fountain of all good, according to the Scriptures.

You go on, and tell me that I said, Christ was not a Minister of Circumcision:
And so I say still, till thou can prove it. And though in thy Letter thou
chargest this for an Error; yet thou do not bring one Text, to prove he was a
Minister of Circumcision. See thy deceit!

Again, thou chargest me with Error in thy Letter, in saying, The Law was not
given by Christ: and yet do not give me one Text, to prove that it was given
by Christ: for the Scripture says, The Law was given by Moses; but Grace and
Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17. and yet thou have the face to call this
one of my blasphemous Doctrines.

Thou tell me in thy Letter, His 12. LIE.
that I said, The wilderness where John preached, was in Jerusalem. James, this
is like thee and thy Father: for what man in his right wits ever said, a
Wilderness was in (...), unless there be one at the Bull and Mouth at
Aldersgate, which is the likest one, of any place in a City that ever I heard
of?

He further says, His 13. LIE.
That I said the River Jordan was in Jerusalem. This is false: for I know that
Text well in Mat. 3. that says Jerusalem went OUT to be baptized of John in
Jordan; therefore I could not think Jordan was in Jerusalem. But however, it is
as reasonable to think that Jordan should be in Jerusalem, as it is for you to
teach, That Jerusalem is IN YOU.

You go on, and tell me that I said, His 14. LIE.
I could foretell things to come, without the Spirit: This (thou say) is
Witchery. To this I answer, That this is another of thy Lies, to say, that this
is Witchery: for the Pharisees did foretell things to come, and had not the
Spirit, when they said, Matthew. 16.2. Luke 12.54, 55. They knew when it would be
heat and rain, before it came to pass; and Christ bare them witness that this
was true: and the Priests and Scribes by the Scriptures did know, that Christ
should be born in Bethlehem, though they had not the Spirit: Was not this to
foretell a thing to come? and yet this is not Witchcraft, though thou art
pleased to call it so. The rest of your Letter consists of Baptism: For answer
thereto, I shall refer the Reader to my book, called Quakers quaking, page 25,
26, and 38.

Thus much as touching thy Letter, and thy Charge going before it, which is the
same with the Letter, except some things which thou chargest me for omitting,
which were spoken at our Conference at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate; and
them thou say are, First, His 15. LIE.
That (I should say) Christ lights every one that comes into the world, and
yet deny, that this Light was within every one that comes into the world. This
thou say I have omitted, to cover Lies: But let me tell thee, James, That if
this Light spoken of in Joh. 1. had been in thee, thou would have been
ashamed to tell thy Reader, That I did diminish this from the Discourse, to
make my self a cover with a Lie, when these very words are once and again
repeated, as page 49. of my book, called Quakers quaking, and page 51. in page
49. I have these words, viz. That I did not oppose the saying of Joh. 1. (which
is) that Christ inlightens every one that comes into the world, but your saying
(which is) that every one in the world has the Light within him, spoken of in
that Text. Again, in page 51. I have these words, In like manner he (viz.)
Christ lights every one that comes into the world (inasmuch as he uses means
for the bringing the world to the Light) THOUGH ALL HAVE NOT THIS LIGHT WITHIN
THEM. James, I have put it into Capital Letters, that thou may (without a
Pair of Spectacles) see thy self a Capital Liar: for thou art so impudent, as
to tell me, If I had been honest, I would have published the whole Truth; and
this forementioned passage, is one of the sayings thou lyingly tell thy
Reader that I did diminish, to make a cover for a Lie, when I printed it word
for word. See his Answer to my book, page 5.

The next Lie he tells his Reader, is, That I omitted to print another passage
that I spoke in the Conference; His 16. LIE.
which was, That the Heathen had a Light that convinced them of sin, but this
Light was not within them. James, surely thou can not forbear lying: for do
not I say, page 52. that they might have a Light among them, that might not be
within them? What is this less, then what thou say I omitted? and is this
false Doctrine? may not God use means, and send his Light among people to
convince them of sin, that they may reject, and not receive into their hearts?
Was not the great Light, Jesus Christ, among many, who did not receive him
within them by believing? And yet thou art so ignorant and shameless, as to
call this a deceit, and false Doctrine.

The next thing thou chargest me with, is, That I did omit the printing of that
saying, which, thou say, His 17. LIE.
I spoke at the Bull and Mouth, viz. That Christ pardons the sins of every
one that comes into the world. Now James, thou have fearfully diminished the
Truth, to make thee a cover for thy Lie: for thou leavest out these words that
I said, namely, That Christ was said to be the Light of the world, or to
lighten every one that came into it, as he was said to take away the sin of the
world, inasmuch as he did graciously afford means for the pardoning the sins
of the world, though every man should not have his sins pardoned. This indeed I
said, and to this purpose I spoke in page 51. of my book; which is just
contrary to what thou chargest: for I say, He does not pardon the sins of every
one; thou say that I said, Christ did pardon the sins of every one.

He now proceeds in his 10 page, to attempt an answer to the fourth Error I
charge upon them, and says, His 18. LIE.
I count it an Error that they bear Testimony to the Light of Christ, which
lights every one that comes into the world; and, That I count it an Error in
them, for holding, That the Spiritual Light of Christ is sufficient to teach in
all the ways of God, etc. and, That their Error is, for saying the light of
Christ is Spiritual, and within. To all this I answer, 1. That the Reader may
see that in thy foregoing Letter thou have laid to my charge things that I
never said: for thou that wilt add to, and diminish from my words that are
published in print, wilt not stick to do the like unto words that were spoken
more privately: For where do I charge any of the fore mentioned things upon you
for Error? I challenge thee to show it me in any page of my book; or else
confess thy wickedness before God and men: and that thy sin may appear at this
turn, I shall desire the Reader to peruse the fourth Error I charge upon you,
in page 18. of my book, where I do not charge it as Error, That you testify to
the Light of Christ that is spoken of Joh. 1. but the words are, that (you say)
Every man has a Light within him, that will teach him to worship God rightly:
And thereupon it is, that I do ground my twelve Quaeres, page 19, 20, 21. of my
book; and not whether it be an Error to testify to the Light of Christ, as
thou falsely suggestest: for though it be a Truth, as I often declare in my
book, That Christ is the Light of the world; yet it is an Error, and an
unwritten Conceit, to say, That EVERY MAN has a Light within him, that will
teach him to worship God aright, without any other means vouchsafed.

And in what page of my book do I count it an Error in you, for saying, The
Spiritual Light of Christ is sufficient to teach in all the ways of God, as
thou falsely says I have? His 19. LIE.
Nay, do not I say (and do not thou confess in page 10. of thy book, that I
say) It is sufficient? etc. And where can thou show me, that I charge it upon
you as Error, for saying, The Light of Christ is sufficient, as thou falsely
have declared?

Again, where do I charge it upon you as Error, for saying, His 20. LIE.
The Light of Christ is spiritual, and within, as you say I do? Do I say any
such thing in my whole book? No, no, I have not so learned Christ; and yet this
you say is the Error I charge upon you. For shame, James, leave off lying, and
speak truth from thy heart; for my charge is not, That you say the Light of
Christ is Spiritual and within, but that you say it is WITHIN EVERY MAN that
comes into the world; that is the Error I charge: and in stead of answering that
which I object, thou answerest that which I never objected, as my book at large
will manifest.

You proceed in page 11. to answer my Quaeres, and therein thou answerest to
that I never asked: For 1. I ask, What need there is of the Scripture to
declare the mind of God, if it may be known without it every whit as well: And
you say I ask, His 22. LIE.
What need there is of the Scriptures to declare the mind of God; importing to
the Reader, (as all may perceive) both in the Question and Answer, That I was a
man that judged them needless. But might he not as well have accused Paul for
saying, Preaching was vain, when he he says, If there be no Resurrection, THEN
is our preaching vain; as tell his Reader, that I ask what need there is of
Scripture, when I said, What need is there of Scripture to declare the mind of
God, if it may be known without it every whit as well, as they pretend? So that
this fills up the measure of his Lies.

Again, I ask, Whether by the Light which is in EVERY man, ALL men may come to
know a Virgin had a Son, etc. And you say I quaere, Whether THAT Light will
show a Virgin had a Son: which was not my quaere; for I know that THAT Light
(which is Christ) will show this and all other Truths: But what is this to the
question I ask, viz. Whether this Light be in every man, etc. Which term, EVERY
MAN, ALL NATIONS, and THE WHOLE WORLD, thou deceifully leavest out of most of
my quaeres, and so makes them speak another thing, and then go about to
answer them, as any one may see that reads my book, and compares thy Answer to
it; and therefore let these instances suffice for the rest, wherein the Reader
may see thy deceit, and also what-snuffling answers thou give to the Twelve
Quaeres, viz. That all those things I quaere (thou say) and much more, were
made known by the Light within, etc. This is the substance of thy Answer. But
James, how does this answer the Quaeres, which asks thee, Whether EVERY MAN
has a Light WITHIN him, that will bring him to know that a Virgin had a Son,
and that Christ rose from the dead in three days, etc? We believe, That by a
Light within, these things were revealed to some men, but that is not our
question; but this, viz. Whether there be in EVERY MAN a Light, that will show
him these things proposed in the Quaeres, page 19. And when I ask you, What
need there is of your preaching and writing to inform the world, if the Light
within the world can do it without you? You answer in page 11. That there is
need of preaching, to direct people to the Light. Oh miserable darkness! what
can the Light within, without any other means, direct people to the whole will
of God, and cannot this Light direct people to it self without you? Is not this
just as if a man should say, That the light of the Sun will show men every
thing but it self?

You answer the fifth Error I charge, which was, That one John Lawson said, The
Day of Judgment was past already: saying, It may be seen whether he own it or
no, by them that read the book: And so it may, if they read but the 35 page
of Saul's Errand to Damascus, which is the book I cited for that purpose.

To the 6 and 7 Errors I charge, which is against one George Fox, for saying,
That he was the Eternal Judge of the World, and the Way, the Truth, and Life:
You answer, That I prove this like the rest, viz. as I did foamings at your
Meetings, because you did not deny it: See page 12. of your answer. To this I
reply, (and that as I have said, viz. That if any shall print to the world,
that they are charged with swellings, foamings, quakings, and roarings; and
also that these things are found among them in little children; and when they
come to answer it, shall only deny to be guilty of one of these, and say
nothing to the rest; may not a man rationally conclude these men guilty of all
the rest, especially considering it is testified by many witnesses, who are
better to be believed then themselves? In like manner I still say, That the
Petitioners of Lancaster did witness this against Fox, and he did not deny it;
viz. That he said he was the Eternal Judge of the World, and the Way, Truth
and Life. Now what clearer proof can be made of any thing among men, then to
witness what is charged, and the person charged deny it not? and yet James says
this is no proof. I pray if this must not go for proof, how will you prove any
thing to be true, that one does not see?

The eighth Error I charge, is, That George Fox said, He that took a place of
Scripture, and made a Sermon of it or from it, is a Conjurer. This thou would
excuse, by saying, These were not Georges words, but the Accusers. Indeed this
is like the rest: But how do thou know they were not Georges words? Can
thou have the face to say, that they are NOT his words, when he, though he
prints the Charge, and Answer to it, does not deny it himself. Here thou
exceedest Fox himself for impudency: Nay, does not Fox answer in page 7. of
Saul's Errand to Damascus, that he that raises the Spirit out of the Letter, is
a Conjurer? And how far does this differ from the charge? But however, is it
not more reasonable to believe the men that witness this against him, seeing he
denies it not, then thee, who wilt deny that for George, which he denies not
for himself?

The tenth Error I charge, is upon George Fox, for saying, The Scriptures are
carnal; and thou tell me, That this is a Lie. But James, how dare thou say
it is a Lie, when George himself, in his printed answer to it, would not tell
the Petitioners that charged him with it, They lied; but in stead thereof,
evades the charge, by saying, The Letter of the Scripture is carnal?

The eleventh Error I charge, is upon one Leonard Fell, which through the
PRINTERS mistake, is printed Hill: and that was, That he said Christ had no
Body but his Church. To this thou repliedst, That thou do not know that
name, and therefore thou make no answer to the charge. Herein thou wast glad
to be ignorant, else thou might have looked into the book and page I cited
for the proof of it, and easily have found it was the Printers mistake.

The eleventh Error I charge, is against one John Lawson, who said, He had been
in Hell, but was now in Heaven: Thou say, It is plain, the Saints have
witnessed being in Hell and Heaven also. What juggling is here! I charge him
with saying HE had been in Hell, but was now in Heaven; and you tell us of the
Saints of old, that some of them had been in Heaven and Hell, as Jonah was in
Hell, when he was in the belly of the Whale, and Paul was in the third Heaven,
2 Cor. 12.2, 4. Is not this thy Logic, James? viz. Jonah was in the Whales
belly, and Paul was in the third Heaven; Ergo, John Lawson was in Hell, but is
now in Heaven. And you say, This was not an Error in them that witnessed this,
nor in Lawson, IF HE SAID TRUE. Now see if this answers the charge: For how
have thou proved he said true, when he said so?

The twelfth Error I charge, is, That you say you are perfect, and sin not.
This you tell me is a Lie: and yet in the next words you say, You own
perfection; and you say, Perfection is not that that you never had, as (you
say) I falsely accuse you. But James, if thou have perfection, what Lie is it to
say thou art perfect, any more then it is a Lie to say one is rich, when he
says he has Riches?

The thirteenth Error that I charge, is, That James Nayler said, None could
come to God or Christ, but they that come to perfection. By this (he says) it
seems I deny perfection to be in God or Christ; but (says he) if that be
granted, then they that come to them, come to perfection. To this I answer,
That it is one thing for men to come to perfection, and another thing for them
to come before a God that is perfect: for Paul was not come to persection, when
he himself says, Not as though I had ALREADY ATTAINED: Now he had attained to
come to God and Christ, as I plainly show in page 33. of my book; and therefore
this cunning evasion will not serve thy turn: for who is there so sottish, as
to think, that when they come to God or Christ, that they come to a God or
Christ that is imperfect? and therefore if that should be thy meaning, then
thou wast but beating the air, and fighting and contending where none opposed
thee. But by this the world may see, how Janus-fac'd thy Oracles are, that look
two ways at once: Nay, and does not the latter end of thy answer to this
particular, in page 14. of thy book, plainly show, that thou did intend
perfection in men, rather then God or Christ, inasmuch as thou say, The
children of God never pleaded for sin dwelling in them? and so say I too.

The fourteenth Error I charge, is, that James Nayler said, That whenever
they did eat or drink, they could have communion with the Body and Blood of the
Lord in eating and drinking, though it were at the Gentiles Table. This he
denies not, but says, It must needs be counted an Error with the Belly-gods of
this world, etc. But what is this to prove, That God does anywhere require you
to have communion with the Body and Blood of the Lord, though it were at the
GENTILES Table? And if he do not require it, how dare thou say thou can do
it? and how dare thou blame me for calling this an Error, when thou have not
brought one Text to prove it is a Truth?

And whereas thou say, Thou CAN have communion with the Body and Blood of
Christ at the Gentiles Table: Does not the Scripture say, That the things which
the Gentiles sacrifice, it is to Devils? And does it not also say, That we
CANNOT partake of the Table of the Lord, and the Table of Devils? and yet this
man says, He can have communion with the Body and Blood of Christ, at the
Gentiles Table.

The fifteenth Error I charge, is, That James Parnel did deny all Baptism, but
of the holy Ghost. To this thou reply, That to own the Baptism of Christ,
and to deny all else, is counted an Error by me; and if so, then the Apostles
did err also. How does this follow? when they did assert pluralities of
Baptisms, and did nowhere deny (as you do) all Baptisms but that of the Spirit.

James now proceeds to tell me, page 14. That I go about to prove Water Baptism
by Questions and crooked Consequences; and (he says) that I cannot find a
Command for it, after Christ's sufferings; and, That we cannot find a plain
Scripture for that which we worship, etc. And he further says, That Moses in
all his house did leave his Ordinances not to be proved after this manner; and
therefore (he infers) we are not to think that Christ will leave his Ordinances
with such kind of proof.

To all which I answer, First, that I have asserted proof for Water Baptism, in
the questions propounded by me upon that occasion: See my book, page 25, 26.
which thou can not answer.

But secondly, how can thou reject Consequences and Questions, when none have
more Questions and conceited Consequences, to prove what they hold, then your
selves?

As for instance (to give the Reader a few among many:)

1 Quest. Where have you a plain Text, without a consequence, that says, That
the Light spoken of in Joh. 1. is IN every man that comes into the world? which
you confidently affirm.

2. Where have you a plain Text, that says, Christ was the Minister of
Circumcision? which, thou said, was one of my blasphemous Doctrines to deny,
page 5. of thy book.

3. Where have you a plain Text, that says, The Law was given by Christ? the
denial of which, thou say, is another of my blasphemous Doctrines, page 5.

4. Where have you a plain Text, that says, God sent some immediately, that
could not work Miracles, or to whose Ministry he did not witness from heaven,
since you boldly affirm, that you are so sent, though you can work none?

5. Where have thou a Text, that says, One may have communion with the Body
and Blood of the Lord at the Gentiles Table, as you affirm?

6. Where have you a plain Text, that says, He that raifeth Spirit out of the
Letter, is a Conjurer?

7. Where have you a plain Text, that says, The Scriptures may not be called,
The Word of God?

8. Where have you a plain Text, that says, There is no Baptism but of the
Spirit; which you also affirm?

9. Where have you a plain Text, that says, John Lawson was in Hell, but is
now in Heaven?

10. Where have you a plain Text, that says, Christ was not born after the
flesh, but after the Spirit?

James, either give me express Scriptures that do affirm these things in the
words, as thou layest them down, or else be ashamed to accuse others for
bringing Consequences, when they bring the plain Text; whereas thou haft
neither Text nor Consequence for any of these thy fond conceits.

And now I cannot but give the Reader to take notice that thou say, I have
not found one Text that does command Water Baptism after Christ's sufferings;
His 22. LIE.
when, whoever looks over the 25, 26 pages of my book, shall find several
Texts to that purpose; and nine several Questions upon that subject, to which
James makes no answer at all, as anybody may perceive, that reads the 14 page
of his book, where he answers all, by calling what I propose, Crooked
Consequences. See if the man be not here at a Nonplus! or else, how could he
have the face to entitle his book an Answer to mine, when he first leaves out
the first two pages of my book, where I show their juggling about their Name
Quakers; and that they have lied in saying, The world Nicknames them so: and
to this he says nothing, but That he shall not contend whether the world call
them truly or falsely, when they call them so?

Again, I spend other two pages to prove, that they do give such Titles to
their Pamphlets, as they will refuse to give to the Scriptures: And this I
prove by their own books, as the Reader may perceive; and to this he says not
one word.

Again, I do print the substance of two Conferences, where he is so miserably
Nonplus'd, that he cannot tell what to say to them, but only tells his Reader,
that I do add words that were never spoken, and diminish Truth, to make my
self a cover with a Lie. This is all that he says touching the two
Conferences, contained in the 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 pages of my
book, as any one may see, that reads the fifth page of his book: and yet he
has got such a stock of impudence, as to call his book an ANSWER to mine.

Again I propound twelve Quaeres in the 19, 20, 21 pages of my book: And to
these, in stead of answering them, he proposes questions of his own, for so I
call them, because he has left out the most material terms of mine in his
transcribing them, by which they become his own questions, and not mine: and to
these twelve Quaeres he says as little as to the other.

Again, the like answer he gives to the nine Quaeres in page 25, 26 of my book;
and the sum of his answer is, That they are crooked Consequences: See page 14
of his book.

He now comes to answer the sixteenth Error I charge upon them, which was, that
one of their Scribes did ask a Minister of the Nation, Whether he had the Light
that did inlighten every one that comes into the world? when he had before told
him, That every one HAD that Light within him. This I charge as a piece of
inconsistency in these, that would be counted perfect. To which he replies,
That Christ did ask the disciples who they said he was, and yet they had the
Light within them, that revealed him to be the Son of God. But what is this to
the case in hand? the case in hand is not, whether a man may ask a question for
the further confirmation of a thing that is in question, as our Lord did his
Disciples, in a time when there was various opinions of him: But, whether after
a man has preached a thing that concerns EVERY man, whether it be not very
ridiculous to ask the same man to whom he has preached, whether it concerns
him? Where does Christ, or any wise man, ask such a question? Again, Christ
demands this question of them that owned him, what their opinion was of him;
but he asked the question of a man that disowned the Light to be in every one:
So that this being considered, I demand, Whether Christ ever asked a man that
did disown him and his Light, whether his Light was within them, or no? as this
man has done: for he asked the question of one that was a Minister of the
Nation, whom they all say disown the Light of Christ.

He passes over the second instance of their inconsistency, and says not a
word to it: I do suppose, as he said at first, that these were some things he
would not TROUBLE himself with answering; and indeed, I think it would trouble
him to answer them, and therefore he cunningly lets them alone.

He comes to say something to the third in stance I bring of their
inconsistency; and that is, that though they pretend to own the Scriptures, yet
one of them said to Parson Camelford of Staveley-Chappel, That he might as well
have burnt the Scriptures, as his Quaeres: He answers, That it does not prove
all my false accusations cast upon them, etc. To this I reply, That I have not
spoke or writ any syllable of untruth concerning you; and further, it does
prove all that I charge against you, about the case in hand, and all that I do
urge in the foregoing pages, about your slighting the Scripture: For, for any
one to say that a man might as well burn the Scriptures, as his Quaeres, does
not this prove, that your design is to eat out the honor of the Scriptures,
and build up the honor of your contradictious stories?

And whereas in a Parenthesis, you question if there was any such that said so:
Fie James, do not I in p. 29. of my book, cite those passages, and tell thee,
That they are in a book called Truths Defense, which is owned by you all? and
yet you question if there be any such: Do thou think that book did write it
self? and if not, why should thou question whether there be such a man as
says those words in his book? for the words are there asserted, as I have
transcribed them. But James, thou would willingly be ignorant of this story,
because it does so much lay open your hypocrisy and double-dealing about the
Scriptures. And further, is not this book bound up, and owned by you, among the
rest of your Works? and yet thou would fain make the Reader believe, that
there was no man among you that published such a thing.

Thou passest over my fourth instance of your inconsistency, and say not a
word to it, which would trouble thee too much to answer it; and that is, That
one Tomlinson in his book called A word of Reproof, p. 11. did blame the
Ministers of the Nation for doing that they had no Rule for, when they prayed
before or after Sermon (this book is also owned by you, and bound up with the
rest of your stories) and yet Edward Boroughs did pray after Sermon, before
hundreds of people, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate.

To this inconsistency among themselves he says not a word, but leaps over it.

He proceeds, and says, The fifteenth Error I charge is a Lie, which is, That
they study deceitful terms, that look with two faces, etc. James, it is not thy
saying, I Lie in charging you, that proves it to be a Lie, as any one may see
in page 30 of my book. And for all thou say, A man may affirm a Negative,
yet that will not serve thy turn, for that is not the question, but, Whether a
man being charged with speaking a thing that is Negative (for that is the case)
does not equivocate, in saying, He spoke no such Affirmative?

He comes now to answer the eighteenth Error I charge, and that is, Their
Lying: First, in saying, They are perfect, and sin not: This (he says) is a
Lie of mine own, and shall rest upon my head, till I prove they have said so.
To this I answer, That I could prove this largely, if I should trouble the
Reader to look over many of your writings: But however, to save that labor, I
shall cite that passage in page 28. of this thy book:

Where you make this your ninth Quaere that you would have me answer, viz. What
Faith is that which pleads for sin, and preaches against perfection? and that
believes that they can never be free from sin, and come to perfection while
they are in this world? show the Saint that so believed, and so practiced. Let
me tell thee, James, that if this be true, that men may be free from sin in
this world, as one branch of the question does plainly import; then if none of
you are free from sin, you do not do that which you MAY do; and then you are
self-condemned sinners, if you may be free from sin, and will not: is it not a
shame for you to cry out against those that live in sin, (who, it may be, do
think that they cannot live without sin) and for you that believe you may live
without sin, to live in sin? Oh the deceit of these men!

But if anybody shall say, That the Quakers do not live in sin: I answer, Then
what lie have I told, in charging them with saying, That they profess to be
perfect? And does not John Lilburn call Nayler once and again (in his Book
lately published, called his Resurrection) that TALL MAN in Christ? and yet
Nayler says, I Lie, in saying, They profess to be perfect. Now how can he be
truly called a TALL MAN in Christ, that believes a man MAY be free from sin in
this world, and yet is not free from it himself?

Again, may not a man believe that TALL men in Christ should be free from sin
in this world, if anybody may? and yet James says, I Lie, in saying they
profess to be perfect: Indeed, this is such a bundle of imperfection, that if I
had said they had been perfect, I had lied indeed.

The second Lie I charge, is, that they said, They were immediately sent of
God. To this he answers, that it is a Truth in them who are so sent, to say so;
and the Lie (he says) is my own, till I prove the contrary. To this I reply:
First, that this is no answer to the Charge, but a mere evasion, to say it is
truth for a man that is so sent to say so: and I wonder when James heard that
denied by me, or anybody. But though it be a truth for a man to say that God
sends him, when indeed God has sent him; yet it is a Lie for a man to say, God
sent him, when he never did: And that he never sent these Quakers, I prove at
large, in page 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 of my book; to which (as I
have said) he makes no answer: where I show at large, that the Turk can say as
much for his Alcoran, and the Pope for his Infallible Chair, as they can for
their immediate sending.

The third Lie I charge, is, that Fox said, The world did not know his Name;
and yet afterward says, He is known by the Name of George Fox. He answers,
That the Saints that overcome have a new Name, etc. But what is this to George
Fox? unless we should take it for granted, That he was an overcoming Saint? is
not this a ridiculous Argument, viz. Every one that overcomes, has a new Name;
Ergo, George Fox has overcome, and has a new Name?

Again, he does not say, The world did not know his NEW Name, but HIS NAME,
without any such distinction.

Again, did ever any of the Saints of old subscribe themselves as these do? but
surely such kind of canting has never been about subscribing names; unless it
were among Thieves, that would be known in the City by one name, and the
Country by another.

The fourth Lie I charge, is, that Edward Burough said, his book was sealed
with the Spirit of the eternal God: to this he answers, that this is called a
Lie, but not proved. But surely if any shall presume to utter such a saying, it
is more rational for him to prove the thing affirmed, then for his respondent
to prove what he denies: for, if God had scaled Burough his book, we should
have had more for the proof of it, then his bare say so.

The fifth and sixth Lies I charge, is about some passages that were in a
letter that James sent me; where he says, that I did tempt him to deny the
Lord; and that I did tell him, that if he came in his own name, I would have
received him. These were both false, as many can witness; for I bid him either
prove he was sent of God, or else disown his presumptions in saying so: and for
my telling him, I would have received him, if he had come in his own name, etc.
surely if I had been of that mind, I should have received him at that time, for
I did then, and so I do still, believe, that he never came in any bodies name
but his own, as our whole discourse does make manifest; though with the false
Prophets of old, they boast of their being sent of God.

And where as he adds at the bottom of his letter in Page 18. of his book,
that I said, if he were sent of God, it were to no purpose to put my faith upon
trial with him, for he would overturn all my proofs: James, thou need not
witness this; but then this does show thy Lies in thy letter: Which was, that I
did tempt thee to deny the Lord; when I did at that time say, that if God sent
thee, we would not stand to contend with thee, if thou could but prove that:
I further added, that then I would fall down under all that he said; does this
look like tempting one to deny the Lord?

The seventh Lie that I did charge upon them, was, that he being charged with
those two forementioned Lies writ in the letter, did deny that there was any
such passages in the letter.

And whereas he says, that he did not know of the fetching the letter, etc.
this is no answer to the charge; the charge is, that he denied he writ any such
passages: and it is not his now printing them, that proves he did not then deny
them; which is all he urges to prove it.

And as for his running away, while the letter was fetching for to prove him a
Liar; that, I did urge as an aggravation of his sin of lying; and that he did
so, though he knew the letter was gone for, (though he now denies it) will
appear by certificate at the end of this book.

He proceeds in the 19. Page of his book, and says, that I make a boast of
something I will prove, His 25. LIE.
and that is (says he) that I said, I would prove the writings of the
Scriptures to be the Word of God. For shame James hide thy face: did I ever say
any such thing? nay, do not I say, Page 34. the writings may be burned, but the
Word of God contained in them, cannot; And, That the Tables might be broken,
but the Commands contained in them did remain like Mount Sion? etc.

And yet this man has the Impudence to tell his Reader, that I say, I would
prove the writings of the Scripture to be the Word of God.

But at this turn the Devil makes him speak nonsense as well as falsities; for
is it not nonsense to say, the writings of the Scriptures? What is that, but
in plain English to say, the writings of the writings? which is absurd, and
therefore the more like the Author that devised it: for my words are these,
that the written precepts and promises of God, together with his threatenings of
Judgments, and exhortations to amendment of life, they are, and ought to be
called, the Words of God: and this I have used arguments to prove, to which he
says little.

His next Lie, is, that he says in Page 14. His 26. LIE.
of his Book, that I would prove that the letter of that roll is the Word of
God which Baruch read; When there is no such passage in my whole book: and
having thus set up a man of straw, he valiantly goes to fight with him; and
says, that Baruchs roll might be burned, but the Word of God cannot. See if
this man has not belyed me in his letters, that will thus bolye me about
things that are published in print, charging that to be in my book which is not
in it, and then go about to confute it; for I say nothing of Baruch, but the
very words of the text, Jer. 36.2, 5.

He proceeds in Page 20. and calls the next proof of mine AS CONFUSED AS THE
REST; because I charge them to deny the Scriptures to be the Word, and yet say,
I will prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God out of their own mouths. But
what confusion is this? does not Christ prove God to be just, and judge the
unprofitable Servant out of his own mouth? And yet the unprofitable Servant
said, God was not just; for he said, that he did reap where he sowed not: so
may I judge you out of your own mouths, that deny the Scriptures to be the
word, who at some turns, to save your credit, own them: and because I prove
from your own words, as does appear by my Book, page 35. that the Scriptures
must be called Gods Word, because you say, nothing can declare Gods Will, but
Gods Word; you from hence would prove that Balaams Ass was Gods Word, because
he declared Gods Will; and this you would fasten as an absurdity upon me,
which is an Argument that I raised upon your own principles; and therefore the
absurdity lights upon your own head, who say, nothing can inform into the Will
of God, but the Word; and yet at another time say, the Scriptures declare Gods
Will, but are not his Word.

You go on still in Page 20. of your book, and say, That I confess Christ is
the light that lightens every man that comes into the World; and yet say, it is
an error for you to say, that THIS light will teach people to worship God
rightly.

Now James, when did I count it an error in you to say, that the light of
Christ is sufficient to teach people to worship God rightly? this is another of
thy lies. Indeed, I have often said that every man has not the light of Christ
in him; and that, that light which every man has, is not sufficient to teach
him to worship God rightly: but did I ever say the light of Christ was not
sufficient? Do I not say the contrary, (viz) that the light of Christ is
sufficient, Page 36. of my book?

Thou go on, glorying in lies, and say, Page 21. of thy Book, that I do
apply that text of Gods purging Israel, Ezekiel. 24.14. to the light of Christ, to
prove it was not sufficient. See thy false tongue! when I do bring those words
to parallel with Joh. 1. to prove. That that Light is sufficient to inlighten
all, though all have not this Light within them: See my book, page 36.

You go on, and call this, The next piece of my divination, because I say, that
if every man have received the Light, then every man has received Christ, etc.
All thou say to take off the edge of the Argument, is, That because Christ
is that Light, I would make that Light Christ. And James, what have thou said
to the contrary? for (is it not the same) Christ is THE Son of God, Ergo, THE
Son of God is Christ? and how can thou deny this? And yet the like Argument
to this, thou call Divination.

You answer the Scripture I bring, Joh. 11.10. where it is said, He that walks
in the dark stumbleth, because there is NO LIGHT IN HIM, by telling us, There
is no Light in his WAY: For shame man, leave off thy adding to Scriptures! Do
not thou add to the words of the book? does not the Text say, There is no
light in him, and thou say, There is no light in his WAY?

But may not a man as well interpret Joh. 1. and say, That when the Text says,
He lightens every one that comes into the world, that it is to be understood,
of his lightning the worlds way, and not as you notion it, That every one has
this Light in him? This is the man that would have nothing proved by
Consequences; and yet when we have a plain Text for what we say, viz. That they
that walk in the dark stumble, because there is no Light in them; he shuffles
it off, by telling us, He has no Light in his way. So that James, it seems we
must believe thy conceited Consequences, by which thou would prove every man
has the Light within him, spoken of in Joh. 1. and not the plain Text, that
says, He that is in the dark, has no light in him.

You come to the next thing, and that is, that I say, The day of Judgment is
not past: This thou seem to own to be a truth, by bidding me prepare for it,
etc. But if with Lawson, thou did not believe it past, thou would never
tell those untruths, as I have made appear thou have told in thy book: For,
did thou believe Judgment to come, thou would tremble after another
manner, then ever thou have done in Quaking Delusions, and fear to lie at this
rate.

You go on still in page 22. and touching what I have asserted about Baptism
and the Lords Supper, in page 38, 39 of my book, you say, You have spoken
somewhat already, and that must stand till it be disproved. I see a short
Answer serves your turn, or else you might have told us where we might have
found it, that so it might be disproved: but though thou did find something
proposed by me about baptism, thou leapest over it, as though thou wast afraid
to look on it, and says nothing to several Texts alleged, and nine Questions
proposed, but that I brought crooked Consequences, and no plain Text, etc. The
next work is (he says) TO PROVE RESPECT OF PERSONS, which are none of my words.

And he says, His 28. LIE.
I pervert that Text in Lev. 19.32. because I read it (as Beza renders it)
Thou shall honor the PERSON of the old man: But why is this a perversion of
the Text, when I have as good reason to follow his translation as any? But 2.
is not that which is done to the face of a man, done to his person, be it
honor or dishonor? And 3. are not these terms, FACE and PERSON convertible;
as Isa. 3.15. where it is said, that The FACE of the poor was grinded; was not
this the person of the poor?

And whereas you charge me with lying, in saying, you deny respect due to
Parents, Masters, Husbands, Wives, etc. I cannot but wonder at you: for I did
not say so in any place of my book; I say, you did deny respect to persons,
which I prove ought to be, because I am commanded to honor my Father and
Mother, etc.

I brought this to prove, we ought to honor some more then others; and you
say, I charge you with denying honor to Father and Mother, etc. But sure
James, thy Conscience is very guilty at this turn, or else thou would never
have said, because I brought those Scriptures to prove what I laid down, that
therefore I said you were guilty: But had thou done fairly, thou should
have spoke to the Scriptures and Arguments alleged, and have showed us in what
sense the unjust Judge was blameable, in not reverencing man; and many other
Texts, which may be seen in page 39, 40. To all which thou say nothing, but
quarrell'st about that I never said.

You go on, and say, That I Lie, because I say, Not one in ten shall give the
same answer to a question, if it be asked them severally: and this thou say
is a lie, because (thou say) I never proved ten of you therein. But James,
this is as true as the rest; for I have proved twenty of you herein: and to
make it appear, I will meet thee at any time, and ask thee a question
appertaining to the things of God, and not one of ten shall give the same
answer with thee, the question being asked apart; if they do, I will be content
to be called a Liar, but not before.

You say, the next thing I would prove, is, That Christ had two Bodies. But
James, why could not thou as well lay down the Proposition in my words, as
thine own? my words are, That Christ had a Body besides his Church; and to the
Arguments and Texts alleged, thou say nothing, but tell us a few of your
own Notions; as, That thou will not dispute with me, but say, It serves
thee to know he is thy head, etc. But why did not thou answer my Arguments
alleged to prove what I urged in the case?

You go on, and say, You do not deny Christ taking flesh, etc. James, I did
draw thy veil from before the face of the people, which thou had cast upon
them, and made thee speak somewhat plainly at the Bull and Mouth; and now thou
would fain speak somewhat to cover over thy vile sayings: but to this I shall
speak anon.

And as touching the next thing, which is, that one of them said, Christ was
but a figure: This he says is a Lie, because of the PRINTERS Errata, who put
page 54 of Saul's Errand to Damascius, in stead of page 8. in which page he has
the words I charge, though he says there is no such saying in the book; for
this very thing was objected against him, and he answers, That Christ in the
flesh was a figure.

And whereas I show you, that you have affinity with Gnostics, Manichees, and
Familists, etc. you answer in page 24. that it is not worth answering; a
cunning shift indeed! but if I should say so to your questions by and by, you
were well enough served.

You go on, and tell me, that I have perverted the Scriptures, etc. but have
not showed one Text wherein, unless it be that of Lev. 19. which I have already
showed to be no perverting of it.

He goes on: and because I say in page 45 of my book, that all that I have writ
against you, is either from your own Mouths or Writings; you say, This is a
Lie: but James, in the same page, about the middle of it, you might have found
these words, namely, That the Errors I charge you with, are either such as fell
from your own Mouths, or else such as your selves being charged with, could
not deny. Now put all this together, and what untruth have I told? for did you
deny any of those things that I say you did not deny? And though you say the
men were bloody persecuting Priests, etc. that charged you, the more shame for
you, that you should call your book an Answer to their Petition, and withal
print their Objections your selves, pretending to answer them; and when all
comes to all, never deny the charge in the particulars I mention, but say
somewhat else in stead thereof, which is nothing to purpose, as you have done
by me, as any may see, that reads your Answer both to my book, and the
Westmerland Petition, which is a thing I never saw, any further then as your
selves did transcribe and print it.

He now comes to the Postscript at the end of my book, and says, that because
some saw my murtherous mind, they did write down what he said. Though that
which they have writ to cover thy Assertion, was not spoken at that time, as
many can witness that came out with me, whatever you spoke after I was gone:
And though you seem to carry it by witness, you must know, That your Witnesses
are Parties, being of the same faith with thy self, viz. That Christ was not
born after the flesh: and it does behove them to make a cloak for thee, lest
thy deeds and sayings should be made manifest. But whatever they have said,
that matters not, since you confess all that I charge, which is, That Christ
was not born after the flesh: And how have you answered the thing I charge in
the Postscript, which is, That it is all one to be born after the flesh, as it
is to be born according to the flesh? and though I prove it all one in the 52,
53 pages of my book, yet thou make no kind of answer; which shows, that thou
have picked up this Letter, to keep thee from the lash of the Law, because thou
say, Some saw I had a murtherous design, or else thou would have answered
what I say in the Postscript, but that you did fear the light.

You proceed, and in page 26. say, that I say, The Scriptures make no such
distinction, as born after the flesh, and after the Spirit. His 29. LIE.
This is another of thy Lies: Where do I say any such thing in all my book? but
this I said, That the Scriptures made no distinction between a being born after
the flesh, and born according to the flesh.

And you say again, That Christ, as he was born of Mary, was not born after the
flesh, but begotten and brought forth by Promise. To this I answer, First, that
this is nothing to the question; for though he was begotten and brought forth
by promise, does this prove, that therefore he was not borne after the flesh?
for Isaac was borne according to the promise, yet he was borne after the flesh
likewise; So Gods promise concerning Christ's Birth, does not prove, that
therefore he was not borne according to the flesh. And whereas thou say, he
that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit;
I say, that though this be true in sinful unregenerate men, that have no other
Birth and generation, then what was after the flesh: yet it is not true in
Christ, and his being borne after the flesh; for he being without sin, did not
persecute him that was borne after the Spirit, as sinful men do. And therefore
James, because thou say Christ was not borne after the flesh, show me a
plain text for such a Doctrine, without any of these conceited consequences; or
else take shame to thy self, for finding fault with proofs that others bring,
when they do not give the express text.

Thou tellest me of my promise to repent, if I should be better informed, etc.
to this I answer, that thou have rather strengthened my former opinions of
thee, then any way better informed me, except I will take thy bare saying I
lie, for a better information.

Thou now come upon me with a pack of questions, to which I shall answer.

His first question is, whose Spirit that is which men understand the
Scriptures with, and try Spirits with, who are without the Spirit of God?
Seeing thou affirms, that a man may understand Scriptures without the Spirit of
God? or whether God has set up such a tryer, yea or no.

Answ. The greatest part of this question, is grounded upon a false bottom,
(viz.) (something that I said) which is most part false; for I did never say
those words: yet I have answered to them, so far as I am concerned, in my
answer to thy letter which thou sent'st to me, after our meeting at Gerard
Roberts, in the former part of this book: but yet if by understanding the
Scriptures, thou do mean all things contained in them; I say, this he cannot
do without Gods Spirit: and if by trying Spirits, thou meanst, to try between
your Spirits, and the Spirit of Christ; I can say again, that a man without the
Spirit of God, may by his own Spirit understand, that you are not guided by the
Spirit of truth, that have told so many untruths.

His second Quest. Seeing thou confesses Christ to be the true light, and that
he lights every man that comes into the World, but denies that light to be
within; show in plainness, where he does inlighten every man that comes into
the World, and not within; and how they come by it: and seeing thou say
every man has it; how have they it, and not within?

This is answered already in Page 51. of my book, called Quakers quaking. The
later part of the question is a lie: for I never said, that every man has the
light of Christ, though Christ has used means to bring the World to the light,
that their deeds may be reproved. But lest both my books should not come to the
readers hand, I do again answer, that Christ is said to inlighten the World, as
he pardons their sins; though none but them that believe shall receive
remission of sins, yet he pardons their sins, by proposing a way for the
pardon of them; So Christ inlightens every man (I, and that within too, if you
will have it) by giving them means to be enlightened within, though thousands
(like your selves) stumble, because there is no light in them.

3. Quest. Seeing thou confessest, that the heathen have a light that reproves
them of sin, but not within, show where it is, and what it is; whether the
light of Christ or no, and how they came by it?

Answ. That the heathen may have a light among them, that may not be in them, I
have already shown in my former book, Page 52. but further, did not Christ tell
the Pharisees, Luke 17.2. that the Kingdom of God was within them, when indeed
it was but among them? and so the margent reads it: for they were far enough
from having his Kingdom erected in their inward man. In like manner may God
send light among the heathen, which may not be within every individial man of
them. And whereas you ask me, what light it is? I say, it is the light of
nature, which taught them to do by nature the things contained in the Law. And
whereas you ask, how they came by it? I answer, that, that manifestation they
have, is from God, for God has showed it to them, Romans 1.19.

4. Quest. Whether that which reproves the heathen when they sin, be the same
that reproves thee when thou sinnest, and the rest, who call your selves
believers? and whether it be in the same place? and wherein does it differ, as
to place, nature, and operation?

Answ. To which I answer, First, that, that which reproves the heathen of sin,
does reprove us and you too. And as touching the place, I confess it is an odd
term: yet I answer, that it is the conscience that must be reproved of sin,
according to Romans 2. but yet this light may differ in the nature of it, as the
light of the Moon differs from the Sun; and as a man may see further by the
light of the Sun, then he can by the light of the Moon; even so may them that
have the light of Christ, have a further inspection into the things of Christ,
then the Gentiles who walk by the light of nature: yet that light of nature we
have (together with the light of the Gospel) which will convince us of sins
against nature; but for sins in the particular circumstances, relating to Gods
worship, the light of nature will not convince: and here these lights differ in
operation also.

5. Quest. The fifth Question is, whether your light, who call your selves
believers, be within you? and if within you, how came you by it, when you were
in darkness, as the moving cause? and if without, how does it inlighten, and
not within? and where does it abide for you, that is not in you?

Answ. To this I answer, that God which commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, is he which has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. this being answered,
there is no need of answering the later part of this quaere, for the light that
is in believers does abide in their hearts.

6. Quest. Whether that light which is not within, can inlighten the heart and
understanding? Whether the Gospel be not hid to all who have their hearts and
minds blinded? and whether it be not the work of the God of this World, to
blind hearts? whether such as deny the light within, and preach against it,
lest people should believe in it, be not in his work and Ministry, yea or no?

Answer. To the former part of this Question, I Answer by concession: to the
later part, if by preaching against Light within, you mean preaching against
the Light of Christ in his Saints, we make one mind with you; but if you mean
preaching against your notion, viz. That every one has the light of Christ in
him; then I say, that a man may preach against this, and say with John, He that
walks in the dark, has no Light in him.

7 Quest. What kind of Faith thine is, who have denied the Faith that is the
gift of God? and how thou came by it, which God did not give thee? and
whether that Faith which is not of God, he not of the Devil, yea or no?

Answ. This question is grounded upon another of thy false suggestions, as I
have showed already: For though I deny thy Faith to be Gods gift, yet I did
never tell thee that my Faith was not his gift: and though I do say, That no
Faith is the gift of God as you fancy it, to wit, that men must do nothing
toward the obtaining it, but wait till they are puffed up with your quaking
dotages; yet I do say, that we ought to contend for that Faith that was once
GIVEN to the Saints.

8. Quest. Did ever any of the Saints profess a Faith which they received not
of God? and whether thy contention be for the Faith once delivered to these
Saints? and if so, from whom had thou it, seeing thou deniest it to be the
gift of God?

Answ. This question is the same with the former, and therefore the same answer
will serve to it, as to the former. However, I cannot but take notice, that
thou multipliest words without knowledge, or else thou might have seen this
question to be the same with the former, and grounded upon the same falsity.

9 Quest. What Faith is that which pleads for sin, and preaches against
perfection? that believes they can never be free from sin, nor come to
perfection, while they are in this world? show the Saints that so believed, and
so preached.

Answ. This I have in part answered already, some pages before, when I proved,
that by the import of this question, that you professed to be perfect men; which
you were forced to deny, when I laid so many imperfections and inconsistencies
upon you, that you leaped over many, and did not answer them; yet I shall add
this further, That the Faith which pleads for sin, is of the Devil (if such a
thing may be called Faith) and from beneath: but where did thou learn this
dialect, as to call a pleading for sin, Faith? whereas the Scripture notes it
for unbelief.

10 Quest. Is not the end of Christ's Ministry for the perfecting of the
Saints? and is not that Antichrist, whose Ministry is against it? or is
Christ's Ministry now changed from what it was?

Answ. The end of Christ Ministry, is for the perfecting the Saints; and that
is Antichrists Ministry that is against it; and Christ's Ministry is not
changed from what it was.

11 Quest. Whether that Faith which is not of God can receive the things of
God, or can be imputed for righteousness to him that has it? And is not his
righteousness of himself, whose Faith is of himself? or can it be otherwise, if
it be the righteousness of Faith?

A. This question is confused like the qerent that made it, or else he would
never ask, whether the Faith which is of God, can receive the things of God?
and, Is not his righteousness of HIMSELF, whose FAITH is of HIMSELF? and yet
ask in the latter end of the same Quaere, If it can be OTHERWISE, if it be the
Righteousness of Faith? Therefore till he understand better how to make a
question, I shall forbear to answer any otherwise, but that he that has not
the Faith of God, is not of God; neither can any other Faith be imputed for
Righteousness, then that which is of Faith in Christ Jesus.

12 Quest. Whether he that has not received the Faith, be not an infidel? or
is he to be believed in matters of God and Christ? And being of a false Faith,
is it safe to believe what he says against the children of Light?

Answ. If by the Faith of God, you mean the Faith that you do profess, which
is, That Christ was not born after the flesh; then I say, That this Faith is
not the gift of God, neither is he an infidel that has not received it;
neither is he to be believed in matters of God and Christ, whatsoever he talks
and prates of, if he have such a false Faith Neither is it safe to believe what
a man of such a ^aith says, either against the children of Light, or ^^y body
else.

13 Quest. Whether it be not plain Nonsense to say, that Christ does inlighten
every one that comes into the world, (as thou do confess in thy book) and
then to deny that Light to be in that inlightens?

Answ. Thou might as well ask, whether John did not speak Nonsense, in
saying, Joh. 1. That Christ is the true Light, that lightens every one that
comes into the world; and yet afterward in Joh. 11.10. says, If a man do walk
in the night he stumbles, because there is no Light IN HIM. But to this I have
spoke once and again, in my last and this also.

14 Quest. Whether Paul was rightly called and endued to the Ministry, who was
not sent to baptize? and whether it was not a sign that John was decreasing,
and Christ increasing, that being left out in Paul's Command, who was called
after Christ was offered up? And cannot a man now be a Minister of Christ, and
not sent to baptize?

Answ. I answer, first, Paul was rightly called and endued, though (he says)
he was not sent to baptize. But James, how can thou prove, that this relates
to his not baptizing with water; since thou will not have that Text in Matthew.
28. so understood? but tell me, our understanding the Text to be meant of
water, is a crooked Consequence, because the word WATER is not expressed: though
thereupon I have said so much, that it would trouble thee to answer; and
therefore thou cunningly slipst it over, and say nothing to it. And now
James, how can thou, without the like Consequence, prove this was meant of
water, since the word water is not here expressed? But 2. if that be granted,
that it is meant of water, does this prove (because it is said, He was NOT sent
to baptize) that therefore he was not in any sense commanded to it? Does not
the Scriptures sometimes lay down such sayings, that are to be understood
chiefly and eminently, and not exclusively? as, Labor NOT for the meat that
perishes; does this therefore prove, that believers are not to labor for
earthly bread at all, but eat the bread of idleness, as you do? in like manner
is this saying of Paul's to be understood, who though he was not chiefly and
eminently sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, yet he also did baptize,
as the same place, 2 Cor. 1.14, 16. does declare. Now if Paul did baptize, it
was either in the Name of God and Christ, or his own Name; but it was not in
his own Name, for this he denies, ver. 13. when he says, Either were you
baptized in the Name of Paul? Well then, if he did baptize in the Name of
Christ, then I quaere, Whether it be not great wickedness to do a thing in the
Name of God or Christ, that Christ never commanded? and therefore I say, Paul's
saying, he was not sent to baptize, does not prove, that therefore John was
decreasing; if by decreasing you mean, that the things that John was a Preacher
of should decrease; for, John was a Preacher of Repentance, as well as
Water Baptism: And may you not as well say, That he decreased in one thing, as
well as another? And to the last branch of the quaere, I say, That in the sense
Paul was a Minister of Christ, and was not sent to baptize, a man may be a
Minister of Christ now: But did you ever find a Minister of Christ in all the
New Testament, that did not baptize at all, or that said as you do, That
Baptism with water is not Gods Command?

15 Quest. Your next question is, seeing the last of Matthew is your strength
for Water Baptism, I ask, Whether one may not be baptized into the Name of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, without being dipped in carnal water? also, whether
all you dip in water, you baptize into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost? if the first of these be Yea, and the later No, then I conclude, that
carnal dipping is not the thing.

Answ. As for thy word carnal water, it is a word of thy own; and therefore I
have nothing to say to it. But as touching the rest of the question, I say,
That the former is Nay, and the latter Yea, to use your own phrases; for none
were ever baptized into the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that were not
baptized with water; and do thou prove it if thou can, without a crooked
Consequence, and I will believe all you say: and the latter is Yea, for we do
not baptize any, but we do it in the Name of Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

16 Quest. Does every one that reads the Bible, hear the Word of God? or has
every one the Word that has a Bible? and what difference is there between the
ministration of the letter now, and that in the Jews time, BOTH denying the
Faith which is the gift of God? and will that save now more without the
ministration of the Spirit, then in their days?

Answ. First, every one that reads the Bible, READS the Word; though it is
true, that many can read, that do not hear. Again, 2. every one that has the
Bible, has the Word; if by Word you mean the written Commands of God, and
his Promises to them that obey, and his Threatenings to them that obey not. And
whereas you ask me, what difference is between the ministration of the letter
now, and that in the Jews time, since both denied the Faith which is the gift
of God, etc. I wonder at thy ignorance, James; does not Paul say, 2 Cor. 3.7.
that the ministration written with Letters, was glorious? and was not that to
the Jews in the Jews time? and yet thou have the face to say, That the
ministration of the letter in the Jews time, did deny the Faith of God; and so
thou say now: But where have thou a text for this, that proves the
ministration of the letter to deny the Faith of God at any time? is not this
one of thy brainsick Notions? And whereas you ask, if it would save now
without the Spirit, more then in their days? I say, That question is needless;
for, neither then nor now can men be saved, without Gods Spirit: But what is
this to thy purpose, who says, That the ministration of the letter in the Jews
time, and now, do both deny the Light and Faith, which is the gift of God? For
shame man leave off thy talking of God, without thou could speak more to
purpose, and less to his dishonor!

17 Quest. Whether that righteousness that a man reads in the letter, sets
him to do the like without Faith, which is the gift of God, or the leadings of
the Light of Christ, the ministration of the Spirit, be the righteousness of
Faith, or Self-righteousness?

Answ. The letter no where sets men to do the righteousness which it calls for,
without the Faith of God and Christ. 2. To the latter part of your question, I
answer, That the righteousness of Faith which men have by the Light of Christ,
and the ministration of the Spirit, is not self-righteousness.

Thus have I plainly and faithfully transcribed thy questions, and answered
them; which in reason thou could not expect, since thou have left mine
unanswered: And were it not but that thou would have been wise in thy own
conceit, I should scarce have taken the pains; and if thou should joy in the
strength of thy Quaeres, know, That the joy of the hypocrite will be but for a
moment, till my Answer can overtake them.

Postscript.
READER,
SOme passages thou have, for which there is but his Yea, and my Nay; and
therefore, that you may know on which side the truth lies, examine my former
book, and his Answer, and see if that he has not accused that book of many
things, that were neither in the book, nor the Authors heart: and by that thou will perceive, that he that will not stick to belie me in a matter so publicly
made known, as my book is, will not matter to do the like, and worse,
concerning what I spoke more private. And also compare this Reply with his
Answer, and see if I have falsely related or perverted any saying in his book,
but have faithfully and impartially transcribed them; and see if I have omitted
replying to any thing that is of weight, or indeed to the lightest thing that
does but look like an Argument; and see also, if he has not left out many
Arguments, and many Pages, to which he says nothing; and whether he has not
added to, and taken from most things that he mentions of my book, and then
attempts to answer it. And whereas he would excuse his Error of denying Christ
born after the flesh, by saying, That that which is born after the flesh, is
flesh, and that which is born after the Spirit, is Spirit: Whether by the rule
of Contraries, it does not undeniably follow, That that which is NOT born after
the flesh, is not flesh? and then, what does he less, then deny Christ to be
made flesh, by the perverting those Scriptures, Joh. 3. and Gal. 4. whatever he
says to the contrary? Consider, and weigh things aright, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things. VALE.

Reader, thou art desired to correct these two mistakes, and all others thou
meetest with, of this or any other kind.

Page 30. lin. 21. for fifteenth read seventeenth. p. 35. l. 14. for page 14.
read page 19.

FINIS.
REader, These may certify, That Jer: Ives did not utter any such thing as
James Nayler falsely charges upon him, viz. As that all good was not of God:
neither did he deny Faith and obedience to be Gods gift, but in the sense
mentioned in this Reply: Neither did he say any of those things; as, That the
Wilderness where John baptized was in Jerusalem, etc. And we do further
certify, That the account he has given of that Conference at Gerard Roberts,
in this Reply to James Nayler, is true; we being there all the time, and heard
none of those things, save what Jer: Ives has here acknowledged, and given an
Account of in this his Answer to that lying Letter. Witness our Hands,

John Fry. Rich. Cleiveland. William Nash.


REader, Whereas James Nayler denies that ever he knew of the fetching the last
Letter mentioned in this book; which Letter was to prove, he had writ some
things that was false concerning Jer: Ives: Now these may certify, That it was
publicly declared to his face, That the Letter should be fetched for to prove
him a Liar, and accordingly it was: and when the Letter came, he was gone;
though it was told him, If he would stay, the Letter should be produced, to
prove his false speaking (though in his book he denies he knew of the fetching
of it.) Witness my Hand this 21 of July, 1656.

John Fry.


