A FAMOUS VICTORY OBTAINED,

By Sir William Brewerton. By Sir Thomas Fairfax. By Sir William Fairfax.
IN A pitched Battle against the Lord BYRON, (Chief Commander of the Kings
Forces) at the raising of the Sledge of Namptwitch.

TOGETHER, With a List of all the Commanders that were slain and taken in the
said Fight.

ALSO, In what estate the Town of Namptwitch now is, and the miserable
condition of the Enemies Forces in these parts.

Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop. Febr. the 2d. 1644.

A FAMOVS VICTORY Obtained by Sir WILLIAM BRERETON, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and
Sir WILLIAM FAIRFAX: Against the Lord BYRON: Chief Commander in the Kings Army.
ALL worthy Sir, I make no question, but you have heard of the last defeat
given to Sir Nicholas Biron and his Serjant Major, and although Sir William
Brewerton has been much distressed in these parts, for want of supplies, and
although the Cowardlinesse of the Manchester men; yet since they have gained
their lost reputation, and stick to us with a great deal of valor, and at
times done great execution upon the enemy. The Lord Byron the Kings General,
has been so terrible unto us, and shows so little mercy on those he
overcommeth or takes prisoners, that some of our forces were unwilling to
venture on any design, where Biron was; but since thanks be to God, our
valiant Leaders, Sir William Brereton, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Sir William
Fairfax, and Colonel Mitton, have done so worthy good services, that believe
from me, our Town of Namptwich is for certain set at liberty, the enemy quite
routed; and dispersed in several companies; that like amazed creatures they
rove up and down the country, and cannot make head of five hundred; which at
the first besi^ging, was full five thousand: our foot forces are greatly
wearied, but exceeding good service have they done, against the enemy: and as
near as I can, I have set down the truth of our late proceedings, with a List
of the number taken, and slain. We are here very busy for the present, and
keep a great Guard over the prisoners which we have taken, and we believe the
Gentry shall be sent to London, and the common Irish to be tried by a Council
of War, the under-Marshall and Keeper of our cutthroates has a beneficial
place thereof, of the Inhabitants, both men, women, and children, daily resort
to the Goal, to see what manner of monsters they be. I believe you will have
this business very suddenly, in regard of which, I will leave you, hoping that
you will pray for our further success, and rest yours

I. ISACK.
From Crews-House, January the 29. 1644.
A List of the Kings Commanders taken at the raising of the Siedge of Namptwich
^ in a pitched Battle between Sir William Brewerton, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Sir
William Fairfax: Against the Lord Byron, chief Commander of the Kings Forces
there.
SErgeant Major General Gibson. Sir Michael Earmely. Sir Richard Fleetwood.
Sir Francis Boteler. Collonell Warren. Collonell Moncke. Collonell Gibs. Major
Hammond.
^ 14, Captains.
1. Castillion. 2. Wither. 3. Leverson. 4. Case. 5. Kise. 6. Woodwofe. 7. Pa^e.
8. Morgan. 9. Lewis. 10. Signum. 11. Toothwood. 12. Thomas. 13. Lidcot. 14.
Billingsley.
20. Lieutenants.
1. Smith. 2. Bates. 3. Saintford, etc.
26. Ensigns.
Brown. Brewerton, etc. 4. Canoneers. 2. Cornets. 2. Quartermasters. 1.
Captatn Lieutenant of a Regiment. 6. Piece of Ordnance. 4. Trumpets. 41.
Sergeants. 40. Drums. 61. Corporals. 20. Carriages. 120. Women with great
Knives. 200. Slain on the right Wing, besides. 700. Taken on the left Wing, 21.
Gentlemen of Companies. 80. Fiery Bullets shot into the Town, but none did
execution; but one, which lighted into a Stacke of Hay.
Postcript.
SIr my intentions were to have sent you a more ample Relation, and to have
certified you of each particular which happened both before and in the Fight,
but the Messenger was in such extraordinary haste, I am forced to omit it till
the next occasion, entreating you to take this in good part.

Vale.

