ENGLANDS OATHS.

Taken by all men of Quallity in the Church and Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

The Oath of Supremacy.

The Oath of Allegiance.

AND

Published by G. J. for satisfaction of his Parishioners.

London, Printed, 1642.

ENGLANDS Oaths. Taken by all men of quallity, in the Church and Commonwealth
of England
The Oath of Supremacy.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal: And that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Preeminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within
this Realm. And therefore, I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities; and do promise that from
henchforth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his
Heirs and lawful Successors: and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities granted or belonging
to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of the Realm: So help me God: and by the Contents of this
Book.

The Oath of Allegiance.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare
in my conscience before God and the world, That our Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES, is lawful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries: And that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any
Authority of the Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any power or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to Authorize any Foreign Prince, to
invade or annoy Him or His Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of
their Allegiance and Obedience to His Majesty, or to give License or leave to
any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to
His Majesty's Royal person, State or Government, or to any of His Majesty's
Subjects within His Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that,
notwithstanding any Declaration or Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation
made or granted, or to be made or granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by
any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his Sea, against
the said King, His Heirs or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects
from their Obedience; I will bear faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty,
His Heirs and Successors, and Him and Them will defend to the uttermost of my
power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made
against His or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of
any such Sentence, or Declaration, or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor
to disclose and make known unto his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be
against Him, or any of them. And I do further swear, That I do from my heart
abhor, detest and abjure as impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine and
Position, That Princes which be Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be
Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do
believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any person
whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof; which I
acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully ministered unto me, and
do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. And all these
things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these
express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and
understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation, or mental evasion,
or secret reservasion whatsoever. And I do make this Recognition and
acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true Faith of a
Christian. So help me GOD.

The late Protestation.
I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and
estate, the true reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery, and Popish Innovation within this Realm,
contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, His
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate; as also the Power and Privileges
of Parliament; The lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and every
person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by Force, Plots, Conspiracies, or
otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this present
Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just and Honorable
ways, endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace between the three Kingdoms
of England, Scotland, and Ireland; And neither for Hope, Fear, nor other
respect, shall relinquish the Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

FINIS.

