Miserere mei Deus. Flevit amare



A TREATY of PACIFICATION OR CONDITIONS of PEACE BETWEEN GOD AND MAN. Ps:
51.17. A broken and contrite Heart (o God) thou will not despise.



By H. J.

1642.

London.

Printed for R. Thral.

W. M. sculp:

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IN Multiloquio non deest peccatum. Prove. 10.19.
In the multitude of words there wants not sin, said the Wiseman long
since: and what he said of Talking, may we not apply to Printing? If Mendacium
(a Lie) be sin, as I trust none will deny, though it be officiosum or
jocosum, the officious or jeasting Lie, then we may without offense conclude,
that (as some now licentiously assume to themselves) in much printing there
wants not sin. So many ( Books I am loath to call them) Pamphlets issue
daily from the Press, without Authority, nay point blanke against Authority,
and they so stuffed with untruths, as though the Authors think it lawful to
draw sin with cartropes. Esa 5.^8.


Well, to this multitude of Books or Pamphlets (call them what you please) I
have adventured to bear the retorting of that fault I found in others, and to
add one more to the number: as fitting for the time, and (I am sure) of a more
necessary and weighty import and consequence, and in a more orderly way, then
many of them.

The subject of it is Repentance, a harsh and unpleasing thing, I confess to
flesh and blood: but for all that, it is unum necessarium, one of the most
necessary duties to be urged, Luke 1^.4^.
and which condu^eth most to our good at this time, especially when the sword
not only hangs over our heads, but has begun to avenge the quarrel of the
LORD in some part of this Land: and how soon it may be felt amongst us and the
other part of our Kingdom, we know not: And this, not the sword of an
Adversary from without, but (which is a worse judgment) from within, amongst
our selves, by Civil (or rather as S. Augustine calls it, uncivil) War and
dissension. Mala quae quanto interiora sunt, tanto miseriora, Evils, are the
more miserable, by how much they grow the more inward, says he.

If it were but the sword from abroad, it were sufficient to awake and rouse us
from the dead sleep of sin, wherein we have so long lain, and to stir us
up to this duty: there is as well Danger, as incitement enough in that. For the
Heathen Orator says of it, non solum adventus Belli, Gid Pr^l. Manil.
etc. Not only War it self when it comes, but the very fear of it, brings
calamity enough with it: For when the Enemies Forces are not far off (though
they enter not at all, yet) people forsake their Cattle, the Husbandman
deserts his Tillage, and the Merchant his commerce and Traffic.

But come we to consider Civil and domestique War, and we shall find, he
calls that, Bellum perniciocissimum, the most pernecious War of all other.
Our Savior tells us in few words the effects of it. Mar. 3.34.
If a Kingdom be divided within it self, that Kingdom cannot stand:
dissension will bring it to utter ruin, if not speedily prevented. For where
Civil War rages, there are not only that agmen malorum, troup of miseries
attending it, that follow a War which comes from abroad, but far more. For
besides (which is common to the other) as Augustine describes them, Rapti
Virgins, De Ci^^ Dei.
etc. Virgins are ravished, and all modesty violated, Children snatched from the
arms of their Parents, Matrons put to whatsoever the Soldier pleases,
Churches spoiled, Houses plundered, slaughter, burning, and all havocke
committed, and the end and conclusion of it is, that every place is filled with
blood, lamentations, and dead carcases. Perit cum divite pauper, the rich, and
poor, both perish. To these we may add one thing, which the other is free
from: that in a Civil War, the Father fights against the Son, and perhaps
kills him, and the Son does the like to the Father, the Servant to the
Master, nor have Friends or Kinsmen any respect to friendship or kindred. He
that considers these evils which accompany War, and more especially Civ^^l
War, so great, and horrid; must needs confess War to be flagellum Dei,
the scourge of God upon a Land: but he that thinks not upon it without grief
and horror of mind, De Civ: Dei
is more miserable (says Augustine) because he has lost the sense of a man.
Horret animus (said Jerome in the like case) temporum nostrorum ruinas
prosequi. It drives my mind into horror, to prosecute and declare the miseries
of our times: and foelix qui haec non vidit, foelix qui haec nonaudit (says
he) happy is he, that neither sees, nor hears any of these things.

And indeed, the danger being so sensible, and the cause (our horrid sins)
being so palpable, who is so stupid, that will not apply himself to the cure,
which is no way to be effected, but by true and hearty repentance: We shall
never remove this heavy judgment, but by accepting these Conditions of Peace,
now offered to us by GOD. Regnum ruit, and tamen cervix nostra non flectitur?
Is the kingdom in danger of ruin, and yet we continue stiff-necked?
Offensum sentimus Deum, nec placamus? Do we perceive that God is offended with
us, and shall we not go about to pacify him? God forbid.

If we do not, destruction and confusion must necessarily and speedily follow.
God has spared and expected us long, to show mercy upon us; if we turn not to
him, he will at last power the full viols of his wrath upon us; Ap^^ 21.9.
his seven plagues mentioned in the Revelation. Quanquam sera ^amen certa
Numinis vindicta. Divine vengeance is sure, though it be slow. The Heathen man
could say, Lento gradu ad vindictam sui divina procellitira, Val: Max.
tarditatemque supplicij gravitate compensat. GODS anger strikes slowly in
revenge of our sins against him, but it remompenceth the slownesse of it,
with the grievousnesse of the punishment. And this false upon us, but as we
deserve: For, subito tollitur qui diu tolleratur. He, and that Land too, will
suddenly be destroyed, that makes no good use of GODS long forbearance and
expectance.

It is reported by Josephus, that (besides many prodigies which appeared in
Jerusalem, before the last destruction of it) one Jesus son of Ananias a
Country fellow, D^bell: Jud: ^7 c. 12.
for a long space (even before the war of Titus) went up and down the
streets, crying, Vae Jerosolymis, woe to Jerusalem; but he was scorned, yea and
punished as a Boutefeau for it; you know what became of that City. We find that
the old world had a 120. years, given for Repentance, and it was neglected,
but what followed? The flood drowned them all, Genesis 6.
except Noah, the Preacher of Repentance, and his Family. And we read that
Jonas cried in the streets of Nineveh, Ion. 3.4.
yet 40. days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. And the Text says, 7.
The people believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, etc. And the King and they
repented in sackcloth and ashes. And ye know how they sped.

God has given us many 40. days, Dedi eis tempus ad poenitentiam, he has
afforded us a time to repent, we know not how long that time may last. Let us
no longer despise the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, Romans 2.4.
and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads (or should
lead) us to Repentance. But take heed, that (having destruction as it were,
before our faces) we contemn not stall Gods counsel, Eze. 18.30.
Repent and turn every one from his wicked vvayes, that iniquity be not our
destruction. We see that the foolish Virgins missing their time, Mat. 25.^^.
had no answer, but nescio^os, I know you not, a fearful answer it was: Let us
therefore lay hold of the time, and repent before it be too late, and our time
out; and not only do this our selves, but (according to that of the Apostle)
exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, Heb. 3.13.
least any of us be hardened, through the deceitfullnesse of sin: Luc. 13.3.
and so (as Christ foretold the Jews) we all perish. God of his infinite
goodness give us all grace, to lay this speedily to heart, that we may avert
this heavy judgment from us, and serve him hence forward in a true fil^ all
fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life.

Amen.

A TREATY OF PACIFICATION OR Conditions of PEACE between God and man.
THere is an appointed time to all things, Eccl. 3.11
says the Preacher, and a little after (coming to particulars) he adds, 3.
There is a time to slay, 4.
and a time to heal. A time to weep, and a time to laugh or rejoice.

There Is nothing so sure, nothing so infallible, as that which is recorded in
the book of God. Gods word never fails, not one jot or tittle of it. Mat ^
18. Luc. 21.^^.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not any of Gods words shall pass away.
For may we not truly say, that these words of the Preachers are, (as Christ
said upon another Text) this day fullfilled in our edres? Zuc. 4 21.
May we not now say, and that truly now, there is a time to slay? and so
consequently, a time to weep and mourn? I would to God we could not.

There was a time, Mat 26, 52.
when Christ said to St. Peter, Put up thy Sword into his place (the sheath,
18.^^.
as St. John has it) but I fear we are fallen into the time, of which God
foretold the Israelites, wherein he threatens to send a Sword upon them, that
should avenge the quarrel of his Covenant. (...) 26.25.


There was a time also of rejoicing, and we had it long, could we have made
good use of it. For what Nation under the Sun has for these 100. years
(almost) had such a time of joy? The great blessing of the Gospel has bin
plentifully and peaceably continued amongst us, and all temporal blessings in
abundance have bin showred upon us. We have bin blessed with a continued peace,
as no Nation has enjoyed the like, together with such plenty, (and what not?)
as has caused us to be maligned by our enemies, and renowned throughout the
whole world. Insomuch as we may truly ask. What could God have done more for a
Nation or people, then he has done for us?

How comes it then, that our rejoicing is taken from us, and that the time of
slaying, of mourning, and weeping is now fallen upon us? The reason certainly
may easily be given. Even the same that brought the Jews into the same estate.
Our disobedience to his commands, our despising his Laws and Ordinances, and
our ingratitude and unthankfullnesse for all his blessings. These are the
causes, by which we have neglected and so lost our time of rejoicing, and for
which, God has begun to take up his time of slaying, Amos 5.16.
and to send thereby mourning and wayling into our streets and habitations, and
to make us say in all our highways, Alas, Alas: and to call the husbandman to
lamentation; Ezec 14 17.
and such as can mourn to mourning. For has he not said, Sword go through
the Land? And this is come upon us, because by our forsaking God, he has
forsaken us, according to that of Augustine, D^verb. Do^^^
Malum est nobis de nobis, and quia dimisimus te, dimisisti nos nobis. O Lord,
evil is come upon us, from our selves, and because we have forsaken thee, thou
have forsaken us, and left us to our selves.

Being in this heavy condition, and our sins daily crying f^r further
vengeance against us. What are we to do, to redeem our misspent time, and to
regaine Gods favor? Surely there is no other way, no other means left, but to
turn unto him by hearty Repentance, and by unfeigned and hearty Humiliation, to
endeavor to appease his wrath, that now is gone out against us.

There are diverse motives to stir us up to this duty, as

1. Naturae vox, the very dictate of Nature, for it is a most reasonable thing,
even in nature: that they which have done amiss, should repent them of the
evil they have committed.

2. Tempus ad hoc impensum. The long time that God has given us to repent.
Apoc. 2.2^.
Dedi ei tempus ad poenitentiam. I have given her a time to repent, says God.
And if God has given it, and in it expected our repentance, why should we be
so stiffnecked and unthankful, as not to accept it?

3. Documenta sapientium. The Counsel of those that were wise in their
Generation. Jer. 26 1^. Ezec. 14.^. Act 3 19.
The Prophets. Repent and turn your selves. And S. Peter, Repent and turn,
that your sins may be put away. S. John. Be zealous therefore, and repent.
Apo. 3 19.


4. Praxis Sanctorum, the practice and examples of the Saints of God. Of holy
Job. Therefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes. Job 42 6.
K. David upon Gods visitation, for his unadvisednumbring of the people. 1 Samuel
^^.
His heart smote him, and he repented of his foolish. act. I^oel 2^
In a time of famine Joel caused a public Repentance. 2 Chronicles 20.
In a time of war, Jehoshaphat and his people repented. In a time of public
calamity, and Gods judgments threatened, we find Esther, Ahab and the
Ninivites doing the like. E^^h. 4.^6. 1 Reg 21.27 Ion. 2.5. 1 Cor. 10, 11.
All which are recorded for examples to us, upon whom the ends of the world are
come.

5. Praesens commodum, The present benefit we may reap by it, as the averting
of Gods displeasure, and the returning into his favor. Ezekiel, 18.
At what time soever a Sinner repents of his sin from the bottom of his
heart, I will put away all his wickedness, etc. If we repent, God will repent
him of the Plague, Ier. 26.13.
he has pronounced against us.

6. Futurum praemium. Not only a present benefit will be gotten by it, but a
reward, Ezec 18 2 Cor. 7.10
which will continue for ever, even the remission of sins, and salvation of
our souls, by the merits of Jesus Christ.

7. Incommoda impoenitentium. The discommodities and dangers that follow the
impenitent, and they are many.

1. He loses the grace of God, Romans 2.^.
by despising the riches of his bountifulness and patience, and
long-suffering, which leads him to Repentance.

2. He runs headlong into misery. We see an example of it in Manasses and
his people; 2 Chr. 33.10.11.
who (being great Idolaters and called upon by the Prophets, yet they regarding
not, nor repenting) were carried into captivity.

3. And not only temporal miseries befall them, but (which is far worse)
spiritual also are threatened against them. God says to the Church of Ephesus,
Apec. 2.5.
Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works:
for else I will come against thee shortly, and will remove the candle-stick out
of his place, except thou amend.

4. Lastly, endless torments are denounced against them. The Baptist calls the
Jews, a Generation of Vipers, Mat 3.8.
and tells them of a vengeance to come; and our Savior tells them, Luc. 3.3.
unless they repent they shall perish. And the Apostle says, that they that
are so hard hearted, that they cannot repent, Romans 2.5.
heap up to themselves wrath, against the day of wrath.

And the reason for all this Chrysostom gives. God is nothing so much
displeased at the sins we commit, as that (when his hand is over us for them)
we refuse to repent, In Mat.
and grieve for the sins we have committed.

Repentance then is the means, and the only means prescribed by God himself,
Isid. de sum. ^ou.
to avert his anger from us. Poenitentia est medicamentum vulneris, spes
salutis, per quam Deus ad miserieordiam provocatur. Repentance is the salve for
the wound of our sins, and the hope of recovery, by which God is provoked to
mercy.

It had bin far better for us, and more acceptable to God, that his goodness
had led us to Repentance: but seeing that we have bin so unhappy, Romans 2.4.
as not to stand, or keep the right way which God has set us in, and thereby
incurred his heavy displeasure; let us not be more miserable, in not rising,
and turning to it again. We have all gone astray from God, peccando, by our
sins, and displeased him, let us return to him poenitendo, by repentance,
and pacify him. He has showed his goodness to us wretched sinners, by diverse
mercies.

1. By exhorting us to Repentance. Cant. 6.12. Ier 7.13.
Revertere, revertere Shunamitis, Return, Return o Shunamite. Rising up
early, and speaking to us, to turn to him.

2. By giving us time and opportunity to repent. Apoc. 2.21.


3. By waiting upon us, to show mercy to us, Esa, 30.18.
if perhaps we would repent.

4. By preserving us in the mean time, Ps 116.8.
from falling into worse sins.

5. By enlightening our hearts, 2 Co^. 4.16.
to find the way to repentance.

6. By his promise to receive us graciously, if we repent. They say if a man
put away his wife, Ier. 3.2^
etc.

But seeing we have despised the riches of his mercy and goodness, Romans 2.4.
and that all the means he has used, has wrought no good effects in us, Ps.
7.12.
He has now whet his Sword, bent his bow, and made it ready. We begin to feel
his indignation, the time of slaying is begun, the wrath of the Lord is
kindled. Let us not be worse conditioned then the Jews, who cum occideret, Ps.
78 34.
quaerebant eum, when he slew them, they songht him, and returned, and sought
God early. Let it prove true with us, which the Wiseman did see to be true in
his time, Pro. 15.32.
that vexatio dat intellectum, affliction brings a man to the true
understanding of his miserable condition. Mor.
Gregory says, Aurem cordis tribulatio aperit, quam sepe prosperitas hujus
mundi claudit. Tribulation opens the ear of the heart, which is oft-times
closed by the prosperity of this world. Let our understanding and our hearts be
clear, to apprehend the misery we are near to; and then cum occideret may be
staid, before we be all occisi. There is great danger in repentance delayed. We
must follow K. David's example that (upon the death of 70000 men slain for his
sin) presently repented. 2 Samuel 14.
If his repentance had stayed but few days, and God had slain the people,
after the first days proportion, there would but few of those many that were
numbered have bin left alive. For ought I see, it may be our own case, and
therefore let us not defer our repentance, but speedily go to the throne of
grace, Heb. 4.16.
that we may receive mercy, and find grace, to help in the time of need.

We see then, that there is a necessity of Repentance. Let us now consider what
Repentance is. This is taken in diverse senses and significations.

1. It is so called, of those, that are grieved for the loss of some temporal
thing, which was formerly pleasing and delightful to them. But this the
Apostle calls worldly sorrow, and tells us, 2 Cor. 7.10.
that it brings death.

2. Secondly, it is so termed, of those, that conceive sorrow and grief for
sin committed, which was formerly pleasant to them, but their grief is not,
in respect that they have offended God, but in regard of some ill, that befalls
them for it.

Lastly, it is so called of those, that not only grieve merely for sin
committed, and purpose to amend their lives for the future; but are truly
sorrowful, in respect that by their sinning, they have offended the divine
Majesty.

And there is great difference in these kinds of Repentance, for the first is
wicked, the second but the effects of a troubled mind, and therefore not right;
but the last is good, and the repentance pleasing and acceptable to God.

There are also diverse other definitions of Repentance, as

1. Poenitentia est virtus, qua commissa mala plangimus and odimus, cum
emendationis proposito. It is a virtue, by which we bewail and hate our sins
committed, with a purpose to amend our lives.

2. Poenitentia est dolor cordis and animae pro malis, Ambr.
qui quisquam commisit. It is a sorrow of heart and soul, for the sins a man
commits.

3. Poenitentia est peccata non committere, and commissa deflere. It is, Aug.
not to commit sin for the future, and to bewail sins past.

4. But these are all short of a true Repentance, for that is a corrective act
of Justice, begetting in us a detestation of sins already committed, with
sorrow and indignation against our selves for it, especially in regard we have
thereby offended God, together with a settled resolution and determination, to
reform the evil custom of our lives: And this is wrought in us chiefly, by
these means.

1. First by the grace of God converting our hearts to him, Tar. 5.2^.
Turn us O Lord (says the Prophet) unto thee, and we shall be turned.

2. Being enlightened by his grace, we apply our minds by faith to him. Heb.
11.6
For he that comes to God, must believe that God is.

3. Being stricken with the fear of punishment for our sins, we withdraw
our minds from them; and cry with holy Job, Job 7.10.
I have sinned, what shall I do, O thou preserver of men?

4. Being raised by hope, of obtaining mercy from God, for the sins we have
committed, we determine to amend our lives for the time to come. Bonum est
mihi, etc. says the Psalmist. Ps 73.27.
It is good for me to hold me fast by God, and to put my trust in the Lord God.
As we hope in God for remission, so we must resolve to cleave to him, by
keeping his laws. Gregory says. Mer.
De spe incassum praefumit, qui timere Deum in operibus suis temnit. He
presumes in vain upon hope, that neglects to fear God in his actions.

5. Lastly, love (enflaming our hearts) begets a fil^all and ingenuous fear,
by which we are very careful not to offend Gods Majesty any more, and a
boldness to implore his fatherly goodness, in forgiving that which is past.

Now Repentance (being a medicine for a sick soul, and a salve for a wounded
conscience) has many ingredients to make it right, according to divine art.

1. The first is faith. Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6.
For whatsoever is not of Faith is sin; and whosoever intends to come to
God by repentance, must believe first, that he is God, and secondly that he is
a merciful Father, willing to receive to grace, all such as shall unfainedly
turn to him. All the other ingredients are strengthened by this virtue.

2. Another is Confession and acknowledgement of our manifold sins to God. For
as Ambrose says well, Lib. de Paraed^s^c. 14.
Non potest quis instificari a pe^cato, nisi confessus fuerit peccatum. No man
shall ever be justified and cleansed from his sin, that does not make
confession of them. Solomon says, Pro. 28.1^.
He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and
forsake^h them, shall have mercy. David found this by experience, and
acknowledged it, Ps. 32.6.
I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so thou forgavest the
wickedness of my sin. And therefore the people in the time of Nehemiah, Neh.
9.2.
when they repented, confessed their sins. So did Daniel. Dan, 9.4.
After S. John Baptist had preached Repentance, Mat 3.6.
Diverse of his auditors same and were baptized, confessing their sins. And
S. John tells us, If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just, to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 3 Ioh. 1.9.


Now to make our confession acceptable, it must be thus qualified.

It must be whole, and not imperfect. We must hide none of our sins, but rather
(if we forget any) pray with David, Ps. 19 12.
Lord cleanse me from my secret sins. Qui promereri vult quod experit, debet
omne malum confiteri quod fecit. Greg. Mor.
He that would have what he desires, must confess all the evil which he has
committed.

2. It must be pure, humble, simple, plain, and not artificially compounded,
Pura, simplex, humilis, non affectata elegantia, as Ambrose speaks. We have a
pattern of such a confession, Dan 9.5.
made by the Prophet Daniel: and the like by holy Job; Inpastor.
of which Gregory thus speaks, Mirentur in bono Job qui volunt, castitatis
continentiam, mirentur integritatem iustitiae, mirentur viscera pietatis, ego
in eo non minus miror, confessionem humillimam peccatorum, quam tot sublimia
virtutum. Let them that will admire in good Job, his continence of chastity,
let them admire the integrity of his justice, and his bowels of mercy, I admire
no less in him, his humble confession of his sins, then so many
transcendencies of those other virtues. Such an humble confession was that of
King David's, 2 Samuel 24.10.
I have sinned exceedingly in that I have done, I have done very foolishly. Is
it not to be marvelled at, that a man should sin (says Ambrose) but this is
to be reprooved in him, that he acknowledges not that he has sinned, and
humble himself for it before God?

3. It must be discrect, not filled with Tautologies. Luc. 18 14.
The Publicans was short and pithy, and departed to his house justified rather
then the Pharisee; for as Isidore says, Confessio est cordis non labiorum,
Confession is a thing more proper to the heart, then the lips. Mat. 23.14. Mar.
11.40. Luc. 20 47.
Long Prayers are not much approved by our Savior.

4. It must be frequent and often done. Pro. 8 16. Chrysostom in Psa.30.
The just man falls seven times a day, and rises again. His falling is by
sin, and his rising by repentance. Peccata tua dicito ut deleas, and dicito
quotidie, confess thy sins that thou may blot them out, and confess them
daily, says Chrysostom.

5. It must be to God, Phil.
I do not say (says the same Father) that thou should confess thy sins
to thy servant, to hit thee in the teeth with them, but to GOD that remits them.

3. A third is Conversion, or turning from our (...) ^vill course of life;
amendment (...) life for the future, for as it is a part of Repentance, to
confess the sins we have committed, so if there be not a purpose to lead a
new life afterward, our confession will not avail us, nor is our Repentance
true. And though Conversio ad bonum, Aug.
turning from evil to good, non homini sed Deo ascribenda est, is to be
ascribed to God, and not to man, yet we are not so to rely upon Gods act, as to
think there were nothing for us to do; for it is necessary, that our will
cooperate with grace, in the act of our Salvation. S. Ambrose tells us, what
this conversion is. Quando sic poenitentiam agis, ut tibi amarum sapiat in
anima, quod ante dulce fuit in vita, and quod te prius oblectabat in corpore,
ipsum recruciat in cord, when thou so repentest, as that whatsoever was
formerly pleasant to thee in the course of thy life, does now taste bitter in
thy soul, and what was formerly pleasing to thee in thy body, does now torment
thee in thy heart.

Now our Conversion must be to God with the heart, and the whole heart (as the
Prophet wills us) A Sinner is out of his right way, Iocl 2 15.
he must therefore turn into it. And this turning should be while we are in
Prosperity, Peace and Health, when all things are ex sententia with us, as we
would desire: we should turn to GOD of our own accord, without compulsion,
Luc 19.4^.
and then it were Sacrificium acceptabile: but seeing we have omitted that,
and that we knew not the things, which belonged to our peace, yet in distress,
GOD will not reject a true and unfeigned Conversion. Again, the turning Joel
speaks of, must be to God, not to sin, from one sin to another. Nor must it
be vertigo capitis, a giddiness or turning of the brain, but cordis of the
heart, not only our mind, but our will and affections must be changed; and
then as S. Augustine says, Conversio nostra inveniet Deum paratum, our
Conversion will find God ready to turn from his wrath, and to receive us to
favor: and there is no sin so great, Isid.
but he will remit to a Convert. His goodness and power is so great, says
Augustine, that there is no offense so heinous, which he will not pardon him,
that truly turns to him.

4. Another ingredient is Contrition, which is a breaking of the heart with
sorrow and grief for our sins, and that by committing them we have so highly
offended so great and good a God. And it alludeth to things, which being hard,
are broken in pe^ces, by some hard instrument, and so the heart hardened by sin,
is as it were broken by sorrow and grief.

It is sometimes called, compunctio cordis, compunction or pricking of the
heart, caused chiefly, by fear of Gods wrath against our sins, and love to his
Majesty and his Commandments. Greg. says, Mor,
Alia est compunctio quae per amorem nascitur, alia quae per timorem: quia
aliud est supplicia fugere, aliud praemia desider are. Compunction which
arises by love is one thing, and that is another which grows out of fear,
because it is one thing to avoid punishment, and another to expect a reward.
This is that which made the Apostles auditors to cry out, Act. 2.37.
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? for the Text says, they were pricked in
their hearts.

Otherwhile it is called, Rentino of the heart, Icel 2.12.
and this is an effect of indignation, as the other is of sorrow: as you may
read in the Story of S. Stephen, after he had pleaded his cause, and touched
the Jews to the quick, it is said, Act. 7 54.
their hearts brast for anger. For as ripe ulcers are launced with sharp
instruments, that the venomous matter may issue out, so our hearts swollen by
the venom of sin, are by this kind of Contrition opened, and the Malignant
humor let forth.

Now this Contrition has many branches. 1. The first is Humiliation, Depositio
excellentiae, not only laying aside our best clothes, and putting on those
that are more vile (as of old they did, humbling themselves in sackcloth) but
in abasing our selves with Jacob, Genesis 18.27.
saying, Non sum dignus, I am not worthy of the least of thy blessings, etc.
Chrysostom says, Contritio est humilitas cordis, vera compunctio, Lib de
co^punct.
magna agere, and humilia loqui. Contrition is humbleness of heart, true
compunction, to do great things, and speak of small and mean.

2. The second is smiting upon the breast with the Publican, Luc. 18.13. Ier.
31.19.
and smiting on the Thigh, with the people in captivity, in sign of true
Repentance and detestation of sin.

3. Another (and not the least) is weeping an mourning, the shedding of tears,
and grieving for our sins. And first of tears.

1. Of tears there are 3. sorts.

1. Natural, which arise from the loss of goods, death of friends,
infirmities, injuries received, and the like.

2. Hurtful are they which craft, hypocrisy and dissembling wring from us; as
the tears of harlots, which are compared to the tears of Crocodiles: but these
two kinds of tears, are not those which be proper to true Contrition.

3. Wholesome tears, are they, which proceed from the Holy Spirit, as from the
fountain: and of these there are two kinds: one the signs of godly sorrow, the
other of spiritual joy. One of hatred for sin, the other of love to God. The
tears of Contrition are demonstrations of hate to sin, and the tears of desire
to see God, are signs of love.

1. The tears of Contrition (proper to this subject of Repentance) are
powerful with God. In Esaium.
Hierom says, Oration Deum lenit, sed lachrymae cogunt. Prayer pacifies God,
but tears force him to grant our suits. Ps. 126.7.
David says, They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. In Sermon.
And Chrysostom speaks thus, Nemo ad Deum aliquando flens accessit, qui non
quod postulavit, accepit, No man ever came to God weeping, that obtained not,
what he desired. And therefore it was, that the Prophet Jeremy so often called
upon the people, in the time of Gods visitation, for weeping, that they might
appease his wrath, and wept himself, as he testifies. Lam. 1.16.
For these things I weep: mine eye, even mine eye, casts out water, because
the Comforter should refresh my soul. Ier. 9.^.
And O that mine head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people.
And in the same Chapter, (telling how God would feed the people with Wormwood,
and give them gall to drink, and send the Sword aft^r them) he calls the women
to mourn and weep. Lastly, Lam. 2.18, 19
he persuades them, that tears might run down like a river day and night,
and to lift up their faces like water, before the Lord, to avert his heavy
judgments from them.

In the sacred Scriptures there are many examples of those that shed tears, to
appease the wrath of God. We will touch some of them. The first were the people
of the Jews, who upon the Angels reprooving of them for their sins, ^lud 2.4.
lift up their voice and wept, and called the name of that place, the place of
weepers and tears. And that these tears were from the heart, and obtained
Gods favor, appears by the end; for a little after it is said, They served
the Lord all the days of Joshuah, and all the days of the Elders that
outlived Joshuah. 7.
Those then are true saving tears, to which a settled change of life succeeds.

The next we find, are the same people, who, (upon two discomfitures,) 20.26.
came up into the house of God and wept, etc. They held a solemn Fast, one
part whereof consisted in weeping.

In the next place, we have the example of King David, a man abounding
plentifully in pious tears, as well for himself and his sins, as for the
sins of others: For first, we read, that after his Repentance for the sins
of Adultery and Murder; he thus speaks of himself, I am weary of my
groaning, ^ ^.6.
every night I wash my bed, and water my couch with my tears. And then for the
sins of others, he says, Ps. 119.136.
Mine eyes gush out with water, because men keep not thy Law.

To come to the New Testament, in which the chief mourner and weeper is our
Savior Christ, of whom we read not, that he ever laughed, but wept often: And
though he had no cause to weep for himself, yet for others he did; as for the
temporal destruction of Jerusalem, as also for Lazarus, whom he restored to
life. Lastly, Luc 1941. Ioh. ^^.35. Heb. 5.7.
the Apostle testifies of him, that he offered up prayers and supplications,
with strong crying and tears, etc.

The next weeper was Mary Magdalen: Luc 7.38.
Who when she began to repent, washed Christ's feet with the tears of
repentance, at a public feast in the presence of many.

St. Peter follows, who committed a great offense (at our Saviors passion) out
of too much confidence of his own strength: for he said, Mat 26.35.
Though I should die with thee, yet I will not deny thee. Yet we see how often
he denied his Master. Mat. 26 75.
But he washed away this sin with so great a shower of tears (for he went
out and wept bitterly) as that we find not, that he was ever reprehended by our
Savior, with so much as one word. Lachrymas Petri lego (says Augustne)
satisfactionem non lego: Ser. 7. infest. (...).
sed quod defendi non potest, ablui potest. I read of Peter's tears, not of
his satisfaction: but that which cannot be defended, may be washed away.

Lastly, (...)
(to speak of no more) with 8. Peter we may join his fellow Apostle St. Paul,
who committed a grievous sin, in persecuting the Church of God, and (as he
himself confesses) was not only a Persecutour, ^^ Tim. 1.13.
but a blasphemer, and spiteful, or injurious. But after his Conversion, where
the offense of persecution abounded, the grace of tears superabounded; for so
he testifies of himself, Act. 20. ^8, 19 31.
Ye know that from the first day I came into Asia, after what manner I have
been with you at all seasons, serving the Lord, with all humility of mind, and
with many tears: And a little after. By the space of three years, I ceased
not to warn every one, night and day, with tears: And in the latter Epistle
to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. (...)
I wrote to you with many tears. So that this blessed Apostle, whether he
spoke to God by prayer, he used tears, that he might be heard; or whether he
spoke by preaching unto men, he endeavored rather to persuade with tears,
then words: for he knew, and had learned by experience, that great was the
power and efficacy of tears, as well with God, as men.

We have seen the power and force of tears, and we have seen the practice of
Gods people, of Christ, and diverse Saints therein, let us now see the necessity
of them, and that for 4 respects.

1. Of the deformity of sin it self. 2. Of the multitude of sins committed.
3. Thirdly, in respect of the Party sinning, and the Party offended by sinning.
4. Lastly, in regard of the miseries of the time.
1. For the first. Sin is an offense against God, and all the creatures, and
therefore he which sins, takes arms (as it were) and is at enmity with God,
and all created things. The type whereof was Ishmael, Gen, 16.12.
whose hands were against all men, and every man's hand was against him.

That sin is an offense against God, may be collected from the definition of
it. S. Augustine (and all Divines follow him) defines sin to be, C^ut. Fanst.
27.
whatsoever is spoken, done, or coveted, against the eternal Law: and the
eternal Law is the chief and everlasting Counsel of God, which is God
himself, now he that offends the Law, offends God himself, and departs from his
obedience, for which he becomes liable to his just revenge. Which God testifies
by the Prophet, Esa. 24.5.6.
They have transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinance, and broken the
everlasting Covenant, therefore has the curse devoured the Earth. The
punishment also which God laid upon the Angels which fell, upon our first
Parents, and their posterity, by the general flood, testifies the same. And
lastly, the eternal pains, which God threatens against sinners by his
Prophets and Apostles, bear witness of the wrath of God, against sin, and
sinners.

A sinner also offends the creatures, and provokes their indignation against
him. For first, one man's sin offends other men, by corrupting them by evil
example. Secondly, he offends other corporal things, which he turns from
their true and proper end. So that all the creatures take it grievously, and
are pained, that they are forced to serve sinners.

He also offends the Angels, whom the new offense of a sinner does no less
displease, Luc. ^5.10.
then the conversion of a sinner does delight. Lastly, he offends himself,
because he robs his soul of Gods grace. Nemo laeditur, nisi a seipso, no man is
hurt, but by himself, says Chrysostom truly; because all evil which comes
from without, from enemies, diseases, or from the Devil, cooperate to good,
if sin were away: but when a man poisons his soul with sin, all good
things turn to evil with him. If therefore a sinner would consider these
things, it could hardly be, but that he would be wholly converted into tears.

2. Now secondly, if a man would well weigh the multitude of sins, every day
committed by every one, he would be much amazed, and tremble at it. The Prophet
David cried out and said, Ps. 19.12.
Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me, from my secret faults.
And in another place goes further. My wickednesses are gone over my head (like
a man overwhelmed with water) and are like a sore burden, Ps 38.4.
too heavy for me to bear: they are insupportable. And for this cause, he every
night washed his bed with tears: But because we know not the least part of our
sins, we confess them with dry eyes.

Saint James says, Iam. 3.2.
In multis offendimus omnes. In many things we offend all. Now if the blessed
Apostles (after they had received the holy Ghost) confess themselves to be
sinners, who shall number our offenses? Pro. 24.16.
And if the just man fall seven times a day, as the Wiseman speaks, how
often fall the unjust and unperfect? fall they not at least seventy times seven
times?

The consideration of this point, should so terrify and confound us, that we
might conceive, we always wallow in mire and filth: and think our selves to be
in that case, which Esaias speaks of, Esa. 2.^^.
From the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, there is no soundness
in us. And can it be, that he that considers diligently the state we are in, by
our innumerable offenses, should not weep most bitterly, and as soon as we
have sinned, make haste to wash it away with tears.

3. Thirdly, we are to consider the party sinning, and the person offended,
which are God, and man. God is all-sufficient of himself, Ps. 16.2.
and has no need of our goods: and man a creature, having nothing at all of
himself, but needing all things. God is a King for ever, 102.7. Iam. 4.14.
Luc. 1.37. Ps. 12 6. Romans 16.27. Ps. 7.10. Genesis 6.5.
who ever was, and ^ver shall be, he is ever the same, and his years fail
not. Man is a vapor, that appears for a little time, and vanishes away. God
is omnipotent, with whom nothing is impossible, and whose power no creature is
able to resist. Man is a worm of the Earth, soon trod to pieces. God is only
wise, and knows the thoughts of man, searching the heart and reins. Man's
thuoghts are evil continually. God is a loving and bountiful Father; Man, if
he were stripped by God of what he has, would be easily reduced to nothing.
Lastly, God is the true and natural Lord of all the Creatures, and Man but the
vassal of his Creator. If then we well weigh these two together, and consider
the disparity between them and how insolently man carries himself, in
opposing, contemning, rebelling, and fighting against his God, would it not be
sufficient to draw a flood of tears from the hardest rock of man heart? And
make him with good K. Hezekias, Esa 38.15.
remember all his years in the bitterness of his soul.

4. Lastly, If we would consider the miseries of the time, there were cause
enough, to draw tears from a heart of flint. Of which miseries, I shall not
need to say much, they being too apparent, and (except by timely repentance, we
make our peace with God) like to bring an inevitable ruin upon this Kingdom.
The Sword (for which the Authors shall one day answer) is already drawn, and
what miseries accompany war, and civil dissentions especially, will easily
appear, if we look into the Histories of former ages, both abroad, and at
home. The Heathen Poet could say of war, Dulce bellum inexpertis, Pinlar.
at qui gustavit, contremiscit animo quoties adventans illud videt. War is
pleasant to them that never tried what a battle is; but he that has once
tasted it, trembles at the heart, whenever he sees it coming. And of a
civil war the Orator says thus. Ci^er.
Omnia misera sunt in bello civili, sed nihil miserius ipsa victoria. All
things are miserable in civil war, but nothing more miserable, then the
victory it self.

1. The necessity of weeping then, being thus laid before us, we cannot, but at
the least desire this gratiam lachrymarum, the grace of tears from God; and
with Jeremy say, Oh that our heads were full of water, and our eyes fountains
of tears, to bewail the miseries befallen us, by offending the Majesty of God.

2. But if we cannot attain to this grace of tears, nor that with David, our
eyes cannot gush out tears, nor that we can water our Couch with them; nor
with Jeremy drop a few tears. Let us complain of our dryness, Esa. 24.16.
^leb. 5.7.
as Esaias did of his leanness, and offer up to God, his sons strong crying
tears, for our barrenness, and beseech him to accept them. And not content
our selves only with that, but give our selves to mourning, if we cannot to
weeping, do one, if we cannot do the other. Ps. 38.6.
We may with David, go mourning all the day long. And if we cannot take up
Ieremies weeping, Ier. 48.3^.
let us take up his mourning, which was from the heart, and cry unto the Lord
and say, Spare thy people O Lord. Joel 2.17. Hos 8.13. Ier. 12.15.
Remember not our iniquities, nor visit our sins in thy wrath. Return O Lord
from thy just displeasure, and have compassion on us.

The fifth ingredient, to make our Repentance full, is Satisfaction. Which (in
the strictness of sense) is a full payment and discharge of a thing due. But
the satisfaction proper to this subject (that is, which satisfies God for
sin) is a compensation, whereby a man pays or performs somewhat to God, in
regard of his sinning against him. And this is of two sorts.

1. The first and most satisfactory, by which God is abundantly satisfied, the
debt due by us, upon the account of our sins, though he would deal with us in
the rigor of his Justice, 1 Cor. 6.10.
is that satisfaction, which Christ made to him, by paying the price of our
sins, in his Cross and Passion. Nor was there any created thing of that value,
to discharge us from so great a debt. 1 Ioh. 2.2.
This St. John testifies, when he says, He is the Propitiation for our sins,
and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world, 2 Cor. ^.19.
For in Christ, God is reconciled to all men in the world, by not imputing
their trespasses to them: So that they, which were once farre-off, Ephesians. 2.13.
are now made near unto him, by the blood of Christ. And in another place the
Apostle says, Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many. This is
the first.

2. The other is that, which we of our own accord make (and for Christ's sake
is accepted) by Repentance for our sins committed, by giving God his due
honor, which none can do, but they, that have a settled resolution, to forsake
sin: which they perform the better, when they cut off all occasions of sin,
and are no way indulgent or prone, to give way to the suggestions thereof;
grieving and judging themselves, for that they have done already, to the
derogation of Gods honor, as much as lay in them. And these must all go
together. For, Aug. l. d^ poenit.
Ad agendam poenitentiam, non sufficit mores in melius convertere, nisi and de
his quae facta sunt Deo, per paenitentiae dolorem, per humilitatis gemitum, per
contriti cordis sacrificium satisfacias. To the making of a perfect Repentance,
it is not enough to change our manners into better, unless we satisfy God,
for that we have committed against him, with the grief of repentance, by
humble mourning, and the sacrifice of a broken heart.

And this Repentance brings forth diverse effects, 2 Cor. 7.
mentioned by the Apostle.

1. Carefulnes, to amend what we have done amiss.

2. Defense, against the tentations, and assaults of the Devil.

3. Indignation, at our selves for our boldness, in offending.

4. Fear of falling into relapse, and sinning again.

5. Vehement desire to be reconciled to God offended.

6. Zeal of Gods glory, and emulation of good examples.

7. Revenge in humbling and chastening the flesh, and punishing it for sin.
Aug.
Quia impunitum non debet esse peccatum, punietur a te, ne tu pro illo
puniaris. Peccatum tuum iudicom te habeat, non patronum. Because sin ought
not to go unpunished, let it be punished by thy self, least thou be punished
for it. Let thy sin find thee a Judge, not a Patron.

6. The sixth Ingredient, is Fasting. And this is of two kinds,

1. The first, and chief Fast, is to abstain from sin, T^^. 2.12.13.
and the unlawful pleasures of the world, to deny ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, to live soberly and righteously, and godly in this present world (as the
Apostle speaks) and there is a reward annexed to this, in the next verse.
Looking for that blessed hope, and appearing of that glory, of that mighty God,
and of our Savior Jesus Christ. In Levit Hom. 10.
Origin asks this question. Will thou have me show thee, what Fast thou shall
keep? And resolves it thus, Fast from all sin, eat not the meat of
wickedness, avoid the banquets of unlawful pleasures; be not enflamed with
the wine of lust, Fast from wicked actions, abstain from evil speeches, and
refrain from evil thoughts: such a Fast is acceptable to God. And Jerome
says, Ad Celam.
Tunc praeclara est abstinentia, tunc pulchra castigatio corporis, cum animus
ieiunus est a vitys. Then is our Fasting excellent, and then is the chastizing
of our body very good, when the soul fasteth from sin.

2. The other kind of Fasting is, an abstinence from meats, lawful to be
eaten, not by forsaking the use of the Creatures of God, which in themselves
are good, if they be taken with thanksgiving; 1 Timothy 4.4.
but by refraining them to afflict and mortify the flesh, and making it
subservient to the soul, and that, subject to God. And this was it, 1 Cor
9.27.25.
which the Apostle meant, when he said, Castigo Corpus meum. I beat down or
chastise my body; for observe his words before. Every man that striveth for the
mastery, abstaineth (or is temperate) from all things. But (says he) I keep
my body under, and bring it in subi^tion. Ps 69 10.
The Psalmists speech, is full to this purpose. I wept and chastened my body
with Fasting.

And this is a duty of so ancient institution, as the beginning of the world,
even in Paradise: for so say the Fathers. Aug. Basili^.
Jeiunium in Paradiso lege constitutum est: Fasting was instituted in Paradise
by a law, says one. The first command concerning it, was to Adam. He was
prohibited the eating a fruit of one tree, Thou shall not eat of it, Genesis 3.3.
says God, and not to eat is Fasting. Now if Adam had fasted from that Tree,
we should not have needed to fast at all; For the whole need not a Physician,
but they that are sick, Mat 9.12.
says our Savior. Therefore since we fell from Paradise, for want of Fasting,
let us fast, that we may return thither again.

There are two kinds of Fasts, 1. Public. 2. And Private.


1. The Public Fast is, when upon any calamity, either present or imminent,
over Church, or State, a whole Nation is commanded by Authority, to assemble in
their several Congregations, to humble themselves, by abstinence, and other
parts of Repentance, before God, to implore his Mercy, and to avert his
Judgments. And this is now the case of our Land, for Calamity is imminent, nay
present with us, and this duty is enjoined us, according to the ancient
practice of all Gods people, by lawful Authority.

2. The private Fast is, when a man does voluntarily undertake a Fast to
himself, being oppressed with any tentation, or over-burdned with the weight of
sins, committed by him; believing, that by this means, and way of
humiliation, by Faith in Christ Jesus, he shall not only obtain Remission of
his sins past, but subject his flesh to the spirit, and make his prayers more
ardent, and take away the predominant matter, which is the cause of tentation,
the better to prevent his sin, for the future.

The particulars of this private Fast, are not much different from that of the
public: Nor is any man prohibited, but (as I conceive) enjoined, to keep a
private Fast, besides the public, in the time of Gods visitation. For first,
all godly exercises, are to be done in charity, and if a man be commanded to
pray in private, for the public, I see no reason, but he may as well Fast.
Besides, as the sins of particular men, as well as of the Nation in general
have made up that gross and heavy sum, which has now called us to account,
with Gods justice: so it behooves every private man, to put to his hand, to
discharge it, and take it off, by imploring his Mercy. I shall therefore handle
this, as the other Ingredients to Repentance, promiscuously, and in the first
place, let you see the good effects of Fasting, and they are either temporal
or spiritual.

1. The first and chief temporal blessing, is life. The Devil could tell
God, Job 2.4.
That skin for skin, and all that ever a man has, will he give for his life.
Now by Fasting and abstinence, a man's life is preserved. There is no medicine
more preservative then abstinence. Sir. ^7.29.
By surfeiting many have perished (says Syracides) but he that dieteth
himself, prolongeth his life. Daily experience teaches us as much. We see how
quickly, men given to excess, end their lives, and how long they live, that
are abstemious and temperate in their diet. Of Galen, the Prince of Physicians,
it is reported, that he lived 120. years, and the reason of it is given, that
he never rose from his table, with a full stomach. Philosophers say, that all
inferior causes consume, and grow weak, by use and working, as we see by
Sawes, Axes and Tools, the more they are used, the duller they grow, and in the
end, by much use, are wasted. So, seeing the natural heat is that Which digests,
and concocts our meat, if we put too much upon it to digest, and concoct, it
languisheth, and loses it is power and faculty: and our natural life,
consisting in the good of that heat, the more of that heat is consumed, the
more our life is shortened.

2. Secondly, as it is a prolonger of life, so it is a preserver of health: and
a life (though long) without health, is but tedious and grievous. A wholesome
sleep (says the same Syracides) comes of a temperate belly, Sir. 31.20.
he rises up in the morning, and is well at ease in himself, but pain in
watching and choleric diseases and pangs of the belly, are with an unsatiable
man. And this was the opinion of the learned Physician Hippocrates. The best
remedy (says he) to preserve health, is not to over-loade the stomach with
meat. The reason is, because when the natural heat (we spoke of before) is
done, and spent, if more be taken, before the first be concocted, a mass of
putrified humors, and crudities abound, which is the cause of many diseases,
and which a body, that is abstemious, is free from.

3. To these might be added, that it preserves a man's temporal estate,
preserves the taste, and appetite, with diverse other benesits, which are gotten
by Fasting, but this is not our scope. I shall let you see what spiritual
benefits are obtained by Fasting.

1. It is a corrective, for sins past, and a preservative, for the time to
come. It chastises and punishes the flesh, that formerly (being pampered) was
apt to ill, and unfit for good; and makes it apt to receive all good
impressions, and graces of the holy Spirit.

2. It cures dullness in Prayer: for the Spirit, which by fullnes of bread,
was drousie and heavy, is, by it, roused up, and made light and apt to pray. I
humbled my soul with fasting (says David) and my prayer returned into my
bosom. Ps. 35.13,
Bernard says, That Fasting and Prayer are so interlaced and woven together,
that they cannot be separated: Prayer obtaines the virtue of Fasting, and
Fasting the grace of Prayer. Fasting corroborates Trayer, and Prayer sanctifies
Fasting. and this is a true religious Fast, when the outward man Fasts, and the
inward prays.

3. It cures all dejection of spirit. For whereas it is a part of the office of
the holy Ghost, to comfort those that are comfortless for the love of God, as
soon as their soul refuses the comforts of the flesh, he presently ministers
spiritual comfort to them, and removes all things, that may any way deject
them. And this the Holy Spirit seems to intimate, when he says, Prove. 31.6.
Date Siceram, give ye strong drink, to him that is ready to perish. For that
heavenly wine, wherewith the Apostles seemed to be made drunk, upon the Feast
of Pentecost, is not given to those that are full of the wine of worldly
consolation; but to those, who for the love of God, abstain from it. For the
Physician is not sent to the whole, Mat. 9.12.
nor the Spirit of God, to those, that are only filled with worldly comfort:
but his comfort refreshes the soul of those, that have a multitude of
sorrows in their heart.

4. It conduces much to increase of spiritual wisdom and understanding, which
fulness abates. It is the constant tenet of all good men, that nothing more
dulls the understanding, then repletion. And therefore, one says very fitly,
that as in this greater World, when many gross vapors ascend from the earth,
the air is darkened, and thickened with clouds, which hinder our sight, from the
clear aspect of Heaven. So in this lesser world (Man) when the stomach is
replete with meat, gross and thick vapors ascend into the head, which darken,
and obscure the virtues of the soul, which serve the understanding in its
operations. Bernard says, In Camic.
that fullnes dulls the sharpest wit, and overthrowes the understanding.

5. It is profitable against all kinds of Temptations, whenever they arise,
and this is no small privilege, And therefore it was, that our Savior (for
example to us) strengthened himself with 40. days fasting, when he was to be
led into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil; Mat. 4.2.
not that he had need of this Armor, but for our instruction; to give us to
understand, that fasting was the best remedy against the assaults of the
Devil. Ad Cel.
Jerome says, Ardentes Diaboli sagittae jejuniorum and vigiliarum frigore
restringuendae sunt. The hot darts of the Devil, are to be restrained, by the
coldness of fasting and watching.

6. Besides all these, it has this efficacy: that being joined with prayer, it
pierces the heavens, and besieges the mercy of God, obteyning Whatsoever it
desires. It would take much time, to commemorate the spiritual, and temporal
blessings, which have bin obtained by fasting. Dan. 10.3.
Daniel mourned full three weeks, and eat not panem desiderabilem, no pleasant
bread, neither came there flesh or wine within his mouth, and he was thereby
fitted to receive and interpret Divine Mysteries and Revelations. By fasting,
Esth. 4.
Esther averted the cruel sentence of the King against the Jews, and turned
his wrath upon their adversaries. What shall I say of Moses, Elias, Sampson,
John Baptist, all famous in their generations for fasting, and performing great
and wonderful things? Fasting is a Sacrifice, as well as Alms and Prayer,
when the body is troubled by mortification, as the spirit by devotion.
Therefere let us Fast, There is a Cum jejunatis, Mat 6.16.
a time when we are to Fast, and the most proper, when danger approaches.
Jehosaphat fasted, 2 Chro. 20, 3
upon the danger of the Moabites and Ammonites Forces. Qu. Esther fasted, Esth.
4.16.
upon the danger of the Kings Edict. The Ninivites fasted, upon the fear of
destruction. S. Paul fasted, upon the danger of the Ships drowning. Ioh 3.5.
Act. 7.21.
And are not we in as great danger as any of these? Why should not we then Fast
as they did? I know, it is Durus sermo, and am afraid, we shall be like the
Young Man in the Gospel, Mat. 9.
as loath to leave our excess, as he his Possessions. It is observed to be our
National fault. But fasting being of such excellency and necessity, I hope we
shall be persuaded to it. And so I come to the next.

7. Which is Misericordia, or the Works of Mercy. We must not part Fasting and
Alms. Quod ventri subtrahitur, pauperi detur. That must be given to the poor,
that is taken from the belly. Phil. 4 18. (...). 4. ^^.
And this is a sacrifice well pleasing unto God. Cornelius was a devout man,
and gave much Alms: and they came up into remembrance with God, as the Angel,
and S. Peter told him. Now the Works of Mercy are diverse, and set down by
Christ himself. (...) 25.35.
1. Feeding the hungry. 2. Giving Drink to them that thirst. 3. Harboring the
Stranger. 4. Clothing the naked. 36.
5. Visiting the sick. 6. Releeving them that are in prison. 7. To which we
may add the Burial of the dead. Alms is compared by the Preacher to seed.
In the morning sow ty seed, (...) 11.6.
and in the evening let not thy hand rest: and it resembles seed in 7 respects.

1. In respect of the large scattering it, 2 Cor 9.6.
plena manu, by handfulls.

2. Of the Discretion used in sowing.

3. Of the close covering it.

4. Of the plentiful watering it.

5. Of the loss of it for a time.

6. Of the expectation of the benefit.

7. Of the multiplying and increase of it.

Blessed is he (says the Psalmist) that considers the poor and needy. Psalm
41.16. Mat.5.7.
And Blessed are the mercisull} (says our Savior) Now it is called
Benedictio, or a Blessing, for diverse respects.

1. For the blessing from the Receiver. Job 31.20.
The loins of the poor have ssed me (says Job) because he was warmed with
the fleece of my Sheep: And The blessing of him that was ready to perish was
upon me.} 29 17.


2. In regard of the Act it self. Act. 20 35.
It is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive: He that has a good eye,
shall be blessed, for he gives of his bread to the poor.

3. Pro. 2^,
In regard of retribution from God to himself, Come ye blessed, etc. Mat 25 36-


4. In regard of a blessing upon his Posterity. Psa. 37.26
The righteous is merciful and lends, and his seed is blessed.

Ambrose writing upon this Text [ Blessed is he that considers, or judges
wisely of the poor, saith] Ille intelligit super pauperem, qui lar gitur
pauperi; nam quid prodest misereri inopis, nisi alimoniam eidem largiaris? That
man judges wisely of the poor, that rele^veth him: for what good does it, to
pity a poor man, if thou give him no relief.

The effects of this virtue be many. For,

1. It makes a man beloved of God. God loves a cheerful giver.

2. It increases his temporal estate. 2 Cor 9.7. (...) 4.18
His barnes shall be filled with abundance, and his presses shall burst with
new wine. Pro. 3.10.
Faecundus est ager pauperum, cito reddit donantibus fructum, says A^g. The
poor man's land is fruitful, it quickly renders back fruit to the giver. But
Jerome in this point, gives this caveat: Sunt qui pauperibus parum tribuunt, ut
amplius accipiant, quae magis venditio appellanda est, quam eleemosyna. There
are some, that give a little to the poor, with expectation, to receive more
back, but this may rather be called a sale, then an Alms.

3. It prolongeth life, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and cures diseases, as Daniel said to Nebuchadnezzar, Break off thy sins
by Righteousness, and thy iniquities by Mercy to the poor. Sit obsecro
sanatio, let there be a healing of thine error. In Mat. S^^m 9.
The great and strongest medicine (says Chrysostom.) in Repentance, is Alms,
for as in the prescripts of Physic, among diverse ingredients, one is most
predominant, so in Repentance, there is one, which is Alms.

4. By it the Bowels of the Saints are comforted, as S. Paul speaks to
Philemon: Whereby God is honored, Phil 7. Pro. 14.31.
The wiseman says, He honors his Maker, that has mercy on the poor.

5. It increases a man's friends. Make ye friends (says Christ) with the
riches of iniquity.

6. It strengthens Prayer, Luke 16 9.
and is one of the wings, that makes Prayer ascend to God. Acts 10.4.
Cornelius gave Alms, and his Prayer came up to God. For Prayer, without
Alms, wants a wing, to elevate it. Frustra pro peccatis rogaturus, manus ad
Deum expandit, In Mat. 12^
qui has ad pauperes non extendit, says Rabbanus. He holds up his hands in
vain to God, for his sins, that stretches them not to releeve the poor:
and Chrysostom. Infirma est oration, In Mat. 5.
quae eleemozynarum largitate non est munita. That Prayer is weak, that is not
strengthened with Alms. And he shuts the door of Gods Mercy, that opens not
the bowels of Mercy to the poor. It was one of the sins, for which Sodom was
destroyed, Ezekiel. 16.49.
that she did not strengthen the hands of the poor, and needy.

I, but some will say, I have not much my self, how then can I give much to
the poor? To this may be answered, God looks not upon the quantum, how much,
but ex quanto, out of how much thou give. Qui multum dat and qui parum, si
aequa voluntas est, aequalem habet M^rcedem. He that gives much, and he that
gives little, if the mind be alike, shall have the like reward. The Apostle
tells us, If there be a willing mind, it is accepted, 2 Cor 8.12.
according to that a man has. The Widows mites were more acceptable to God,
Mat. 12.42.
then the Rich men's largo gifts: For a cup of cold water shall not go
unrewarded. Mat 10.42.


8. The last (but not the least) Ingredient is Prayer: which being joined with
the former duties, will be able to prevail with God for his supply in any
thing we want, and for his protection, against any thing we fear. Oration si
pura sit, coelo penetrans, Ang.
vacua non redibit. Our prayer, (if it be qualified as it ought) pierces the
Heavens, and will not return empty. For as Chrysostom says, Nihil potentius
homine or ante. In Mat. 6.
Nothing is more powerful then a man when he prays. We may see it in one
Example. Moses ad bellum non vadit, In Levit
sed or at, and vincit Israel. Moses went not to war with the people of
Israel but only prays, and the people overcame their enemies, by the strength
and force of his prayers.

The definition of Prayer is thus. It is Piae mentis and humilis ad Deum
conversio, fide, spe and charitate subnixa. A turning of a pious and humble
mind to God, propped up with faith, hope and charity.

The parts of it are many. As Intercession, Thanksgiving, Invocation and
Deprecation: but (because I have spoken of them formerly) I shall only touch
again the two last, as most properly conducing and suiting with this subject
of Repentance: which are couched in a short, but pertinent saying of one,
declaring the effects of Prayer. Cass.
Per orationem, venia peccatorum procuratur, and ira Dei suspenditur. By
Prayer, pardon of sins is obtained, there is the effect of Invocation, and Gods
anger is deferred or averted, that is the effect of Deprecation.

1. First for that part of the effect of Prayer, which is remission of sin, we
have Gods promise. If my people which are called by my name, 2 Chro ^ 14.
shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways: then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sin, and
will heal their Land. Job 33.16,
So says Elihu to Job (speaking of a sinner returning to God by Prayer) He
shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he shall see his
face with joy. David was confident in this point. Psa. ^6 19^
Verily God has heard me, he has attended to the voice of my prayer. And in
another place. The Lord is ready to forgive, 86.5.
and plenteous in mercy to all that call upon him. And lastly, S. James says,
The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and if he have committed sins, James
5.15.
they shall be forgiven him.

2. In time of danger and affliction, or when any cross lies upon men, by
reason of Gods anger for sin, the other part of Prayer is very prevalent to
avert it. Psa. ^0 15. James 5.13,
We have Gods promise for this also. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and
I will deliver thee. And it is the counsel of S. James. Is any afflicted? let
him pray. We see the holy men of God ever used this recepit. K. Hezekiah being
in danger of death, 2 Reg 20.5.
prayed, and God tells him, he had heard his prayer. Johoaz (being in danger of
being overrun by Hazael K. of Assyria) prayed, and the Lord delivered him.
Daniel upon danger approaching, 13 4. Dan. 6.10.
prayed three times a day, and the Lord heard him. Jonas being in danger, in
the Whales belly, Ion 2.1.10.
in the sea prayed, and God caused the fish to cast him out, upon the dry land.
Acts 16.25.
Paul and Silas being in prison, prayed to the Lord, and he forthwith delivered
them. David says, God will regard the prayer of the destitute (of all help)
and not despise their prayer. Ps. ^^2.^7.
And this is the second benefit that comes by Prayer.

Now for the place of Prayer, though it be to be made in omni loco, as the
Apostle enjoynes, every where, (as by Daniel in the den, Job upon the dunghill,
Jonas in the Sea, our Savior in a garden, and Paul and Silas in prison) yet is
this duty more especially appropriated to two places. I. Public. 2. Private.

1. The Public place is the great Congregation, My praise (says David) shall
be of thee in the great Congregation. ^sal 22.25.68.26.
I will pay my vows before them that fear thee. And bless ye God in the
great Congregation. 29.9.48.9.
Which he expounds in other places, to be the Church or Temple. And which the
Prophet tells us, that God will have called, Domus Orationis, the house of
Prayer, Ecclesia est singularis fidelium uniuscujusque civitatis Congregatio.
says Hugo. Esa. 56.7.
There in deed it is, that God desires especially to be prayed too: and where,
by the unity of many souls in prayer, the greatest blessings may be soonest
obtained. For public prayer is compared to a storm of ha^le, pjercing the
Heavens, and the Fathers say, that the Amen in the Primitive Church, was like a
clap of thunder. And thereupon S. Ambrose says, De Poe^^^,
Multi minimi dum congregantur unamines, sunt magni: and multorum preces
impossible est contemni. Many little ones being met unanimously, become great,
and it is impossible, that the prayers of many should be despised.

2. Private is twofold. 1. In a man's Family; and every Pater familias, father
of a Family, is bound, not only to see, that those which are under his
government, do frequent public assemblies, to perform the duties before
mentioned, but to see them do it in his private house also. He must say with
Joshua, Josh. 24.15.
Ego and domus mea, I and my house will pray to the Lord.

And at this exercise Christ has promised his assistance, Mat. 18.^0.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst
of them.

The second is in Cubiculo. Prayer must be in a man's closet. 1. Which is either
literally taken, as when a man retireth himself, to pray to the Lord in some
private place without disturbance. 2. Or as the Fathers gloss upon that Text
[when thou prayest enter into thy closet] Quae sunt ista cubicula, Mat 6 6.
etc. what are these closets, but the hearts of men? according to that of the
Psalmist, Ps 4.4. Aug de s^r. Dommi in monte.
Commune with your own heart upon your bed. And Ambrose says, Intellige
cubiculum non inclusum parietibus, etc. You are to understand by the word
[closet] not that which is enclosed with walls, De Cain and Abel. c. 8.
and wherein thy body is shut; but the closet, that is within thee, wherein are
enclosed thy thoughts. This thy closet is every where with thee, and is every
where secret, the searcher whereof is God, and no other.

Now that our Prayers may be the more prevalent, either in public or private,
it is necessary that we observe these Rules.

1. Our prayers must be offered to God the Father, in the name and mediation,
and for the merits of his beloved Son Christ Jesus, Mat. 3.^7. Esa. 41 1. Ephesians
3.11.
in Whom he is well-pleased: His elect, in whom his soul delights. In and by
whom we have boldness and access to the throne of grace. Job. 16.23,
And whatsoever we shall ask the Father in his name, he will give it us.

2. They must be hearty, from the heart and soul, as David's did. Unto thee o
Lord, do I lift up my soul: Psalm: 25.1^
and as he counsels others, ye people power out your hearts before him. Psalm:
62.8,


3. They must be offered with all humility, like to the prayers of Abraham. Gen
18.17.32.10.
Behold I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and
ashes; and to that of Jacob, Non sum dignus, I am not worthy the least of all
thy mercies: and to that of the Publican, that would not lift up his eyes to
Heaven, Luc. 18.13.
but stood a long, a far off, and smote his breast, saying, God be merciful to
me a sinner.

4. Fourthly, with fervency. For Quanto graviori miseria premitur, tanto
orationi insist^re ardentius debemus. Greg. Mor.
By how much the more grievously we are afflicted, so much the more ardently we
should betake our selves to prayer. As the case stands with us, These ^ 17
we must pray without ceasing.

5. Lastly, we must offer our prayers to God only. Chrysostom upon the words
of the woman of Canaan to Christ [Lord have mercy upon me] says, vide
prudentiam mul^eris. Non regat Jacobum, etc. Observe the woman's wisdom. She
prays not to James, nor does she entreat John, nor goes she to Peter, nor any
of the Apostles, she fought no Mediator for her suit. So much briefly for the
rules or directions in prayers.

Seeing then that in the first place, Esa 59.2:
our iniquities have separated between God and us, Let us follow the Prophets
counsel, and take words unto us, and turn to the Lord by Prayer, and say unto
him. O Lord, take away all iniquity, Hos. 14.3.
and receive us graciously. 2. And secondly in as much as this separation has
brought a just judgment upon us, let us humble our selves with another Prophet,
and say. O Lord, Dan, 9.4,
the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant, and mercy to them, that
love him, and keep his Commandments.

We have sinned, 5.
and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled by
departing from thy precepts and judgments.

Neither have we hearkened to thy servants the Prophets, 6.
which spoke in thy name to our Kings, our Princes, and our Fathers, and all
the people of the Land.

O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face, 8.
because we have sinned against thee.

To the Lord belong mercies and forgivenesses, Dan^ 9.9.
though we have rebelled against him.

O Lord, 16.
according to all thy righteousness, we beseech thee let thine anger and thy
fury be turned away from this Land, which is called by thy Name: because for
our sins, and for the iniquity of our Fathers, we are become a reproach to
all that are about us.

Now therefore, 17
O God, hear the prayers of thy servants, and their supplications, and cause
thy face to shine upon us that are desolate, for the Lords sake.

O our God, 18
incline thine ear, and hear, open thine eyes, and behold our desolations.
For we do not present our supplications before thee, for our righteousness,
but for thy great mercies.

O Lord hear, 19
O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do: defer not for thine own sake, O God,
for this Land, and the people are called by thy Name.

Thus much for prayer.

And thus have we taken a view, 1. Of our miserable condition by reason of Gods
heavy hand upon us. Secondly of the cause of his visitation, which is our
heinous sin, and transgression, 3. And lastly, of the Cure, which is to be
wrought by repentance.

In which I have presumed ( ultra crepidam, I confess) to act the Physicians
part, and to prescribe what ingredients are to be put to the making of the
Dosis of Repentance, secundum artem, that it may work with effect. I dare say,
they may be taken safely, there are no Minerals in it. Nay let me tell you,
except they be taken, there will be no hope of recovery. And as much must be
taken (if not q.s.) as our poor and weak nature (enfeebled with the long
custom of sin) will bear: not nicely or perfunctorily upon a knives point, as
a taste, to see whither we can relish it or no, but the whole Bole if we can:
and then by Gods blessing and assistance, we shall nor need to doubt of the
cure. Probatum est, it has past the Test long since, above 2000 years, by
Ahah, and the Ninivites, neither of them sound in Religion, nor having all
these Ingredients in their prescript; and it has bin practiced and used with
good success, diverse times since. Let us therefore speedily take it, and no
doubt, but it will have the same effect theirs had.

One thing give me leave to add, that we must fully resolve our selves, that
Repentance is an Act, not a speculative or theoreticall, but a practical duty.
Mat. 3.7.
The Baptist tells us of an Ira ventura, a wrath to come, and gives us charge to
repent, with two active verbes.

1. Agite Poenitentiam, settle your selves to repent, there is somewhat more in
it, then hearing or reading of it, what it is (for though that be unum
necessarium, yet is it not unicum) the only necessary thing.

2. 8.
The other is facite, or proferte fructus dignos poenitentiae, do, or bring
forth fruits worthy of Repentance, and that to free us, ab ira ventura, propter
peccat^ praeterita, from wrath to come, for sins past.

It were to be wished, that it were yet, Ira ventura, that it were to come, but
(the more wretched our condition) It is Ira accensa, the anger of the Lord is
kindled, some have already felt the heat of it.

And let us tell our selves, that we are no less sinners in this part of the
Land, then they that have already felt it. Luc. 13.4^50
They upon whom the Tower of Siloe fell, were not sinners above all men, that
dwelt in Jerusalem: Let us apply this to our selves, and that which follows
in the next verse, Except we repent, we shall all likewise perish.

God has long time tendered good Quarter, good conditions of peace, and we
have still stood out in rebellion. It is reported of Tamberlaine, that when he
besieged a City, the first day he displayed a white flag before it, and upon
that day the besieged might have reasonable conditions. If they yielded not
that day, upon the second he set up a red flag, and on that day, they might
have conditions, but they were harder, then the former. And the third day (the
two former being rejected) he hung out a black flag, and then no conditions, no
quarter would be granted. So, God has displayed his white flagge of peace,
and we have carelessly neglected it, and he has now hung out his red flagge of
wrath. Harder conditions are come upon us. Now, though we have been so
obstinate to him, and fearelesse of our own misery hitherto; let us quickly
take hold of his conditions, lest he hang out the black and dismal flagge, to
our utter desolation and destruction.

And let us, even all of us, in the public Congregation, and in our private
Families and closets, fall down and humble our selves before Almighty God, and
implore his pardon and grace; and let us truly repent us of our former sins,
with purpose of living better hereafter: and no doubt, but God will repent him
of his wrath against us; and say to his Angel, Sufficit. It is sufficient,
enough, stay now thy hand; If we turn from our sins, he will turn from
punishing us, for them. If we walk in the statutes of the Lord, Luc. (...)
he will give peace in our Land, and we shall lie down and none shall make us
afraid, (...) shall the sword go through our (...). We shall have peace in our
houses, and peace to all that we have. 1 Samuel: 25.6.
The voice of joy and salvation shall be in our Labernacles. Ps^ 8 15.
We shall rejoice both young men and old together, and our mourning shall be
turned into joy Nay God himself will rej^yce in our Land, and joy in us his
people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in it, Ier. 21.1^
nor-the voice of crying. Esa: 65.19.
He will rejoice over us to do us good, and place us in this land with
stability.

The God of peace, will be peace unto us. Ien 32.41.


Christ (the Prince of peace) will be our peace. Rom: 15.33


The Spirit of peace and unity, Esa ^.6 Ephesians: 2.14 Gal: ^.^1.
will keep us in peace and love.

Lastly, Ephesians: 4.3. ^ Reg. ^^ 20 Rom: 14.17. Luc: 19.38.
we shall not only live here in peace, but we shall be gathered to our fathers,
and to our grave sin peace. And after this life, enjoy everlasting peace; we
shall have peace and joy in the holy Ghost here, and peace in Heaven hereafter.
All which he grant us, etc.

FINIS.
Poenitentiall Prayers.
LEt us redeem the time, Ephesians. 5.16.
because the days are evil.

And let us repent, Acts 3.1^
and turn from our wickedness, and our sins shall be forgiven us.

Let every one turn from his evil way: Ion. 3.8.9.
for who can tell, if God will turn and repent, and turn from his fierce
anger, that we perish not?

POnder our words o Lord, and consider our meditation. Psalm 51:


Oh hearken unto the voice of our calling, our King, and our God, for unto
thee, do we make our prayers.

Oh God, 22.20
We cry in the day time, and thou hear not, and in the night season also, we
take no rest.

Thine indignation lies hard upon us, 86.6
and thou have vexed us, with all thy storms.

Thy wrathful displeasure goes over us, 16.
and the fear of thee has undone us.

Thou have given us over to the sword, and art wrath with thine inheritance.
(...)


Thou feedest us with the bread of tears, ^0.5.
and give us plenty of tears to drink.

Thou have made us a very strife to our neighbors, 6.
and our enemies laugh us to soorne.

O Lord we acknowledge that all this is come upon us, Psr^ 9.1^. (...) 13.117.
for our evil deeds, and that thou o Lord art righteous, and thy judgments
upright.

Because we have not hearkened to thy word, Ier. ^.^7.
nor to thy law, but rejected it, thou have brought evil upon this Nation.

We have bin disobedient, and rebelled against thee, N^ 9.16.
and cast thy Law behind our backs.

We have sinned, (...) 7.10.
what shall we do to thee, o thou preserver of men? Why have thou set us as a
mark against thee, so that we are burdens to our selves?

Lord we cover not our transgressions with Adam, Job 11.13.
by hiding our iniquities.}

But we abhor our selves, Ps. 41.^.41.4.
and earnestly repent and say, Lord be merciful to us, hea^e our souls, for we
have sinned against thee.

Take notice o Lord of our misery,

Out of the deep of misery and affliction have we called to thee o Lord, 130.1^
Lord hear our voice.

Oh, let thine ears consider the voice of our complaint. 2.


Enter not into judgment (we humbly pray thee) with thy servants o Lord, for
in thy sight shall no man living be justified. 143.^.


The Heavens are not clean in thy sight. Job 15 15.


How much more abominable and filthy is man, 16.
that drinks iniquity like water.

Remember o Lord the infirmity of our nature.

Consider, that of our selves we are but weak. Isal 6^


That we are but flesh, 78.39.
a wind that passes away, and comes not again.

Thou know o Lord whereof we are made, ^03 14.
thou remembrest that we are but dust.

That our days are but as grass, and as a flower of the field, 15^ 16.
over which, as soon as the wind goes, it is gone, and the place thereof
shall know it no more.

Remember also O Lord, thine own nature.

That thou art full of compassion, 8.
and mercy, long suffering, and of great goodness.

That thou can not be always chiding, ^
nor keep thine anger for ever.

That thou are good and gracious, (...). 5.
and of great mercy to all that call upon thee.

That thou art loving to every man, Psalm: 145.5^
and that thy mercy is over all thy works.

That when thou punishest, Esa. 28.21.
it is not thy proper work, and that thine own work is mercy.

Remember o Lord thy Name.

The Lord, the Lord God, Exodus 34.6.
merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness, and truth.

That thou art a Father of Mercies. 2 Cor. 1.3.


Remember thy Sons Name.

That he is called the Lamb, Ioh 1.26.
that takes away the sins of the World.

That he is called the Redeemer of the World. Job 19 25. Psal^ 9 14. ^itus 2 14.


That he is called the Savior of the World. Ioh: 4.42.


That he is called our Mediater, and Advocate. 1 Timothy: 2 ^. 1 Ioh: 2.2.


Remember the Name of the Holy Spirit.

That he is called a Comforter. Ioh 16.7.


Help us therefore o God of our salvation, Psalm. 7^.9.
for the glory of thy Name, Oh deliver us and be merciful to our sins, for thy
Names Sake.

We are called by thy Name, (...) 4.9.
o Lord, leave us not.

Remember o Lord, thy Promise.

That if a sinner repent, and turn from his transgressions, Ezekiel. 18.30.
his iniquity shall not be his ruin.

That when we call upon thee, Psalm 50.15.
in time of trouble, thou will deliver us.

Lord, Psalm 86.7.10^^^
we call upon thee, in a day of trouble. Hide not thy face from us in the day
of trouble, incline thine ear unto us in the day when we call: answer us
speedily.

Remember Lord that we are the work of thine hands.

Thou art our Father: Esa. 64.8.
We are the clay, and thou the Potter, and we are all the work of thy hands.

Be not wrath very sore o Lord: neither remember iniquity for ever: Behold, see
we beseech thee, we are all thy people.

Forsake not o Lord the work of thine own hands. Ps. 138.^


And we are not only thy handiworke, Genesis 1.^^. Col 3 ^^.
but the Image of thy Countenance. Deface it not o Lord.

We are Members of thy Mystical Body. 1 Co^ ^15.^ 1.27.
O Lord we beseech thee cut us not off.

We are the price of thy Sons Blood. 1 Cor 6 20. 1 Pet. 1.^9.
We are bought with a price. We were not redeemed with silver and gold, but
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb, without blemish, and without
spot. O Lord undervalue it not.

Thou o Lord have an especial property in us, Ps 119.94. 1 6 16.
cast us not off. We are thine, o save us. We are thy servants. Esa. 64.^.
We are all thy people. Mar 4.38. Esa. 63.16.
Lord carest thou not that we perish? Though we be undutifull children, yet are
we thy Children. Doubtless thou art our Father. Thou art our Father o Lord.
Though we have lost the duty of children, Aug.
yet thou have not lost the love of a Father.

Behold o Lord we repent of our backslidings.

Sorrow is continually before us for them. Isa: 38.17.18
We confess our wickedness, and are heartily sorry for them, and cry, Lam:
5:16.
woe unto us that we have sinned. And we know that a broken spirit, is a
sacrifice to thee; Psalm: 51:19.
a broken and contrite heart o Lord, thou will not despise.

It has bin thy practice to show mercy.

Call to remembrance o Lord, Psalm: 25:5.
thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindness, which have bin ever of old.

Thou have bin our refuge from one generation to another. 90:1
And we humbly pray thee, that as, thou have bin our succor, 27:11.
leave us not now, neither forsake us o God of our salvation. But rather, 80:3.
turn us again o God, show the light of thy countenance, and we shall be
whole.

Turn us o God our Savior, 85.4.
and let thine anger cease from us.

Show some good token upon us for good, 86:17.
that they which hate us may see it, and be ashamed because thou Lord have
helped and comfortea us.

O satisfy us with thy Mercy, 90:14.
and that soon, so shall we rejoice, and be glad, all the days of our life.

In the multitude of the sorrows that are in our hearts, let thy comforts o
Lord refresh our souls.

Another.
Have mercy upon us o God, Psalm: 51:^.
after thy great goodness, according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away
our offenses.

For we acknowled our faults; 3.
and our sin is ever against us.

Against thee only o Lord have we sinned, 4.
and done much evil in thy sight.

Behold, we were shapen in wickedness, 5.
and in sin did our mothers conceive us.

O Lord we confess, 78 11.12.
that we have not kept the Covenant of thee our God, nor walked in thy Law: but
forgate what thou have done for us, and the wonderful works that thou have
showed for us.

We have sinned with our Fathers, 106.6.
we have committed iniquity, and we have done wickedly.

Our sins are gone over our heads, 38.4.
and are as an heavy burden, too heavy for us to bear.

O Lord we have not hearkened unto thee, Lev. 26 15.17.
nor done thy Commandments, but bave despised thy Statutes, and our souls
have abhorred thy Judgments. therefore have thou set thy face against us, 25.
and brought the sword upon us, to avenge the quarrel of thy Covenant.

Thou have whetted thy sword, Psalm. 17.13.14.
and bent thy bow, and made it ready. Thou have prepared for us instruments of
death.

The sorrows of death and destruction compass us, ^6.3.
and we have found sorrow, and trouble.

We are full of confusion, Job 10.15.
therefore, O Lord, look upon our affliction.

Thou renewest thy plagues against us, 37
and encreasest thine indignation upon us. Changes, and war are against us.

Thou have kindled thy wrath against us, 19.13.
and accounted us as thine enemies.

The days of affliction take hold of us. 30.15, 31.
Our Harp is turned to mourning, and our Organ into the voice of them that
weep.

And in these our miseries, thou have covered thy self with a cloud, Lam. 3
44.47.
that our prayer should not pass through, so that feeare and a snare is come
upon us, desolation and destruction.

How long, O Lord, will thou forget us, O Lord, for ever? Ps 13.1,
How long will thou hide thy face from us?

Wherefore hidest thou thy face, 44.26.
and forgettest our misery and trouble?

Thou make us to be rebuked of our Neighbors, 14.
and to be laughed to scorn, and to be had in derision of them that are round
about us.

Thine Arrows stick fast in us, 18.2.
and thy hand presses us sore.

We are brought to so great misery, 6.
that we go mourning, all the day long.

Our hearts are disquieted within us, 55.4.
and the fear of death is fallen upon us.

O Lord, 60.2.
thou have moved the Land, and divided it, heal the sores thereof, for it
shakes.

Thou have showed thy people heavy things, 3.
thou have given us a drink of deadly wine.

Lord take away this plague (of war) from us, 39.11.
else we shall be consumed, by means of thy heavy hand.

Turn thee unto us, and have mercy upon us, 25 15.
for we are desolate and in misery.

Look upon all our adversity, ^7
and forgive us all our sin.

Oh break not leave; Job 13.25.
driven to and fro, neither pursue dry stubble.

Write not bitter things against us. 26.


What profit is there in our blood, Psalm: 30.9.10
when we go down unto the pie? Shall the dust give thanks to thee, or shall
it declare thy truth?

Do thou show wonders among the dead, 88.10,
or shall the dead rise up again, and praise thee?

Oh let us live, 119:75. Esa 38.19.
and we shall praise thee. The living, the living, they shall praise thee.

Lord thou know our desire, Psalm: 38 9,
and our groaning is not hid from thee.

Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses? 89.4^.


Our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, 22.9.
and thou did deliver them.

They called upon thee, ^.
and were helped, they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded.

Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us also. 4.6.


Hide not thy face from thy servants, 6^.17.
for we are in trouble; O have thee and hear us.

Hear us O God, Psa. 69: 14.
in the multitude of thy mercy, even in the truth of thy Salvation.

Our help stands in the Name of the Lord, 124.8.
which has made Heaven and Earth.

Thou only art our helper and redeemer, 70.6.
make no long tarrying O God.

Arise, 41.26.
and help us, for thy mercy sake.

Bring our souls out of trouble, 143.11.
for thy righteousness sake.

And while we live, 246.1.
we will praise thee; yea, as long as we have any being, we will sing praises,
to thee our God.

Another.
OH Almighty God, and most merciful Father in Jesus Christ our Lord, behold I
beseech thee, me thy most unworthy servant, prostrating my soul and body,
before the footstool of thy Throne of Grace, with Fasting, Tears, and humble
supplications, on the behalf of the distracted, distressed and disconsolate
estate of thy dejected Spouse, the Church, and the miserable condition of these
thy Kingdoms: both which without thy present succor and relief, are like to
fall into utter desolation.

I acknowledge o Lord, with hearty and unfeigned sorrow and grief of soul,
that the great and horrid sins of this Land in general, and of my own in
particular, have ascended into thy presence, and called for vengeance, and are
the chief cause of this heavy judgment now upon us; that thy judgments are
just, in afflicting this Nation: that we have by our manifold and heinous
sins, deserved all the punishments, Ps 119 137. Deuteronomy. 25.15, etc.
which thy Law has threatened against them that are disobedient to thy
Commandments. And lastly, that by our ingratitude to thee for all thy
blessings, we have justly fallen from so happy and glorious an estate, as has
been admired by our friends, and envied by our enemies, into so wretched a
condition, as cannot but be pitied by them both.

Wherefore O Lord, I humbly pray thee to behold me, an unworthy son of thy
now distressed Church, and a weak member of thy now distracted Kingdom, which
thine own righthand has planted, who in the bitterness of my soul, and
grief of heart, in the name and mediation, and for the merits of thy blessed
Son, humbly present my prayers, supplications and intercessions for them.

Hear my Prayer O Lord, Psalm: 55 1.
and hide not thy self from my Petition.

Bow down thine ear and save us, 33.13.
haste thee, O Lord, to deliver us.

O be not far from us, 22.11.
for trouble is hard at hand, and there is none besides thee to help us. Vain
is the help of man. 62.11.^^.5.


Eearefullnesse and trembling are fallen upon us, and an horrible dread has
overwhelmed us.

O be favorable O Lord, unto Sion (thy Church) build thou up up the walls of
Jerusalem, 51 18,
and restore peace to this distracted Kingdom, and reconcile all unhappy
differences amongst us.

I pour out these my weak Prayers unto thee, O Lord, 86.5, Exo: 34.6.7.
knowing that thou art full of compassion, good and gracious, and of great
mercy, unto all them that call upon thee.

That thou art merciful and gracious, long-suffering; keeping mercy for
thousand;, for giving iniquity, transgression and sin. Abae 3 ^1 Esa. 30.18.


That in thy wrath thou remembrest mercy, and that thou waitest (an
opportunity) to begracious to thy people.

Be pleased therefore, O Lord, to extend this thy accustomed pity and
compassion toward us, that we which are now under thy heavy hand, and ready to
perish by the Sword, and civil diffentions, may by thy omnipotent goodness,
mercifully be delivered and freed from it. Haste thee, Ps: 70.1.
O LORD, to deliver us, make haste to help us, O GOD. Thou only art our
helper and redeemer, 40.21.
make no long tarying, O GOD.

And thou O Lord, that art the God of Peace, who only by thy mighty power,
can cause the Sword to be sheathed again, put thy hook into their
nostrills, that endeavor to disturb the peace of this our Israel. Ps: ^8.3.
Reword thou them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of
their inventions. 4.5.
Recompense them, after the work of their hands, pay them that they have
deserved.

Give peace in our days, O Lord, and unite the affections of our gracious King
and his people, give a good and right understanding between them: That upon
himself his Crown way flourish; that he may have peace on all sides, 132.19.
1 Reg: 4.25.
round about him. And that all we his people may dwell safely, every man under
his Vine, and under his Fig Tree.

This humble Petition if thou shall be pleased to grant, it will not only
breed astonishment and wonder, in all that cast their eyes upon us, which
expect our present ruin and confusion; but it will also redound to the
exaltation of the glory of thy Name, and to the comfort of thy poor dejected
people. And so we shall all with one accord, Psa: 26 12.
bless thee in the great Congregation, and sing that sweet Antheme of thy
blessed Angels, Luc: 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest, peace in Earth, and toward men good will.

Grant it therefore, O good God, for the merits of thy blessed son Christ
Jesus, our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Sat, si serio.

