Ireland's Declaration: Being a Remonstrance of the Generality of the Good
People of IRELAND.
WE need not insist much upon the so generally known Calamities of this
deplored Island, by the want of, or fault in the regiment of our affairs in
Church and State, since the deposing first, and after (we wish we could not
say) murder of our lawful and good King. Only, as we cannot but ascribe the
past, present, and impending distractions in the three Nations, to the just
judgment of God upon us in general for our Treasons and Rebellions against his
Anointed: So (being truly sensible that this Nation was first in the
wickedness) we think it a duty impending us in particular, first to endeavor
the expiation of those dreadful crying sins of Rebellion and Murder, we stand
so hainously guilty of, by doing penance in this sheet (being at present
capable of bringing no better a Peace Offering) that so we who led others to
wickedness, may be likewise an example and inducement to their repentance. And
therefore (though briefly) most seriously remonstrate.

I. That (having duly considered the present state of Affairs in the three
Nations; The Confusion of Church and State; The Oppression of the People in
general, by the Ambition and Avarice of some insatiable, aspiring persons that
preside us; The continual slavery we have groaned under for these Nineteen
years, and the visible and more dreadful Judgments of an angry God still
impending, with the true Cause, and most probable Remedies for the averting
Judgment, and healing our Divisions, (We do from our hearts and consciences
disown, abhor, and deplore that wicked Murder committed upon the late King
Charles under the specious pretenses of Law and Conscience.

II. That we do disown, and will to the hazard of our lives and fortunes,
oppose all Authorities whatsoever as usurped and sacrilegious, but that of King
and Parliament, consisting of Lords and Commons, according to the ancient
fundamental, Civil and Ecclesiastical, Laws of this Realm.

III. That we do heartily and absolutely own Charles H. Crowned King of Scots,
to be rightfully, both by the Laws of God, and the three Nations, undoubted
King of England, Scotland and Ireland; And that we hold our selves engaged by
conscience, duty, and Allegiance, not only to the utmost of our power to defend
him from the violence and treachery of his Enemies, but withal to endeavor
his restoration to that Right and Enjoyment of the three Nations he is so
unjustly debarred of, under these, or some other Qualifications of the like
nature.

1. That he shall absolutely and without exception grant his gracious pardon in
general to all and every of his and his Fathers enemies, as to life and Member,
for all and all manner of matters and things acted or done in opposition to his
Father or himself, before his establishment in the three Nations, be their
offenses or crimes of what nature soever.

2. That a reasonable respect be had to the Purchasers of Crown or
Church Lands, so that they may not be damnified by the laying out of their
purchase-money.

3. That all the Soldiers who serve under the Parliament in England, Scotland
and Ireland, or elsewhere, may have speedy satisfaction for their Arrears by
some way and means to be considered of, before the Kings Introduction, and to
be specified in certain Articles to be tendered him upon the same. That so as
far as may be there may be an accommodation with all persons whatsoever.

And as we are fully persuaded that this is the only means under God left us
for the healing our breaches and divisions in some measure, restoring Peace,
Trade, and Plenty to this miserably distracted and almost undone Realm,
rescuing the lost honor of these formerly so renowned Kingdoms from reproach
and infamy among the neighbor Nations, and averting the so visibly revenging
hand of God: so we do with all carnestness possible invite all those in England
and Scotland, who have any spark of Religion, Conscience, Justice, Loyalty,
Ingenuity, or common Honesty, to return with us to their Allegiance, which is
the asserting of the Good old Cause indeed, which we first generally declared
for, but have since been biassed by Ambition and Interest so much to Apostatize
from.

Consented unto, and agreed upon by many thousands of the good people and
honest Soldiers of the Kingdom of IRELAND. Dublin Tuesday March 13. 1649.

