THE IMPUDENCE OF THE Romish Whore: Continued, and improved, in her shameless
and barbarous Brood of the JRJSH REBELS; Calling themselves, His MAJESTY'S
Catholic Subjects.

Discovered by a Particular of certain MOTIVES by them divulged, and falsely
alleged to be the Occasion of their late taking up Arms:

As also, By their Oath of Association, And by certain ridiculous and arrogant
PROPOSJTJONS, Which they have prepared, with a foolish hope, that they shall be
condescended unto, by the KING and PARLIAMENT of England.

All which are here exemplified, with some brief Notes and Observatious upon
them: By a Lover of his Country.

Published by Authority.

Printed by Robert Austin. M.DC.XLIV.

The Motives and Reasons, which the Irish Rebels have published, as the
occasions of their taking up Arms; with brief Replies unto them.
THese Motives and Propositions following, lately published by the Popish Irish
Rebels (and excellently discovering the shameless insolence, madness, and
folly of that barbarous Nation) came newly to my hands: which having perused, I
perceived the Motives to be so false, and the Propositions so absurd, that me
thought, I saw in them, and through them, the very Quintessence of that brutish
Malignity, which might be extracted out of Popery, and Barbarism, united. And,
though they divulged these Conceptions of theirs, to advance their own
designs, I judged it not amiss to further their publication, that the
besotted English may take notice of the sting which is in the tail of those
dangerous Scorpions (newly invited, and entertained, by some of them, into
their bosoms:) and to that purpose, therefore, I send them forth, with an
Antidote pressed out of their own poison, for the curing of the mischiefs, and
malignancy, which the might else, perhaps, occasion, or increase; and you shall
find them, in brief Notes, annexed to the several ensuing Motives, and
Propositions, as they hastily dropped from my Pen.

The Rebels first Motive.
I. It was plotted, and resolved, by the Puritan^ of England and Ireland, to
extinguish quite the Catholic Religion, and the Professors and Maintein^rs
thereof; and to put all Catholics of this Realm to the Sword, that would not
conform themselves to the Protestant Religion.

There was no expression of any purpose, in those whom they call Puritans, nor
in any other of the English Nation, to extirpate them, or their Popish
Heresies, otherwise then according to the Laws long since established; and no
probability, of any secret, or published intent, to put any of them to the
^word, for their Religion, in a hostile, or illegal way; nor to punish them in
a legal way, so much as their mischievous and seditious activenesse often
deserved.

II. The State of Ireland did publicly declare, that they would root out of
the Realm all the Natives, and make a total second Conquest of the Land,
alleging they were not safe with them.

If the State of England, or Ireland, ever made any such Declaration; it was
not until their bloody, unequaled, and inhumane massacres of the British
Protestants were first, causlesly, and without provocation, both begun, and
almost finished. It was not before these Irish had taken up rebellious and
persidious Arms; nor was it then purposed, by the Britans, that any innocent
Irish should have suffered, either in body, or estate, though they, who judge
the cruelty of other men's hearts by their own, falsely pretend this Motive.

III. All Natives here were deprived of the benefit of the ancient Fundamental
Laws, Liberties and Privileges, due, by all Laws, and Justice, to a free
People and Nation; and were particularly due by the Municipall Laws of Ireland.

This is falfe: for, the Irish were (for the most part) during many Ages past,
a brutish People, living under the Arbitrary tyrannies of their petty Lords,
according to rude Customs, more Heathenish, then Christian; and having,
instead of Ecclesiastical, or Civil Laws, certain uncertain Traditions,
patched up, out of Popery, Profaneness, and Superstition, without any
conformity to Justice, or to such Laws as became a civillized Nation, until
their wildness became regulated by the good example of the English, who gave
them wholesome Laws, yea, and Privileges, and Freedoms from their Oppressors.

IV. That the Subjects of Ireland, especially the Irish, were thrust out
forceably from their ancient possessions, against and without color of Right,
and could not have propriety, or security, in their estates, goods, or other
rights, but were wholly subject to an Arbitrary Power, and Tyrannical
Government these forty years past, without any hope of relief or redress.

They had generally (except those who forfeited their estates by wilful
Rebellion) the same right, and propriety which the Britans had; if they
submitted to the Laws as they did. And if any propriety were taken from them,
by a tyrannical, or Arbitrary Power, it was by the corruption, and cruelty of
those, whom they now take to be their great Friends, and by whom the Britans,
there, and we, here, also, were, and are, as much oppressed, as they pretend to
have been, in this Motive.

V. Their native Youth debarred, by the practice of State, from all learning
and education, in that the only University here excludes all Catholics
thence; neither are they suffered to acquire learning, or breeding, beyond the
Seas, on porpose to make them rude, and ignorant of all Letters.

This is untrue; for the native Youth have as free liberty of education, in
all good Studies, Arts and Sciences, as the Britans, and are debarred nothing,
but what the Children of the said Britans are also debarred, if they be not
conformable to the Laws. Yea they are debarred nothing, but what is likewise
mischievous to themselves, and repugnant to the Law of God; of which
prohibitions none ought to complain, seeing the like are in most other
Kingdoms and States; much less ought they to make it a motive of rebellion,
or thereupon to infer, that it is purposed merely to keep their Youth
ignorant of letters.

VI. The Catholics of this Kingdom are not admitted to any Dignities, Place,
or Offices, either Military, or Civil, Spiritual, or Temporal, but the same
are conferred upon men of no quality, who purchase it either for money, or
favor, and not by merit.

The Protestants are not admitted to Dignities Military, Civil, or Spiritual
in Spain: were that a just Motive therefore (their Laws not allowing it) for
their Natives to take up Arms against the State, and murder, unexpectedly,
their brethren, as these have done? Now if such dignities were conferred for
money, and on undeserving men, it was done by their good Friends, and Patrons,
only, who did the like here, and therefore, me thinks, they should have
concealed their corruptions, till they had totally inslaved them, which yet is
but partly effected.

VII. All the trading, traffic, shipping, and riches, of this whole Isle, by
the corruption of the State, are engrossed by Dutch, Scottish, and English, not
residing here, who exclude the Natives, wholly, from the same, and who return
the Product of all their stock and coin back into their native Countries.

This, if it were so, is also to be imputed, only, to their dear friends at
Court, whom they might have yet spared, in policy, or good manners.

VIII. All the Staple and rich Commodities of the Realm are turned to
Monopolies, and heavy impositions, against Law, laid on all Merchandises.

This was done by one of those Prerogatives, which, they say, is invaded by the
Puritan Faction in England. Therefore let them also blame, only, their dear
Friends for it: and, if they will be like themselves, not complain against the
Prerogative of monopolizing, till they have perfectly in vassalled the King to
the Papal Monarchy. For Papists had the first Grants of most Monopolies in
England, and Ireland, and sold them to the Protestants, to lay the scandal on
them.

IX. The principal native Wares of the Land exported into Foreign Countries,
unwrought, and unmanufactured, thereby depriving the Kingdom of Manual
Trades, and Occupations, and driving the Natives to furnish themselves, from
head to foot, with manufactures from abroad, at very dear Rate.

This is not done by the Puritan Faction, but is performed, by virtue of that
Prerogative, which they pretend to be invaded by the said Puritans, therefore,
me thinks, they should not yet quarrel with it: and it seems reasonable also,
that they should remember, their brethren, the native Irish, were, for the most
part, such a rascal, idle people, that, if their Staple Commodities should not
have been exported, unwrought, they would have rotted in their hands: for it
was long ere their sotrishnesse could, by example, or compulsion, be brought to
any honest labor; or from their ill custom (in husbandry) of drawing by the
horse-tailes, instead of harness.

X. All their heavy and insufferable pressures, prosecuted, and labored, by
the Natives of this Kingdom, with much suit, expense, and importunity, both in
Parliament here, and in England, before His Majesty, to be redressed: yet could
never be brought to any happy conclusion, or as much as hope of contentment,
but always deluded with delays.

What their successes have been in Parliament, heretofore, I know not, nor what
Motives they made; but if they were like their ensuing Propositions, they had
as happy conclusions as they deserved. If they were not unreasonable, yet
Parliaments were not to be blamed: for they had not power to preserve their own
Privileges, for many years together; and the Favorers and Confederates of
these Irish Rebels were the cause of it.

XI. Common Justice, and the Rights, and Privileges of Parliament, to all the
Natives of the Realm, and ancient course of Parliamentary Proceedings, wholly
declined.

This is false: and were it true, it is but the same grievance which we have
partly suffered by the Patrons of the forementioned Rebels, who, we know, will
remember it, and very zealously cut their throats, as well as our, in requital
thereof, (if God prevent not) as soon as their aims are accomplished.

XII. His Majesty's royal Power, Honor, Prerogative, Estate, Revenue, and
Right, invaded upon by the Puritan Faction in England.

May we believe, if the Devil should say the Lords Prayer, and seem zealous
of advancing the Name, Will, Kingdom, and Glory of God, that he were in good
earnest? when we may confidently so do, then may we be assured, that the Irish
Papists take up Arms for defense of the Kings Honor, etc. Their own malice to
the Britans, their covetousness, and the honor and prerogative of the Pope,
were their prime inducements to rebellion; and this, and all the rest of their
Motives to arm themselves against us, were devised, after the treacherous
outrages by them committed. Those whom they call the Puritan Faction in
England, have invaded none of the Kings just Prerogatives: but it will appear,
by the conditions of peace, tendered, by these Traitors, in the following
Propositions, that they intend a greater invasion upon the royal Power,
Honor, and Prerogative, then has been hitherto made, by those whom they
accuse.

XIII. The Government of all his Realms, his Queen, Children, and Families,
usurped by the Parliament of England: and especially by the House of Commons:
as likewise the nominating, and disposing of his Privy Council, Judges,
Clergy, Officers, Navies, Forts, and Castles, arrogated by the said House of
Commons, leaving his Highness nothing but the bare name of a King.

The Parliament have taken upon them, no more, then by the Laws and ancient
Privileges of the Kingdom, appertains unto it: For his Queen, Children, and
Family, ought to be regulated by the Laws, whereof they are the supreme
Judges; and the disposure, and ordering of all particulars mentioned in this
Motive, (especially when the public safety is in hazard) belong unto the
Parliament, though Rebels, and Malignants; pretend, ignorantly, or insolently,
to the contrary: and thereby the King loses no Honor (as these, and other of
his disguised enemies, would make ignorant people to believe) but His Majesty's
dignity, and safety, is rather thereby secured, from the mischiefs, and
indignities, which these would bring upon him; who will not leave him, so much,
as, they say, the Parliament has left him, (the name of a King, and the
benefit of living) if he shall, at last, fail their concealed expectations.

XIV. The many affronts, and wrongs, done by the said House, to the
Ambassadors of foreign Princes, Confederates of His Majesty, residing in
England; and to their Chaplains, and Servants, against the condition of the
League, and the Law of Nations.

What Affronts, these insolent Animals can justly say, have been offered, by
the House of Commons, according as they object, no man shall ever hear: for,
it is but a scandalous suggestion of that impudence which dares affirm any
falsehood; and judges it meritorious, to slander, and lie for the Catholic
Cause.

XV. The gross injuries, and scandals, given by the said House of Commons, to
the Queens Majesty, and her Chaplains, and Servants, in breach of the Articles
made upon the Marriage.

These are the Champions, entitled, The Queens Army, and you must not think
much, if they lie, and rail, for Her, who have listed themselves to fight
under her Banner. Yet take notice, that this, and many other of these Motives,
of taking up Arms, had neither color, nor occasion, of being the ground of
their quarrel, till after their said Arms were taken up, and the whole
Kingdom of Ireland made as it were a bloody slaughterhouse by these Butchers.
But, perhaps, they knew before hand, what occasion their Jesuiticall Directors
would compel the Queen to give this Parliament, of being questioned; and what
impeachments, would thereupon be drawn up: and therefore they barbarously
murdered their neighboring Protestants beforehand; therefore they surprised
those harmless Brittans in their beds, and houses, before they dreamed of an
enemy; and therefore they took up Arms, to be in readiness; and that,
instead of a legal purgation, they might wash her from future imputations, in
the precious blood of Innocents. As for those Articles, and Conditions, of Her
Marriage, and the Privileges, thereby granted, to her Popish Priests, and
Servants, they were made without the consent of a Parliament, yea in despite
of Parliament, and contrary to the Laws, of God, and the Kingdom; therefore
they ought rather to have been sooner broken, then so long tolerated, as they
were.

XVI. The many horrible murders, Robberies, Pillages, Wastes, Burnings, and
other execrable Cruelties, perpetrated of late, by the Protestants Army here,
by public direction of the State of this Realm, upon His Majesty's good
Subjects of the English Pale, and other parts of the Land, they not offending
against the Laws, or Peace of the Realm but merely standing upon their own
defense; and this done them, against His Majesty's pleasure, and without his
privity.

The impudence of every son of the Babilonish Whore is very monstrous, but
none like that of her Irish Bastards. For, after they had committed (I will use
their own words) so many horrid Murders, Robberies, Pillages, Wastes, Burnings,
and other execrable Cruelties, upon the harmless Protestants, living among
them, who neither gave occasion of offense, nor suspected such cruelty, till
they felt the skenes in their throats: they are, nevertheless, not ashamed
(contrary to their own, and our knowledge) to affirm, that these cruelties
were put in execution upon them, and by direction of the State of that Realm,
before they took up Arms, or acted in the massacre of the Protestants; which
is the most impudent falsehood, that ever was averred, by any child of the
Devil. For, all the British Isles rung with the horror of their hellish
cruelties, before the Protestants, whose brethren were murdered unawares, had
so much as a thought of any such offense, as was pretended; or of any such
defensive preparatives, as have been since made. Yea, it is generally known,
that the remainder of the murdered Britans in Ireland, took not up Arms, to
prevent their total extirpation, till that mischief was begun and proceeded
in, almost beyond prevention. And that they then armed themselves against these
Rebels with his Majesty's privitie and good liking, appears (with his
detestation of their inhumanity) by the Act of Parliament made against them,
and confirmed by his Majesty, as also by his own voluntary Declarations,
often mentioning bleeding Ireland, and remembering the Parliament not to be
remiss in sending supplies against those Miscreants; though since termed his
loyal Subjects: Therefore no tongue but Irish could have averred so apparent a
falsehood, nor any but Popish Irish Traitors have dared to affirm, that our
preparations to avenge the blood of his murdered Subjects and our Brethren,
was without his Majesty's privitie, and against his pleasure, unless they will
confess and prove his secret will to be contrary to that which was revealed.

XVII. All the Natives in the English Plantations of this Realm were disarmed
by Proclamation, and the Protestant Plantators armed, and tied by the Condition
of their Plantations, to have Arms, and to keep certain numbers of Horse and
Foot continually upon their Lands, by which advantage many thousands of the
Natives were expulsed out of their possessions, and many hanged by Martial
Law, without cause, and against the Laws of this Kingdom; and many of them
other ways destroyed, and made away, by sinister means and practices.

That which is here affirmed is totally false, for, had the Natives been indeed
unarmed, and the Protestants armed, as by law they ought to have been, and as
the treacherous condition of the Irish required; the public peace had been yet
preserved: at least such Butcheries had not been committed. But the Britans
were too secure, and so far from using the cruelties against the Irish, or
taking the advantages, laid to their charge, that they suppressed them not as
they ought to have done; much less hanged them as they deserved: for which
cause, they have since cut their throats, who saved them from the Gallows.

XVIII. Half this Realm was found to belong unto His Majesty, as his ancient
Demeasne and Inheritance, upon old feigned titles of 300. years past, by
Judges, against Law, their Evidence, and Conscience; who were corrupted, to
find the said Titles, upon promise of part of those lands so found for the
King, or other rewards; or else drawn thereunto by threats of the Judges of the
Circuits, or by heavy Fines, Mulcts, and Censures of Pillory, Stigmatizing, and
other like cruel, and unusual punishments.

What was unjustly found for the King by the corruption of Judges and others,
let them answer for whom it concerns, as also to the rest of this Article. For
we have seen and felt so much injustice in England, that much of it, may
perhaps be true: But me thinks Saint Patricks Beads-men should have considered,
that this imputation of injustice will more disparage their friends at Court,
then those whom they account their enemies, for from them proceeded that
injustice which was done.

The Preface to the Oath of Association, taken by the Irish Rebels.
Whereas the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom of Ireland have been enforced
to take up Arms, for the necessary defense and preservation, as well of their
Religion, plotted, and resolved to be quite suppressed by the Puritan Faction,
as likewise of their Estates, and Liberties, and also for the defense and
safeguard of His Majesty's Royal Power, Prerogatives, and Right, invaded upon:
(which we will defend so far forth only as may serve our own turns) And
for that it is requisite there should be an unanimous consent and real union
between all the Catholics of this Kingdom, to maintain the premises, and
strengthen them against their adversaries: It is thought fit by them, that
they, and whosoever should adhere unto their party, should, for the better
assurance of their fidelity and constancy of the public Cause, take the
ensuing Oath.

The Rebels Oath of Association.
I A. B. do promise, vow, and make Protestation, before God and his Angels, of
my Allegiance to my Sovereign Lord King Charles, and to the Heirs of his
Body, Kings and Queens of England: and that I will maintain his and their
just Prerogatives, Honor, Estate, and Rights: the Power and Privileges of
Parliament, and all the ancient and fundamental Laws of England, now of force
within this Realm, so far forth as they are not contrary, or against the
Roman Catholic Religion: (this was well provided:) And do further promise,
vow, and protest, before God and his Angels, that I, as Confederate and
Associate to the rest of the Confederate Catholics of this Kingdom, will by
all lawful means maintain, uphold, and defend, to my power, the free
exercise of the said Religion through this Kingdom, as also the just
liberties, possessions and estates of this Kingdom, who have or shall take
this Oath, and perform the Contents thereof, with men, money, and other
provision, as it shall be reasonably required, from time to time, by the said
Catholics Confederates. And moreover, I will join with the same Confederates
in any lawful way, that shall be agreed on by them, to free this Kingdom and
Nation from the oppressions and cruel Government of the now State and Officers
of this Realm, and from the designs or attempts of all others, that have
plotted the destruction of the Roman Catholic Religion within this Land, or
the professors thereof. And this Oath, and Protestation, and every part
thereof, I do take freely, syncerely, and heartily, in the literal sense,
without any equivocation, or mental reservation, and shall not, for any cause,
respect, or pretense, relinquish this Promise, Vow, or Protestation. So help
me God, and the holy Gospels.

I would we were so cordial and unanimous in our Associations and Covenants,
as it is probable they will be in this.

The means to reduce this Kingdom to Peace and Quietness.
This Kingdom being for the most part composed of diverse ancient Irish and
English Families, the Irish having without stroke, or striving, voluntarily
submitted unto the Government of the Kings of England, and do glory, that His
Majesty's Ancestors and first Predecessors are of their own blood, (The
Arrogant Rebels claim kindred, and would, forsooth, be cosens to the King)
take pleasure, and delight, and a conscionable pride, to be ruled and commanded
by him, and likewise the ancient English being Colonies settled here upon the
first Conquest of this Kingdom (if Conquest it may be justly called) have ever
since continued here, and by their faithful endeavor, sealed with their
blood, have maintained and preserved themselves and this Kingdom in their
natural obedience (so long as they were kept under by strong hand) to their
Kings, being extremely provoked, with the indignities offered to their Prince,
whom they naturally and passionately affect; and being all grieved to see and
observe the gates of his mercy and goodness forceably shut by violence against
his Catholic Subjects, may be nevertheless reduced to peace, upon the
granting and confirming to them, in Parliament, of the Conditions following, if
the same be condescended unto, before bloodletting make matters
irreconcilable.

The insolent Propositions which the Irish Rebels have propounded at Oxford, as
the Terms upon which they will treat of peace: with some brief Observations
upon them.
I. First that a general, and free pardon, without any exception, be granted
to all His Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom, and that in pursuance thereof,
and strengthening of the same, an Act of Association may pass in Parliament
here.

Some good use might be made of some things to be taken from this Proposition
at another time, but not in the Irish sense; for though I am not so
uncharitable as to deny mercy to the whole Nation, without respect to the
innocent, yet by my consent, I would have no other peace then the Jews had
with the Amalekites, concluded with those who were either actors in the late
Massacre of our brethren, or obstinate in the Romish Superstitions, for
considering their principles and their condition, it is impossible there should
be safety in being at peace with them.

II. That all marks of National distinction between English and Irish may be
abolisht and taken away by Act of Parliament.

This motion to some intents and purposes might be considerable, if the
Kingdom were purged of bloody and obstinate Heretics.

III. That by several Acts of Parliament to be respectively passed, here, and
in England, it be declared, that the Parliament of Ireland has no
subordination to the Parliament of England, but that the same has in it self
supreme Jurisdiction in this Kingdom, as absolute as the Parliament of England
there has.

This is a mere Irish motion, raised out of witless and rebellious
presumption, deserving only to be scorned and passed by till opportunity
affords use of it.

IV. That the Acts of 10. Hen. 7. commonly called Poynings Act, and all other
Acts expounding or explaining the same, may be repealed.

Let this be referred to Poynings to report his opinion of the motion, and by
my consent let it be granted, when he certifies for the propounders.

V. That as in England there passed an Act of Trienniall Parliament, there may
pass another for a sexenniall Parliament here.

This, for ought I know, may be assented unto, when Ireland is reduced to
obedience, and restored to peace.

VI. That since this Kingdom, since S. Patricks time, continued constant in
the Catholic Religion, and that the same was only professed in His Majesty's
Dominions, unto the change happened in Henry 8. his time, upon occasion known,
though not fit to be repeated* and since that Religion is professed by the most
learned Divines throughout the most considerable parts of the Christian world,
and was never condemned, but was always affirmed by all Oeconomicall
Counsels, and that the same is most consonant to the Monarchical Government,
which the opposites of Catholic Religion (as experience shows, in all and
every our neighboring Countries) industriously labor to dissolve, destroy,
and beat down: It may be enacted by Parliament, that the Acts of the second of
Q. Elizabeth in Ireland, and all other Acts made against Catholics, or the
Catholic Religion, since the second of Henry 8. may be repealed.

This Proposition savours not so well now, as perhaps it would have done in
Saint Patrick's days, and therefore we will either refer it back to Saint
Patrick's time, or leave it to be answered or condiscended unto till Saint
Patrick's time comes again, for his Metropolitanship is of little authority at
this present. What his Religion was we are uncertain; but we know very well that
the Religion of these Irish Rebels is very conformable to the Papal Monarchy,
and very advantageous to those temporal Monarks who are Vassalls thereunto,
whilst they can humor their Sovereign Lord the Pope, or till his Holiness
grows froward or quarrelsome, for his private ends; and what conformity there
is then between that which these call Saint Patrick's religion, and the
temporal Monarchies of Christian Princes, we are well informed by those
Histories which testify the Papal pride and tyranny: But that it has any
conformity with our British Monarchy, which is bounded and regulated by the
Laws, I understand not: yet this I hope (whatever conformity they seem to
have) that instead of those acts which these Rebels desire should be repealed
to the reviving of Saint Patrick's Religion, (as they term their Heresies)
some other shall be enacted to help root it quite up; without any respect to
their foolish hopes, or their false peace, or their most learned Divines, or
their Oeconomicall Counsels, or their Irish Skenes, or their Catholic devises.

VII. That the Bishoprics, Deanries, and all other Spiritual Promotions of
this Kingdom, and all Frieries and Nunneries, may be restored to the Catholic
Honors, and that the Impropriations of Tithes may likewise be restored: and
that the City, Ambits, and Precincts of the Religious Houses of the Monks may
be restored to them: but as for the residue of their temporal possessions, it
is not desired to be taken from the present Proprietors, but to be left to
them, until that God shall otherwise incline their own hearts.

This Proposition with the next, and some other of those that follow, were
indeed the true inducements occasioning the Irish Rebels (as they have
confessed) to take up Arms at this time, even their Bishoprics, Deanries,
Fryeries, Nunneries, etc. In hope of these they plunged themselves into blood
and Rebellion, and infested us with an unnatural war, foolishly dreaming
that, now, to purchase our peace with them, we will be glad to allow them this
and the rest of their following demands, whereas (they deserving nothing but
the Gallows) we shall disdain, if all men be of my opinion, to have peace with
them, whilst they are Papists, upon any conditions* yea though they would give
us all they had, and become slaves unto us for ever. Much more disdain we to
give ought, though but to the value of a durty ragge, to be reconciled unto
them; because by the principles of their Religion their peace will be worse
then war to us; and as appears by their late and ancient practices, their
friendship is destruction, their reconcilliations are but trecheries, and their
embraces murders: And none save a Nation more unreasonable then Beasts, having
so trecherously and so inexpressibly exasperated the British Protestants by
their late barbarous murders of them, as these Irish have done, could have
been so blockish as to believe that we shall ever confide in them, or in any
peace concluded with them, till they have washed away their bloodshed with
penitential tears, and renounced the witchcrafts and abominations of the
Romish Strumpet.

VIII. That such as are now entitled Catholic Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
or other Dignitaries in this Kingdom, by the donation of the Pope, may, during
their lives, retain their Spiritual Promotions, with Protestation
nevertheless, and other fit clauses to be laid down, for preservation of His
Majesty's Rights, of Patronage, First Fruits, and tenth Parts, in manner and
quantity as now His Majesty receives benefit thereby.

It would be too tedious to illustrate all the impudence and craft which is
involved in this Proposition, let the Reader therefore consider it by himself.

IX. That all Protestants, English and Scots, may enjoy the free liberty and
use of their Consciences here, and not contribute to the maintenance of
Catholic Parson, Vicar, or Curate, but shall maintain their own Ministers at
their proper charge, and that all Irish Catholics may enjoy the like
Privileges in England and Scotland.

Are not the Scots and English Protestants beholding to them, that they will
but take away their Parsonages and Vicarages from their Ministers? and not make
them contribute also to their Catholic Parsons, Vicars, and Curates? You see
the Rascals will be content for a while to allow a tolleration of our Religion
among them.

X. That it may be lawful for all Catholics in this Kingdom, to found and
indow Colleges in the same, as well for teaching and training of youth, as
otherwise, they taking an Oath of Fidelity to the King.

It shall be lawful for them to be hanged, and then there will be no danger of
their disloyalty to the King.

XI. That for the training up of the Gentry of this Kingdom in the common Laws
thereof, Innes of Court and Chancery may be erected, founded, and endowed, and
such Catholic Natives of this Kingdom as go to reside, or study in any place,
University, College, Innes of Court, or Chancery, in England, may enjoy there,
without molestation, the liberty of their Consciences.

This and the other 12. Propositions, whereto I have not leisure to reply in
particular, do give us truly to understand what we are to expect from this
barbarous people, if it should please God to put them into a prevailing
condition, to wit the total extirpation both of us and our Religion, and the
invassalling of the Crowns of England and Scotland to the Pope. These are the
unparalleled presumptions of his Majesty's Catholic Subjects of Ireland by
whose aid his infatuated Counsel at Oxford seeks to ruin him and his truest
Liege People, for the avoiding of their due punishment, and the satisfying of
their lusts. These are those murderers of our Brethren whom the Queeens Iunto
at Court complies withal, and have called hither for the accomplishment of
their bloody designs upon the Britans: These are the results of those
confederacies, which Moah and Ammon and Amalek and the spiritual Canaanites
(whom we preserved among us contrary to the Laws) have unhappily produced, to
be not only pricks in our sides, and thorns in our eyes, but the indangering
also of all our happiness; these are the fruits of our foolish policies, and
of those cursed Marriages with Idolaters, which were hunted after with peril,
and consumated, as it were in despite of Gods Word and humane discretion:
These are the effects of hearkening unto flatterers, and such Counselors as
pervert the Laws; and if God in mercy do not speedily pluck the King from
them, or tear them from about his Throne, a sad conclusion will ere long follow
thereupon: For doubtless he that strengthens himself by the wicked, shall have
his portion among them; he that had rather be established in his Kingdom by
the cruelties and savagenesse of hypocritical Rebels, then by the just and
legal services of loyal Subjects, may at last, instead of loyalty, reap the
fruit of their rebellion, whom he favored. But God open the eyes and heart of
our Sovereign, that he perceiving their fraud and mischievous intentions, may
return in peace unto us, and be both an instrument and partaker of that
happiness we desire, to his honor, to our greater consolation, and to the
shame and confusion of his and our malicious Adversaries; who shall be snared
in their own Net, and taken by the wiliness of their own imaginations.

XII. That an Act of Parliament may pass here for securing the subjects title
to their several estates against the Crown, upon any title accrued unto it
before 60. years, or under color or pretext of the present Commotions.

XIII. That all Inquisitions taken since 1634. to intitule His Majesty to
Connaught, Thomont, Ormond, Ellioganty, Killomanagh, Duhere, Wickloe, Idvogh,
and Vone, may be vacated, and their estates secured, according to His Majesty's
late Graces.

XIV. That all Plantations made since 1610. may be avoided by Parliament, (if
the Parliament should hold this Act just) and their possessions restored to
those or their Heirs from whom the same was taken, they nevertheless
answering to the Crown the Rents and services proportionably reserved upon the
undertakers.

XV. That the transportation of all Native Commodities to all places of the
World in peace with his Majesty, may be lawful, his customs first paid, and
that the Statutes of the 10. 11. and 13. of Queen Elizabeth, to restrain the
exportation of Native commodities, may be totally repealed.

XVI. That all preferments Ecclesiastical, Civil or Martial, in this
Kingdom, that lie in his Majesty's gift, may be conferred on Natives of this
Kingdom by his Majesty, such as he shall think meet, without any distinction
of Religion; provided always that upon the Prime of his blood of England, he
may bestow what places of Command he shall think meet.

XVII. That a Marshall and Admiral of this Kingdom may be erected in it, to
have perpetual succession therein, with the same pre-eminence, authority, and
jurisdiction, as they respectively have in England, and that the said places be
ever conferred on Noble men, Natives of this Kingdom.

XVIII. That there may be Trained Bands in all Cities, Towns, Corporations and
Counties of this Kingdom, armed and provided at the charge of the several
Counties, Cities and Towns, and commanded by the Natives of the same, who
shall be named by the Counties and Cities respectively.

XIX. That His Majesty may release all tenures in Capite, and by Knights
Service, in consideration whereof he shall receive a settled Revenue of 12000.
l. per Annum, being double the sum which he received casually by them.
Relief, Primier, Seizure, License of Alienation, Escuage and Aid,
nevertheless to remain.

XX. That all Monopolies be ever taken away by Act of Parliament.

XXI. That such new Corporations as have not the fare of Corporate Towns and
were erected to gain voices in Parliament, may be dissolved, and their Votes
taken away, and that hereafter none shall be admitted to voices in Parliament.

XXII. That there may be an Agent chosen in Parliament, here or otherwise, as
shall be thought meet, so qualified to attend continually, his Majesty in Court,
to represent the grievances of this Nation, that he may be removable by such as
chose him, and in case of death or removal, others may be successively
substituted in that place, and that such Agent may enjoy the freedom of his
conscience in Court, and every where else.

It is said, that these Propositions are likely to be condescended unto (if not
already assented unto) at Oxford; and that these Rebels, and their
Confederates, resolve to have their demands, or else to destroy, or be
destroyed; and it appears probable, both by the late Proclamations sent abroad,
and their firing of diverse places, refusing to submit to their tyrannous
commands. The Britans therefore may see whereto they shall trust.

FINIS.

