THE DESIRES AND PROPOSITIONS OF THE Lord Inchequin IN Jreland, to the
Parliament of England Assembled at Westminster; with his Declaration concerning
Charles, King of great Britain, and his Resolution to defend and maintain His
Royal Crown and Dignity, and to oppose and bring to subjection, the Popish
party in Ireland, who have now declared for the King of Spain.

ALSO, A great Fight, and the Lord INCHIQUINS taking of diverse strong Holds of
the Rebels.

LIKEWISE, The proceedings of the Royalists at Bristol, and their declaring for
God and King Charles.

LONDON: Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.

The DESIRES OF The Lord Jnchequin in Jreland, to the Parliament of ENGLAND;
With a relation of the affairs and conditions of that Kingdom, as it was
certified by Letters from Dublin.
SIR,
ALl things here are still in a distracted condition, and all sorts of
provisions very scarce and hard to come by; We look upon England, as a
storehouse, or reserve, on which we confide as the chiefest earthly means to
keep and preserve us from utter ruin and destruction; but the disturbances
which are noysed to be in England, is a great discomfort to us, and a sadness
to every well affected heart.

The Lord Jnchequin still keepts compliance with the Rebels, and the conditions
made between them, are as yet on both parts kept unviolat^d, the Rebels to show
that they confide in the Lord Incheqin, have delivered and surrendered up into
his Lordships hands, many of their holds and places of strength, some of them
being of consequence.

Also, it is with confidence said, that the Lord Inchequine desires to make
some overtures to the Parliament of England, and to desire the Parliament for
moneys, and an ordinance of Indempnities

Also the Lord Inchequine pleads, that what he did was to act by that faction
and party of Catholics in Ireland, which did acknowledge the King of Englands
right and title there, to destroy the other that are for the King of Spaines
interest in that Kingdom; but whether the Rebels will begin, and fight with the
King of Spaines party, it is not yet known, but what their intentions are, a
little time will make appear.

Here has lately been a fight at Sea between some Waxford, Frigots, and
certain Barks which were laden with corn and provision, the Waxford Frigots
after a short encounter took five Barks laden as aforesaid, and the
Passengers are come to this C^ty not any thing worth.

April the 18. a party of the Rebels attempted a garrison of ours, named
Kildare; and with eight scaling Ladders, so large that 8. might go up a
breast, they ascended the Walls half an hour before day; Some got into the
town, but were presently put to the Sword, the Rebels beaten off, and three or
four score left dead in the place, besides many others mortally wounded, which
got away; on our part, two Lieutenants and a Sergeant were slain, and about
twenty common Soldiers, and Captain Dison wounded, one of the Lieutenants,
was Lieutenant Brewerton.

We have yet great hopes, that if convenient supples come from England, much
good may be done this Summer, against those bloody Rebels; for if the
Protestants party were but thoroughly furnished with provisions, and some
aditionall Forces, whereby they might be able to engage with the enemy, upon
all occasions, or to keep the Rebels close within these places which they
command, the famine would consume them, all sorts of livelihood is so exceeding
scarce amongst them: Many of the beast which they have, dye so extremely, with
a Murraine which is amongst them, that all sorts of Cattle will be very
scarce, many of ours dye also; Collonell Jones intends to improve his utmost
ability against the Rebels, and hopes to give the Parliament a good account of
his proceedings this Summer.

Dublin.

The Copy of a letter from Bristoll, relating the condition and state of that
City.
Sir.
THe state of the things is something unsettled here as well as in other places,
which makes the Malignants bold to say and do somethings which may prove
clearly prejuditiall to the Kingdom, if not timely prevented, Here are some
royalists privately listing with whom many take part, they declare there
undertakeings to be for God and King Charles, the Auxilleries do not yet comply
with them, nor take part against them, also the Trained Bonds are not so
careful, s^it were fit they should, to suppress them, but let things as it
were hang at hazard and suspense; but if p^ivate mettings and listing^ of
Malignants be not suppressed by some speedy course, it may cause sad effects,
both here and in other parts of the Kingdom, and then those negligent people,
when they feel the smart, will wish they had prevented those Messengers which
they may then suffer, if they will wi^fully neglect the prevention thereof,
having opportunity and power so to do,

Bristoll, April 19. 1648. It is reported that Poyer is beaten, and 16. of his
Colors, with many prisoners taken.



A letter containing a perfect Relation of the condition and state of things in
South Wales, with the Declaration of the Earl of Ca^berie, Sir Richard Price,
and others against Poyer, who have deserted him, although formerly of the Kings
Army, and how the Welsh Smiths have cut down their Bellows, and many left
their Habitations upon advance of the Parliaments Forces.
SIR,
THe Malignants from many places do yet come in unto Poyer, and use their
endeavors to strengthen him, and what they can they persuade the Welsh to
assist them, and to that end, many lies and fiction, are scattered and spread
abroad, the better to animate and encourage the simple misled Welsh, to join
with them, as that the City of London has declared against the Parliament, and
that the Armies are divided, and ready to engage the one against the other,
with many to this purpose; but it is hoped that their assistance will not be
nothing so great as they expect, for the ^a^^ of Carbery who has once been
engaged against the Parl. and formerly a Commander in the Kings Army ^s also
Sir Richard Price and others, have withdr^wn themselves out of their society,
and also out of that Country, which may happily by their example move others
to do the like.

The Earl of Carbery and others, have likewise declared, their d^slikes of
their undertakings, and would not have that there should be so much as any
suspicion, that they will either joy^e with them, or associate with them, for
they do declare and ingag^ their honor, that they will neither join with them
nor assist them, neither shall any of their f^i^nds as far forth as they can
persuade or hinder them; but on the contrary, they will engage with, and
assist the Army against them. His Lordship has also voluntarily explained
many other tokens of love and good affection to the Parl. and Army.

Yet, the mores the pity, some of those parts are universally bent to oppose
the Parl. and Army, what forc^s soever comes, as appears by this, for as the
Parl. forces march forward, they make away, and carry away with them their
wives, their Children, and drive away their Cattle, with what good^ they have,
or can get together, and are fl^d into he Woods, and into the Mountains,
lea^ing their houses empty, many of their Smiths are also gone, they themselv^s
having cut ^own their Bellows before they went; for they being a^pi^efull
mischievous people, have in many places spoiled and carried away what they
conceive may be of use to the Parl. Forces, and in some places there is neither
a Horse^ shoe to be bad, nor a place to make it if one would give 40 s. to
have an Horse shod. Therefore some extraordinary and unusual course must be
taken to end this trouble, and bring down the stomachs of these little less
then barbarous people.

It is supposed and reported that Ma. Genesis Laughorne is come in unto Poyer, but
whether it were he or not, we cannot tell, but the Welsh l^tly shot off all
their Guns, to welcome some person of quality. The Welsh care not for fighting,
but upon passage, and scarce then neither, except they have a good opportunity,
for the Welsh have always been observed to be cowards, and seldom act but
upon advantage. Colonel Horton has taken fifty of the Welsh Soldiers
prisoners, whereof ten are Gentlemen, and were taken fortifying a house at
Broshock, for whose exchange, a Drummer has been sent into Wales unto Poyer.

This present Monday, being the 8. of this instant May, it was commonly rumored
up and down the Town, that there has been another late fight in Wales,
betwixt the Forces commanded by Colonel Horton, and the Forces commanded by
Colonel Rice ^owell, and that Colonel Horton has obtained a great Victory,
taken 16. Colors and diverse prisoners; The truth whereof, few days will make
manifest.

Imprimatur,

G. M.

FINIS.

