A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mrs. ALICE BRAY, wife to FRANCIS BRAY of
Farthingo, near Brackley in the County of Northampton, Gent.

Upon PSALM 37. and verse. 37. March the 2. 1645.

By W. I. Minister there.

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that m^n is
peace. LONDON, Printed for MATTHEW WALBANCKE, 1646.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
PSALM. 37. ver. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end
of that man is peace.


THe princely Prophet in this Psalm persuades to patience, trust and
confidence in God. These duties he enforces by sundry forcible Arguments and
Reasons. These Arguments and Reasons are taken from the different estate of the
godly and the wicked: And this estate of theirs is considered either in their
life or in their death; in each whereof the difference is very great.

1. In their life, although the wicked for a time seem to flourish, yet they
shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb, verse.
2. But on the other side, the godly man who trusts in the Lord and does good,
who delights himself in the Lord, commits his way unto the Lord, etc. he
shall dwell in the Land, etc. and the Lord shall give him the desires of his
heart, etc. Yea, he shall bring forth his righteousness as the light, and his
judgment as the noone day, verse. 3, 4, 5. etc. Again, another difference is,
that evil doers shall be cut off, but those that wait upon the Lord, i. e.
rest in him, and wait patiently for him, they shall inherit the earth, and that
in a short time, yet a little while, etc. verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. such shall be
the success both of the one and of the other.

Moreover another difference is in the carriage and behavior of the wicked
toward the godly, that though the wicked out of envy and malice, plot against
the just, and gnash upon him with his teeth, yet the Lord shall laugh at him,
etc. yea, though the wicked draw out the Sword, and bend their Bow to cast
down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be upright, yet their sword
shall enter into their own heart, etc. verse. 12, 13, 14, 15.

So for their outward estate, the wicked may abound in wealth, and the godly
live in want, yet a little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches
of many wicked, verse. 16. etc. many like differences you may observe between
them in their outward estate, in ^he verses ensuing: And also in their inward
estate, of ^he godly man it is said, The Law of his God is in his heart, etc.
But contrarily, the wicked man bearing malice in his heart, he watches the
righteous, and seeks to slay him, verse. 31, 32. etc. These and many more like
differences between the godly and the wicked, you may observe in the former
passages of this Psalm, whereby they differ in the whole course of their life.

But the maine difference between them, whereof the Holy Ghost would have us
take more special notice, is at the end of their life, or at their death; this
he would have us more seriously to consider, and therefore, Mark, says he, the
perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace. But on
the other side, the transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the
wicked shall be cut off, verse. 38.

Thus as their estate is different in the whole course and progress of their
life, so also especially at the end of their life, in death; the difference is
very great, for the end of the godly and upright, is peace; but the end of the
wicked is destruction, the transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end
of the wicked shall be cut off, verse. 38.

I shall at this time speak unto you only of the end of the godly, and of
their blessed estate in death, for the end of such is peace: The end of that
man, man put for mankind, man or woman, of either sex, or age, young or old,
or outward condition, rich or poor, the end of that man (or woman) is peace;
and this the Prophet would have us carefully consider; and therefore, Mark
(says he) the perfect man, and behold the upright.

We have here a double precept, with a reason enforcing the same. 1. The
Precept, in these words, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright. 2. The
Reason, in these, for the end of that man, etc. 1. The Precept, as I said, is
double, consisting of two branches, yet both expressing the same thing, Mark
the perfect man, and behold, etc. doubled to note (as I conceive) both the
necessity, as also the excellency of the duty, worthy our serious observation.

And in each we may observe the act and the object: 1. In the first, the act is
Mark. 2. The object or the person to be marked and observed, is, the perfect
man: So also in the second, 1. The act is behold, 2. The object is, the
upright, Behold the upright. I shall endeavor to explane each of these
particulars, and then proceed to instruction. 1. In the first precept, the act
is Mark, Mark, says he, etc. Mark, that is consider diligently, take a serious
view of him, look upon him wishly, and with special observation, so much the
word implies. 2. The object or person thus to be marked, etc. is the perfect
man or woman, man for mankind, as I said, mark the perfect man or woman.

You will say, is there any such man or woman? who can be justly called
perfect? who can say my heart is clean, I am pure from my sin? who dare
assume to himself the title of perfection, seeing so sanctified a vessel as
Paul himself, says of himself, that he had not already attained, either were
already perfect? Phil. 3.12.

I answer, perfection in some sense cannot be denied unto a Christian, for then
in vain were this and all such like precepts to observe it, or exhortations to
endeavor it, as Heb. 6.1. etc. A Christian man or woman may in some respects
be called perfect, or else how should we mark the perfect man, if there were
none such? or why should we be exhorted to go on to perfection, if perfection
could not be attained.

To resolve this doubt therefore more clearly and fully, it is necessary that
we distinguish of perfection, and thereby make enquiry into the several kinds
thereof, and thence see in what sense a man may be called perfect: Know we
therefore that a Christian man or woman may rightly be said to be perfect
sundry ways; for instance,

1. A Christian may be perfect in respect of acceptance, though not in respect
of operation; namely, in respect of Gods acceptance, who of his infinite
goodness, accepts the will for the deed; and therefore as in case of
liberality to the poor, so in any other duty, whether of piety to God, or
charity to man: If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to
that a man has, etc. says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.12. If a man or woman have a
willing mind, joined with a readiness of endeavor unto holy graces and
duties, it is accepted with God as perfect obedience: Thus is he perfect in
respect of acceptance, that is, of Gods acceptance, though not in regard of
operation, his own best works deserving no such thing.

2. A Christian man or woman may be said to be perfect comparatively, though
not positively or absolutely; comparatively, in respect of others, though not
positively or absolutely in himself: For example, if a Christian that devotes
himself to serve God in sincerity, be compared with wicked, carnal, and
worldly-minded men, who serve him not, he is perfect in comparison of them.

So he or she that makes conscience of their ways, though they have many
failings, weaknesses, and imperfections therein, and so not positively and
absolutely perfect in themselves; yet are they perfect in comparison of others
that make no conscience of their courses, but follow their own corrupt and
vile affections, and seek not the power of godliness, thus is he perfect
comparatively, though not positively and absolutely.

3. A Christian man or woman may be perfect Evangelically, though not legally,
that is, after such sort as the Gospel accepts, although not as the Law
enjoynes; for perfection of the Law, is, when a man loves God and his
Neighbor, according to the Letter of the Law, namely, loves God with all the
heart, might, mind and strength, and his neighbor as himself; this perfection
of love is found in no man in this mortal condition.

But 2. perfection of the Gospel is that endeavor of obedience, which God
accepts in Christ, at the hands of his children; which if it be in truth,
sincerity and singleness of heart, it is accepted: Thus is he or she a perfect
man or woman, that desires and endeavors after perfection, though in act they
attain it not: And so is the Apostle to be understood in that place before
named, Phil. 3.12. not as though I have already attained, or were already
perfect, i.e. according to the perfection which the Law requires.

And yet afterward he speaks of himself and others, as being perfect, verse.
15. Let us therefore, says he, as many as be perfect, be thus minded; that is,
as many as be perfect according to the Gospel, namely, so as the Gospel accepts
perfection, that is, so it be in truth, sincerity, and singleness of heart:
This sincerity is the perfection of a Christian: And so were. Noah, Abraham,
Job, Zachary, and Elizabeth, perfect in their Generations, that is, sincere in
the sight of God both in heart and life.

4. A Christian man or woman may be perfect in respect of parts, though not in
respect of degrees: Perfection in parts, is when he has all the parts of
perfection, though in a weak measure: Perfection in degrees, is when he has a
full measure of Perfection in every part: For example, a child newborn is a
perfect man in respect of his parts, because he has all the parts and members
of a man; but he is not perfect in degree, till every part grow up to his
perfection.

So the child of God when he is newborn, by his second birth or regeneration
(whereof mention is made, Ioh. 3.3, 5.) is perfect in respect of parts, because
he has all the parts of perfection, is renewed and changed in every part,
though in a weak measure; and therefore the Apostle calls it a being
sanctified wholly, and a preserving blameless of the whole spirit soul and
body, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. that is in all parts of soul and body, but yet he is not
perfect in degrees, i.e. in that full measure and degree which the Law
requires in every part.

Thus it is said of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.17. that the heart of Asa was perfect all
his days, and yet in the same place it is said, the high places were not taken
away out of Israel, those idolatrous places were not removed by him; yea, he
failed in other things also, for it is said, chap. 16.12. that in his disease
be sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians: So then Asa had perfection in
parts, he had a persect heart, and so also perfection in some measure in all
parts, but he attained not to perfection in degrees, be had not a sull measure
and degree of perfection in all parts, for he failed in the things
before-named; he had his imperfection through the weakness of sanctification,
which is not perfectly attained to in this life.

By all which it appears, that perfection cannot be denied, but that a
Christian man or woman may attain it, for so here you see such a one called a
perfect man, Mark the perfect man.

Perfect in respect of Gods acceptance, though not in respect of his own
works or opperation, God accepting his will more then deeds. 2. Perfect
comparatively, though not positively or absolutely, in comparison of others not
yet converted or sanctified, though not positively and absolutely in himself.

3. Perfect Evangelically, though not legally, accordingly as the Gospel
accepts, though not as the Law enjoynes.

4. Perfect in respect of parts, though not in respect of degrees; having all
the parts of perfection, though not a full measure of perfection in every
degree; and this is the perfect man we are here to mark, and so you have the
sense of the first Precept, Mark the perfect man.

2. I may say of the second, as our Savior did of the second Table of the Law,
the second is like unto it; for so indeed it is; and but, a further description
of the godly, who as in the former is called perfect, so in this latter,
upright, and behold the upright. Here is also both the act and the object: 1.
the Act is behold, 2. The Object or person is the upright; both these are in a
manner the same with the former, and therefore I shall more briefly insist
thereon.

1. The Act is, behold, that is, take a serious view, look diligently, and with
consideration, consider well, 2. The upright, that is the object: And this
uprightness is the second property, whereby the godly man is here described,
which is more fully enlarged Psalm. 32.11. upright in heart; that is, sound and
sincere without guile, verse. 2. And this is, when the heart is set right
toward God in doing all duties of piety and charity toward God and men, truly
aiming at the pleasing of God, and not at by-respects: this is uprightness of
heart, called truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51.6. thou love truth in the
inward parts.

And although no man is indeed upright, without some crookedness and declining
from the straight rule; yet because here is, first a drawing near, and
endeavor after full perfection. Secondly, a comparative rightnesse, in respect
of the unregenerate, whose course is wholly crooked. Thirdly, the acceptance of
a merciful Father, therefore they are called upright. And thus you have the
meaning of both Precepts, both in the act and object, Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright.

Now let us see what may be observed from hence for our further instruction:
And first of all, it is worthy our enquiry, why we are so earnestly exhorted
here, and that by a double precept, to mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright; that is, to take such a serious view of them, to look so wishly upon
them, and with consideration; surely, there is weighty reasons why we should do
so, or else it would never be so earnestly pressed upon us.

And indeed many reasons might be rendered, and time would fail to enlarge
them; I will only pitch upon one, which I take to be most principal, and that
is this, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; namely, for your
imitation, mark and behold them, that you may imitate and follow them in their
perfect, upright, and religious conversation, and this will direct us to this
duty comprised in this Doctrine, namely,

That we are thus to honor the Saints living and dead, eminent in gracious
practice, by following their holy examples. To this end therefore I say,
chiefly, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, that we may make choice
of them for our patterns, and follow their good examples.

To this end, St. James thus exhorts, chap. 5.10. Take my brethren the
Prophets for an example of suffering affliction and of patience: And S. Paul
also claims to himself this honor, Phil. 3.17. Brethren be followers
together of me, and mark them which walk so: Mark them, why so? as ye have us
for an ensample, says he; namely, that you may follow our example: And so
also he charge Gods people, to afford the like to their Pastors, Heb. 13.7.
Remember them which have the rule over you, etc. whose Faith follow,
considering the end of their conversation. Mark, and behold that ye may follow
their faith, etc. The Lord has dealt very mercifully with us, as in many other
things, so herein especially, in providing us all helps convenient for our
salvation. Two senses there are of learning, sight and hearing, they are
neither of them without their means of instruction.

As to our hearing he has furnished us with Pastors according to his heart,
which shall feed us with knowledge and understanding Ier. 3.15 and has given
us in our congregations, as formerly to the Jews in the wilderness, the voice
of cryers, Prepare the way of the Lord, Matthew. 3.3. to whom we ought to attend
and hearken what the Lord God will say.

So to our sight, he has not only laid open the Book of Scriptures, but also
the great Book of his creatures, wherein the rudest may read his power and
wisdom, in plain characters written, as the Apostle shows, Romans 1.20. the
invisible things of him from the Creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power, etc.

Yea, moreover to both these, he has set before us the practice of his Saints,
whose conversation we may see, and whom we are here called upon to mark and
behold, by their perfection and uprightresse, tracing out unto us the way that
leads unto life, therein providing, not only the honor of his eminent
Saints, but also our instruction and encouragement to sanctity, perfection,
uprightness, and integrity, for these reasons especially.

1. Knowing how naturally we are addicted to imitation, and how examples move
more then words, as Bernard said, Validior ect operis quam eris vox, the voice
of works is of more force then of words. In this he would not be wanting unto
us, that if we will needs be imitating, we may have such patterns as shall not
mislead us into error; but contrarily, such as shall lead us on to perfection
and uprightness, and therefore to this end we must mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright, and so honor them by following their holy examples.

2. Besides, lest any should be discouraged with the opinion of insuperable
difficulty in the practice of the duties so to be imitated; he has sampled us
with men of our own mould, subject to like infirmities, that in the hardest
and harshest of Christian offices, have gone before us; insomuch that the duty
cannot be named so hard or harsh to flesh and blood, wherein some of his Saints
have not gone before us.

That, I think, may well be numbered amongst the most hard and difficult
proposed by our Savior, Matthew. 10.38. Namely, to take up our cross and follow
after him: And can we name the cross that some of the Saints have not
comfortably endured? It is hard you will say to part with goods, yet there were
some that suffered that spoil with joy, Heb. 10.34. It is hard to exchange
hopes of advancement and preferment for rebukes; yet is this chosen willingly
by Moses, and counted honorable, Heb. 11.26. esteeming the reproach of Christ's
greater riches then the treasures in Egypt.

It were much, yea too much for many, to leave Country and Kindred and fathers
house, yet did not Abraham so? Genesis 12.1. etc. Hardest of all were it to leave
life, (since skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he give for his life,
Job 2.4.) especially to leave it by violent torments; yet what death can we
think of, so full of shame or torture, but has bin endured by the Saints of
God, as Heb. 11.37. etc. they were stoned, they were sawne asunder, etc. so
fatherly has the Lord provided for our benefit, in providing this honor for
his Saints, whom we are to mark and observe, that we may imitate and follow
their godly and religious examples whether in doing or suffering.

This honor therefore we willingly afford the Saints, to make them our
presidents and patterns in holy practice, or if there be any other of due
praise and commemoration of their virtues warranted by that saying of our
Savior touching that fact of the woman, pouring ointment on his body for his
burial, Verily, says he, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the
whole world, there also shall this that this woman has done, be told for a
memorial of her, Matthew. 26.12, 13. and so also the author to the Hebr. chap.
11. does commemorate at large the Faith and other virtues of the Saints, to
their perpetual praise and commendation.

Yet this suffices not our adversaries the Papists, to give this honor to the
Saints, but they censure us as sacrilegious, because we give them not Gods
honor, namely, the honor of invocation, because we do not pray unto them,
and make them our intercessours to God, though Augustine long since delivered
it for a rule, Honorandi sunt propter imitationem non adorandi propter
religionem; the Saints are to be honored for imitation, not worshipped for
Religion; and can they be more dishonored by any means, then by being made
Idols?

Judge in your selves, whether do more dishonor them, we by denying them
invocation; or Papists by refusing imitation, which God has allowed them; let
it therefore suffice us to mark and observe them for our imitation.

It is not impertinent here to add that enquiry, how far the Saints practice
may be our pattern; and how far their example warrants or binds us to
imitation?

For answer whereunto, we must know, that their actions admit this
distinction: 1. Some of them are noted as sinful (for the best have not been
without their failings) wherein they bewrayed humane frailty, these are
spectacles of natural infirmity, not examples for like practice; they are
written for our caution, not for imitation.

2. A second sort were done by virtue of special dispensation: So Abraham
attempts to slay his son, Genesis 22.10. so the Israelites rob and spoil the
Egyptians, Exodus 12.35, 36. This is no warrant of cousenage to any man, for the
general rule binds us to owe nothing to any man but love, Romans 13.8. and it
is a mark of the ungodly, to borrow without conscience of paying again, Psalm.
37.21.

3. A third kind they did by special and extraordinary calling; as Abraham
leaves his country for pilgrimage in Canaan, Genesis 12.1, etc. as John Baptist
professed a kind of hermitage in the wilderness, Mat. 3.1. Is not the popish
inference pretty from thence? Therefore Pilgrimages are satisfactory, Hermitage
a state of perfection.

4. There is a fourth kind occasioned by special necessity of times, or
appearance of scandal; so the primitive Christians had all things common, Act.
4.32. and Paul makes his hands minister to his necessities, Act. 20.34. Yet
there is no footing herein from these examples for Anabaptisticall community,
nor necessity laid on Ministers to use manual labor, except where cases and
times are alike to those.

5. The last sort of the actions of Saints, which are principally, if not
only, written for our imitation, were their practices which do accord with
the general Law moral, such as those of patience, humility, meekness,
obedience, etc. herein is our bond of imitation, to follow them in the practice
of these and the like Christian graces and virtues, mark and behold them,
herein to imitate them.

Thus Sara is commended to our women's imitation, for modesty and gravity in
attire, 1 Pet. 3, 4, 5, 6. What should I multiply words in this respect? The
Apostle himself has set us our line, 1 These. 1.6. namely, that we become
sollowers of them and of the Lord: Christ is the pattern of patterns, the
rule and measure of all examples; Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me,
says he, Matthew. 11.29. for I am meck and lowly in heart, etc. therefore Paul
to his precept, Be ye followers of me, sets this limit, even as I also am of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1.

In him as the gifts of grace were transcendant, so their exercise
supereminent; he erres not that follows Christ as his precedent, in any thing
wherein he is commanded imitation, nor he that follows the Apostles or
Disciples of Christ, with the limitations before-named, to this and therefore
mark and behold the perfect and upright, to imitate and follow their holy
example in all gracious practices.

And to encourage herein, consider the reason hereunto annexed, for the end of
that man is peace: In which reason is set down the different estate of the
godly and the wicked in the end of their life, and in their death; for whereas
the end of the wicked is destruction, as verse. 38. the end of the perfect and
upright man is peace.

For the better understanding whereof, we must know, that peace is thus
tripled by Divines, 1. Internal: 2. External: 3. Eternal.

1. Internal peace is the tranquillity of the mind and conscience in God,
satisfied in the sense of his goodness, and is a fruit of Justification; for
as Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ: this is that peace which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7.
and of this it is rightly said, no man knows it, but he that enjoys it.

2. External peace is the quiet and concord in our outward estate and carriage
with men, as betwixt a man and his neighbor, etc. when we keep the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. and this is either domestical, or
ecclesiastical, or political.

1. Domestical, or household peace, which shows it self by freedom from
bitterness, discords or any absurd peevish passions in our houses.

2. Ecolesiasticall, or Church-peace, which is not only a rest from
persecution, but also from discords within the Church; this peace is a holy
amity and heavenly concord in the true members of the mystical body, both in
consent and doctrine.

3. Political peace, and that is either private, and so it is a rest from suits
and quarrels; or public, and so it is a rest from wars, and rebellions, and
tumults: These be the branches of peace external.

3. Peace external, is the blessed rest of the Saints in Heaven, for at the
end of this life they shall enter into peace, as Isa. 57.2. where is the most
perfect tranquillity of order, where we are set out of touch or reach of the
Devils wrangling, or any of his instruments.

Now, although all these kinds of peace may in some sort be applied to the
perfect and upright man or woman; because, if it be possible, as much as lies
in them, they would live peaceably with all men, as Romans 12.18. yet I take it,
that here principally is meant the first and the last kind; and so the sense
is this, the end of the perfect and upright man or woman, is peace, that is,
they have peace of conscience, peace with God through Jesus Christ, etc. and so
enter into peace eternal in heaven: So then, here you see, as was said, one
maine difference between the godly and the wicked in the end of their life; the
end of the one is peace, of the other destruction: The end of the perfect and
upright man is peace, but the transgressors shall be destroyed together, the
end of the wicked shall be cut off.

I shall only, and that briefly, speak of the former at this time; namely,
the end of the perfect and upright, which is peace; peace both internal and
eternal: 1. Internal of the mind and conscience in God satisfied in the sense
of his goodness, and assurance of his mercy in Christ. The collection is
plain from the Text, that the godly man or woman shall make a peaceable end,
their mind and conscience very comfortable in death; for mark the perfect man,
etc. the end of that man is peace.

It is truly affirmed by the wise man, that the righteous has hope in his
death, Prove. 14.32. that is, the man justified before God by Christ, and
studying and endeavoring to walk in the ways of righteousness in his life,
when death comes, he quietly awaiteth the Lords good leisure, in assured hope
of entering into a place of rest, by the merit and death of Jesus Christ.

This appears also in Paul's disposition, Phil. 1.23. having a desire to
depart, or to be let loose, and you may see in him the true disposition of a
religious man of a perfect and upright man or woman, so far was he from
endeavoring to put death out of his mind, as if it were a terror to think
thereon: As that contrarily, he took comfort in remembering it: So far was he
from fearing, least it should come too soon upon him, that he rather desired
it, and the delaying thereof was irksome to him: This therefore is an
argument, that Paul's thoughts respectively to death were very comfortable, and
his end peace, when as that which man naturally fears, he desired with all
speed to come unto, having a desire to depart.

The like may be seen in that good old Simeon, who did even in a manner beg of
God to be dismissed, Luke 2.29. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace: And to assure us, that his desire herein proceeded not from any worldly
discontent; he speaks of a departure in peace, as an evidence of some feeling
of peace betwixt God and his soul, and gives his reason of it, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation: He had now as much spiritual comfort and contentment,
as in this world could be hoped for, and was therefore now desirous (if it
might stand with Gods good pleasure) to end his days in the midst of that
sweet peace which he felt in great abundance in his soul.

It was the blessing that God promised to Abraham, Genesis 15.15. that he should
go to his fathers in peace, which is to be referd, not only to the rest which
God meant to give him before his death, from all his former travels, but also
to the comfortable disposition of his soul, at the end of his life, that then
he should go to his fathers in peace: Thus it is plain that the godly man or
woman shall make a peaceable end, their mind and conscience shall be very
comfortable in death.

Neither is it thus with the godly, the perfect and upright men and women
without cause; for 1. it fares so with them through the assurance which they
have of reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ: How can this but breed
peace and quietness in the mind and conscience, when I am persuaded and
assured in my soul and spirit, that all cause of danger after death is utterly
removed, and that God both is and ever will be gracious unto me in his Son
Christ Jesus?

This was the ground of the Apostles confidence, Phil. 1.23. he knew that so
soon as he was departed hence, he should be with Christ, which is far
better; and therefore he desired this departure: He that felt himself now in
Christ, could not but be assured that he should afterward be with Christ, and
so at peace. To whomsoever God gives Christ, he gives all things, for all
things are in Christ; and therefore he that has Christ, has life, and all
things pertaining thereunto, righteousness, peace, etc.

Now if it be questioned, whether the servants of God, the perfect and
upright, have this assurance of their reconciliation, and so of peace? I
answer, it is certain, that sooner or later, they all have it in some measure;
for it is said plainly, They which are Christ's, have the Spirit of Christ, and
if any have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. And again,
verse. 10. This Spirit bears witness with our spirit of our adoption, that we
are the children of God. Here is a double testimony, Gods Spirit and our
spirit, and these give evidence of our adoption, and consequently of our
reconciliation and peace.

2. This peace proceeds also from the comfortable testimony of their
conscience, touching their former care to glorify God in uprightness of heart
and holiness of conversation. Hence came Paul's comfort, 2 Timothy 4.8. I have
fought a good fight, says he, and this encouraged him to expect that Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord reserves for all which love his appearing.

Consider to this purpose the example of Hezekiah, Isa. 38.1. etc. he knew, no
doubt, that he must dye, but at that time there mentioned, when the Prophet
Isaiah came unto him from the Lord with this doleful message, Set thy house in
order, for thou shall dye, and not live.

Whom would not these tidings have stricken to the heart, and what could
Hezekiah then expect but present death? Well then, all things thus threatening
his end, the common condition of nature, the mortality of the present
sickness, (being as it is thought, the Plague) and above all, the doom
brought from the Lord by the hand of such a Prophet: Where now was the staff
of Hezakiahs comfort, but even the witness of his soul and conscience,
testifying unto him the sincerity and holiness of his former course? Remember
now, O Lord, says he, verse. 3. how I have welked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight.

Even so also could that good old Simeon, with a glad spirit have besought the
Lord even instantly to dismiss him, if his conscience had not told him, that
all his life past had been an intentive waiting for the consolation of Israel,
Luke 2.25, 26. thus the piety, the purity, the sincerity of their former
courses has secured these worthies of the glory to come, and withal procured
their present peace, and the same ground of peace has every perfect and
upright man and woman.

Neither is this so, because of any connection between work and wages, a^ if
Gods children should build their hopes upon merit or deserts; for they know,
that when they have done what possible they can, they are yet unprofitable
servants, etc. but because they know good works to be the way to the Kingdom,
but not the cause of reigning, God has ordained, that we should walk in them,
Ephesians. 2.10. And they find by the Scripture, that an holy life here is the
first fruits of a glorious life herefares; and so the conscience of their
former course is the assurer, not the deserver of their happiness; the
evidence, not the cause of their peace. Thus for peace internal in the mind
and conscience, whereof the godly are partakers, not only in life, but in
death, they shall make a peaceable end, their conscience very comfortable in
death; For mark the perfect man, etc. for the end of that man is peace.

It is also equally true touching their peace eternal, for at the end of his
life, the perfect or righteous shall enter into peace; they shall rest in their
beds, etc. Isa. 57.2. they shall enter into eternal peace and rest. The
Apostle Paul is an evidence to us of the condition and state of all perfect and
upright men or women. Now he speaks confidently, that no sooner should his
soul be separated from his body, but it should be by and by with Christ, Phil.
1.23. Death should be but as a door opening unto him, a speedy admittance into
the society and presence of the Lord Jesus, and so at peace.

And if any should think that Paul's case herein was singular, and that albeit
it might be his portion, thus speedily upon his death to be conveyed unto
Christ; yet it cannot be so with every Christian. The Apostle elsewhere puts it
out of all question, that herein he did not think himself privileged as
another, as you may observe by his own words, 2 Cor. 5.1. Per we know, says
he, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house, etc.

This then by Paul's plain words, is the lot of all true Christians that
instantly upon the dissolution of their earthly houses, which their souls here
inhabit, they shall be admitted into a more excellent kind of dwelling, even
such a one, wherein being absent from the body, be present with the Lord, verse.
8. that is, in peace.

Needs must it be acknowledged, that this place is spoken, not of some special
ones, but of all believers, even of all to whom God has given the earnest of
his Spirit, verse. 5. and that is a common favor bestowed upon all the Elect, 2
Cor. 1.22. who has also sealed us, and given us the earnest of his Spirit.

Many other evidences of Scripture might be produced to this purpose: I will
only add that, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from
henceforth; yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors: Here
is a rest presently upon death, and what rest is it, but that peace the Prophet
Isay says, they shall enter into, and shall rest in their beds, etc.

Thus it is clear, that the end of the perfect and upright man is peace, and
that both internal and eternal: 1. Internal of the mind and conscience in
God, satisfied in the sense of his goodness, and assurance of his mercy in
Christ. 2. Eternal, for at the end of this life, he shall enter into peace
eternal in Heaven.

Now then for application, seeing it is so, that an endeavored perfectness
and uprightness brings with it in the end of life peace internal, and after
this life peace eternal in heaven; for the end of that man is peace: Then 1,
let us be exhorted to labor for assurance of this peace, That when our earthly
house of this Tabernacl^ shall be dissolved, we may have a building of God,
eternal in the heavens, and to this end,

1. We must labor for assurance of reconciliation with God by Jesus Christ,
for Christ is the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. Yea, he is our peace, Ephesians. 2.14.
and therefore only by him is our peace procured; only they that are by grace
and mercy accepted of God in Christ, have their portion in this peace.

Would thou then find inward peace in thy heart and conscience, to stablish
thee in thy combar against the terrors of sin and temptation of Satan? thou
must then serve under the Prince or Peace, and become a subject under him, who
will possess thee with such peace, as shall make thee in mourning, and
suffering persecution, for righteousness rejoice, not only in the promise,
but in the possession of a present happiness.

In a word, would thou enjoy peace eternal in Heaven, acquaint thy self
with God, and be at peace, Job 22.21. Become a child of the Church, for great
shall be the peace of her children, Isay 54.13. and that both here and
hereafter.

Humble thy self, sue for mercy, labor for increase of faith in Christ, for
only in him is true peace to be found. Do thou perceive God frowning against
thy sin? There is no way for thee, but to get him to behold thee in the face
of his anointed, Psalm. 84.9. No merits, no works, no good intentions, no gifts
can clear his countenance to make it shine upon thee, only he is well pleased
in his Christ, and with such as he beholds in him, and no other: Thus this is
the first means to procure our peace; namely, by Jesus Christ, Acts 10.36.

2 In the next place we must make conscience of our ways, going on still to
perfection, Heb. 6.1. not as though we had already attained, or were already
perfect; but this we should do, forgeting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth unto those things which are before, we press toward the market
for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.13, 14.

Strive also for uprightness, sincerity and singleness of heart and life, and
to keep thy self unspotted of the world; this is that which will bring a man
peace at the last: He that goes this way, though with much weakness, with
many falls, and sundry imperfections, yet he cannot miss of comfort; for mark
the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.

Who so then would have peace in death, let him labor to have grace in life.
Would thou end thy days happily? Make conscience to spend them holily; as
many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them, Gal. 6.16. the end of
such is peace. And so much for this time of these words.

Now, I doubt not, beloved, but you will acknowledge that this Text may be
fitly applied to this present occasion, and that I may say in the words of the
Psalm, Mark this perfect woman, consider diligently, and take special
observation of her, and you shall not doubt to call her perfect in the sense I
before named; namely,

1. Perfect, in respect of acceptance, though not in respect of operation, God
in his infinite goodness and mercy accepting her desre and endeavor after it,
as perfection, though by their best works, neither she, nor any other can
attain it; yet, where there is a willing mind and constant endeavor, as was
in her, God accepts, as perfect obedience, being graciously pleased to accept
the will for the deed, and full performance, and so perfect she was in respect
of Gods acceptance.

2. Perfect she was also comparitively, though not positively and absolutely.
In which respect we may say of her, as Hezekiah of himself, Isay 38.3. She
walked before God in truth, and with a perfect heart, and devoting her self to
serve God in sincerity and singleness of heart: She was perfect in comparison
of others, who following their own corruption, sought not the power of
godliness.

3. Perfect we may likewise pronounce her to be Evangelically, though not
legally: After such sort as the Gospel accepts, though not as the Law enjoynes.
For though she attained not to that legal perfection: to love God with all the
heart, mind, strength, etc. and her neighbor, according to the letter of the
Law: (which perfection of love, is found in no man in this life) yet perfection
of the Gospel in such an endeavor of obedience, as God accepts in Christ, at
the hands of his Children, we doubt not to affirm that she attained.

4. Perfect finally, we may conclude her to be, in respect of parts, though
not in respect of degrees, having all the parts of perfection, though not
perfect measure of degrees in every part; or according to the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23. Sanctified wholly, the whole spirit, soul and body preserved blameless,
etc. no part or power of body or soul, but felt the virtue of Gods Spirit
purging corruption: yet not perfect in degrees in this full measure and degree
in every part, which is required.

And as in this sense, we may mark her as perfect: So also we may behold her
upright. First, sound and sincere without guile and: hypocrisy Her heart being
set right toward God, in doing all duties of Piety or Charity, to God or
man, truly aiming at the pleasing of God, and not at any by respects; Not, but
that she had her failings herein also: For there is no man or woman so upright,
without some crookedness and declining from the right rule. Yet because there
was in her, First, a drawing near and endeavor after uprightness. Secondly,
a comparitive rightnesse in respect of the unregenerate, whose course is wholly
crooked. And thirdly, the acceptance of a merciful Father; In these respects,
we may pronounce her upright, and so say also with the Psalmist, Behold the
upright, mark and behold her for your imitation, that you may imitate and
follow her, in her perfect upright and religious conversation, even as Sara is
commended to godly Matrons for imitation, 1 Pet. 3.6. so may she, etc.

And for your encouragement mark her end also: we doubt not to pronounce that
her end was peace, and that both external, internal, and eternal. First,
external, being all her lifetime of a peaceable condition, of whom we may give
like testimony, as Hamor and Shechem did of Jacob and his retinue, Genesis 34.21.
These men are peaceable with us. So this woman was ever peaceable with us; no
causer of contention, no breaker, but maker of peace, such shall be called the
Children of God, Math. 5.9. noticed of all men, to bear the Image of the God
of peace. Secondly, internal peace, between God and her Conscience, satisfied
in the sense of his goodness, whereof she gave many good evidences as my
self can witness, especially those two before named. First, a well-grounded
faith, whereby being justified, she had peace with God, etc. Secondly, a
constant endeavor after perfection and uprightness of heart and life, the end
whereof is peace. From which so infallible premises we may charitably conclude
her eternal peace, in the words of the Prophet, Isay 57.2. that she is now
entered into peace, even into peace eternal in the Heavens, and there we leave
her at peace and rest.

FINIS.

