INTELLIGENCE FROM THE ARMY, In a LETTER, Dated from His Excellencie's
QUARTERS, NEAR READING, June 5. 1643.

WITH A Relation of Captain Wingates escape from Oxford, and the condition of
the Prisoners there, being about 70.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, June 8. MDCXLIII.

INTELLIGENCE from the Army: With a Relation of Captain Wingates escape from
Oxford, and the condition of the Prisoners there, being about 70.
SIR,
YOu wonder at my silence, and I at your wonder, howsoever you have been
pleased to give my Letters the title of Mercurius, I can assure you the Writers
Brain and Pen are not so Mercuriall as to make something of nothing, no not
much of a little. Oxford Mercury is Ovids Mercury, that steals Oxen, and with a
charmed Rod endeavors to beslumber and stupifie the people, till their eyes,
or what should be as dear to them, become a prey for the ornament of Junoes
Birds. But I am so professed a servant of Truth and Seriousness, that I
almost repent me the mention of a Fiction, though very well recompensed with
the reality of the Moral.

But since you press me to write something, to give you evidence that I can
deny my self sooner then my friend, I have forced my Pen to this Letter, and my
self to deal more freely with you then the world with me, and tell you some of
my thoughts: for in this vacancy of action I have endeavored to turn Idleness
into Meditation. And first taking my self something concerned in affairs of the
Church, I have spent (it may be cast away) some time and thoughts in the
consideration of that unhappy and unnecessary difference betwixt the pretenders
to Reformation, I mean the more sober part (for as I have forgotten the
Bishops, so I shall scarce trouble my self with thoughts of the rigid
Separatests) some whereof are called Presbyterians, others Independents;
betwixt whom I conceive the Divisions stronger then the Distinctions. First,
let me disclaim any interest in the Quarrel, and then give you my observation
of it. I hope I may be allowed to a Sceptick in this point till our learned
Antiquary has declared himself concerning the necessity of any Government at
all, Though some say, The bottom of the business is, Not so much no
Government; as no other then what has been; And our judicious Senate made
their Determinations upon the Disputes of our reverend Synod; if these be
Riddles, time will expound them. But to the purpose (if it be possible) this
Difference, or rather Defiance, for the imprudence of men has almost strained
it so high, is doubtless unseasonable, it may be unreasonable. For the season,
we doubtless have enemies now that challenge our united strength: For the
reason, something it is like there is, but if there be much, there is more then
I discern. This may be observed in general, That the feud is more bitter among
the disciples then the masters, and where there is least light there is most
heat; They agree best when nearest, and a sober Conference makes them almost
friends: Were I for a Presbytery, I could yield to be Independent till there
should fall in an evident necessity of Communion with neighbor Churches: Were
I for Independencie, I should rather dispense with my Opinion than Truth and
Justice, when they challenged a necessity of Communion. As for the other
differences, there may be some mistake; The Independent party compare their
opinions with the practice of these Churches corrupted, and not with the rules
of Churches, as their supposed adversaries would have them constituted: I hope
they would both agree to those rules which should be most for the increasing
and establishing the Church of Christ. For the present, as I see in this
vacancy no Presbyterian Discipline exercised, so neither would I have
Independentiary; if it be of absolute necessity to make this Separation, let
the world be evinced of it, and the grounds and rules be known, If not, let it
for a time be dispensed with; Some think it would be as to this place and time,
only a dispensation with a fancy in the most, and the reputation of a taking
opinion: For the real advantages of gathering a scattered Church are (say
they) hard to be understood, and the great pretended benefit of Covenants and
Communion, in these distances and confusions, lost. I have heard some look upon
it as a great fault, that some men make that their great glory and rejoicing,
which is the shame and sorrow of the Church of Christ, That they are divided
from others whom yet they acknowledge not to be divided from the Head; which
some say is a Schism: And it may be worthy consideration whether it can be a
matter of glorying; I am of this or that Division; when the Prayer of Christ
was, That we might be one, as his Father and he were; and even the distinction
of Assemblies, is but a fruit of natural necessity, not a part of Moral
beauty. In brief, it is to be wished, rather then hoped (yet, quid non speremus
amantes) that these Differences and Distances were reconciled, but to be hoped
as well as wished, that they may be for the present consopited; and doubtless
they would, were it not for some Dreamers. They are but both yet upon the way
(they hope) for their relief; Why should not Joseph's counsel be acceptable, if
in this new world any old counsel were to be taken, See that ye fall not out
by the way? I am sure the world would laugh at me, if I should be now in a hott
quarrel with my brother whether he or I should be governor of Hispaniola when
we had got it from the Spaniard. Why may not the accomplishments of these men
be as far off? I add no more then this solemn Obtestation; For this Cause and
Kingdoms sake, for the Churches, for Christ his sake, let us labor to keep the
unity of the spirit in the bond of Peace. If we will not agree, we must be
beaten together, and by a communion of affliction be helped on to union in
affection; let us prevent the rod, and fashion our selves as dear children. But
enough, I hope not too much of this, I must write, not according to the extent
of the business, but the limits of a Letter.

There is something else has challenged part of my thoughts, which I shall
with equal freedom impart; and that is the variety of new Doctrines, under the
most glorious pretenses of new light and free grace spread abroad; I will not
stand to examine them, but truly the issue of my thoughts upon them has been,
just thankfulness to my God, that I had received my Principles, I hope and
believe, a form of sound Doctrine from a sober and pious Ministry, which in
mercy was afforded me, before this Libertinisme of opinions, in which it is
impossible for the heart to be established. And here let not me be thought
guilty of confining men to the bounds of former ignorance; I wish to all the
Saints a growth in grace and the knowledge of our Savior Jesus Christ, which
yet I think in fundamental points of Conversion and Salvation, must not be
expected to be a laying new Principles, but a building upon the old, scil.
Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God, working by love unfeigned. If
nothing but noveltie will suffice, this is a new and a living way, though
Preached and practiced of old. But I will pass no absolute censure of these
men's raptures, lest I be thought to speak evil of the things I know not, till I
see the fruits of them, Leaves is the most that they have yet produced, and
scarce enough to cover their own nakedness.

But it is like you expect something concerning the present state of the
Commonwealth, if there be any such thing; I must confess I have been so
presumptuous as to adventure some thoughts this way, and can reduce things to
nothing but confusion, in which confusion there is yet a distinction, for it is
threefold; a confusion of ends, a confusion of means, a confusion of minds.
For ends, it may be easily discerned that on both parts there are different, on
the Antiparliamentary part, the conspiracy is not a consent, but as in the
Ephesian confusion, some cry one thing, some another, all, it may be, Great is
Diana: On this side like wise there are doubtless different aims in the same
actions, and I observe every man hunting his brother with a net, and sounding
him with a plummet to know his end, possibly to prevent his execution of it,
but men are grown so mischievously cunning that they do as studiously conceal
their designs as prosecute them. I can only say that some of them are not so
good and public as they ought, thought it be strange that men should have so
high an opinion of their persons or places, as to think blood and rapine, and
all the other miseries of war, to be no more then a sufficient price for their
obtaining particular ends in this public distraction. As for the rest, I shall
wait the discovery of time, and rest satisfied in this, That the supreme
disposer has finem supra finem, some end or other for his own Glory, and the
good of his Church and people, which he will accomplish in the best season, in
the midst of all the cross and underworkings of the sons of men. But for their
own sakes, I could wish men were a little honerster, though I hope their
mischief shall not reach the public. Some things, I confess, I could, were is
not for a resolution to the contrary, be angry at, That the iniquity, I speak
of the Cause (for as for persons, there is iniquity on both parts) should lie
on the one part, and yet the danger almost solely on the other. Were there no
other world or Kingdom but this, I should never do as I do, but presently
engage my self on the Kings part, and expose my self to the merciful justice
of the Parliament, especially if I had relation to some Lord, where I might,
although after actual service against them, either lie in honorably with the
Earl of Lindsey, or have license to walk abroad with another Lord, to air his
tainted honor; or with a third and fourth, be admitted to the House again for
further mischief: it were not much matter to lie in the Gate house at
Westminster, and beg under the professed notion of a Cavalier, which they there
constantly do. Not that I envy any man's so acquired security, that which I
enjoy of conscience, is far more to be prized by all honest men. But there are
some others whose felicity you think a sober man may emulate, and that is those
who profess themselves yet on the Parliament part (I know not how this new
expected discovery may shake their Copy) and yet can with the same affection
hear of the success or loss of that which is yet called their Cause; these
are sure men of a gallant temper, and excellent wits, that make so good use of
any thing; I wondered at it a while, but after found it to be this; Their end is
any kind of Composition, that they may have at least their old enjoyments upon
any terms; it may be an acquisition of some new advantages, if they can do good
service, and to this, good and ill success are equally conducible; the
prosperity of the Parliament Forces will make the King more pliable; the
disadvantage, will abate of the rigid humor of the Puritan faction, to them
equally formidable: Think you not that these men have learnt the Apostolical
Lesson, In ^^y condition to be content: Howsoever, I wish them the Apostolical
Benediction, Grace and Peace.

But you require my most serious thoughts concerning the issue of the present
business, What these things are like to come to: Let us be wise to sobriety;
If we look to our aff^^rs as in the hands of men, what can be expected but
miscarriage? And truly if we consider them with relation to heaven, they may
seem scarce to have a favorable aspect from thence; in this regard, That we
have not attained in any measure the first step to a Restoration, which is,
Reformation, according to that method in the Prophet; In the day that I shall
have cleansed them from their iniquities, I will build their waste places,
Ezekiel. 36. Notwithstanding our new Doctrines, we retain our old sins, and it may
be have added some new: The profaneness and contempt of Piety remains still as
deep, and the divisions and distractions of the Church are rather increased,
which to me speaks sadly, and sometimes make me think, That this froward and
adulterous generation shall be spent in conflict (always reserved to the
remnant of Gods waiting people the benefit of their particular promises) and
turned back into the Wilderness of confusion, with unthankful Israel, to
perish there, and leave the enjoyment of their hopes to posterity. The works
that some think run parallel to ours, as that of Isreal's coming out of Egypt,
and the building the second Temple, after the Captivity, have endured strong
interruptions, and of some continuance. But yet I doubt not but the issue will
be good; which I am persuaded to, by the observation of a strong and fine thread
of divine providence running through this Contexture of Knavery and Folly, which
make up the Webb of this present world, which disposes of things to correction,
rather then destruction: The punishment of our iniquity seems not yet
accomplished; I speak it not that we should wilfully protract it in obedience
to an uncertain guess, but willingly and patiently accept it, and labor that
the iniquity of Jacob may thereby be purged, that the plaster may fall off
when the sore is healed: I confess I have not arrived at that Seraphicall
infallibility which some profess themselves to have attained in this point; I
have a good hope, but my faith must not go beyond my promise for fear of
presumption.

But something of News you expect.

In general, our condition, as it is not so good as our friends would have it,
so neither so ill as our enemies report it: The particulars you must bear with
me for; I have given you an account of my own idleness, I shall shortly do it
of others actions. The resolution of slighting Reading is in action, and so far
proceeded, as to consent to tomorrow's march, as I believe. We sustained some
loss of 14 or 15 Dragoons, I think more, at Pangborn, four miles from Reading,
which I hope we turn into the gain of a warning, and be more vigilant. Sir
William Waller, we hear, is now at length upon his march for the West, and our
Auxiliari^s of Buckingham-shire, Bedford-shire, and Hertford-shire, in good
forwardness: The best is, if we be not in good condition, our enemies, I
think, ^e in little better; so that we are like to be the fitter march.

Yesterday we were very much gladded at the arrival of resolved Captain
Windgate, whom we received as it were from the dead; wonder not at the
expression, it is rather too modest then otherwise, for his condition in Oxford
Castle was below the grave, as appears by the Petition of which he has a Copy
about him, That himself and some others, might rather be executed, then
continue in their present condition: Its a miserable world when hanging is a
courtesy. At first he acknowledges he was honorably entreated by the duo
fulmina Belli, as the world takes them to be; and promised the Rights of a
Cavalier; but they were quickly weary of weldoing, only at Edgehill that
monster of iniquity, Smith, the Provost Marshall General, had such a qualme,
as to use him fairly, and confessed his ground, That he suspected the scales
were turning, and the Prisoner like to become Keeper. But since the
embitterment of that days work, himself and fellows have endured with more
then Christian patience, more then Turkish cruelty; as close Imprisonment in a
noisome place, without the benefit of converse with the living or dead, men or
books; which was a punishment for the highest form of Captains and Gentlemen:
the rest fed with bread and water, which they were almost pined for want of,
beaten, burned with Match, set in a place called Bridewell up to the ankles in
their own excrements: which kind of usage has taken away the lives of many of
them, as of nine Captains, beside other Officers, Countrymen, and Soldiers.
One story of himself I cannot but relate for his honor, for it may be it will
not stand with his modesty; That when his enlargement was procured, upon
condition of obliging himself to quit the Parliament service, he stoutly
refused, in the midst of all that misery, to lose any freedom of spirit, to
gain the freedom of his body; and chose rather to have his karcase in p^ison,
then his courage. The ground of that tyrannical cruelty they exercise, is
their refusing to take that most unconscionable Protestation, which yet they
disclaim the pressing of: Men that had not given defiance to Religion and
Reason, would never so severely urge so irrational a thing; First, I must be
fully assured of His Majesty's purposes and promises, The heart of man is
deceitful, and desperately wicked, who can know it? And the Wiseman tells
such fools, That the Kings heart is unsearchable: if he give no other assurance
of the integrity of his intentions for Religion and Liberty then what His
actions of raising a Popish Army, trading with the Irish Rebels, and such
kind of imprisonments; be not angry if an honest man cannot rest fully assured.

Then I must be persuaded of the necessity and justice of the cause and means.
I cannot force my own belief; It is a Scholasticall Rule, Nemo credit, quia
vult credere, either my conscience must be seared, or my fingers. I must
profess my self not obliged by Vote or Ordinance of Parliament, though I have
not so much Law as to know my self disobliged, and more conscience then to free
my self where I fear Law has bound me. And to color the business, I must
profess against obedience to any Order of the King contrary to the known Law.
En quomodo mentita est iniquitas sibi; in their own snare is their foot taken:
For first, The administration of this Oath is from the King, or those that
represent, not only without, but against Parliament, and known Law; which
order they must yet obey, while they profess and protest not to obey any; thus
in the same breath is their faith broken and given: it was said, That it was a
thing only expected, not exacted; but we are ascertained of the most violent
compulsions to this contradiction that could be; so that the world need lie no
longer under the ignorance, and danger of such rash and horrid perjury.

Pardon this Digression from the story of the Captain, it is not altogether
impertinent. His usage continued very bad, till within this Month, when the
barbarous dealing of this Monster, I cannot call him man, became odious to the
authors of it, or at least was found disadvantagious to their designs, when he
treated him more fairly, lest he should give in too strong evidence against him
if questioned. He is now, through the good providence of God, escaped, and has
only this misery upon him, The thought of the miseries of his friends and
fellowprisoners left there, which I hope, upon his account given, that Court
that is so merciful to their enemies, will see relieved.

It is a sad thing to think how slight a thing we make of this solemn appeal to
heaven, for so War is, and manage it betwixt jest and earnest as if our
thoughts were really conformable to the expressions of him who called fighting
playing, Let the young men arise and play before us. If the height of our
enemies faults arrive not to the desert of some severity, let the depth of our
friends miseries call for so much as may help on their relief. The way of his
escape, which was on Wednesday last, while some were praying for his
deliverance, I leave to himself to relate; it was in general, with much danger
and difficulty, and special providence: As for the particulars, I hope some
more able pen shall be entrusted with the whole story, so far as concerns the
Public, that the sins of our enemies, yet all this while strongly pretending
to Religion and Liberty, may go before them to Judgment.

The noise and confusion about the execution of Colonel Fielding, which was
then pretended, though a Reprive granted, and the peoples passing to and fro,
gave the advantage; which as he is, so let all his friends be thankful for.

If I have not yet tired you, I could tell you news from London, and thoughts
of it. The demolition of the idols at Somerset House makes a great noise; but
they say Master Martins zeal is like Jehu's, it destroys the idolatry of Ahab,
but leaves the Calves of Jeroboam still, and is not proceeded to White Hall and
S. James, though doubtless the images and idolatry there, is as contrary to
the Laws of God and the Kingdom for the Marriage Contract, they say it was
private, and ought not to rise to the breach of a known Law. We hear that the
Queen is impeac^ed, as well as many more; And that there is a strange damnable
Plot upon the matter discovered; And that the Parliament and City have one more
warning given them, before their throats be cut; I pray God they take it, and
make not the most serious intimations of providence to be in their use
ridiculous and vain: if this advantage be not taken to the utmost, I shall not
shut them out from my prayers, but deny them much of my pity, if any evil
befall them.

But I will not be too unmercifull, I mean to you, in tyrannizing upon your
patience; but till the next opportunity, which I hope will be suddenly, rest
yours.

From the Quarter at Cavesham Lodge, June 5. 1643.
FINIS.

