Sad NEVVES from IRELAND: HOW The Lord has been pleased to Chastize the
Parliaments forces by a loss from the Rebels, where the Soldiers transported
in five Boats, were afterward repulsed by the enemy, and all but eight killed
and drowned.

Where we lost Major Walker, Cap. Graves, Cap. Whiting, the Lord Deputies
Ensign, and diverse other precious stout men.

With a List of the particulars, and the manner of the Fight.

ALSO The taking of the Castle in the Wear, and Col. Tuthill and others
Cashiered for killing some of the Irish after quarter was given them.

And the taking of the Fort at Limbrick Bridge, by storm, with other
considerable News.

CERTIFYED By a Letter from the Lord Deputy IRETON.

July 4. 1651.

IT is thought fit that this Letter from the Lord Deputy of Ireland, be
forthwith Printed and published, to prevent the misinformation of others.

Imprimatur Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti. LONDON, Printed for Robert
Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane end. 1651.

Sad News from Ireland, Certified by a Letter from the Lord Deputy Ireton,
From before Limbricke 15 July, 1651.
COL. Tothill being lately put out of his place by a Council of War (for
breach of quarter to some of the Enemy that were taken prisoners flying out of
the Castle on the Wear, when we had begun to batter it) I intend Col. Lehunt
(if he return) shall be Col. of that Regiment, and that his Lieutenant Col.
Eaton (shall be Lieut. Col, to Sanders, or at least Major to some other
Regiment, his intended Maj. Warren that lately came over we shall dispose of
otherwise. And therefore I pray you let Col. Lehunt and his Lieut. Col. be
acquainted with so much (as from me) and know that I desire both of them (if
the Lieut. Col. be not come over before you can give them notice hereof) or at
least that Col. Lehunt himself do forbear the raising of any new Companies, or
new men to bring over, either for themselves or any other (as for their old
Regiment) but that if any be already raised, for that purpose, they be
disbanded (if not already come over) though we loose the money advanced (if need
be) we having men enough (with the remainder of the Pressed men expected) to fill
up all our Regiments to 1200 a piece or very near (if not more. We took about
a fortnight agone the Castle on the Wear. those of the Enemy that were in it
quitting it upon the first shot of two guns we had planted against it, one of
which killed three of the men within, so as the rest fled out immediately in
their Cots, but being commanded from each side the river with the shot of our
men, and some of them wounded in their Cots; they came in to our men, part of
them to this side (where Tothils and Slades Companyes were) upon promise of
Quarter, the other half to the other side (where Colonel Ingolsby was)
rendering themselves at his mercy.

The first being stripped immediately, and committed to a guard by Slades men
(that gave them Quarter.) were presently after sent for by Col. Tothill and by
his order knocked in the head, notwithstanding the Quarter promised. The latter
that came in to Ingolsby at his mercy were spared, and not so much as stripped or
pillaged.

This we rejoiced in, as some balance to the breach of Quarter upon the other
(being about equal in number.) And giving notice to the Enemy of what was done
to both parties, we did toward reparation release and send them in freely
(without exchange or ransom) those that were prisoners with Col. Ingolsby at
mercy, tendering what other satisfaction they would reasonably desire, but they
asked no more, and for Justice amongst our selves, I appointed Col. Tothill
(that commanded and his Ensign that acted the Violation) to be presently tried
by a Court of War.

But he alledgeing, that he did it partly from an opinion, that no Soldiers or
inferior Officers had power to give Quarter without consent of himself, then
being chief in command on that Quarter, and partly from an apprehension, that
I would have been offended with him if he had spared them; The Court thought
fit to do no more justice, but cashier him, and his Ensign for it.

But I fear it fell short of the Justice of God required therein to the
acquitting of the Army from the guilt of so foul a sin (the excuses whereof
were equally abominable, for the base and servile fear pretended in the latter
part, as for the pride of spirit (I doubt) predominate in the former.

About the same time we on this quarter having battered and opened the nearer
side of the Castle on the Bridge, and filled up (with the rubbish of the Breach
and some Bavins) the open Arch under their Draw-bridg before the Castle,
stormed it, and God gave it into our hands; and we have ever since possessed
it, and partly repaired it, and by other works since carried on beyond it upon
the Bridge are possessed of about half their Bridge, so as they are
sufficiently locked in on this side; But they have quite broke down two new
Arches toward the further end, so as we have little hopes of making further
use of it, to work our selves over the bridge, (as otherwise we might) into
the further Gate House, and so into the Town.

After this we attempted (by great Boats drawn from the ships below over land,
toward the upper end of their Island, and by other less boats, and a great
floate brought over from Castle Connell to the Wear, and thence by water to the
head of their Island) to storm and possess the Island, which they had
encompassed with a Line all along the water side, pretty well flankt, and a
great Fort in the middle of it, which if we had possessed we might suddenly
have been Masters of the Town.) But herein it pleased the Lord, not to favor
us, but on the contrary, to put a greater check and rebuke upon us, then I can
remember or have heard to have fallen upon any party of ours in this War (for
so clear and sad a loss both of the party engaged, and the business
attempted.)

We had 11 Boats and two Cots (besides the great Floate,) in the five boats
first lanched (which were the least) there went over my Maj. Walker (who was
appointed to command the whole party with Cap. Graves of Col. Stubbers
Regiment, Cap. Whiting of Col. Axtels, and my own Ensign, and about 90
Soldiers, and non-Commissioned Officers, most of my Regiment, and Col.
Stubbers. Four of these boats landed their men, and came off again to fetch
more.

The men ran up to the Enemies line, beat off their Guard, and some of them
pursued that Guard over the Line toward the Fort in the middle of the Island:
But a fresh body of the Enemy from the Fort and other Guards of the Line (being
betwixt 2 and 300 and not more as we could discern, or can since learn,) came
suddenly upon those of ours that were pursuing beyond the Line, beat them
back to the rest on this side the Line, and suddenly forced the whole party
(being in confusion, and no Officer having any entire party of his own, as yet
got over to make a body) from the Line unto the River again, where pressing
into the 5th. Boat that was but then landing, and half sunk before with shot
from the Enemy, they sunk her and so all the Officers and Soldiers that went
in those five boats (being pressed upon by the Enemies Pikes, and shot and
forced further into the River were al drowned or killed before the rest of the
boats which were coming) and the Float could get over to second or relieve
them, except about 6 or 7 Soldiers that by swimming to those other boats that
were coming, got off alive and one Soldier that had quarter from the Enemy.

The rest of the boats being (before this) lanched and filled as fast as could
be, and the four that came back being filled again were got most of them to the
middle of the River; by that time our first Parties were forced into the water
and drowned, and diverse of them went on to the further shore offering to land.
But beyond their expectation, finding not any of our party left on the shore,
but such a body of the Enemy ready to receive them, they turned head again, and
so the rest came back to us without attempting further.

And by this time the morning was grown too light, and the enemies too
numerous, pouring out their shot so plentifully upon our naked shore as it was
too late to set on more men (though we had more then enough in reserve) or to
renew the attempt, and besides our men too much discouraged by the sad loss
fallen upon our first parties: We find missing of the Party 86 or 87 men,
besides the four Commissioned Officers aforementioned, and not more, what ever
may be reported.

The most visible occasions of this defeat were, the going over and landing of
the four first and smallest Boats so hastily before the rest, their boating so
confusedly (not one Officer with any one entire party together their keeping no
order nor holding a body together when landed, their overhasty and disorderly
pursuit of the enemies first Guard beyond their line; whereas by appointment
they should, after beating the Guard from the line, have kept the line only
(which having no Ditch before it toward us, but as we understood, a small one
beyond it, on the enemies side was better to us against them, then to them
against us, and have kept a body standing betwixt the line and the River, to
make good that part of the line, till the whole party of Foot, and a party of
Horse also upon the Float had landed) and the slownesse of lanching the greater
Boats; the slacknesse and confusednesse of the rest of the parties getting
into them, and slownesse of their motion when filled: But all this made not
above a minutes difference betwixt the landing of the first Boats, and the
coming over of the rest (within which space the first party was destroyed out
of sight, as if it had not been) and what ever we in that duskie time of
twilight could discern over the River or can learn of miscarrage in our
party, or what ever men may (as occasions of miscarriage) attribute the loss
unto, the hand and will of God was eminently appearing against us in the whole;
The security of landing, and facility of making good a landing (enclosed to us
perfectly from any infall of their horse by the very work the enemy had made)
was far greater then where we attempted, and God gave us passages for the Army
over the River; you know we had there but two Cotts and another small Boat
(which carried not at first above 24 Soldiers) here besides the five first
Boats which carried near 100) we had eight more to follow which would carry
much above 200. and a great float of Caske and Deals) reaching near half
over the River, which would bear near 300. men, or a Troop of Horse at once;
yet in the other case God made the enemy both horse and foot fly from those few
landing, and not hearts to return upon them, when so little or so slow
possibility of their being seconded) but in this gave the enemy hearts (against
all the danger and preparations threatening them, though I dare say they dreampt
not of such a thing, nor had the least Alarm till one minute or less before
our first Boats went over) to stand at first til our men came up to their
line, and after beaten thence to return upon our party again in the face of
all the seconds coming after) and to prosecute them and the shot both of them
and a great reserve of foot placed all along our shore and to act in the whole
business with as much courage, vigor, and resolution as ever I saw men, and
on the other side, so took away both the hearts and judgments of our party,
that they did nothing with advantage, either to the justifying of the attempt,
or their own security, nor had confidence, when their lives were at stake, to
fight one quarter of a minute for their own lives, but distractedly (and yet
at last in an heap together in the Water) cast themselves upon a certain death
(as to such as could not swim) to avoid an uncertain and short danger, when
they knew before hand, and might easily discern then so many seconds coming
over, as much out numbered the Enemy and (had they but stood and fought for
their lives one quarter of a minute) they might evidently either have carried
the attempt, (if the Lord had pleased) or been relieved and brought off in the
Boats and Floate, sufficient to have saved all; And yet I dare say both the
Officers and Soldiers were men of as great natural Courage and Resolution
ordinarily in this Cause as any in our Armies, and have done as valiantly when
God has pleased to favor them, Major Walker you know) commanded the party at
our attempt for the passage of the Army at Brian-Bridge.

Captain Graves did the like the same day at Castle-Connell, both these failed
and fell here under the hand and good pleasure of our God, we had many other
advantages here, above what we had in the other case, more then I have leisure
to set forth, and almost as great as we could wish and (if poor Creatures may
say so) it was not resolved or gone upon without the fear of God, and much and
often seeking to him before and (I am persuaded in much simplicity; yet blessed
be his name we find cause (in truth) to say, That most justly the Lord has
rebuked us, and cast reproach and confusion of face upon us.

I touched on one thing before, concerning the violation of Faith, and Quarter
to Enemies coming out of the Water (who were some at the execution of them,
forced into the same River again and drowned.

God has taught us also (in dreadful language) who it was that gave us
passage over this River, by his outstretched arm, and taught us how to value
such a mercy and reproved our under-valuings and unmindfulne^ of it. Diverse
other things he has hereby given us hints of his mind in (more then I can well
make out) the wound was deep, and the rebuke and loss most sad upon us all;
yet thus far already appears to be from the good will of a Father, That through
his grace it has had (so far as we can judge of our selves or of others in the
Army) a more deep through impression, and tender kindly sense of his hand then
any such dispensation I have known. But alas, we are apt (without daily new
awakenings one way or other) to forget, grow cold, secure, and sleepy again,
and soon loose (even though in part we have found somewhat of) the fruit
intended; and though this has had some effects of humbling melting and
teaching upon many hearts amongst us; yet for the foregoing reason, and
because such a signal and eminent testimony of his displeasure toward us, in
so un-used a kind of both blasting our enterprise, and giving us up that party
so clearly, and in view of all the rest of us into the hands of our enemy is
surely not without some extraordinary ground and ends; and when this insolent
enemy took occasion of reproach, blaspheming against our God with sacrifycing
to their own, and the hearts of his poor Servants that much sought to him in
that business have temptation to discouragement, and to be ashamed of their
hope and confidence, (as I desire and beg that my self and others here may not
lightly or soon pass it over, or take it up with slight humiliation, or with
short and easy inquiries into our own hearts and ways and the mind of God in
such a thing, so) it calls for humiliation and earnest supplication of all Gods
people concerned with us (that shall have notice o^ it) that the full meaning
and effects intended of such a thing both to themselves and us, may be made
out, and not fallen short thereof: To which end I have thus largely set forth
these things, though much short of wha^ was observable and remarkable therein;
we were before this in Treaty for the Town, but made at that time the delay,
indeed too politiquely on our parts: It has been since renewed by them and
readmitted by us, but now is in a manner broke off, (I am persuaded) from duty
and in faith on ou^ parts, they are high and like to be hardened; Lets pray and
commit all (...) the good pleasure of our Father, to whose abundant and
immutable grace I commend you, and rest,

Your true friend, H: IRETON. Imprimatur Hen. Scobel Cler. Parliament^
From before Limbricke 15. July 1651.
FINIS.

