CHARITABLE CONSTRUCTIONS OF THE DESIGN OF THE TRUSTEES usually sitting at
Sadlers-Hall.

For brevity sake set down in Questions and Answers. AND Written and published
to prevent the Sin of rash Judging.

By a well-wisher to the Work.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.

Charitable Constructions of the Design Of the TRUSTEES usually sitting at
Sadlers Hall.
A. SIR I pray you what do you conceive is indeed their Design?

B. To make their Nation more learned, and military; more learned, for the
saving of souls, because as those who 2 Pet. 2.16. Were undiscipled and
unprincipled did wrest the things hard to be understood to their own
destruction so do many even now among us. More military, for the saving of
soul^^.

A. But will not the exercise of Arms occasion quarrelling, sedition etc. and
so rather kill more than keep more alive?

B. No, for 1. The discipline of war (strictly) observed preventeth all
quarrelling, fewer Duells being fought i^ camps ^^en in cities and towns.

2 If men do quarrel, they (...) one another with swords c^uos and many
things else as well as with any other instruments of war.

3 But not therewith so well defend themselves against the invasions of
foreign enemies nor help their friends.

A. But by what means do the Trustees endeavor to make this a learned Nation?

B. By sending all hopeful poor Scholars now ready unto the Universities, and
maintaining them there either in part, or in all, as they shall need. And to
this purpose the Trustees have appointed a Probationary College here in
London, un^o which they first bring them, and through which they pass them to
the Universities as the Romans did through the Temple of virtue unto the Temple
of honor and this they do.

1 That they might satisfy every one of their (the Trustees) consciences of
the said Scholars maturity and ripeness for the said Universities.

2 For the Scholars proficiencies, for if the said Scholars (notwithstanding
certificates from Country Schools) be not fully ripe, the Trustees mature them
for some Months in the Probationary College, least the said Scholars by going
raw to the Universities should be discouraged.

3 That the Trustees might have some experience how in the said College these
Probationers do settle to their studies.

4. That the Trustees might provide the said Scholars godly and fit Tutors in
the Universities.

A. But will the Trustees admit no men of years into their Probationary
College.

B. Yes* if they b^e men of great natural parts like Apollos mighty in the
scriptures and withal, Orthodox, sound in the faith* for they consider the
present necessities in which thousands of Congregations are: And that such men
in a short time spent in Latin, Rethorick, Logic, etc may quickly be very
serviceable in the Church.

A. But will they admit no younger Scholars then such as are ready or almost
ripe for the Universities?

B. I conceive that yet they have no reason to to do so until all such as be
mature be first provided for, indeed (if that being done they have more money
they may contribute unto minors, I mean younger Scholars.

A. But whilst the Scholars do abide in the said Probationary College what
shall be done unto them? or shall they do as you hear and conceive?

B. A few Professors shall instruct them, the Scholars, at certain hours
shall question and answer each others by asking and answering in Latin the
questions in our English Catechismes citing the Scriptures, brought to prove
the answers in Latin troping them and turning them into Sylogismes before
their Professors, whereby with the (Lords blessing) the said Scholars will be
1. well principled. 2. perfect in the sacred Scriptures. 3. more expert in
Rethorick. 4. be excercised (at the least somewhat) in Logic.


2. Beside the professors lodging and diet shallbe given to two or more
strangers, Scholars upon condition that they read weekly such lectures of the
Arts as they excel in: which the foreign Scholars (as it is conceived)
will take as a courtesy in England and during their stay in the said College,
be willing to perform, and not lose their faculties in those arts by dis-use.

A. But by what means intend the Trustees to raise money for so vast and
expencive a work?

B. Two ways. 1. God has given estates and hearts unto some as unto David 1 Samuel 24.24. and they give gross sums because they be able, and will not
offer unto the Lord of that which cost them nothing.

2. There are others unable to give gross sums and yet they are willing to
abstain from one meal in a week and give the value thereof toward this good
work, that they also (whether Children or Servants in Godly families) might
likewise share in the blessing: which they (as by the motives in a little book
written and in many men's bands) may happily conceive to be better given unto
poor Scholars then unto any other poor whatsoever.

3 So much victuals as is thereby spared the Commonwealth gains, and the
poor will pay the less for victuals, a point very considerable in these
days, now dearth is so much felt already by some, and feared by others.

A. But by both these means if much money come in, though the said Trustees
being many and men of known integrity, unto those who by their subscriptions
make them their Trustees, yet if they give no account but unto themselves, they
must expect to be aspersed as their betters have been,

B. For provision against the scourge of tongues, I understand that the said
Trustees have taken this course: Namely to request one faithful and well
affected Common-councelman of every ward in London to come as often as they
can, and please, and to sit with them, and to be eye and ear witnesses how
they behave themselves, and if any of these Common Counsel men die in their
year or not chosen the next year, that the rest of the six and twenty
Common Council, elect another Common Council man in his room, and that these
26 will be pleased to audite the Trustees accounts out of the Trustees own
Books once every year and declare in open Common council how they shall find
the same accounts.

The like request is made by the Trustees unto twelve Reverend Ministers (in
every Classis of the Province of London one) to come as before) and sit with
the said Trustees: to examine the said Probationary Scholars maturity for the
Universities and to assist the Trustees in providing good Tutors in the
Universities for the said Scholars.

A. But diverse Aldermen, Ministers, Common council men, and others have
undertaken this work also and therefore the Trustees who you mention that
usually sit at Saddlers Hall may do well to desist since the other, by greater
sums of money given them will frustrate this design, and make it now
needless and superfluous,

B. 1 Many months before these arose or did appear in this good work, the
Trustees of Sadlers Hall, were Legally called to be Trustees by many
subscribers both of gross sums and also of weekly meals, and how can they
with a good conscience now give over and not perform that trust, and dispose
of those moneys according to the same trust?

2 The other combination at the first declared their intentions to be only to
maintain such poor Scholars as were already in Universities, and were likely
to come from thence for want of maintenance, as appears by the first printed
paper of their project, indeed sithence that time they have made an overture of
sending more Scholars also unto the Universities.

3 But their annual subscriptions (which men's Estates must needs feel) may
fail as Landfloods, and experience of contributions of that kind after a
little while commonly do.

And should the Trustees at Saddlers Hall (before mentioned) let their trust,
and work fall upon the others ^ssay of so great uncertainty?

A. All this while you have not discovered how you conceive the Trustees will
endeavor to make this also a military Nation.

B. I conceive (by what I hear) that since Scholars (especially the hardest
students) have need (after their sedentary labors) of bodyly recreation by way
of motion to maintain them in health, and that no recreations are more
excellent or honorable then the excercises of Arms for young students, (and
for the defense of the Church and Commonwealth they are incomparably the best)
that the Trustees intention is to have the said Scholars to exercise with
small Muskets, and Bows and Pikes, with which Bows and Pikes, by use (^f need
require) they will as easily fight jointly (as a man taught in a Fence School
will) with a sword and a dagger, and is not this a most excellent design? For
a single pike man stands only (as a man condemned by a council of war)
and is shot to death by the enemies Muskets and is of no other use (in one
battle of an hundred) then to keep of the Horse: whereas with his pike and bow
he may not only do that service but father off than the Musket can reach,
wound the enemies in all their ranckes both of horse and foot with his barbed
Arrows, which are far worse then any bullets, and that in many respects as
might be showed, and the most expert warriers of our time acknowledge and do
now begin to practice.

A. But I hear (how true I know not) that the said Trustees intend, to passe^
their Scholars from their Probationary College with more popular solemnity
then many that are wise and well affected think meet: if they intend to do so,
what do you conceive may be the reasons moving them thereunto?

B. Truly if they shall do so, I dare not condemn them for indiscresion.

1 Because of the Old Adage honos alit arts, honor nourishes or advances
Arts.

2 The multitude is moved unto benificence, by sense, as well as by solid
reason, yea, much more.

3 The wisest nations in all ages, have advanced the public good with
costlesse honors. The Grecians and Romans by Laureating Learned men and
Conquerours. And our degrees in Schools at this day are of the same nature.

4 To honor learning (at this day so much decried) seems not superfluous.

5 Paul observing the prevalency of earthly honors, to make men strive to
excel others by arguments from the least to the greater, urges us to strive
for heaven by honor and glory 1 Cor. 9.24. etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2, 19. 2 Timothy 2, 5,
and 4, 8.

6 If honors be given in London for learning, and the report thereof carried
by every carrier into every Country, may not this probably make many
Schoolmasters and Scholars ambitious to excel others in teaching and
learning: yea and parents to send their Sons to Schools, and by that means
much advance both Arts and Arms?

A. Only one question more and I have done,

Rumors, and somewhat written and printed intimating an intention to found an
University here in London makes many not only in the Universities but others
that have been of other Universities afraid of the Trustees declining those
Universities ancient honors, by such a new erection? and this I fear may do
hurt.

B. I have perused the books you mention and conferred with some of the said
Trustees, and truly I am nescious or else there is no cause of any such fear.
For,

First, I find the said Trustees (especially such of them as have been of
either of our Universities) for the doctrine which they have attained unto in
those Universities, as desirous as any at this day in the said Universities to
preserve the dignity of the Universities: therefore they will not do ought that
tends to the detriment of either of them.

Secondly, I do not see that by this Essay they can possible hurt them if they
would, but very probable it is that happily they may help them by this means.

For either they will not be able to, found an Universitie here in London or
else they will be able?

If they attempt it, and do somewhat yet fail to effect it fully, then all
that they shall do will but advance the Universities as the erection of
Schools do in all parts of the Kingdom, and until an University be here
completed, London (all the m^ane while) shall more and more replenish
Cambridge and Oxford both.

And therefore whereas others would not have an Universitie in London to be
mentioned until Cambridge and Oxford were full: I cry out, hoyst up a new
University (toward which here in London people will sooner give pounds then
shillings to fill Cambridge and Oxford) and should this money be refused and
lost, which is offered unto Christ by men and women yearly living and dying
especially of the attempting to erect a new University, will soonest of all
other means replenish Cambridge and Oxford.

Whilst any man is building a College is he not also providing of Scholars
to put into it? and does not that fill other Schools and Colleges.

For a man buyeth plants first in the Market and then planteth them in a
Nursery, and after, when they are more grown brings them into his Garden or
Orchard.

Thus Nurseries furnish Orchards, and Orchards Nurseries: and new Universities
furnish old Universities with young Scholars, and old Universities furnish new
Universities with elder Scholars: This is evidently seen in the new Colleges
which have been built in Cambridge or Oxford, that the new have not emptied but
rather filled the old.

And so would a new University, our old Universities suppose that Northampton
shire men or one Citizen borne in that County would build a fair house to make
College of and either call it the Northamptonshire-Colledge, or after his own
name: sure he would either be prompted by his own providence, or some would
put it into his mind how he should fill it with Scholars, and bid him write
into Northamtonshire, unto poor people to send their Sons to School and he
would give them schollerships in that College, and if others would but
maintain their Sons a little while at Cambridge or Oxford, he would give
them followships: would not this do somewhat toward the filling both of
Country Schools and also of the Universities presently: and if more Countries
or men did the like would it not do much more? But say that in the end London
should grow to be an University, then would it not decline Cambridge or Oxford?

1 I answer no, for by such time as London is grown to be an University;
Cambridge and Oxford will be full.

2 Even then when they are filled there will not be Scholars enough, for there
is not College room in them both, either to furnish us with a Ministry
numerous enough for all our occasions; or, if we were (as the books mentioned
prove) now fully stocked with such a ministry, be able to maintain that
stock.

3 New Colleges built by the Jesuits do not empty the old Colleges, nor
among the Papists make the old Colleges (or order of the Jesuits) to be less
esteemed.

4 The more Colleges there shall be founded in Cambridge or Oxford the more
honors will accrue unto those Universities so long as there is employment for
those Scholars, and the more Universities be founded in England, the more
will it make for Englands honor so long as England shall have use of all those
Scholars, as indeed at this day England has of as many more, as Cambridge and
Oxford now have, can hold, or possibly send forth.

5 When new Colleges are built in the Universities the rest of the Colleges
are well pleased that those new Colleges are built: and why should not both
our Universities be as well pleased that a new Universitie should be founded
elsewhere in England, as a new College in either of their Universities? For
whatsoever can be alleged against the founding of a new University in
England, may as well and better be alleged against the building of so many
new Colleges in our old Universities.

FINIS.

