IMITATION AND CAUTION FOR CHRISTIAN WOMEN: OR, The life and death of that
Excellent Gentlewoman, Mrs. MARY BEWLEY; Who departed this life (her only son
having finished his course the 9th. of December before) on the first of Febr.
1658/9.

Recommended to the Reader, by the Reverend and Eminently learned Doctor
REYNOLDS.

But a woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised, Prove. 31. 30. But he
(Jacob) refused to be comforted, and he said, For I will go down into the grave
unto my son mourning, Genesis 37. 35. O my son Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom, would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son, 2 Samuel
18. 33. LONDON, Printed by E. M. for George Calvert, at the Half Moon in Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-door, 1659.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader.
THough I had not the happiness to be acquainted with that excellent woman,
whose character is here published for an example unto others; yet having been
desired to peruse this breviate of her life and death, I could not but judge it
fit for public view, in regard of the great benefit which many may reap by
reading of it; for examples have a special efficacy to provoke and extimulate
others to be followers of those who through faith and patience do inherit the
Promises. The Apostle amongst that cloud of witnesses by whose faith he does
persuade others to run with patience unto the race which is set before them,
has recorded the examples of Sarah, Rahab, Moses his mother, and other women,
as an encouragement unto unweariednesse in that race. And makes honorable
mention of Phebe, Priscilla, Mary, Persis, and other holy women, whose graces
are not only crowned in heaven, but are left as a sweet perfume in the Church
on earth, to quicken the imitation of all good women in all after-ages: Nor was
this way of celebrating the memory of gracious women out of use afterward.
Gregory Nazianzen has a Panegyrical Oration on his Sister Gorgonia; Basil upon
the Martyr Julitta; Nyssen upon Pulcheria and Placilla; Chrysostom upon
Bernice, Prosdole, Pelagia; Hierom is copious in the praises of Lea, Marcella,
Asella, Blesilla, Paula, Fabiola, etc. Nor do women of eminent graces now less
deserve honor, nor others of inferior note less need helps for their
encouragement, than they did in former Ages. I commend both the work and the
Readers to Gods blessing.

Edward Reynolds.

IMITATION and CAVTION FOR CHRISTIAN WOMEN; Or the life and death of that
Eminent Gentlewoman, Mrs. MARY BEWLEY.
WHo Prove. 31. 10.
can find a virtuous woman? said the wise Solomon (who to his own proper share
had no fewer than 1 King. 11. 3.
a thousand of them to make Eccl. 7. 27, 28
trial of) being so Prove. 31. 1.
taught by his mother, who by her communion with the sex, might have larger
acquaintance with, and by reflecting on her self, deeper experience of the
weakness and vanity of the generality of the female world: but when Prove. 18.
22.
that good thing, that fav^ur, that Prove. 12. 4.
Crown is found and obtained of the Lord, then is her price above rubies, and
she to be Prove. 31. 28, 29, 30, 31.
blessed and praised by her relations, and the chief of the people meeting in
the gates while alive, lamented over when Act. 9. 36, 39. Genesis 23* 2.
dead, and kept in memory after Genesis 35. 20, 48, 7. Mat. 26. 12, 13. Luke 1. 48.
death: And it is by reason of the scarcity of such virtuous women, that in
Scripture such special notice is taken of an 1 Pet. 3. 6..
obedient Sarah, a prudent, discreet 1 Samuel 25.
Abigal, a 2 Samuel 20. ^2
wise woman of Abel, a Esther 4. 10.
publick-spirited Hester, a 1 Samuel 1, chapter 2. Luke 1.
devout Hannah and Elizabeth; Luke 1, chapter 2.
the humble, yet most high woman, the Mother of our Lord, Luke 2. 38.
and that excellent Gospel-news publisher Anna; Acts 16. 14.
the tenderhearted Lydia, 2 Kings 4. 10
that liberal Shunamite, and those other charitable Luke 8. 2, 3. 21. 2.
women in the New Testament: Phebe Romans 16. 12. Mary, ver. 6. and Dorcas, Acts
9. 36. of the 1 Pet. 3. 5. Genesis 24. 65.
modestly adorned holy women of old; of that private instructrix, Act. 18. 23,
26 Romans 16 3.
Priscilla the Tent-maker, together with Tryphena and Tryphosa, Romans 16. 12.
Lois and Eunice, 2 Timothy 1. 5. with 3. 15. of that repentant sinner, Luke 7. 37.
that importunately bold believing Syrophoenician, Mark 7. 24, 25, etc. and of
the Luke 10. 38. John 11. 5.
loving and beloved Martha and Mary. And for the same reason did the Ancients
and others record and celebrate women of special note in all Ages; as may be
seen in the writings of Ludovicus Vides de institutionae Christiana foeminae.
Englished Anno 1547. Cornelius Agrippa* de nobilitate and praecellentia
foeminei sexus: in English also Theatrum vita humanae* Bezerliuck. vol. 8 lib
M. Zwingeri. Theatrum vitae humana. The general History of women, by Heywod.
Mr. Clarks Examples, and second vol. of lives. The woman's glory by Mr. Torshel.
The English Gentlewoman by Mr. Braithwait. Opera Annae Mariae Aschurman. And
who list may see more in Draudii Bibliotheca Tit. mulierum Commendationes
Historic^^; and T^t. vita Heroinarum. The Ladies vindication by Mr. Gerbier.
those who have thought it worth the while to draw them together under one
view: yea, and in this Nation, Mrs. Br^^^^rghs life and death subjoyned to the
two Funeral Sermons preached at her burial, by Mr. Harrison, and Mr. Leigh. The
holy life and Christian death of Mrs. Stubs: Two Funeral Sermons of Mr Gataker;
the one at the Funeral of Mrs. Rebecca Crisp; the other at the Funeral of Dr.
Featlies wife. Mr. Nicholas Guy, his Narration of the life and death of Dr.
Gouges wife. Dr. Down, D. of Saint Paul's, Sermon of Commemoration of the Lady
Danvers. Mrs. Drake revived, showing her strange case and cure; printed, 1647.
Mr. Josselin at the Funeral of Mrs. Harlakendin. The life and death of Mrs
Ratcliffe of Chester, by Mr. Ley one of the Assembly. Mr. Robinsons Sermon at
Mrs. Barnidistons Funeral. Mr. Mantons, at Mrs. Blackwels. Dr. Spurstows at the
Lady Honor Viners. Mr. Calamies at Mrs. Moors. Mr. Roberts at Mrs. Jacksons of
Bristol. Mr. Shawes Narrative of his wifes life and death, recommended to the
Reader by the Epistles of Mr. Manton, Mr. Heath-coat, Mr. Pool, and the
consolatory verses of Mr Jenkin. Mr. Thomas Goodwins Sermon at the Funeral of
the Lady Barrington; Mr Greenhill on Ezekiel vol. first, his Epistle Dedicatory
to the late Princess Elizabeth. And the many Epistles Dedicatory to Ladies and
Gentlewomen:
Reverend Divines have judged it expedient and useful to propose some women as
patterns to others; not as if they were the only eminent, (for many dye, and
their excellency goes away without any regarding it) but that in such a
scarcity all may not be lost; for though holy women in educating their
children, and governing their family, may yield a sweet favor to those about
them; yet the lives (as Mr. In his Epistle before Mrs. Shawes l^^e.
Manton has well observed) of Gods precious Saints (how private soever their
station be) are very well worthy of record and public notice, exhibiting not
only a pattern and lively Transcript of Religion, (and truly now and then it is
good to look upon Christ's living Epistles) but also of much provocation and
encouragement to holiness.

Therefore it is also judged convenient to represent briefly, plainly and
truly, the latter part of the life, and the deservedly lamented death of this,
though not generally known, yet eminent Gentlewoman, Mrs. MARY BEWLEY; and that
not so much out of private affection to her, (an object of purest and choicest
love) or to preserve her memory, together with her sons among us, (for to whom
of their relations, will they not Prove. 10. 7. Psalm. 112 6.
always smell fragrantly?) but chiefly to illustrate the glory of God, and to
edify the living; especially her kindred, friends and acquaintance, yea, so
many of her sex as shall find leisure to read his short Narrative, in which
they may find some things worthy of imitation, observation and caution, and
that both in her life, prosperous and afflicted, and in her sickness and death.

Her life, not to insist on her modest and holy deportment while a 1 Cor. 7.
34. 2 Cor. 11. 2. Genesis 24. 65.
Virgin; it suffices for a proof hereof, that she was much esteemed by Doctor
Stoughton, and by him Romans 16. 1.
recommended to her now desolate husband, as a godly and meet consort for him:
And that in her latter years it was a ground of fear to her, that she could not
remember the time and manner of her conversion; though she had the testimony of
her conscience, that through the whole course of her pilgrimage she had loved
and feared God, and had walked in all holy duties before him; a scruple
sufficient to trouble a tender soul, but abundantly answered Eccl. 11. 5. and
Ps. 139. 15, 16. with John 3. 8. Mark 4. 26, 27. Luke 15. 13. - 17. with v. 31.
from the holy Scriptures in the Writings and Sermons of our English Divines:
Take therefore a prospect and view of her as a woman; in all her relations, in
her holiness, and in her behavior under her late affliction; she was then,

A Gentlewoman docile, of quick apprehension, not like those silly women, who
are ever learning, and still ignorant; She has been observed to dispute with
her son syllogistically, and to enlarge her discourse with him by the help of
the Predicaments, and to reply upon him in witty extemporary verse; she had a
good understanding, and solid judgment, could both give (as sundry have
experimented) and take counsel; she was prudent in her behavior, far from
lightness or morosity, but stately affable; 1 Timothy 5. 13. Prove. 19. 3. 27. 15.
Prove. 31 26. Eccles. 3. 7.
she was no tatler, no continual dropping, but opened her mouth with wisdom,
and shut it with discretion, both when and where her judgment prompted her; she
delighted not to tire her hearers with an impertinent flux of words, or to
Prove. 11. 13. 20. 19. 25. 9, 10.
reveal those secrets which were committed to her, but had a faithful spirit;
and needed no seal for her lips to keep her self from shaeme, and others from
trouble; and yet to give her her due, as a woman she was too much overruled
with love and sorrow, care and fear about her near relations.

In all her relations; as,

A Child. Prove. 4. 3.
Her fathers darling while he lived, and her mothers delight since his death,
always loving and Prove. 23. 22. Ezekiel. 22. 7.
dutiful to her, both in her behavior, words and actions; who though she was
eldest of all her mothers children, yet was most Luke 2. 51.
obedient to her; comforting, cherishing and entertaining her, with her self,
in her own home; and when she died, John 19. 27.
recommended her in a special manner to her husband; so that now the reverend
good mother, laments for her daughter as her eminently gracious child, and one
that never offended her, but fought God betimes.

A Wife. Known to be surpassing kind and loving to her husband, solicitous for
Job 19. 17.
his health, neglecting her own for to take care of his; 1 Samuel 25. Prove. 31.
a wise manager of what part of his estate he committed to her: So that his
heart trusted safely in her; for she did him good, and not evil, all the days
of her life; counselling and assisting him both by pen and tongue; yea, with
Abigail, sometimes 1 Samuel 25. 36, 37.
seasonably and discreetly admonishing him; comforting and chearing him up, for
the law of kindness was in her mouth; keeping in her grief before him, though
to her own prejudice, lest he should be grieved; wisely compliant with his
will, and that in some things wherein many wives will have their will; loyal to
him, See examples in Lewis Vives in English, Genesis 20. 16. Prove. 5. 19.
delighting most in his company, and never taking pleasure to walk abroad
without him; being to him as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe; for all which
her husband praised her, all commended her, and some imitate her.

A Mother. Who her own self Other examples see in the Authors already cited.
instructed her only son to read even his Accidents, and like another 2 Timothy 1.
5. with 3. 15. Prove. 1. 8, 31, 1, 2, etc.
Eunice, to know the Scriptures from a child; framing and propounding such
questions to him, as made him give a good account of the chief Histories in the
Bible, she was in pain till she saw Christ formed in him; prayed daily for him,
followed him with her wholesome counsel and wise reproofs, not conniving at the
least imperfection or appearance of evil in him; ambitious to have him eminent
and useful in that employment which he intended, often persuading him to be
diligent, and therefore setting before him the deteltablenesse of the life of
an idle Gentleman. What her true love to him was, and that though it was great,
yet not foolish and sinful, may appear by this following letter, written to him
four months before his death. Dearly beloved Child, I rejoice exceedingly to
hear of the welfare of thy body, and that thy outward man prospers; but the 2
Cor. 4. 16. Epist. 3. of Joh. ver. 2.
flourishing of thy inward man, and the prosperity of thy soul, thy thriving in
grace, how much this will add both to the inward joy and outward contentment
of her that bare thee, I want both time and words to express? And as God in
his wise providence has seen it good to give me but one to build my hopes
upon, I hope the Lord Jesus has both purchased and prayed that this one Joh.
17. 21.
may be one with himself, which ever has been, and I hope shall be the prayer
of thy most affectionate and endeared mother. As also this passage in a letter
of hers to his friend. Sir, one request more in the behalf of my Child, to beg
your earnest prayers that what you have endeavored 1 Cor. 3. 7.
to plant, God would water with the heavenly dew of his Spirit, that his soul
may flourish, and you see of the travel of yours and be satisfied. And Isa. 53.
11.
for this, her son most ardently loved her, most dutifully obeyed her, and
arose up and blessed her: yet herein was she to be blamed, that she was
over-careful about him while he lived, and over-sorrowful when he dyed.

A Sister,] who as she had got the first-borns portion of parts, (as her son
used to speak) so she did faithfully improve them for the good of her brethren
and sisters, being a stay and support to them all, advising them by word and
letter, admonishing, and mildly reproving when need required; keeping them in
the house with her, while unmarried, and together with her husband, (who is and
has engaged himself still to be kind to all her relations) disposing of them
in marriage; setting them a copy of obedience to their mother, love to their
husbands, and of piety toward God, so that every one of them in particular are
sensible of her death, before which also she expressed her love to them, in
recommending them to her husband.

A Governess of family] Prove. 31. 27. 1 Timothy 5. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 34.
that looked well to the ways of her house, and that chiefly out of
conscience, often complaining that her household encumbrances required so many
of her thoughts, and so much of her time; her delight was to abide at home, not
spending her time on needless and complemental Titus 2. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 13.
visits, or in going about from house to house, being modest and reserved; the
most of her converse being with her relations, and some few friends; which made
her liable to be censured by some as proud, and loving to keep at distance,
from which she was free in a good measure.

A Friend that Pov. 18. 24. 17. 17. 1 John 3. 18.
stuck closer than a brother, that loved at all times, especially when most
need of her help, that loved not in word and in tongue only, but in deed and in
truth; a friend courteous, sincere, affable, grateful, intimate, and another
Jonathan to a David in her life and death; and 1 Samuel 18. 1.
therefore may her friend weep over her as David did for Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. 25.

Her holiness did appear

In her Phil. 2. 15. 1 Pet. 3. 4. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10.
Conversation] which was blameless and harmless, she being of a meek and
quiet spirit, adorning her self as a woman professing godliness, not exceeding
her husbands rank, and professing that if it had not been for her husbands
credit, (men now adays being judged penurious if their Dames go not fine) she
would not have put on some of her apparel; and was so far from Jer. 2. 32. Isa.
3. 18, 19, etc.
priding her self in her clothes, that she was often heard to say, What a
burden and expense of time is this dressing and undressing? how hard is it to
distinguish women professing godliness, from the profane, by their outward
garb! The fault is acknowledged, but how few reform it?

In her delight in the Word preached] for she had an high esteem of, and
special love to Scriptural preaching, and to those Sermons which by clear, full
and pertinent Scripturelight, not only moved her affections, (wherewith most
women are satisfied) but solidly settled her judgment, increased her knowledge,
and raised her soul. She heard with a Acts 17. 11 16. 14. Luke 8. 15. Jam. 1.
23, 24, 25. Heb. 2. 1.
Berean spirit, and Lydias heart; did faithfully retain, and promptly repeat
what she thus heard, and conscionably practice what she thus embraced. Sometime
she refrained from writing in the Church, that she might exercise her memory,
and be the more affected with what she heard, which after she came home she
committed to writing.

In her great reverence and due respect to that great Ordinance of the Lords
Supper, through godly jealousy 1 Cor. 11. 29.
fearing to approach it, and solemnly preparing for it; and was hardly
persuaded to go to it, the Sabbath day before she sickned, for fear lest her
sorrow had indisposed, and made her actually for the present unfit to partake
of it; and yet said she, Why should I not go and remember the death of the
Son of God, seeing I so sadly remember the death of my own son? and this it
may be shall be the last I go to. And such was her esteem of this Ordinance,
and such her tenderness of spirit, that it troubled her in her sickness that
she had been prevailed with to receive, though at length by the discourse of a
Reverend Divine she was satisfied; and this may be a warning to all rash
intruder's on, and undue preparers for that Ordinance.

In her care to sanctify the Lords day, which she Exodus 20. 8. Nehem. 12. 19
Isa. 56. 4, 5, 6.
remembered the night before it came, and accordingly prepared for it; and when
it came she sanctified it throughout; for besides public and family duties,
she used to retire oftener that day than on any other day; sometimes neglecting
to eat that she might gain the more time to be private, either repeating what
she heard that day, or questioning with her son about what he had read and
heard; choosing rather to keep silence at table, than speak what was not Isa.
58. 13.
suitable to the day; and did not curtilate the day by lying too long in the
morning, or going too soon to bed at night; Amos 8. 5.
or being wearied with it.

In the joy she took in spiritual conference, and the Romans 1. 11, 12 Col. 3. 16.
communion of Saints; delighting to hear of the experiences of others, and
Psalm. 66. 16.
freely communicating her own to those in whom she confided, often Acts 8. 34.
asking direction how to read the Scripture with most advantage, and how to
walk comfortably with God; often speaking of the love of God and Christ with
tears in her eyes, and joy in her countenance; bewailing her not walking up to
her knowledge, and the wandering of her thoughts in duty; talking with an holy
disdain of the vanities of this life, and of the excellency of that to come;
evidencing in her Christian conferences, knowledge of divine things in a
Scritural strain, with holy affections.

In her valuing much Christians Romans 15. 14. Gal. 6. 1. Genesis 4. 9.
watching one over another, and therefore she could receive Psalm. 141. 5. Prove.
27. 6. Prove. 25. 12. 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33.
an admonition (even for that in which she was most faulty, her distrustful
fears and overmuch passion) with meekness, thankfulness and reformation,
evident to beholders; and professed often that free and faithful admonition,
was a most real Rev. 3. 19.
token and endearment of love: And she also manifested her love to others in
this kind, yet with much wisdom, as suting her words, and timing the
admonition so, that the offender without shame has known his fault, and
admired her masculine prudence; and yet even in this she has bewailed her
sinful bashfulnesse, that when in the company of other Gentlewomen, she has
not had the confidence to interrupt their poor, low discourse, and bring in
more profitable and edifying. And indeed women professing godliness should
spend their time better when they meet, rather discoursing of Jesus Christ, and
the Robe of his righteousness, than censuring, praising or dispraising such a
person, or such a garb; and should study how to remedy their Read the
conference betwixt Elizabeth and the Virgin Mary. Luke 1.
own folly, than fo^lishly talk of the folly of others. And as thus she
manifested her piety and walking with God in these public Ordinances, and
private duties, so also in secret (where there is less temptation to
hypocrisy) she kept up communion with God.

In her Closet duties.] She was observed to be Mat. 6. 6. Dan. 6. 10. Mark 1.
35. Acts 10. 9. Zach. 12. 12, 13 1 Cor. 7. 5.
frequent (not satisfying her self with Morning and Evening) every day in her
Closet, and has professed that she found greatest satisfaction when most
there; and therefore was thought to neglect that sometime, which busy Luke 10.
41, 42.
house-wives keep a stir about; her weeping red eyes have manifested her ardent
holy prayers: Ephesians. 3. 14.
she was careful to know to whom to direct her prayers, that she might not
worship an unknown God; and after prayer she looked up for an answer, and with
joy Psalm. 5. 3. Psalm. 34. 3, 4.
has taken special notice of the return of her prayers, looking on that duty
not as a task, but as her privilege, and the way of keeping up intercourse
with heaven: and so much and earnest was she in this duty, that she has not
hudled up or abbreviated her requests to God, upon the pretense of other
businesses: Hence it was no small trouble to her in her sickness, (for the
Devil can molest us with small matters) that in her health, one day begging
hard something from God, one knocking at her Closet door, she (to avoid
ostentation, and supposing earnest business) broke off her discourse with the
God of heaven, to speak with a fellow creature; (for so she charged her self)
How may this shame the short superficial prayers of many, who are glad of
distractions to satisfy their consciences in dispensing with Closet-duties!
And as she thus poured out her soul before God, so she greatly delighted to
read search, understand and meditate on the holy Scriptures, in which (for a
woman) she was mighty; for she daily read, them, could not endure to read and
not understand, and therefore often Acts 8. 28, 29, etc.
propounded the difficult passages she understood not, and craved others
judgments to assist her; not neglecting her own Ps. 1. and 119.
pondering and meditation, which she begun the last half year of her life to
commit to writing, and which after much importunity she has read to her
husband and friend, to their great satisfaction; for therein she discovered her
gifts and graces, knowledge and affection, excellent matter, handsomely
composed, and all in Scripture Language, which being in shorthand writing can
hardly be read, some of the Characters being of her own invention; but some of
the Scriptures which were the subject of her meditation, are these, Psalm. 73.
25, 26. Psalm. 42. 11. Ephesians. 5. 14. Heb. 9. 27. Gal. 2. 20. Psalm. 77. 3. James
4. 6.

She has also left in writing a collection out of the Psalms. 1. Of the
troubles inward and outward of the righteous. 2. Their good or bad deportment
under them. 3. Their present support by faith and experience. 4. And the issue,
and their happy deliverance out of them. She begun also to draw forth all the
commendable virtues and noted vices of the women recorded in Scripture, that
she might have the one for a pattern, the other for a beacon. Also she
intended, and did begin to read over the whole Bible, that thence she might
find some mitigation of her sorrow by collecting all the presidents and
promises which were suitable to her condition; and sundry other Manuscripts she
has left, which could they be read, might be proposed as a spur to
Gentlewomen, how to improve their much spare time.

In her inward graces] For the Kings daughter is chiefly Psalm. 45. 13. Romans 2,
28, 29 1 John 3. 9. Gal. 5. 22.
glorious within. She had not only leafes and blossoms, but had the seed of
God abiding in her, and was filled with the fruits of the Spirit. She had a
godly fear and solicitude concerning the state of her soul, working out her
salvation Acts 16. 30. Phil. 2. 12.
with fear and trembling, and giving all diligence to make her calling and
election sure. She was blessed with a large measure of spiritual knowledge of
God and Christ, and the Covenant of grace, and had good insight in the ways of
her own heart, and the vanity of the world. She had melting affections,
sorrowing for sin, and that she was 2 Cor. 7. 10.
not more heavenly and fruitful, fearing to sin against God, serving him with
reverence and godly fear: had an Heb. 12. 28.
intense and prevailing love to the Lord Jesus Christ, her heart leaping within
her, to think on his love and undertaking, Luke 7. 47.
and to speak of his praises; and of this love of God in Christ, (which is
wonderful) she has left a meditation, as by some words may be conjectured, but
cannot all be read: And hence her love flowed out to the Saints, (those
excellent in the earth, in whom was her delight) without respect Psalm. 16. 3. 1 Timothy 5. 10.
of persons, doing very mean offices to some of them: And of this love of the
Saints, she has left in Italian hand, this meditation following; This
Christian and wellgrounded love, as it is a fruit of the Spirtt, for love is of
Gal. 5. 22. 1 John 4. 17.
God; and as it proceeds from him, so is it enjoined by him; this is my
Commandment that ye love one another; nay, he John 15. 12.
styles it a new Commandment: It is not so much a Legal, as Evangelical
Commandment, backed with a most transcendent John 13. 34.
pattern, I have given you an example; and hereby perceive we John 13. 15. 1
John 4. 16.
the love of God, that he laid down his life for us; yea, it bears the
similitude of God, for God is love; and though its residence be in heaven, yet
it has an habitation in and with 1 John 4 8, 16
the sons of men; for he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him;
and when Christians walk in this praiseworthy Acts 2. 42, 46. Romans 12. 9. 1
Pet. 1. 22. Heb. 6. 10. Gal. 5. 13. Heb. 13. 1. 1 Pet. 3. 8. Philem. 9. Heb.
10. 24. 1 Cor. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 8. Phil, 2. 3. Gal. 5. 26.
Palace, then do they behold most of God. This love then is sincere, fervent,
pure, serviceable, constant; and under the mantle thereof lie, teaching, free
admonition, meekness, kindness, faith, and with this garment a multitude of
sins are covered. She had zeal for God, witness her not sparing her dear
son, but reproving him for the least arising of the least evil in him; and
has been heard to say, that she would not care for the enjoyment of him, if
she had not seen something of God, and a tender conscience in him. She was
humble, though naturally of a high spirit; often concealed her parts, and
preferred others in love, neither provoking Gal. 6 3.
nor envying others, nor thinking her self to be something when she was
nothing; and of this grace of humility, take this her own meditation written at
large; Humility is a rare and singular grace, does admirably adorn a Christian;
1 Pet. 3 4. Eccles. 8. 1. with Prove. 11. 2. 1 Pet* 5. 5.
for if wisdom make the face to shine, then with the lowly there is wisdom;
it is like the gold and enamel about the precious Diamond, sets it off with a
magnificent luster; it has the promise of addition; an humble soul is an
habitation for a holy God; and the Creator delights to dwell with the humble
Isa. 57. 15. Job 22. 29. Luke 23. 27. 14. 11. Prove. 29. 23. Prove. 16. 18. 15.
33. 18. 12. Psalm. 10. 17. 9. 12. 25. 9. Psalm. 138. 6. 147. 6. Psalm. 37. 11.
Isa. 61. 1. Isa. 29. 19. Psalm. 149. 4. 1 Pet. 5. 5.
creature, and the Redeemer will save the humble person; for he humbled himself
that sinners may be exalted; and if they humble themselves, he has promised to
exalt them; for honor shall uphold the humble in spirit; as pride is an
harbinger to destruction, so humility is a conduct to honor; great are the
in-comes of an humble soul, riches, honor and life; and excellent their
privileges; for the Lord hears the desire of the humble, and forgets not their
cry; they shall be taught the way of God, and guided by him in judgment; for
the Lord has respect to the lowly, and he lifts up the meek, and they shall
inherit the earth; good tidings shall be preached to them, and they shall
increase their joy among men; for the Lord will beautify them with salvation;
therefore who would not be clothed with that shining garment of humility?
According to the ability of a wife, she was not wanting in Almsdeeds, 2 Kings
4. 9, 10.
prompting and encouraging her husband to lay out some of his Estate on pious
uses, (especially since the death of her son) and persuading him not so much
to look after an heir to keep up his name, as to do something Psalm. 49. 11, 12.
Job 29. 13. Luke 16. 9.
that might cause the blessing of the poor to come upon him. She often
professed that if she had more children, she would never be so saving and
sparing to lay up for them, but would liberally do good; for God (said she)
has taught us the vanity of disquieting our selves in laying up riches, now
not Psalm. 39. 6. Eccles. 2. 18, 19
knowing whether he shall be a wise man or a fool that shall enjoy them. Let
good women remember that all this is for their imitation. Now to proceed to the
last thing in her life.

Her behavior under her late trial and affliction] Her sharp trial and
stinging affliction indeed, was the death of her only son, eighteen years
old, who on the ninth of December last, after eight days sickness dyed of the
small pox; suddenly unlook't for by her, (being put in hopes by those who had
more skill in that disease than her self, that there was no apparent danger)
and she a spectator of the assaults of death. What Parent is not filled with
sorrow for the loss of one son? even a Prince that prevailed with Hosea 12. 3.
God, yet cannot overcome his sorrow, for the absence of one Joseph, though
more than ten sons rose up to comfort Genesis 32. 28. with Genesis 37. 34, 35.
him; did not Christ's bowels yearn toward that weeping mother who had lost her
only child? Luke 7. 12. And does not the Scripture hold it forth to be the
greatest of sorrows, Jer. 6. 26. Amos 8. 10. Zech. 12. 10. if Naomi change her
name into Marah, Ruth 1. 20. for such a loss; if that noble and good
Shunamites soul be vexed in her, 2 Kings 4. 20, 27. for her lads death; and if
Rachel weep for her children, and will not be comforted, because they are not,
Matthew. 2. 18. if a gallant King David lie in the dust for a newborn child, 2 Samuel 12. 16. and womanishly lament for his rebellious son, 2 Samuel 18. 33.
What indulgence, pity and compassion must be showed to this Gentlewoman, who
lost her child, her only child, her son, her only son, at such an age in
such a way, the son of her vows, of her prayers, of her cares, the object of
her love, her hope and expectation; a loving, obedient, industrious, ingenious,
holy son; (as was in the w^rds of truth and soberness represented in his
Funeral Sermon by the Reverend Mr. Clarke) not any more to converse with him in
the Land of the living, or see his face any more; put but your soul in her
souls stead, (as she used to say) and then blame her if you can. This loss
indeed struck her to the heart, so that she wanted tears to express her grief;
and though her passion rose high, yet had she no such impatient expressions as
even good men and women have let go from them; for these following were her
sharpest, the day and night after her sons death; O is he gone! shall I see him
no more! a pleasant child, O my son, my son, of whom I was not worthy,
whom I have sinned away with my cares and fears! a bitter potion, a a bitter
potion; but its my God, my Father that has done it! O what have I done that
has procured this? I must be some great sinner, (but here she stopped, when she
remembered Dr. Spurstowe and Mr. Ash, who had lost their only sons) O God, tell
me why thou have thus smitten me? Could no other rod but this do me good? not
my will, but thine be done, wise and just God? Would you have thought (said she
to standers by) that I had loved a creature so much? I have had a deceitful
heart, I am sure I did not love him better than Christ; for I have abhorred the
least sin in him, and would not commit the least sin to have him alive again.
Oh Let us in time improve one another society; for here we have no abiding,
Joh. 9..4.
that I had been worthy to have known this his so sudden departure; how should
I have conversed with him these months past; what spiritual and heavenly
discourses should we have had: and how should I have ripened him for heaven!
but now he is gone; and must it be so? O God make me submissive to thy will: O
stubborn heart yield, yield, O God bring down this stubborn heart; pray tell me
(said she to a friend) if I speak unadvisedly with my lips; my grief is great,
Lord keep me from dishonouring him. And as thus she entertained the affliction
at the first, so her heaviness till the seventeenth of January (the night of
her sickness) was continual, seldom did abate, except when she had been at
prayer alone, or reading the Scripture, or hearing some comforts administered to
her, which in her judgment she closed with, but could not becalme her passions
by them. Some Scriptures brought her ease by holding forth her condition, as
Psalms 38. 102. 77. 88. Job 1. 2. and 3. chapt. Job 6. 2, 3. - 7. 3, 4. Job
10. 15. - 19. 21. The consideration of holy men, their sad afflictions, and
distemper of spirit under them, did keep her from thinking too badly of her
self. Other Scriptures quieted her spirit sometimes, as holding forth arguments
for submission and patience, as Romans 9. 20. Job 11. 6, 7. - 12. 14. - 13. 15,
16. - 33. 13. - 34. 13, 14, 15, 29, 33. Psalm. 46. 10. Dan. 4. 35. Psalm. 55. 22.
Nahum from ver. 1. to 10. Romans 11. 34. Isa. 40. 13, 14. Matthew. 26. 42. Jer. 44.
28. Lev. 26. 41, 42. Lam. 3. 29. 30. Jer. 18. 1, - 6. Job 23. 13. - 9. 4. - 38.
2. Nehem. 9. 33. Ezekiel. 18. 25. Exodus 3. 17. Judge. 10. 16. and these examples in
Lev. 10. 3. 1 Samuel 3. 17. 2 Samuel 12. 26. Genesis 23. 2, 3. Isa. 39. 7, 8. and
other Scriptures diverted her thoughts for the time, as Col. 1. Heb. 12. John
13. 14. 15. 16. 17. chapt. 1 Pet. 1. Romans 5. 1, - 12. Romans 8. chap. Mat. 11.
25. to the end. Rev. 1. 4, - 9. the 2. and 3. chapters of the Revelations, and
chap. 5. from 9. to the end; and chap. 7. from the 13. to the end; and the 22.
17, 20. 1 John 1. and 2. And the History of Christ's passion recorded in the
four Evangelists; ( which also she usually read and meditated on before she
went to the Sacrament) and truly, a lively discourse of Jesus Christ did more
quiet her, than direct storming her passion; for then she could shed tears, and
then she could chide her self for so much grieving for a creature, and then
forbear to speak of her son: for either God or her son was the subject of her
talk and thoughts.

That wherein this holy woman failed, and for which her friends blamed her, (
which may be a warning to Christian mothers) was, she did not speedily and
cheerfully submit to the will of God, and acquiesce in his declared good
pleasure; bur pored too much on her sons death, and the small circumstances
thereof, imputing his death one while to this, another while to that omission,
and so did create more trouble to her self, by putting her thoughts on the
rack; and though in her judgment she condemned these her thoughts, and called
them her burden, and wished to be gone from them; yet could she not withstand
them: the subtle and cruel Adversary no doubt played his game by his injections
and phantasmes, which she suspected and bemoaned; and indeed otherwise such an
understanding woman could not have been pestered with such petty trivial
thoughts. She lost appetite to her food, and sleep departed from her eyes, and
by day she neither could nor would use any diversions, and took but too little
comfort in the mercies God had left her; was full of thoughts, and had few
words, Dr. Reynolds Treatise of the passions, chap. 22. of sorrow. Charron of
wisdom chap. 31. of heaviness of heart.
all which made way for her sickness and death, which was a malignant fever,
and vapors of the mother, followed with convulsion fits: The last thing then
to be spoken to, is,

Her sickness and death;

On the first assault of her sickness she apprehended death would follow, and
that which she had more than once (too hastily) desired, would now in earnest
make speed: Therefore her first and greatest care was ( setting now aside all
thoughts of her son; for God will whip his own out of their sins) to settle the
affairs of her everlasting peace, and to secure all things 'twixt God and her
soul: Her nexr work was to review her five weeks carriage under her affliction,
upon which she sorrowed most of all that she had not glorified God more in her
suffering, that she, wearied of life, had been so thoughtful about her sons
death, and that the consolations which were administered to her, had done her no
more good, and that by neglect of her body and lawful diversions, she had made
way for this her painful sickness: wherein she saw the vanity of her former
anxiety concerning her sons death; for those medicines which (prudently) were
omitted to him, were administered to her self; and did only help her to dye the
more sensibly, and with the more pain: she exhorted others to learn by her
example, to beware of setting their hearts on any creature, and that they would
strive to glorify God while they live, that they would redeem their time, and
make their acquaintance and peace with God before they lie down on their
deathbed. During her sickness, she had great bodily pain, (so that she
seldom slept) and no small trouble of mind concerning her future estate, being
assaulted in her weakness by that sly, roaring and cowardly Devil, whom she
overcame by the Lamb of God (in which expression she delighted) that takes
away the sins of the world; and though John 1. 29.
she complained for want of assurance, and the comfort that does attend it, yet
she did receive, look to, embrace and John 1. 12. 3. 14. Heb. 11. 13. Heb. 6.
19, 20. Mat. 22. 37. Acts 11. 23. Luke 1. 75. Psalm. 63. 3. Phil. 33. Heb. 2.
17. 1 John 3. 8.
anchor her hope on Christ, and durst appeal from Satan unto God, that she had
loved him with all her heart, and had endeavored (through much weakness said
she) to walk before him in righteousness and holiness, and that she had prized
his favor before life, and would not adventure on the least sin for all
imaginable contentment; she satisfied her self in the satisfaction of Christ,
and in that he was a merciful and faithful high Priest, that came to destroy
the works of the Devil. And if in the height of her bodily distemper, (the
vapors fuming up to her head) she spoke any thing amiss of her self (which is
no See Psalm. 22. 38. 77. 88. Job. Isa. 49. 14. Mat. 27. 46. Perkins vol. 1.
page 290. 491. 492. vol. 3. page 407. Greenham, page 9. 81. Mrs. Bretterghs
life, and her Funeral Sermons, in 8. Mr. Boltons instructions for troubled
consetences. p. 232. 236, etc. Dr. Spurstowe on the Promises, chap. 15.
new thing, and its better to go out of the world, troubled, than lulled by
Satan; in a holy solicitude, than in a carnal security) she afterward
remembered and bemoaned it; and acknowledged that God was a holy and just
Sovereign, in letting her find he had sharper rods for his people than the
death of a son, and that it is folly to stand it out against God. All Sabbath
night she put away sleep, and prepared to launch into that boundless Ocean,
eternity; and therefore proposed all her objections, fears and doubts, that she
might have resolution; laid open the temptations of the Devil, that she might
know how to repel them; and freely confessed all her sins, (in some of which
most live without taking much notice of them) which her tender conscience
aggravated to the full; and when she could not remember any more, she begged a
friend to help her in this her search, and when he could not, then she turned
her speech to God, saying, O thou God search me, and try me, and let me not dye
in one unrepented for sin, let me not deceive my self, O gracious God what
shall I do? I will anchor my faith on Jesus, who has been favorable to
others, and why not to me? She prayed earnestly for pardon of sin, and that
she might have her soul for a prey: And of this she expressed her hope, hoping
that she had all her hell in this life, (meaning that nights agony) and that
notwithstanding all her fears, she should go to heaven, comforting her self in
the remembrance of a most holy upright old Disciple, Mr. Trench.
who had gone to heaven without assurance; (what a joy does she now find in
being delivered from all her fears, and how greatly does it set off heaven, to
travel to it through the Suburbs of hell!) and now all her doubts and
temptations being answered, and she silenc't, she did rest all Monday satisfied
in great calmnesse of mind, giving directions concerning her body after death,
and other affairs, and was not heard after that nights conflict, to speak
doubtfully or fearfully of her eternal salvation. About seven of the clock at
night, finding her convulsion fit to seize on her, she desired one to pray with
her, and after being asked if she heard, and had joined in spirit? answered
yea; And I thank God I have delighted in prayer. One desiring her to speak
something of Jesus Christ, she knowingly and affectionately spoke of his
natures and offices; and afterward taking a draught of cordial jullep, she
paused, and shut her eyes, (as she was wont to do) to beg a blessing on it, and
being asked her thoughts, answered feelingly, giving thanks unto the Father who
has made Col. 1. 12.
us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. And so the
convulsion fit increasing, and the pangs of death catching hold of her, and she
talking a little of her dear son and husband, betwixt one and two of the
clock became speechless, and then one asking her whether her thoughts were not
now on God and Christ, she lifted up her eyes and hands, and offered to speak,
but could not, and so slept quietly in the Lord, the first of February, 1658/9.
and the thirty sixth year of her age; the seventh week after her sons death,
and was with honor laid in the same grave with him: Mr. Ley preaching her
Funeral Sermon.

And thus this true relation is left to the application of every tenderhearted
mother, and wise woman. May it prove serviceable to those ends, for which this
precious Gentlewoman only desired life, even to publish the Sovereignty,
Wisdom, Equity, Power and Love of her God: Who though when she died, desired
that nothing might be spoken at her Funeral, (such was her self-denial) and
though now she be incessantly night and day praising, adoring, and admiring God
without imperfection; yet if she have any leisure to look off Jesus Christ, and
have any knowledge of what is done here below; it will satisfy her greatly
that God is glorified by her memory on earth, in stirring up women to imitate
what was praiseworthy in her, and in warning them to moderate their love, fear
and sorrow, and to pitch their affections on never fading objects. He that
testifyeth these things, knows that he says true, and would not willingly
(through grace) make a lie, to uphold the reputation, or preserve the lives of
the best, and most deserving women in the world.

On her Tombstone.
Enclosed here, in love do lie together;
BENONI, MARAH; the only son and mother: Genesis 35. 18. Ruth 1. 20, 21. 2 Samuel 1.
23.

Who in their lives, lovely and pleasant were;
In death and grave they undivided are.
ERRATA.
Page 2. marg. for institutionae and institutione. for Bezerliuck. r.
Beyerlinck.

Mr. Clerks Sermon at the Funeral of the only son of this Gentlewoman,
(wherein is a short Narrative of his life) is sold by George Calvert at the
Half Moon in Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-door.

FINIS.

