NEW PROPOSITIONS FROM THE ARMY, PROPOUNDED By Cornet JOYCE (who lately
guarded His Majesty's Person from Holmby) to all free Commoners within the
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales.

Wherein is more fully set forth, Their further Resolution and Proceedings,
concerning the Kings Majesty's Royal Person, the preservation of this Nation,
and touching every member that challenges an interest in this KINGDOM.

Whereunto is annexed, The Copy of another Letter sent from the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and read in the High and Honorable Court of Parliament.

Printed for the use and satisfaction of the whole Kingdom.

London, Printed for Robert Ellson, July 17. 1647.

The Kings Majesty's last Message, to His Highness, James Duke of York.
SIR,
TIme being my greatest favorite, and the proceedings of this object of time,
the chief supporter of my ensuing intelligence, I shall here (according to
your desire, represent unto you, some particulars very remarkable, now in
disputation betwixt the King, Parliament, and Army, together with a brief
summary, (or Copy) of the Kings Majesty's last Desires, communicated to his
Son, James Duke of York, written by his Majesty's own hand; which was, (as we
hear,) presented to His Highness, by the Right Honorable, Algernon Piercy,
Earl of Northumberland; the Copy, or effect whereof follows; beginning in
these words viz.

JAMES,
I Desire and do earnestly request, that you may be permitted with your Brother
and Sister, to come down to see me, and therefore I desire you to ask leave
for the obtaining of the same, to accompany me for the space of awo or three
days; And because it is my earnest desire to see you, I shall be williag,
(rather then not to enjoy this happiness, that you may be permitted to come to
dine with me, at some convenient place, and to return the same night, it may
be some will conjecture, that you will be drawn away by the Army, but for your
safe return again, the General Sir Thomas Fairfaxand all his Officers has
engaged themselves for it. So God bless you.

Your loving Father CHARLES R.
Causan, the 4. of July, 1647.

Since the presenting of this Letter to his Highness, and acquainting both
Houses with the same; we have received Intelligence, that the said honorable
Court, has gave their assent and resolved, that His Highness the Duke of
York, together with the rest of the Kings Children, shall have leave to go down
to see their Royal Father, the King, there to reside the space of two days;
and we hear that the Right Honorable the Earl of Northumberland is to attend
them down.

Having no more (at present) to communicate unto you, concerning the King and
his Princely issue, I shall reserve you to the enclosed paper, and remain

Causan, July 16. 1647. Your affectionate friend, John Willis.

A Copy of a Paper, containing 4. Propositions, set forth by Cornet Joyce, in
behalf of the Kingdom.
I. Now fellow Commoners, you who are borne to as large privileges and
immunities as any people on the earth, which you may all challenge as your
birthright, lest you should be induced through the subtilty of some litigious
Lawyers, or through the policy and specious pretenses of any man whatsoever to
judge our action of guarding his Majesty from Holmby to be illegal, and
contrary to the trust reposed in us, assure your selves that action of ours was
not a rash precipitant enterprise, as some say, but challenges the law of
Nature, Nations, this Kingdom, and our Commissioners derived from the
Parliament for its foundation.

The lyw of Nature vindicates us, for as in a natural body which is composed
of sundry members, may lawfully seek its own preservation as from inward
distempers, or outward dangers that threaten its ruin, so likewise may a
political body do, if the head be in danger, the foot ought to run, and the
hand to act for its preservation, and in this endeavor every member
particularly, as well as jointly, is obliged, so that if one hand be cut off,
one foot lame, one eye forth, the other hand foot and eye are not hereby
disingaged, but the more firmly bound to put forth their utmost powers for the
bodies fence.

II. The Law of Nations warrants us, every Nation inviolably maintaining this,
that every member in the Nation ought to preserve the Nation as much as in him
lies; It is a universal principle, non nobis solum nati sumus, etc. We are not
born for our selves alone; but the Country in which we live challenges an
interest in us, this principle made many rejoice in dying, esteeming it, dulce
and decorum pro patria mori.

3. The Law of this Kingdom (by which we may expect to stand or fall) secures
us in this Kingdom, we have this Maxim, that solus populi is suprema lex, The
safety of the people is the supremest law; this was the hinge we moved upon,
the Kingdoms safety was endangered, and without a speedy application of a
timely preservative was likely to be consumed: the best preservative we could
see, was the security of his Majesty's person, which our act has effected.
Whose enemies are so dull, and whose understanding is so stupefied and
sottishly blind, but may remember and know what a sad disaster has befallen
the Kingdom, in the expense of so much blood and treasure, by the surprising
of his Majesty's Person in the late wars? who can but know, had they not had
his person for their designs had proved abortive: We well know there was a
design to seize on his Majesty, to raise a new Army, and unnaturally to
involve this Kingdom in its own blood, and so to render our latter end
miserably worse then our beginning, but this we thought our selves bound to
prevent if possible, which we still judge and doubt not to prove it, and is yet
lawful for us to do. As the King is by the law of this Kingdom bound to
govern and secure us according to the Law, so are we engaged to secure his
Person against the violaters of the Law, which we have, through the blessing of
God accomplished, Our end was not his enthrallment, bondage and ruin, as by
our actions may appear, but his safety, and the Kingdoms preservation, which
otherwise we justly fear, had both been endangered; suppose the King through
ignorance of traitors intention to destroy His Person or His Kingdom, should
expose himself to the mercy of him that sought his life, do you imagine it
would be treasonable for any one to remove his Majesty though without his
consent from the place the traitor sought his life in, and to preserve him? but
the case is yet more fair for us, His judgment being satisfied, his will was
likewise concurring to his remove, we hope this our action will be recented in
good part by all the Nation for whose good it was effected. Had the King been
surprised, another army been under his name raised, the Nation once more
wallowed in its own blood; then surely but too late, would the people have
cried out, oh that some had been stirred up to have stood in this breach.

IIII. The Commission from the Parliament (whom some say though with more
boldness then judgment, more malice then wisdom, and more envy then prudence
or honesty, we have rebelled against and acted contrary to in this action)
acquits us, for by our Commission we are bound to seek the preservation of the
Kings person, whether we have not so done let all the Kingdom judge: what hurt
to his person have we done? what hurt to the Kingdom have we done? we are not
conscions to our selves that we have in this done amiss, who has cause to
complain, surely none can nor will, except those who had thought to have made
all men dance after their pipes, kiss their hands, and resign up their
birthrights, liberties and lives to their arbitrary and tyrannical, lawless,
boundless wills, these Haman-like are mad to think a poor Mordecai will not
stand cap in hand, bow his knee, and bend unto them.

FINIS.

