The Great Turks LETTER, SENT UNTO THE PRINCE OF TRANSYLVANIA. Containing many
impious, and unheard of Blasphemies, against our Savior CHRIST; and fearful
threatenings against all Christendom.

Translated out of the French Copy Printed in PARIS. And Reprinted here
according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by T. FORCET, 1645.

IBRAHIM the Son of the most famous, and most renouned of the Emperors, Son
of GOD, Emperor of the Turks, of Greece, Macedonia, and Moldavia; King in
Samaria, Anglian, and of the Great and little Egypt, King of all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and of the earthly Paradise, a Consecrated Prince,
preserver of the Cities of Hungaria, Provost of the earthly Paradise, Keeper of
the Sepulcher of thy God, Lord of all the Emperors in this World, who are from
the East to the West, King of all Kings, Lord of the Tree of life, Conqueror
of Melonia, Anglian, Of the City of Porcheviz. Great Persecuter of the
Christians, and of all the wicked, the joy of the flourishing Tree. Provost,
and Keeper of thy Crucified God; The Lord and hopes of the Pagans.
LET Our Greeting be given to the Prince of Transylvania, if thou do desire
it: and if thou art our friend, and of our Magistrate also, unto whom we have
given great Power.
Thou have a while since violated, and persecuted Our friendship; though we
have given thee no cause thereof; neither by War, nor by Battle: So that
thou have taken a secret counsel with other Kings and thy Counselors, to free
thee from our Power: in which thou have done indiscreetly. And therefore, Thou,
and thy people ought to fear, and must expect nothing else, but death, which
thou have prepared unto thy self. For, I tell thee, that I will get a victory
upon thee, and pursue thee from the East to the West, and I will make my
Majesty known as fart as the end of the World. My designs shall be
manifested unto thee, to thy own ill fortune: Which I let thee know, and I
will have thee to acknowledge my great Power. And forasmuch as thou put thy
trust in some Towns, and Castles, I will destroy, and ruinat all thou can
behold with thy eyes: and it is in vain for thee, either to expect any more
amity from Us, or to put any confidence in thy Walls. For I will destroy thee
with thy own people without any hinderance I will plunder thee, and leave a
memory of my bloody sword after me in the Country. That this thing may be
known, and manifested to every one. I will moreover plant my own Religion
effectually therein, and destroy for ever thy Crucified God: whose wrath I
fear not, and he cannot afloord you any succor to free you from my hands. I
will besides this couple thy Sacred Priests to Plowes: and make Dogs, and the
wild beasts to suck the breasts of women. Thou shall do well and wisely to
leave the Religion thou have; For, otherwise, I will have you all burnt. Be
thou satisfied with what I say unto thee for this time. Thou may understand
me (if thou vvilt) so far as I declare thee my Word, and intent against thee.

Jbrahim, Hottoman, Trapetan.


THese words ought to make us tremble: no, not tremble, but encourage us: not
encourage us, but provoke our just wrath, to avenge the outrage and injury done
to God, and his Son Jesus Christ our Savior; by that Barbarian, who scorns
Christ's power, and seems to challenge him to a comb^te. Shall we not be
stirred through the example of our Predecessors? That Giant, that Goliath, is
already at the gates of Transylvania, to pass from thence into Hungaria.

He is in person, and has sent his Army out of Andrinopolis, to thunder upon
his neighbors. What hopes can Germany have, when he has conquered those
Countries? And who doubts, but that he will fall upon us, if Germany be once
reduced under his power? But one may say, that he has great and vaste
Countries to gain, before he can come so far. But shall we not take pity of
our brethren that are Christians? Shall we be so base as to let that Infidel
invade the Empire of the west, as he has done that of the East? Shall our
hearts be so frozen, as not to be kindled with the zeal of avenging the
injury done to the Divine Majesty of God? Shall we leave so shamfull a
memory of us unto Posterity, as that they may accuse us, That we were not able
to keep the deposite, which our Ancestors had left us? Let us then die like
Christians, Let us spend our lives for the defense of his cause that dyed for
us. God will direct our hands in the day of battle, and will make our Armies
to prosper: So that one shall pursue ten, ten an hundred, an hundred a
thousand, and a thousand shall pursue ten thousand.

You may have read in my Exchange Intelligencer, that the Grand Signor had a
design upon the Isle of Maltha: but I have not as yet related unto you the
occasion, which had moved him to entertain such a design. I will impart it
unto you now.

There was a Russia Gentlewoman, who did wait upon one of the Grand Signors
Sultanesse of a rare beauty, and of extraordinary parts. He fell in love with
the Gentlewoman, and got a son by her. The Sultaness grew Jealous, for the
extraordinary favors the Russia Gentlewoman did receive from the Grand Signor,
and above all the rest her own Mistrisse. So that they did all conspire
against her life, and did give her Poison: which being not strong enough could
not make so soon an end of her, as they did expect. The Grand Signor took the
Gentlewomans languishing sickness unto heart: and was exceedingly grieved to
see that her young Babe was in danger of his life as well as the Mother. He
therefore sent them in Pilgrigmage unto Mequa, to his false Prophets Tomb,
both to be healed, and the Child to be Circumcised there. The Knights of Maltha
met with them upon the Sea, whilst they were a going to Mahumets Sepulcher,
took and carried them both Prisoners into Maltha. Whereupon, the Grand Signor
demanded Counsel of his Mufty, or high Priests, to know what he was to do in
that business. The Mufty, who do always give his Counsels and Answers,
according as he knows which way the Grand Signor is inclined. Counseled him,
that since his Love, and his Son were taken by the Maltesi, in an Hostile
way, he was to set them at liberty by force of Arms. We that are Christians,
do use to pay a ransom for our brethren; to redeem them from under the
Turkish slavery.

FINIS.

