A PROCLAMATION Concerning A Cessation of ARMS.

Agreed and concluded on at Siggings-town, in the county of Kildare, the
Fifteenth day of September, in the Nineteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, by
and between James Marquess of Ormonde, Lieutenant General of His Majesty's
Army in the Kingdom of Ireland, for and in the name of our gracious Sovereign
Lord CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
etc. By virtue of His Majesty's Commission bearing date at Dublin the last of
August, in the said Nineteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, of the one party.
And Donogh Viscount Muskerry, Sir Lucas Dillon Knight; Nicholas Plunket
Esquire; Sir Robert Talbot Baronet; Sir Richard-Barn well Baronet; Torlogh O
Neale, Geoffrey Brown, Ever Mac-Gennis and John Walsh, Esquires; Authorized by
His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects, of whose party they are, and now in
Arms in the said Kingdom, etc. To Treat and Conclude with the said Marquess
for a Cessation of Arms, by virtue of an Authority given unto them, bearing
date at Cashel, the Seventh day of September, in the said Nineteenth year of
His Majesty's Reign, of the other party.

Whereunto is added, An Instrument touching the manner of payment of 30800
pounds sterling by several Payments.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Proclamation be forthwith
printed:

H* Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed first at Dublin by William Bladen, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty; And now Reprinted at London for Edw. Husbands. October 21. 1643.

By the Lords Justices and Council.
Jo: BORLASE. HEN. TICHBORN.
Upon consideratio^n had of the annexed Articles of Cessation of Arms, whereby
it is concluded and accorded, That there be a Cessation of Arms, and of all
Acts of Hostility, for one whole year, beginning the Fifteenth day of
September, Anno Domini, One thousand Six hundred Forty three, at the hour of
Twelve of the clock of the said day. We the Lords Justices and Council,
according to His Majesty's Letters of the One and thirtieth day of July last,
Do by this Proclamation in His Majesty's Name, ratify, confirm, and Publish
the same; And do require all His Majesty's Subjects, whom it may concern by Sea
and by Land, to take notice thereof, and yield all Obedience thereunto, in all
the parts thereof.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of DUBLIN, the Nineteenth of September, 1643. R.
Bolton. Canc. La. Dublin. Ormonde. Roscomon. Edw. Brabazon. Ant. Midensis. Cha.
Lambart. Geo. Shurley. Getrard Lowther. Tho. Rotherham. Fr. Willoughby. Tho.
Luca. La Ware. God save the King.

ARticles of Cessation of Arms, agreed, and concluded on at Siggingstown, in
the county of Kildare, the Fifteenth day of Sept. in the Nineteenth year of His
Majesty's Reign, by and between James Marquis of Ormond, Lieutenant General of
His Majesty's Army in the kingdom of Ireland, for and in the Name of our
Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, etc. By virtue of His Majesty's Commission bearing date at
Dublin, the last of August, in the said Nineteenth year of His Majesty's Reign,
of the one part; And Donogh Viscount Muskerry, Sir Lucas Dillon Knight,
Nicholas Plunket Esquire, Sir Robert Talbot Baronet, Sir Richard Barnwell
Baronet, Torlogh O Neale, Geoffrey Brown, Ever Mac Gennis, and John Walsh
Esquires; Authorized by His Maj^sties Roman Catholic Subjects, of whose
party they are, and now in Arms in the said Kingdom, etc. to Treat and Conclude
with the said Marquess for a Cessation of Arms, by virtue of an Authority
given unto them, bearing date at Cashell the Seventh day of September, in the
said Nineteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, of the other part.

FIrst, It is concluded and accorded, that there be a Cessation of Arms, and of
all Acts of Hostility, between His Majesty's said Roman Catholic Subjects,
who are now in Arms, etc. in this Kingdom, and their party, and all others His
Majesty's good Subjects, for one whole year, to begin the Fifteenth day of
September, Anno Dom. 1643. at the hour of Twelve of the clock of the said day.

Item, It is concluded and accorded, That free Passage, Intercourse, Commerce,
and Trassique, during the said Cossation, shall be between His Majesty's said
Roman Catholic Subjects, who are now in Arms, etc. and their party, and all
other His Majesty's good Subjects, and all others in League with His Majesty by
Sea and Land.

Item, It is concluded and accorded, and the said Viscount Muskerry, and the
rest of the above named Persons, do promise and undertake, for and in the
behalf of those for whom they are Authorized to Treat and Conclude as
aforesaid; That all Ships, Barques, and Vessels, which shall bring Provisions
to any Harbor in this Kingdom, in the hands or possession of such as shall
obey the Articles of this Cessation, from Minehead and Whitehaven, and from all
the Ports between, on that side where Wales is situate, so as they be Ships
belonging to any of the said Ports, and do not use any Acts of Hostility to any
of the said Roman Catholics, who are now in Arms, or to any of their party,
or to any who shall be waged, or employed unto or by them, shall not be
interrupted by any of their party, nor by any Ships or other Vessels, of what
Country or Nation soever under their power or command, or waged, employed, or
contracted with on their behalf, or by any Forts, Garrisons, or Forces, within
this Kingdom under their power, in their coming to this Kingdom, or returning
from thence.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, and the said Lord Viscount Muskery, and
the rest of the above named parties do promise and undertake for and in the
behalf of those for whom they are authorized as aforesaid, that all Ships,
Barques, and Vessels, which shall bring Provisions to any harbor in this
Kingdom, in the hands of such as shall obey the Articles of this Cessation
from any Ports in the kingdom of England, having his Majesty's pass, or the
pass of any who is, or shall be his Majesty's Admiral or Vice Admiral, or the
pass of any Governor or Governors of any the Ports in England, in his
Majesty's hands, or which shall hereafter during this Cessation, be in His
Majesty's hands, or the pass of the said Marquis, shall not be interrupted, by
any of those for whom the said Lord Viscount Muskery, and the rest of the above
named Persons are Authorized as aforesaid, neither in their coming to this
Kingdom, or in their return, so as they use not any acts of hostility to any
of their said party. And this to be a rule until his Majesty's pleasure be
further declared therein* upon application of the Agents of the said Roman
Catholic Subjects, now in Arms, etc. to his Majesty.

Item, It is concluded and accorded, and the said James Marquis of Ormond, does
promise and undertake, for and in the Name of His Majesty, that no interruption
shall be given by any Ship, or Ships, under His Majesty's power and command, or
waged, employed, or contracted with, by or in the behalf of his Majesty or by
any of his Majesty's Forts, Garrisons, or Forces, within this Kingdom, to any
Ship, or Ships, that shall trade with any of the said Roman Catholics who are
now in Arms, etc or any of their party; or which shall come in, or go out of
any the Cities, Towns, Harbors, Creeks, or Ports, of this Kingdom, in the
hands of the said Roman Catholics now in Arms, etc. with Arms, Ammunition,
Merchandise, Commodity, or any thing whatsoever, during this Cessation: as on
the other side, the said Donnogh Viscount Muskery, and the rest above named of
that party, do promise and undertake, for and in the behalf of those by whom
they are Authorized, that no interruption shall be given by any Ship, or other
Vessel whatsoever, under the power and command of their party, or waged,
employed, or contracted with, by or in the behalf of their party, or by any
Forts, Garrisons, or Forces, within this Kingdom, in their power, to any Ship,
or Ships, that shall trade with any of his Majesty's Subjects, obeying this
Cessation, or which shall come in, or go out of any of the Cities, Towns,
Harbors, or Ports of this Kingdom, which shall obey this Cessation, with
Arms, Ammunition, Merchandise, Commodity, or any other thing whatsoever during
this Cessation. Provided that no Ship, or Ships, shall be admitted free Trade,
by color of this Article, but such as are warranted by the precedent Articles.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, that the quarters in the Province of
Leinster be as follows, viz. That the County of Dublin, the County of the
City of Dublin, the County of the Town of Droghedagh, and the County of Lowth,
shall remain and be during the Cessation, in the possession of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, and of such as adhere unto them respectively, saving and
excepting unto the said Roman Catholic Subjects, now in Arms, etc. and their
party, all such Castles, Towns, Lands, Territories, and the Lands and
hereditaments thereunto belonging, which upon the said fifteenth day of
September, 1643. at the hour aforesaid are possessed in the said counties, or
any of them, by any of the said party. And it is further concluded and
accorded, that as much of the county of Mead, as in the East and South side of
the river of Boyne, from Droghedagh to Trym, thence to the lordship of Moylagh,
and thence to Moyglare, and thence to Dublin, shall during the said Cessation
remain and be in the possession of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and of
such as adhere unto them respectively, saving and excepting to the said Roman
Catholic Subjects now in Arms, and their party, all such Castles, Towns,
Lands, and Territories, and the Lands, hereditaments thereunto belonging, which
upon the said fifteenth day of Sept. 1643. at the hour aforesaid are possessed
by any of the said Roman Catholic Subjects now in Arms, etc. and of their
party, within the said limits, and boundaries, and that the Residue of the said
County of Mead shall remain in the hands and possessions of the said Roman
Catholic subjects now in arms, etc. and their party, except the Castles,
Towns, Lands, Territories, and the Lands and hereditaments thereunto belonging,
which upon the said fifteenth day of Septem. 1643. at the hour aforesaid are
possessed within the said last mentioned quarters in the County of Mead by his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and such as adhere unto them, or by any of them
respectively. And that so much of the county of Kildare, as is on this side of
the Liffy where Naas is situate, and on the other side of the Liffy from
Dublin westward into the County of Kildare, so far as the Rye water at Kilcock,
and so far betwixt that and the Liffye, as shall be at the same distance from
Dublin, as the said Rye water is at Kilcock on that side of the Liffye; shall
during the said Cessation, remain and be in the hands and possessions of his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects and their adherents respectively, except such
Castles, Towns, Territories, and the Lands and hereditaments thereunto
belonging, which upon the said fifteenth day of September, 1643. at the hour
aforesaid are possessed within the said quarters by the said Roman Catholic
Subjects who are now in Arms, etc. and their party, and that the residue of
the said County of Kildare, shall remain in the hands of the said Roman
Catholic Subjects now in Arms, etc. and their party, except such Castles,
Towns, Lands, Territories, and the Lands and Hereditaments thereunto
belonging, which upon the said fifteenth day of September, 1643. at the hour
aforesaid are possessed by his Majesty's Protestant subjects and their
adherents respectively, within the said last mentioned quarters in the said
County of Kildare. And that the several Countyes of Wiglow, west Mead, Kings
County, Queens County, Catherlagh, Kilkenny, County of the City of Kilkenny,
Weixford, and Longford, shall during the said Cessation remain in the hands of
the said Roman Catholic Subjects now in Arms, etc. and their party, except
such Castles, Towns, Lands, Territories, and the Lands and hereditaments
thereunto belonging which upon the said fifteenth day of September, 1643. at
the hour aforesaid, are possessed within the said County, by His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, and their adherents respectively.

Item, It is concluded and accorded, that what Corn, has been sown by any of
his Majesty's Army, or by any of his Protestant subjects, or their adherents,
or by any of them, within any of the quarters allotted in the Province of
Leinster, to the said other party, the same shall be enjoyed by the sowers and
manurers paying, for the same as they did agree, and in case they did not agree
paying the fourth sheafe unto such Garrison within whose quarters the same
shall fall. And that in case any of the said Roman Catholic Subjects, now in
Arms, etc. or any of their party have sown Corn within any the quarters
allotted in the Province of Leinster, to the said other party, the same shall be
enjoyed by the sowers and manurers, paying for the same as they did agree, and
in case they did not agree paying the fourth sheafe unto such Garrisons, within
whose quarters the same shall fall. And it is likewise concluded and accorded,
that those places which have been protected, by the Lords Justices, or any
Officer of His Majesty's Army, do pay according to the agreement which was
made, and if no agreement were made, to pay the fourth Sheafe, to those
Garrisons or persons who protected them, in whose soever quarters they are; And
this to continue for a rule, other then as to so many of those Garrisons, who
granted such protection, and are since regained by the said party, or some of
them, for whom the said Dounogh Viscount Muskery, and the persons abovenamed
are Authorized as aforesaid. And that the Tenants of the Town of Baniboght in
the County of Dublin, if they have not been protected, shall pay according to
agreement, and if no agreement made, then the fourth sheafe, and to continue
their possessions during this Cessation. And it is further concluded and
accorded, that where his Majesty, or any of his Protestant Subjects, or their
adherents shall happen to have any Garrison or Garrisons within the quarters
set forth in the next precedent Article, for the said other party, that such
Garrison and Garrisons, shall have such competency of the Lands as well
profitable as unprofitable, now termed wast, as shall be found necessary for
them by any indifferent Commissioners, to be appointed for that purpose.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, that the quarters, in the Province of
Munster be as follows, viz. That the County of the City of Corck, and so much
of the County of Corcke, as is within the subsequent Garrisons, viz. From
Youghall to Mogeely, thence to Formoye, thence to Michellstowne, thence to
Liscarroll, and so in a line from Michellstowne, and Liscarroll northward, as
far as His Majesty's our Garrisons on that side do entend; and from
Liscarroll, to Mallow, thence to Corcke, thence to Carrig-Croghan, thence to
Rochfordstowne, thence to Bandonbridge, thence to Timmoleagie, and thence
forward to the Sea, together with the said Garrisons, shall during the said
Cessation remain; and be in the possession of his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects and of such as adhere unto them: Saving and excepting to the said
Roman Catholic Subjects now in Arms, etc. and their party, all such Castles,
Towns, Lands, Territories; and the Lands and hereditaments thereunto
belonging, which on the said fifteenth day of September. 1643. at the hour
aforesaid are possessed in the said Counties, or any of them, by any of the
said Roman Catholic Subjects now in Arms, etc. and their party. And that the
residue of the said County of Corcke, shall likewise remain to the said party
last named, saving and excepting to His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and
their adherents, all such Castles, Towns, Lands, Territoryes, and the Lands,
and hereditaments thereunto belonging, which on the said fifteenth day of
September, 1643. at the hour aforesaid, are possessed in the last mentioned
quarters by them, or any of them. And that the County of Tipperary, the County
of Limerick, the County of the City of Limericke, the County of Kerry, the
County of Waterford, the County of the City of Waterford, and the County of
Clare, shall during the said Cessation remain and be in the possession of the
said Roman Catholic Subjects now in Arms, etc. and their party. Except
Knockmorne, Ardmore, Piltowne, Cappoquin, Ballinetra, Stroncally, Lismore,
Balliduffe, Lisfinny, and Tallowe, all situate in the County of Waterford, or
as many of them as are possessed by His MAJESTY'S Protestant Subjects, and
their adhaerents, the said fifteenth day of September, 1643. at the hour
aforesaid, and likewise except all such Castles, Towns, Lands, Territories,
and Hereditaments thereunto belonging, as within the said Countyes
respectively, on the said fifteenth day of September 1643. at the hour
aforesaid are possessed by any of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, or such as
adheaere unto that party respectively, in the said County of Waterford, and the
rest of the last mentioned Countyes. And it is concluded and accorded, that the
like rule for Corn sown, and what shall be paid by places protected, and for
the laying out wastes for the respective Garrisons, shall be observed in the
Province of Munster, as it is set down for Leinster.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, that the quarters in the Province of
Vlster, be as follows: viz. That such Countyes, Baronyes, Lands, Tenements,
and hereditaments in the Province of Vlster, which the said fifteenth of
September, 1643. at the hour aforesaid, are possessed by any of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, or any that adhaere unto them, and all Places protected by
any Commander during Authority from his Majesty, shall during the said
Cessation remain entirely in the hands and in the possession of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, and such as adhaere unto them, excepting such Castles,
Lands, and hereditaments, as on the fifteenth day of September, 1643. at the
hour aforesaid, are possessed by the said Roman Catholic Subjects now in
Arms, etc. or their party. And that all such Countyes, Baronyes, Lands,
Tenements, and hereditaments, in the said Province, which on the said fifteenth
of September, 1643. at the hour aforesaid, are possessed by the said Roman
Catholic Subjects now in Arms, etc. and their party, shall remain entirely
during this Cessation in the hands and Possession of the said Roman Catholic
Subjects now in Arms etc. and their party, saving and excepting thereout all
places protected by any Commander, deriving Authority from his Majesty, and
likewise excepting thereout all such Territories, Castles, Towns, Lands,
Tenements, and hereditaments, which on the said fifteenth day of September
1643. at the hour aforesaid are possessed by any of his Majestyes Protestant
Subjects, or such as adhaere unto them. And it is concluded and accorded, that
the like rule for Corn sown, and what shall be paid for protected places;
and for the laying down of wastes for the respective Garrisons, shall be observed
in the Province of Vlster, as is set down for Leinster.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, that the quarters in the Province of
Connaght, be as follows, viz. that the County of Galway, the County of the
town of Galway, the Counties of Mayo, Roscomon, Sligo, and Letrym, in the
Province of Connaght, and all such castles, lands, tenements and hereditaments
in the said Province which the said fifteenth day of September, 1643. at the
hour aforesaid are possessed by the said Roman Catholic subjects, now in
arms, etc, and their party, shall during the said cessation remain entirely in
the possession of the said Roman Catholic subjects, now in arms and their
party, excepting all such Territories, castles, lands, tenements and
hereditaments within the said several Counties which upon the said 15. of
September 1643. at the hour aforesaid, are possessed by any of his Majesty's
Forces, or by their party, or by any of them, and that those who after taking
protection of any of his Majesty's Forces, or any of that party, or from any
Governors, deriving Authority from his Majesty there, have joined themselves
to the said Roman Catholic subjects now in arms, etc. and their party, shall
pay no contribution unto such who protected them. But in regard there may be a
rule different touching persons that may be said to do this, and consequently
touching the Contributions payable by them. It is concluded and accorded that
such disputes and questions, if any shall arise, be determined by Commissioners
indifferently chosen on each side, and it is concluded and accorded, that the
like rule for sowers and manurers of corn within the quarters of each other,
shall be observed in the Province of Connaght, as is set down for Leinster.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, and the said Marquess of Ormond; for and
in the name of his Majesty does promise and undertake, that no interruption
shall be given unto any of the said Roman Catholic subjects now in Arms, etc.
or their party, in any of the said Counties, quarters, or places by the said
precedent Articles unto them or any of them limited as aforesaid, during this
Cessation; like as the said Donnogh Viscount Muskery, and the rest of the above
named persons who are authorized, as aforesaid, do promise and undertake, that
no interruption shall be given unto any of his Majesty's Forces, Protestant
subjects, or such as adhere unto them, within any of the said Counties,
qu^^^^rs or places, by the preced^nt Articles limited unto them, as aforesaid,
during the said Cessation.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, that no Officer of the Army, or Soldier
of either side, shall be admitted without license from the Commander in chief
of the Army on both sides, or of the Commander of the next chief Garrisons
respectively to pass or repair into any garrison on either side, save that it
be lawful for either party to furnish any garrison in their power during the
Cessation, with victuals, cloth, ammunition or other necessaries by license, as
aforesaid, which is not to be denied upon demand.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, that if any Army or Forces in this Kingdom
raised by his Majesty's authority, or any part thereof, or any other his
Majesty's subjects shall not yield obedience to the Articles of this Cessation,
but shall publicly stand in opposition thereunto; that the said Roman Catholic
subjects now in Arms, etc. and their party may persecute such: and the said
James Marquess of Ormonde does promise and undertake that such who shall so
stand in opposition, shall not be assisted, protected, or defended against the
said Roman Catholic Subjects now in arms, etc. or their party, by his Majesty
or any of his forces. And yet nevertheless the same shall not be understood to
be any breach of cessation, as to other parts of the kingdom, which shall
conform and yield thereunto. And whereas the assistance of his Majesty's
forces is desired by the said Roman Catholic subjects now in arms, etc.
against such as shall oppose the Articles of this cessation and will not yield
obedience thereunto, or interrupt the trade and traffic, albeit that it is not
to be supposed that there will be any such, the said James Marquess of Ormonde
does further promise and undertake, that their said request shall be made known
to his Majesty, and upon signification of his pleasure the same shall be obeyed.

Item, It is concluded and accorded, that if in other cases it be pretended on
either side that the Cessation is violated, that yet no Act of Hostility is
immediately to follow; but first the party complaining is to acquaint the Lord
General, Lieutenant General, or other chief Commander of either side in that
Province, in which the said Cessation is pretended to be violated therewith,
and to allow fourteen days after notice given, for reparation or
satisfaction, and in case reparation or satisfaction be not given or tendered,
then fourteen days notice to be given before Hostility begin.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, that all Prisoners and hostages of both
sides in all parts of the Kingdom, excepting such of them as are indicted of
any Capital offense, shall de mutually released and set at liberty, within
seven days after publication of the said Cessation. And the said Marquess of
Ormonde, does further promise and undertake; that such prisoners who indicted
of any capital offense, shall be set at liberty upon Bail, until his
Majesty's further pleasure be known therein. Provided nevertheless that if
any party of his Majesty's Army in any other Province of the Kingdom, shall not
within ten days after publication of these Articles, yield obedience
thereunto; that the same shall be no breach of cessation, but that his Majesty
be first made acquainted with such disobedience, and his direction expected
therein: and that all other persons that do reside with either party, and all
women and children shall be permitted within seven days after publishing of
this cessation, or when they please, with their goods and chattels, to depart
to what place they please, with a safe conduct or convoy if they desire it.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, that the said Roman Catholic Subjects,
now in arms, etc. and their party, may at any time during the cessation send
such Agents to his Majesty as they shall think fit: and that the said Agents
shall have safe conduct in writing from the chief Governor or Governors of
this Kingdom for the time being, upon demand.

Item. It is concluded and accorded, and the said Marquess of Ormond, does
promise and undertake for and in the name of his Majesty, that all and every of
the precedent Articles, which have bin agreed unto, and undertaken by the said
Marquess, for and in the behalf of his Majesty, shall be faithfully, truly,
and inviolably observed, fulfilled and kept. And the said Viscount Muskery, Sir
Lucas Dillon, Knight, Nicholas Plunket, Esquire Sir Robert Talbot, Baronet, Sir
Richard Barnewell, Torlogh o Oncale, Evea Match Gennis, Geffry Brown, and John
Walsh, Esquire For and in the behalf of the said Roman Catholic subjects, now in
arms, etc. and their party do promise and undertake, that all and every of the
precedent Articles, which have agreed unto and undertaken by them, for and in
the behalf of their party, shall be faithful, truly, and inviolably observed,
fulfilled, and kept.

Lastly. It is concluded and accorded, that all possessions, and likewise all
goods and chattels, that shall be found in Specie, taken by either party, after
the hour of twelve aforesaid, and before publication of this Cessation, shall
be restored to the owners, and after publication, all possession and goods that
shall be taken, to be restored to the owners upon demand, or damages for the
same.

In witness whereof the said Marquess to the party of the said Articles
remaining with the said Viscount Muskery and the rest of the above named
persons, has put his hand and Seal. And the said Viscount Muskery, Sir Lucas
Dillon, Knight, Nicholas Plunket, Esquire Sir Robert Talbat, Baronet, Sir Richard
Barnewell, Baronet, Torlogh o Neale, Geffry Brown, ever Mac-Gennis, and John
Walsh, Esquires. To that part of the Articles remaining with the said Marquess
Ormonde, have put their hands and seals, the day and year, first above
written.

Muskry. Lucas Dillon. Nic. Plunket. Rob. Talbot. Rich. Barnewell. Torl. o
Neale. Geffry Brown. Ever Magennis. Io. Walsh.

An Instrument touching the manner of payment of 30800 pound sterling, by
several payments.
Whereas by an Instrument bearing date with these presents, we have in the
behalf, and by authority from the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, freely
given unto his Majesty the sum of thirty thousand pounds sterling, wherein the
times or manner of payments are not expressed. We do therefore hereby agree,
that the same shall be paid in manner following, viz. 5000 pounds within one
month next after the date of these presents, the one half in money, and the
other half in good and Merchantable Beeves, not under four, or above ten
years old, at the rate of 30 pounds the score, at the City of Dublin, 5000
pounds more: within one month, next after the said first month; the one half
in money, and the other half in Beeves as aforesaid, at the like rates at the
City of Dublin aforesaid; also within two months next after, five thousand
pounds more, whereof one half in Beeves, as aforesaid, at the like rates; and
the other half in money: one other five thousand pounds, at or before the last
of February next, and the sum of 10000 pounds, being the last payment of the
said thirty thousand pounds, at or before the last day of May next, which shall
be in the year 1644. And we hereby further agree, that eight hundred pounds
more shall be paid to his Majesty's use, to whom the Lords Justices shall
appoint at the Garrison of Naas, within two months next ensuing, the one half
by one months end next after the date hereof, and the other half by the end
of one month more, next after that first month; all other payments in money,
save the eight hundred pounds shall be paid at Dublin, and the rest of the
Beeves, save the said first two payments, to be paid within the several
Provinces to His Majesty's use, to such persons as shall be appointed by his
Majesty's Lords Justices, or other chief Governor or Governors in this
Kingdom; they first giving notice to us, or any one or more of us, of their
pleasures therein. In witness whereof, we have hereunto put our hands and
Seals the sixteenth day of September. 1643.

Muskery. Lucas Dillon. Nic. Plunket, Rob. Talbot. R. Barnewell. Ter. Neale.
Geffry Brown. Ever Magennis. Io. Walsh.

FINIS.

