royal blazon or coat of arms DIEV ET MON DROIT

By the Lords Justices and Council.
VV. Parsons. Io. Borlase.
WHereas many malignant and divellish Papists, and Jesuits, Friars, Seminary
prfests, and other superstitious Orders of the Popish pretended Clergy, most
disloyally, treacherously and wickedly conspired to surprise His Majesty's
Castle of Dublin, his Majesty's principal Fort in this Kingdom, the City of
Dublin, and all other Cities and Fortifications in this Realm, to massacre Us
the Lords Justices and Council, to destroy and root out all the Protestant
British, and all other Protestants in this Realm; and finally, to deprive His
Majesty of this His ancient and rightful Crown, and Sovereignty of this
Kingdom, and to possess themselves thereof, all which was by the said
Conspirators plotted, and intended to be acted on the 23. day of October in the
year of our Lord God 1641. A Conspiracy so inhumane, barbarous and cruel, as
the like was never before heard of in any age or Kingdom, and if it had taken
effect in that fullness which was intended by the Conspirators, it had
occasioned the utter ruin of this whole Kingdom, and the Government thereof.

And howsoever it pleased Almighty God in his unsearchable Wisdom and
Justice, as a just punishment and deserved correction to us for our sins, and
the sins of this Nation, to permit then, and afterward, the effecting of a
great part of that destruction complotted by those wicked Conspirators, whereby
many thousand British and Protestants have been massacred, many thousands of
others of them have been afflicted and tormented, with the most exquisit
torments that the malice of the Devil could suggest to the mischievous
Rebels, and all men's estates (as well those whom they traitorously slew, as all
others) are utterly wasted, ruined, and destroyed, yet as his Divine Majesty
has in all ages shown his power and mercy in the miraculous and gracious
Deliverance of his Church, and in the protection of Religious Kings and States,
so even in the midst of his Justice, he was graciously pleased to extend mercy
to His Majesty, and to this His Kingdom and good Subjects therein, not only
in miraculously discovering to Us the Lords Justices, that hideous and bloody
Treason, not many hours before the appointed time for the execution thereof,
but also in preserving the said Castle and City of Dublin, and some other
Cities, Towns and Castles in the Kingdom, from the bloody hands of the
barbarous Conspirators, as also in thereby rendering Deliverance to the Lives of
Us the Lords Justices and Council, and of all the British and Protestants in
Dublin, and in the said other Cities, Towns, and Castles preserved, and of
sundry other British and Protestants, fallen even into the hands of those
Rebellious Conspirators, and likewise in sending Us succors, (whereby with
Gods blessing) We have hitherto continued safe under his mighty protection,
notwithstanding the unexampled rage and implacable fury and malice of those
merciless enemies of Gods truth.

Wherefore as We do most humbly and justly acknowledge Gods Justice in Our
deserved punishments, in those calamities which from the Counsels and actions
of those Conspirators and their Adherents, are fallen upon Us, and this Nation
in general, so We do in like manner acknowledge, that even in exercising of
that his Justice, he remembered mercy also, and magnified his mercy to Us, in
those great blessings which We humbly confess to have proceeded merely from
his infinite goodness and mercy, and therefore to his most holy Name We do
ascribe all Honor, Glory and Praise: And to the end this unfeigned thankfulness
may never be forgotten, but may be had in a perpetual Remembrance, that all
ages to come may yield praises to his Divine Majesty for the same, and have in
memory This joyful day of Deliverance. We do ordain and establish by this
Our Act of Council (in the mean time until by Authority of Parliament it
shall be made a Law to be delivered over to posterity) that all and singular
Ministers in every Cathedral and Parish Church, or other usual place for
Common Prayer within this Realm of Ireland, shall always upon the 23. day of
October say Morning Prayer, and give Thanks unto Almighty God for this most
happy and miraculous Deliverance, and for our preservation hitherto, far
above the expectation of those wretched Conspirators. And that all, and every
person and persons, inhabiting within this Realm of Ireland, shall always
upon that day diligently and faithfully resort to the Parish Church or Chapel
accustomed, or to some usual Church or Chapel where the said Morning Prayer,
Preaching, or other service of God shall be used, and then and there to abide
orderly and soberly during the time of the said Prayers, Preaching, or other
service of God there to be used and ministered.

And because all and every person may be put in mind of his duty, and be then
better prepared to the said holy service: We do ordain and establish by this
Our Act of Council, that every Minister shall give warning to his Parishioners
publicly in the Church at Morning Prayer, the Sunday before every such 23.
day of October for the due observation of the said day. And that after Morning
Prayer, and Preaching upon the said 23. day of October, they read publicly,
distinctly and plainly this Our Act of Council.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 14. day of October. 1642. Ormond.
Ad. Loftus. Geo. Shurley. Gerrard Lowther. I. Temple. Tho. Rotherham. Fr.
Willoughby. Ia. Ware. G. Wentworth. Rob. Meredith.



