A True NARRATIVE OF THE Occasions and Causes of the late Lord Genesis Cromwell's
Anger and Indignation against Lieut. Col. George Joyce, (sometimes Cornet
Joyce, who secured the King at Holmby) and his proceedings against him to
Casheer him from the Army, and imprison and destroy him in his Estate.
A Little after the King was brought into the Custody, or Quarters of the Army,
Notice was taken, that Cromwell lifted up his hands in the Parliament, and
called God, Angels, and Men to witness, That he knew nothing of Joyce's going
for the King.

Thereupon Joyce asked the said Genesis Cromwell, What made him to speak such
words? and whether he intended to do as the King had done before him, viz.
Swear and Lie; and bid him mark, What would be the end of such things;
cautioning him to take heed and beware of such Actions: But he slighted those
warnings; and soon after flattered the said Joyce again with tears of seeming
repentance.

The next Occasion of difference between the said Joyce and Cromwell, was
concerning the Marquess of Argile's carriage in Scotland; at which time
speaking plainly to him according unto his own exhortations; putting him in
mind of former neglects of his, he immediately fell into a violent fit of
passion against the said Joyce; and laying his hand upon his sword, uttered
many threats against him in the presence of Capt. John Vernon, and one more.

Not long after this, the said Joyce, with some other Officers went with a
Petition to St. Albans to General Fairfax for Justice against Capital
offenders: And from thence was sent to Pomfret Leaguer, with a Letter and
Message from our General and Army, to know whether that Brigade under Cromwell
would join with us. And while he was waiting for an answer, Cromwell took an
occasion to fall out with him, and in a railing manner, called him Rascal many
times, and with great threats said, That he would make him write a Vindication
of him, against a book intuled, The Grand design discovered. Wherein was many
things declared concerning Cromwell's carriage toward Joyce, before he went to
Holmby for the King: which afterward he called God to witness he knew nothing
of.

And had it not been for Col. Dean and others, who through the mercy of God
prevented him, he had in all probability done him mischief at the same time.

Not long after this, the Parliament was to be purged, which the said Joyce
protesting against, was by the said Cromwell threatened to be destroyed.

But it came to such a height at last, that the said Parliament must be
dissolved forthwith; against which the said Joyce protested, and gave him his
reasons for it, viz. First, he feared he designed to be King by it. Secondly,
That if he dissolved the Parliament, there would be no Legal way to raise
moneys for the Army; which would be a means to take off the affections of all
the Parliaments friends; desiring therefore it might not be dissolved, until
they had by our means Introduced a more righteous and equal Government, which
in our Declarations and Remonstrances they had held forth. Then was a certain
select company of men to be sent for out of several Counties; the said Joyce
protested against that likewise, still telling him, that he intended by them to
make himself King. At which he was extremely angry with him, and in a great
rage -- After this,

About the year 1650, one Mr. Hen. Philpott being chief Ranger of Finckley-Park
in Hampshire, by a Patent from the late King; the said Park, for the
Delinquency of the said Philpott, was sequestered; by which means it came into
the hands of the Lord de la Ware, who never accounted to the Commonwealth for
one penny of the profits.

Whereupon one Mr. Villers Philpott, Kinsman to the former, desired him, that
in as much as his Cousin was beyond the Seas, that he would get the said Park
into his possession, and he would engage, that his Kinsman, upon his coming
over, should do this Commonwealth very signal Services, and such, as few
besides himself were able to perform.

To the latter he very readily hearkened, and thereupon procured Mr. Henry
Philpott to come over; which he accordingly did, and gave so good an account of
affairs abroad, that it came not short of his Kinsmans word, nor his
expectation: But for the former, he was altogether unwilling, and offered him
diverse reasons against it, although his Kinsman upon his coming over, had made
him several proffers, of assigning all his interest in the said Park unto him;
which he as often refused.

Notwithstanding which, he was continually importuned by both, but nothing
prevailing, they desired him to offer it to some friend of his, and alleged
this, That it were indifferent to them, whoever had it, so it were out of the
hands of him that then enjoyed it.

But he being as much to seek in this, as unwilling in the former; they
earnestly entreated him, that in regard of his more then ordinary Knowledge,
(as they would persuade him he had) of the L.G. Cromwell, that he would prevail
with him, or one of his Sons, to take it into their hands; which, after some
time, and persuasion, he brought to this issue, That upon the assignment of Mr.
Philpott, and the resignation of the Lord de la Ware, Mr. Richard Cromwell
desired to take it: all which being accordingly done, he was possessed of it, and
has ever since enjoyed it. But farther, there was this agreement between Mr.
Richard Cromwell, Mr. Philpott, and him self, That if ever the said Park were
exposed to sale, that he should have the sole right of purchasing it, before
either of them two: In order to which, he bought up all the Arrears of
Portsmouth, Hampton, and the better part of the Isle of Wight, at 7 s. 6 d. per
l. deeming him self obliged in conscience to allow the Soldiers (who had
equally ventured their lives with him self) a more proportionable rate, then
the common prices of 1 s. 18 d. per l.

After this, the Parliament made an Act for the sale of Kings Lands, of which
the Park aforesaid being parcel, it was amongst others surveyed, and exposed to
sale: he having notice of it, by the consent of the Lord Richard, went to the
Committee, and informing them of the matter, at large, they ordered, that a
stop should be put to the sale of the said Park for the present, and that when
ever it was to be sold, him self should have the preemption; giving this for
the reason of their order, That he had deserved better then so small a
courtesy: by which means the Lord Richard enjoyed the said Park between 4 or 5
years longer, his Debenters all that while lying dead upon his hands.

By this time the greatest part, if not all the Kings Lands being sold, comes
in one Capt. Urland, and pretends a discovery of the said park; whereupon the
Committee forgetting, or at least taking no notice of the former passages,
order a new Survey; which being returned, and the Park upon sale, he went to
him then called Lord Richard, (Cromwell his Father having interrupted this
Parliament) and desired to know of him, whether he would let the Park go so, or
whether he had forgot our former agreement? his answer was, No, he had not
forgot it, but for the Park he would not meddle with it; and therefore bade him
do in it what he would: Whereupon he pressed it to him, how convenient it lay for
his Estate, and therefore if he pleased, he would purchase it, and he should
have the whole, or half at the same rate it cost him. To which he said, he
wanted moneys. He replied, Let not that trouble you I will purchase the whole,
and trust you for one half, till you are able to pay me; but before we proceed
farther, I will acquaint your Father: which being accordingly done, and he
having shown him a particular of other Lands that were likewise upon sale, and
offered him his choice; he took me in his arms, and told me, that himself, his
Son, and Family were more beholding to me, then all the world besides; and
therefore bade me go on and prosper.

Upon this, he went the next morning about it, and there being a full
Committee, he was just upon the point of contracting for the said Park; when on
a sudden in came the Lord Richard (his Father then overtopping all in power)
with three Lawyers with him, and required them to proceed no further in it, in
regard it was his own Inheritance, and no Park, as was supposed: whereupon he
informed the Committee of the whole discourse, that passed between the General,
his son, and him self the night before; upon which he fell upon him in foul
words, saying, Sirrah, Sirrah, hold your tongue, or I shall make you repent the
time you were born; which the Committee perceiving, they desired us to
withdraw; and since that time, never durst meddle with the Park any farther.

Hereupon the anger of the Father and Son waxed hot against the said Lieut.
Col. Joyce.

Upon this, and also upon the said Lieut. Col. his bearing testimony in the
public meetings of the Officers against the Armies Apostasy at that time, who
were then concurring to make the said Lord General, Lord Protector, endeavors
were used to ruin him; and to that purpose his Lieutenant (who had before
given information against the Lieut. Col. but could make nothing of it, as the
Commissioners who had been appointed to examine the matters alleged, had
signified to the General) was sent for from Portland by General Cromwell, and
by him encouraged to prosecute his Lieut. Col. again, and contrary to the
course and Custom of the Army, privately appointed about 9 Officers, such as
he could then trust in such an affair, viz. Col. Whaly Col. G. Col. Gravener,
Lieut. Col. White, and Lieut. Col. Worsley, etc. to take the Lieutenant's
information against him; and they (having no power thereunto) took his
deposition against the Lieut. Col. who falsely swore, That he should hear the
Lieut. Col. say, (in a discourse in Portland about the death of Lockyer) That
he was sorry that Lockyer had not pistoll'd Cromwell; and thereupon sent him to
prison without bayl, and order was given, that he should be kept close
prisoner: So he was carried away with Musketeers to the Mewes, and put into a
close Chamber within the common Dutch prison, where the lice creeped up very
thick, and where he was forced to continue above 10 days; After great
importunity he obtained a remove to another Chamber in the Mewes, where he fell
sick with the filthy smells, and other inconveniences, and continued ten
weeks, but was often sent to by Oliver Cromwell to lay down his Commission,
which he absolutely refused to do; declaring to all, how unworthily he was
dealt with, and that what was sworn against him was false, and that it would at
last appear to the view of the whole world; and when they should understand
what was the design, they would marvail; And when he could not be persuaded out
of his Commission, Articles were drawn against him; and by the false and
double-swearing, and prosecution of his Lieutenant (so encouraged as aforesaid)
and the Officers privately instructed by their General, he was outed and
cashiered, though the Lieut. Colonel was in his own Conscience clear of any
Crime or Offense unstable by any Law, or deserving such usage.

After this the said Lieutenant moved the General, then called Protector, for
his promised preferment, and his charges, in prosecution; but he answered him
in these words: You have not dealt like a Christian with your Lieut. Col.
Joyce. To which the Lieut. replied, That he had done nothing but what he had
commanded him, and persuaded him into, upon hopes of preferment. Whereupon the
General thrust him out of his Chamber, and bad him go like a Knave as he was.

This was the Case; but the effects of it were more considerable, as to the
ruin of his estate: for before he was in prison, he had made large Contracts,
and paid many pounds in part; by which means, he was endebted greatly to
private persons, who as soon as they heard he was in prison, came so thick upon
him, that to satisfy them, was forced to sell at such under Rates, or else
relinquish his bargain, that he lost above 3000 li. in money, and 500 li. per
annum, in Lands, and he pays Interest at present for 1200 li. and he ows the
Commonwealth 1600 and odd pounds in Money and Bills for the Estate he now
lives in; which being part of that which was the Lord Cravens, no man can deal
in it, there being so many Clamours about it.

And now that he has declared to your Honors, both his Case and Sufferings,
he knows not what he should add more, unless it be to beseech your Honors so
to take them into serious consideration, that being vindicated to the World, he
may once again appear to be an honest man, a true Servant o^ (...) Country; or
else suffer according to his deserts, if he shall be found the contrary.

FINIS.

