A LETTER SENT FROM THE LORDS OF THE Council in Ireland, to the high Court of
PARLIAMENT here in England assembled.

Delivered to the Lords, by the Lord Dungarvan, eldest Son to the Earl of
Cork, on Tuesday the 15. of March. 1641.

Wherein are many passages worthy the Readers observation.

As also the Names of those Lords who have adventured all their estates, for
the defense of the Protestant Religion in IRELAND.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Pain in Goldsmiths Alley. 1641.

A LETTER FROM THE LORDS OF THE COUNCIL IN IRELAND, to the High Court of
Parliament here in England assembled, etc.
Right Honorable,
THe present distractions and troubles raised in this Kingdom by the Rebellion
of the Catholic party still increasing more dangerous and perilous to this
Kingdom, enforced us again to apply our addresses to the High Court of
Parliament for speedy prevention of the same, with great joy and
thankfulness, acknowledging the vigilent care and painful endeavors of the
same hitherto, to relieve us in our present troubles.

That your Lordships have manifestly showed your Noble and affectionate desires
to preserve and defend this Kingdom from utter ruin and desolation, by your
willing and cheerful concurrence with the Honorable House of Commons, in all
their proceedings for our assistance; and removing the obstructions and
hindrances that have been procured in expediting the same by evil and
malignant Instruments, the Prelaticall faction, in taking away their Votes, and
sitting in Parliament, which hitherto we conceive have been much prejudicial,
and of great disadvantage to our timely assistance.

The Noble Courage and Magnanimity of the Parliament, in wading through all
troubles and distempers of State, has infused into our drooping spirits life
and vigor, which were ready to faint with despair, but holden up with
confident assurance of your tender cares and indulgent affections toward us in
our miseries: we received strength and courage, not doubting but at length
through Gods mercy and your provident wisedoms we should have relief and
remedy against our Enemies.

We now humbly inform your Lordships of the present Condition now standing,
viz. the County of Cork is wholly subdued by the Rebels, Lemster, Munster,
and Vlster, even at the last gasp of yielding up themselves. The Earl of Cork
has lost all his Lands and means, and this Kingdom in apparent hazard of
utter confusion and ruin, unless your Wisdoms prevent it not in time by a
speedy supply of more men, money, and munition.

The Rebels are grown to that height of impudency and boldness, that they
give forth in their Declarations, they fight in defense of the honor and
prerogatives of their King and Queen. And we are credibly given to understand,
they have presumed to send a Letter to his Majesty, intimating they take Arms
only for the preservation of his Majesty, and his rightful government over
them, his Queen and posterity, the defense of their Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, in the exercise of the same. That they take not Arms, as did the
Scots, for lucre of gain, to raise their own fortunes by the ruin of others,
but only out of Conscience and duty to God, and his Majesty; which by their
inhumane and savage behaviors since their Rebellion, have manifested to the
contrary.

We rejoice with great thankfulness, that the Wisdom and care of your
Lordships, and the House of Commons, have provided and sent over for our aid
and assistance, such worthy and valiant Commanders, by whose prowess and
magnanimity, many great over-throwes and victorious exployts have been
archieved against the Rebels in diverse places of this Kingdom, to the great
refreshing and encouragement of the distressed Protestants.

Our further desires therefore are that the High Court of Parliament would be
pleased to proceed in expediting that effectual Remedy, to reduce this
Kingdom to due obedience to the Crown of England, and the Laws and
Ordinances of the States of both Kingdoms, their Design in agitation upon the
Propositions propounded by the House of Commons, for the speedy raising of
money for that purpose, of such persons willing to be purchasers, by their
moneys and persons, of the Lands won and obtained by the Rebels and our
endeavors, shall not be wanting to comply with them in the same to the loss
of our lives and fortunes.

From His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, March 10. 1641. Cork. Loftus. Ormond.
Ridgway. Kildare. Munster. Carey. Courtney, etc.


FINIS.

