RVLES TO KNOW A Royal King, From a Disloyal Subject. WITH An exact account
given of the Jewels of the Crown of ENGLAND. Whereunto is added, A Touchstone
for a Traitor. Written by the Kings friend, and a Lover of the Commonwealth,
Tho: Jordan.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wood and Edward Christopher. 1642.

Rules to know a Royal King, from a disloyal Subject.
A King is our Father which is on earth, in that he is the Father of his
Country, and made Gods Vicegerent by that All-giving Power, Our Father which
is in heaven. This being allowed, we are the Kings Children, (as he is King,
and we good Subjects) in that we are his Country: And (according to this
sense) none but a Traitor can be illegitimate.

There is this near affinity betwixt a Royal King and a natural Father; they
have both a like power ascribed by Divine Ordinance, and but one word to
express that power; Honor thy Father and Mother, likewise Honor the King;
and I may join the sequel of the first to them both, That thy days may be
long in the land, (I pray heaven we turn not this blessing to a curse, and
shorten our own days) There is such a sympathy in their equal power, and our
filial obedience, that I conclude he cannot truly honor his Father and
Mother, that does not honor the King: I am so confident of it, that were I the
father of a knowing son, I should guess how much his duty were to me, by his
observation of this command, Honor the King. Grace must take precedencie of
Nature, though (according to Creation) to the last we are most lenitive. And
since we are commanded one form of obedience to our King and Father, Father and
King, I have some assurance there is an unity in their form of government.
First, in Justice, a Father and a King have equal power to correct offenses,
and mercy to remit: They both make Precepts, and (according to their piety)
are themselves Examples: They assimulate in the way of Providence; As a father
is master of a Family, and protecteth the least member of it; so does a King
protect his Family, (which is his Country) surrounding it with Fortifications
to prevent all barbarous invasions; which if it cannot be effected by his own
proper charges, it is no more then duty the son should help the father. As no
wise father will destroy his own household; so no right royal King will ruin
his own Country. With bowing reverence I record the words of Jesus Christ, or
what man is there of you whom if his son ask bread will give him a stone? or
if he ask fish will give him a Serpent? This is one perfect rule to know a
Royal King from a disloyal Subject. Honor and obey him in his Laws. He
cannot be a Royal King, that lets a Subject rule him. His royalty consists
in your obedience, or in suppressing your disobedience: in which the King still
appears Royal, and the Subject disloyal.

As it is inhumane, and startles Nature it self to see a son draw weapons
against the father; so it should do in the opposition of a Subject to his
King: And because the Lord would secure him, fore-knowing the wickedness of the
people, (who constantly rebel against their Maker) he gave them this strong
and most infallible Prohibition in these words,

Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. That is, do not
assault the King, nor his Orthodox Divines. This sense is thus expounded. Some
still-standing Neuter will answer me very seemingly honest, He will obey that
Text; heaven defend that he should lift a hand against his Sovereign. But let
me justly inform him, He is as guilty in standing still to see another do it.
He that does no good, (where his ability can maintain it, and the cause require
it) does harm; and he that proceeds not in that good, (having begun it)
goes backwards. He is no honest man that is a coward, and he must needs be a
coward that is a Neuter, (a Iohn-indifferent) who would peaceably live in the
Truth; but in case of necessity, when the cause requires it, he dares not
hazard his life and fortunes for the protection of this Truth, there lies the
cowardice, and (consequently) the dishonesty. Is it not strange a man dares not
wear a sword for fear of being beaten? it has been a cowards policy, who
has lived secure upon the valor of his adversary; and his word is, I hope you
will not strike a disarmed man: he shall never be John for the King I Will warrant
him, therefore I Will leave him.

The Royalty of a King does mightily consist in the loyalty of a Subject: True
Princes will not be injured: The great unquestioned power that made the
Universe, did make a King, but evil Subjects first made him a Tyrant. (A Lion
will not be roughly handled) A Princes anger to a Subject should be received as
wool embraces flint, or any ponderous substance cast upon it. This is my fixed
resolution, Who loves not truly a pious Prince, and such a one is our most
gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, I will scarce believe that he can love
his Maker. If any man be offended with it, let him do his pleasure; as he
uses me, he would do my Master, for whom I Will lay my life down.

Wipe your eyes clear, and I will show you the Jewels which illustrate and
illuminate the Crown of England.
1. THe first you fix your eyes upon, is the Jewel Innocence; so clear, that
Crystal would be a spot in it. The virtue is this, It darkens others eyes, but
can it self receive no blemish; it is no color, but a luster.

2. The next Jewel is Fortitude, a round stone, the virtue lies within; where
if you look you shall see to your thinking the beauty of a glorious creature
crowned, and armed capape with many stout Commanders; the Banners bearing this
Motto in them, Vive le Roy: a stone of most unvalued price, and worth your
seeing.

3. The third Jewel is Patience, a stone that can cure the disease of a whole
Nation, if it be not abused by too much handling.

4. The fourth Jewel is Peace, a Jewel not for every eye to look on, for it
has made some blind; in it self glorious, and of much virtue.

5. The fifth Jewel is Love, a stone very scarce, but in the Diadem, and some
few other Coronets. He that can truly view it, shall find it work upon the
soul; it is the only thing in the earth to cure a man corrupted with idle
jealousies.

6. The sixth Jewel is termed Royal Anger, a stone that shows a clear flame,
yet appears burning and dangerous. It is not to be touched, but discerned at a
distance. As you stand and look on it, it looks flaming; when you kneel, the
fire seems to vanish.

7. The next Jewel to this, is the Jewel Justice; a stone foure-square: you can
stand no way, but it seems to be in your eye, and appears square, which way
soever you turn it. It is a stone so full of glory, many are afraid to look on
it; yet they that have good eyes, may view it freely. Let any Traitor look upon
it, his eyes will presently be bloud-shot: therefore it is called by some, A
touchstone for a Traitor. I would not have a Brownist look on it, for fear of
spoiling his eyes.

8. The eighth and last Jewel is called Mercy, a stone of a most delicious
color, and pleases every eye; It preserves good eyes, and cures sore eyes,
if they be not too dangerous. It contenteth a good nature, but many times makes
a bad one worse. I have now shown you the Treasury of the Regal Diadem: if
these please your eye, next I Will content your ear with a Sonet:

To a Tune composed by W. L.
-- PEace, Peace,
The glory of a Kingdom does
Consist in well agreeing:
Faction is the worm that can ruin straight,
A growing Commonwealth.
Cease, cease,
And jarre no more ye valiant Britains,
Lest you lose your Being:
Turn your weapons against such as daily wait
The ruin of your health.
Think abroad there be foes
That will come when your Drum
Calls for blows,
Who have often misht the jarre
Of an English Civil war.
France and Spain are full of those.
Let the King have his due,
Lest the dangers of Strangers ensue,
Though ye had a Laud and Wren,
Bishops may be honest men,
And preach almost as well as you.
So shall the Commonwealth increase
In wholesome Laws, in Love and Peace,
Which private mutiny would mar:
Deep pierce the wounds of Civill-warre.
Let us embrace with arms stretched wide,
And throw our Iron Coats aside,
They were not made for us to jarre,
Or to contend in Civill-warre.
Let Us bend our weapons against those
Who are proclaimed our Countries foes.
You would forsake these homebred jarres,
Had you but read Pharsalia's wars.
Tho: Jor:

God save the King.
FINIS.

