A PROCLAMATION published by the Lords Justices and Council OF IRELAND, To
annull and make void all Protections unduly granted to the Rebels by certain
Commissioners in diverse Counties in Vlster, etc. contrary to their instructions
and the intention of the State.

Printed at Dublin by William Bladen, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and now reprinted at London for Edward Husbands, 1642.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A Proclamation, Published by the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, to
annull and make void all Protections unduly granted to the Rebels by certain
Commissioners in diverse Counties in Vlster etc. contrary to their Instructions,
and the intention of the State.
W. Parsons, Jo. Borlase.


WHereas in the beginning of this hideous and detestable Rebellion, We the
Lords Justices and Council, desirous, if it might be, to give some sudden stop
thereunto, so to prevent the spreading thereof, and the growth of it to that
height to which it has sithence risen, and conceiving that at that time the
multitude was by evil Council or false rumors, seduced to partake in that
Rebellion, who not knowing the truth and depth of the combination, We did
think, could not so wretchedly fail in their duty and loyalty to their most
gracious King and Sovereign, as so universally to persist in their course of
disobedience to His Majesty's authority, but would with treatable and fair
admonitions, laying before them their great danger and the iniquity of their
enterprise, have returned to their obedience; We therefore on the 27 of
Oetober last authorized diverse persons ot quality and trust for the several
Counties of Down, Antrim, Armagh, Monaghan, Cavan, Tirone, and Fermanagh
(amongst other powers then entrusted with them) to parley with the Rebels, or
any of them, and by Proclamation, or otherwise, to proffer his Majesty's grace
and mercy to them, or any of them, and to receive such of them into his
Majesty's grace and mercy as should submit themselves and desire the same. Yet
We held it fit then to accompany the said Commission with our letters to the
said Commissioners, wherein we signified to them, that although by the said
Commission we gave them that power, yet we did then let them know, that for
those who were chief amongst the Rebels, and Ringleaders of the rest to
disobedience, that we adjudged them less worthy of favor than the others,
whom they had mis guided. And therefore for those principal persons we required
them to take care not to be too forward (without first consulting this Board)
in profering or promising mercy to those, unless they the said Commissioners
saw it of great and unavoidable necessity: which power entrusted by Us with the
said Commissioners was then granted, in respect of the comuncture of affairs at
that tune, and to answer the then sudden extremities in the public service.
And whereas we have now received information that a long time after the said
power entrusted with them, and when the state (...) the Country was far
different from (...) Condition wherein it stood, at the issuing of the said
Commission, and after the general Conspiracy was fully discovered; and that
the Rebels of all degrees and conditions had with hateful and bloody obstinacy
declared their purpose to extirp the British throughout the whole kingdom,
without hope of reconcilement, other then by ye strength of his Majesty's
forces; some of the said Commissioners (notwithstanding the premonition given
them by our said Letters, and without consulting this Board therein) have given
Protections of late to many of ye said Rebels, being principal persons and
Freeholders, which protections are (in sundry respects) found to be a mighty
hindrance to his Majesty's service in those parts, and tending to his Majesty's
loss and disadvantage. And albeit we are informed that those persons so
protected, have by their mis-behaviours since the protections granted to them,
violated the express, or employed conditions of all protections, which besides
the unseasonablenesse of the granting of them, contrary to the intent of our
d^rection in our said Letters, might justly give cause to have those Rebels
immediately fallen upon and cut off. Yet in regard we who are entrusted here by
his Majesty for the government of this his Kingdom and People, are so tender of
his Majesty's honor, as we neither have done, nor will do any thing, that by
any construction, can be interpreted a breach of any word given by Us, or any
other authorized by Us.

We think fit before we proceed to the just correction of those Rebels, hereby
to publish and declare, that all the said Protections granted since the first
of March last to any person or persons whatsoever, in the County of Down, or
other Counties above named, shall at the end of ten days next after the
publishing of this Proclamation at Down-Patrick or Strangford in the said
County of Down, or at any other public place in any of the said Counties
respectively stand vo^d and be annulled, repealed and revoked. And we do
hereby accordingly from and after the said ten days revoke, repeal, make void
and annull them, and every of them, to all intents and purposes, as if they had
never been granted, and do order that from and after the said ten days, they
be of no force, nor derive any benefit, protection or security to any of the
parties to whom they were so granted. And this Proclamation We require the
Sheriff of the County of Down, and the several Sheriffs of the said several
Counties respectively, to cause to be proclaimed and published at Down-Patrick
and Strangford aforesaid, and at some public places in the said several
Counties respectively, that so all persons whom it may concern may take notice
thereof, and that hereafter when by the power and Strength of His Majesty's Army
the said Offenders receive due punishment for their high transgressions, they
may not have any color to pretend the least breach of word in this Seat or
any the Ministers thereof:

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 19 day of August. 1642. La.
Dublin. Ormond Ossory. Cha. Lambert. Ad. Loftus. I. Temple. Tho. Lucas. Ia.
Ware. Rob. Meredith.


FINIS.

