THE SPEECH SPOKEN TO THE Lord General Monck AT GOLDSMITHS-HALL April the
tenth, 1660. By WALTER YOLKNEY.
MY LORD,
WE have layn under Hatches many years,
Enthralled at first with Jealousies and fears:
Since then, th'Indulgence of Pope Oliver
Pardoned all sins did to his Rise refer.
Then Dapper Dicky did succeed his Sire,
A very gentle, proper, ample Squire,
A Man of Wax, that each Fool worked upon:
Fleetonian, or a Lambertonian,
They then prevailing, did prepare a Pack
Of all-together Knaves, walk, What do you lack:
This was the Rumpin, Thumpin, Rumpin RVMP,
To Rhyme to which, my Wits I Am forced to Pump.
The Rump had not sat long, but it began
To stink in th'Nostrils of th'Soulderian.
Wallingford-House gave light to Hewsons Eye,
To find the ready way to Butchery.
The Sultan Lambert's Pride, with paces even,
Traced NOLL in Mr. Sterry's way to Heaven:
He swayed the Officer with Swaddling Clout,
Until Your Excellency gave him the Rout:
You murdered him in point of his Repute,
In that you Vanquished him without Dispute;
That, since (My Lord) You have appeared, the Else
Is A la mort, and may go Hoyle himself.
Thus has our late so famous Government,
Been, by the Teeth of Malice, torn and rent;
Which, to patch up again, the Cobbler comes,
The Botcher, and the Tinker, with their Thumbs:
But your approach dispersed that Rabble Rout,
Banished our Fears, and gave our Hopes no doubt:
So that we see your Word's of greater force,
Than the huge Menaces of Foot or Horse;
That, like Cyneas, you a Conquest gain
Where e're you come, and yet not any slain.
A Civil Garland has Renowned you more,
Than all his Bloody Triumphs did before:
Your Prudence has brought Peace unto our Gates,
And knit the dislocated Joints of States;
That, by instinct, We sensibly do feel
Our Center fixed, that late began to reel.
Religione purer Robe so rent and torn,
Will be made new, and in a sense, Re-born:
The Law so threatened to be Ham-string'd, now
Will find Protection from your awful brow;
And Trading, that long time has Bedridden lain,
Will sprightly grow, and shake its Legs again:
That we, e're long, shall be so innocent,
As not to know what the word PLOT has meant.
Then blame Us not, if that our Joys abound;
What e're Our Reasons are, YOU are the Ground.
London, Printed for John Towers 1660.


