JOYFUL NEVVES For the Citizens of LONDON

From the Princes Fleet at Sea; Wherein is communicated, the The full
particulars of a great Victory obtained, the dispiersing of the Navy, and
beating them into several Harbors; the taking of thirty ships and Frigates,
two hundred pieces of Ordnance, and above four hundred prisoners. The rising of
a new Army in Ireland, for Prince Charles consisting of twenty thousand and
their Declaration and Letter sent to his Highness showing their present
Resolution and Intentions. With the further proceedings of the Prince, and the
Scots, the preparations against England, and the buying of ten thousand Arms
in Holland.



Printed in the year Year, 1649.

JOYFUL NEWS For the Citisens of LONDON FROM The Princes Fleet at Sea;
Wherein is communicated, the great Victory obtained, the full particulars
thereof, the dispiersing of the Navy, and forcing them in to several Harbors,
etc.
SIR,
Upon a late dispute and engagement between the two Navyes at Sea, great was
the resolution and gallantry on both sides; and for the space of many hours the
Victory seemed doubtful; but in the heat of the Conflict, Divine providence
proved a Banner to the Parliaments party, and Fortune so attended their
several motions in their heroic achievements, that they soon became Victors
over their insulting Enemies, and in a short space dispiersed that formidable
Fleet, who for many months have lain raging upon the Neptune Seas, and forbed
the two unfortunate Princes to take sanctuary in Harbors; so that now the
Citisens of London may receive comfort from the Ocean, and the Merchants and
others proceed unanimously in free Trade and Commerce without fear or
molestation; The faciliating whereof, may cause thousands to rejoice, and sing
hallelujah, for the vanquishing of this potent Enemy; it being affirmed, that
since our first engagement with them we have re taken above 30 ships and
prizes, 200 pieces of Ordrance, and at least 400 prisoners. We hear that Prince
Charles upon the 15 instant, with the Prince, and Princess royal about six
of the clock in the morning went to Dort, so far the Queen of Bohemia, brought
him on his way. The 11th of June the Electoresse of Brandenburg, went toward
Cleave, by Vionen, Rhenea The 17th of June, Prince Charles went from Breda
toward Bruxels; where an Earl has order to receive his highness. Therr is a
Col. left in the Hague, who is to buy arms for ten thousand men. There passing
a boat from England to Ostend, with diverse English they were set upon by some
English, who lie there and rove to get booty. The Passengers were in great fear
at which one of them stood up, and said to the Pirates, I have lately broke out
of New gate, being a prisoner for King Charles, and these are all my friends,
therefore do them no harm? at which they cried, Vive la Roy, and bid them pass
there should none of them be touched.

They tell us that come from Edinburgh, that Scotland is quiet, and that the
Parl. has no enemy in arms, in any part of that Kingdom, which is sufficiently
confirmed by the soldiers beginning to be unruly and unseparable concomitant
to idleness, which has been complained of by the Parl, and Ministers, which
occasioned the Genesis Excellency, the E. of Levin, write to the Liev. Genesis that
there might be a meeting of all the chief officers, for redress or all
grievances, and for ordering matters, so that nothing might obstruct the work
in hand: the particular which fercht in this Gen, was that there were English
Cavaliers scattered up and down in the army, some whereof had entertainment,
others shelter which actions it were necessary to remove, and retain only those
who of them were honest Covenanters. There is displeasure taken, that letters
between Newcastle and this place going for Scotland, were intercepted and
opened, which is likely to procure the like, and is already threatened;
displeasure is apt to catch: Dr. Sibbald the Physician, is discharged of his
imprisonmen. upon the Fine of 500. Scotch marks, he says let them take what
they will, he will not recant his paper, and will rather choose to suffer the
most ignominious death at the openest plece in Edinburgh.

The Gent. that brought the letter from Parl. of England, of having neither
countenance nor answer, nor is like to have if the deportment be evidence of
respect to this nation, there is little if an answer should be returned, as it is
unlikely, or not like to be sudden, it will be sent in all probability by
messengers of their own.

The Commis. are at last returned from their declared King and landed at
Kirkaldy: the pure Royalists say that there is no agreement brought (whether
with joy or sorrow these expressions are made appear not the Sages and knowing
Divines seem cheerful and express that Scotland has cause to bless God for
the great condiscention or so much compliance in their King, and this seems to
be the more probable; yer some begin to think it may now be in their power to
act or speak at least in favor of their friends in England.

Berwick the 18 June 1649.
SIR,
THE Lord Louthian, and the rest of the Commissioners are returned from the
young King, with a message and answer to the Proposals and Desires of the
Parliament; wherein he declares, That he is willing to give his Condescensions
to those things, which may stand with his honor and safety, and the liberty
and freedom of his people, but does wholly decline the taking of the Covenant,
or to grant to what they last delivered in, saying, That for the establishing
of the Presbyterian Government, the granting of a general Act of Oblivion, and
the composing of all differences whatsoever unhappily sown and sprun up amongst
his people, he will give his Royal assent thereunto and therefore requires
them to hearken to him, and not to proceed no further in contest, He being
assured, that he had friends enough amongst them, that would join with him, and
endeavor the sacrificing of all that was near and deer unto them, for his just
restitution, in restoring of him to his Throne and Dignity.

After which, his Highness had a conference with the Lords of his privy
Council, wherein he further remonstrated, That he conceived it requisite to
decline sending over any forces into Scotland, until such time that the result
of the Parliament was known touching his last Answer and Condescensions and not
to hazard an engagement with the Parliament of England and the Army, under the
conduct of the Lord General Fairfax and Lieut. Genesis Crumwell, till the next
Spring

At which Conference most of the Nobility seemed to rescent the same with great
alacrity, declaring, That they did very well aprove of his Highnesses motion,
and that it would prove very prejudicial to the advancement of his Cause, if
they should engage before he be both powerful and potent.

But indeed there is little probability of faciliating that Design; for we hear
that their displaying of the Royal game at Sea has quite broken the neck of
their design at land, and that upon their losing of so many brave ships and
prizes, many hundreds ashore have wholly deserted, and in stead of becoming
masters at Sea, and become the slaves thereof; insomuch, that the coast is
clear, and commerce free for the Citisens of London, which otherwise might have
been obstructed.

Berwick 15. June. 1649.
Postscript.
Sir, Since the receipt of the last message from the young King, to the
Parliament, in answer to their former Proposals and Desires, much time has
been spent in debate thereof, and after some Result thereupon, voted, That the
said Concessions are unsatisfactory, and (in paat) very destructive and
prejudicial to the peace of that Kingdom. The General Officers both of Horse
and Foot, and the major part of the Soldiery, of the Scottish Army, have
declared, That they will in no ways comply with the Royal party, for the
establishing of Charles the second, until such time that he has given full
satisfaction to all interests whatsoever, in reference to the safety and
preservation of their just Rights and Liberties; and to that end are resolved,
to keep a fair correspondency with the Parliament and Army of England, for the
prevention of future misery, and suppressing of all insurrections. Some of the
Scots horse are advanced toward the borders of England, for the inlargment of
their quarters, and easing the oppressed of that Nation.

Yours, etc:

There is news from Ulster of special note but the report goes several ways,
which for more certanity a way is taking, some say 20000 have met together and
declared for Ormond, others that they have reneued the Covenant, and upon a
Declaration, showing upon what terms, they will join with Scotland or Ormond;
and have agreed that a letter be sent to their King, telling him if he content
not the Scots Kingdom, he is likely to lose Ireland. From the premises where no
doubt there is a vein runs through those Island of the same metle, wherein, no
doubt there is brimstone or Sulpher Plenty.

Sir, Those who come accidentally out of Ireland for no letters are come from
Dublin speak with confidence, that Owen Roe Oneal is joined wit some 500. Col.
Monk had, and they are come from Dun^alk toward Dublin; to join with Col.
Jones and jointly to take the field against Ormond who is still buried with
taking little Garrisons: wherein he is not long. The inclination of the
Soldiery, being so great as to be courted out of them, and perticlarly that of
Donade not many miles from Dublin, is delixered up by Major Smith as the
reporter says.

Chester June 18. 1649.
FINIS.

