RULES, ORDERS, and directions, appointed by his MAJESTY'S COMMISSIONERS for
EXECUTING the Act of SETTLEMENT And the Act of EXPLANATION OF the same, to be
observed by all persons concerned before them.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



DUBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
1666.

Rules, Orders and Directions appointed by his Majesty's Commissioners for
Executing the Act of Settlement and the Act of Explanation of the same, to be
observed by all persons concerned before them.
I ALL Adventurers, and Soldiers, and Protestant purchasors in Connaught, and
Clare, and other persons claiming any Lands, or Tenements by virtue of the said
Act of Settlement, or of the Explanatory Act (other then persons already
adjudged or restored) shall put in their petitions or Schedules into the
Registry of the said Commissioners within Thirty days after the date hereof,
The said Petitions to be under the hand and Seal of the party claiming or
under the hand and Seal of some Agent authorized by them, and signed also by
one of the Attournies of this Court hereafter named.

II. Every one so claiming shall in their said Petition or a Schedule
distinctly express what Lands they or those from whom they claim were possessed
of upon the 7th of May 1659. with the County and Barony where the same do lie,
and also the denominations of the said lands and the quantity of Acres
profitable and unprofitable according to the Down Survey, where the said Down
Survey has been taken, And where the Down Survey has not been taken, then by
the Survey taken in the Earl of Straffords time, and if it be not within that
Survey, then by some other Survey according to the directions in the said
Explanatory Act page the 10th, And where no Survey has been taken, then the
said lands are to be described by the most apt and known Denominations both
English and Irish that may be.

III. Every one Claiming as aforesaid, shall likewise in his Petition or
Schedule set forth what lands they have lost or been removed from since the
said 7th of May 1659. whether by decree of the Court of Claims or otherwise,
and to whom the same is decreed, or restored, and what estate therein is
decreed away, whether for life, or in remainder in Fee or for years.

IV Every one so claiming shall likewise in his Petition or Schedule, express
distinctly what encumbrances the land he is now possessed of is liable unto, and
to whom, and when, and by what Court the same were allowed or decreed, and for
the receiving and entering the said Petitions and Schedules no Fee is to be paid
unto the Register.

V Every Adventurer shall likewise set forth the name of the original
Adventurer from whom he claims, and the sum of money that was paid, and shall
likewise distinguish what lands he had set forth upon the doubling Ordinance,
and if the lands were set out promiscuously with other lands, then they do
express what money was lent upon the said doubling Ordinance.

VI. Every Soldier likewise to set forth in whose right, and for whose service
the land he claims was first set out.

VII. Every Petition and Schedule after it has been entered, and marked by the
Register shall be transmitted to our Sub-commissioners hereafter named, who are
to examine, and compare the same as well with the decrees formerly made (as to
such lands, which have been decreed away) as also with the Records remaining in
the Surveyor Generals Office, where it shall be necessary, and to return them
back into the Registry with their examination, and with the stating of the
Quit-rents due thereupon to his Majesty, After which the Commissioners will
appoint convenient times for the final hearing and adjudication of the same.

VIII. If any Adventurer, Soldier, or Connaght purchasor or other person who
by the Act is to enjoy two third parts of what he was possessed of the 7th of May
1659, is now possessed of less then his due proportion, and yet shall desire to
take out his Certificate for what he is: now possessed of, The Commissioners will
proceed to hear his claim for so much as he is in possession of, and to state
his deficiency for so much more, as shell by the Rules of the Act be due unto
him, in order to his future reprizal and satisfaction.

IX. If any Adventurer or Soldier etc. have more in his possession then his
two thirds, he is to make his Election in his said petition or schedule, of
what third part he will quit, observing therein the Rules of the said
Explanatory Act page the 11th and 12th.

X. If any Adventurer, Soldier etc. having as aforesaid more land in his
possession then his two thirds, have any deficiencies or other interest
allowable by the said Act to place upon his overplus; that he do express, and
mention the same in his petition, and if he have none now ready, he shall if he
desire the same in his petition have the preference for three months after the
putting in the same, for placing any such deficiencies, or other allowed
interest upon the overplus now in his possession, And if in three months he do
not procure any, and give public notice thereof to the Commissioners, That
then the Commissioners will proceed to dispose of the said overplus to the uses
to which by the Act they are appointed, Nevertheless the said Adventures,
Soldiers etc. having overplus as aforesaid shall be at their liberty to take
out their certificates immediately for the two thirds they shall elect to keep,
if they shall desire so to do.

XI. Adventurer, Soldier etc. who by decree of the Court of Claims or
otherwise have lost any lands for life, or in remainder shall in their
petitions make their election according to the rules mentioned in the said
explanatory Act page 23, and 24.

XII. Adventurer, Soldier etc. being possessed of any Estate where the
proprietor has been decreed inoncent but left to the Law for recovery of his
Estate, are likewise to make their election in their petitions if conveniently
they can, or otherwise within three months after the first sitting of the
Commissioners at the farthest, whether they will stand the Trial at Law, or
quitt the land, and have recourse to their proportionable satisfaction,
according to the rules of the said explanatory Act page 54, and 55.

XIII. The trustees for the Officers who served His Majesty or his Royal
Father of Blessed Memory before the 5th of June 1649, shall forthwith deliver
unto the said Commissioners a list in writing containing the names of all such
Officers, who they conceive are to be Post-poned, and likewise of all those
whose arreares are to be retrench't by virtue of an Order made by the Lord
Lieutenant and Council bearing date the 12th day of January 1663, reducing
those Officers under the several titles and qualifications mentioned in the
said Order, to the end that due and public notice may be given to all persons
concerned therein to show cause (if they can) why their respective arreares
should not be retrenched accordingly.

XIV. The said Trustees shall likewise within thirty days deliver unto the
said Commissioners in writing a true Account of the valluations of their
security, as the same has been returned unto them, within the several
Counties, Cities, Towns and of the Mile line, respectively where the same does
lie. And also of all such encumbrances, and rights of Redemption as they have
yet discovered, and which are by the said Acts part of the security of the said
Officers.

XV. That such of the Right Reverend Fathers in God the Bishops who by the said
Act of Settlement are to have augmentations in Right of their Sees do also
within thirty days deliver into the Commissioners a schedule of such lands as
they are already possessed of in Custodium, or by Patent or otherwise in Order to
their said augmentations, with the yearly value of the same, that what is
wanting may according to the rules of the said Act, and of the explanatory Act
be supplied unto them, and the overplus (if any be) may be retrench't.

XVI. And the said Right Reverend the Bishops are desired as soon as
conveniently they can to certify unto the Commissioners what Parishes within
their respective Diocesses have less then Ten Acres of Gleabe, to the end care
may be taken therein for their supply, in which case nevertheless Parishes that
have been united by virtue of an Act Entitled, An Act for real union of
Parishes are to be esteemed but as one Parish.

XVII. The 54 persons commonly called the Nominees and mentioned in the 101 and
102 pages of the explanatory Act are desired within thirty days if
conveniently they can, or otherwise at farthest within two months to deliver in
writing unto the Commissioners, the Denominations and quantity of Acres of such
lands, and Capital Message or Castle, or ancient Seat (if any such there be)
which they shall elect to be restored unto, by virtue of the said Clauses
relating unto them, and in whose possession the same now are, and in what
County and Barony the same do lie.

XVIII. Where any person by color of any Decree in the late Court of Claims
has entered upon more land then did Rightfully belong unto him, and was in his
possession the 22th of October 1641. (unless the land were particularly expressed
in some clause of the said Act of Settlement) that he discover the same, unto
the Commissioners and surrender up the land so entered upon, within three months
at the farthest after their first sitting according to the rules, and under the
penalties contained in the said explanatory Act page. 50. and 51.

XIX. Those who have been restored to any land by virtue of his Majesty's
Letters, and have not since had any Adjudication of innocence, are likewise
within thirty days to deliver in a schedule to the Commissioners of what lands
they so enjoy with the quantities and Denominations thereof, and if they are so
possessed of more then two thousand Acres they are to make their election, what
part they will retain, provided the same did rightfully belong unto them on the
22th of October 1641. And do not exceed 2000. Acres as aforesaid, that so they
may be proceeded with according to the rules of the Act page 107.

XX. All such persons who have been adjudged innocent Papists by the late Court
of claims, and have not yet taken out their Decrees, are forthwirh to apply
themselves to the taking out their said Decree, so as the said Decrees be taken
out at the farthest within three months after the first sitting of the
Commissioners at their peril, expressed in the Act page 51.

XXI. And whereas the Earl of Inchequin, the Earl of Clancarty; Theobald
Purcell Esquire Dudley Bagnall Esquire Henry Bagnall and Katherine Corbett are
particularly mentioned in the said Act of Settlement to be restored to their
former Estates without any previous reprizall, and yet have hitherto neglected
to take out their Decrees from the Commissioners, whereby it cannot appear what
Estate they were possessed of in 1641, nor what satisfaction is or ought to be
given to such Adventurers or Soldiers or other persons as have been dispossessed
by their said restitution, for which reasons they are by name required by the
explanatory Act to take out their Decrees within such time as the Commissioners
shall appoint, the said Commissioners do think fit and accordingly do hereby
appoint the time of two months from the date hereof shall be the time for the
said Earl of Inchequin, Earl of Clancarty, Theobald Purcell, Dudley Bagnall,
Henry Bagnall, and Katherine Corbett, and also for Christopher Eustace, and
Sir. Andrew Aylmer of Dounada in the County of Kildare Knight, and Baronet
(being in the same condition) to prove their possession and right on the 22th
of October 1641. and to take out their respective Decrees under the penalties
mentioned in the said explanatory Act page 50.

XXII. All such persons as claim any new estate by virtue of any particular
provisoe in either of the said Acts, or by virtue of any grant or Patent
mentioned in, or confirmed by either of the said Acts, are likewise within
Thirty days after the date hereof to put in to the Registers, a Petition or
schedule expressing the date of their said Patents or grants, with the
particulars of the lands which they claim thereby, with the Denominations and
quantity of Acres as before, and the names of the persons in whose possession
the said lands now are, as far as they know the same, to the end the same may
be proceeded upon accordingly. And those who are by the Rules of the Act to
part with a third, are to make their Election according to the directions page
127.

XXIII. Whereas the Earl of Clanrichard, The Countess Dowager of Barrimore, Sir
Allexander Keith, and others mentioned in the 68 and 69 pages, and other places
of the explanatory Act are to have their Arrears stated by the Commissioners,
they are hereby required to be ready within thirty days after the date hereof,
with their Accounts and certificates relating unto their service, for which
their Arrears are to be stated as aforesaid.

XXIV. The Register shall keep an Alphabeticall Table of all claymants or
Petitioners before the said Commissioners with the day that their Petition or
schedule was delivered in, and the Attournies name signing the same, which
Table shall be hung up publicly in the Court that reference may the more
speedily be had upon all occasions to the Petition.

XXV. No Petition or claim shall come to an Adjudication, till the name of the
Claymant and the day appointed for hearing the same, have been publicly set
up in the Court, for the space of fourteen days at the least.

XXVI. No man shall change his Attorney after he has retained him, but by
motion in open Court.

XXVII. Where several persons do claim the same lands, he that first brings
his claim to Trial, shall give timely notice to the Attorney of the other.

XXVIII. None are to be admitted to practice in this Court as Counselors, but
such as are admitted in the four Courts of Dublin.

XXXIX. All Attournies of this Court are strictly enjoined to give constant
attendance on Court days upon pain of forfeiture of their employment, except
in cases of sickness, or License by the Court.

XXX. That no Register, Subcommissioner, Attorney or other Officer of this
Court during the time he shall continue in this employment do by himself or
others to his use, directly or indirectly purchase any of the lands, or
Tenements which shall fall under the Adjudication of the Commissioners by
virtue of either of the said Acts, in pursuance of what is required of them
page the 54 of the Act of Settlement.

XXXI. As to all Cases where the proof of the possession the 7th of May 1659,
or of the possession the 22th of October 1641, is required that the same be
made in open Court viva voce at the time of hearing, and so in all other cases
where witnesses are necessary, except where particular Order shall be given to
the contrary.

XXXII. Where Affidavits are necessary, no Council shall move upon them till
they are filed.

XXXIII. Where any particular Order has been granted in any case no Council
to move upon or against the said Order without producing a Copy thereof.

XXXIV. The Register shall set up publicly in the Court a Table of the names
of all the sworn Officers of the Court and of their respective Fees.

XXXV. No person unless the Clerks belonging to the Registry or other sworn
Officers of the Court shall come into the Office of the Registry unless it be
in presence of one or more of the Commissioners.

XXXVI. Walter Welsh, Walter Scudamore, Robert Pugh, John Barbor, George
Millner, Thomas Heron, John Hughes, John Brampton, John Moland, Robert Pain,
George Rider, George Lambert, John Humphreyes, John Darbisheire, William
Cooper, Edward Go^wyn, Samuel Bull, John Coghlan, Skarning Philips, Lominick
Dean, Samuel Mosely, are sworn and appointed Attournies and hereby authorized
to practice before the said Commissioners.

XXXVII. Thomas Tailor, Thomas Syms, John Burniston, and John Petty Gentlemen,
are hereby appointed Sub-Commissioners.

XXXVIII. And whereas several Periods mentioned in the said explanatory Act
are to begin and commence from the first day of the sitting of the
Commissioners for the Execution of the said Act, the first day of their sitting
in Execution of the said Act is hereby declared to be Thursday the fourth day
of January 1665, from which day all the said Periods limited as aforesaid are
to begin, and all persons concerned therein are to take notice thereof
accordingly.

These Rules, Orders, and Directions and such further Rules, and Orders as
shall hereafter be given and appointed by the said Commissioners for the better
and more speedy Execution of the said Acts, are to be observed by all
Counselors at Law, Attournies and Officers of the said Court and all other
persons concerned therein respectively.

Dated at the Kings Inns Dublin January 5, 1665 Signed and published by Order
of His Majesty's Commissioners. George Philips, John Jeffreys.


FINIS.

