Joyful and Happy News FROM IREDAND Being an exact relation of a great Victory
obtained against the grand Army of the Rebels, on Tuesday Feb. 7. 1642. at a
Town called by the name of Roscolleth, near Longford.

In which battle there were slain above 2500. of the Rebels, and but 3. of
the English, only many wounded.

The names of the English Commanders were these: Sir Rich. Greenvill, Cor.
Emely. Lieuten. Cor. Sherlock, Lieuten. Cor. Gibs, Ser. Maj. Shirman, Ser. Maj.
Ashkey, etc.

The names of the Irish Commanders. Ser. Maj. Preston, Cor. Fits Gerrat, Cor.
More, Cor. Tirrell, Cor. Philip Onelly, and Lord Trimnelstowne.

The names of the Irish Commanders that were slain in the battle. Coronel
Plunket, Captain Brian, Sir Tho. Nugent, Captain John Nugen, Cap. Adascalle, a
Parliament man. Cap. Roger Davies, with eleven Colors, and many Prisoners.

LONDON, Printed for Edw. Blackmore. 1643.

A Relation of a great Victory obtaind by Sir RICHARD GREENVIL. Against the
Irish Rebels, on Tuesday the seventh of February.
BY command of the Lord Marquis of Ormond, certain forces of both horse were
foot unto were sent unto Trim for the relief of Athlone, with a direction
unto Sir Richard Greenvile to have the chief command thereof, which forces
arived at Trim on Thursday the 26. of Ian. on Friday morning then following Sir
Richard marched thence toward Athloane, about 900. foot, which Sir John
Shirlog Commanded, and also 200. horse which Captain Vaughan (since Knighted)
Commanded, and that night all lodged at Athbay. Saturday the 28. being come
nigh Ballinacurre a very strong pass, we found the enemy possessing it with
300. hundred men, having there cut off the bridge, whereat Sir Richard
commanded certain dragoners to force that, and also sent a party of horse to
second them, which the enemy opposed, until some of the horse found a place
there by, where they leapt over a deep ditch of water which put them all to
flight over a bog, in which escape diverse of the Rebels were slain, and as it
was said also one of their Commanders.

Sunday the 29. marching forwards four of our horse scouts espied four of the
Rebels scouts on the top or a hill before them, who seeing; our scouts hasting
toward them withstood them (being Country Gentlemen) of good quality, and
being but four to four they encountered each other fairly with their swords,
until one of the Rebels had both given and received a wound, and was seized on
by one of our scouts, whereat the rest being very well mounted escaped away,
leaving their consort to be slain in the place, and being come nigh Tubbertorne
where we lodged that night, some of our horse took a Gentlewoman of good
quality who stood on ^ hill thereby guarded with some Musketeers. Monday the
30. Being come nigh and within five miles of Athloane, we took one Mr.
Richard Dillon prisoner, who informed Sir Richard, that Collonell Preston was
sending all the Forces he could make to hinder our coming at Athlone, therefore
wished us to make all the haste thither we could presently thereon a horseman
of our forlorn-hope came back and informed Sir Richard that 7. Colors of the
Enemies were marching toward us, Sr. Richard then presently commanded forth
some of his Horse to second the four Troops which that interim charged the
Enemy, who retreated to a Bog, where most of them might have been cut off, had
not the care of the safe conduct of the provisions appointed for the relief of
Athlone care forbidden it, that night we came all safe to Athlone, where we
all staid the next day following.

Wednesday 31. Sir Richard sent all our Horse and Foot to quarter at Kilkennie,
west 4. miles thence, until such time as 300. of the Lord Kanelaghs, and 300.
of Sir Michael Ernelies Regiment might he drawn thither from their out
Garrisons to march back with us, and when our Horse approached nigh to
Kilkennie, they discovered that it was strongly manned by Sir James Dillons
Forces, Captain Mr. Thomas his Troops, and Collonell Farrals Regiment of the
County of Longford, whereat Captain Vaughan with some of the Horse fell into
their quarters, and killed a Captain and some other of their Officers, and also
about 50. of their soldiers, and took many of their Officers, and also about
quarters until Satturday, at which, on the 4. of Feb. we all quartered at and
about a place called the Mote, at which time the 600. expected, were lodged
with us, where Captain Vaughan found in his quarters, an Englishmans wife, and
understood the general report of the Country was, that the Irish had gathered
all the Forces they could get together, and were confident to compass us in on
every side, and to cut us off, resolving, and vowing not to leave a man of us
alive, saying also that if we should get that victory the heart of their wars
would be broken, for that it was an ancient Prophecy much talked of among the
Irish, that that side that should win the Battle at Rathconnell, should be
conquerors of the Kingdom, it being a tradition superstitiously held by the
native Irish; On Monday the 5. we marched toward Trim, meeting no oppsition
but foul weather, and ways, which greatly disheartened the soldiers, and
killed diverse of them, in which time we took several of the Country People,
who all confirmed the former reports of the Enemies Forces and intentions, Sir
Richard notwithstanding said he was resolved not to shun a foot of his way
were the Enemy never so strong; Tuesday the 7. proceeding on the march, we
understood of diverse Troops of Horse and foot that daily had followed our
Rear, which then was guarded by a Troop of Horse commanded by Lieutenant
Hatcher, who charged certain Forces of the Enemy which were advanced somewhat
nigh him, and then cut off about 20. of them, afterward about 11. of the
Clock the same day, being come nigh Mollislingar, we took a prisoner, who told
us the Irish Forces possessed our Pass at Rathconnell, being very strong in
numbers of men, and the prime officers and gentry of the Country, whereupon
Sir Rich. hastened the advance of his Forces, and being come nigh in view of
the Pass, perceived it to be very narrow, and that it was cut off by a broad
and deep trench, being compassed in on each side with great bogs, and having
adjoining unto it on a very steep hill a very strong castle, and diverse other
works well manned, by which there appearee no passage either for horse or foot,
then did Sir Rich. draw all his forces into battle order before, which
consisted of a forlorn hope of 50. Musketeers, commanded by Lievten. Dikes,
and 2. wings of 60. shot more, commanded by two Ensigns (one of them a coward)
the forlorn hope being seconded with a division of 200. Musketeers, which was
commanded by Sir John Sheirlege, which the vanguard of our little Army,
whereof the first division was led by Cap. Varney, and Lieuten. Oliver, and the
second division of it by Lieuten. Williams, and also the third division by
Sergeant Major Morris, the rest of the Forces consisted of 3. divisions of
Pikes, flankt with shot, which served for the battle of the Anmie, each
containing about 300. men, whereof the first was led by Cap. Honiwood, the
second by Major Shipman, the third by Sir Mich. Ernely, after which followed
another division of 200, Musketeers, commanded by Major Fortescue, which was
for the reare-guard, which rear was guarded by a forlorn hope of 50,
Musketeers: likewise those foot were flankt with three divisions of Horse,
whereof Capt. Vanghan commanded the Vanguard, Lieuten. Rogers the battle, and
Lieuten. Hatcher the reard-guard. Likewise before the Vanguard of the Foot
marched the Lo: Ranelagh, leading a troop of Volunteers, likewise for the
forlorn hope of the Rear, Cap. Pate commanded 40. Dragooners, which were also
assisted with 20. firelocks. Which done, and not only having a strong enemy
before us of above 2000. foot and 6. horse-troops, and others at least 600. on
our right hand, and 600. more at a distance on our left, (upon the bogs of
Langford men, not far off from which were hasting up to second them 800. of the
Reilies) then unknown to us there was waiting upon our rear 500. more, which
then newly possest-Mellingar, half a mile behind us, to hinder our retreat,
then for to begin the play, the forlorn hope 50 shot, advanced on right
toward the pass, did the left wing of shot to flank that, the right wing
staying behind contrary to command, whose ground notwithstanding was made good
by others, those together being advanced as far as they could, were seconded by
several divisions drawn out of the vanguard, which also disputing it with the
enemy, without any apparent good success, Sir Rich. was enforced before the
front of the rest of the Forces to say, there was no other remedy now, but that
we must resolve to carry it or dye, because he saw great numbers or men
approaching toward our right hand, and also our left, which if they should
come to join with those before us, would be too strong for us. Therefore now of
necessity all must use their best endeavor through the Pass upon the enemy,
and by doing of it resolutely, there was no doubt of good success. Whereunto
all men seemed very willing, and so accordingly the 3. divisions of the battle
advanced cheerfully with their colors, flying to force the way, Sir Rich.
keepi^k upon reserve 250. Musketeers, which 3. last divisions being come at
push of pike, with the Rebels that defended the Pass, and Sir Mich. Erneley
espying the advance of the Longford men on our left hand, marched toward them,
and they presently received a charge by the horse that Bryan commanded, which
by our shot was repulst, and Bryan himself shot dead, and that gave a stop to
the Longford men, in the interim of the conflict many of the Forces from off
the Castle were running speedily to charge our right wing of shot, which Sir
Rich. repulst by sending against them more shot, from out of his last reserve,
which sudden fury being stopped, and the service continuing violent on all sides
for two hours together, with doubtful success, Sir Rich. sent forth all the
remainder of the foot to assist those at the Pass, during which skirmish Lieu.
Rogers did at several times very earnestly desire Sir Rich. to give him leave
to attempt to force a way through that Pass with the Horse that he commanded,
whereto at last Sir Rich. gave him leave, who hastened to find a way, and being
come at the bank and ditch of the Pass, found no possible means there of
getting through, at which time Major Morris called unto him, saying, he had
found a place for his horse to pass through, then that troop hastened on to
it, Edward Roscarroh of the said troop first rid through, the Lieuten. and the
rest of the troop closely following them, and being got over, the forlorn
troop led by Bru Dicksey followed them, and then presently did those of our
horse charge the enemies horse that were before them, who being unwilling to
stand the shock, began all to run away, in the pursuit whereof Lieuten. Rogers
with the troop he commanded chanced to follow a troop, in whose rear was taken
prisoner Coronel Anthony Preston, eldest son of their General Preston, and
also there was slain many of the said troop, and the same time Corporal
Picksey commanding the forlorn hopes, pursued another horse troop, killed many
of them, and found the dead body of Cap. Brian, who was lately run from Sir
Tho. Lucas troop, whose head was brought away, our foot having been at least
two hours before at handiblows, and throwing stones, our men with one accord
cheerfully came on upon those that manned the trenthes, and made them run away.

Which sudden change drew after them all the rest of their Forces, and being
possessed of their works and hill, Sir Richard gave charge to Sr. John Sherlocke
that he with all convenient speed should draw his men together in good order
upon that ground, and furnish all his men with Ammunition, while he himself
with the Horse pursued the Longford men, in which pursuit it happened that
Captain Vaughan with a part of those Horse taking another way, was guided by
noble Sr. Charles Coote that way ward that the Enemy escaped, and at last
overtooke the greatest part of them, and there slew as is by all believed at
least 200. of them, so that we verily believe there was slain in all about a
2500. during which pursuit our Foot remained about the adjoining Gastle,
searching as they usually do all holes, found in the Castle 8. Ensigns of the
Rebels, also Captain Betagh, Captain Bardall, Lieutenant Elmore, and about 6.
soldiers, and 3. other of their Ensigns were found abroad among dead bodies,
in conflict of our men was slain but only 3. soldiers and about 20. Officers
and soldiers hurt, whereof Sergeant Major Shipman, who showed himself a very
valliant soldier, was one of the chief that was hurt.

The Battle being ended, our Forces marched thence to Masistown, and in the
field before the Forces were drawn into their quarters, Sir Richard caused a
Minister in the head of all the Army publicly to give God thanks every man
kne^ling for the victory, publicly saying that it was the work of God and not
of man, which every man seemed thankfully to acknowledge, and this night we
understood that there was slame in the fight, Coronell Patrick Plinket, Cap:
Bryan, Sir Tho: Nugents only son and heir, Cap: John Nugent of Balinscarrie,
Captain Adan Cusake a Parl. Man, Cap Marcus Geohagan, Cap: Roger Darcyes.

Also the names of the enemies Commanders that were present at the Battle are
these, Ser. Major. Genesis John Preston Col: Anthony Preston, Coronel M. Tho: fits
Gerrat, Cor. Piers fits Gerrats, Sir Luke fits Gerrat, Cor: Roger O Moore, Cor:
Tirrell, Cor: Walter Nugent, Cor: Phill. O Reyley, Cor: Francis Farrall, Cor:
Brian Farrall, Sir Tho: Nagent, Tho: Trimnelstowne, etc.

That night Sir Richard Greenvile in giving out his orders for the watch, gave
for the watch word Revenge, and also for the field word Justice, which was
correspondent to Gods blessing in the victory. ^n Wednesday the 8. we lodged at
Martinstowne. Thurs the 9. all our forces quartered in and about Trim, from
whenc they marched the next day unto their former garrisons.

The names of the superior officers we had present in these conflicts are Sir
Richard Greenvile, Coronell Sir Mich: Ernely, Leivt: Cor: Sir John Shirlocke;
Lieut. Cor: Gibbs, Ser: Major, Sir Abraham Shipman, Ser: Major Ashkey, Ser:
Major Morris, Ser: Major Fortesene, Cap: Hunnywood, Cap: Lucas, Cap: Varney,
Cap: Sands, Cap: Loftus, Cap: Nichols, Cap: Palmer, Sir William Brouchrost,
Cap: Vaughan, Leiutenant Rogers, Leuit: Hatcher, and for Dragoners Cap: Pate,
all which officers did excellently perform their duties, as did also all the
inferior Officers, excepting only Ancient Lake. Gloria Deo.

FINIS.

