AN ACT For Continuing the Statute for An Additional EXCISE Upon Beer, Ale, and
other Liquors.

W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEIN TIENDRAI

DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

An Act for Continuing the Statute for An Additional Excise upon Beer, Ale, and
other Liquors. CHAP. XXIII.
WHEREAS in this present Session of Parliament there was an Act Established and
Enacted by Authority of the said Parliament, That from and after the Three and
Twentieth Day of October, in this present Year of Our Lord, One Thousand, Six
Hundred, Ninety Five, there shall be throughout this Your Majesty's Kingdom of
Ireland, Raised, Levied, Collected, and paid unto Your Majesty, during the
space of one Year from the said Twenty Third of October, and no longer, for
Beer, Ale, and other Liquors in the said Act Expressed, by way of Excise (over
and above all other Duties, Charges and Impositions formerly Set and Imposed)
the Excise and Duties in the said Act. Set and Imposed, as by the said Act,
amongst other things therein Contained more at large it does and may appear.

And whereas the said Act may not fully Answer the Ends, therein Designed
toward the Defraying the Necessary Charges of the Public, We Your Majesty's
Most Humble and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, taking into Our Serious Considerations the Weighty and Pressing
Occasions which at this time Require a further Supply of Money, in a Most
Dutiful Acknowledgment of Your Majesty's great Goodness, Expressed in Your
Tender Care of the Welfare of Us your People, Do humbly present Your Majesty
with a further Supply, by way of Additional Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale, and
other Liquors; And do Most Humbly Beseech Your Majesty that it may be Enacted.
And be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That the said Act, and
Every Clause, Article, Provision, Thing and Things in the same Specified or
Contained, and the Duties therein mentioned, be, and are hereby Continued and
made payable in manner as in the said Act. is Specified, until the Twenty
Fifth Day of December, which shall be in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand,
Six Hundred, Ninety Eight.

FINIS.

