IGNATIUS HIS PROPHECY Concerning these Times.

Sent from France where it was prophesied 159. into England and found in the
Abbey of St Benedict near the City of Norwich in Norfolk.

Containing the Praedivination concerning the various Distempe^s and Divisions
of this Kingdom, which was in this Prophecy praedictated, and now perfectly
fulfilled.

Expressing likewise every thing that should succeed between the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, unto King Charles now Reigning, concerning the Crown and
Royal Empire.



LONDON, Printed for JOHN GREENSMITH, 1642.

IGNATIUS HIS PROPHECY Concerning these Times.
THe Inundation of Heresy which is harb^red in the breasts of the Schismatics
in our days deserve a second Cicero to exclaim against the same. But the
praeposterous tumult in our Age requires not only a Prophet, to praedictate
the subsequent verity, and predetermination of the errors which we are fallen
in, but also to elevate us from that sinck of impiety wherein we are now fallen.

As for that Prophecy, which I am at this time to describe, it is apparently
demonstrated what should follow in after times, and now it is most truly
perfected, and really come to pass, all that was prophesied. Prophecy is the
key of heaven, that opens the mystical door of those secrets, which none but
God himself has praedestinated. Prophecy is the To^er of humane knowledge,
that defends mortality, and preserves Kingdoms from destructive ruin
Pr^phecy is a divine inspiration, that discloseth the mystery of heavenly
things, determined to be acted on earth, suggested by the divine providence of
God. When the prophet Jonah related the prophecy of God to the City of Nineve,
it repented, and God turned away the indignation of his spirit, and his
predetermined resolution. And would to God this famous and tenowned City would
exactly consider this prophecy which is here mentioned: most part whereof is
already fullfilled, and therefore I am more suspicious, that all the subsequent
will likewise hereaf^er come to pass. My resolution was once fully intended to
make an apparent exposition of the same: but now my resolution is altered, in
respect that some things are intended of persons, being of higher Majesty, and
greater Dignity, then I dare presume to gaze upon: wherefore I will commend the
mythologie, and apologization thereof to the Censure of better judgments.

The Prophecy.
IF Eighty eight be past, then thrive
Thou may, till thirty four, or five.
After the E is dead, a Scot
Shall govern there: and if a plot
prevent him not, sure then his sway
Continue shall till many a day.
The ninth shall dye young, and the first
perhaps shall reign: but (oh) accursed
Shall be the time, when thou shall see
To sixteen joined twenty three;
For then the Eagle should have help
By Craft to catch the Lions whelpe,
And hurt him sore; except the same
Be cured by the Maidens name.
In July month of the same year
Saturn conjoynes with Jupiter.
perhaps false prophets shall arise,
And Mahomet shall show his prize.
And sure much alteration
Shall happen in Religion.
Believe this truly, if then you see.
A Spanyard a Protestant to bee^
The lines (I confess impartially) are very mysterious, and withal they are
involved in a stupendous obscurity. They seem as aenigmaticall, as Sphynk his
hidden Riddle, yet J doubt not but that your judicous minds will prove as
auspicuous unto this, as Oedipus did to his.

You may enucleate the genuine sense, and signification of the words, if you
do but seriously revolve them.

When the formidable Armado was dissipated in 88. this Kingdom did flourish a
long time in peace and prosperous tranquillity, unto one thousand six hundred
and thirty four or five: After Queen Elizabeth dyed, King James came out of
Scotland, and inherited the Imperial Crown after her.

A plot all men know was most nefariously hatched in his Reign, to wit, the
Gunpowder treason: which not preventing him, he swayed the Scepter very
peacefully in a great succession of future time.

Prince Henry the 9. of that name dyed young, and King Charles the first of
that name reigned next in Majesty (whom God long preserve, and protect from the
wicked Plots of his enemies.) The beginning of these perilous times, begin in
1639. The next 4 verses I will l^a^ ^ to the exposition of the Reader hereof.

The Philosophers have given their unite a stipulation, and withal the
Astrologians have affirmed in their solid assertions, that when Saturn has
any coniu^ction with Jupiter, great wars and bloody times shall ensue, and I am
sure their opinions have not proved fallible in this respect. Many false
Prophets are now risen amongst us, and do prophecy false things to the people,
who dare presume to preach in Tubs to their schismatic Auditors: whom they
delude and suggest vain imaginatio^s unto them, that they are sent from
heaven, and have the spirit of God, when they have nothing but the spirit of
error and falsehood. Mahomet has shown indeed his prize sufficiently amongst
us, for too many (I suppose) in our times rather Mahometans, then true
Christians. The alteration of Religion has bin very great, and tossed too and
fro by the various wind of every ones opinion.

The last two verses I refer to the judgment of the Reader: for I will nominate
no man particularly.

This prophecy is stupendous, and as it includes a mist^ry, so it includes
verity withal: as by the former it is involved in obscurity, so by the latter
it is illuminated in apparent Truth.

The demonstration of prophetic divination, praedictates the future estate of
a Kingdom, and whatsoever has bin expressed in this lately mentioned, is
already fullfilled in exemplary relations.

But the distracted opinions of most men are still so promiscuous, that we want
Prophets enough to exclaim against them; for some they will not hear, others
they neglect, others they in a despicable detestation do contemn.

But God of his infinite mercy grant, that we may hereafter all make true use
of the sincere prophecy of him, and his holy Gospel, that these various mists
of errors may be expelled, these roaring waves of Schism may be calmed, and
the distempers of the whole Realm cured perfectly.

FINIS.

