THE IMPEACHMENT OF SIR Edward Harbert Knight HIS MAJESTY'S Attorney General
by the Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

London, Printed for John Burroughes, and John Frank. 1641.

The Impeachment of Sir Edward Harbert, the Kings Majesty's Attorney General.
THat the said Sir Edward Harbert Knight, his Majesty's Attorney General,
sworn the third day of January in the year of the Lord 1641. Contrary to his
oath and the duty of his place, did falsely, scandalously and maliciously,
advise, frame and publish, certain false, scandalous Articles of High Treason
against the Lord Kimbolton, one of the members of the House of Peers in
Parliament, Denzell Holis, esquier, sir Arthur Hazelrigge Barronet, John Pym,
John Hampden, and William Strode esquiers, being then, and yet members of the
House of Commons in Parliament: A coppie of which Articles I am commanded by
the House of Commons to deliver to your Lordships.

1. That they have Traitorously endeavored to subvert the fundamental laws
and government, of the Kingdom of England, to deprive the King of his regal
power and to place in subjects an Arbitrary and Tiranicall power over the lives
liberties, and estates of his Majesty's liege people. 2. That they have
Traitorously endeavored by many foul aspersions upon his Majesty and his
government, to alienate the affections of his people, and to make his Majesty
odious unto them. 3. That they have endeavored to draw his Majesty's late Army
to disobedience to his Majesty's Commands, and to side with them in their
Traitorous designs. 4. That they have Traitorously invited and encouraged a
foreign power to invade his Majesty's Kingdom of England. 5. That they have
Traitorously endevered to subvert the right and very being of Parliaments. 6.
That for the completing of their Traitorous designs they have indeavored (as
far as in them lay) by force and terror to compel the Parliament to join
with them in their Traitorous designs, and to that end have actually raised
and countenanced tumults against the King and Parliment. 7. That they have
traitorously conspired to Levy, and actually have Levied War against the
King.
And the said sir Edward Harbert, the third day of January did falsely,
unlawfully, and maliciously exhibit the said Articles into the House of Peers
in Parliament, and caused the same to be entered into the Clerks book of the
said house intending and endeavoring thereby, falsely, unlawfully and
maliciously to deprive the said houses of their said several Members, and to
take a way their lives, estates, and good names: All which doings of the said
Attorney, and every of them, were and are high breaches of the priviliges of
Parliament, tending to sedition, and to the utter subvertion of the
fundamental Rights and being of Parliament, the Liberty of Subject and to
the great scandal and dishonor of his Majesty and his Government, and were
and are contrary to the oath of the said Attorney General, and to the great
trustreposed in him by his Majesty:and contrary to the laws of this Realm,
and a great derogation to his Majesty's Royal Crown and Dignity.

For which High Crimes, and Misdemeanors, the said Commons saving to themselves
the liberties of exhibiting any further or other Impeachment or accufation
against the said Sir Edward Harbert, do impeach him; And do pray that he may
be forthwith put to Answer the premises in the presence of the Commons.

FINIS.

