A Diurnall of Dangers.

Wherein are manifested and brought to light, many great and unheard of
Discoveries.

To the Admiration of all who have Ears to hear, or strong hearts to endure.

Found out and Published in the Year of Just Jealousies, Apparent Plots,
Fatal Fears, And Single Securities. 1642.

Written by T. J.

Printed at London for E. Christopher.

A Diurnall of Dangers.
SOme conceive (and not without just cause) that there is a great division in
this Kingdom of England, divided into two Parties, the Malignant and the
Well-affected; but for my own part, who they be that be Malignant, or
well-affected, I am utterly ignorant; that there be Malignant, I do not much
doubt of; but who are, or ought to be the well-affected, I leave to censure:
Betwixt these two I am confident there are half as many Neuters; men se basely
indifferent, and of such timorous natures, that aiming to serve God and Mammon,
(it being too hard a task) they resolve truly to serve neither, but write
themselves the servants of the Time: These be they who in times of Action no
question will be dangerous, and (as they think) securely mischievous; because
they pronounce a fair and submissive friendship both to the right hand and to
the left; and I could wish that when they are found out, because we may the
better know them again, they may be distinguished by some queint mark, as a K.
and a P. and the picture of a Round-cut head on one shoulder, and the form of
a golden Coronet on the other; any thing, so it may make a distinction; that
whilst one party is striking at the Crown, the other may be breaking of the
pate: And by this means John Indifferent will be indifferently well knocked, as
(when you shall hear their barbarous and inhumane plots) you will say they are
worthy ont; and that it is pity they should live.

Monday.
IT was really reported, that last Monday was Senight, early in the morning,
before the valiant Prentices came to exercise in the Artillery-ground by
Moore-Fields, that a crew of these Neuters had planted in the 6. Windmils 6.
Pieces of Ordnance charged with white powder, to the end there might be no
Report heard from the Pieces, when they intended their monstrous and bloody
execution, though against whom on man can yet directly tell, but being mounted
with their muzzles toward Shoreditch, it was reported by a very understanding
man (of a Citizen) that (as sure as we live) their full intention was to batter
down Bow, and make pillage of the green Geese; and nothing (he said) grieved
him so much, as that his wife and children would be like to suffer in the
flock. Another Gentleman in scarlet (a Soap-boylers man) standing by, having a
little better skill in Military affairs, gave his opinion, that if they had
intended such a business, their only way had been to beat down Shoreditch,
for after that it was ten to one but Bow would yield the town up, where they
might fortify themselves against Black-wall, Limus, and Ratcliffe, and having
taken them, they might easily purchase shipping, and with those ships take
Greenwich and the Castle. Another Cavalier being next him, with a buffe coat,
which he constantly wore when he was a brown-baker) gave his opinion that his
friend had censured weil, and bolted out sufficient judgment, for, says he,
(do ye mark me) having taken the Castle, they might easily shoot down Saint
Toolies, and then it were a thing of nothing to plant Ordnance upon Saint Mary
Overies Church, against the Tower. This Baker for his junhement was presen^ly
laid hands on as a conspirator: and so it happened, for without the rack he
confessed that his Miller drew him into the plot, who all this while thought
himself as secure as a thief in a mil; but the baker (to redeem his credit,)
ventured up the wooden Fort, and pulled the miller down by the heels, whose
brains gave a rebound upon every staire. After this they discovered
themselves, and as it happened the Ringleader of all this conspiracy, was a
fat stradling fellow they called him Captain Tripes, whose ambitious venture was
only for honor, that he might forsooth be suddenly advanced from a Sergeant
to a Captain, yet for his good service, he was not absolutely doomd to
perpetual imprisonment, but confined to live by a prison all days of his
life, and to have no mnat allowed him but what he can get by the catch (at which
it seems he has been old dog at.) These conspirators thus miraculously
taken, the 6. Ordnance were dismounted, and by a dozen chosen strong men
carried closely back again to Tower wharfe, from whence the night before he
brought them. The policy of these men's planting Ordnance in the Windmils, was,
because their forts should turn according to their Religion, they being
Neuters, that if there should be any battle between Bow and Higate, they
might wind to the stronger side: but since we have by providence escaped this
great and iminent danger, it shall become us to be thankful, make bone-fires,
and drink till with maudlin joy our tears extinguish the firebrands.

Tuesday.
THis first attempt failing they practiced fresh inventions, new conspiracies,
their mischief grows as faithful as the round heads of Hidra, whose every lop
causes the springing of another head, whether some of these late honest
volenteeres must be put in Guarrison in these small Villages about the City,
for the oecessary safeguard of it, or whether it be the conspirators jelousie,
(for they that are bad themselves, daily ground jelousies upon others) what is
the cause I know not, but the Tuesday night following, these contrivers, these
Covenanters, 20. of them pretended to be merry (note the villainy of these
rogues) because it was near Islington, and thought it a Guarrison Town, and
knew they should have good ale and cakes for pillage (impudent villains that
dare pillage their own Country) went all into the water-house, and called in
freely for all varieties, spared no cost, (a pox on them, they knew how to come
by it again) the Master of the house though it were midnight was loath to put
them out again, especially being such profitable guests: Yet having been up the
night before, desired they would excuse him and suffer him to go to bed,
(cunning Traitors) they were presently as willing as he, that they might act
their deed of darkness, their helbred purpose, (for now comes on the horror of
it) the servant being drunk a sleep, they got with all speed about their
business, in came the hundred barrels of gunpowder, the cunning pioners had
sprung a mine under the water by which they had access to through the cellar,
when they had laid the barrels under water, made their trains sure, and were
ready to fire the match, a damp put the candle out, and (as good luck would
have it) there was no fire in the house, one of them steps to Clarken-well to
fetch fire, which when he had, the watch seeing a man run hastily with fire to
Islington, the hour being late, and the times dangerous, they follow him at
heels; not only to the house, but in and down into the cellar, broke open their
barrels, conveyed away their fire, apprehended the conspirators, or as sure as
we are here they had (before morning) blown up the new River, and drowned all
Islington, to the utter desolation of cheesecakes, cakes, lamb-pies, stued
prunes, custards, cream and fools: nay there is not a man would have bin left.
The plotters were that night carried to the powdering-tub, where now they
remain in a sweet pickle; if ever they come to trial, they will be hanged,
drawn and quartered, and glad they escape so too.

Wednesday.
MIschiefs never come alone, and to see how they succeed one on the neck of
another. On Wednesday there was a strange and desperate felony committed in the
Tower among the Lions, but it may pass for a cheat; there was the biggest Lion
stole from thence, and a mastife-dog left in the room; but the thief never
carried him to heaven nor to hell, for coming to Fan-church street, who should
he meet with but one that knew the Lion, who forced him back again, and the
Lion is in the Tower at this hour, in a good hour be it spoken; but they have
a very sick den of it with two of them; one is troubled with the chin-cough,
and the other lies sick of the toothache.

Thursday.
ON Thursday there was a dangerous rumor in Kent, that at Dover-Peere an Army
of 4000. Venetian Curtizans are landed, to subvert this Nation; for it is
reported in other Countries that we are sooner captivated with women then with
men: and in such wars there is no difference betwixt the Roundhead and the
Cavalier; they can both agree well enough in their vices, but cannot in points
of Religion; therefore they may do good, who knows, and be the only means to
reconcile us; yet if that were the way, we should not need to borrow aid of
other Nations; we have more women already then can live honestly one by
another, (take City and Suburbs) therefore I believe this is a lie, and will
tell it no farther.

Friday.
ON Friday there was no known danger, but toward evening; and then they say the
Bears of Paris-garden were seen to row the mastife-dogs up and down the
Thames. It is a little unusual, but no danger in it, it is a sign we shall
all be friends.

Saturday.
ON Suturday there was a combustion amongst the Bedlamites; insomuch that the
Keeper and his strong assistance could scarce restrain them. One (above the
rest) cried, cried, He would have Justice, or he would pull the house down: and
swore he was committed for a mad man, because he had the audacious impudence to
demand his own at the hands of his betters. Four or five other cried out, They
make us mad, They make us mad, and our only way is to petition that we have no
more new moons. Whilst they were thus speaking, one of the maddest sort, with
three or four mad women, had set fire of the straw, which were seconded by
most of the rest; and by a strange miracle were reclaimed, with Music, and a
Song, made and sung by a Gentleman that was almost recovered from his lunacie;
and while the fire slacked, thus went on his Ditty:

SONG.
Tune Tom of Bedlam.
THe world is all but madness,
Then why are we confined
To live by Law, and lie in straw,
With hunger almost pined?
But then give me way
Take my locks, take my bolts off,
We Will be free as they be,
who keep such state, that none dare prate,
Yet are as mad as may be.
The State is in distraction;
Can any man deny it?
But here is the curse attends it worse,
There Is none can make it quiet.
Then give, etc.
The Trojan Siege was tedious,
In The days of old King Priam,
The sword did stand in the mad man's hand,
Who was as mad as I am.
Then give, etc.
To arms I hear the drum beat,
Let me my Captains pay have:
Why should they go and leave me so?
I have as much cause as they have.
Then give, etc.
Alas there is none obeyes me,
It Is power prevails on all things:
The World is bad, and dangerous mad,
Whilst we lie here for small things.
Then let me stay,
Keep the doors, let me sleep here.
Abroad I shall be sadder,
Should I but go, they will use me so,
I fear 'twill make me madder.
With this conclusion all was quiet, and thus ends this weeks disasters with
the strange remedies; think of them, and let it be a fair warning to us.
Farewell.

FINIS.

