The Christian Soldier. OR, PREPARATION FOR BATTLE.

A Legend containing true Rules for a Soldier, in whom at once is met Religion
and Resolution.

Published by a well-willer to the Gown and Sword, T. J.

To the Regiments on Foot.

You who do List your selves in numerous swarms,
Who think your Pikes and Muskets are safe charms,
Observe these Rules, you shall be free from harms,
And boldly give the word, -- Stand to your Arms.
To the Chevaleires, (in English) the Horsemen.

A beggar set on horseback rides apace,
But he that wisely mounts, sits in full grace:
Receive these few instructions, and you shall
Return victoriously, -- Monte Chevall.
LONDON, Printed for Edward Christopher. 1642.

To all Gent. Soldiers, of what gradation soever, of Horse or Foot, fom the
Colonel to the lowest Musquetier of the last Rank and Foil.
Give the word for silence.
Noble Gent.
ALthougb I am no Soldier, in that I never bore Arms, yet I am so exact an
admirer of your glorious profession, I could not but tender my service to you
in this rough Legend, in which I have endeavored to picture a complete
Soldier; and scored out in chalk and coal a well-shewing coward, that the
excellency of the one may the more glorious appear, by how much the other is
sordid (in condition I mean, though not in form) and I doubt not but some
unexperienced men (if they do not want gratitude as much as knowledge) will
give me thanks; if not, I shall acknowledge my self enough requited if these
rules be only practiced, and it shall hereafter encourage him that daily
wishes peace and prosperity to his King and Country,

T. J.

The Christian Soldier: OR, Preparation for Battle.
Arms are altogether unlawful, but where their only necessary use is for the
protection of Religion, defense against Heresy, maintenance of a Kings Right,
in which consists the liberty of the Subject, and (by that consequence) the
safety of a Kingdom: what ever is in opposition to this, must needs be
illegal I cannot find it from the Creation of the first Adam, to the
Expiration and Ascension of the last, that ever any Nation had command to teach
their King to rule; and hold it as unfit, as if the Son should enstruct the
Parent, or the Scholar exhort his Schoolmaster. This being allowed,
Civill-warre is altogether unlawful, for they who have so little authority to
enstruct, sure have less power to correct; let his life be as wicked as Saul,
or as divine as Solomon; The unity betwixt a King and his people are as the
Gordian knot twixt man and wife, ( for better for worse.) Coronations and
Marriages admit of no Conditions; to prove which, I have (with ease) collected
from the many Texts of Scripture to this purpose these following few: Prove. 17.
26. To punish the just is not good, nor to strike Princes for equity. Chap. 40.
31. Against a King there is no rising up. Ver. 32. If thou have done foolishly
in lifting up thy self, lay thy hands on thy mouth. Chap. 20. 2. The fear of
a King is as the roaring of a Lion: who so provokes him to anger, sins
against his own soul.

Fellow soldiers, in this point you see there is no preparing for battle, in
respect it is unrighteous; and you can receive no conquest but misery and
destruction, as well of soul as of body, if you dare believe that eternal God
that made you, who says thus in the Psalms of David: Psalm. 45. 5. Thy arrows
are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies; whereby the people fall under
thee. Psalm. 89. 23. I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them
that hate him. Psalm. 132. 18. His enemies will I cloathe with shame, but upon
himself shall his crown flourish.

This is legible in the Bible, and (believe it) fellow soldiers, our surest
way of fighting is by the Book; it is not only store of coin, high spirited
horse, good Ammunition, sound skill, fierce resolution, nor a strong Arm, but
a strong Cause that makes a complete soldier. There are three general
Postures belonging to the Musket: Make ready, Present, and Give fire, which
ought to be joined with these most necessary considerations:

Ere you Make ready, remember your Cause; when you Present, be not
bloodthirsty; and when you Give fire, consider against whom. The field is a
soldiers deathbed; and when he stands stoutest in expectation of a full
victory, he is but drawing on: were it not most expedient then that his last
actions should be his best? Every fellow is not a soldier that struts, looks
big, swears much, wears a broad blade, and takes Tobacco; a perfect soldier
is a perfect man, and shows most glorious in his civil valor: and such a one
can kill without cruelty, and gain a conquest without tyranny: He holds it
more victory to take one man prisoner, then put ten to the sword: You shall
hear him say, that none but cowards fear to see their foes living. A valiant
man in the expression of a battle makes no noise, but discourses it with
civil sorrow; and when he comes to declare the conflict, (though of his
enemies) he does not glory in their confusion, but says, It is pity there
should be so much blood shed. You are safer in his arms, then at his swords
point. If you be his enemy, the only means to protect your self is to wear
no weapon, and that is the only way to conquer him, for he is angry because
you go without it.

Your Coward, whom necessity and vainglory have drawn into the field, at his
return from silly service, in frighting language ushered in with oaths,
describes how many towns they burnt, how many women great with child were
slain, how many men blown up at the springing of a mine, how desperately he
returned their hand Grenades into the enemies work after the fire was given;
that in a set battle he was forced to march up to the knees in blood, and
stumble over carkases; when (poor scab) perhaps you might have found him
asleep in the greazie arms of his Sutlers wife, or drunk under the barrels;
these are the men that cry aloud in Taverns By the faith of a soldier; draw
their swords often, and swear it is that they get their living by; wear great
Belts, and hats cut on the brim; great spurs, and uncompt hair, with a black
taffety plaster cross the nose. I would have a complete English Christian
soldier observe such sots, to loathe them, and take these few instructions as
true rules to fight by: 1. To examine the cause, 2. (If his cause be just) to
spend a little grief he has that cause. 3. To come on boly and cheerfully
without desire of blood. 4. Not to make gain, or vainglory his only object.
5. To be merciful to a couchant enemy, and not to kill where he may save with
his own safety. 6. And lastly, to ascribe the honor of the conquest not due
to his valor, but the all providence of his Maker.


If he can do this, let him gird his sword about his loins, and fight
courageously; Jehovah is his General.

I will conclude the rest with these few lines, and leave them to your
practice, whose lives and fortunes depend upon the sword, drawn for an honest
cause.

COme hither Soldier, if thou can obey
God and the King, doubt not to have the day.
If thou can swear it is for none other cause
Thou fightest but for Religion and the Laws,
Heaven protect thee; may thy days increase,
He that does justly fight makes way for peace.
If thou can save thy friend, and spare thy foe,
When thou art up, and he trod down below;
If thou can grieve to spoil the plow-mans Village,
And make it not thy aim to fight for pillage;
If in the furious sacking of a Town
Thou can avoid to cast their women down
With their young newborn infants; if thou fly
From all base actions of red cruelty;
The Lord will sure protect thee from all harms,
And I my self will say, -- Stand to your Arms.

FINIS.

