Two ACTS I. An ACT to take away Damage Clear. II. An ACT to take away the
Benefit of Clergy from him that does Stabb another not having a Weapon drawn.




DVBLIN, Reprinted by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty, on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

An Act to take away Damage Clear. CHAP. X.
WHEREAS the Moneys which are taken by Prothonotaries of Your Majesty's Courts
of King's Bench and Common Pleas, and by the Clerk of Your Majesty's Court of
Exchequer at Dublin, and the Clerks and Prothonotaries in any other Court
within this Realm, in the name of Damna Clericorum, or Damage Clear, are an
unnecessary Charge and Burden to all Your Majesty's Subjects, who have good
Cause and put to Sue for Damage in Actions where Damages are Recoverable: For
avoiding of which Inconveniency for the future, and that Your Majesty's
Subjects may have an easier means for the Recovery of their Damages and Just
Rights which are unjustly detained from them; May it please Your Most Excellent
Majesty that it may be Enacted, and His Most Excellent Majesty being willing
upon all Occasions to Ease His Subjects of all unnecessary Charges and
Burdens, is Graciously Pleased that it be Enacted.

And be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no Damage Clear
shall by any Title or Pretense whatsoever be Due, Payable, Taken or Received
from any Person or Persons in any Action whatsoever, Sued or Prosecuted in any
of His Majesty's Courts at Dublin, or elsewhere within the Kingdom of Ireland,
by any Prothonotary, Clerk or Clerks, or other Officer or Officers of the said
Courts respectively, and that the said Fee of Damna Clericor. or Damage Clear,
shall wholly cease and be for ever Abolished in the said Courts; and that if
any Prothonotary, Clerk or Clerks, or other Officer in any of the said Courts,
shall take or Exact any Sum or Sums of Money in the name of Damna Clericor.
or Damage Clear, or any thing in Lieu thereof, or if any of the said
Prothonotaries Clerk or Clerks, or their Deputies, shall Exact or take any
Damage Clear, or Sum of Money, Bond or Security in Lieu thereof from any
Plantiff or Plantiffs, Demandant or Demandants, in any Action where Damages
have been or hereafter shall be recovered in any of the said Courts, or shall
refuse or delay to Sign any Judgment until Damage Clear be first paid by the
Plantiff or Demandant, he or they so offending shall forfeit Treble the Sum so
Taken, Exacted or Demanded to the Party or Parties grieved, to be recovered by
Bill, Plaint or Information in any of the said Courts, wherein no Essoyn,
Protection or Wager of Law shall be Allowed.

An Act to take away the Benefit of Clergy from him that does Stabb another not
having a Weapon Drawn. CHAP. XI.
TO the End that Stabbing and Killing Men on the sudden, Done and Committed by
many Inhumane and wicked Persons in the time of their Rage, Drunkenness, hidden
Displeasure, or other Passion of Mind, Contrary to the Commandment of Almighty
God, and the Common Peace and Tranquillity of this Realm, may from henceforth be
Restrained for fear of due Punishment to be Inflicted on such Cruel and Bloody
Malefactors, who heretofore have been thereunto Emboldened by presuming on the
Benefit of the Clergy.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That every
Person and Persons, who after the End of this present Parliament shall Stabb or
Thurst any Person or Persons that has not then any Weapon Drawn, or that has
not then first stricken the Party which shall so Stabb or Thrust, so as the
Person or Persons so Stabbed or Thrust shall thereof Die within the space of
Six Months then next following, although it cannot be proved that the same was
Done of Malice Forethought, yet the Party so Offending, and being thereof
Convicted Virdict of by Twelve Men, Confession, or otherwise, according to the
Laws of this Realm shall be Excluded from the benefit of his or their Clergy,
and suffer Death as in Case of Felony, without benefit of Clergy.

Provided always that this Act, or any thing therein Contained, shall not
Extend to any Person or Persons which shall Kill any Person Se Defendendo, or
by Misfortune, or in any other manner then as aforesaid, nor shall Extend to
any Person or Persons, who in keeping and preserving the Peace shall Chance to
Commit Manslaughter, so as the said Manslaughter be not Committed wittingly,
willingly, and of purpose, under pretext and Color of Keeping the Peace, nor
shall Extend to any person or perons which in Chastizeing or Correcting his
Child or Servant, shall besides his or their Intent and Purpose Chance to
Commit Manslaughter.

FINIS.

