A SPEECH Made to his EXCELLENCY THE Lord General MONCK, AND THE COUNCIL of
STATE, Goldsmiths Hall in London, The tenth day of April, 1660. At which time
they were entertained by that honorable Company.
After a Song in four parts, at the conclusion of a Chorus, Enter a
Sea-Captain. LEt me make one too; are you grown so stout,
To contrive Peace, and leave the Seaman out?
Have you in those large Bowls which Plenty gave ye,
Drank off the Ocean, and swallowed the Navy?
You never think upon our Rocks and shelves,
So you may snudge in quiet by your selves;
Are not you Britains? Is not Navigation
The only Guard and Glory of the Nation?
Can you have Treasure brought without a Fleet?
What is it gilds Cheapside and Lumbard Street
But our Sea trade? By our cutting the curled
Ocean ye hold Commerce with all the World.
Whence come your costly Carpettings, and Works
That grace the Chambers of triumphant Turks,
But from Beyond Sea? Whence comes all your gold,
For which, by some, both Law and Gospel's sold,
But from Beyond Sea? And wise men of trust
Believe, if ever we have Peace again, it must
Come from Beyond Sea; And do you go about
To make a Peace, and leave the Mainmast out?
But where is my Admiral? Oh! I have spied him,
His Merits are so clear no Clouds can hide him.
I must go droll with him though, What Cheer hey?
Up to the Ears in Custard, here is a fray
Compounded without bloodshed; these would be
Good bitts upon a March, George, or at Sea:
When, in the fury of tempestuous weather,
We and our meat were pickled up together.
Here are pure Quarters, Plenty keeps her spring
In London, It Is a City for a King.
I came just now ashore to speak with you
Directly up to Goldsmiths-Hall, I knew
Where I should find you out: You love to settle
With honest Hearts, and Men of the best Mettle.
They love St. George, and yet they highly set
A value on St. St. Dunstan was a Patron of the Goldsmiths.
Dunstan, they are well met,
They both did put the Devil in a dump,
One had him by the Nose, the other the Rump,
And thereby hangs a tail. When I came hither,
My business, and my boldness mixed together
Made me thrust in: Where crowd you? (cried they all)
Quoth I, to speak with my LORD GENERAL,
I Am one of his Sea Captains; presently
The Master and the generous Company
All bad me welcome, and did strongly woo
Me to bid you so, and this To the Council of State.
Council too
In these, or such like words; they bad me say
The Sunn's not welcomer to a dark day,
Than you unto this City: for you are
Temperate in Undertakings, Stont in War,
Prudent in Councils, Quick when Dangers call,
Secret in great designs, Honest in All:
'Twould make the greatest Rebel quite renounce ill,
To see but such a Soldier, such a Council.
God prosper both, and may you never cease,
Till you have brought home the bright Princess Peace,
That long-lost Lady: Could we make a Crown
As rich as that was worn by Solomon,
Rather than we would lose her, or displease her,
(I mean fair Peace) we would give that Crown to scize her*
If any other Speech be printed, pretended to be spoken in Goldsmiths Hall,
they are Counterfeits, and none true but this.

Tho. Jordan.

London, Printed for H. B. at the Gun in Ivy-lane, 1660.


