A IOVRNALL, Or, A true and exact RELATION OF Each days passage, of that party
of the Right Honorable The Earl of Manchesters ARMY, Under the command of the
ever honored Mayor General Craford, From the first of August to the end of
the same Month.

WHEREIN There is truly related the taking of several places, with the
Conditions and Articles of the same: Purposely set forth for the honor of that
Party.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Hugh Perry, Anno Dom. 1644,

A true and exact RELATION OF THE Several passages of that party of right
Honorable the Earl of Manchesters Army, sent from Doncaster to reduce to the
obedience of the King and Parliament, the Castle of Sheffield, under the
command of the ever honored Major-generall Craford.
HIstory (says Cicero, is the witness of the times, the life of memory and
light of verity: I have therefore undertaken to testify that, whereof I was an
eyewitness, and to give light unto the truth of all the following passages
which otherwise might be obscured or prejudiced, by the ^^ception of the first,
and none of the truest News.

August 1. Thursday, The Major-generall drew out of Doncaster and the adjacent
Villages, to the (...) said Town, his own Regiment, Colonel Pickerings and
(...) their Regiments, in all not above 1000 march^ (...): Lie^tenant-Colonell
Rich drew out his Colonel Colonel Sidney his Regiment of horse. And thus with
a great deal of patience us marched through a very rocky, and almost
inaccessible country, in and about, Conisburough, an old ruinous and strong
Castle, where of Ordnance were ever like to be over-turned. Our fo^t ca^e at
night to Rotheram, our Ordnance and Carriages were left behind with a
sufficient guard to follow us, who came to Rotheram about midnight. The same
day the Major-generall omitted no opportunity, went the nearest way from
Doncaster to Sheffield, being accompanied with Colonel Bright, (who at first
valued not the Castle:) but when the Major-generall had viewed it, he found it
to be a very considerable strength, both for natural situation, being in a
triangle with two Rivers, the water deep in the West and East sides of the
Castle, flackered on all sides, a strong Fort before the gate pallisado'd, a
T^ch 12 foot deep and 18 broad about the Fort, and the other parts of the
Castle, and a Breast-worke pallisado'd within the Trench, betwixt it and the
Castle. The Major-generall returned at night to Rotheram, and sent the Earl of
Manchester a draught of their Works; and his opinion of the place desiring his
Lordships further orders. The said Colonel returned the next morning, August
2. with a Letter from the Earl of Manchester, wherein the Major-generall was
left to his own discretion, with this proviso, not to in danger men; which
Letter the Major-generall did communicate to the rest of the Officers, who were
very willing to go on in that enterprise, and to be directed to him: And
thereupon they marched on toward Sheffield, and Colonel Bright went to York,
to bring two battering-peeces from thence (as he did undertake) against Sunday
night, we to Sheffield Manor, being welcomed and received with great
acclamations, and the many prayers of that well-affected people. In the edge of
the Park we planted the Culverin (having before sent a party of horse and foot
into the Town) and there did discharge three great shot with great dexterity
into the Castle, one whereof shot through the Governors chamber: and
thereafter we marched through the upper part of the Park, and drew a great
circumference with our Ordnance, to eschew the danger of the Castle, and entered
at the upper end of the Town, where the Townsmen with great joy drew down the
Ordnance to the marketplace: and thereafter the Major-generall summoned them
by a Trumpeter in the Earl of Manchesters name, to surrender the place into
his hands for King and Parliament; but they discharged three shot at the
Trumpeter, who could not get audience. All this night all degrees and sexes
with all cheerfulness cut sads, and brought them to make the battery cross
the street, within forty yeards of the Castle, where the careful and vigilant
Major-generall was himself working, encouraging others with his presence,
cheerful words, and example, the battery was well nigh perfected this night.

August 3. Captain Sands captain of the Pioniers, and the master Gunner,
attended the Major general to view the little Tower by the River, that
flauncked two quarters of the Castle, and the mount before the Gate, to the end
that they should find out some convenient place to raise a battery to beat it
down, which might be very advantageous for us, to the gaining of the castle.
Whereupon the Captain and Gunner were both shot, the one through the theigh,
and the other through the shoulder, whereof they both after dyed, they were
shot in a place which was out of all view of the Castle, having both houses and
hay betwixt them and it, this night we helped and raised the battery, made the
Platform, and the Major General, with Major Hamilton, went to view the Castle
more narrowly.

August 4. After two Sermons this day, all the people went to erect a new
battery, and at night the Major General accompanied with major Forbus and
major Hamilton, went to view a sluice that was stopped to keep the water deep
about the east side of the Castle, which he thought to draine the more to
facilitate his business, this night was spent by him with great toil, and no
small danger, the Ordnance were planted without all hurt.

August 5. The Ordnance began to batter, which made the besieged more mild
then they were before, and their Governor received our summons, and returned
us answer that the Castle was entrusted unto him by his Majesty, which trust
he valued more then his life: at night the Major General by threats, promises
and money, got together some Colliers to mine the Castle, which they found not
to feasible, it being builded on a rock. This day the Major general wrote to
the Earl of Manchester, that Ammunition and Ball was likely to be wanting, and
the Major general went to the Iron Mils, and set men a work to make moulds for
to cast Balls for our pieces, which was forthwith done; this night the Major
general attempted to break up the Sluice through the Dame, to let out the water
of that corner against the Orchard, on the east side of the Castle, which could
not take effect. And this night we perfected the battery and platmforme that
fl^uncked the drawbridge of the Castle, with intention to b^a^e it down with
one of our Sa^, whereby they might not have passage to relieve the fort from
the Ca^^le.

August 7. This day we received some powder from the Earl of Manchester, some
Sakar shot from the Iron works, and news of Coll. Bright, that he was on his
march with 500. foot, 300. horse to convoy an Iron Domicaunon and the Queens
Pocket Pistol to us. Whereupon the Major general sent to hasten their march,
and this day the town of Sheffield sent a petition to the Earl of Manchester,
desiring his Honor to continue his Forces with them, until the Lord would be
pleased to deliver it into our hands otherwise of all men would be the most
miserable: for if they abode after our departure, their consciences would be
overburthened, their estates plundered, and themselves become subject to all
s^ery and misery, or otherwise they would be necessitated to follow the Army,
hereupon his Lordship was pleased of his own goodness, to take into
consideration their present condition, and the ensuing dangers of so good a
people, and did grant a positive to reduce the Castle, and not depart from it
until it was surrend^d. And this night the Major-generall raised a new battery
against the west side of the Castle, and then placed the Culvering which made a
small breach the next day.

August 8. Our Sakars beat down the Battlements, and a part of the Tower that
flauncked that quarter of the Castle, and dismounted a Drake planted thereon.
This day the enemy shot some great Grenades into the Town and Church-yeard,
which did no execution; the same day two Gunners were shot through the
Port-holes, in the fingers by the enmy, the Major general sent Major Alford to
conduct the ordnance with four Troops of Horse from Doncaster to us, hearing
that the 500. foot were diminished to one, and that the horse were not above
two hundred in all. He likewise sent to the adjoining Constables, to provide
fresh draughts to further the Ordnance speedy march.

August 9. This day at six a cl^ck in the evening, the Ordnance came to us, and
the Major-generall both day and night with indefatigable pains, d^d see the
battery raised higher, the Port holes mended, the ground levelled, the
platformes made, and the Ordnance planted.

August 20. this day the Culverin, Demi-cannon, and Pocket-pistoll, played at
the brea^h the Sak^ at the battlements very soundly, which made a good breach,
and thereafter summoned them the second time to yield the place for King and
Parliament: in answer whereto they desired a parley; which was granted, and
the Commissioners authorized by the Major-generall were, Colonel* P^^kering,
Lieutenant Colonel Grames* and Major Hamilton: and for them were Cap.
Heinsworth, Mr Samuel Savill, and Mr Robson; which parley continued till six
of the clock at night without effect, but that Cap. Heinsworth with his
associates desired that they might acquaint the Governor with the debates
controverted; which was granted, and that they should return an answer within
a quarter of an hour, or otherwise stand to their hazard. And they returning
no answer within the time prefixed, we discharged six shot more, which brought
them to desire a continuation of the Treaty; which was continued till night,
and thereafter agreed on these Articles enclosed, and they sent out hostages to
us for performance of the Articles, viz. Sir John Key and Captain Heinsworth.

Articles of agreement between the Commanders authorized by Major General
Craford and Major Thomas Beamount Governor of Sheffield Castle for surrendering
the said Castle to the right honorable the Earl of Manchester upon conditions
following.
1. That the Castle of Sheffield with all their fire Arms, Ordnance, and
Ammunition and all other furniture of War, with all other provis^^ns therein
(excepting what is allowed in the following Articles, be delivered up to Major
General Craford to morrow in the afternoon by three of the clock, being the
eleaventh of this instant August without any diminuation or imbezlement.

2. That the Governor and all Field Officers, Captains, Leiutenants and
Ensigns shall March out of the Castle upon the delivery thereof, with their
Drumes and Colors and each his own horse, Sadle, Sword, and Pistolls to
Pon^ract Castle or such other place as they shall desire, with a sufficient
Convey or pass for their security, and the Common Soldiers with the Inferior
Officers, to march out with their Swords and Pikes, each to his own home or
where else they please.

3. That all such Officers and Soldiers as march out upon this agreement shall
have liberty to carry with them, their Wives, Children, and servants, with
their own goods properly belonging to them, and have all convenient
accommodation for carieing of the same.

4. That the Lady Savile with her Children and family with her and their own
proper goods, shall make pass with Coaches, Horses and Wagons to Thomehill,
or else where with a sufficient guard be fitting the quality of her person,
without injury to any of their persons, or plundering any of their goods, or
otherwise she or they or any of them to go or stay, at their own pleasure,
until she or they be in a condition to remove themselves.

5. That the Gentlemen in the Castle, being no Soldiers shall March out with
each his own horse, Sadle, Sword, and Pistolls, and shall have liberty to
remove their Goods, and to live at their own houses or else where without
molestation, they conforming themselves to all Ordinances of Parliament, and
that they shall have protections from the Earl of Manchester or Lord Fairfax
for the same, and all Officers and Soldiers who desire to lay down Arms
shall enjoy the same protection.

6. That the Governor, Officers, Soldiers, Gentlemen and all others, who are
by this agreement to carry their goods with them, shaly have six weeks time
for rem^ving of them and in the (...) are to be left in the Castle, and they
secured from imbezeling; and this Article is to be understood of all such goods
as are at present either with in the Castle, or under the absolute Command
thereof.

7. That Kolme Homer now dwelling in the Castle shall have liberty to remove
his goods into the Town or else where without molestation.

8. That all Officers and Soldiers Gentlemen, and other persons shall
according to the Articles above mentioned, march out of the Castle with out any
injury or molestation by plundering stripping or otherwise.

9. That hostages (such as Major General Craford shall approve) be delivered
by the Governor, upon signing of these Articles for the delivering up of the
Castle, and safe return of the Convoy, which shall be returned safely upon the
performance thereof, unto such places as they shall desire.

Signed by us the Commissioners authorized by Major General Craford at
Shefield this 10th. day of August, 1644. I. Pickering. Mark Gryme. William
Hamilton.

Signed by us the Comissioners authorized by Major Thomas Beamount Governor of
Shefield Castle at Shefield this 10th, day of August, 1644. Gabriell Hemsworth.
Samuel Savile. Thomas Robson.

I do hereby engage my self to the faithful performance of the Articles
above mentioned, agreed upon by the Commissioners authorized by me.

L. Craford.


I do hereby engage my self to the faithful performance of the Articles
above mentioned, agreed upon by the Commissioners authorized by me.

Thomas Beamount.



August 11. This day, after solemn thanks performed, the Lady Savill with her
retinue marched forth of the Castle with her Coach to Woodhouse, whether she
was safely convoyed by a Lieutenant, of our horse. The Governor being 200
strong marched out of the Castle, and those few (not being in all 30) that had
no desire to lay down their Arms, were to be convoyed to Pontefract by
Captain Gothericke, one of the Lord Fairfax his Captains of horse, who expected
them all day at the Bridge under the Castle, but they came forth so drunk, that
they were not apprehensive of danger, nor capable of any thing but evil and
raising speeches, whereof they were very lavish, which cost some straglers
their clothes, who went not with the Convoy. The Governor, Captain Hemsworth,
and many others received Protections, to live in the country, they submitting
themselves to all the Ordinances of Parliament. We got in this Castle abundance
of provision, which was sold for the use of the Army, to the Town of
Sheffield, for 250 li. We found many hundreds of Granado's, and many hundreds
of round shot from the Cannon to the Minion, ten barrels of powder, eight Iron
pieces, five hundred Arms, and some other provisions and necessaries for the
Castle, two Morter-pieces.

Aug. 12. The Major General went to view Balsower, and found it to be
inaccessable in the one side, being build on a steep Hill, and the Castle well
flanckered, and from the Town a brest-work, having a deep Trench 16. foot
broad, and a Fort pallisado'd, and that withal he could secure a strong
party of Soldiers very nigh the Castle, and would undertake (if the Earl of
Manchester would be pleased to send him thither to reduce it under his
Lordships command, the Major General in his Journey to Balsower viewed Col.
Fretchwell his house who came along with him to Sheffeild, the Major General
by his fair carriage and wisdom, effected that House without blows which
otherwise might have cost us dear, we obtained in it 11. Iron Gunnes, and
whereof was a Demiculverin, 300. Arms, and a considerable quantity of powder,
and that the said Colonel should slight his works, which were exceeding
strong, which was begun before our departure from Bolsower, and submit himself
to all the Ordinances of Parliament. I cannot forget one passage that was acted
at Bolsover this day, which was questionless an argument of Gods Justice
against the Gunner of the Castle, who seeing the Major General draw near to
view it, with blasphemous curses gave fire upon him with his Drake, which
breaking in pieces, it killed himself, and his Sister standing by him.

August 13. This day the Earl of Manchester by the earnest solicitation of the
Commitee of Darby was pleased to leave it to the discretion of the Major
General, where he should march to it, or not, who calling the Officers to
consultation unanimously they did agree to advance thither, and marched this
night to.

August 14. We came before night to Balsover, where the Major general set men a
work to erect a battery cross the street, against the Fort before the Castle
Gate, and the other Battery to be erected upon Sheffeild side of the Castle,
but were prevented to execute our Intentions, by the coming of a Drum from the
Castle with a Letter from an old Gentleman to Colonel Barmudin, who at this
time lay about Chesterfield, attending on the Major General, desiring to
speak to him, the Gentleman believing him to be Commander in chief. The
Colonel immediately acquaints the Major General therewith, who gave safe
conduct unto the Gentleman, before whom the Major General carried himself
very highly, and disdained to send them summons because they made small account
of the Earl of Manchesters summons, which were sent them from Doncaster, by
which means the Gentleman seeing the Major Generals resolution was desirous
to secure his own life, and (if he could) the house which at as great a value
as himself, the Gentleman went in, and told the Governor of the Major
General Carriage and resolution (which proved effectual for the speedy
delivery of the Castle) who heretofore vowed to make it his Grave, was now
resolved to come to an agreement, wherefore he came out himself, and two
others to the Major General, without any Hostages asked, and thereafter agreed
upon the enclosed Articles.

Articles of agreement between Major General Crauford, in behalf of the
right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, and Major Edward Muschamp, Governor
of Balsover Castle for surrendering the same, made at Bolsover the fourteenth
day of August 1644.
IMprimis, That the Castle of Bolsover, with all the fire-Armes, Ordnance, and
Ammunition, with all other furniture of War, and all other provision therein
(excepting what is allowed in the following Articles) be delivered up to the
said Major Genreall Crauford to morrow being Thursday, the fifteenth day of
August 1644. by three of the Clock in the afternoon, without any diminution,
or imbezelment.

Secondly, That the Governor, and all the Officers and Gentlemen shall march
out of the Castle upon delivery thereof, with their Drums, and Colors, with
their Horses, Swords, and Pistolls to Newarke, on such other place as they
shall desire, with a sufficient Convoy, or Passes, and the common Troopers with
their Swords and horses, and the common soldiers with their swords and Pikes,
to their own homes or such places as they please, and the Surgeon with his
Chest to such places as he shall desire.

Thirdly, That all such Officers Gentlemen and Soldiers, as shall march out
upon this agreement shall have liberty to carry with them their Wives,
Children, and Servants with their own goods properly belonging to them, and
shall have all convenient accommodation for carrying of the same being no way
injured or molested by plundering, pillaging or otherwise.

CRAVFORD.

Edw. Muschampe.

We got in the Castle six pieces of Ordnance, Iron and Lead, 300 Fire-armes,
10 barrels of Powder, Match and Bullet proportionable, and very little
provision for the garrison.

August 15. This day the Governor marched out of the Castle 180. strong, and
those few that had no desire to go to their country, were safely convoyed by
Colonel Barmudin toward Newark: only except the Governor himself, who
straying from his Convoy, was pillaged of all, and afterward had arms and
horse, befitting his quality, given him by Colonel Pickering, and was by him
sent with a guard to the Convoy. This day the Major-generall went to view
Wingfield Manor, upon whose return the Earl of Manchester was pleased to
leave it to the Major-generalls discretion; who hearing that the enemy in
Leichestershire were drawing to a considerable body, and fearing lest they
should ruin that poor county in defeating the forces before the Manor, and
seeing the place not likely to be obtained by Sir John Gell without more
Forces, he, with the advice of the Officers, resolved to advance to the Manor
the next day.

August 16. The Major-generall this day set things in order at Balsover, and
placed Captain Mercer with his Dragoons in it, whilst he received further
orders from him; and left with the said Captain Colonel Fretchwells Ordnance,
for which at that time we had no sure carriages

August 17. we marched from Balsover to North-Wingfield, and upon Sunday August
18. after prayer, to Alfertown, and the places adjacent: and after Sermon in
the afternoon the Major-generall omitting no opportunity, this night erected a
battery within eighty yards of the castle; whereupon Monday night August 19.
the port-holes and all other things fitting were completed.

It shall not be amiss to show you how we found Sir John Gell about this
place, which for natural situation is very strong, being builded upon the
side of a steep hill, and extraordinary steep in three quarters of it, the
fourth quarter strongly fortified with a breast-worke pal^isado'd, a deep
graffe, the Mannor-house and Works extraordinary well flankered, they within
resolved to dye, rather then to surrender it to Sir John Gell and therefore
would not permit that any one of that county should parley with them, being
furnished with all things necessary for a long siege, and men full of
resolution who before we came sallied out twice on Sir John Gell his men,
killed and took Prisoners above thirty: Sir John Gell had before it about 500
foot and 600 horse, and was myning above the Mill, against the Town of
Wingfield, the enemy were countermining three yards under him, his Ordnance not
then near enough to make any good breach: Thus we found him, before a strong
place, and a daring enemy. Having placed our Ordnance with Sir John Gells
brass and iron Culverings, the Major-generall gave orders to play the Tusday
morning August 20. by daylight, which he himself did see them perform: And
after that he had made a breach, he summoned the Castle to be surrendered into
his hands for the King and Parliament: they sent forth upon the summons, to
desire an hostage for Major ^yr^ to come forth, which was granted and Major
Forbes was sent into the Manor. Major Air desired that he might send to
Sheffield and Bolsover, to see whether they were surrendered or not: the
Major-generall showed him the Articles of agreement and told upon his
reputation, that they were surrendered unto him: The Major notwithstanding
persisted in his desire, to have a man sent to Sheffield: which the
Major-generall hearing, sent him into the Castle again, and began to batter
with more alacrity then formerly; whereupon the enemy beat a Parley, which for
the noise of the Ordnance was not heard for a long time, but at last was heard,
and they desired a Parley; which was granted, and thereafter these enclosed
Articles were agreed on, by the Commissioners appointed by the Major-generall,
viz. the adjutant General Stirling and Colonel Pickering: and on their party
the Commissioners appointed were, Major Air and Will. Whichcot, the Governor
gave in hostages for the safe return of the convoy, viz.

Articles of agreement between the Commissioners authorized by Major general
Crauford on the behalf of the right Honorable the Earl of Manchester and
those authorized by Colonel Molyneux Governor of Winfield Manor concerning
the surrender of the same, made at Winfield this 20. day of August 1644.
Inprimis. That the Manor of Winfield with all the Arms, Ordnance,
Ammunition, with all other furniture of war, and all other provisions therein
(excepting what is allowed in the following Articles) shall be surrendered to
Major-generall Crauford by twelve of the clock to morrow being Wednesday the
21. of this instant August, without any dimunition or imbezelment.

2. Item. That the Governor with all the Officers, Gentlemen and Soldiers in
the garrison of Winfield Manor, shall upon the surrender thereof, have liberty
to march out of the same to Lichfield, or such other places as they shall
desire, with a sufficient convoy as far as Tutbury, and Passes for these that
go any other way, the Governor having thirty horses allowed him, of those in
the Manor, for the mounting of such persons upon, as he shall think fit.

3. Item. That the Governor, Officers, Gentlemen and Soldiers, who march out
of the Garrison upon this agreement, shall pass quietly to such places, as are
in the former Article agreed upon, without plundering, pillaging, or any let or
molestation whatsoever.

4. Item. That the Governor, Lieutenant, Colonel Whitchcot, Major Eynes,
Major Air, Captain John L^w, Captain Arthur Low, Captain Lieutenant
Wilkinson, Lieutenant Chippindale, and Cornet Bennet, shall march out with
their pistolls and swords, and the rest of the Gentlemen and Officers, who
march but on horseback, with their swords.

5. Item, That the gentle women now in the Manor, shall have liberty to march
out at the time appointed, with their Clothes, and such necessaries as are
allowed in the Articles, in Hampers, or otherwise for their convenience.
Provided, they be first viewed and sealed up by an Officer, that shall be
appointed thereunto.

6. Item, That such persons as upon the Articles above mentioned, have liberty
to march out, and are at present unable by reason of sicknesses, or other
indisposition to march out with the rest, shall have liberty and protection to
stay in the Country until they be recovered, and then shall have liberty to
march to such places as are allowed in the former Article.

7. Item. That Master Hawley and his wife, shall have liberty to abide in the
said Manor of Winfield, if they think good or dispose otherwise of themselves
as they please, being no way injured or molested,

Lastly, That the Governor upon signing of the Articles, shall immediately
deliver two Hostages (such as Major-generall Crauford shall approve) for
performance of the Articles above mentioned, and safe return of the Convoy.

Signed by us the Commissioners authorized by Major-generall Crauford the 20.
day of August. 1644. J. Pickering. Robert Stirling.

Signed by us the Commissioners authorized by Colonel Molyneux Governor of
Winfield Manor the 20, day of August: 1644. William Whichcote. Th: Air.

I do hereby engadge my self to the performance of the Articles above
mentioned and agreed upon by the Commissioners authorized by me.

L. Crauford.


I do hereby engadge my self to the performance of the Articles above
mentioned, agreed upon by the Commissioners authorized by me.

Roger Molyneux.



August 21. The Governor marched forth with 200 men: All the Officers
(himself excepted) laid down their Arms, and received Protections from the
Major-generall, (as they of Sheffield) which were confirmed by the Earl of
Manchester: The common Soldiers went to their own homes; the Governor had
some forty that went to Tutbury in Staffordshire with him, they were convoyed
by Major Alford with four Troops of horse, who were marshalled thus; one Troop
in the Van, another in the Rear, and a Troop in each Flanck of the Governor
and his followers. There was found in this Castle 500 Arms, four barrels of
powder, Match and Bullet proportionable, eight pieces of Ordnance, and
provision for the garrison, which was given over by the Major-generall. Out
hostages, Major Air and Major seeing the fair demeanor and affability of the
Major-generall, and hearing the country people (whose affections were very much
united to him) speak very much of his goodness toward them, in not suffering
them to be oppressed, and hearing of the gallantry of the man at the late siege
of York. and some of them being eyewitnesses of his wisdom and valor at the
battle of Longmosten moore they were glad to be conquered by him and thought
it their happiness to be acquainted with him and resolved never after to carry
Arms against the Parliament, finding (beyond expectation) the good carriage
and behavior of our Officers and Soldiers toward all, and they desired the
Earl of Manchesters protection which was granted them at Lincoln, and now are
returned to their own habitations.

Thus the Lord did give a blessing to the careful endeavors and undertakings
of the Major-generall, and the other Officers, who with an handful of men
possessed the enemy with fear, and reduced that whole country to the obedience
of King and Parliament: And uwon the 22 day we marched to Mansfield, and from
thence to Redford, and thence on the 23 to Littleburgh, and thence on the 24 to
Gainsborow, where now we remain, not six men fewer then when we left
Doncaster, only some few are sickened. The Lord give us thankful hearts for
this his goodness toward us and crown this work begun, to his own glory,
and our comfort. Amen.

FINIS.

