A IOVRNALL OF The most Memorable Passages in IRELAND.

Especially that Victorious Battle at Munster, beginning the 2^. of August
1642. and continued.

Wherein is related the Siege of Ardmore Castle; Together with a true and
perfect Description of the famous Battle of Liscarroll.

Written by a worthy Gentleman, who was present at both these Services.

LONDON, Printed for T. S. October 19. 1642.

A Iournall of the most memorable Passages in Ireland, especially that
victorious battle at Munster, beginning the 26 of August, 1642. and continued.
AFter the Irish had gathered together the greatest part of their Forces about
Killmallocke, with intention to pass the Mountains into the County of Cork,
and found they should receive opposition by our Army, which was drawn up to
Duneraile and Mallo, with resolution to encounter them, if they once descended
into the Plains, they again retreated toward Limmericke, and we about the
20. of August, Disbanded and went to our several Garrisons, both with like
intentions of gathering the Harvest of the Country. Sir John Paulets, and Sir
William Ogles Regiments went to Cork, and Kingsale, the old Regiment was
Garrisoned about Duneraile, part of Sir Charles Vavasors, lay at Malle, the
rest that went to Youghall were commanded to obey the Lords Dungarvan, and
Broghils, who having procured a Culverine to be sent along with them, resolved,
as soon as our men were refreshed after their March, to take in the Castle of
Ardmore. The Fort is of its own nature, strong and defensible, it was well
manned with 100. able Soldiers besides the people of the Country, it had
munition sufficient, so we expected not to gain it, but after a long Siege.
Notwithstanding it being a place of good consequence affording the Enemy means
of getting the Harvest on that side in security, and blocking us up in Piltowne
and Youghall, so that a man durst not appear on the other part of the River,
we resolved the taking of it, and upon Friday, being the 26. of August, we
marched from Lismore, toward the Castle. Our Forces were about 400. all
Muskets, besides 60. Horse, part of the two Lords Troops, by the way we
summoned the Castle of Glogh Ballydonus which promised to yield and receive our
Garrison, if Mr. Fitzgerard of Dromany would permit; we were satisfied with the
answer, Mr. Fitzgerard being yet our Friend; and the place being of no great
importance, so that it was not thought convenient to lose time there, but
Marched away and sat down before Ardmore; The same day about three of the
clock in the afternoon we summon^d it, but they not admitting of a Parley, we
Quartered our selves about the Castle, expecting our Culverine which we sent
down by water; In the mean time our men possessed themselves of some
outhouses belonging to the Castle, whereby we with more security might play
upon the Enemies Spikes, and they in the evening fired the rest. All the
beginning of the night they played from the Castle very hotly upon us, but
nevertheless we ran up and took the Church from them, so that now we were
within Pistol shot of the Castle; this did much advantage us, for besides
provision, whereof there was good quantity, the Church standing high beat into
their Bawne, so that from hence they lost the use of it, and were forced to
contain themselves within the Walls of the Castle. There was yet the Steeple
of the Church, something dis-joyned from the body of it, yet remaining, which
was well manned, Powder and Bullets they had sufficient, but wanted Guns, there
being no more then two Muskets only among forty men, the Church cut off all
hope of supplies from them; so that we were confident to have it surrendered
either for want of provision or Ammunition. Thus we spent that night; next
morning there appeared about 100. Horse, and 300. Foot of the Enemy, and it
was generally believed there was a more considerable number following; we
received the Alarm with joy and courage, and leaving only sufficient to
continue the Siege, drew forth the rest of our men, resolving to encounter
them; but as our men advanced, they retreated toward Dungarvan, our Horse
could not follow by reason of a Glinne betwixt us and them, and our Foot would
have been too slow to overtake theirs. We returned therefore to our Quarters,
where we received intelligence from M^llo, that all the Enemies Forces were
again drawn into a Body, and upon their march toward Duneraile; whereupon we
were commanded to be at an hours warning: this troubled us, only because we
feared we should raise the Sieges, and now more then ever we wished for our
great Artillery, which came about noone to us; And such diligence we used, that
before three of the clock we drew it up within half Musket shot of the Castle,
and there planted it, though they played upon us all the way both from the
Castle and Steeple, which we so carefully avoided by woollpackes we carried
before us, that there was not one man shot in that Service.

We placed our piece to ruin one of the Flankers first, but when it was ready
to play, the Castle desired a Parley, wherein they asked Quarter for goods and
life, but that being denied, they were content to submit themselves to the
mercy of the Lords, who gave the Women and Children their clothes, lives, and
liberty to depart, the men we kept prisoners.

All this while the Steeple held out, nor would they yield until they had
conferred with their Captain, after which they submitted to mercy.

In the Castle were found 114. able men, besides 183. Women and Children, 22.
pound of Powder, and Bullets answerable: in the Steeple were only 40. men, who
had about 12 pound of powder, and shot enough. The next day we hanged 117. The
English Prisoners we freed, the rest we kept for exchange of such of ours as
were with the Enemy.

Thus was this Castle delivered unto us after one days Siege only, wherein we
lost not a man: The next day we left a Guard of 40. men in the Castle, and
marched away to our several Garrisons, expecting further command from our
General, which we received upon Wednesday, being the last of August.

Upon Thursday, the first of September, we Marched to Mallo, where we were
advertised from Liscarroll, that the Castle was straightly besieged, and that it
was impossible, without relief, they should hold it more then three days: the
messenger was rewarded and dispatched with answer they should expect us within
four and twenty hours; and that night we mounted our Artillery, two Sakers,
two Minions, two Falconets upon their Carriages: and on Friday, the second of
September, we came about eleven in the forenoone to Bontinant, our Rendezvous,
being a Village about four miles distant from Mallo, and as far from the
enemy; where, in regard the greatest part of the Army had been wearied with
the former days March, we encamped that night.

Here we were now with the Lord Inchequin our Generals forces, full 1700.
foot, and six tropes, out of which forty commanded horse were sent with
Captain Bridges to view their forces, but they returned without any perfect
discovery.

About two in the afternoon their Artillery began to play against the
Castle, which continued till night; it was determined therefore by a Council
of War, that we should the next morning show our selves before the Castle,
with resolution to adventure a battle rather then not to raise the siege, here
they ordered that the Lord Inchequin should command the horse, Sir Charles
Vavasor the foot, and Mynne his Lieutenant Colonel, should be Sergeant Major
General for that service.

But because the ground where the enemy stood was extremely disadvantageous,
they determined a full troop should March a a good distance before our men,
with orders, as the enemy advanced, to retreat; this we did to draw them from
their Quarters, which we heard they had fortified.

Thus we spent the day, at night orders came we should refresh our selves with
rest a while, and be ready to March the next morning before day.

The Irish, (who have still quick intelligence of all our actions) resolve to
use all diligence to take in the Castle first, after which they thought to set
upon us in our own Quarters, promising themselves a victory, which would
secure the whole Province to them; and indeed it was not to be doubted but
Youghall, Cork, and Kingsale, in all which were not more then four hundred
Soldiers left, would have cut the throats of their Garrisons, and declared
themselves for the Rebels, had it succeeded; herein for their mutual
encouragement, they bound themselves by oath, receiving the Sacrament upon it,
not to quit the field without the victory.

The next morning about two hours before day, when we were in readiness to
March, we sent our forlorn hope before us, consisting of thirty commanded
horse, led by Master Sturges a Gentleman of King sale: the whole Army marched
about half a mile distance after them according to our resolution the night
before.

About break of day they discovered a troop of the enemies, which stayed not
the encounter, but fled to their maine body; we continued our March, and about
half an hour after we came in sight of the Castle: the maine body of our
horse was here commanded to make a stand on a hill side a good English mile
distant from it, the Lords, Inchequin, Dungarvan, Kinalmeaky, and Brogbill,
Master Francis Boil, Captain Jepson, and Bridges went with the Lord
Inchequins troop to our forlorn hope which stood upon a little rising ground
in middle way betwixt us and the Castle of Liscarroll, the whole Army of the
Irish lay about a mile from them; which upon our first appearing was drawn out
in perfect good order; and this was the first time we saw their whole strength,
which was I believe about six thousand foot and three hundred horse.

The enemies horse began now to advance toward our forlorn troops, who
being now a little nearer the Castle, were unkindly saluted with a peale of
shot from the place we came to relieve, whereby we first discovered we had lost
the Castle.

Their horse which came on in good order, were all lined with Musqueteeres, so
that our forlorn hope and the Lord Inchequins troop were commanded to
retreat, which they performed with much bravery, by making frequent stands and
facing about to express how little they feared them: the enemy plied them with
continual shot, and got ground of them, yet they kept a most perfect order in
their retreat; the four Lords Inchequin, Dundarvan, Kinalmeakie, and Broghil,
marching still in the rear, and in this height of gallantry, fell the valiant
Gentleman, the Lord Kinalmeakie, his horse was brought off by his brother
Master Francis Boil, as his body had been, had any life at all remained in
him, but that they were forced to leave a prey to the enemy, and retreat to us,
who stood all this time on the side of the hill.

But this could not stop the current of their good fortune, for they still
pursued, their Musqueteeres running before to bushes and ditches, from whence,
with security they played upon us; their body of horse following to second
their Muskets, and their whole Army ready to relieve their horse upon all
engagements: the order the enemy here used was excellent, and certainly they
had that day Commanders of greater judgment then valor, otherwise both we and
the whole Province had suffered.

All our horse was now forced to retreat toward our foot, but so slowly that
their grand Body of six thousand advanced faster then we went off; we
retreated thus more then half a mile, till our foot came to us, out of which
we drew sixty Musketeers of Sir John Brownes company to beat off their
Ambushes, they played hotly upon us at first, ours did the like; the Lord
Inchequin standing by them on foot, giving directions till the Ambuscadoes
fled, whereupon their whole Army retreated to the place where they first stood
near the Castle; in their retreat they lodged shot in diverse places to play on
us as we advanced, which were all beaten back by Captain Saint-Leger,
Captain Thornton, and Lieutenant Rowning, who were commanded upon that service.

And now both sides began to prepare for battle, resolving that place should
decide all doubts betwixt them; they divided their foot into three bodies,
each consisting of near two thousand men, the right Wing was placed upon the
top of a little ri^ing ground near a fortification they had made, which was
well manned with store of shot, their left Wing stood near the Castle within
half Musket shot of another work wherein their Artillery was planted as a
guard to it; betwixt these two a little behind them stood their maine body,
consisting most of pikes; thus were their foot ordered; the horse advanced all
in one entire body, and made a stand near their right Wing upon the brow of
the hi^l.

Accordingly we divided our men into three parts, our battle which was
composed of Pikes and Muskets, being about eight hundred, stood upon a little
hill where our Artillery was planted almost opposite to their greatest body;
our right wingled by Sir Charles Vavasor, wherein were about 600. all
Musketeers, stood ore against their left Wing, and just opposite to their
right Wing we drew forth three hundred Muskets led by Captain Cooper and
Hutton Lieutenant to Sergeant Major Appl^yard: on the left hand of these we
placed our horse to encounter theirs: thus were the two Armies ranged in
Battalia, between which was a plain flat valley interposed about twenty
scoare in breadth.

You see upon what disadvantages we fought, they had advantage in number three
to one, advantage in ground, besides two Forts and the Castle, to any of which,
upon a die faster, they might have retreated; the Sun was for them too, only
God was for us, Et si Deus nobiscum (it was the word of one of the Colors we
took) quis contra nos? In this posture we stood about half an hour, in which
time they made fourteen shot at our horse, but without any execution, ours
played as fast upon them, and not with much better success, for only one shot
hit which slew five of them; our greater shot effecting so little, we resolved
to charge them with our less, and our horse was appointed to give the first
onset; the Lord Inchequin to charge the left hand seconded by Captain Jepsons
troop, and Captain Bridges, who had the Rear. The right hand the Lord
Dungarvan was appointed to charge, seconded by his brother the Lord Broghill,
and Oxenbridge Lieutenant to the Lord Barrimore brought up the Rear; between
the two Armies (as was before expressed) was a little meadow interposed about
twenty score in breadth, at the upper end of which, near the place where our
horse must necessarily pass to the charge, stood their Huts well lined with
Musqueteeres, which we imagined (knowing they used not to lose any advantage)
and sent down sixty of the three hundred to clear that passage, they
discharged hotly one upon another at first, but in fine they left their Huts,
and sought security behind their Army. Lieutenant Oxenbridge was sent to
pursue them, wherein he so far engaged his men, that had not all the troops
come to his relief, he had been cut off, the enemies whole troops coming
down upon him. But when they saw us advance, they made a stand, and so
received the charge: the Lord Inchequins troop had the Van, he himself
performed it bravely and resolutely, but his troop (by what misfortune I know
not) retreated, and in it disordered the Lord Dung revans, and the Lord
Broghils, and all the troops that followed. The Lord Inchequin charged Oliver
Stevenson a Captain of their horse, slew him, brought off his horse with a
rich saddle, and was himself in great danger, had he not been relieved by
Captain Jepson and Bridges, in which service Jepson was slightly wounded in
the hand, and his hat cut. The Lord Dungarvan charged another of their
Captains, shot him with a Pistol and wounded him, but so near they were,
that before he could recover his other shot, he gave him such a stroke with his
sword, that certainly his Lordship owes his life to the goodness of his Armor,
without which, out of doubt he had been slain, he was far engaged and still
accompanied by his brother the Lord Broghill who behaved himself very
gallantly that day, and had been taken, had the enemies pursued, the advantage
they had of our disordered retreat, but our 300 Muskets, who that day did
gallant service, plied them so fast with shot, that they gave both him and the
rest time to get off to ralley their troops, who were in such confusion, that
it was absolutely impossible to order them so soon as the necessity of the
service required; we feared likewise lest our confused retreat should have
discouraged our Foot; we resolved therefore to fall about only, and to the
charge again, which was performed with courage, and good success for the
Rebels seeing us resolute, they stayed only the discharging of their first
shot, and fled.

Their Foot supposing they should be unable to resist the fury of both Horse
and Foot, who all this time had found our three hundred Muskets an equal, (if
not an overmatch for them) would have accompanied their horse in their flight,
could they have followed fast enough, but a great part of this body fell short;
our Horse breaking in and doing much execution, one of their Ensigns, and the
first that I saw fall, was slain by the Lord Broghill, who shot him and
brought off his Colors. While we were thus employed, Sir Charles Vavasour with
his 600. fell bravely upon their left wing, which stood to guard their
Ordinance; the fight there was sharp while it lasted, diverse fell on their
fide, some of ours were wounded. Both their Artillery and small shot played
thick upon our men from the Fort, one of their Sakers they discharged at Sir
Charles when he was within half Musket shot, but without doing execution. At
length seeing our men's resolution, and that they were already deserted by their
own, that their Artillery wherein they did much confide, did not that service
was expected, they quitted the Fort and left Sir Charles the Artillery, which
had been unserviceable to them.

The third body, which stood firm all this time, (and well it might, for it
was out of Gunshot) seeing the rest fly, turned their backs and hasted to
their best Fort, a Bogge, which was about half a mile from them; We pursued,
and indeed the execution was bloody and cruel, no man gave Quarter, nor was it
fit, considering their multitude. Our Horse was now beyond the furthest part of
the Wood and Bogge where most of the Rebels lay, our Foot marched on in good
order toward it, so that they were on all sides encompassed, and I believe
they thought themselves it was impossible they should any of them escape, and
indeed I am confident no considerable number had come off from that days
service, had not my Lord Inchequin unfortunately mistaken our own men for
enemies, and caused us to retreat almost a mile, before we discovered our
error, in which time they fled to another Bogge, where it was impossible to
follow them, notwithstanding we pursued them two miles along the skirts of the
Wood, but did no great execution.

Thus after a long and doubtful fight, which continued full seven hours, we
at last obtained a glorious Victory. These were not such as formerly we met,
naked Rogues, but brave and gallant men, armed as well as our selves, nor did
they want any thing but a good cause. Twice they made our Horse, whereon we
most relied, to retreat, once they disordered and almost routed us, and then
God, as if he would manifest it was he alone in whom we ought to repose our
trust, caused us in that disorder to vanquish those, from whom when we charged
them in perfect order, we but newly had fled. There was slain in this battle
about 600. of the Rebels, on our side we lost but five beside the Lord
Kinalmeakie, about 30 were wounded, whereof diverse dyed since, some of theirs
were hurt, but the number is uncertain.

We took from them three pieces of Artillery whereof one was a brass
Demi-canon, of almost 7800 weight, the fame of which had won more Castles then
the valor of their whole Army, the other were Sakers, one Brass, the other
Iron; besides these we took two or three hundred Muskets, and so many Pikes
they served us for firewood; Of powder we had th^ee Barrels, and about 200.
Bullets, all which were sent with the Artillery to Cork.

Fourteen of their colors we carried away with us, whereof five were taken
by the Lord Broghils troop, besides that he took himself: The prisoners were
few, because the execution was so bloody; notwithstanding some we have of good
quality, as Colonel Butler, whose valor was heretofore recommended by his
Majesty to the King of Poland, and indeed this day he showed much gallantnesse,
being the last man that stood of their whole Army; besides him we took
Captain Butler, Thomas Burgale, and their Commissary General.

In the Wagons, whereof thirty were taken, we found store of pillage, and some
of good value: there were present at this fight almost all the Lords of
Munster, viz. the Lord Bache, Lord Muskry, Lord Ikerine, Lord Dunboine Bureh,
Lord Britas Bureh, Lord Casteronnell Buller, Brother to the Lord Ormond,
Sergeant major Furcell, Sergeant major Henesy.

Thus you have the Relation of that Memorable Battle was fought at Lisearroll
on Saturday the third of September, where, next God, nothing did contribute
more to our Victory, then the necessity we had of sighting; advantages they had
of us every way, only we were Virtute pares, and necessitate superiores.

FINIS.

