THE ANARCHIE, Or the blessed Reformation since 1640.
Being a new Song, wherein the people express their thanks and pray for the
Reformers.
To be said or sung of all the well affected of the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, before the breaking up of this unhappy Parliament.
To a Rare New Tune.
NOW that thanks to the Powers below,
We have e'ne done out our do,
The Miter is down,
And so is the Crown
And with them the Coronet too;
Come Clownes and come boys,
Come hober de hoyes,
Come Females of each degree,
Stretch your throats, bring in your Votes,
And make good the Anarchy.
And thus it shall go says Alice,
Nay thus it shall go says Amy;
Nay thus it shall go says Taffie I trow,
Nay thus it shall go says Iamy.
Ah but the Truth good people all,
The Truth is such a thing,
For it would undo, both Church and State too,
And cut the throat of our King;
Yet not the Spirit, nor the new light,
Can make this point so clear,
But thou must bring out, thou Deified rout
What thing this truth is and where.
Speak Abraham, speak Kester, speak Judith, speak Hester;
Speak tag and rag, short coat and long,
Truth's the spell made us rebel,
And murder and plunder ding dong.
Sure I have the truth says Numph,
Nay I have the truth says Clemme;
Nay I have the truth says reverend Ruth,
Nay I have the truth says Nem.
Well let the Truth be where it will,
We Are sure all else is ours,
Yet these divisions in our Religions,
May chance abate our powers;
Then let us agree on some one way,
It skills not much how true,
Take Pryn and his Clubs, or Say and his Tubs,
Or any Sect old or new;
The Devils in the Pack, if choice you can lack,
We Are fourscore Religions strong,
Take your choice, the major voice
Shall carry it right or wrong:
Then we will be of this says Megg,
Nay we will be of that says Tibb,
Nay we will be of all says pitiful Paul,
Nay we will be of none says Gibb.
Neighbors and Friends pray one word more,
There Is something yet behind,
And wise though you be, you do not well see
In which door sits the wind;
As for Religion to speak right,
And in the Houses sense,
The matter's all one to have any or none,
If 'twere not for the pretense;
But herein does lurk the key of the work,
Even to dispose of the Crown,
Dexteriously and as may be
For your behoof in our own.
Then lets have King CHARLES says George,
Nay lets have his son says Hugh,
Nay then lets have none says jabbering Ione,
Nay lets be all Kings says Prue.
Oh we shall have (if we go on
In Plunder, Excise, and blood)
But few folk and poor to domineere ore,
And that will not be so good:
Then lets resolve on some new way,
Some new and happy course,
The Countries grown sad, the City horn mad,
And both Houses are worse.
The Synod has writ, the General has --
And both to like purpose too,
Religion, Laws, the Truth, the Cause
Are talked of, but nothing we do.
Come come shal's have peace says Nell,
No no but we will not says Madge,
But I say we will says fiery faced Phill,
We will and we will not says Hodge.
Thus from the rout who can expect
Ought but division;
Since Unity does with Monarchy,
Begin and end in One;
If then when all is thought their own,
And lies at their behest,
These popular pates reap naught but debates
From that many Round-headed beast.
Come Royalists then, do you play the men,
And Cavaliers give the word,
Now lets see at what you would be,
And whether you can accord;
A health to King CHARLES says Tom,
Up with it says Ralph like a man,
God bless him says Doll, and raise him says Moll,
And send him his own says Nan.
Now for these prudent Things that fit
Without end, and to none,
And their Committees that Towns and Cities
Fill with confusion;
For the bold Troops of Sectaries,
The Scots and their partakers;
Our new British States, Col Burges and his Mates,
The Covenant and its Makers,
For all these we will pray, and in such a way,
As if it might granted be,
Jack and Gill, Mat and Will,
And all the World would agree.
A pox take them all says Besse,
And a plague too says Margery,
The Devil says Dick, and his Dam too says Nick,
Amen and Amen say I.
It is desired that the Knights and Burgesses would take especial care to send
down full numbers hereof, to their respective Counties and Buroughs, for
which they have served Apprentiship, that all the people may rejoice as one man
for their freedom.

(...): 24 1648
FINIS.

