A DECLARATION AND COMMISSION for Three Months ASSESMENT, Of Ten thousand
Pounds by the Month; Beginning the 12th of April 1655, and Ending the 12th of
July following.

seal of the Commonwealth

April this 5. 1655.

By the Lord Deputy and Council.

ORdered by the Lord Deputy and Council, That this Commission for the
Assesment, be forthwith Printed and Published.

THO: HERBERT Clerk of the Council.

DVBLIN, Printed by WILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1655.

IRELAND By the Lord Deputy and Council.
A DECLARATION and COMMISSION for three Months Assesment of Ten thousand Pounds
by the Month, beginning the 12 of April 1655, and ending the 12 of July
following.
WHereas by an Ordinance of his Highness the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland. and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, with the advice of his Council, bearing date the 23th. of June,
1654. Entitled, An Ordinance for the further encouragement of the Adventurers
for Lands in Ireland, and of the Soldiers, and other Planters there. It is
(...) things) that from and (...) the 24th. Day of June 1^54. For and during
the space of two years, the^ ^ext e^suing, there shall be Taxed, Assessed, and
Lea^ie^, upon all (...) places in Ireland, and all the Estates real and
personal therein, the sum of Ten thousand pounds by the month, for every month,
during the said two years: It is, ^e^efore (...) Ordered, and Declared, that
toward the pay of the forces of the Commonwealth to Ireland, and other
public charges, the Counties, Cities, and places, be charged for three months,
with the sums hereafter named, respectively, by the several sums, and according
to the several Rates, and proportions, and in manner and form hereafter
expressed, viz.

The County of Dublin, the sum of thirteen hundred pounds for three months.

The City and County of Dublin, the sum of eight hundred pounds for three
months.

The County of Kilda^^, the sum of six hundred pounds for three months.

The County of Catherlagh, the sum of two hundred and nine pounds for three
months.

The Kings County, the sum of one hundred sixty eight pounds for three months.

The Queens County, the sum of three hundred forty six pounds for three months.

The County of Longford, the sum of fifty pounds for three months.

The County of East-Meath, the sum of two thousand (...) hundred ninety two
pounds, for three months.

The County of West-Meath, the sum of four hundred pounds for three months.

The County of Kilkenny, the sum of one thousand five hundred eighty five
pounds for three months.

The County of Wexford, the sum of five hundred ninety nine pounds, for three
months.

The County of Wicklo, the sum of fifty seven pounds for three months.

The County of Limerick, with the City and County thereof, the sum of eight
hundred forty seven pounds for three months.

The County of Cork, with the City and County thereof, the sum of three
thousand nine handred eighty eight pounds for three months.

The County of Waterford, with the City and County thereof the sum of one
thousand three hundred and two pounds for three months.

The County of Kerry, the sum of two hundred fifty five pounds for three
months.

The County of Tipperary, including Ho^^cross, the sum of one thousand nine
hundred and forty pounds for three months.

The County of Clare, the sum of four hundred and fifty pounds for three
months.

The County of Donegal or Tirconel, the sum of one thousand, two hundred and
forty pounds, for three months.

The County of Tirone, including upper and nether Tirone, the sum of three
hundred and ninety pounds for three months.

The County of Fermanagh, the sum of three hundred and seventeen pounds for
three months.

The County of Cavan, the sum of two hundred twenty nine pounds for three
months.

The County of Monaghan, the sum of one hundred twenty nine pounds for three
months.

The County of Antrim, with the Town and County of Carrickfergus, the sum of
two thousand and seventie pounds for three months.

The County of Down, the sum of seventeen hundred and forty pounds, for three
months.

The County of Ardmagh, the sum of two hundred and nineteen pounds for three
months.

The County of Londonderry, with the City and County thereof, and the Town
and Barony of Colera^e, the sum of one thousand two hundred and fifty pounds
for three months.

The County of Lowth, the sum of seven hundred forty eight pounds for three
months.

The County of Roscomon, the sum of six hundred and sixty pounds for three
months.

The County of Mayo, the sum of four hundred and thirty pounds, for three
months.

The County of Sligo, the sum of five hundred pounds for three months.

The County of Letrim, the sum of fifty pounds for three months.

The County of Gallway, the sum of two thousand three hundred and forty pounds
for three months.

And it is further Ordered, That the several Commissioners of the respective
Counties and Places, nominated in an Order and Commission for the Assesment,
bearing date the first of January last; as also those that are appointed by
Order in writing from us, shall be and are hereby Ordered to be Commissioners
for the Assessing, Leavying, and Collecting the Assesments aforesaid.

And it is further Ordered, That the said Commissioners appointed for the
respective Counties and Cities aforesaid, shall in Assessing, Leavying and
Collecting the Assesment aforesaid, observe the Directions and Instructions in
the aforementioned Order and Commission for the Assesments, bearing date the
first of January aforesaid, and the respective powers and directions in the
said Order and Commission, the aforesaid Commissioners or any three of them,
are empowered to put in effectual execution. Provided nevertheless, That if the
way of a pound rate shall prove prejudicial and obstructive to the bringing in
of the said three Months Assesment, hereby appointed or ordered; that then and
in all such cases the major part of the said Commissioners in any of the
Counties and Cities aforesaid being met according to Summons for that purpose
to be given by the Receivers in each County, shall be and are authorized to
proceed accordingly, to the most just and equal way of rates held in such
places in the apportioning, Assessing and Leavying the respective Sums charged
upon them: Provided, That notwithstanding any former practice or directions, no
Commissioners hereby or formerly nominated, shall be forced to go out of the
Country for which they serve or are appointed for the managing the said
Assesments. And to the end no impediment may be in managing the work aforesaid,
the said Commissioners, or any five or more of them, are hereby empowered to
choose, nominate and appoint such fitting Clerk or Clerks, as shall be necessary
for transscribing the said Assesments, Certificates or other Papers relating to
the said Assesment.

And it is hereby further Ordered, That the said Commissioners do make returns
of the said Assesments to the Commissioners General, and the respective
Receivers according as in the aforementioned Assesment is directed.

Dated at Dublin the fifth of April, 1655. Tho. Herbert, Clerk of the Council.

By the Lord Deputy and Council.
Ordered by the Lord Deputy and Council, That this Commission for the Assesment
be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas Herbert Clerk of the Council.
April 5. 1655.

