SIXTEEN QVERES PROPOUNDED By the Parliament of Ireland to the Judges of the
said Kingdom. AS ALSO, Another SPEECH, made by Captain Audley Mervin, to the
House of Commons, concerning their Privileges, and their exorbitant grievances
in that Kingdom.

Printed in the Year; 1641.

SIXTEEN QVAERFS, Propounded by the Parliament of Ireland, to the Judges of
the said Kingdom.
I. THat the Judges may set forth and declare, whether the Inhabitants of this
kingdom be a free people, or whether they be to be governed only by the
ancient common laws of England.

II. Whether the Judges of the Land do take the Oath of Judges, and if so,
whether under pretext of any Acts of State, Proclamation, Writ, Letter, or
direction under the great or privy Seal, or privy Signet, or Letter, or
other commandment from the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, Justice, Justices,
or other chief Governor, or Governors of this Kingdom they may hinder, stay
or delay the suite of any Subject, or his judgment, or execution thereupon, if
so, in what cases, and whether, if they do hinder, stay or delay such suite,
judgment or execution, what punishment do they incur by the Law for their
deviation and transgression therein.

III. Whether the Kings Majesty's privy Counsel, either together, or with the
chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, without him or them be a place
of Judicature, by the common Laws, where in case between party and party for
Debts, Trespasses, Accounts, Covenants, possessions, and title of Land, or any
of them, and with them may be heard, and determined, and of what civil Causes
they have jurisdiction, and by what Law, and of what force is their order or
Decree, in such cases or any of them.

IV. The like of the chief Governors alone.

V. Whether Grant of Monopolies be warrantable by the Law, and of what, and in
what Cases, and how, and where, and by whom, are the Transgressors against such
Grantees punishable, and whether by Fine and mutilation of Members,
imprisonment, loss, and forfeiture of goods, or otherwise, and which of them.

VI. Jn what Cases the Lord Deputy, or other chief Governors of this Kingdom
and Counsel, may punish by Fine, imprisonment, Mutilation of Members, Pillory,
or otherwise, they may sentence any to such the same, or the like punishment,
for infringening the commands of any Proclamation, or Monopoly, and what
punishment do they incur, that do vote for the same.

VII. Of what force is an Act of state or Proclamation in this Kingdom to bind
the liberty, goods, possessions, or inheritance of the natives thereof, whether
they or any of them can alter the common Law, or the infringers of them lose
their Goods, Chattels, or Leases, or forfeit the same by infringing any such
Act of State or Proclamation, or both, and what punishment do the sworn
Judges of the Law, that are privy Counselors, incur that vote for such Act
and execution of it.

VIII. Whether the subjects of this Kingdom be subject to the Marshall Law,
and whether any man in time of peace, no enemy being in the fields, with
displayed can be sente^ced to Death, if so, by whom, and in what cases, if not,
what punishment do they incur that in time of peace, execute Marshall Law.

IX. Whether voluntary Oaths taken freely before Arbitrators, or others for
affirmance, or disaffirmance of any thing, or for the true performance of any
thing, be punishable in the Castle-Chamber, or in any other Court, and why and
wherefore.

X. Why, and by what Law, and upon what Rule of policy is it, that none is
admitted to reducement in the Castle-chamber, until he confess the offense
for which he is censured, when as Revera he might be innocent thereof, though
subordined proofs or circumstances, might induce him to be censured.

XI. Whether the Judges of the Kings Bench, and by what law, do or can deny,
the copies of Indictments, of Felony, or Treason to the parties accused of
Treason, contrary to the statute of 42. Edw. 3.

XII. Whether the statute of Baltinglase take from the Subjects, outlawed for
Treason, though erroniously, the benefit of his Writ of Error, and how, and by
what means, that blind clause not warranted, by the body of that Act came to
be inserted, and by what Law is it countenanced to the diminution of the
liberty of the subject.

XIII. What power have the Barons and the Court of Exchequer, to raise the
respite of homage Arbitrarily to what value they please, and to what value they
may raise it, and by what Law they may distinguish between respite of homage,
upon the diversities of the true value of the Fees, when as all Escuage is the
same for great and small Fees, and the apportionable by Parliament.

XIIII. Whether it is censurable in the subjects of this Kingdom, to repair
into England to appeal to his Majesty for Redress of Jnjuries, or for others
their accusers, if so, why, and in what condition of persons, and by what Law.

XV. Whether Deanes and other Dignitaries of Cathedral Churches, be properly
de mero jure donative, by this King, or not elective or collative, if so, why,
and by what Law, and whether the confirmation of a Deane de facto of the
Bishops Grantee be good, and valid in the Law, or no, if not, by what Law.

XVI. Whether the issuing of Quo Warranto's against Burroughes, that anciently,
and recently sent Burgesses to the Parliament, to show cause why they sent
Burgesses to the Parliament be legal.

CAPTAIN AVDLEY MERVINS SPEECH to the House of Commons in Ireland.
Mr Speaker,
IT was equal care and policy in our Predecessors. First to lay a foundation,
and then by a continued industry to build and perfect so glorious a fabrique as
the house of Commons lawful summoned by the Kings writ represents it self
unto us at this day. In which so elaborate and exquisite a structure being
finished and crowned with those fruitful and peace-speaking events, may
challenge by right the title of a Jubilee.

To so great a model with neat and provident husbandry they intend no less
then suitable furniture (which allowed pride) disdain to cloth it with any
other, but with what by his Majesty's favor they had procured out of his own
store; J mean those great and large privileges, which by several acts of
royal favor have bin dispensed, annexed, nay hypostatically united, to the
same Privileges are the soul, by which we move the Sinues and Nerves, by
which we are compacted, they are the^, by which we breath Privileges for their
birth allied to the Kings Prerogative, for their antiquity sacred, for their
strength so re-intrenched by common law, fortified by statutes, insconsed by
precedents of all times, that no man ever attempted their violation with
impunity, so that now and then it may be truly said, The Kings house is all
glorious within. If we which are Heirs to their laws, is unto their lands,
will strive to make no addition to the rich invent ^^ie of those privileges
they have bequeathed* ^^to us, yet with united spirits, let us all least
prevent the dilapidation; nay the diminution of the least of them.

This present occasion of debating Mr. Fitz-Gerralds petition exhibited to this
honorable house, sets before us blessings and cursings, and is the first leaf
(as we may term it) of the house of commons Almanac, not made to serve for
one, but for many years, and calculated to serve indifferently for all
latitudes, in which, our carriage makes this and all succeeding days but
sevill and working days, or otherwise imprints this day and our privileges in
a conspicuous, plausive rubrique to posterity; whilst the Palladium was in
Troy, neither the power nor the long siege of the Grecians, could prevail
against it, whilst Minoes purple locks curled from their native roots, Creete
was unvanquished. The Moral of these (affictions) emphatically preach and
teach us this Doctrine, that the safety, pregnancy, glory, and strength of this
house, is but only sent us upon this condition, whilst we keep, preserve, and
defend our liberties, our rights, our privileges unbetrayed, unsuppressed, and
uncontrolled: if any more allied to the corruptions of our own distempers, then
challenging an interest in us by a legitimate birth, could involve this grave
and great assembly, in such epidemicall liturgy, as directly to snore, or at
lest to wink whilst our privileges clothed in a purple robe of glory (like a
word never to be recalled) escape from among us, I say if ungrateful, I should
cut off the inheritance of these immunities entailed upon us, and confirmed is
a monumentall portion upon this younger brother of state, this House of Commons
what can we expect, but that our Fathers Ghosts apparetted with indignation,
should (...) unto us with this or the liking branding phrase. Most ungrateful
and unfortunate posterity. O aetas parentum pejor Avis; better had it bin for
you not to live then to outlive your own infamy. If there had been a
necessity, you should involve your selves in a general-guilt, the election
ought to have been of such a one as might have dyed with your selves; but this
like original sin, binds your posterity to sigh for a redemption. Did we
bequeath unto you those fair ornaments to be stolen or snatched from you? Oh,
where, where was your vigilance and boldness to present so disasterous and
fatal a consequence. Did we with no better success of imitation by your
labor, and even unto hoarsenesse contend in the Parliament held 39. Hen. 6. as
Prophesying your weakness, leave you a record to build upon? Where we
admitted and privileged one Walter Clarke a Burgess of Ch^pengham, though at
that time in execution ad sect. Reg. Did we for this purpose recommend unto you
Ferrars case and our proceedings against the disturbers of his right? Did we
for this purpose recommend unto you Belgraves case 43. of the Queen. Who
notwithstanding he procured his election in Winchester by collusion, yet Mangre
the great opposition raised by the Earl of Huntington upon the sight of the
Sheriffs return (a sufficient amerment to satisfy us) we admitted and
confirmed him in the protection of our house, did we for this purpose
exemplify unto you the case of Richard Chidder, 5. Henry 4. who being arrested
in his journey toward the Parliaments (where note that the date of the
election is the date of the privilege.) They are twins of one birth, we
ingraft him as a twig to be writhed by our common root, and quickly lopt off
that so perilous authority which would prunne our branches. Nay Mr. Speaker, our
fellows laboring Parliament in England, with their hearty commendation have
transmitted unto us a precedent from each house. The house of the Lords opening
the gates of the Tower to prepare an entry to the censured Bishop of Lincoln,
and the house of Commons with like imitation and likesuccesse having performed
the same in Sir John Elliot and innumerable others. But now I will endeavor to
allay the distempered spirits of our Fathers, whilst with more patience and
duty we attend the modest corrections of our indulgent King. And so exeunt
Patres; and Intr. H. 8. in his own person commending the resolution and zeal
of the house of Commons in preserving the luster of their owne^ Privileges
from being Eclipsed, alleging himself to be interessed in them, since that
he and they, knit together, completed one body, who in this out deserved
calamities, would not rather imitate us by scoss, then qualify our untimely
repentance by absence of our own murdering wrongs. What may not E. 4.
exprobrate unto us, who in the 3. year of his reign, records his regal
pleasure to posterity? That all Acts, Suites, judgments, censures and qui dicit
omne excludit nullum, awarded against any Member of Parliament, should be
utterly void and frustrate, crowning the Act with an Emphaticall epiphonema and
this act to endure for ever. And surely common reason is pregnant in the
justification thereof. That where the public service and good is primarily
intended, a supersedeas must issue to private respects, since they cannot stand
in competition, and inhabit our sphere: If their judgments are not yet calmed
and settled, behold his Majesty, that now is, clothed in his royal Robes, and
thus speaking unto you from underneath his state, Gentlemen, why stagger you
thus, that are your selves the pillars of the commonweal, you are not upon
breaking the Ice, nor bound upon the discovery of the unknown world, each
leaf reports your precedents that are like Maps that secure and expedite your
fortunate Navigation. From me you can expect no more satisfaction, then what J
have declared in the 3. year of my Reign, in answer to the Petition of Right
in Parliament, that J am interested in the maintaining of the Privileges of
this House, being a maine pillar of the liberty of my Subject, the goods of one
(...) being seized in my name, and for my use, for denying. Tonnage and
pondage, they reassumed, he being at the time of that seizure a Member of the
House, and whether J distasted, sure J am, J had no redress. As for the tender
care of my interest in the Fine of 10000 l. and that you admitted my Attorney
general to a favorable hearing in my behalf, though against your selves (a
Parliamentary custom not to be written in small Print) I thank you Gentlemen,
yet I think you know, as well as I, that these great sounding Fines to me,
have in their effects, but short and little accounts, if there be 3. bags, the
little one is mine: The 5000. l. damages to the party (a sum equal) or more
to the defendants estate) is as much as Magna Charta, by those words of falvo
contenem^nto, would warrant. Therefore my Judges, by dividing it, might have
considered me somewhat, whereas now the old proverb binds me, where there is
nothing left, the King loses his right.

Now Mr. Speaker, in a Parliamentary way, we must withdraw and enter into our
own Sphere. Enter into a discuss of those objections, that impugn Mr.
Fitz-Gerralds election, admittance and privilege of this House.

The first that ushers in the train, is a sentence clothed in sable, standing
on tip-toe, and with a rustie dagger thrusting at a star, I mean a sentence
speaking error, a sentence visiting the third and fourth generation, a sentence
striving to leap over the bounds of magna charta, thirty times confirmed, a
sentence awarded against a Judge of a higher Court, then from which it issued.
The cause in question is to nullify this sentence, which if he appear a
person capable of his privilege, mote sua vivit, and then neither it, nor any
thing derivatory, or collater all to it, may be admitted against him by the
rules of common, civil, or cannon Law, it being a maxim consonant to them
all. Non potes edduci ejusdam rei excepie cujus petitur dissolutio. Now to
prove this sentence void (Mr. Speaker) I being no professor of the Law, yet a
Disciple of reason, and the body of the audient Subject to the like guilt: I
will couch myselse in arguments, quae probat and non probantur, leaving
precedents and Booke-cases to the learned long Robe: Then thus I argue. By the
Stat. 3. E. 4. All judgeme^ts, censures, sentences, etc. awarded against a
member of Parliament are void, so was this government: some may say, the King
is not here included, I say (qui dicit omne, excludit nullum) And experience,
the mother of know ledge, teaches the same in precedents before rehearsed, and
one J will add for all, which is Trewman, 38. Hen. 8. who was in execution
upon a writ of exigent after a Capias adsatis faciend. at the Kings suite, and
yet privileged, besides, this is not at the Kings suite, for the King is
interessed here but secondarily both in name and profit. Now I must make good
my minor, that he is a member of this house: he that was duly elected and
truly returned, is a member of this house, so was he. Ergo, etc. My minor will
be questioned, J confirm it thus, where the Kings writ for election is duly
pursued, according to the most used and received form, there such an election
is good, so was this. Ergo. Here (Mr. Speaker) falls the weight of their
objection, which we will master, and answer with equal speed, and first
vellicat mihi aureum nescio quis, and says the writ is Burgenside Burgo, but
he is not Burgensis de Burgo. First I say quomodo constat, here is none to
offer in proof he is not so, beside I offer it in Quaere, whether the election
does not ipso facto make him a Burgess, and in omni instanti, again I say the
writ is directive not positive. v.g. in a venire facias, the Sheriff commanded
to return 12. yet if he return not 24. he shall be fined, in respect
experience and practice proves, some of the 12. may be questioned and
challenged: besides the writ explains it self, the Knights must be Comitatus
tui, but the Burgesses and Citizens dequalibit Civitate and Burgo, which can
admit of no other co^struction, but these two Burgesses out of every Borough
(and not as Comitattus tui, is, which were then of every Borough, and
certainly the Law provided this with great reason as not doubting every Sheere
could afford * Knights, resident, yet jealous, whether every borough could
provide 2. resident Burgesses qualified with these necessary adju^cts, as could
befit a member of so noble a place; Again the writ commands duos milites, and
yet exception was never taken upon retorning of Esquires, so that the writ
expounds it self, it is not literally to be taken. Next there is Thunder and
Lightning shot out of the Statute, 33. H. 8 being a Stat. to regulate election,
and absolutely commanding every Knight and Burgess to be resident and have a
certain Fee-simple in every borough and County, our of which they are
elected; Here they suppose our Privilege will cry quarter as ready to be
murtherd by the Statute, but it is ominous ante victoria^ canere. For first, we
answer, that the disuse of a Statute antiquates a Statute, as is observed upon
the Statute of Merton, and custom applauded by fortunate experience has in
all Parliaments ever prevailed; a house of Commons would rather present Babell
in it is confusion, if the Tincker would speak his Dialect, the Cobbler his, and
the Butcher conclude a greasy Epilogue, then the writ were well pursued, these
were J donei homines to take and give counsel de rebus arduis; but even to cut
off the head of their own argument by a Sword of their own, this Stat. of 33.
H. 8. see mes by the preamble to be made in repeal of all former Statuts, by
which, election not qualified with residencie, was made void, and so became a
greevance to the Commonwealth, and therefore this Statute makes the election
not observed ut supra, only penal, so that there is nothing offered in
objection, either from the writ or Statute to avoid this election. Now I have
placed him and daily elected him, and then his privilege grows by
consequence, but yet we have other objections minoris magnitudinis, and to
repeat them is to confute them; First say they every Libelleris, de jure,
excommunicated; J answer, every Libeller must be Scriptis; Pictis, or
Cantilenis, our member is guilty of none of them, no, he is not termed, so
neither in the censure, nor in any present proceeding. Another flourish is,
that he pleaded not his privilege in the Castle-Chamber, in which very
objection, they confess him privileged, and make themselves guilty, that they
would proceed against a known member of our House. But see the Roman Spirit of
Mr. Fitzgerald, who would rather undergo the hazard of being a Star Chamber
Martyr, then to submit our Privilege to an extrajudiciall debate. It was in
our honor he did this, and for his eternal applause: some body says the
castle chamber will think it self injured, there being Lords of the house of
parliament at and in the censure. As for the Lords, humanum est errare, but the
Judges are rather involved in these words Prameditata militia, for his election
was the 11. of November sitting the in Parliament; and his censure the 13. of
December, so they had 22. or 23. days to repent of their ill-grounded
resolution, a greater affront never offered to the house of Commons, being
comparative, as if the Recorder of the Tolsell should sentence the Lord chief
Justice of Ireland a member of our house is a walking Record: and needs not to
melt the Kings picture in his pocket. Others allege, it was an election
purchased by collusion, but de non existentibus and non apparentib. eadem est
ratio. And since the end of his election is in it self and per-se, for the
advancing of the public service, as well as to prove a sentence not then in
rerum natura, both Law and charity in a benign co^struction of these 2. ends
will allow the more favorable. Another objection is whispered, that the
entrance is not found in the Clerk of the Parliaments Role; This is no matter
to the validity of his election, for his Privilege commenced 40. days before
the Parliament, therefore this and the like are to be judged of as accidentia
quae possunt abesse and adesse sine subjecti interitu. Truly (Mr. Speaker) my
memory and lungs begin to prove Traitors to me; Another objection, if omitted,
may be judged by these of what strength and maturity they, even as by the
coynage of a penny, one may judge of a shilling; What hinders then, since here
is water but, that he may be baptized? Here are no non obstant's to be
admitted in his new Pattent of Denization, the common law, the Statute law, the
Canon, the Civil Law plead for his admittance, the writ of election, the
exe^plification of the Sheriffs return, all presidents of all ages, all
reports plead for his admittance, our Forefathers Ghosts, the present practice
of Parliaments in England plead for his admittance, the Kings successive
commands, command and confirm his admittance; Away then Sergeant and with the
hazarding power of our Mace touch the Marshals gates, and (as if there were
Divinity in it) they will open and bring us our Olive branch of peace wrested
from our stock, that with welcome Art we may ingraft him to be nourished by a
common root. Thus the King shall receive the benefit of an able Subject, who
is otherwise, Civiliter mortuus, we enjoy the participation of his labor, and
posterity both ours and this.

FINIS.

