An ACT OF STATE, Made by The Lords Justices and Council OF IRELAND, For the
Observation of the Three and twentieth day of OCTOBER yearly, to be a day of
Thanksgiving, for the discovery and prevention of the horrible Conspiracy and
Plot of the Papists, to massacre all the Protestants in that Kingdom.

W. Parsons, Jo. Borlase.

Printed first at Dublin, by William Bladen, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. And now reprinted at London for Edward Husbands. November.
23. 1642.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lords Justices and Council.
W. Parsons, Jo. Borlase.


WHereas many malignant and devilish Papists and Jesuits, Friars, Seminary
Priests, and other superstitious Orders of the Popish pretended Clergy, most
disloyally, treacherously, and wickedly conspired to surprise His Majesty's
Castle of Dublin, His Majesty's principal Fort in this Kingdom, the City of
Dublin, and all other Cities and Fortifications in this Realm, to massacre us
the Lords Justices and Council, to destroy and root out all the Protestant
British, and all other Protestants in this Realm; and finally, to deprive His
Majesty of this His ancient and rightful Crown and Sovereignty of this
Kingdom, and to possess themselves thereof; All which was by the said
Conspirators plotted, and intended to be acted on the 23 day of October, in the
Year of our Lord God, 1641. A Conspiracy so inhumane, barbarous, and cruel, as
the like was never before heard of in any Age or Kingdom: And if it had taken
effect in that fullness which was intended by the Conspirators, it had
occasioned the utter ruin of this, whole Kingdom, and the Government thereof.

And howsoever it pleased Almighty God in his unsearchable Wisdom and Justice,
as a just punishment, and deserved correction to us for our sins, and the sins
of this Nation, to permit then, and afterward, the effecting of a great part
of that destruction complotted by those wicked Conspirators, whereby many
thousand British and Protestants have been massacred; many thousands of others
of them have been afflicted and tormented, with the most exquisite Torments
that the malice of the devil could suggest to the mischievous Rebels, And all
men's Estates (as well those whom they traitorously slew, as all others) are
utterly wasted, ruined, and destroyed: Yet as his Divine Majesty has in all
Ages shown his power and mercy in the miraculous and gracious Deliverance of
his Church, and in the protection of Religious Kings and States, so even in the
midst of his Justice, he was graciously pleased to extend mercy to His Majesty,
and to this His Kingdom, and good subjects therein, not only in miraculously
discovering to us the Lords Justices, that hideous and bloody Treason, not many
hours before the appointed time for the execution thereof, but also in
preserving the said Castle and City of Dublin, and some other Cities, Towns,
and Castles in the Kingdom, from the bloody hands of the barbarous
Conspirators; as also in thereby rendering deliverance to the lives of us the
Lords Justices and Council, and of all the British and Protestants in Dublin,
and in the said other Cities, Towns, and Castles preserved, and of sundry other
British and Protestants, fallen even into the hands of those Rebellious
Conspirators; and likewise in sending us succors (whereby with Gods blessing)
we have hitherto continued safe under his mighty protection, notwithstanding
the unexampled rage, and implacable fury and malice of those merciless enemies
of Gods Truth.

Wherefore, as we do most humbly and justly acknowledge Gods Justice in our
deserved punishments, in those calamities which from the Counsels and Actions
of those Conspirators and their adherents are fallen upon us, and this Nation in
general, so we do in like manner acknowledge, That even in exercising of that
his Justice, he remembered mercy also, and magnified his mercy to us, in those
great blessings which we humbly confess to have proceeded merely from his
infinite goodness and mercy; and therefore to his most holy Name we do ascribe
all Honor, Glory, and Praise. And to the end this unfeigned thankfulness may
never be forgotten, but may be had in a perpetual Remembrance, that all Ages
to come may yield praises to his Divine Majesty for the same, and have in
Memory, This joyful day of Deliverance; We do ordain and establish by this our
Act of Council (in the mean time, until by Authority of Parliament it shall
be made a Law to be delivered over to Posterity) That all and singular
Ministers in every Cathedral and Parish Church, or other usual place for
Common Prayer in this Realm of Ireland, shall always upon the 23 day of
October, say Morning Prayer, and give thanks unto Almighty God, for this most
happy and miraculous Deliverance, and for our preservation hitherto, far above
the expectation of those wretched Conspirators; And that all and every person
and persons, inhabiting within this Realm of Ireland, shall always upon that
day, diligently and faithfully resort to the Parish Church or Chapel
accustomed, or to some usual Church or Chapel where the said Morning Prayer,
Preaching, or other Service of God shall be used, and then and there to abide
orderly and soberly, during the time of the said Prayers, Preaching, or other
Service of God there to be used and ministered.

And because all and every person may be put in mind of his Duty, and be then
better prepared to the said holy Service, We do ordain and establish, by this
our Act of Council, That every Minister shall give warning to his Parishioners
publicly in the Church at Morning Prayer, the Sunday before every such 23 day
of October, for the due observation of the said day: And that after Morning
Prayer and Preaching, upon the said 23 day of October, they read publicly,
distinctly, and plainly, this our Act of Council.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of DUBLIN, the 14 day of October, 1642. Ormond.
Ad. Loftus. Geo Shurley. Gerrard Lowther. J. Temple. Tho. Rotheram. Fr.
Willoughby. Ja. Ware. G. Wentworth. Rob. Meredith.


FINIS.

