Moses his Death: Opened and applied, IN A SERMON At Christ-Church in London,
December. 23. MDCLVI. AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. Edward Bright, M. A. Fellow of
Emmanuel College in Cambridge, and Minister of the Gospel there.

By Samuel Jacombe M. A. Fellow of Queens College in Cambridge, and Pastor of
Mary Woolnoth, Lumbardstreet, London.

With some ELEGIES.

Nec unquam magnis ingeniis cara in corpore mora est. Exire atque ^rumpere
gestiunt: Aegre has augustias ferunt, Vagi per omne sublime et ex alto assueti,
humana despicere. Inde est quod Plate clamat Sapientis animum totum in mortem
prominere, hoc velle, hoc meditari, hac simper cupidine ferri, in exteriora
tendentem.

Seneca lib. de Consol. ad Martiam, c. 23. London, Printed for Adoniram
Byfield, at the Bible in Popeshead Alley near Lumbardstreet. 1657.

To the Reverend and Learned WILLIAM DILLINGHAM, D. D. Mr. of Emmanuel COLLEGE
in CAMBRIDGE.
And to the Fellows of that Religious Foundation.
HONORED SIRS,
HE whose memory is a faithful Register of former practice, and whose judgment
does not much miscarry in his observation of present experience, will as easily
acknowledge this truth as I can propose it, viz. That men of noble and gallant
spirits, able to scorn injuries, bravely to conquer, yea to revenge themselves
upon the base attempts of malice, by not vouchsafing so much as to take notice
of them; yea men whose magnanimity is heightened by danger, and their courage
increases with it; that these generous minds, have been disconsolate at the
absence of a friend, have been male-contented at the death of a beloved
relation. He who could not be astonished by Hectors valor, nor his
attendants rage; yet when the news comes that his friend Patroclus is dead, it
is then said. -- (...), etc. Iliad. 6.6.
Sorrow like a thick cloud sat upon his countenance, and obscured those
sparkling rays which used to come from it. The victorious David that trembled
not to see Goliath, but with undaunted resolution, though a young stripling,
sets upon him; yet Jonathans death, makes him say, I am distressed, 2 Samuel 1.29.
when he was grown elder, and had more experience of Gods presence with him.

The Holy Jesus, that great exemplar of piety, who always submitted to his
Fathers will, and therefore could not be obnoxious to the corroding thoughts
of discontent, yet by his practice, showed how much our nature was liable to
be afflicted with the loss of Friends, for he who wept but twice (that I
remember) wept once for impenitent Jerusalem, Joh. 11.33, 35.
dead in sins and trespasses, and another time when the beloved Lazarus lay in
the grave, and the chorus of mourners came lamenting him.

Nature it seems quickly opens the floodgates, the ingenuity of Christianity
allows a serious sense of the presence and absence of a real friend; true
goodness promotes compassion, -- (...), the great skill is to moderate the
passion, that the stream may keep within the channel, and not overflow the
banks: I hope all you, by your piety and prudence secured your selves from
discontent, when you heard of the sickness and death of our dear and truly
honored Friend. But I for my part must confess, that few Providence in my
life, have hitherto been made such arguments to it, by the tempter to me, as
this was; and because it is possible, that some in your Famous University,
might feel the same disease with my self, I shall make bold to tell you (I am
sure I speak to my Friends) the course I took for my Cure.

The Dictate of the Imperious Stoic, soon came into my mind, Non sentire mala
non est hominis, non far, non est viri, Not to feel an evil, speaks no
humanity, not to bear it, speaks no manhood.

This I thought was soon said, but all his arguments (though I deny not their
usefulness) yet were too short to bring me to that manly, I will rather say
that Christian (...), peace and tranquillity which I desired: Two things I
found (...), that had the true virtue of Nepenthe in them; partly awing me,
and commanding down impetuous tumults; partly relieving, and refreshing me in
my combat with them.

The first of them was the command of our Savior to his Disciples, Let not
your heart be troubled. Joh. 14.1.
When I considered the occasion of it, the command was strange, but the
stranger it appeared at first sight, the more emphatical and remarkable it was.
The great evidence of Gods love to man was now withdrawing; the Prince of life
was to suffer death. He whose presence animated the poor Disciples, as the
Generals does the unskilful Soldiers; He whose Miracles kept them from
contempt. He for whom they had forsaken Father and Mother, goods and lands.
He who asked them most pathetically when others forsook him, Will ye also go
away? He is now leaving them, John 6.
will go away himself, and yet he says, Let not your heart be troubled.

I from hence concluded, that if I had been in the Disciples case, I should
have seen more reason for discontent than now I do: And if it was not lawful at
the farewell of the blessed Jesus, it could never be lawful.

Whilst I thus stated my duty, I found something refreshing me, and it was
nothing else that satisfied me, but that which was the occasion of the grief
of the Disciples, and of all good men before them, and since: -- (viz.) That
Christ dyed, Thus the wise God can make use of this sad providence to satisfy
under another.
and all the holy men that lived before him, and all that had given up
themselves to him as his servants since his coming into the world: For I
considered there was no reason why God should work Miracles for my sake, and
since so many were dead, that I knew were the love and delight of God; I
concluded death could not be to a good man's loss; and since I saw God had
provided for the world, notwithstanding the death of so many useful persons
thus long; I concluded he could still, and if for the world, and the Church,
sure he could for my peace and comfort.

Whilst I concocted these meditations, and surveyed the examples recorded in
Scripture. None sooner came into my thoughts, than Moses, who by his Country
man is truly called (...), and the Heathen not at all mistaken, when he said,
(...), Philo Judaeus. lib. 1. Longinus.
a man not of the ordinary rank, but rarely accomplished, of whom God himself
gives most full testimony. His death in the Wildernss, when one would have
thought his life might with much confidence have been expected, (...). Diadorus
Sic. lib. ult.
made me think a discourse on it, was pertinent to the present occasion, and
would tend both to awaken some, and satisfy all others that were perplexed at
the death of our Friend, so suddenly upon his coming hither, and entering on the
Ministry in this City.

This Discourse, such as it is, is yours, and though there are many things in
it, that will need your pardon, and a second reading makes me observe more
Errata's in my own copy, Nam and mihi prope semper sermo meus displicet. August
de Catechiz. rudibus. cap. 2.
than in the Press; yet because I know it is next to impossible for me to
please my self; and because I know it will be welcome for his sake, whose
death was the occasion of it, I present it to you, with confidence of your
acceptance.

The Almighty God bless your Society: Make your College a Nursery of Religion
and Learning: Sanctify this providence to us all, convince us by it, more
fully of the vanity of all things, Quod cuiquam conting it, cuivis potest.
yea of learning, that most curious piece of vanity, make us to provide for
sickness and death; Make us thankful for life, health, the use of reason, and
understanding, carefully to improve all for the glory of God, that we may dye
with the testimony of a good conscience, and the love of good men, yea of God
himself.

So prays Your most real Servant, Sam. Jacomb.

TO The Inhabitants of Christ-Church Parish, LONDON.
IF the care of a most compassionate, Dr. Cox
and ingenious Physician: If the prayers of good men in this City, and in the
University, had been sufficient preservatives against the assault of death,
there had been no occasion for the preaching, or publishing of this Sermon:
That I should preach at his Funeral was his request, to whom I might lawfully
deny nothing: that I should publish it, is the request of his Friends, whom I
heartily respect, whom I was the more induced to gratify, that I might have an
opportunity to tell you what thanks my dead Friend had for all the expressions
of your love to him; how deeply he resented them, and how much resolved he
was to testify his thankfulness by a serious and conscientious care of your
souls.

I am confident you cannot easily forget him; I beseech you, let his memory put
you in mind of these two things.

1 Of the vanity of all the world: Alas you see all the joys of this world are
not big enough to counterpoise the trouble of one disease; you cannot with all
your estates buy a faithful friend: and when you have him, you cannot keep him
from the stroke of death: -- nay, you cannot ( Nebuchadnezzar a greater man
than any of you, could not) keep out one melancholy fancy: was any of you
great as the Roman Caesar; beloved like Titus, wise as Solomon, learned as the
best Philosopher; yet you could not tame the rebellion of one pertinacious
humor, nor preserve that which is as dear to you as life.

2 Look after a better world seriously, and to that end be sure to prize the
next conscientious Minister God shall give you: To press you to more care in
your choice would be superfluous, since I am not ignorant how solicitous you
have been already. I hope he upon whom you have pitched your thoughts, will
accept that charge: and if he do, I can easily be confident, he will be a
great blessing to you: but when you have him, or any other faithful preacher of
the Gospel; then remember what reason you have to profit by every pious Sermon,
when you know not but that your next Minister may be taken as suddenly from
you as Mr. Bright; but this duty with diverse others are at large pressed in
the Sermon it self: I have nothing to desire of you, but this, if you forget
Mr. Bright, remember the welfare of your immortal souls, that Christ may see
the fruit of the travel of his soul in you, and may be satisfied; that the
godly Ministers you have had, or shall have, may rejoice in the day of Christ,
that they have not run in vain, nor labored in vain; this is his request to
you, who is

Your Servants for Jesus sake Samuel Jacombe.

ERRATA
THe ingenuity of a Scholar will either not take notice of, or easily pardon
the mistakes of the Press, in accenting Greek words; as (...) for (...), p. 1.
and in these words themselves, captius, p. 21. Marg. for captivus. Antonio p.
26. Marg. for Antonino. (...) p. 4^. for (...) p. 47. for (...), etc. The
mistakes which prejudice the sense are; And p. 12. l. 4. for An. Grace p. 26.
l. 18. for Grave.

Joshua 1.2. Moses my Servant is dead.
SAd News: But may it not be hoped, that he, who in his infancy was
miraculously preserved in an Ark of Bulrushes; and therefore called Moses,
n="a" Exodus 2.10 Hanc nominis rationem assignant tum illi qui verbum volunt
esse Aegyptium, ex (...) aqua and (...) servatus factum. Sic Philo. Jud.
Josephus. Cl. Alex. Tum illi qui ex Hebrae^ (...) derivatu^ volunt quod verbum
nunquam usurpati nisi de eductione ex aquis, observat. Bochartus. v. 2 Samuel
22.17. Isa. 63.11.
because drawn out of the water: And he, who once was absent forty days, and
forty nights, and the Israelites said, n="b" Exodus 32.1.
As for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot
not what is become of him; Yet he descended from the Mount with his face
shining, and brought excellent Laws for the Jewish Nation, and established a
(...), n="c" Joseph. Cont. Apion.
a Divine Government amongst them: May it not be hoped, that a third
providence equally miraculous attends him, and that once more his presence may
scatter these fears of his death, as the rising Sun does the foggy vapors?
Never did the poor Hebrews need him more, they were yet in the Wilderness, had
Jordan to pass over, the Canaanites to conquer: And will the compassionate God
take away the Nurse before the child can go alone? Will it be a crime then to
question that intelligence, it will, if you consider who is the Intelligencer,
viz. God himself, for so it is said, verse. 1. The Lord spoke to Joshua, saying,
Moses my Servant is dead.

But if the Sun be set, and work be yet to be done, a candle must be
lighted. If Moses Gods Servant, be not here, then Joshua who was Moses servant
shall arise, and lead the people over Jordan, no Parenthesis put in by God,
shall spoil the sense of what he was speaking: his gracious providence may,
like some Rivers, run on a sudden under ground, but by and by they appear
again, and the swelling torrent pleases and refreshes him who sees it: Israel
must take possession of the promised Land, and since it cannot be done by the
hand of Moses, it shall by the hand of Joshua, Moses my Servant is dead, now
therefore arise, Verse 2.
go over this Jordan, thou and all this people unto the Land which I do give
unto them.

That is the Context.

The Text it self presents to us, 1 Moses his relation; and God owning him in
it, A Servant: My Servant. 2 Moses his present condition: Moses my Servant is
dead.


A transient view shall serve for the first part of the Text, the latter we
must longer gaze on; for we are not now considering Moses going up to Mount
Sinai to receive Gods Oracles, and coming down with his face shining; but we
are considering him as gone up to Pisgah to view the promised Land, and dye
there: And therefore three or four Conclusions shall contain what at present
shall be said on the relation wherein Moses stood to God. Deuteronomy. 34.1.6.


Moses my Servant.

Conclu. 1. The proper notion of a servant is to be used at the pleasure of
another. What a servant is. Laert, in vita Zen. Arist. 1. polit. c. 9.
Zeno well defined liberty, (...): And Cicero to the same purpose, in Paradox.
Est potestas vivendi ut velis, a power of living and acting at a man's own
pleasure: The true notion of servitude which is opposed to liberty, must
therefore be this, To be determined to act, or not to act at the command and
will of some other. See Justinians Instunt. l. 1. Tit. 3.
The Philosopher has no less ingeniously, than truly defined a servant, (...),
a living instrument. And the Centurion in the Gospel described a servant to the
life, when he said of him, I say, Go, and he goes, Come and he comes: All
that we have said in this Conclusion, is asserted by the Apostle, Know ye not
that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, Romans 6.16.
his servants ye are to whom ye obey? and is implied in our Saviors words,
Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin. Joh. 8.34.


Conclu. 2. The use of any person at pleasure, or obedience from him, can no
further be demanded, than there is right and title to him, and it: That the
difference of right and title does alter the case as to the power of use, A
servant has no right to himself.
is palpably evident from this one instance: He that holds Lands in
Fee-simple, has power to alienate, sell, or let them to whom he will; he
which is a Tenant, and only rents those lands, has the fruits that grow upon
them, as entirely his, and will dispose of them without control, but either
give away, or sell a foot of the Soil he dare not, because that is the
Landlords. The common maxim amongst Civilians, is, Servus non est sui juris, a
servant so far as he is a servant, has no right to himself: yet Masters had
not equal title to all servants; for amongst the Heathen, those whom they took
captive (and called mancipia quasimanu capti) them they made account they could
sell, and dispose of, Justin. Inst. ut supra.
as we of lands that are our own inheritance; those whom they hired, they
could dispose of, as we of land rented (i.e.) They thought they had right to
the persons of the former, but to the actions only of the latter.

Conclu. 3. God alone has an universal right to all that any creature, is,
has, or can be done by it: And therefore the Apostle has most properly
joined these two together, Act. 27.23.
Whose I am, and whom I serve, by reason of that short and imperfect title
which one creature has to another. The same Apostle argues excellently, Seneca
Ep. 47. Servi sunt imo homines; Servi imo Conservi. In mancipio Cogitandum
quantum permittir aequi bonique natural lib. de Clem.
Col. 4.1. That Masters should give to their servants that which is just and
equal, because they also have a Master in heaven. Which notion I find urged by
the Masters of Moral Philosophy among the heathen, who put us in mind, that
though they be servants, yet they are men; and that we and they too are
servants together of the supreme Deity. And howsoever the world has neglected
this great truth in their practice. Yet the beauty of it has so far enamoured
all persons that they have rather chose to be called Patres-familias, Gratius
est nomen pictatis quam potestatis.
fathers of all their Family, quam Domini, than Lords or Masters, as Tertullian
has observed to my hands.

Amongst the Romans, it was lawful, if any servant was mis-used, to fly to the
Statues of their gods, whereby it was an acknowledged case, Grot. de Jure. Bell.
and Paci^. lib. 3.
that Masters had not full and absolute Dominion. In the Jewish Polity God
ordained, Ex. 21.26, 27. If a man smite the eye of his servant that it perish,
or smite out his tooth, that he should let him go free for it.

Amongst other famous instances of most remarkable and imitable piety,
wherewith the 31. Chapter of Job is filled, Job 31.13.
we find this for one, verse. 13. that that holy man did not despise the cause
of his Manservant, nor of his Maidservant, when they contended with him. O
rare example of incomparable humility! he who had so much authority, that
before him Princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth. The
Nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth:
Job 29.9, 10.
Yet he secured his humility as well as his Majesty; of which this is
sufficient evidence, that he did not despise the cause of his meanest servant;
In caetu principum memor regiminis, in ceitamine fimulorum memor conditionis,
Gregor. Mag. in 31. c. Job 17.
his reason for this noble practice is unanswerable, and pertinent to our
purpose, verse. 14, 15. What then shall I do when God rises up, and when he
visits, what shall I answer him? Did not he that made me in the womb, make
him? And did not one fashion us in the womb?

But though the title which one creature has to another, be imperfect, as we
have demonstrated, yet Gods is full, complete, perfect, absolute; His we all
are by Creation: He made us, not we our selves: We are, as the Psalmist
phraseth it, Ps. 100.
Psalm. 95.7. The sheep of his hand. No Shepherd makes their sheep, as this
heavenly Shepherd does, as St. Austin paraphraseth upon that Text: His we are,
not only by Creation, but Preservation, which is Creation every moment in a new
edition: His we are by Redemption, by virtue whereof, all his Saints shall
when the day of glory dawns, come out of his hand as a curious volume which
Angels shall read with admiration, wherein there shall be no blot, no Errata,
though they were whilst in the Devils hands as a copy spoiled, that nothing
almost could be seen in them that was imprinted; when the prime and
Masterpiece of Gods Workmanship came into the world: Upon this last foundation
of Divine right, the Apostle concludes, We are not our own, 1 Cor. 6.
for we are bought with a price.

I have insisted the more largely upon this Conclusion, not only because the
whole superstructure of Worship is built upon it, but because it is peculiarly
useful.

1 To Masters, and all in Authority, that they impose no other commands on
those under them, and behave themselves no otherwise toward the meanest
servant, than the supreme Lord will allow of. 2 That all who are under
subjection, and are diligent observers of the pleasure of those who are above
them, would remember, that they owe more to God, than to any creature, and that
his service never must be neglected.
Therefore God ought to be served.
Conclu. 4. Since God alone has a sovereign and peculiar right to all his
creatures, it follows naturally, that all Angels and men, ought freely and
voluntarily to pay that homage, to do those acts of obedience, to perform that
service which is due to him. Our Saviors maxim, should be evermore before
our eyes, as the Jewish Phylacteries were before theirs, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Mat. 4.10.
The unhappy Jesuit, who in most of his notions is like the horse-leech,
sucking the worst blood, and leaving the best behind, might if fond prejudice
would have given him leave, have understood enough from this place, to have
abhorred the doctrine of Saint-worship: For he might easily observe that our
Savior refuses not to worship the Devil, because he was Gods enemy, because
a Rebel, because an Apostate, but because he was not God; for his answer is
framed, as an universal deciding of this case, that religious worship is due to
God alone; and therefore the holy Angel refused it upon this account; See thou
do it not, Rev. 19 10.
I am thy fellow servants.

Let that which is Caesar's be given to Caesar; those testimonies of honor and
respect which we owe to creatures, let them have it, but that which is Gods,
let it be given to God; who since he has a peculiar right, ought to have a
peculiar service; for so we are taught by the examples of all pious, and
understanding persons mentioned in holy Writ, the Holy Jesus said, It was his
meat and drink to do his Fathers will; and though he fulfilled the Law, and
might by virtue thereof have demanded life (for the Law says, Do this and
live) yet he became obedient to the death, and spoke words never to be
forgotten, Father, not my will, but thine be done.

Abraham is called Gods servant, Genesis 26.24. as a faithful servant he
followed his heavenly Master whithersoever he pleased; and therefore it is
said, Isa. 41.2. That God called him to his foot, that which is in the Hebrew
(...) righteousness; we well translate the righteous man, for the following
words that speak of a person, justify that Translation; and the Chaldee
Paraphrase tells us, who the person was, which is plainly intimated by the
Context. (...) Abrahamum electum justum. Abraham that choice and famous man for
righteousness, God said no more but this, Go to a place that I shall show thee,
leave thy Country, and thy friends: He is obedient, follows his Master step by
step, (...). Homer.
whithersoever he leads him.

I must confess Moses Gods servant in the Text, was at first unwilling to go
about the work God called him to, yet not because he was unwilling to do God
service, but because he thought himself unfit for it; yet I cannot think him
so unwilling, as some incautelous Reader may perhaps guess he was at first
sight of those words, recorded in Exodus 4.13. And he said, O my Lord, send I
pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send; Which to a vulgar English
ear, sounds as if he should say, O Lord, send whom thou will, I will not go
about this errand; I rather think as a very learned man has observed to my
hand, that he desired God to send by the Messiah, that excellent Messenger
whom he had promised to the lost world: For the common name of the Messiah
among the Jews, as the New Testament informs us was, (...) He that was to
come, Mat. 11.3. and he who was to be sent, by which notion John's expression
may be understood, Joh. 3.34. For he whom God has sent speaks the words of
God. John was Gods Messenger, yet he utterly disclaimes this title of being
that person whom God has sent, which he could not have done had it not been
peculiar to the Messiah; The Syriack, Arabic, and Samaritan versions. Quem
mislurus es.
the meaning therefore of Moses his words seems to be, Lord I know thou have
promised to send an authentic Messenger into the world, one that shall speak
as never man spoke, I beseech thee at this time send him on this great Errand
to Pharaoh for the deliverance of thy people Israel: I am the more inclined to
this interpretation, because I yet see nothing in our Modern Commentators that
oppose it, which should weigh down the scales against the judgment of the
Ancients: But whether he did particularly eye the Messiah or not, or whether
he left the person to be indifferently at Gods choice, so he might be
excused himself; It is certain it was his fault to dispute so long against Gods
call; For which God was angry, verse. 14. Yet his modest entreaty, verse. 13. O
my Lord, I pray thee, makes it to me evident, that this unwillingness arose
not from perverseness of spirit, but a deep sense of his inability: But we
find sometimes that a tree shaken by the wind roots it self the faster, and
broken bones well set, grow stronger, and they who go backwards, leap the
further for it: Moses when once he accepts Gods employment (having bafled the
great temptation at the first undertaking) he does his work with courage, and
afterward receives Gods testimony, that Moses his servant was faithful in all
his house. Heb. 3.5.


God owns Moses in this relation.
For God uses to observe, and to own all that are in relation to him; Moses my
Servant; which was the second thing we took notice of in the first part of the
Text; and had we time to dwell upon it, it might be of excellent use to
consider, that God has not only minded them, and acknowledged them whilst
living, but he has evidenced great respect to them when they are dead. The
Israelites got many a blessing for Abraham's sake; and it is remarkable, that
when God considers himself, he considers David too, 2 King. 19, 34. I will
defend this City to save it for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.

Oh rare encouragement to be faithful to God! when it shall not only be said
to us at death, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters
joy: But for our sakes also it shall go better with those we leave behind us
on earth. Children, Families, Countries, shall all partake of a blessing, out
of Gods respect to us when we are laid in the dust, and they say of us, what
the Jews said of Abraham and Israel, Isa. 63.16.
That we are ignorant of them, and acknowledge them not.

But if I should stay here, I should prevent my self, in that which is most
pertinent, both to the Text and the present occasion: It is sufficient that I
have given you gold in the mass, your meditation must beat it into leaf gold;
and it may be I shall assist you, before I put a full period to this Discourse.

The second thing which the Text presented to us, was Moses present condition;
Moses condition.
Moses my Servant is dead.

Faithful service to God is no security from the common Law of Mortality: Note.
Gods best servants are not persons privileged from the arrest of this surly
Sergeant.

Of the man Moses it is said, That he was very meek above all the men which
were upon the face of the earth; Numb. 12.3.
Yet his meekness could not charm this adversary.

He was admirably useful, and so is the Sun to the Traveller, and yet it sets:
Deaths sith makes no distinction betwixt wholesome herbs, and stinking weeds.

He was a man of excellent Education, brought up in Pharaohs Court, Act.
7.21.22.
he was skilled in all the learning of the Egyptians.

But China metal, and Venice Glasses, are as soon, yea sooner broken to
pieces, than course pots: Pure complexions soon catch infectious diseases.
(...) Philo, called the young King. Exodus 11.3.
He was a man of power and authority. The man Moses was great in the land of
Egypt; Yea he was mighty in words, and in deeds: But he that could work
Miracles, to save or destroy others, can work none to save himself: The great
Xerxes wept when all the strength of his Army could not keep death out of their
Quarters. A holy man he was that chose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, Act 7.22. Deuteronomy. 34.12. No Prophet like him in all the terror
which he showed in the sight of all Israel. Heb. 11. (...) Philo. lib. 1. de
vita Mosis Exodus 32.10. Verse 14.
than enjoy the pleasures of sin; But yet he was a man, and a natural body
will be natural, when the soul is refined from the dregs of wickedness; and a
sick horse will be faint, and go heavily, and at length fall, though you
should set a better Rider on his back: Yea which is further remarkable, he was
a man whose prayers were prevalent with God for others; that when God was about
to destroy the Israelites, he says to him, Let me alone; and upon his
intercession the Text says, That the Lord repented of the evil which he
thought to do unto his people. Yet when this man comes to beg for his own life,
yea when he begs that he may but live a little longer to enter the promised
Land, yet God will not hear him.

If my memory fail me not, it is the only request recorded in Scripture which
God denied to grant him; after he had accepted this service of bringing the
people out of Egypt.

Moses was such a man that God says of him, Deu 34.10, 11
There arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew
face to face, a man rarely accomplished; (...)
will you know what is become of him? Moses Gods servant is dead.

I shall give three Reasons for it.

Reason 1. That God may show the world how little he stands in need of any
creature; when God would punish the Egyptians, he does not bring Earthquakes,
not only Thunder and Lightnings, but Frogs, and swarms of Flies, Exodus 8.16.18.
the dust of the Land is turned into Lice, and the Magicians that had done some
thing greater, shall not be able to do this: God makes the meanest things the
greatest scourges, and then much of himself is visible: When God will break
Nebuchadnezzars pride. He will not bring a Puissant Army to conquer him: Nor
shake the fabric of the world to amaze him; Qui^ autem dicit sensum libi
redditum, oftendit non forman se amisisse sed mentem. Hiei on. in 4. Dan. v. 34.
but when he speaks loftily, Is not this great Babylon that I have built for
the house of the Kingdom, ^c. he does but hear a few words, The Kingdom is
departed from thee, and God lets a melancholy fancy pursue him, and the great
King is below the poorest man in all his Dominions. One would have thought if
Moses should have delivered the people, it should have been done whilst he was
a favorite in Pharaohs Court. But he must go into the Wilderness, and live
forty years in Midian, endure hardship and misery, Act. 7.30. (...) Philo.
lose his favor in Egypt, before he be fit for God to make use of as a
Deliverer. And when God has sent him, and he has wrought miracles, and
carried the people through the Red Sea, they are ready to say, Exodus 32.1. It
was Moses that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt. But they shall see God
needs him not. Joshua one of his young men, that used in all his addresses to
say, My Lord Moses, Numb. 11.28. he shall conduct them, and it shall be
evident God can be with him as he was with Moses: And sure God is seen most
when Daniel looks better with poor pulse, than the rest do with the Kings
delicious fare.

The way to shorten the best men's lives, is for people to think they cannot
live without them. The Sun never yet needed a Glowworm; nor God a creature, as
God sometimes discovers himself in his dealings with wicked men, that he
brings the mischief upon them they feared, by the means they used to prevent
it. Pharaoh fears the Israelites should multiply, and be mightier and greater
than the Egyptians, and therefore he will oppress them, Exodus 1.9, 10.
Jeroboam fears that the hearts of the people will return to Rehoboam if they
should go up to Jerusalem to offer sacrifice, and therefore he sets up two
golden Calves, 1 King. 12.27. The Jews are afraid, if they suffer Christ to
proceed in his Doctrine, and Miracles, all would believe on him, and the Romans
would come and take away their Kingdom: These instances makes that truth
evident which Solomon has recorded, Prove. 10, 24. That which the wicked fears
shall come upon him; yea, his own policy to prevent it, shall be the means to
bring it, the Israelites increase the more for their affliction, Exodus 1.12.
Jeroboams family is therefore rejected, 1 King. 14.8, 9, 10. The Jews are
destroyed by the Romans for crucifying Jesus Christ: and have ever since
continued the scorn of the world; so God in his dealing with his people in
ways of mercy, chooses not the means which they think most, but least on:
Gideous army is too great, a few shall do that work, Moses is too much admired;
Moses shall die, that God may be more acknowledged, and man less; for it is
our sin and folly to ascribe to Saul his thousands, and to David his ten
thousands, but to God nothing at all.

Reas. 2. Moses is dead. That God may show what an extreme hatred and antipathy
he has to sin every where; Psalm. 106.32.
even in a Moses: If this meek man be provoked, and speak unadvisedly with his
lips, it shall go ill even with Moses, Psalm. 106.32, 33. If the good man be
passionate, and say, I am not able to hear all this people alone, it is too
heavy for me, Numb. 11.14 15.
and if thou deal thus with me, kill me I pray thee out of hand. Moses shall
know that God can take him at his word, and another shall have the burden, and
the honor too; yea, though he be afterward earnest for lite, and beg
importunately that he may enter into the promised Land, yet God will not be
entreated: We little think, how much mischief we do our selves, who may be
any way publicly serviceable, to be at any time weary of the employment God
has charged us with; especially if the discontent show it self to others, for
then the divine providence is engaged to make it manifest, that he can well
enough be without such muttering servants; and that it becomes us not to be too
bold, or presumptuous by the confidence we have in our former fidelity, or
present usefulness. Let Jonah run away if he will, but a storm shall follow
him: For God will have all the world take notice, that he hates sin, because
it is. sin, and not because such a person commits it.

If we would observe, we might easily perceive, how irreconcilable Gods
hatred is to sin. Adam was the prime piece of divine Art; the glory and honor
of the visible World; if he sin, he shall die; and because the dishonor is
great, an^ unavoidable necessity of death, shall be the fad condition of all
his posterity. We read of none excepted from the execution of this fatal
sentence but Enoch and Elijah: one would think that any considering mind, that
shall see the tears of them that are in misery, hear the groans of them that
lie on sick-beds; observe the sighs of consuming persons, who decay by little
and little, as a garment that is Moth-eaten, or that shall surveigh the
tossings of men in fevers, who are never at rest. God outs them off with
pineing sickness, and as a Lion he breaks their bones: I say, one would
think, a very weak head, that will but seriously consider, might easily from
those premises conclude, that sin is a thing odious and abominable, and though
God be good, yet he is not fond; for the righteous Lord loves
righteousness. Psalm. 11.7.


If this convince thee not sufficiently; come nearer, and see how sin like a
noisome carcass. infects the air, and all that come near it, suffer for it;
let a man be openly wicked, and do high acts of baseness, and his relations,
his children, Exodus 20.5.
yea his childrens children shall smart for it; for God v^sits the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the children to the third and fourth Generation.

Epiphanius tells us that for three thousand three hundred and thirty two
years; there is not one example in Scripture of a Son that died before his
Father: till Terahs time, whom he conceives to be a notorious Idolater; and of
him it is said Genesis 11.28. That Haran died before his Father Terah, in the Land
of his nativity in Ur of the Chaldees: he could not forget Abel, and therefore
no question he intended only that they of whom it might properly be said,
They died, not they who were killed should come within the reach of this
observation.

He that is not a very careless reader of Scripture, cannot but grant, that
if this Leprosy once break forth, no man knows whither it will spread: When
Korah, Dathan, Numb. 18.30, 31.
and Abiram sin, the earth swallows them up, and their little children two,
even all that appertained to them. Yet we must remember that a temporal evil
brought upon the child, as a punishment of the Father, may be a mercy to the
child, of which we have a happy instance, 1 King. 14.13. that this child
came to the grave, was the great grief of Jeroboam, and yet the great blessing
of the child.
Adams sin made death certain, and when sin grew greater, than death which
before crept like a Snail, began to come faster, till it had brought the life
of man, from a thousand years long to seventy; and if any one was an open
affronter of the Laws of Heaven, the poor family, and the innocent infants
found the thread of life cut asunder for the Parents crime: Do you yet believe
that God hates sin? If you will see further, behold the holy God is no
respecter of persons; and it David murder Uriah, the sword shall follow him; If
Moses be angry, and speak unadvisedly, God is angry presently, and Moses shall
die in the Wilderness.

Reas. 3. Moses is dead, that he may be rewarded for the faithful service he
has done already; sin brought in death, but God has made death to bring in
glory: the dark room is an entry into the presence chamber: It was a great
riddle to flesh and blood, but was perfectly discovered at Christ's
resurrection, and ascension; Out of the cater comes meat: Had Moses lived, he
would have found that in every day there was something of Autumn, as well as
Spring; even in the face the most beautiful part of the body, is the sink of
the brain; It is better to be in the mount with God, than to be troubled with
the Idolatrous Israelites; he cannot forget, Numb. 12.1.
that even Aaron and Miriam spoke against him.

Meekness of spirit is one of the best Antidotes against such mischiefs from
near relations, but no man knows what trouble he may find from those he
loves best, and whom he has served most: If Moses be blameless himself, they
will be angry, because of the Ethiopian Woman: Thus one relation produces
trouble from another: If his face shine, when he comes down from the mount,
the Israelites cannot bear it, he must put a veil on; let the life be
careless, and then he scorns himself, or others may quickly scorn him; let
it be exemplary that a man shines as a light in the world, holding forth the
word of life; it will be always true, that sore eyes cannot bear it. It is
better to be with Angels, who alwaies-behold the face of God in Heaven: All
things are yours, Life and Death: 1 Cor. 3. ult.
in life, good men do work; after death, they enter into joy; yea, into the joy
of their Lord; they are glorified together, Romans 8.17. Particeps est herilis
gaudij. Grot. in Mat. 25.23.
Here they serve, there they are served, Luke 12.37. Blessed are those servants
which waited for their Lord, whom at his coming, he shall find watching;
Verily I say unto you, that he shall girde himself, and make them sit down to
meat, and will come forth and serve them: Moses cried out passionately, Lord,
show me thy glory; God will now answer that prayer, Honorem illis novum
habebit atque insolitum Grctius. in loc.
but then his desire of life must be denied, for no man can see my face, and
live; upon which words Saint Augustine meditating, cried out, Moriar Domine ut
te videam, Let me die Lord, that I may see thee. And indeed, Paul told him,
that he must be dissolved, if he would be with Christ: A soul that is (...)
winged with divine love, is like a poor bird in a cage, sits often sad, because
imprisoned, Chrysostom. In Acts 26.
looks through the wires, sings when the Sun comes at it, but alas, it sets by
and by, and a cloudy dismal night follows it: The souls clear visions of God
are too glorious for this state; here it is rara hora, br^vis mora, as Bernard
phraseth it; the man whose piety is steady, and industry great, sees here
through a glass darkly, there face, to face; and then he shall know, even as
he is known; When you therefore wonder why good men die, you forget too much
the trouble of life, and the glory after death: Jacobs Motto agrees well with
their experience: Few and evil have been my days. So great are the exigencies
and necessities of the present state, that it requires the skill of the wisest
man, and most self-observing, to give a catalogue of those imperfections which
all persons feel and groan under; the happiness of infancy is, that we feel
only the trouble of what is present, and wrack not our selves with fears of
what is future; when we get up to understanding there are boisterous lusts,
like cruel Pirates, setting upon us that we cannot quietly sail to the Haven of
peace and rest. What it is to be wise, and live in the enjoyment of God, and a
man's self-busy-passions scarce suffer the Juvenile age to make enquirry: If a
man come to old age, he is an Imperious Infant, or a child in authority: If a
man be good, the Devil sets on him, Waspes are busy where the honey is. If
he cannot be hindered from doing good, which is the Devils first design, he
shall be Fly-blown with pride, which is the second, and as dangerous. Upon due
thoughts it will be found that for us to serve God here, is our great wisdom;
for us to dye when God pleases, is Gods great mercy. Labor in the Lord shall
not be in vain, but the reward of Labor in the Lord, is when we dye in the
Lord; For then we rest from our labors, Rev. 14.13.
and our works follow us.

Hitherto our Discourse has tended to give satisfaction to this enquiry why
Moses dyed: It remains that we draw some Corollaries, and so make application
to all your consciences.

1 The death of Moses speaks something to all that stand in the same relation
to God, that he did, viz. that are his servants, public instruments for the
doing of his work. 2 The death of Moses speaks something to all those, who are
in a capacity of losing persons so eminently useful and beneficial to them,
as Moses was to the Israelites.
I begin my Discourse with all those that are in public employment, and are
sincerely faithful to the trusts committed to them, whether they be Magistrates
or Ministers: Two things are proper advice, from all that we have hitherto
spoke upon this Text.

Corol. 1. Promise not to your selves long life: One would have thought if any
man in the world might have be confident of his life, sure Moses might, till
he had carried the people through the Wilderness, and brought them into the
Land of Canaan; this business was that which God set him about. It was the
fulfilling of the ancient Promise made to Abraham; Gods glory was engaged to
perfect it, that his Name might not be dishonored by the heathen round about,
who had seen, or heard of all his Miracles. Moses knew the people, and was much
honored by them; and so one would imagine the fittest man in the world for it,
yet Moses dies.

Know therefore that when you are about the best work, the most excellent
design, most honorable for God, most useful for others, yet then death comes
with commission, the shadows of the evening stretch themselves upon you, it is
no longer day; And when this night comes, no man can work.

When first thou did entice to thee my heart; I thought the service brave See
Herberts Poems.
Philosophers observe, that a very great calmness usually goes before a mighty
Earthquake; Such folly and madness has spread it self upon the hearts of men,
that generally they promise to themselves, what God never promised them, and
promise not to themselves, what he has promised them. God never persuaded men
to be Christians by constant health, by long life, by applause and honor, but
he has told us of a providence about us that shall make all things work for
good. Wormwood we may drink, but it shall turn to health, that we shall not
dye, or that we shall not dye at thirty, as well as at threescore, God has
not spoke one syllable; but he has told us of a great glory hereafter, and
that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. If ever a good man might
have hoped for exemption from such sore calamities, sure Job might, then, when
they fell upon him, Immensi praeconii est bonum eriam inter malos extitisse.
Gregor. Mag.
though he lived not among the Jews, but in the land of Uz, yet he was
perfect and upright, he feared God, and esehewed evil. The Sunshine of
outward plenty, put not out the fire of his devotion; he did but fear that his
sons might sin, It may be that my sons have sinned, verse. 5. and he must send
for them, and sanctify them, and offer burnt offerings according to the number
of them all. Did not' Job hope for a happy life from hence? Yes, When I looked
for good, Job 30.26.
then evil came unto me, and when I waited for light, then came darkness? Was
he not one that acted the part of a good Magistrate? Yes, He was eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame, he was a father to the poor, Job 29.
and the blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon him. But the
conclusion which he made, did not follow from the premises; Job 29.18.
Then I said I shall dye in my nest, and I shall multiply my days as the sand.
Long life and peace, were things presumed; but you will find it a sad mistake,
if you peruse the next Chapter, verse. 15. T^rr^urs are turned upon me, verse.
23. Job Chap. 30.
I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all
living. His harp was turned to mourning, and his organ into the voice of them
that weep.

In the time of our Saviors greatest joy, Luke 9.28, 29, 30, 31.
when the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment was white and
glistering, and Moses and Elias appeared in glory, they spoke to him of his
decease. I could wish all persons of worth and excellency in their mutual
converse, in their contribution of assistance for the promoting of the most
pious interests, would sometimes entertain one another with a discourse about
their decease, for that would pluck up the weeds of vain hopes, and fond
imaginations which are apt to grow in the hearts of good men.

And though some men, whose thoughts are so immersed in secular and worldly
affairs that they are scarce at leisure to consider whether their strength be
the strength of brass or clay: Though they be guilty of this mistake, whose
lives meet with few hours of pain, and their little sadness is but like vinegar
put into sweet sauce, makes it taste better, or like a harsh note in music,
that goes before a sweet one, forcing the ear to be more covetous, and making
the harmony more grateful; yet it is wonderfully strange, that they who by long
study and serious thoughts have macerated their bodies and made them sickly,
who are like a flower exposed to the violence of the North wind, and have no
shelter; that such as these should forget their death, seems to be incredible:
Did not sad experience tell it was too true. I would not be as the
Screech-owl, a messenger of death to any one, much less to my beloved brethren
in the Ministry, I would gladly be as the Crow on the Capitol, who when she
could not say, It is well, said, It shall be well: I cannot say, (...).
It is well with us, when Mr. Vines, Mr. Frost, Mr. Bright, Sueton. Domit.
are carried to their graves, I would say, It shall be well, and the next year
shall produce no such sad spectacies. But neither my Text, nor the occasion of
this solemn Assembly, make me able to promise it: In the former you find a
Prophet, that never had one like him (till the Son of God appeared) dead before
you; By the latter you may be informed, that a holy man may have his Autumu
even in his Spring, and his leaves may drop asunder before he be well ripe.
When the Sons of the Prophets came forth to Elisha, they said to him, Know
thou that the Lord will take away thy Master from thy head to day? he
answered, Yes, I know it, hold you your peace. 2 King. 2.3.
If I should tell you that your Savior is dead, I might say, Know you that
your Master lay in the grave, and the servant must not be better than his
Lord. But now I say, Know you that God has taken away from you your
fellow servants? I presume you will answer me, We know it, hold you your
peace. Yet I am ready to urge that Question thrice, as the Sons of the Prophets
did; for I am sure that which you know quickly, you may forget hastily. It is
not hasty showers, but soft snow that soaks deep, whilst the former runs off as
fast as it comes, the latter gently creeps in at every chink of ground.

Let me humbly therefore beseech you, to think again, and again, to look
wishly upon the Text, and upon the Grave of that useful friend whom God has
now taken from us; And then I question not, but you will be prepared for the
second thing which the Text recommends to your practice.

Corol. 2. Then it is good reason you should do your work, as fast, and as well
as you can.

It is good reason, 1 Because you are servants. 2 Because you are dying
servants.


1 Consider, you are servants: If you be asked, Why stand you idle, and go not
down into Gods Vineyard? you cannot answer, God has not called us: Shall
servants loyter? It was Moses commendation, that as a servant he was faithful
in all Gods house: Let it be yours: Suffer me to propound a few Queries: Let
all your consciences answer them.

Query 1. Is it not your Justice: Is not your service a debt? Ought you not to
discharge it? Have you a right to your selves? Did you make and redeem, or do
you now preserve your selves? Has God no way engaged you? Did God give you
your parts and talents to be laid up in napkins, or does he expect his own
with due improve^^ent? or were not your gifts given you for others sake? as the
mothers breast for the childs advantage. Mr. Gurnals Christian Armor, Part.
1. p. 333.


A most accurate Preacher has said truly, If the Minister labor not to
increase his stock, he is the worst Thief in the Parish. It is wicked for a
man trusted with the improving of Orphans estates, to let them lie dead by him,
much more for a Minister not to improve his gifts, which I may call the Town
stock, given for the good of the souls of both rich and poor.

Or have you a mind it shall be said at your death, There is gone the unjust
servant, that called God Master, but served the Devil.

Quer. 2. Is not faithful service, the expression of your ingenuity? Are you
not beholden to God? Do not mercies make thee resolve to present thy self to
him, Romans 12.1.
which is thy reasonable service? Can you forget how passionately the bleeding
Savior said, If thou love me feed my sheep; Love thou me, feed my lambs:
Have diverse lusts and pleasures which you have served too long, Tit. 3.3. Done
you greater favors than God?

Quer. 3. Is it not your security? The Coward that runs away in this service
shall certainly be killed: If Jonah will go to Tarsus, a storm must follow
him, and overtake him; Do we provoke God to jealousy? 1 Cor. 10.^^
are we stranger than he? Oh remember often those dreadful words of our
Saviors, Take the unprofitable servant, and c^st him it to everlasting
burning. The servant that had work to do, and began to drink and be drunken;
His Lord will come in a day when he looks not for him, and will cut him in
sunder, Luke 12.46. M^s crat dominorum nomen servis in front scribere.
Ari^ophan^^ Babylonios s^rvos cum front inscripta introduxit in Scenam. Grot.
in loc.
and will appoint him his portion with the unbeleevers. None were safe when the
earth was hurt, Rev. 7.3. but the servants of God who were sealed in their
foreheads. Do you think you shall always live at Gods table, to delight in
the Devils drudgery? No, at length you must have their portion too, Depart ye
cursed, I know you not. We may flatter, and deceive men, but we cannot that
God, who will not be mocked, who tells us, That he will require the blood of
others at our hands.

Quer. 4. Does not your compassion to others force it? You that are Gods
Stewards, have this for your work in Gods household, Luke 12.42.
To give them their portion of meat in due season; Can you forbear to break the
bread of life to souls; souls for which Christ dyed? Can you forget how
passionately he said, If ye love me feed my sheep? Have you neither love to
Christ, nor his sheep neither? Do you not remember that your Savior had
compassion on the multitude, because they had nothing to eat, and he would not
send them away fasting, Mat. 15.32.
lest they should faint by the way? Oh that we had as much love to souls as
Christ had to bodies, How many have continued many years, and never yet tasted
the bread of life! Oh what sad deliquiums, what fainting fits at death! what
dreadful horror, when they shall enter into the borders of Eternity, and see
themselves separated from the true portion of immortal spirits! Will they not
be ready to upbraid your cruelty, and unmercifulness. Observe what ridiculous
and absurd things sinners make themselves here. The covetous man that has more
than enough, yet perplexeth himself with his own wants, look how like a fool
he goes leading his horse in his hand, and carrying his saddle on his back
till he be pickled in his own sweat, when his horse would with ease carry
him, and his saddle too. Look what a fool the proud man is, that will needs be
popular, and do every thing to be honored by others, yet himself is as much
afraid, left this secret plummet which puts all the wheels in motion, should
be discovered, as a Thief is to be taken in the very act; and if he have the
hat and the knee of spectators: the poor man does as the Ass, that thought she
was honored, when alas it was the image she carried. It is not the man (for
him they scorn) but the fine clothes, and the great estate, that is so much
Idolized; for so a dull beast shall command the eyes of the multitude with
gaudy trappings, when one of better spirit and service shall not be looked on.
Do you not mind what a Swilling-tub a beastly Drunkard is? what a childish Ape
he is that is given to chambering and wantonness? Look how the poor
discontented man like the Silkworm, eats out his own bowels? Can you see all
this, and much more which your own thoughts tell you, and not pity the
degenerate estate of lost man?

Oh what is become of the glory of Gods Creation! How has this fair Picture
lost the oriency of all its colors, that beauty of all its Lineaments? Cast
your eyes upon the excellency of a true Christian, who is bonorum rector,
malorum victor, one that knows how to want, how to abound; one whose goodness
and wisdom, strikes an awe and reverence into all that converse with him, the
profane person fears him, the hypocrite counterfeits him, as knowing he has
no beauty, unless painted with those colors? Can you see sinners want these
perfections and be satisfied? Has the Devils malice done so much mischief?
Shall your affectionate compassion do no good? but the dreadful terrors of
Eternity (me thinks) should strike fire out of a flint. All vice is folly
here, and this folly will be punished with weeping and wailing, and gnashing
of teeth hereafter. Oh think when you are preaching, it may be here are many
that have not hearkened to Gods voice, and God may now be about to swear that
they shall never enter into his rest. Can this enter into your serious
thoughts, and you forget to do the work of faithful servants: If it be
possible, persuade this foolish world to leave mudwalls for good food, and
Pest-houses for healthful air. Tibinobilius est servire quam regna mundi
capessere, merito, quando ex servis filii, eximpiis Justi de eaptius reddimur
absoluti. Cassidor. in orat. p. 439. Herbe^ts Odor: p. 169. new. Ed.


Query 5. Is it not your glory and perfection, your own great honor and
privilege, to be Gods servants? Abraham is Gods servant, but he is his
friend too, Isa. 41.8. Moses is his servant, but Moses sees him face to face.

How sweetly does My Master sound, My Master.
As Amber-greese leaves a rich Sent unto the Taster.
So do these words a sweet Content
An oriental fragranoy, My Master.
With these all day I do perfume my mind: so Mr. Herbert, that pious, and most
incomparably ingenious Poet of whom it is said, That in his ordinary speech
when he made mention of the blessed Name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
he used to add, My Master, Who is it, I beseech you, that you can glory in as
your Master? your selves, your lusts, the world, the Devil, or God; which is
greatest honor to be Ambassador for a wise Prince, or to be a slave to a
base beggar?

(...)
(...) Aristoph, Plut.

Alas, we are too much fools to be fit to rule our selves, and the Devil has
wit enough, but it is to cheat us, and make us miserable.

The Philosopher has well observed, Arist. pol. lib. 1. cap. 3. (...).
that there is (...), one whose weak spirits, and crazie intellectuals show him
born to be in subjection to another wiser than himself, and the best character
that can be given of him is, (...), he is able to be under Authority; he is
not so wilful as to refuse government, not so stubborn as to scorn direction.
Unhappy and miserable creature that cannot see it self, and will not be led by
a seeing guide. The greatest favor that can be done to children, is to put
them under the inspection of wise and sober Tutors; and it is childrens credit
when under them; to be like soft wax warmed, that will receive any impression:
It is the happiness of an Angel to comply with the Divine will: sure it must
be ours, who are yet in a state of infancy and nonage, ready to run headlong
into all dangers to consult the Oracle of heaven, and take Gods advice in all
we go about; (...). Plut. (...).
for it any thing be rational, this is: Where the superior is infallibly
wise, righteous, and good; there the inferior cannot do himself so great a
courtesy, as universally to surrender his uncertain, fallible, mutable will to
him in all things. I wonder not therefore that David chooses to be a door
keeper, and that he cries out so pathetically, Psalm. 116.16. O Lord, truly I
am thy servant, I am thy servant.

I might at large prosecute this great argument to diligence, and fidelity by
propounding, 1 The excellency of all Gods Laws. 2 The great reward which his
bounty has promised. Compare the former with your own passions, the latter
with shame and death, the only profit that can be reaped from sin, and it
will easily be granted, that every prodigal when he comes to himself, will
quickly cry out, Make me as one of thy hired servants: And indeed a right
understanding in this point, makes the service to be such as it should be;
For he that looks upon God as a hard Master, will either hide the Talent in a
Napkin, and do nothing, or else that which is as good as nothing; whilst he
has better thoughts of sin, and the pleasures of this world, then he has of
God, and of the rewards which he will give to them that observe him. Gods
Creation, Preservation, and Redemption, give him a right to us, and make our
service necessary: but the excellency of his nature, the goodness of his work,
the future happiness promised, make the service cheerful.


The sum of all is, Ye are servants: And then your Justice, your Ingenuity,
your Security, your Compassion, your Glory, requires faithfulness.

I conclude this Consideration with Mr. Perkins Motto.

Minister Christies, hoc age,
Thou art Christ's servant, mind thy work.
We have at length finished the first Consideration, which should promote care
in Gods service. I shall briefly urge the second.

Consideration 2. Ye are not only servants, but dying servants, and therefore
do your work as well, Dying servants
and as fast as you can. When Mr. Calvin grew sickly, and some friends
dissuaded him from some employments, he gave this answer, Vultisne Christum me
invenire ^tiosum? Would you have Christ find me idle? Shall death, a
Messenger that was never idle, but always did his errand, find us idle when
Christ sends it? there is a night coming when we cannot work, and it is very
like our day is a Winter day, not a Summer day. Play the lesson God has set
you whilst the Instrument is in tune, the weather will alter presently, and
then the strings will fall, or break.

Per columbam simplicitas, per ignem zelus judicatur. In cap. 1. Job.
Gregory has observed that the Spirit of God descended in two shapes, the
first was of a Dove, the last of Fire; the first showed Innocence and
Simplicity; the last Zeal and Activity: That we must do no harm, is certain,
(let none but hellish slaves carry Plague-sores about them) but that we must
do good, be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, is as certain: What good from
an eye that is always covered with its own lid, or from fire that is always
buried in the ashes, or a ship that always lies at anchor? You must be doing,
for God will ere long say, Give an account of your stewardship, you must be no
longer stewards.

The last words almost which were heard from that famously learned, and pious
Bishop of Armagh, were, Lord in special forgive my sins of omission; yet he
was singularly industrious in writing, reading, exhorting, instructing. Sins of
omission will at death go nearer our hearts than we thought they would in
life. Be as zealous for God all your life, as you thought you should be when
you first entered on this public employment for God, and as you resolved to be
when you last lay upon a bed of sickness. But sad experience finds the common
observation too true, That bells strike thick while they are rising, but stand
still, and give no sound at all when they are at full pitch, We forget what
we were, and what we shall be, and consider not what a great account we
must suddenly make, and therefore fall asleep, and do not by deep meditation,
wind up those weights which must keep our souls in spiritual motion; We find
in nature, that stones the nearer the center, move faster. We find the Devil
raging, because his time was short; Hev. 12.12.
Shall not we be as industrious who have but little time for better work;
reprove sin to day, as a man that may dye at night, Nemo restituet annos nemo
iterum te tibl reddet. Seneca de Brevit. vit^^ cap. 8.
for when thou dyest, the opportunity is lost, then you know not how to beseech
sinners to be reconciled, then it is too late to make Dives his motion. Oh
that my brethren were warned not to come into this flame!

The Stoic says truly, Maximum vivendi impedimentum est, Idem cap. 9.
expectatio qua pendet ex crastino, The greatest impediment to a good life, is
hope of living to morrow. They who please themselves with their own thoughts
and company, sometimes find they are at their journies end, before they
thought that they had been near it. Men that sleep securely wonder so much time
should be gone, as they find there is when they awake: Whilst we are
employed in things worldly and sensual, our time is gone, but our work is not
done.

I read lately Chrysostomes third Homily upon the Acts, wherein because I found
many things, which affected and awakened me much. I shall recommend them to
your consideration.

I am persuaded says he, (...).
That very few of them who are entrusted with the Gospel, and the care of
souls, shall be saved, the far greater part is damned; my reason is, (...),
sc. This work requires a soul more than ordinary, he had need have a thousand
eyes in his head, and have them all awake. The sin of a public Minister gives
more offense, than of a private person. God could better bear with the
discontent of an ordinary Jew, than he could with the passion of Moses. (...).


Which of us shows so much care of the flock of Christ, as Jacob did of his
Uncle Labans, In the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night, and
my sleep departed from mine eyes. Genesis 31.40.
I value (says he) nothing more than the light, yet I could wish to be
blind, if by that means I might open the eyes of your minds, and convert your
souls, yea this I could wish a thousand times: (...).
I wish you may never further make experiment by your iniquity, of the truth of
this vastaffection: When so great a calamity befalls me, as if any of you sin,
Let me perish, if I be not like one paralytical, or in an ecstasy, that I can
truly say with the Prophet, (...).
As for the light of mine eyes it is gone from me, Psalm. 38.10. I hope this
fire warms.

I would add more force to these considerations of our relation as servants,
of our sudden discharge from that relation by death, but that my charity
forbids me to suspect that others needs so much as myself, to awaken constant
diligence; and to prevent that dull Lethargy which is apt to creep upon us.

Tanta sane diligentia subjectos sibi populos rexit and omnia and omnes quasi
sua essent, curaret. De Antonio pio. Julius Capitolinus.
God grant that all Christian Magistrates may mind the affairs of all
particular persons under them, as if they were their own: And that all
Ministers of the Gospel, may sincerely endeavor to save themselves, and them
that hear them, not preaching themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and
themselves the servants of others for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5.

I have now finished the first part of my task, which was to draw practical
inferences that did concern all that stood in Moses relation, that were Gods
public officers in the world, acting for him by his direction; the other part
must now be undertaken, which we hope will more briefly be dispatched: It is
to tell you, what Moses death speaks to all those, who are daily in a capacity
of losing such servants of God, who are useful to them in their generation, as
Moses was to the Israelites in his.

We have heard what Moses death spoke to Joshua, and the Elders of Israel, let
us now hear what it speaks to the people, and it recommends five things.

What Moses death speaks to the people.
1 Let no man be Idolized, be he what he will, he is but a servant, and a
dying one too, a flower, yet withering and fading. Epiphanius says, That in
Arabia Moses was accounted a god, and there his Image was worshipped; their
reason was because of the miracles which he wrought; Sure they knew not that
he was but a servant, and that he dyed in the Wilderness: Fools we are to
adore the conduit-pipe, and forget the Fountain. We look to instruments, and
forget the principal Agent: When Pharaoh consulted Joseph as an Oracle, he
wisely told him, God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace: When Paul and
Barnabas come to preach the Gospel; if they may be looked upon as gods for
their Miracles, the malicious Devil is as well pleased, as if they had be
scorned or trampled on.

And if some great Scholars be not mistaken, the great respect which were in
the world to the better sort of men among Heathens, (...). Chrysostom ad 12 cap.
2. ad Corinthos. Luodo: Vives in Comment. in August de Civit. Dei. I am not
ignorant that Grotius gives another account of the original of this practice
viz. because the stars had been by the Astronomers cast into the forms and
shape^ of Beasts. See Explicat. De ealog. p. 28. Plut. de Defect. Orac.
and holy men amongst Christians have served his interest, more to bring in
Idolatry, than the base practices and wanton wits of profane men could to
bring in Atheism; for by this art (it is thought) the silly beasts came to be
worshipped as gods; for whereas several Princes and great men, applauded by the
people, had several devices and emblems which they bare in their Shields or
Crests (some best liking Dogs, others Lions; Wolves, or Cats, as sympathy of
nature, fancy, or particular occasion led them) the spectators minds were by
little and little tainted, and for the man's sake began to give adoration to the
Beasts, till posterity looked upon them as Coadjutors, and helpers in all
victorious success in war, or prosperous events in peace.

I might at large prosecute this notion, if I had time to view Popish Images:
We sometimes find a sordid, but a cunning fellow, turned out at one door, to
sneak in at another: When Paganish Idolatry must fall to the ground, and the
Isles hear a d^leful voice, that the Great god Pan is dead, the Devil joins with
the multitude of Christians, and cries down all the ancient duties, but it is
that he may the more applaud the Saints; and then you know, if any person be
much beloved, his picture shall be desired. Experience has given sad
testimony, that adulterous hearts, when they once had Minions, pleased
themselves more with them, than with their lawful Consorts. To this day the
Devil has no such engine to wind up the hearts of the faithless Jews to such
an incredible height of unbelecf, as their high thoughts of Moses, and of that
Law, which they kiss and reverence: Insomuch that this is now their settled
maxim, that no person can be looked on as coming from God, that does not
establish the Mosaical Occonomy, the fancy of whose perpetuity would prejudice
and take away the efficacy of that great Argument, Maimon. Fund. legis with
Vorstius.
used by our blested Savior, I mean Miracles.

I am persuaded the Devil has played the same game, in these late years of the
Christian world; for when men are persuaded to have men's persons in admiration,
either the admired creatures continue what they were thought to be, and then
God is little acknowledged, or if they turn to error and bad practice, either
their admirers see it not, and so follow them, or if they do see it, then it is
a good argument to Scepticisme, and make men suspect all Religion. I persuade
my self, most Sects (which have caused woeful divisions) have arose from
Idolizing the Sect-master. It is known well enough that a Masters error is no
small temptation to a Scholar: And indeed there is no temptation to the Master,
like the admiration of the Scholar.

But I forget my self, and stay too long upon this head; Lonly suggest that
then we Idolize any man: 1 When we set him up as a Dictator, to believe and
act as he would have us, without his showing Gods Commission for what is
propounded by him to us. For who dethroned God, and set up man as the ruler of
my faith and life? 2 When we are so dis-satisfied at the loss of any creature
that we enjoy not quiet of mind in God, and believe not his ability to supply
that loss; as if God could not make the stream to run as well for our advantage
in another channel. It is a sign when the case is thus, that we put the
servant into the Masters place, and make account the Families welfare depends
on him who is sent, and not on him who sends him. Whatsoever he be, though
excellently adorned with the accomplishments of a man, with the perfections of
a Christian, know, if he do good, it is because God blesses him, the
Instrument makes no Music, unless some curious hand touch it; and know, that
all that glory thou admirest is carried in an earthen vessed, and a little
knock may break that Pitcher which has often brought good water from the
bubling fountain. Let these considerations keep our affections sober; for if
men be once inordinate in passion, and listen to temptation, you had as good
talk to mad men, and the Devil knew there was such amongst the Jews, and
therefore contended about the body of Moses with the Angel. Not questioning but
they who were so ready to worship a golden Calf, would quickly have some
devotion to pay upon his Sepulcher; but the phyfick, and those cordials which
do no good when nature is spent, are proper and succesful medicines, before
strength be too much impaired, and spirits wasted. Those arguments which speak
to sober, indifferent, or not over much prejudiced Auditors, are to others
whose passions are engaged, like lightning, which goes through a porous body,
and leaves no impression, nor any testimony of its presence there.


Got causes the Sun to rise, like a Giant to run its course, and he makes it
to set at night; God sends forth men into the world to be useful, they are his
servants; he calls them home, they dye; Let God every where be acknowledged,
no man^dolized.

2 Yet Moses his death, charge you that they be not slighted: Servants
indeed they are, but they are Gods servants, they dye, but it is God that calls
them from you to himself that he may reward them: Have you any good
Magistrates? thank God for them, live quietly under them in all godliness and
honesly. Have you good Ministers that labor in the word and doctrine? bless
God for them; they beseech you, as in Gods stead that you would be reconciled
to him, respect the Ambassador for his sake that sends him; those whom you
value not upon their own account, value as they stand in relation to God. I
presume no man can easily be so fond and ignorant as to imagine that he is
bound to think, every one that has the name and the garb of a Minister, must
be looked on as Gods servant; No it is too evident that many carry Gods
livery on their backs, which do the D^vils service, with their hands: Unto many
of whom, even men may say, what God will, when they talk of prophesying in
Christ's Name, Ye are workers of iniquity, we know you not; and if Korah,
Dathan and Abiram, will offer strange fire, the congregation must leave them:

But I now speak of those whose study and prayer is to save themselves, and
them that hear them, who prays to their people whilst they are spectators, as
well as whilst they are auditors; they are would convert souls to
righteousness; let them be respected for their works sake; yea, for their
Masters sake, let them be reputed servants of the most high God: The Devil
found it would be a good way to pine and starve the vitals of Christianity, to
make the feet lame, Mr. Baxters learned and excellent Discourse, to prove that
over doing is undoing; in his directions for peace of conscience.
and the hands feeble, if he made the head too big, if he put a Pope into
St. Peter's chair; and then the design ever after should be, more to maintain
their own grandeur and greatness, than the life and power of godliness: If the
Protestant Religion finds out this temptation, then scorn, vilify, down with
Ministers, and Ministry, vilify the persons, and that will help to make the
Doctrine vile.

I cannot forget how angry God was even with Aaron and Miriam, Numb. 12. For
alas! even they could speak against Moses: Wherefore says God, were ye not
afraid to speak against my servant Moses? verse. 8. And the anger of the Lord
was kindled against them: Why, what had they spoke? see verse. 2. Has the Lord
spoke only by Moses; he married the Ethiopian, a strange woman, he is not so
much wiser than we. God will not bear any thing which manifests contempt of
them that are employed by him.

But the best way to show respect to them, that now consecrate themselves to
Gods service, is to accept of the Doctrine which they preach (viz.) the holy
commands and promises of the Gospel: What though some of them have not such
parts, such sagacious apprehensions, such peircing expressions, such lively
representations of their thoughts: remember, that Isaiah was a noble man, and
nearly allied to the King. Amos was a Herds-man, yet both were Prophets. Jesus
Christ dies, Mark. 16.
and sends out poor Fishermen, and they do more miracles, and greater than
ever he did; and convert more souls: If God please, the pulse, the courser
fare, shall make Daniel look better than the rest: though Moses must not be
idolized, yet Joshun must not be despised. I of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of
Cophas; sure ye are carnal: are they not all the servants of Christ? what, is
no sense nor reason spoke, unless it be adorned with such a degree of
eloquence? Is there no light, unless there be noonday glory? this is just like
a silly Countryman, that counts him the King which has most silver lace, and
can show the biggest handfuls of gold: the foolish sports of lacivious fancies,
grave and masculine plety, looks on with a noble contempt; though I love with
all my heart to hear discourses, wherein my understanding perceives learning,
and my affections feel piety, yet I am far from thinking, that one quarter of
them is learned, which the world reputes so: where the words are starched, and
they are set together, to make a few fine cadencies, and they please an itching
ear, that affects trifles, but cure no disease, blow away no mist from the
understanding, leave no foundation for settled peace, or sober godliness:
Hieronimus ad Pannachium.
Cito turgens spuma dilabitur, this froth that looks white is presently wasted.
A tumor in the face that glisters and shines much, is contrary to that
healthful complexion which makes beauty: I would have learning, but it should
be to convey truth better to the understandings of all that hear me: learning
to make every thing plain, not to make any thing obscure and difficult.

Mr. Meade used to say, to preach so as people should not understand, was like
a Shooe-makers bringing home a handsome Shoe, but with a Last in it: it looked
nearly, but it was of no use as it was; for no foot could be put into it: When
I am in pain, and a member gangrenes, talk not to me how the Surgeon looks,
but tell me how fit he is, and how well skilled for the cure: does the Prince
applaud the Ambassador? that has showed he could speak elegantly, and had
words at will, but left out the potent reasons, wherewith he should have
secured the business, or else so buried them in his own phrases, that they were
not understood: If any one ask why I speak all this, I shall tell him no other
reason but this (I wish I had no more) I would not have the water of life
valued, for the Vessel through which it runs, nor Gods truth for the man's
parts, but them for truth; and every one esteemed as he is a member of Gods
family, and is more or less a faithful servant.

But if you will slight them, let me tell you, they shall not be troublesome
to you very long; for Moses shall die: God sends them now to demand fruit, and
to charge you to prepare for eternity, and to invite you to accept of great
salvation, it may be, it is the last time that ever this Messenger shall be
sent to you, welcome him now or never: Think every time you see a godly
Minister going into the Pulpit, it may be I shall never hear this man more,
never hear him pray for my soul more, never perceive him entering into my very
heart, and command my affections, and raise my spirit by Gospel Arguments, and
allure me by divine motives, if not now, never; if not now, nothing must speak
to me but his gra^e, until the day of judgment, when he who loved my soul,
and asked me why I would die; must come in as a witness against me, and
justify God in my condemnation, why should I slight Gods message, or slight
him who brings it? Now he is for ought I know, entering into the joy of his
Lord; now God so values him, as to reward him.

Surely this arguing is rational, and might easily enter into any man's mind,
who observes but common experience, though he had nothing else to prompt him.
-- I hope all of you will reap this advantage from the present occasion, to
value the persons, and the Sermons of all conscientious preachers better:
idolize them not, was our first advice, that is one way to lose them. Gustavus
the renowned King of Sweden, prophesied truth when he said, God would take him
off, because men too much admired him; yet scorn them not, for Ambassadors are
soon called home, when it is desperate to prevail so far as to get fair
audience: but howsoever you deal with us, do but practice godliness, and we
shall rejoice; for I question not but holy men can heartily present Paul's
petition: Now I pray to God that ye do no evil, 2 Cor. 13.7.
not that we should appear approved, but that ye should do that which is
honest, though we be as reprobat^^. Experience tell us, that good thoughts of
the Physician facilitate the cure, and the good health of a sickly patient,
brings credit enough to the Physician.

3 Moses his death, Charge you not to be confident of long life your selves:
if Palaces crack and fall, sure weak cottages must; if Moses die, a^private
Israelite must not live always: All flesh is grass, Isa. 40.6, 7, 8. Homo cum
sis, id fac ut semper intelig as: The Heliotrope, may pride it self, at the
Suns presence, the pretty flowers may open all their heads, and welcome the
salutes of the grand beauty of this visible world; but the Sun will set, and a
night must be found every four and twenty hours in Summer, but at length comes
a cold Winter, a tedious absence of the warm beams, and then the leaves drop,
and the roots perish; we are far nearer sickness and death, than we think we
are: Soul take thine ease; that the man said; This night shall thy soul be
taken away from thee, that God said: Is not this great Babel that I have built
for the honor of my name. The great King has no sooner said it, but he hears
a voice, that speaks something of a different nature, like the noise of a
thunderclap, that swallows up the melody which his secure pride made him: The
Kingdom is departed. A remarkable check you have to men's vain presumption of
life, in 1 King. 16.8, 9. Elah is drinking himself drunk, and his servant Zimri
comes in and kills him; -- Well, Zimri will be King, promises himself much
happiness in his royalty, but it hastens his death. Omri besieges him, and
when the City is taken, 1 King. 16.18
the poor King goes into the Palace, burns the house over him with fire, and
dies.

The Israelites like not Mannah, they must needs feed more delicioussy; they
shall; but while the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God fell upon
them, and slew the mightiest of them; we are blind if we see not, that man
grows up as a flower, and is cut down; Job 14.2.
he flees as a shadow, and continues not: Every thing in nature tells us of
changes; our very Table is but a (...), a bier, whereon every dish of meat
stands as a dead corpse: I could weep sometimes, and drop my tears as the dew
of the morning, when I see a young man in the pride of his strength, Quis
pacturientem rosam and papillacam corymbum anteq^^m in calarnum f^andatur
orbis, and tota ruben ium foliorum unbitione immature demesium aequis oculis
may cessere videat. Hieron. ad Pammachiam super obit. Paulinae uxoris.
in the acuteness of his parts, in the blossom of his beauty, whilst he is
the delight of friends, and his society the ambition of spectators; he sits
still, and thinks no hurt, when a rude passion stabs him; or he is innocently
merry, but his juvenile blood is inflamed, he is sick, he groans, he sighs,
he dies: But I resolve to stop the floodgates, and blame my folly; for it is
folly to forget that it is as natural for the grass to wither, and it is as
ordinary for it to be cut down, as it is to creep out of the womb of the
earth: Be as careful as we can, good fruit will perish, because it is
worm-eaten, and that which eats it, is bred within it. Just when Pharaoh will
have bricks made, and build Pyramids; leave Monuments of his greatness to
posterity, then is God about to break him, and pluck down the plumes of
Egyptian pride.

And surely, if an Israelite cannot presume that long life shall be his
portion, an Egyptian cannot; if a Moses cannot, then not an Israelite; but
this fond self-flattery, this great disease of besotted humane nature, whilst I
perceive so much reason as a medicine proper for its cure, and yet so little of
it received; makes me sad, and bewail the delirium that has deprived us of
all sober understanding: And indeed who can think of Jonathans great integrity,
and read his great mistake, without some degree of this passion, 1 Samuel 23. he
said to David, Thou shall be King over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee.
Alas, good man, who knew not that he was to dye in the next battle, and shall
not the tares* be cut up when the wheat is? Shall not the dust be blown away
when pearls are? Whether I, or you shall be deaths portion next, I know not,
but that we shall all be, is certain, for Moses is dead; neither humility,
nor meekness, power, and greatness; neither the love of God to him, nor the
love of Israel gives a dispensation, from deaths claim.

4 Moses his death: Commands you to prepare for death; nothing will secure from
it; therefore provide for it: Art thou great or small, in prosperity, in
adversity, the way may differ, it may be fairer to thee, fouler to another;
but the journies end is the same; the debt is due, the day of payment not
expressed, and therefore it may be demanded presently: What have you to say
when death comes? Will you speak to Time, as Joshua to the Sun, Stand still,
that I may be avenged of all my adversaries, that I may murder and crucify
those sins and lusts which have robbed me of God and Heaven: Alas, you cannot,
Times Chariot runs post, he will not hear; or is the grim visage of death, and
the thoughts of eternity, and a day of judgment so little formidable, that
thou can look steadily without amazement on them? Alas thy heart fails thee
at the thought of them? What cordial then have thou? Moses my servant goes
before, Death comes after: be Gods servant; and thou art well prepared for
this charge; be the Devils servant, and have the Devils curse; be Gods, and
the gift is eternal life: Aaron goes up willingly to Mount Hor and dies: Moses
when he sees it is Gods will, is satisfied: Nothing like the testimony of a
good conscience, that a man has been faithful in Gods service; though every
one in Gods family be not a steward, a public officer as Moses was, yet every
one is a servant, has some work to do; oh why do you neglect it? Is that a fit
time for man to dress himself in a dark night, when the dreadful cry
astonisheth him that his house is on fire about his ears? the poor man stands
naked, amazed, and is either burnt, or runs down the stairs, with fears not to
be conceived by any body but himself; so it is when death fetches the sinner,
and conscience cries aloud that the fire of hell will scorch him, and the great
Judge infallibly condemn him: Is this a time now for him, to put on the
ornaments of grace, when he is putting off the body? No, alas, that is too
great a work to be done so soon, and he is too much amazed to go about it:
The fear of a danger past, kills Nabal, and makes his heart like a stone within
him. There are sad instances that make it evident, that the time which men
allot to make preparation for death, is generally useless, and ineffectual for
that purpose.

A learned Doctor of our own has collected three sad examples which give
sufficient restimony to our last assertion, Great Exampl. 3. Part. p. 144.
the first of them he met with in S. Gregory, who reports of Chrysaurius a
Gentleman in the Province of Valeria, rich, and vicious, witty, but lascivious
covetous, proud; that being cast upon his death bed, he fancied he saw evil
spirits coming to arrest him, and drag him to hell; he fell into a great
agony, shreeked out; And when his disease grew desperate, he cried out, Give
me respite, but till the morrow, And with those words he dyed. His second
example is of a drunken monk, whom Bid mentions; who upon his deathbed seemed
to see hell opened, Lib. 5. c. 15. Hist. Gent. Angloium.
and a place assigned him near Caiaphas, and those which crucified our Savior.
The Religious persons which stood about his bed, called on him to repent of his
sin, to implore the mercies of God, but he answered, this is no time to change
my life, the sentence is passed upon me, it is too late. His third example is
one Gunizo, a factious and ambitious person, of whom Damianus reports, that the
Tempter gave notice to him of his approaching death; but when any man preached
repentance to him, Biblioth. F. Pp. Tom. 3.
out of a strange incuriousness, or the spirit of reprobation, he seemed like
a dead and unconcerned man; in all other Discourses he was awake, and apt to
answer.

Diverse now in Cambridge will quickly perceive that these three instances call
to their minds a fourth, of a woman that lived there, who on a sickbed being
visited by diverse persons of piety, and entertained with holy discourses, used
to say nothing but this, Call Time again.

It is true, we have not every day such remarkable instances, no more is every
murderer hanged upon the Gibbets, yet so many suffer this dreadful punishment,
as to make acts of baseness formidable, and to show the sore hatred, which a
good and compassionate Magistrate has against them; so the former examples
demonstrate that Gods grace (though of absolute necessity to our happiness) yet
then when we should need it, we may either forget, or else not find it, we
thought we should, at the command of our wishes.

But what is the design of poor besotted man? Let a sickness arrest us, a
Physician is sent for, an estate, a great revenue shall be parted with for
Time, get but health, and then any man shall have it for a trifle: Nay we are
weary of it if it must be spent in the thoughts of God and eternity; then this
short, very short life, is too long for us: Men that are full of business in
the world, talk like Augustus, Aliquande se victurum sibi sperabat, he hoped he
should sometime live to enjoy himself, and they long passionately for a great
Vacation; but when it may be in their power, they act like Turannius, who
after the ninetieth year of his age, having received a discharge from Caesar,
and got liberty to be freed from Court attendance, Componi se in lecto, and
velur exanimem a circumstante familia plangi jussit. Seneca de Brevitvitae,
cap. ult.
will needs be laid in his bed, like one that has breathed his last, and all
his family must bewail the old man's death. The God of heaven will tell us at the
day of judgment, how little we knew what to do with our selves, and our time
when we had fair opportunities to prepare for death, and to work out our
salvation: God will easily convince us, that it was our wilful prosecution of
our own lusts which ruined us, and that we would not come to him that we
might have life.

If any one shall ask me, what should be done to make preparation for death:
I would beg of him, first, Nihil minus est hominis oecupati quam vivere, idem
cap. 6.
That he would be so much at leisure as to be a while serious, if he can
but prevail so far with himself, as not to be turned out of doors by his own
thoughts, he will answer his own question himself, and soon resolve, that to
live, is the best preparation to dye. Haec quae vides ossa circumvolura nervis,
and obductam cutem, vultum que and ministias manus and caetera quibus involuti
sumus, vincula animorum tenebraeque; sunt. Seneca Consol. ad Marciam. c. 24.


For it is one thing to be in the world, another thing to live: To be a man
in the due use of all powers and faculties in the just command of all passions,
to be a Christian in the exercise of all Divine graces, this is to live,
otherwise men are dead in sins and trespasses, and their souls are buried in a
lump of flesh.

I persuade my self in this point, men need more to be awakened than
instructed, for who knows not that he ought to repent, and who understands not
that by repentance, God means that which he himself means, when he charges a
son, a friend, a servant to repent, viz. That he should be heartily sorrowful
for what is past, S. Augustinus sibi jussera: Psalmos Dividicos de paenitentia
scribi ipsosque jacens in lecto contra paretem Posito Jegebat jugiter and
ubertim flebit. Posidonius.
and do so no more; why then is not the Catalogue of sin read over till thy
heart be melted with godly sorrow, and a constant antipathy against iniquity
make thee watchful That thou sin no more lest a worse thing come.

Reader, tell me, Would thou not do this, this week, it thou thoughtest
thou should dye the next? but remember this day cannot be too soon, because
to morrow may be too late. It was a good saying of a wise Rabbi, It is every
man's duty to repent one day before he dies; and he that knows not but that
this day may be his last, had need begin to day, and so make every day a
continued act of repentance: Do this to purpose now, for since nothing makes
enmity betwixt the holy God and us but sin, practice this duty daily by
surveying all thy life, by continuing resolutions of obedience, by holy
watchfulness, that when the hour of death comes, thou may have this by thee
as a never failing cordial.

And do thou not know, that thou will then need a strong belief of this great
truth, That God has mercy for a repenting sinner, That the case of man is not
desperate; That we have liberty for second thoughts by the New Covenant; That
there is a great glory hereafter, and a certain resurrection to eternal life?
why is not this point studied by thee till thy soul be fully confirmed in this
great Article?

Or art thou ignorant that thou shall be unwilling to dye if thy treasure be
not laid up in heaven? (...) Plat. in Phaed.
you may pull off a glove with ease, but not the skin; you may easily see a
soul go hence, that has none on earth that it desires in comparison of God.
Whereas a soul immersed in body, used to nothing but eating and drinking, and
the pleasures of the belly, (...), sc. that is bewitched by the body, fallen in
love with it, and imbraceth it; Oh how willing it is to catch at, and clasp
about every thing that might make it stay in its beloved tabernacle; Oh be sure
to inure thy mind to things heavenly, and spiritual, for inordinate consent to
the pleasures of our outward man do (...) (as the noble Philosopher speaks)
strangely unite our souls to our bodies, that they cannot go from that which
they count their happiness without infinite torment and vexation: That day
wherein the vanity of the world, the emptiness and dissatisfaction of all
corporal delights are not so far studied, as to preserve our love for God, that
day did nothing for our provision for death.

Reader, all this thou art persuaded of, practice it; yet for thy comfort and
quiet, at the hour of death, remember to familiarize death to thy thoughts in
life; a Mariner is not afraid in a storm at Sea, when a child, or a timorous
woman quakes for fear in a fair day, on a shallow river: Think thy Savior the
beloved Son of God died, and lay in the grave; remember if thou art Christ's,
all things are thine, life, and death; seriously read, and duly consider, Heb.
2.14.15. 1 Cor. 3. last.
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy
him that had the power of death, that is the Devil, and deliver them, who
through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage.

Did we thus practice, and thus anticipate death by thoughts, we should find
our childish fancies apt to converse with that grim visage, which at the first
they ran away from.

By this means we should be worthy that character of those valiant people.
Lucan.


-- Animaeque capaces Mortis. -- Men not transported with the love of life, nor
inslaved with the fear of death: Men fit to live; fit to die; men that could
triumph, and sing that glorious (...), Oh death! w where is thy sting, Oh
grave! where is thy victory?

Fifthly and lastly, I speak here only of good men that make provision for
death by a pious life.
Moses death charge you to be satisfied, quiet, and contented, when you die
your selves, when your friends, when good Magistrates, good Ministers die
before you; for sure we, and they may be sick, and die, and yet be beloved
of God; so was Moses: Yea behold a greater than Moses, Jesus Christ; he that
heard the voice from Heaven, this is my beloved Son, he felt the pains of
death, and lay three days in a Sepulcher: deaths face looks more lovely ever
since, and may be beheld with less astonishment: Now we may cheerfully say,
come let us go and dye also: sure though the Be humme, and make a noise,
though the Serpent hiss, yet the sting is gone: Blessed be God for the
satisfaction we have in this great case by the death and resurrection of our
Lord and Savior: when our pains are next to intolerable, though we should
sweat as he did, drops like blood; yea, when we feel the stroke of death, and
find the face besmeared with a cold clammy moisture; the eyes are dim, the
hands stiff, the friends stand by and weep, they speak, but can receive no
answer: there is no liberty for a thought of any thing but pain and sadness,
grief and sorrow, yet may a sober Christian now by this Gospel-knowledge of the
death of Christ, make this happy conclusion; this may be my case, and yet I
not be hated, but so far beloved of the holy God, as that I may hereafter
shine as the Sun in the firmament, Mat. 13.43.
and may for ever be as the Angels beholding the face of my Father in Heaven:
Go then ye useful exemplary persons, who speak much to the World, when you say
nothing, who by good works, Est aliquid quod a magno viro, vel tacente
proficias. Seneca.
those unanswerable syllogismes, those invincible demonstrations, convince
spectators, who by the beauty of holiness, steal away the hearts of
gainsayers, and win their affections almost against their wills; go, lay y^^r
heads upon a cold stone, or a soft turfe, we are satisfied; if we weep, it
shall be for our selves, not for you: Our Savior, when he died, charged his
disciples they should not let their hearts be troubled, his death has
prevented the cause of trouble, we are no more Scepticks, whether the grave
be the way to glory or not? no more scrupulous whether it be best for you to
die, Fine Apologiae.
or live? It is not now, (...), as Socrates speaks, a thing known only to God,
whether the Scales turn for the advantage o^ the dead or living; and since the
Son of God, and the best o^ Gods servants, ever since the creation, have walked
through this dark vault, we will never expect a better way for our selves
(that is to be proud) nor will we be amazed when we come at it, for (after
this Gospel knowledge) it is to (...) nothing but play the fool, or to fear
where no fear is.

And if ever I needed this understanding, I do now; for if ever I had reason to
resent deeply, the loss of any man, I have reason now to be affected at the
loss of my faithful friend Mr. Edward Bright, Minister of the Gospel to this
Parish; what affections you had to him your tears at the late public fast we
kept on his behalf, did abundantly testify: Shall I a little tell you and the
world, who is dead, when it shall be said, that Mr. Bright is dead.

I abhor to be unworthy in my speech of any dead person: It is base, when
others cast friendly dust, to affect to cast dirt into any ones face; yet I
think painting becomes dead people worse than living; and whosoever have used
it, have hitherto got but little credit by it: I would be as unwilling to
speak more good, than truth allows me of a dead friend, as I would to raise an
evil report upon a living enemy.

I shall therefore say nothing but that which all who had any converse with
him, whose funeral we now solemnize, might easily observe in him.

Though I have often heard him thankful for his good education, of which his
Father, a godly Minister in Kent, was very careful.
I meddle not with that part of his life which I knew not my self, and therefore
shall only tell you those things wherein he was exemplary since I had happy
acquaintance with him.

1 The first which I shall instance in was, the nobleness of his disposition;
he was not like a Whirle-pit, to suck all into it self, but like a fountain,
that sent forth streams from it self, to refresh others; amongst other things
which I heard from him in his sickness, this was often repeated, I thank God I
came not to London for money: few nights passed over his head, but he used to
say to his Uncle (a most affectionate Uncle in whose house he dyed) if you
would be rich, Remember he that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord: Many
there are in Cambridge who had much experience of this good Spirit; Munerarius
pauperum, and egentium, Hi^ronimus ad Pammachium.
candidat us sic fest^nat ad Coclum.

2. The plainness, sincerity, and simplicity of his heart: his actions were not
checker-work, half black, and half, white: he was not as too many now are, a
great nothing i^ a Juggling box: that which glistered was metal, not gilt over
with pretenses; this he used to say often to me, I thank God I brought a good
conscience from Cambridge, and have not lived here to spoil it; and indeed he
was a man so free from all dissimulation, that I know very few his equals in
that perfection; being as far from flattery as any man I know, I had almost
said, as any man living; yea he would when you required it, open his breast,
speak so plainly to you, that you might see his heart spoke five words, when
his tongue spoke but one.

3 His courage and resolution: Elijah durst speak to Ahab, and Moses to
Pharaoh: I can truly say, I never knew him timorous, where he was
conscientious; and I could have promised this Parish this great happiness,
that the greatest man in it should not have been bold to sin, but he would
(since God had given him this relation) have been bold to tell him of it, and
accent it too, with all those circumstances which were convenient: he was not
steel in one cause, lead in another, if he thought Religion concerned: and as
Solomon's throne was supported by Lions, so must Christ's by such as these.

4 His candor and moderation: though zealous for practice, for truths
fundamental to a pious life, yet in other things fairly he allowed good men to
differ; and if his natural temper, did at any particular time on a sudden
transport him, yet he was quickly sensible.

Oh that the Christian world did enough remember, that it is good to be
zealous always in a good matter: Sincerity is good blood, zeal is good
spirits; and it is pity good spirits should be spent in throwing feathers.
Moses could not bear the people in Idolatry, no more would he any in
profaneness; yet he is a very unwise Physician that makes no difference
betwixt an ordinary boil, and the plague sore; betwixt a little dirt in the
skin, and a leprosy; he that knows not how to consider that in every thing,
he is not infallible, is like to be a very inconsiderate person; and he who
takes it for granted, that he is fallible, would have but little love himself,
because he has none for others; if he would, s^^e he is very proud, to
think all the world ought to give him that which he gives to no body; and
indeed that act of pride will soon follow, if men can once persuade themselves,
that every one ought to be of their mind which if I mistake not, is though
the subtilest, yet the highest pride in the world, The heat of the heart
purifies the blood, yet if good air be not sucked in by the ^ungs to cool it,
it will ruin the body by hectic fevers. That may be of excellent use which
is boiled gently upon a little fire, but let it boil hastily, and run over, it
raises ashes enough to spoil it self, to make it good for nothing, and to put
out the fire too, which had been useful for many purposes.

5 His abilities for the Ministry: -- he had good natural parts, and so the
metal was good at first, he had well improved them by study, and so the
metal was kept from rust; besides, he had a deep compassion for souls: And
indeed he had need be able that goes about Gods work, 1 Chronicles. 29.1. The work
is great it is for the Lord, said good David, when a palace was to be built
for God. To prepare spiritual Temples where God shall dwell, is a greater
business than most of our Tradesmen think it is; he loved to have his Sermons
filled with sense, could not endure a great bundle of words: And indeed it is
absurd to see men's tongues run as fast as the River at full tide, but their
judgments move, as standing water, covered with a sheet of ice; or if you
will, it is ridiculous to see fancy and humor riding gallop, but sober reason,
just understanding, come speaking like a Lacquey behind them: The judicious
Discourses, of which diverse of you were Auditors, made by this able Preacher
upon Ephesians. 4.14. [That ye be not as children tossed to and fro, with every
wind of doctrine] shall witness that his name was to be put into the
Catalogue of them, whose thoughts are sober, and who do as it is said Aristole
did, when he wrote his book, (...), Dip their pen in their soul, in the
composing of Divine Treatises.

I could wish that qualification required by the Apostle was a little more
considered by the present generation, viz. That he who is to take care of
souls, and preach the Gospel must not be (...), 1 Timothy 3.6. (...). Su^^as
Interpreta^ur. Gregor. Nazian. Vide Justel. Notas in codicem Canonum Eccles.
Universal p. 134.
a Novice, we translate it in the Margin, plainly one newly come to the faith;
they that were yesterday Gentiles, to day should they be employed as the
public dispensers of Gods Oracles? (...). Stay a while, the armor may be
good, but every young man cannot use it; and he may do well under command,
that would be a bad leader. It would be better for young students to stay
longer at their studies, to satisfy themselves in the great truths of
Scripture, than to be baffled by every one that shall ask them how they can
confute an Atheist, and how they can prove the Divine Authority of the Bible;
Read Pownals excellent Apology for a young Divines stay in the University.
and when truth is known, it is good to see the heart be well balanced, that
it be not quite discouraged if the world frown, nor lifted up with pride if it
smile; it is dangerous to lay a great building upon green walls. This good man
therefore was thankful for his Fellowship in Emanuel College above all the
providence that he had in his life; whereby he had liberty for study, for
converse with men of the greatest worth, thinking always, that it was no
wisdom to be hasty to spend, if there was no good stock.

But besides the accomplishments which he had by his natural parts, his
acquired learning, his diligent perusal of the holy Scripture, and other
Authors subservient to his design, he had a most deep compassion to souls;
nothing more appeared in his prayers in public, in his private conference than
this: And indeed no man is rightly qualified to preach Christ's Gospel, that
has not Christ's affection in some measure; he had need be compassionate,
that will give good food, and good phyfick to mad people, though they beat him
for it; the world loves their bodies, and will thank a Physician that discovers
their disease, but are either so careless of their souls, or so confident of
their own skill, that they will hate a Minister that shall show them the
leprosy of sin which has spread it self over their persons, and their
families: But herein was this good man singular, that he had a most ardent
desire to save the souls of them that heard him, and cared not what the sinner
said of him, so he at length might pluck him out of the gall of bitterness,
and the bond of iniquity; he that is to guide the Israelites, those peevish
creatures through the wilderness, had need be a Moses, that is, a man of great
abilities, and vast affection.

6. His admirable Industry, a very learned and worthy friend in the University,
whose thoughts of Mr. Bright I desired, (because (if I may be bold to use his
expression) Good Astronomers are in this case to be imitated, who choose to
take the altitude of a star at two several stations, that they may make the
more steady judgment) gave me this account of his industry; for one whole year
(I think the last of his residence there) he discharged all these several
employments, viz. preaching once every Lords day in Trinity Church, besides
Catechizing there frequently in the afternoon, explaining the Commandments,
examining the younger and more ignorant sort, to whom he gave Catechismes;
also preaching in the College once every fourteen night, and moderating
Divinity Disputations, both which were his charge as Dean of that College,
besides the care of his Pupils (above thirty) which was continually upon him,
who fared very little the worse for all his other business.

I humbly propose this to the consideration of all pious and conscientious men
in the University, into whose hands these papers shall come.
Nor must I forget his diligence in instructing College servants, and constant
attendants upon young Scholars, wherein they that knew his practice, know he
was very exemplary.

Nor must I forget his readiness to visit the meanest man or woman in Town,
whose necessity required his presence.

Thus did this good man put the Talents that God gave him to use: Idleness is
the burial of a living man, every where odious, but there abominable, where
sloth will not suffer a man to stir, though it be to save a life: No death is
cruel enough for that Nurse, that lets her child, though it cries, starve to
death, because she will not be at the pains to pluck out her breast; This good
man so much abhorred this vice, that it might be said to him what Jethro said
to Moses (unto whom, but that I dare not be nice and curious, I might show him
very parallel) Thou wi^^ surely wear away, Exodus 1^.1^.
for this thing is too heavy for thee.

The strict^ess and exactness of his life, standing always Sentinel to observe
what thoughts appeared in his soul, Cum sublatum (...) conspectu lumen est, and
conticuit uxor moris jam mei ^onse ia, totum diem mecum scrutor* facta ac dicta
mea ^emetior, nihil mihi ipse abscondo, nihil transeo: quare enim quicquam ex
e^^oribus meis timeam cum possim dicere, vide ne istud amplius facias, nunc
tibi ignosco; in illa disputatione pugnacius loquutus (...). Noli postea
congredi cum im perltis, N^lu^^ diseere qui nunquim dilicerunt. in lib. 3. de
ira cap. 36
and that he might secure a good fra^^e of heart, and a holy life, he kept a
constant Di^ry, and no day went over his head for some years before his
sickness* but he called himself to an account, that he might see, what evil
had that day been done, what good neglected; he used to record his fins which
he had to consess, to make the ^^reams of godly sorrow run fresher; to record
the mercies he wanted, to make his prayers more importunate; to record the
mercies he received, to make his thankfulness more hearty, and more constant:
he used to compare the observations he made of himself at the latter end of
the month, with those made in the beginning of it, that be might see whether
his sins or his graces had made the greater progress: This is a course which no
man will long keep, but he that is resolute to follow holiness, without which
no man can see God.

8 His profound humility: pictures that have no curtains before them, gather
nothing but dust, and so do their minds that stand exposed to all men's view,
and their own too: that is a blessed soul which knows how to do good for
goodness sake, and when it is done by him, to be able to say, Not I, but the
grace of God with we; the sense that Mr. Bright had of his own infirmities,
together with his contracted melancholy, made him more apt to complain than
boast.

It is said, Numb. 12.3. that the man Moses was meek above all the men of the
earth. Meekness was Moses his great perfection, and when our Savior proposes
himself as a pattern, he says, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly: It is
admirable when we receive many mercies to see our selves less than the least
of them. When Peter has the draught of fishes, he cries out, Lord, I am a
sinful man, Luke 5.8. It is excellent when Gods affliction makes us not to
forget his goodness, and when Gods mercy makes us not to forget our sinfulnes.
Loss than the least of all Saints, is the Motto of the greatest A^^stle. I
never perceived our good man apt to prefer himself above others, he would
heartily bless God for breaking that pride of his spirit which he would say
was too wilful, and excessively impetuous before he had a serious sense of
true piety; Omni acto triumpho depositus triumphus clarior, adeo spreta in
tempore gloria, interdum redit, cumulatior. Livi. lib 2.
when he read over to me (as he did often) the history of his life, he was
willing to stay there where he might speak something to shame himself; but
true beauty will be seen through such Cypress, he got respect by it: Like
Fabius in the Historian* who got more honor by refusing the triumph, than
others did by having it: Follow thy Savior, O my sold and tread in the
footsteps of all thy friends, who are truly humble; humility is the souls
ornament, Quantum bonum est ubi sunt praeparata pectora in quae tuto see otum
omne descen^dat quo^um conscien^^am minus quam tuam timea^, quorum sermo
solitudinem leniat, sententia, concilium expediat, hilaritas tristitiarn
dissipet, conspectus ipse delectet. (...) Seneca de tran^quillit. cap. 7.
the basis of all Religion, the vessel of graces, the foundation of friendship
betwixt God and man, the channel of all divine communications, the proper
imitation of Christ, the transcendent excellency of the Gospel, the only way to
true rest and peace, Matthew. 11.29.

9. The faithfulness of his friendship, and this whosoever forgets, I must
not, who had happy experience of it: how rare a thing is it, to find prepared
souls, where secret thoughts are safely laid up, and a man is more afraid of
himself, than he is of him with whom he does converse, and is more suspicious
of self-flattery, and falseness, to his own interest, than he is of either from
his friend: the present temper of this age, makes me think most men take that
advice, which if I mistake not, the Orator, says Bias gave; it a amare
oportet, ut aliquando osurus; you must love no man otherwise to day, than as
you may hate him to morrow; But Scipie said, Vide Ciceronis Laelium.
never was there a speech more pestileutial to the vitals of this noble thing,
friendship, than this is: But the former virtues we have observed in this good
man, made him capable of being a faithful, sincere friend: Aristot, in^ Ethic.
the Philosopher says, (...), a friend is another self, and therefore a wicked
man can never be a true friend, he is not (...), not himself, but one passion
or other is always in rebellion, and they make him to have so many interests,
that he cannot be faithful to the dictates of reason, which is the foundation
of friendship, but he that steadily aims at this one thing which we call
piety, and true goodness, he converseth with himself, and so may others too,
and not find him Proteus like, changing shape in every place he comes to, but
the humility, the strictness and exactness of this holy person, made him
amiable, made him love, and be beloved: might I lawfully take the Poets
expression of his friend, Dimidium anims mea, I must then say, I am half buried
since he is, or he is but half dead since I am alive; my passion speaks as
St. Austins did, Mirabar caeteros mortales vivere, quia ille quem quasi non
moriturum dil xeram. mortuus erat, and me magis quia ille alter eram vivere
illo mo^tuo mirabar. Lib, 42. confess. cap. 6.
when he had lost his friend Nebridius; I wondered any mortal man could live,
when he was dead, whom I loved as if he had been immortal, but I wondered more
how I lived my self, when our affection had made us as it were one person.

With thankfulness to God I this day remember this friends readiness to preach
every other Lords day for me in Cambridge, when my own weakness made me
despair of being able to preach constantly, and attend my other business.

Something I have now told you, what Mr. Bright was; but alas! I have but drawn
up the floodgates, which I should rather have let down, Miserum est fuisse
felicem; but it is ordinary to see sad persons pleasing themselves with stories
of their friends, that they have lost, and though every word almost is
interrupted with a sigh, and every sentence has tears, to make it emphatical,
yet no other discourse delights; nor is any thing else grateful, but what leads
to raise this passion higher; so me thinks I could begin again, and tell the
story of his life larger; and when I have finished it, wonder how I did to make
an end so soon: I have said the less, because he charged me to say but little
of him, and only refer him to God.

But this I have said, because I desire, that the Parish, to which he was
related that this City which yet knew not his worth might know whom they have
lost, and might be sensible of it. It is sad to lose a good Christian, but
more to lose a good Minister: Ad Pammachium.
It was a notable speech of Metania, mentioned by Hierome, who when she saw
her Husband dead, presently before he was cold, had two children died also:
she only said, Expeditius sum tibi servitura Domine, quiatanto me onere
liberasti, I hope Lord I shall serve thee better, having now nothing to attend
but God; S^ent immobilis nec gutta fluxit.
what her relations were, I cannot tell, but I am sure Ministers should be
helps in our service of God, not hindrances; that is it which makes the loss
multiply, when death summons them out of this world; and this is it, which is
grievous to me at the present, I am afraid you will not serve God so well
without him.

Yet I would not have any who are most sensible of this loss, be discouraged:
I did not all this while make the wound gape, that the patient should faint,
but that I might make the safer cure: Was he not Gods servant? yes, that is it
which causes our present sorrow for his absence; but is he the first servant
that ever God took away out of the world? You have seen in the particulars I
mentioned, how like he was to Moses in his life: see how like he was in his
death: Moses had but begun that blessed work, of bringing the people to a quiet
enjoyment of the promised land, and he dies in the wilderness: so this
Minister of the Gospel had but begun to sow this seed of life, He preached not
above six or seven Lords days. He lay sick fifteen weeks.
lived not to see it coming up, but a sore fever arrests him, and a pineing
ague, with other sad distempers, cut the thread of life, and makes us call for
a burying place, where we may bury our dead (formerly the delight of our eyes)
out of our sight, let us see whether our sins made not this breach, and let us
remember to mourn for them: Quod gravissimum fecit, natura commune fecit, ut
crudelitatem facti consolaretur aequalitas. Seneca. consol. ad Polyb.
Let us sin no more, lest a worse thing come, lest God send sorer and heavier
judgments upon the Parish and City too.

Yet let Moses his death satisfy you in Mr. Brights: let Mr. Brights in your
own. God has used to do thus in the world: and if the tide stay not for the
best Merchant, every petty chapman must not chafe, because it runs too fast
from him: If the Sun set to Kings and Princes while they travel, it will to
beggars: God will not comply with all our humors, Id Princeps potest, quod
salva majestate porest.
nor must his wise understanding submit to our passionate fancies, where a
Moses is taken away, it becomes them, from whom he is taken to be modest, not
to murmr against Gods pleasure, but to pray hard, and use all the means they
can to get a Joshua, and when they have him, to be thankful.

I have done, only I beseech you that are Parishioners here, that you would
remember to use all the means you can, if it be possible to get another Bright
amongst you. Empericks were always confident, but there were that heard, Paul
I know, and Jesus I know, but who are ye? he said wisely who said, the Cart
was empty when the Horses ran so fast: get a Minister that will be faithful to
your souls, that you are assured aims at your everlasting welfare, and when
you have him, hear divine truth from him with attention, practice it with
conscience, refresh him by the fruits of your piety, by the exercise of the
power of godliness; no comfort to the tender nurse, like the thriving of the
child.

FINIS.
To the Dear Memory of my Friend, Mr. Ed. Bright.
IF a large heart, open, and unconfined,
Free as the Air, it lately breathed; a mind
Worthy of God, and brave friends that durst be
Good, in this age, and scorn hypocrisy.
If to speak so in the Pulpit, that from thence
Atheists might learn to think Religion, sense:
The virtuous so inspired, as still to be
Made more in love with virtue, and with Thee:
(Rare Preacher! where the times are so perplexed
To see the Sermon often confute the Text.)
If good men's wishes, Physick's noble cares,
If Heaven importuned with early prayers:
If flourishing years, which now so far had run,
To be a just Meridian for their Sun:
If all these might have kept thee! that dark Fate
That too soon closed thine eyes, had then come late;
Late, as the slow-paced motion of that year,
Late, to the most long-lived, that wished thee here;
Late, as thine own requests; that asked a truce,
Not for thy self, but for thy Master's use.
Late, as the time, when best friend's might desire
To see thee full of day's, and God, expire.
Thou now had lived, and preached, and our tears bin,
Not for the Preacher shed, but for our sin
Awakened at his Sermon's: Then O why!
So soon, should what deserved whole ages, dye?
Must great mind's, like New Stars, but look about,
Be wondered at a little, and go out?
Yet we are secure, that their eternal light,
Removes not from its being, but our sight.
To spend it is glory's in some better place,
Where no dark exhalation hides it is face.
But let us weep leisurely, and think for what,
Retail our sigh's, Item to this, and that
Virtue, a tear, deliberately view
Him in his Pulpit, when quick lightning flew
About men's ears, and their steeled souls did melt
Within'um; or again, as when he dealt
A thunder through the Church all in a fright,
Thunder, would make Caligula look white:
Or when -- but tear's distract these objects so
(As numerous refractions use to do)
That they dam up themselves, and hinder more,
Being thus at once, both their own sea and shore:
And so it is fit; let trifling subjects throw
Our griefs into soft Number's, make them flow
Uninterrupted in one even stream,
A motion as unworthy as the Theme;
For Thee our sorrows tumult shall confess,
It is more full, and high by seeming less.
Ascend brave spirit! in thy robe of light,
Thy Flame is more illustrious through this Night
Of grief beheld by us, who can no more
But weep, and what thou now enjoy'st, adore.
And for you Sir! whose pious labor must
Hallow the Urn, that receives this dust;
Whilst his fair Name moves in your paper-bark
On flood's of tears, like Noah in his A^k;
Often may we meet, and for that Name so dear,
Whilst living, on it is Ashes drop a tear.
Will. Croone, Fell. of Em. Coll.

ELEGIES
On the much lamented death of Mr. EDWARD BRIGHT, his sincerely honored
Friend.
DEar Soul (too dear for earth) are thy bones laid
With common dust, and numbered with the dead?
Thou dead! who have so often with thy breath
Blasted life's fatal Foes, Sin, Hell, and Death.
Thou! who did erst men's hearts with flagrant words,
As lightnings through the scabbards melts the swords,
And by thy skill in Chemistry Divine,
Turnd'st courser metals into current coin
For Heavens Kingdom; such as neither rust,
Nor earth corrupts: What! Art thou turned to dust?
Is the salt melted, and the moisture dried?
The Conqueror vanquished, and the Chemist tried
In his own furnace, and to ashes turned?
Has Divine heat the Microcosme burned?
Yet thus we see sharp swords soon cut the sheath,
The purest flame aspires and vanishes.
The finest China mettal's broken soon,
The Nightingal's sweet pipe's soon out of tune.
Houses of best prepared, and purest clay,
Often totter, fall, and moulder in a day.
Nor may we wonder (when let loose to fight
The Elements begun to try their right,
And for dominion strove; the little world,
Being with wars into confusion hurled)
That then thy peaceful soul stirred up its might
To quit the Kingdom which disclaimed her right:
And just incensed rage awaked thy mind
To make a way out where it could not find:
As a bold Lion, when he meets his foes,
Lashes his sides, and roars, then stoutly goes:
Through hot'st encounters straight unto his den,
That there he may repose in peace again:
So (like Petars) thy soul made gates to fly,
That op't the passage to felicity.
And at such gates who would not venture in,
When though he lose his life he is sure to win.
But you Physicians who are wont to boast,
You Are Natures helps; why quel'd you not the host
Of Rebels here, and caused the civil war
Of inmate enemies to cease? what, are
Your Potions, Clysters, and your letting blood,
Only to save the bad, and kill the good?
Or to the grave did you his body give,
'Cause his design was that your souls might live?
Vanish vain thoughts, here neither care nor skill
Was wanting, nothing but his Makers will.
When God says no, Physic shall lend no aid,
Who first has done his work, shall first be paid.
An Epitaph for his Tomb.
HEre ly's a Saint; the poor man's purse,
Of babes in Christ the tender Nurse;
The Sick man's salve, the blind man's eye,
Of troubled hearts the ease and joy.
Zeals sacrifice, Faiths Herbenger,
His Saviors wise Ambassador.
His passion's Master, and the Lord
Of's time, and every thought and word.
Whose bones and ashes pawned remain
In Christ Church here, until again
The world dissolve by the same fire
That calcined him; but then entire:
Both soul and body shall unite,
And with the Lamb stand clothed in white
With Saints and Angels there to tell
The praises of Emmanuel.
J. Illingworth, Co.Em.Soc.S.

On the Death of his highly valued, and much beloved Friend, Mr. Edward Bright.
When grief makes Poets, and untimely death
Makes room for tears; Sure then a barren heath
Can yield a Flower or two, to deck a Hearse,
The driest fancy can weep out a verse;
And leave the Reader to determine why
Such ill-scann'd, course-spun, shriveld Poetry
Appears in Print; it is not because the name,
Worth, Learning, Piety, well-bottom'd fame
Of our Dear Friend with God, need such Divine
To show him to the world; such foggy Vapors
Do rather intercept Bright's beams, alas!
I bleed afresh to name him, cannot pass
It over without a sigh --
-- Now me thinks I could wink
This vain world into nothing; called a sink
Of emptiness; nothing betwixt two dishes,
Embroidered lies; women's and childrens wishes. Herb. Poems.

Yet why so passionate? Is it so strange,
That friends should shake hands here, that dust should change?
That smoke (yet such is man) should disappear?
That stars should twinckle in the Hemisphere?
I Will play no more the child, but curb my passion,
I Will dry mine eyes, and henceforth learn this lesson;
To dote no more on friends; I see a Rose
If held too fast, can prick me in the close.
R. Perrot.

An Epitaph.
ZEal without Faction, charity
Free from vain glory, piety
Not soild with sordid affectation
Religion void of innovation,
An able head, an honest heart
A down right man in every part,
Lies here entombed, a burning light,
Spent in the Temple: Now good night.
R. Perrot. Sid. Suss. Col.

THPNODIA. Upon the Death of E. B. M. A. Fellow of Emanuel College Cambridge,
and Pastor of Christs-Church, London.
1
HOw! Bright dead too! Ah let m'lone!
Think you, a sigh, or groan,
Or blubbered eyes,
For him just obsequies?
Ah! tell me not, the greatest Urne,
Has but a hearse,
Scutchion, and verse,
And gets but one poor month to mourn.
2
Oh that I had Timanthes art! who drew
The Giants Thumb to show
How might be guest
The greatness of the rest!
For who can Bright-at-length set forth?
Though all the nine
Adore his shine,
Vails are best comments on great worth.)
3
I Would quickly show, no need to let
One word sound griefs retreat;
But ah my span
'S too short for th'least of him!
So great! so good! so learned was he!
My words want weight,
To take his height;
Tears his best Epitaph will be.
4
Know you him not? go then and spy
Within his Tomb, there eye,
How his green head
Was the gray-Fathers bed.
Then Is mouth, where Greek and Hebrew played,
About his tongue,
Whither did throng,
Chalde^, and Syrick there to trade.
5
In's rumbling bowels, you may trace
Whole troops of Lumbards race,
Which conquered stand,
Great Sir, at thy command;
Strong his Supporters were, you will see
The liberal Arts
Did play their parts,
Nor in a Science lame was he.
6
His heart you will find all scor'd with lines,
Out of our own divines;
And now at last
Entered on Baxters rest.
And, as Ignatius had, so there
Within (I Am told)
Is writ in gold,
The Creed, Commandments, and Lords Prayer.
7
But griefs are soon fordable that have
Their ^ides, or needs a grave
To make them spring;
Give me the offering
Of sorrow when retired: Th^n see,
This done, you part,
Then will each heart,
Keep time with Nicke, and me.
Jos. Hill.

In Obitum Mri. Bright, Col. Eman. Socii:
QUid tantum egregias animis, quid debit a c^^lo,
Pectora, terreno querimur defunct a ve^islo:
An, quia nos retinent inviso care^^^ clanstra
Corporis, and miserae servant ergust^ila vitae;
Ergone Divinis animis, coeloque locandis,
In partriam prohibemus iter? Ergo optima fata
Impia sacrilego deflemus turba dolor?
Proh sancta impietas! suspiria prersus iniqua,
Aequatamen! lachrymaeque ipsapi^^ are propha^i
Sed nostras lugere vices, mata nostra quer^^^s
Flere licet: non illum adeo vixiffe do^^^ (...) often,
Quam quod nos ultra dimisso vivim^is ipso.
Eheu! sidere as quae tanta penurlo J^des
Invasit? sic nempe vacant caeles^ia Regua.
Ut Terrae invideant? illine tamra^a pi^^^^
Ut capita abripiant? ingens jactura relict^^^
O nimium delecte De^ quem postulat Ether
Ante diem! and fati dignum melioris, amiea
Vis rapuit Coeli, gestitque ornate triumphis!
Ergo ageter felix, terrena mole solute,
(...) Ch^^^^, super astra (...)
Perge triumphali currus educere pompa
Non qualem in Terris (...) mentis
Tot curis ambire solent, non quam sibi plausu
Captat ab obstropero miseranda superhia vulg^;
Sed te vera manent, (...) cupess^
Aurea sidereis decorand^ ^^hioulu fortis.
Gul. Leigh. A. M.C.C.S.

In Obitum Magistri Bright M. A. Nuperi Tutoris mei Charissimi.
SOlve parentales ritus, and justa repend^,
Justo funde^us ca^^i^a^^^sa part,
Intima cui pietus, quae su^^^ fr^^^ decora,
Sincer^ cordi^^^^g^^que promus erat:
Quo fervor, ca^^^que ammi, discordia ^^^^^rs,
Tynd^^ d^^f^^^re^ (...),
Non vacat ign^^us Genis, qui m^^era plura,
Qua totum posc^^ (...);
Nec satis est lucer^dien^, (...),
Contentus mini^^ nocte Britannus erat.
Dumque alio luce^^ vibrus, arde^^ (...),
(Ut pell^^c^^^^ pictoribus ^^^bras)
Heu! oleum citiu^ perlit, in (...):
Sin oleum perdas, niloper^^^ periit;
Sed tibi long aq^^is f^ss^^, fortique triu^^bus,
Sementique gravi^^s^^ (...).
Splen ridere facit, (...), sed^ad (...)
Descondit morbus, sp^enque d^^er^ fa^it.
Caetera dam solvit, qu^ dibit, mast^^ camana,
Solvitur in luctus. --
Rob. Alfounder. M. A. Col. Em. Soc.

In Eundem:
A Writ of ease so soon, and do thou turn
Thy vocal Pulpit to thy silent Urne?
No sooner watchman, but with sleep oppressed?
Thou went not there to labor, but to rest.
We often find that plants upon remove,
By their new welcome thrive, and fruitful prove:
But thou transplanted soon decayest; we fee
Death with his Spade and Mattock fells the Tree.
No, it is removed: this Tree of Knowledge is
But hence transplanted into Paradise.
If any wonder at thy shorter day,
That night treads on the heels of noon; we will say
Thou rann'st the faster to have won so soon,
Thou wroughtst the harder, to have done by noon.
Such Lamps as are not niggards of their light,
Soon spend their Oil, and bid the world good night.
We Will not compute thy time by days and years,
But by thy labors, then thine age appears
Double: let actions be the Sands that run,
And then thy glass runs long, when much is done
But fate, what makes thee hard to us? alas:
Thou needs not shake or break the Pulpit Glass.
Is this thy cunning there to send the stone,
Where it may hit a multitude in one?
Are Pulpits Butts, because they stand so high?
Preachers the marks, at which thou let fly?
And is the Laurel that was counted free
Now sooner struck, than any other tree?
We see; when sentence is pronounced by fate
Then Beneficium Cleri's out of date.
On the Death of his very dear Friend Mr. Edward Bright Fellow of Emmanuel
College in Cambridge.
O Death, I cannot skill thy arts
How thou could by thy power win,
And by thy Method kill that man
That Is dead unto the world and sin.
It seems it is not hard to put to flight
That soul that is fledged for it is eternal light.
Sure we are mistaken, he but sleeps,
Or if you rather call him dead,
I Am sure you mean no more but this,
That he is unto his kindred fled.
Then let us dress ourselves against he come,
Who shall be sent to call us also home.
So may we meet and join in one
Wreathed in an everlasting love,
Breathing our joyful praise to him
Who only wrought us this remove.
For so we see rejoycings in a Quire
Redoubled, where all meet, and all conspire.
This may suffice then, here lies one
Whose life was upright, and whose end
Was like his life: But yet we weep
Because bereaved of such a friend.
That man whose life was just, example rare,
Shall never need a verse, nor want a tear.
Rich. Kidder, A. M. Fell. of Emmanuel Coll.

Upon the frequent Death of Ministers, diverse young; of Mr. Brights in
particular, and the manner of it.
HOw is it the span of life so little shows,
Since the hand that measures it no shorter grows?
The grants of life in Character are writ;
Death finds some fault with Time; and now thinks: fit
To date its strokes after the modern style;
Anticipating Natures debt a while:
All Times proportions, we by sem briefs rate;
Into th'imperfect mood are shrunk of late.
The vital shadow does too nimbly haste,
And the famous Temple-clocks go much too fast.
Sure God's incenst, we treat with such delay,
He takes Ambassadors so soon away;
Or his revenewes don't to the sum amount,
He calls so many Stewards to account.
Or it is to screen his Seens eyes from fire,
By Deaths thick shade, he is kindling in his ire.
The Promethean Games more sacred now revive,
Where Lights run races, and so ardent strive,
Which shall be first kissed out by that pure Sun,
To whom their divine flames as tribute run.
Amongst which our Brights extinct; the reason why
My thoughts are tinctured with this mourning dye;
And put on black, teaching my hand to wear
This Elegy, griefs Phylactery here.
All lives are lines drawn to the point of Death,
Of which some upward tend, some end beneath;
Some long, some short* some crooked, some more straight;
This centred line was shorter, cause 'twas right
A line made up of points; emphatick light;
A sprightly ray reflected out of sight*
But in some deeper waters broken first,
Or through a duskie cloud Meanders ^h^^st.
A silver thread u^t wined at the end;
Coin of diviue impresse, but with a bend.
A Theme which reconciles integrity
With a dis-jointed judgment: where we see
In life's last page, Reasons errata cast;
A Chaos to another world prefac't.
A twist of night and day; a polar guide
Or fiery Pillar, but with a dark side.
A living Sermon, but of one use lame;
Gods Image seen inverst; a vigrous flame,
Panting with often assaies to assoil
It self with dimness, charged by grosser oil;
Deaths penumbra his setting Sun 'ore cast,
While vapors raised did reasons twilight haste.
His tongue then rang his senses funeral,
Which was the Curfeu that to rest did call.
Those jarring sounds so harsh to tender ears,
Were but while he was tuning for the spears;
His souls Reveile struck at the dawn of glee;
The Prolegom'na of eternity.
Whose speech sometimes yet flowed in nobler sort,
Like spirits rectified in a retort.
His heavenly Master laid his hand on's head,
And turned him round to manumit him dead.
A sacrifice to God his body meant
He to consume a fire, a fever sent.
He was an interlined Text, whereon
Heavens bestowed a gloss, the world needs none,
(He was not so obscure) to hint his fame,
Whom to commend's to comment on a name,
With Glowworms, that is writ with beams; or teach
B' our breath a Star to shine; or light to bleach.
This pen shall only be the Tube to set
His luster this short draught on Paper set;
Zeal gave his words their accent, piety
Figured his life, grace't with simplicity:
Whom faithfulness advance't to richer case,
Being called from Christ-Church to a better place;
Which countermands our tears, bids joyful be,
He Is gone from Christ Church, but to Trinity.
John Reyner. M. A. Em. Col.

In Obitum Edvardi Bright, Col. Eman^ Socii.
NIl opus esse Deo (quis uti saepius ipse
Dignatur) studios hominum, nil art, manuque
Auxiliatrici, quicquid discernit agendum,
Nos tua (sed quantum deflenda) Vir optime, fata
Immatura docent, quo non iustructior alter
Extitit interpres divina mentis, and alma
Pandere summa pot is mysteria religionis.
Qui tam flexanimi Suada, nervoque potentis
Eloquii, traheres mortalia pectora, sacra
Leg is in obsequium: rigidas impellere mentes
Doctus, and artifici dextra formare sequaces.
Nempe hoc illud erat, captiva scientia rebus
Caeter a divinis aderat, rati^que modeste
Ancillabatur fidei, prudentia zelo
Temperieni dabat, and coelesti plenus amore
Humanas miserente vices tibi Spiritus intus
Ardebat flammis non luce carentibus; instar
Lampadis heu nimium, radiis and lumine donec
Impertis alios, oleum vitale liquescit.
Haec quoties animum subeunt, geminata recursat
Maestitia, and (veluti lani^ praesente cadaver
Caede recente madens ebullit sanguine) vulnus
Triste recrudescit, dolet immedicable vulnus.
Nos imprudentes, numeris qui stringere paucis
Quaerimus, and luctus pedibus metirier arct is
Immensos, remurque animos eludere tandem
Carmine posse brevi tanti moment a doloris.
T. L.

In Exequiis Edoardi Bright, nuper Collegii Emmanuelis Socii.
QUis dabit ut liquidas oculi vertantur in und as,
Et fluat in madidis lachryma multa genis?
Sic tua perpetu^ deflerem funera rivo,
Non requies flendi, non modus ullus erit.
Sed men's obstupuit nimio perculsa dolor,
Pectora continuo deriguere gelu.
Sic oli^s Niobe evasit monument a doloris,
Dum sua defleret pignora chara nimis.
Sed quoniam in versus rigidus dolor ire recusat
Impatiens numeri nec mea musa valet
Nune faciles proferre m^des; suspiria saltem,
Singultusque mei sigua doloris erunt.
Dum micat aeternam cunctis ^stendere vitan^
Ex Orco rev^cans, ipse Edoardus obit.
Ah Mors crudelis, nullaque invisior umbra!
Debuit hoc saltem non licuisse tibi.
B. D. A. B. E. C.

Ad charissimi Fratris manes alloquium.
A Pagite qua nimis Inbenter credulum
Animum feffellerunt satis temeraria
Dogmata; mihique spem diderunt (ah cito
Ad irritum casuram) amica pectora
Nunquam suos nexus fideles solvere:
Has nempe nostr as molis incolas pigrae
Se dividi nunquam manu crassa pati,
Acutiorisque ingeni ludere aciem.
Animae ecce dimidium mea de perdidi,
Et ego superstes vivo tanto vulneri
Pars altera infelix, fugis dulcissimum
Poctus? brevisque conjugi te panites
Nostri? ergo cur l^^t^^ parum co^^i^^ (...),
Et Pegasei^ ^endis avolans gradu?
Caros per amplexus, sinusque egote precor
Blandos, and olim quae fuerunt dulcia
Colloquia, tot fraterni ^moris pignora,
Respice, pedem siste, retro tandem fer gradum,
Parumper expectatus ipse ero comes:
Eadem supremo lux mihi cibique sit.
Sed abiit. Heus! cur aure surda iro simul^!
Viam reflecte, oro, nec a me me trah^
Durus nimis: jam en jam paratus sum sequi;
Socium tuae me sortis and fati accipe
Tecum: mane donec. -- sed in cassum process
Fusae valebant nihil, ad ^ftra viam t^nes,
Cognataque impigro impetu lumina petit.
Coelisque terrisque anima dilecta merito,
Vale; sed hunc gemitum infim^ de pec^ore
Audi pri^s. Visa est ad haec remissa v^x:
Lachrymas inaenes pone (ait) questus t^os
Comprime. Venit (nee erit diu) venit die^
Iste tibi, qu^ arcte gremia complicabimus,
Positaque grandi corporum peripheria
Nostra (mihi quam laetus is dies erit)
Animas duas punct^ unico miscebimus. G. Bright.
Col. Samel. Soc.

Books printed, and are to be sold by Adon^ram Byfield at the Bible in
Popes-head-Alley, near Lumbard-street.
A Commentary upon the three first Chapters of Genesis, by that Reverend
Divine, Mr. John White late of Dorchester, in for.

An Exposition upon the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh,
twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of Ezekiel, by Mr. William Greenhill, being
the second Volumn, in 4o.

An Exposition upon the fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, and
nineteenth Chapters of Ezekiel, by the same Author, the third Vol. 4o.

The humbled sinner resolved what he should do to be saved, or faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, the only way of salvation, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick in 4o.

The Riches of Grace displayed, in the offer and tender of salvation to poor
sinners, upon Rev. 3.20. by the same Author in 12o.

A short Catechism by the same Author.

The Reasons of the Assembly of Divines concerning Presbyterial Government, 4o.

The Assemblies larger and lesser Catechism, in 4o.

The tenth Muse, several Poems, by Mirs. Ann^ Bradstreat in 8o.

Hidden Manna, or the Mystery of Saving Grace, by Mr. Will. Fenner, in 12o.

Safe Conduct, or the Saints Guidance to Glory, at the Funeral of Mirs.
Thomasin Barnardiston, by Mr. Ralph Robinson, 4o.

The Sts. longing after their heavenly Country, a Sermon by the same Author in
4o.

A Sermon at a Fast by Mr. Nath. Ward:

A full Discovery and Confutation of the wicked and damnable Doctrines of the
Quakers: As also a plain Vindication and Confirmation of sundry Fundamental
points of the Christian Religion, denied, or corrupted by the enemies of the
Truth in these times. Whereunto is annexed an excellent Discourse, proving that
singing of Psalms is not only lawful, but an Ordinance of God, by Mr. Jonathan
Clapham, in 4o.

A short and plain Catechism, instructing a learner of Christian Religion,
what he is to believe, and what he is to practice; With the proofs thereof
out of the Scriptures in words at length.

FINIS.

