THE ACTIVE and PUBLIC SPIRIT, HANDLED In a SERMON, Preached at Paul's, October
26th. 1656.

By Thomas Jacomb, Minister at Martins-Ludgate, LONDON.

When Sanballat the Horonite, etc. it grieved them exceedingly that there was a
man come to seek the welfare of the Children of Israel,

Nehem. 2.10. And let us not be weary in well doing, for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not.

As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good to all men, especially to
them who are of the household of Faith,

Gal. 6.9, 10. Nihil habet fortuna magna majus quam ut possit, nec natura bona
melius quam ut velit bene-facere quam plurimis.

Cicer. (...).

Marc Antonin. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Philemon Stephens at the gilded
Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard, and Abel Roper at the Sun near S. Dunstons-Church
in Fleestret, 1657.

Titchborne Major. Tuesday 4. of Novem. 1656.
It is ordered, that Mr Jacomb of Martins-Ludgate be desired from this Court to
Print his late Sermon at Paul's.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SIR JOHN DETHICK, lately LORD MAJOR, AND To the Right
Worshipful the Aldermen of the famous City of LONDON.
Right Worshipful,
YOUR Order brought this Sermon some few months since into the PULPIT, and now
into the PRESS: Might I have been mine own Chooser, I should have wished that
this slender Discourse, like David in the Text; after it had done some small
service to its Generation, might have fallen asleep, and seen the light no
more: But obedience to your Commands must make me to break through all my own
private desires.

I hope the Matter here handled, did not, nor will not, give you, or any other
person any occasion of offense, I know Truth is biting, where there is guilt;
Veritas loquendi grande praesagit malum: Lactant.
and therefore to some it is very dangerous to preach it, but yet the sound
back will endure to be touched, Amara est veritas and quisquis eum praedicat
amaritudine satiabitus. Hieron.
and there is no kicking at it.

I humbly beg your candid acceptance of this poor Mite, such as it is, and
your pardon for two things; First, That so much time is runn'd out since your
Order, before it was obeyed; which has not been occasioned from an
elaborateness in the Work (as every Reader will easily perceive) such
Mushroomes as this may grow in a very little time, and a few days are enough
for so mean a Birth: But partly by many occasions interveniug; partly by some
threatening trials in my Relations, which have much distracted me in my Studies,
and partly by my very great backwardness to appear thus in Print, unto which
(during my present years and abilities) nothing should drive me but mere
necessity. I further beg your favor in excusing some variations that possibly
you may take notice of in the Printing and in the preaching; the substance and
matter is the same, here and there some expressions and enlargements are
altered, which I have done, because I judge, that which is presented to the
Ear, may with greater advantage be presented to the Eye, when it is a little
put into another dress.

The drift and design of my Sermon was to quicken you up to an active and
public Spirit: And I pitched upon this Subject, not in the least to reflect
upon you, as being slothful and selfish in your places, but that I might stir
you up yet to abound more and more in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 35. ^^^
and in your activenesse for the good of your Generation: Should I say the
former I should very much wrong you, and should I say there was no need of the
latter, I should very much wrong my self.

It is observed of the Planets, the higher they are in their situation, the
quicker they are in their motion. God has set you in very high places, a low,
Monstrosa res est gradus summus and animus infimus, seeds prima and vita ima.
Bern. de consid. l. 2.
and lazy, and un-active Spirit is very unbecomming to your places; I beseech
you therefore with indefatigable diligence lay out your selves for God, and the
public, trade your Talent of power to the utmost advantage. Let your Spirits
be as public as your Places are; Has God set the Sun in a public Orb to
give light to its self? Self-seeing was always naught, but in such times as
these, it is naught with a witness: Seek thon now great things for thy
self? Jer. 45.5.
seek them not. Let the blessing of many come upon you for your zeal and
sincerity in serving your Generation; It is better to have the Prayers of the
public, then the Profits of the public. Do you work for the people of God in
the Court, they will work for you in the Closet, let them have your Power, you
shall have their Prayer, do you rule for them, they will pray for you.

To you (Right Worshipful) in whose hands the Sword of Authority has been
lately held, at the laying down of which this Sermon was preached; I hope you
find the comfort of what Service you have done. Generation-work is like the
gathering of Roses, which in the gathering, may be they prick the fingers, but
when they are gathered, they are very sweet. I think he went too far, that
writing the life of Anastatius, said thus, Stella de vit. Pontif.
Aquo haud quicquam habetur quod merito reprehendi queat. I am sure I should
not go far enough, as to your Government; if I should not say, much was done by
you, which deserves justly to be commended, you are not yet fallen asleep,
though as to that Office you are. The Lord heighten your zeal, and make you
yet more isntrumental for good, that your Life may be comfortable to others,
and your Death comfortable to your own self; Which is the hearty prayer of,

Febr. 26. 1656. Your worthless Servant in the Work of Christ, Tho. Jacomb.

Errata.
Epist. p. 2. l. 16. r. any. in the Margent r. eam, satiabitur. Sermon, p. 13.
l. 7. r. up. p. 18. l. 17. r. disserve. in the Margent r. temporum. p. 22. l.
13. add did.

AN ACTIVE and PVBLICK SPIRIT. HANDLED In a SERMON, preached at Paul's, October
26. 1656.
Act. 13 36. the former part. For David after he had served his own Generation
by the will of God, fell on sleep.


THIS Text is part of a Sermon preached by Paul at Antioch; v. 14.
the drift and argument whereof is, to prove this fundamental truth, that Jesus
Christ is the only and the true Messiah. And this the Apostle makes good, v.
25.
partly by the testimony of John, partly by the prophesies or promises which
were made to the Fathers, but fulfilled in Christ. v. 32.33.
And these prophesies do principally relate to Christ's resurrection, for that
being proved, the truth of his Messiah-ship would evidently appear: And
therefore I find the Apostles in the proving this main Doctrine of the Gospel,
generally to pitch upon this medium; Math. 12.38.39.40.
and indeed Christ himself uses this very Argument; when the Scribes and
Pharisees come to him, and desire a sign (that is, some clear proof that he
was the Messiah) says he to them, There shall no sign be given to you but the
sign of the Prophet Jonas; For as Jonas was three days and three nights in
the Whales belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in
the heart of the earth. And what can be more convincing or demonstrative of the
business in hand, See Garbuts exc. Treatise upon the Resurrection of Christ.
or of the verity of the Christian Religion, then the resurrection of Jesus
Christ. Undermine this you undermine all, you make Christ an Impostor, and all
our faith to be in vain, but confirm this and you confirm all: 1. Cor. 15.14.
This the Jews foreseeing, above all things they labor to hide and suppress
the knowledge of Christ's resurrection; Math. 28.12.13.
they knowing that by this, Romans 1.4.
he was mightily declared to be the Son of God.

The Prophesies which the Apostle does instance in, Psalm 2.7. Isai. 55.3. Psalm.
16.10.
are three, Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee (that is
declaratively) I will give you the sure mercies of David. Thou shall not suffer
thy holy one to see corruption. The latter of these he does most insist upon;
and least it should be mis-applyed, he gives in the Text a short Comment upon
it, Some might say. This was spoke to David, what is this to Christ. True
indeed, it was spoke to David, but not accomplished in him, for he dyed, and
did see corruption: For David after he had served his Generation fell on sleep,
v. 37.
and was gathered to his Fathers, and saw corruption. But this was fulfilled in
Christ; for he whom God raised up saw no corruption, he saw a dissolution but
no corruption, (...), but not (...), Peter inlarges much upon this head, when
he had upon the same occasion cited the same Prophecy, he gives his hearers an
explication of it, as to the person to whom it was to be applied, Men and
brethren, Acts. 2.27.29.30.31.
let me freely speak to you of the Patriarch David, that he is both dead and
buried, and his Sepulcher is with us to this day. Therefore being a Prophet,
etc. He seeing this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul
was not left in Hell, neither his flesh did see corruption.

You have the Coherence: In the words themselves you have, first, the person or
the subject, and that is David, set forth by a blessed Character, v. 22. v. 22.
A man after Gods own heart.

Secondly, the predicate, or the thing that is affirmed of him, After he had
served his generation, by the will of God he fell on sleep: In which words you
have a short description of David's life, it was serviceable, He served his
generation; and of David's death, it was comfortable, He fell on sleep.

In that clause which relates to his life, you have,

First, An account of what he did, He served; David reigned, and David served;
this serving implys not some one single, individual Act, but a series or
succession or complication of good acts, in the whole course of his life.
Secondly, You have, the publikenesse of his activity, He served his own
generation, not his own self, but his own generation. Thirdly, The ordering or
disposing cause of all this, and that is the will of God, By the will of God.
Briefly for the explication of the words, I find some difference amongst the
learned, as to the reading of them, some making the comma at generation, read
them thus, Haec distinctio neque invetustis exemplaribus invenitur, neque ulla
ratione nititur quis eenim aliter quam Dei decreto interveniente moritur? Beza.
vide Calvin, in loc Hanc distinctionem, etc. rejecta altera in margin, quae
tamen, etc. Actio enim verbi (...) melius fertur, etc. Boisius.
David after he had served his generation, by the will of God fell on sleep,
and so they referr this will of God to his sleeping, and not to his serving.
thus the Syriack, Oecumenius, and Erasmus; Beza dissents from these, and says,
there is neither antiquity nor reason to favor this Lection, and therefore
contends for the reading of the words, as we have them. After he had served his
generation by the will of God, he fell asleep, Calvin says, this is very
probable, but yet the other is not to be rejected.

There is another difference, set down in your Margents, according to which
some would have the words run thus, For David after he had in his own age
served the will of God, fell on sleep, and this the learned Boisius contends
for, I will not determine which is the best, only give me leave to follow that
at present which is in our translation, from which I could never vary without
weighty reasons.

You shall have the sum of the words, and the further explication of them, in
these four Doctrinal Propositions, three of which I shall do little more then
name.

Good men if they be serviceable in their generation, this is by the will of
God, David served his generation by the will of God How by the will of God? I
answer, either as God had designed him from everlasting, to be such a public
Instrument of his glory, (for God in his secret purpose, orders every man his
service in the world,) or else as all his actings were subservient to the
accomplishing of Gods will, I mean his decretive and providentiall will (for
this will of God in the Text is not to be understood of Gods preceptive will,
Huic consilio servivit David, quia fuit efficax Instrumentum per quod and per
cujus manum illud consilium ac beneplacitum Dei in execution emvenit, Stres.
but of Gods decretive and providentiall will) all his ways and actions in
public service were decreed from eternity, and disposed or ordered in time to
be according to, and for the accomplishing of the holy and wise will of God.
Thus David served his generation by the will of God. And this truth reaches to
all men, whether they do much or little in their sphere, this will of God is
the foundation of all their service, this designs their work to them, and them
to their work, (for there is a double designation, one of the person to the
service, the other of the service to the person) there is a divine ordination
in all they do, as Christ says concerning the work of his mediatorship, Joh.
17.4.
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do: And there is also a
Sovereign super-intendent providence, which does wisely and certainly so
dispose of things, and actions, that in all, the will of God is done, that let
men be who they will, or do what they will, still all is carried on in a
straight Channel to the doing of Gods work, and the fulfilling of his will.
And not only a David but a Cyrus also, he serves by the will of God, Isai,
44.28. Ezekiel, 29.20.
for even he is but Gods Servant to perform his pleasure, Nebuchadnezzar too
serves by the will of God, for he does but work for God. Nay not only the
services, but also the very sins of men are in some sense by the will of God,
that even in their sinful actions, the will of God is done, not the will of
his command, but the will of his decree; As in that grande nefas, Acts 4.28.
that sin of the first magnitude, Hae^ sunt magna o^era Domini, etc. etiam per
^andem creaturae voluntatem, quafactum est quod Creator noluit impleret ipse
quod voluit, etc. ut miro etc. ut miro and ineffabili modo non fiat praeter
ejus voluntatem, quod etiam contra ejus fit voluntatem, Aug. Enchir. ad
Laurent, c. 100. and de Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 1. Multa fiunt a malis quidem contra
voluntatem Dei, sed tantae est ille saepientiae tantaeque virtutis, ut in eos
exitus, quos bonos and justes ipse praescivit, tendant omnia, quae voluntaei
ejus videntur adversa. vid. Lombard. C. 10. D. 47.
the crucifixion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Herod and Pontius Pilate
did but what Gods hand and counsel had determined before to be done. But so
much for this point; David served by the will of God, God cut out his work,
David was but his Journiman to make it up.

Useful and active men in their generation, shall not dye before they have
done their work, (or thus) God will not take away any Instrument of public
good before he has finished his service, David after he had served his
generation, then he fell a sleep, but not before. Serviceablenesse exempts none
wholly from death, the most useful man must dye, as the Sun must set
notwithstanding its public influence, but serviceablenesse prorogues de^ath,
that through mercy it shall not arrest an active man, before he has done that
work which God has allotted him. It Is in the world as it is in a Comaedy, there
are several actors, that have their several parts, which when they have
acted, they go off from the Stage, and others come on, thus it is here with men
upon the Stage of the world, Lombard c. 1. D. 47.
in the acting of their several parts as to service, God has this business
for that man, this for another; Disce quod homines non citius moriuntur neo
diutius vi vunt quam donec nou possunt amplius servire consilio Dei, Stres.
the Magistrate is to do so much, the Minister to do so much, when they have
done it, then the all disposing providence of God removes them, and others are
raised up in their room, to bear up the name of God, and to be Instruments of
his glory. But I say, never till they have dispatched their task of service a
Moses, a Joshua, an Eli, a Nehemiah, first serve, then dye, first finish their
work, Phil. 1.23.24.25.
then (and not till then) their days, Take the instance of Paul for this, he
was in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ,
which is far better, what is Paul in a straight as to his being with Christ?
surely his whole soul could not but pant and breath after that: True, but his
eye is upon service to others, nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more
needful to you, to me death is most gainful, to you life is most needful, that
in my ministry I may further your joy and faith, Well, here is work to be done
for Paul, his ministry is not yet fully discharged, see what he says upon this,
and having this confidence, I know I shall abide and continue with you all for
your furtherance and joy of faith, as if he had said, I see God has more for
me to do, I must not go to heaven yet, I must stay and serve a little longer
till your grace be perfected. Pray observe me in this, God will not, wicked men
shall not, out off one that is useful in his generation, till his work be
done, I say, God will not, and wicked men shall not, let them rage and fret
never so much, and be their power never so great, they shall not hurt a godly
Magistrate, a godly Minister, a godly Christian, if God has more for them to
do, some come to Christ, and tell him Herod would kill him, what kill me now
before I have finished my work? go says Christ, Luke 13.31.
and tell that fox (for I fear him not) behold I cast out Devils, and I do
cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected, he cannot
touch a hair of my head to day and to morrow, that is, whilst I have work from
my father to do, in deed when this is done, then they shall take away my life,
the third day I shall be perfected, when my service is perfected, but not before.

David in suae etc. (i. e.) postquam perfecisset ca quae Deus in hoc mundo
ipsum agere coustituit, placide desunctus est. Ge^hard de morte.
death is and will be very sweet and welcome to that man, who in his life has
been faithful in the serving of his generation, David after he had served his
generation, fell asleep, death was nothing to him but a sleep, sleep is welcome
to the weary man, the labourer that has been toyling and sweating all day, how
sweet is rest to this man, so is death to him that has laid out himself for
good in the place where God has set him. Whatsweetned death to Hezekiah, I
beseech thee O Lord to remember now, Eccles. 5.12. 2. Kings 20.3.
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight, to Paul; I have fought the good fight, I
have finished my course, 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
I have kept the faith, henceforth is, etc. To Christ himself, I have finished
the work, which thou gave me to do, Joh. 17.4.5.
and now O Father glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I
had with thee before the world was. When God the Father had finished the work
of creation, and looking back upon what he had done, saw that it was very good,
the Scripture says, Genesis 1. ult. Genesis 2.2.
he rested; Not only so as to work no more, but he found great rest and
complacency in what he had done, because all was very good, It Is thus with men,
when they can reflect upon their lives, and can say, they have not been idle
nor unprofitable, nor self-seekers, but, in some measure, active for God and
public good; These men when they come to dye, shall have in their consciences
un-speakable joy and satisfaction, and after death they shall enter upon an
everlasting Sabbath of rest; the truth is, a lazy sluggish man, upon the
approaches of death, though others have but little grief, yet he himself is
filled with abundanc^ of horror, others do not much lament him, say they, who
was the better for his life, who will be the worse for his death, let him dye,
and let his name perish, but he does very much lament himself, conscience
gripes him, and flashes in his face, O how little have I done for God, how
unprofitable have I been in my place, etc. I say, these reflections make death
to be very terrible to such a drone, but to a David that serves his generation,
death is welcome and full of comfort, He fell asleep.

But I come to the fourth and maine Proposition, where I intend to dwell a
little, upon this occasion, and that is this; It Is the glory and the duty of a
man to serve his generation, to have a public Spirit, not serving himself but
his generation; I say, this is the glory and the duty of a man, David served
his generation, and this is recorded here by the Spirit of God for his honor,
and for our imitation. He did not make himself the Center of his designs and
actions, he was not a man of a private selfish Spirit, no, he minded the good
of others, and laid out himself for the good of others, he was active, and
active for the public, he served his generation. Now as for particulars,
wherein he did thus, I must leave the finding out of them, to your selves in
the reading of the Historical part of the Bible, To the point in hand.
Narrowness and selfishnesse of Spirit, it is a man's shame and sin, but
largeness and publicknesse of Spirit, 1 Kings 4.29. (...) S^p^uag. Lati.
tudinem cordis (h.e.) mentem multarum rerum capacem, quemadmodum arena long
lateque occupat circalittus Maris Vatabl.
it is his glory and duty. It Is said of Solomon, God gave him largeness of heart,
I do but allude to it, oh, this largeness of heart is an excellent thing,
when a person looks beyond his own private ends and interest, lays out
himself for the good of the community, trades every Talent, power, preferment,
gifts, wealth, grace with respect to the public good, here is a man of worth,
and one who is faithful to his duty.

I Will prove the truth in some few particulars, and so come to the application,
which I mainly intend.

First serving our generation is a frame of Spirit, not only highly commended,
but strictly commanded, the word is full of this. Gal 6.10. 1 Cor. 10.24. Phil.
2.4.
As we have opportunity let us do good to all men: Let no man seek his own
things, but every man another wealth: Look not every man upon his own things,
but every man also on the things of others. Let me tell you, he that lives to
himself, and does not lay out himself for his generation, this man (mark him)
lives in an open and flat contradiction to the word of God, let such profess
what they will, they are very Antipodes to the rule of the word.

Secondly; This is one great end of our Creation. Why does God send us into the
world? ^inc monemur quorsum homines vivant in mundo, ut scilicet alii alios
mutua communicatione juvent. Neque enin sibi quisque natus est, sed inter se
quasi sacro nexu colligatum est humanum genus. Ergn nisi leges Natuta evertere
libeat, meminerimus, non privatim nobis vivendu^ esse sed proximis nostris.
Calvin, in loc.
To be idle and selfish, to gratify our selves in the present delights? to be
immersed, and swallowed up in our own private interests? No, this is not the
end of God in our being, we are made for higher things then these, namely, the
public good, and the service of our generation. If the Scripture was silent,
the School of nature would learn us this lesson, we are not borne for our
selves, or made for our selves, a Heathen can tell us that the Law of our very
being calls upon us to eye and serve the Community; A private spirited man is a
shame to his Creation, because he walks so contrary to the great intendment of
God in it, for as Fulvius said to his Son, Ego te non Catilinae genui, sed
patriae, so here God did not make us for self, but for the Community.

And further this is the design of God in all our gifts, parts, indowments,
enjoyments, all are as so many Talents concredited with us, and put into our
hands, not that we should wrap them up in Napkins, but that we should trade
them, for the glory of God and the good of others; Some have wisdom,
knowledge, understanding; why, that their generation may be the better for
them, some have wealth, God blesses them with great estates, why? Not that they
should have their Gold and Silver lie moulding in their coffers, but that they
may relieve the poor, and be charitable to them that are in wants. Look upon
all that you have received, the end of God in all is this, he gives in to you
that you may give out to others, you are not as Vessels where the mercy is to
be lodged, but as Pipes to convey it to others; He has filled the Sun with
light, the Sea with water, that they may communicate of their fullness to the
benefit of the world, and so it is here, as the Apostle speaks concerning gifts,
The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal: 1 Cor.
12.7.
How shall many answer for their gifts at the great day, who have only studied
how to advance themselves, and not to profit others, Peter's advice here is very
seasonable, 1 Pet. 4.10.
As every man has received the gift (be it what it will) even so minister the
same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God. The Steward
does not receive money from his Lord for his own use, but he is to lay it out
for the good of the Family; so says the Apostle, Be ye Stewards of the grace
of God,: what ever you are, what ever you have, all is Grace, improve and lay
out all in service for the benefit of others; this is to be good Stewards of
the grace of God. Manna stank if it was not eaten, and so parts and gifts are
offensive, if they be laid up, and not laid out for God.

Thirdly, Our common union in the Mystical body calls for this, that we should
serve our Generation. It Is with the Church as it is with an Army, which is divided
into several Regiments, yet it is but one Army: Or as it is with a civil
Corporation, there are in it several Companies, yet the Corporation is but one;
or as it is with the body which consists of many parts and members, yet it is but
one body. Thus it is in the Church, it consists of many Christians, is made up
of various Professors, but still the Church is but one, and all the people of
God, where ever they live, they are all united in this own body, for there are
many members, 1 Cor. 12.20. Ephesians. 4.4. Ephesians. 3.6.
but one body. There is one body, and one spirit, etc. Jew and Gentile all
(...), but one body. Now upon this union it should be in the body Mystical, as
it is in the body Natural, all the members in the body conspire for the good
of the whole. The Eye sees not for it self, the hand takes not for it self, the
Stomach digests not for it self, but all their Organical acts tend to the
benefit of the whole body. Thus I say, it should be in the body Mystical, or
politic, the members whereof must not keep their Graces, their Comforts, their
Abilities singly and seperately to themselves; No, but all must be laid out in
a blessed subserviency to the public and common good. Paul having made a large
discourse in setting forth the Church by allusions to the natural body, shuts
up all thus, 1 Cor. 12.25.
That there should be no schism in the body, but that the members should have
the same care one for another. Let me only say this further under this head;
The self-seeker, the Gallio, that cares not what becomes of the body, Acts
18.17.
this man is but like a Glassie Eye, or a wooden Leg, he is no living member in
this body, he is a prodigious Monster, rather then a genuine Member. Nothing
more unsuitable to our common union then a private spirit.

Fourthly, This public spirit discovers much of that excellent grace of love.
(...). Arist. Rhetor. l. 20. c. 40.
Faith and Love are the two great graces of the Gospel; Faith is a getting
grace, Love is a spending grace, Faith lays up, Love lays out; Faith lays
out from Christ, Love lays out for Christ; Faith receives all, Love returns
all. Now I say, this serviceable active spirit for generation good, discovers
much of love, for love is a diffusive communicative grace, it is (...), a
sociable and public grace, Love is noble and generous, it keeps open house,
will not eat its Morsels alone: if it has good, if it can do good, Job 31.17.
others shall be the better for it. 1 Cor. 13.5.
Love seeks not her own, its designs are vaster, then so N^rrowness of heart,
argues much scantness of love. I may set this reason higher; A public spirit
discovers the truth of grace, it is an inseparable adjunct from saving grace;
David was a man after Gods own heart, and he serves his Generation, The true
Israelite cannot but pro modulo, lay out himself for the good of others: if any
be weak he must strengthen him, if any be sad, Luke 22.32.
he must comfort him, if any walk disorderly he must reprove him. It Is the voice
of a Caine to say, Am I my brothers keeper? What have I to do with my brother,
Genesis 4.9:
I Will mind my self? The Children of God say with the Lepers, We do not well,
this day is a day of good tidings, 2 Kings 7.9.
and we hold our peace: We have received many mercies, shall we bury them? We
have many opportunities, shall we not improve them? This is the language of
grace. Do not mistake me here, I do not say, that every public spirit is a
gracious spirit; but this I say, every gracious spirit is a public spirit.

Fifthly, This public spirit is our due conformity to God, to Jesus Christ, to
the choicest and most excellent Saints.

First, This is our due conformity to God. He is Summum bonum, and sum bonus,
the chiefest good, and chiefly good, infinitely good, and therefore infinitely
communicative: He is a Fountain full and overflowing, and all the creatures in
Heaven and in earth do all participate of his goodness (so far is he from
engrossing all to himself.) The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies
are over all his works. Psalm. 145.9. Psalm. 33.5.
The earth is full of the go^dnesse of the Lord. There is not the meanest
creature but it receives something from this inexhaustible treasury; nay, there
is not the vilest man, the most wicked man, but God does good to him. He
causes his sun to arise upon the bad as well as the good; Matthew. 5.45.
Nieremberg.
Vt nemo sine illius gustu vixerit. And as for his own people, his goodness
there is written in the beams of the Sun, there we must say, Truly God is good
to Israel, even to them that are of a clean heart. Psalm. 73.1.
And why does God thus open his hand and his heart unto us? why such bounty,
why such bowels? the reason is clear, He is good, and therefore he does good.
He might enjoy himself in his own fullness, Matthew. 5. ult. (...). Synes.
(...). Marc. Anton.
and keep to himself the sea of his own blessedness, but he will not; no, his
poor empty creatures also shall receive from him, for he looks upon his
goodness as his glory What then makes a man more like to God then a public
Spirit? To be good, to do good, this is to be perfect as our heavenly Father is
perfect. Do you see a man that aims at nothing but himself, that never lets
the Cock run but when it is for his own advantage, that envys every drop that
is not for his own use, that limits and confines all to himself, and none
shall be the better for him; how contrary is this man to God, and how little of
God appears in him? Here Is Walking indeed as man, but here is no walking as
God. 1 Cor 3.3.
But on the other hand, do you see a man, that makes it his business and
design to do good, to communicate to others, it is not well with him, if others
be not the better for him, this man is a lively image and representation of God
himself.

Secondly, This is our conformity unto Jesus Christ, who as he is a public
Head, so he is of a public spirit. Acts 10.38.
He went about doing good. Why did he come down from Heaven into the World? To
save sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15.
Why did he set himself apart to the work of his Mediatorship? For the good of
others, John 17.19.
For their sake also sanctify I my self, that they may be sanctified by the
truth. Why did he lay down his life? Not to merit any thing for himself, but
for his sheep. I lay down my life for the sheep. Why did Christ arise again?
John 10.15. Romans 4. ult.
For our justification. For whom does he intercede at the right hand of his
Father? He ever lives to make intercession for us. When he was ascending into
his Fathers presence, Heb 7.25.
does he only beg for glory for himself? No, he asks it for his members also.
Father I will that they also whom thon have given me, may be where I am: John
17.24.
He is not content to be in glory himself, but Beleivers also must be with
him. What a public spirit was in Christ? He pleased not himself, he sought
not himself, Romans 15.3.
the circumference of his love was very vast, and the center in this
circumference of his love, was not his own private but the public interest. I
sinde the Apostle pressing the duty I am upon, from this example of Christ,
Look not every man on his own things, Phil. 2.4.5:
but every man also in the things of others. Why so? Let this mind be in you,
which was also in Christ Jesus. He did not mind his own things, do you so too.
Ah miserable and sad had our condition been, if our Lord and Savior had been
of this temper, he might have stayed upon the Throne, enjoyed his Fathers
presence in Heaven, delighted himself in those infinite loves which were
betwixt him and his Father, but he leaves the Throne, and comes to the Manger,
the Bosom of his Father, and lies in the Lap of the Virgin, puts of the Robes
of his Majesty, and clothes himself with the Rags of our mortality: And all
this he does perfectly upon the account of poor man, that he might bring him
out of a state of misery, into a glorious and blessed estate: Lombard l. 3. D.
18.
Let the Schoolmen dispute whether Christ merited for himself, or not,
certainly his aim was not there, but all for poor lost undone man: Who can
study Christ, and have a private selfish spirit?

Thirdly, This public Spirit is our conformity to the choicest and most
excellent Saints, who the more they have had of God, the more they have had of
this spirit: I might here give you a cloud of instances, take some few for
many; Moses is so set upon the serving his Generation, that he is in danger to
wast and consume himself in their service: Thou wili surely wear a way, Exodus
18.18.
sor this thing is too heavy for thee, thou art not able to perform it thy self
alone: (says Jethro to him) when God makes him a very fair proffer, It shall be
well with thee, Exodus 32.10.11.
only let me punish this people. I have seen this people, and behold it is a
stiff-necked people; Nor therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot
against them, and I will make of thee a great Nation. This will not stop Moses
his mouth, if it go ill with the public, private advantage shall not take him
off: And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord why does thy wrath wax
hot against thy people, etc. And this his mediation saved them; Nay, he seems
to embarque the common good, and the salvation of his own Soul in the same
Vessel: Yet now if thou will forgive their sin; if not, Exodus 32 32.
blot me I pray thee out of thy Book which thou have written. O Admirable zeal
for the public good! such another was Jehojada, whom the Scripture says, They
buried in the City of David amongst the Kings, 2 Chronicles. 24.16.
because he had done good in Israel, both toward God and toward his house.
Hester will hazard her own life to serve her Generation, I will go in to the
King, and if I perish, I perish. Esther 4.16.
But I Will pass over many who have been eminent in this, and give you only one
example more, and that is Paul, of whom the Gospel records such things as
these. The care of all the Churches was upon him, 2 Cor. 11.28. 1 Cor. 9.19. 1
Cor. 10.31.
he becomes all things to all men, that he might win some. He denies himself in
that which was his right, that the passage of the Gospel might not be hindered.
1 Cor. 9.12.
If others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless
we have not used this power, but suffer all things, least we should hinder the
Gospel of Christ. You find him counting not his very life dear to him, Acts
20.24.
if he may but finish his Ministry for the good of others: He tells the
Thessalonians, he was willing to impart to them, 1 These. 2.8. Phil. 1.23.
not the Gospel only, but his own Soul: He is willing for the public good
to stay out of Heaven for a time, which is a piece of the highest self-denial
that I know, when a man is sure of Heaven, and yet willing to stay on earth for
service; Nay highest of all, he says, Romans 9 3.
I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ for my Brethren, my
kinsmen according to the flesh. And to add no more, what was the great thing
that troubled this holy man; it was the great sin of self-seeking: All seek
their own, Phil. 2.21.
and not the things which are Jesus Christ's.

sharply to be reproved, who are far here from David's practice, and David's
praise, He served his Generation. I will level this reproof against four sorts
of persons.

Caligula (homo omaium scelest ssimus) de condition templum suorum quaestus
est quod nullis calamitatibus publius insignirentur. Psatina.
First, There are some (as I fear too many) who are so far from serving their
Generation, that they do what they can to disgrace their Generation: My meaning
is this, they are so far from designing public good, that they design public
mischief, they are working and plotting, and have a vaster reach then self,
but what is it for? only to do hurt to the places where, and to the persons
with whom they live; They are men only ad perniciem nati, to be pestis Ecclesia
and Reipublicae, They sleep not unless they have done mischief: Prove. 4.16.
Such are your Incendiaries, Promoters of strife, that go about like Sampsons
Foxes, with firebrands at their tails; to put Church and State, Cities,
Corporations, Families, all into flame, men of Nero's Spirit (that Monster of
men) who sets Rome on fire, and then laughs at it when it is done; no draught so
sweet to these men, as a draught of their brethrens blood: No fire warmes their
hands and hearts so well, as the flames of public discord and misery;
Viper-like, they will not stick for their own ends to tare the bowels of their
Mother Church, and State: What shall I say of these men! Men did I call them?
they are not men, they are Devils incarnate, Devils in men's shape; Jam. 3.6:
Hell is broke loose in these persons, they are set on fire with Hell it self:
Acts 13.10:
These are Elymasses, the very Children of the Devil, Job 1.7. 1 Pet. 5.8.
and as like their Father as can be, who goes about to and fro to do mischief,
I say they are the very Children of the Devil, for he that does not do good, is
not the Child of God, but he that does, de industria, study how to do mischief,
this man is the first born of the Devil, and one of his prime Instruments or
Factors that he imployes in the world. David serves his Generation by the will
of God, they that disserve their Generation, it is by the will of the Devil; But I
hope I speak to no such spirits at this time, and therefore I forbear, let me
only add this one word, The unprofitable man is to be censured, but the
mischievous man is to be abhorred.

Secondly, they are to be reproved (and I pray you suffer this word of reproof
submissively) who instead of serving their Generation, serve themselves upon
their Generation; who I say, instead of serving the public, serve themselves
upon the public. These, may be, are not altogether so bad as the former, but
they are bad enough. Many of your Heathenish barbarous people that live upon
the Sea coasts, have a wicked custom; When there is stormy foul weather, they
will fall down upon their knees and pray for a wrack, it is no matter what
becomes of the lives and estates of others, the wrack will be for their
advantage, and therefore they pray for it: It Is little better with these whom I
am here taxing; may be, in civil Wars and public distractions, they do not
pray for a wrack of the State, but if such a thing fall out through Gods sore
indignation, it is welcome enough, and they will make the best of it for
themselves. Does not this reproof reach to too many in our times, in our late,
never enough to be deplored Calamities? have not many advanced themselves by
the public sufferings, and built their fair houses out of the common ruins?
have not many spun their fine cloth out of the Nations Fleece, when it was
torn in pieces? and are grown fat like the Child, to the Mothers leanness?
have not many got Estates by the public losses, and are made rich by the
general poverty? May not England say to many, as once a great man said to his
Servants, Lord Bacon.
Your rise is my fall? It was wont to be said, The public Treasuries were
increased by private losses: Regia privatis crescunt araria damnis. Claudian.
but now it may be said, The public Treasuries are diminished by private men's
gains. Has it not been with us, as it is too often at your fires in the City?
where many come pretending to quench the fire, but indeed it is to steal and
to get something in the common confusion. I fear such has been the practice
of too many in our State, they have meddled and acted, pretending nothing but
the quenching of the sire, whereas in truth enriching of themselves has been
the main thing they have looked after.

Two things are to be much lamented amongst us, and I know not which of the two
most, whether this, That the times have made so many poor; or this, That the
times have made so many rich.

Nehemiah was in a great place, but he buys no Land; Nehem. 5.16.
we have had many in very mean places, but they have made a shift to buy great
Estates. I do not here aim in the least at those who have been very
isntrumental for good, whose Salaries have been much inferior to their
deserts. I only speak to those, who by corruption, and cheating, and
dishonesty, and self-seeking, have out of the public built their houses, and
filled their Coffers; But let such know, God will make them vomit up their
Morsels again; Prove. 23.8.
And their third H^ire shall never rejoice in Estates thus gotten, but as the
Prophet speaks, Jer. 17.11.
As the Patridge sitieth on Eggs and hatcheth them not, so he that gets
riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his
end shall be a fool.

Thirdly, this reproof reaches to those, who do little or nothing for the
service of their Generation; and here I speak to those that are dull, heavy,
spiritlesse, unactive men, mere Droanes and Ciphers, -- Fruges consumere nati.
--
that take up so much room in the world, they eat, and drink, and wast the good
Creatures, but they do no work, their Generation is never the better for them.
O that our Hives, our Cities, our Congregations, our Families were not too full
of these Droanes; but these useless men, these walking Ghosts, these lumps of
flesh, that are not animated with an active Soul, these I say, abound every
where. Pardon me if I speak a little tartly, for I confess my heart rises at
these men. The state of Athens judged that man a Monster that did in republica
sine publico fructu versari: Osor. 7. H. Curpi mareecentes otio non tam vitam
agunt, quam praete^vetun^ur nec vivunt sed in vita morantur, nec sero tales
moriuntur s^d diu Morus to suo, Calvino
we have too many of these Monsters amongst us, I do not here only mean your
dull men, who do rather sleep then live, but such also as have parts enough,
and life enough, and opportunities enough, but yet as to Generation-works are
mere stocks and shadows. The Politician has wisdom enough, but he will sit
still, and save one, it is good sleeping in a safe skin. The voluptuous man is
active enough, but how? He games and pursues his recreations, so his time runs
out, what does the public get by him? I wish too many of our Nobility, and
Gentry, and Gallants not fall within this charge. The Magistrate has power
enough, but he le^s the Sword rust in the Scabbard. The Christian pretends to
grace, but he keeps it to himself, Matthew. 5 15.
puts his Light under a Bushel, he does not with a vigorous activity lay out
himself for God, and his fellow-professors good. Let me tell you, an
unserviceable life will end in an uncomfortable account; when God shall come to
account with you: Friend, I gave you a Talent, Matthew. 25.
where is it? how is it improved? I let you live so many years in the world,
what did you do all that time? Read legiors^ vare.
you did not hurt, but what good did you do? how were parts and gifts traded
with zeal toward me, and love toward your brethren? you had such an Office,
what did you do in it? such an estate what did you do with it? what? nothing?
Take that unprofitable servant and cast him into utter darkness, Matthew. 25.30.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. O dreadful and miserable end,
for a slothful and unserviceable life.

Fourthly, Let this be a word of reproof to those who serve their own selves,
not their own Generation, such as are swallowed up in their own interests, and
mind their private concernments, but as for the public, that may sink, or
swim, Acts 18.7. 2 Timothy 3.1.2.
they are Gallio's and care not. Paul has a sad prediction, This know, that in
the last days perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of their own
selves. (those are perilous times indeed) And he makes a sad complaint; Phil.
2.21.
All men seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ. Are not these
places fulfilled in our days? what a spirit of selfishnesse is there amongst
us? men have now set up a fifth Gospel, and that is, private interest, and this
(says Causine) swallows up all the four Gospels of Jesus Christ. Are we not
very busy in building our own houses? but if Ministers speak to us of building
the House of God, either we say with them, Hag 1.2.
The time is not yet, or with the Emperor, Dus Deorum curae sunto? let God look
to Religion himself, if he please. Let me apply that of Jonathan in his Parable
(for I find it made use of in this case) The Trees went forth to anoint a King
over them. They go to the Olive, Judge. 9 8 etc.
to the Fig Tree, to the Vine; but shall I leave my fatness says the Olive?
shall I leave my sweetness, says the Fig Tree? shall I leave my Wine says the
Vine, and go up and down for other Trees? So it is read in the Margents, and so
it is in the Hebrew.
This is the carriage of many; go to them, pray lay out your selves for the
public good; What shall I leave my ease says one; my profits says another, my
pleasure says a third, to go up and down for other men, for their benefit?
Tabulas, domos, villas vestras, pluris secistis quam rempublicum, Sallust.
We will not do it. It was once charged upon the Senate of Rome, they minded
their own possessions more then the Commonwealth; and may not this be charged
upon too many in our times? Magistrates, Ministers, private Christians, all
full of self: Not here and there one, or two sick of this disease, but
multitudes lie under it; self-seekers swarm, they are like Motesin the Sun,
Pittacus.
insomuch that (according to the fancy of the old Philosopher) if any should
shoot an Arrow against self-seekers, a thousand to one but he would hit, let
him shoot where he will, our age is so full of them. I fear (if I be
uncharitable I beg your excuse) there are too many of this spirit in this
Congregation, and you that are so, know, that this self-serving, and
self-seeking is a very heinous sin, and a very mischievous sin, especially when
it gets into those who are in public places. What has set our Reformation
back ten degrees? What has kept the Child in the Womb so long? Whence is it
that our hopes have been so much dashed? I fear this is one reason, men in
public places have had private spirits: And further, know three things will
rise up in judgment against you for this sin; Word; dumb Creatures.Does the Be
gather Honey for it self? Does the Sheep yield Wool for it self? does not all
Creatures serve the Community? and you all for self? These poor Creatures will
witness against you: Heathens will shame you, they hated that sin which you are
guilty of; they looked upon themselves as born to serve their Generation, --
Toti genitum se credere mundo. Lucan. spoken of Cato. See A. Gell. l. 3. c. 7.
of Caedicius. Valor: Max. l. 5. c. 6.
they would willingly lay down their very lives in the service of their
Generation: Are not you short of the very Heathens, if you be, it is very sad,
and will be more sad; for they that have less then the Heathens virtues shall
have more then the Heathens punishments. I have been large in this Use, I shall
hasten in the rest.

Having spoke so much upon a public Spirit, I will in the next place give you
some Characters of one that has such a Spirit, that you may thereby examine
your selves, and know what temper you are of.

The first is this, 1. Car.
a public spirited man will serve his generation, even when he cannot serve
himself by his generation; He is one that will lay out for his generation,
when he cannot lay up from his generation; He will not desert his work though
he can have no wages for it. Many will seem very diligent for the public, when
their service is gainful as well as painful; but take away the profit they will
do no more. He Is a man of a brave Spirit, who whether he has any thing or
nothing, yet this shall not hinder him in the serving his generation, such an
one was Nehemiah, when the people were poor for 12 years he served them for
nothing, Neh. 5.14, 16.
I and my Brethren have not eaten the bread of the Governor. Yea, also I
continued in the work of this wall. Though he could not have that allowance
that was due to him because of the common poverty, yet he went on in his work.

Secondly, 2. Car.
a public spirited man is very meek and quiet under injuries that are done to
himself, but very zealous and passionate under injuries that are done to the
public. You shall observe some men, if they be but a little prejudiced in
their own interests, they cannot bear it, there they are full of anger and full
of spirit; but let the public be wronged never so much, that they can easily
put up. Saul is much to be commended for the publickness of his Spirit in this
particular, under a private affront put upon him he is silent. But the children
of Belial said, 1 Samuel 10.27.
how shall this man save us? And they despised him and brought him no presents,
but he hold his peace, but when he hears of an affront and wrong done to the
people by Nahash the Ammorite, the* Text says, 1. Sam. 11.6.
The Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings, and his anger
was kindled greatly.

Thirdly, 3. Car.
A publick-spirited man is more sensible of, and does more lay to heart the
miseries of the public, Isa. 22.4. Jer. 9.1.
then his own private sufferings. Does God lay personal afflictions upon him,
he is sensible of them; but is the Nation, the Church in flames, like to be made
desolate by the miseries of war? oh, this overwhelmes him. Good old Eli has
the sad news brought him of his Sons death, that was a sore affliction; but
that he bears: 1. Sam. 4.18.
but the tidings of the taking: of the Arc, that he could not bear; that broke
neck and heart and all.

Nay, you shall see further; A publick-spirited man is more sensible of the
public miseries, then he is of his own private mercies. There is not so much
in the latter to comfort him, as there is in the former to grieve him; Though
all be well with him, wealth enough, health enough, comfortable relations, all
sweet; yet if the Church or state be like a ship not only tossed upon
troublesome waters, but even ready to sink, this imbitters all his comforts,
and puts a check upon all his joy. Neh 2, 2.3.
See this in good Nehemiah, says the King to him, why is thy countenance sad,
seeing thou art not sick? what have thou to trouble thee, art not thou in my
favor, my cup bearer, is not thy condition very good? True, but yet he is sad,
why? Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City, the place of my
Fathers Sepulchers lie^h wast, and the gates thereof are consumed by fire? The
public suffered, therefore Nehemiah mourned. So Vriah who denied himself in
his private comforts upon this account; The Arc and Israel and Judah abide in
tents, 2 Samuel 11.11.
shall I then go into my house to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife:
as thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing. David when
he had rest from all his enemies, and was in a very prosperous condition, in
which he might have solac'd himself to the utmost, you shall find this put a
damp upon all his enjoyments; 2 Samuel 7.2.
I dwell in an house of Cedar, but the Ark of God dwells in ourtains.

Fourthly, 4. Car.
A publick-spirited man rejoices in public good, and more in the public then
in his own private good. How far are they from this excellent Spirit, who
fret and envy at the good of others. The Angels I sinde thrice rejoicing in
the Scriptures, and it is always for the good of others, oh there is the public
Spirit; At the Creation of the world, Job 38.7.
when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted
together for joy. At the Incarnation of Christ. And suddenly there was with the
Angel, Luke 2.13.14.
a multitude of the heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in
the highest, etc. At the conversion of a sinner, There is joy in the presence
of the Angels of God, Luke 15.10. Scias illum plurimis abundare virtutibus qui
alienas sie amat. Plin. Ep. 17.
over one sinner that repents. The blessed Angels are not so much concerned
in this good as we, and yet they rejoice at it. But this is not all, A
publick-spirit does more rejoice in the public good then in his own private
good. This you see in David; Let my hand forget her cunning, and my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, Psalm. 137.6.
if I do not prefer Jerusalem before my chief joy. The Churches welfare was
the object of David's highest joy, 'twas not his crown, his victories, his
treasures; the weal of Jerusalem (which was a public good) was his chief joy.

Fifthly, 5. Car.
A right publick-spirited man will not stick at danger, if he may bring about
public good. What though I lose my name, my estate, my liberty, my life, if I
may but serve my God and my generation, it is no matter. Esth. 4.16.
I will go in to the King, and if I perish, I perish, O brave Spirit. Esther
knew her danger was great, for this was not according to the Law; she knew how
Vashti had been dealt withal before her, she knew that she had many enemies
that would aggravate this boldness, but all this is nothing to her; to save the
lives of the Jews, she will hazard her own. What mean ye to weep and to break
mine heart? (says S. Paul) For I am ready not to be bound only, Acts 21.13.
but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. Come what will
come a public spirited man will serve his generation, though he suffer for it.

Sixthly, 6. Car.
A publick-spirited man desires of God rather that which may make him useful,
then that which may make him great. You may know what Spirit you are of by what
your hearts do most run out after in prayer. Says the selfish man, Lord give
me ease, and safety, and wealth; says the public spirited man, Lord give me a
heart to serve thee, abilities to serve thee, opportunities to serve thee. Take
the instance of Solomon for this; 1 King. 3.9.10.
Give thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may
discern between good and bad, for who is able to judge this thy so great a
people? And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.
Solomon does not ask long life nor riches, nor any thing for himself, but
parts, that he might be useful to his generation; here was a publick-spirit,
and a spirit very pleasing to God. I say, look to the matter of your prayers,
and the end of your prayers, you ask of God such and such gifts, and therefore
you ask them, not that you may be proud of them, or applauded for them, but
that you may be serviceable with them, here is a choice Spirit.

Seventhly, A publick-spirited man will rejoice in public good done, 7. Car.
though he himself have not the glory of it. Some men are like the Senate of
Rome, that would not let Christ have a place amongst their gods, because
another would have the honor of it; they do what they can to retard and stop
any motion for public good, if they themselves shall not have the credit of
it. Nothing makes their mill to go but the wind of popular applause. It Is
otherwise with the man I am characterizing, if good may be done, though he be
not advanced by it, he rejoices and blesses God for it. The carriage of Paul
was excellent in this. Some preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some
also of good will: What then? Phil. 1.15.16, 17.
Notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is
preached, and I therein do rejoice, and will rejoice; Let the world say, they
preach better then I, and so Eclipse my reputation, that is nothing to me; so
long as Christ is preached for the salvation of souls, I do rejoice and will
rejoice. Genesis 13.8. (...). Agath. (...) p. 8.


Eighthly, publick-spirited men will pass by private differences and wrongs,
rather then endanger the public: Let there be no strife I pray thee between me
and thee, for we be brethren; says Abrham to Lot. Oh that this spirit did but
more prevail in our times. But what rancor and bitterness and rage is there
even amongst Brethren upon private differences, though hereby the common safety
be so much endangered. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.
Can the mariners fall out amongst themselves, and the ship not be in danger?
Should member unnaturally fall upon member, would not the body be destroyed?
Can saint and saint be at variance and the public be safe? Let us pray for
this public spirit* A selfish spirit has kindled the flames, a public spirit
must quench them.

The ninth and last Character is very comprehensive, 9. Car.
the public spirited man, in all things prefers the common before his own
private interest. Let the balance go down on my side, if it may rise there;
let me be laid low, if it may but go well with Church and State, it is very
well. I say, when the private sheaf bows to the public, here is a man of a
public Spirit. I am willing to dye (said that famous Bishop) if the Church may
do well when I am dead and gone. Peream ego modo ille imperet, Moriar ego, mod^
me moriente vigeat Ecclesia.
said Agrippina of her son Nero; so here let me be laid as low as may be if
Christ may but reign, if the Gospel may be but advanced, if peace may be
continued, I have enough. Nehemiah prefers the public before himself; when the
King bids him make his request, does he ask something for himself? Nehe. 2.4.5.
no, his eye is upon generations good. He asks that he may go and build the
Sepulcher of his Fathers. Like that famous Terentius, who petitioning to
Adrian, that the Orthodox Christians might have liberty of worship by
themselves, the Emperor in great indignation tore his petition in pieces; but
bade him ask something for himself, and it should be granted; the good man
gathers up the pieces of his petition again and tells the Emperor, If he could
not be heard in the cause of God and of his people, he would never make request
of any thing for himself.

And thus I have described unto you this public Spirit, and where now shall we
find it? It Is cafie to say what it is, but it is hard to say where it is. Take
your candle and lantern and make the most diligent search you can, you will
hardly find a man of this temper. Narrow, private spirits abound, but David's,
Nehemiah's, Mordecai's, their number is very small. Blessed be God we have some
in this Nation, in this City, but would to God we had more.

Use shall be for Exhortation;and here let me stir you up to the practice of
that which is the duty and the glory of a man; Oh, serve your generation; write
after David's copy in this, be public blessings in the places where God has
set you, be not slothful and selfish, but of an active and public Spirit.
Self is a carnal man's god, his Unity in Trinity, (as one express it) Honor,
Pleasure, Profit, are the Trinity; self is the Unity. Let it not be so to you,
crucify it and keep it down as an enemy, do not obey it and advance it as a
God. It Is the greatest conquest in the world, for a man to overcome himself and
his own Interest; Do you devote what ever you are, what ever you have, what
ever you can do, to the good of your generation. I will press this upon 3
sorts.

private Christians do you lay out your selves for the public good: Alas,
you will say what can we do; we that are so mean and inconsiderable in our
stations, wherein can we be serviceable to our generation? Let me tell you,
there is not the meanest Christian that hears me this day but some way or other
he may be instrumental to the public: There is not the least star but it
has its light; Exodus 35.6.
there is not the meanest member in the body, but it has its use: They that
brought but hair to the building of the Temple were serviceable: I will reason
the case a little with you: many of you, though but private men, yet you have
great estates: Why do you not honor the Lord with your substance? Prove. 3.9.
Why do you not serve your generation by being charitable? Are there not many
naked backs, why do you not clothe them? Are there not many hungry bellies, why
do you not feed them? Go to the University, go to the Hospitals, see if there
be not there to be found opportunities and objects for your service: In your
civil capacity you may serve your generation. You have friends, acquaintance,
relations, children, servants, you may serve your generation there, bring them
in to Christ, advance the power of godliness amongst them, instruct them in
the mysteries of the Gospel; Nurture them up in the fear of God; Ephesians. 6.4.
In your relative capacity you may serve your generation: Again, you have
grace, why do you not trade it for God? By your holy conversation you may
either convince or convert many, 1 Pet. 3.1.16.
Is not this good service? You have a spirit of prayer, Isa. 43.26.
You are the Lords remembrancers, like so many Jacobs to wrestle with God and
prevail with him: By your prayers you may save a Nation, and turn away the
judgments that are threatened; Is not this generation-service? Moses stands in
the breach, Psalm. 106.23.
and saves the people of Israel from destruction: Even private Christians are
the props and pillars of a place, the stay and the staff thereof, how? Isa. 3.1.
by their prayers and wrastlings with God. We read of a German, who was wont
as often as he heard of rumors of wat, to say, I fear it not so long as Luther
lives; Luthers prayers would prevent National miseries: You say, you cannot
serve your generation, Go and pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Again, Psa.
122.6.
you can mourn for public sins, you can reprove them that go astray, you can
encourage the Ministers of the Gospel, you can contend for the truths of God;
These and many such things you may do, and thus in your spiritual capacity you
may serve your generation: Do but do what you can, and you will do enough; It
is not want of power, but want of will that makes many private Christians so
unserviceable.

Ministry, let us serve our generation; Shall we call upon others, and not stir
our selves? Like the Bell that calls others to Church, but moves not it self? Of
all men we Ministers, if we be sluggish and selfish, are the basest men: An
idle, self-seeking Minister, is a flat contradiction to his office: Paul says
of Timothy, Phil. 2.20:
he did naturally care for the state of the Church: and Paul himself sought not
his peoples good for his advantage, but his peoples good for their own
advantage: I sought not yours but you, This is the spirit that becomes us: Is
there work to be done? 2 Cor. 12.14.
We are to spend and to be spent in the doing of it: Chrysostom tells his
hearers, He lived only for their profit, 2 Cor. 12.15.
and he would refuse no labor if he might be serviceable to them: What though
spirits be wasted, health prejudiced, strength weakened, we are not propter
vitam vivendi perdere finem (as that great Scholar answered his Physicians, D.
Reynolds.
when they desired him to spare himself, We live to serve, and if we may by all
our pains but turn one soul to God, that is worth all our pains. Are there
divisions in the Church? we are to labor to heal them, and lament them. Vid.
Calv. in Ep. ad Arch. Cranmerum. Tragoediae Luthe^ranae mihi ipsi calculo
molestiores. Erasm
Are the Truths of God opposed? we are to stand up in their defense, with all
our might, to put a stop to the inundation of errors. Do National sins spread
and prevail? we are to reprove them, not sparing the greatest of men. I will
not enlarge (because this is not so proper in this Assembly) We are non nobis
sed multorum utilitati nati (as Bucer speaks, Mal. 5.14.
) God has set us as Lights in a public place, and we are to communicate to
others; we must tread in the steps of our Master, who went about doing good:
Act. 10.38.
Our generation will not be able to answer well for their contempt of us, but
we shall worse be able to answer for our neglect of them.

Right Honorable Magistrate and Magistrates of this great and famous City; Do
you especially serve your generation: God has set you in a public Orb, You
are worth ten thousand such shrubs as we are; You have many Talents in that one
of power and authority; Oh improve it to the utmost for generation-good. I do
not speak to you under this or that quatenus, as rich men, No, but only
quatenus Magistrates, We bless God, and are thankful to you, for your great
care, diligence, and faithfulness in promoting our good: We reap the fruit of
your labors, sit under the shade of your Government with much peace and
quietness, you have been drawn out in zeal for the strict observation of the
Lords Day; Great encouragement you have given to the Ministers of the Gospel
(which in these times is no small mercy to us) you do appear to punish sin, to
execute justice, and I hope the poor Orphans will have cause to bless you for
your securing and improving that livelihood which is left to them: Many Fathers
adopt their Children, these Children have adopted you to be their Fathers:
Shall I go on in your praise? No, I forbear, rather I beseech you go on in
service, and yet do more worthily for God and for your generation.

Let me with all humility quicken you to this active and public spirit by
these few short considerations.

Secure the public, and the public will secure you- Is not your private
safety wrapped up in the public? What becomes of the Cabin if the Ship be lost?
The best way to secure the Cabin, is to secure the Ship; So the best way to
secure your private comforts is to secure the public good.

You shall not lose by serving your Generation: Act for God and your community,
God will bless you and reward you for it: Quod grave perpendit ex opere leve
existimat ex remuneratione. Greg. Moral. l. 8. c. 7. Hag. 2.19. 2 Samuel 7.13.
Ezekiel. 29.20. 1 Cor. 15. ult.
As no man seeks him in vain, so no man shall serve him in vain: From this day
will I bless you: He shall build an house for my Name (there is his service) I
will establish his Kingdom for ever (there is his reward) A Nebuchadnezzar
shall do nothing for God but he will requite him for it: Abound in the work of
the Lord, your labor in him shall not be in vain.

Thirdly, The remembrance of this will be matter of comfort to you when you
come to die: Nehemiah had been active for the good of the people; See how he
spreads this before God, Think upon me, my God, for good, Neh. 5. ult.
according to all that I have done for this people. Lay out your selves (Right
Honorable) in the ways of service; Service and sincerity in service will
unsting death.

God has done great things for you, will you do nothing for him? What you do
for the generation you do for God: Has not God blessed you exceedingly in the
things of the world? Are not Estates increased? Are not comforts providentially
heaped upon you? Job 29.3, 6.
Does not the Candle of the Lord shine upon you? You wash your steps in butter,
and the rock pours you out rivers of oil (as Job speaks:) What has been done
to Mordecai for all this? Esth. 6.3.
Now you have such opportunities, make some requital. This is (...) W.

This will interest you in the hearts of Gods people, and it is no small thing
to have an interest in the hearts of such; Serve your generation, they will
desire your life, they will lament your death; You shall nor die as J^horam
did, 2 Chro. 21.20
undesired and unlamented: Serve your generation, they will prize and honor
you, Your Name shall be as precious ointment to them. It is said of Mordecai,
He was accepted of the multitude of his Brethren: Esth. 10.3:
Why so? Seeking the wealth of his people: Serve your generation, you shall
have their prayers; Let them have your labors, and you shall have their
prayers; Lord, bless such a man, and spare his life to us, for he does much
good in his place: I say, you shall have the hearts of the people of God, Jud.
5.9.
My heart is toward the Governors of Israel that offered themselves willingly
amongst the people; They are weary of men that seek themselves, and fain would
be rid of them, but a useful man has their very heart, such a one they love,
contend for, could even lay down their lives for him: And therefore upon all
these motives, I humbly beseech you, let head, and heart, and hand, and power,
and estate, and interest, and all be acted and laid out sincerely and
faithfully for the good of your generation. Titus the Roman Emperor, Amice
diom perdidi. (...).
if a day passed him wherein he had not done some good, was wont to say,
Friends, I have lost a day, and this day I have not reigned; The Lord give you
this active spirit, which will be so much for his glory, our benefit, and your
own comfort both in Life and Death.

Direction; In a few words I will give you some advice in the discharge of this
great duty.

mainly and chiefly lay out your selves for the Gospel, for the things of
Christ, for Religion, For this is the best service you can do to your
generation; 1 Chro. 29.2.
David's service was Temple-service: Laws are good, for they are the bulwarks of
property, and the boundaries of the lusts of men; What a Chaos of confusion and
cruelty? What a wilderness of wild beasts would the world be, was it not for
Laws? Liberty is good, for it is one of the sweetest flowers in the Nosegay of
our civil happiness: Peace is good, for as the wreath of the Faggot binds all
the sticks together, so does this all your comforts, break this in pieces, and
all your comforts fall asunder, And therefore stand up in your places for the
defense of these things, and do not easily part with that, which cost your
Forefathers sweat and blood: Epaminondas will either dye with or for his
buckler; he would either defend it, or it should defend him; the Application is
obvious. But yet what are these things to the Gospel, to the grand Concernments
of Religion? The Gospel is the Glory of a Nation, 1 Samuel 4.21. Florente verbo
florent omnia in Ecclesia. Luther. 2 Samuel 6.12.
the very Nerves and Sinews of a Kingdom, it makes not only the Church to
flourish, but the State also where it is; It brings all blessings along with
it, not only spiritual but temporal too, as the Ark made Obed-Edoms House to
prosper; Religion is the Cement, or Bond and (...), etc. Plutarch.
Ligament of all Societies; When that is lost no Comforts can make up the loss
of it: Phinehas his Daughter has a Child, but what is a Child when the Ark
is taken? You may have peace and plenty, and all outward enjoyments, but if the
Gospel be removed, call them all Ichabod, for the Glory is departed. 1 Samuel
4.21.22
And therefore in the first place be active and zealous for these things of
Christ, Phil. 2.21.
that the Gospel may yet be continued, that the Protestant Religion may yet
flourish, notwithstanding all the contrivances of J^suites amongst us, 2 Samuel
14.19.
(for Is not the hand of Joab in all this?) that the Truths of God may prevail,
that the Worship of God may be administered in its spiritualnesse and purity,
that the Ministers of Christ may have due honor and maintenance, that the
Government of Christ may be settled; Government did I say? I did, and do not
recall it, though we live in an Age very zealous as to the Government of men,
very cold as to the Government of Christ: (...). Plutarch: Sympol.
What is the Ship without a Pilot? What is a City without a wall? What is a
Vineyard without a Hedge, and what is the Church without a Government? I think
no Government is so bad as no Government, at least wise, Some Oppression is
better then Ataxy and absolute Confusion. God show us the Pattern of his House,
Eze. 43.10.11 Quoties est, ut populus aliquis, posteaquam disciplina and
religio corruerint, salvus stererit. Zwing. De Provid.
that we map all know what is that Form of Discipline which is to be erected.
But I digress, (though the Lord knows not out of any bitterness of Spirit) I
say In the first place, Lay out your selves for these things, this will be to
serve your Generation indeed, Nay, the Generations that shall succeed you will
reap the Benefit of this Service; Your Posterity, and Childrens Children will
bless God for such Progenitors; The Advantage of this your activity will
remain when you are dead and gone.

Labor to be good your selves, as well as to do good to your Generation:
There is a great difference betwixt a good man, and a good Magistrate, betwixt
a Gracious Christian, and a Serviceable Common-wealths-man. There are many that
are but bad men as to their inward state, and yet they are good men in their
places as to outward Service; God makes use of Gifts sometimes where there is
little or no Grace: The Raven was an unclean Creature, 1 Kin. 17.4.
and yet God fed the Prophet by it; 1 Kin. 5.10.
Hiram was but a Heathen, yet he sends Timber to the Building of the Temple,
And so it is in this case, Graceless men are not always Useless men, nor
Useful men always Gracious men; God in his overruling Providence uses many
whom he will never save: How many Ministers are eminent in Service, and yet
they shall be but Cast-aways: 1 Cor. 9. ult.
Oh! that is a terrible and awakening thing; How many Magistrates are very
active for good, that God will never own in the matter of Salvation: Many in
public places are but like the Carpenters that built the Ark for others, but
were drowned themselves, They do good to others, but themselves shall perish
to all Eternity. And therefore I beseech you rest not in serviceablenesse for
Generation-good, but get Grace in your hearts for your own good: Be upright men
as well as useful men. There are two things in this Chapter where my Text
lies, The Spirit of God says of David, He was a man after his own heart, ver.
22. ver. 36.
and He served his Generation, That is a blessed thing indeed, and let it be
your care, that sincerity toward God, and serviceablenesse for God may go
together.

In all your activeness for public good, see that you do all in a right
manner. As the object must be right, and the person must be good, so all must
be done in a regular manner. What Is that? what you do, do it with zeal, with
sincerity, with courage, with perseverance, with humility, I might much enlarge
upon these heads, but I must not.

First, Do all with zeal, be not lukewarm, indifferent, lazy, slothful in
public concernments, but what ever you find in your heart to do, Eccl. 9.10.
do it with all your might; (as Solomon speaks) Jehosaphats heart was lifted
up in the way of the Lord. 2 Chro. 17.6. 2 Chro. 31.21.
Hezekiah in every work which he began to do in the service of the house of
God etc. He did it with all his heart. Even Artaxerxes commands, whatsoever is
commanded by the God of Heaven, Ez^^ 7.23.
let it be diligently done for the house of the God of Heaven. what a shame is
it to see the common Enemy, so zealous to do hurt, and we so cold and
lukewarm in doing good; that Jesuits should cross sea and land to make one
Proselyte, Mat. 23.15.
that when we see their zeal in their way, we may well wish as once Agesilaus
did of Pharnabazus, Cum talis sis utinam noster esses; That I say these men
should be so active, and we so careless and secure? Where is your zeal for God
for Christ, for the Gospel? Oh, that zeal and wisdom might go together. Some
have zeal, and no wisdom, and they are too hot; some have wisdom and no zeal,
and these are too cold. Zeal with wisdom is like a Diamond set in a ring of
gold. When wisdom regulates the zeal, and zeal acts and animates the wisdom;
when zeal is the spur, and wisdom guides the reine, there is much done for
public good. Both these you shall find in this David, Psalm. 78. ult.
So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the
skilfulness of his hands.

Secondly, Do all with Sincerity; There must be the sincerity of the Work as
well as of the Person. Do never so much, if you be not sincere in it, 1 Cor.
3.15.
your Work shall be burnt, and you shall suffer loss, Others may be the better
for it, but you your selves shall not; Do never so little, if it be done in the
integrity of your Hearts God will accept of it, and reward you for it: Jacob
serves Laban a great many years, but all that while his eye was upon his
Rachel, It was not love to Laban but love to Rachel that made him undergo so
much. Many take much pains in Generation-work, but all that while the heart is
not right: It is not the public good that they aim a^ but something of self,
for many serve and advance Self by serving the Public: What brave things would
Absalom do if he was upon the Throne, 2 Samuel 15.4.
and all this was but to make himself more popular: We have too many such
popularis aurae vilia mancipia (as Hierome speaks, Ep* cd Julian.
) I speak to Magistrates, to Ministers, to all, Let Sincerity run through the
Vein of all your Service, and that thus, Do all from Love, according to the
Word, for the Glory of God; For three things make up this Sincerity, Aright
Principle, A right Rule, A right End. When Love is the Principle, the Word the
Rule, the Glory of God the End, here is Sincerity. The Truth is, The Hypocrite
does but make use of God, and God does but make use of him. He does but make
use of God, for though he looks and pretends to Gods Glory, yet he rows another
way; And God does but make use of him, for he has nothing within him to
incline him to any Service, only God overrules him, and so makes use of him:
Well, be sincere, that when you shall be laid open at the great day, 1 Cor.
3.14. Romans 2. ult.
your work may abide, and your praise may be, not of men but of God.

Thirdly, Serve your Generation with Courage, Go on through difficulties and
dangers with undaunted Resolution. Do men scoff and reproach you? Care not
for it. Nehemiah is not discouraged at the scoffs and taunts of Tobiah and
Sanballat. It is no new thing for Dogs to bark at the Horse that goes apace.
Active men shall have many to snarle at them, but so long as they act for the
good of others, it is nothing. May be Estate, Liberty, nay, Life it self may be
in danger, Esth. 4.16.
yet hold on. If I perish, I perish, (said that Heroical Spirit;) Can you
Sacrifico your Lives better then for the Cause of God, and the Public Good?
(...): I would to God it might be so, said Basil; Whatever you lose here,
Matthew. 10.30.
will not Christ's Hundredfold make up all to you?

Fourthly, Persevere in your activity for Public good; Many are like your
Bells, that strike very fast till they be raised, and then but very seldom:
Many Magistrates and Ministers are very diligent and sedulous till they have
got a Name, and are up in the esteems of the world, and then they can put their
hands in their bosoms, and do as little as who does the least. This is base;
We must hold out with an even pace in our Service: Indefatigableness and
Perseverance is the Crown of all: If any man draw back, my soul shall take no
pleasure in him. Heb. 10.38.
Be not weary in well-doing, ye shall reap if you faint not. He that endures
to the end, he shall be saved. Gal. 6.9. Matthew. 10.22.
If the house be not covered all over, and the tiles well joined together, the
rain will come in. Benefacta benefactis pertegito, ne perpluat, (says
Plautus.) If there be gaps and flaws in your good service, censures will get
in, and to be sure the wrath of God will get in, and fall upon you: Oh, Mar.
9.50.
be not like Salt that has lost its savor.

Fifthly, Do all humbly; And that in two things: Fetch all your strength from
God, Ascribe the Glory of all to God: Enter upon all things by Prayer; Shut up
all by Praise. Nehemiah in order to public Service, first prays, So I prayed
to the God of Heaven. Paul ascribes all to God by praise, Neh. 2.4. 1 Cor.
15.10.
I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the Grace of God
which was with me. Never set about any thing in your own strength, Luke 17.10.
Valde perfectorum est, sic ostenso opere gloria a authoris quaerere, ut de
illata laud priva^a nesciant gaudere. Gregor.
Go to God for Wisdom, Direction, etc. When it is done never ascribe any thing
to your own parts; And when you have done all, say, You are unprofitable. The
Ear that is full of Corn, and the Bough that is laden with Fruit, bows down
toward the Earth. The most serviceable are the most humble; They that do most,
think they do least; and this is a rare thing to see men high in service and
low in spirit.

By your Example as well as by your Power; Men live more by the Examples of
others then by the Precepts of God, not squaring their actions by qua eundum
but qua itur, not by what ought to be done, but by what is done; especially the
examples of such as are great, have a great influence upon them. A wry neck in
Neroes Court was the mode, because he himself was wrynecked. Facore recle cives
suos princeps optimus faciendo docet, cumquesit imperio magnus, exemplo major
est. Vellei. Pater. Tit. 2.7.
You that are Magistrates, Let me humbly tell you, Good Laws without good
Examples will do but little good. Would you have the Sabbath observed strictly,
see you do not profane it at home. You cannot better serve your Generation
then by being Patterns of Good Works unto them.

Do not neglect work at home: One Duty must not justle out another. You have
your Callings mind them. You have Relations, provide for them, for he that
provides not for his own, has denied the Faith, and (quoad hoc) is worse then
an Infidel: Aquinas. 1. Tim. 5.8.
You have Salvation-work to mind; Serve your own Generation, but in the first
place Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling. phil. 2.12.
You are to be laying up as well as laying out, Magis mihi me debeo quam
hominibus caeteris, quamvis Deo magis quam mihi. August. Retract. l. 1. c. 8.
And indeed upon these two things as upon two Poles all Religion turns, Doing
good, and getting good.

In all Service look to your Call, otherwise you will be but Busybodies and
Intruders upon those things which do not concern you. 1 Pet. 4.15. Vid. Bez.
in Phil. 2.4.
Your Service must be regular, otherwise it will End only in scandal to the
Gospel, and in Judgment upon your selves. Uzzah got nothing by laying his
hands upon the Ark, when he had no Call to it.

Do not do evil that good may come of it; Will you lie for God, Job 13.7.
and speak falsely for him?

but do not comply with your Generation in that which is evil. This is to serve
the Times, not your Generation; In bad times, In bad places, be you as Lots;
and when you can do no good to your generation, let your generation do no hurt
to you.

In the carrying on of Gods Providentiall will, do not swerve from Gods
Preceptive Will, for it is not Providence but the Word that is your Rule,
Providence without the Word is doubtful, but Providence against the Word is
dangerous.

Mortify Self. get large Affections: Great Service in the Life, 1 Chr. 29.3.
begins with large Affections in the Heart.

These things I thought to have insisted upon more fully, but I see the work
grows to too great a bulk, therefore I break off. The Lord bless this Sermon
to all that heard it, to all that shall read it, that we may be all men of
David's Spirit, Serving our Generation, that having so done, we may with comfort
fall asleep.

FINIS.

