HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lords, Justices, and Council.
Will. Parsons, Jo Borlase.


WHereas a Petition has been preferred unto Us, by diverse Lords, and Gentlemen
of the English Pale, in the behalf of themselves and the rest of the Pale, and
others of the old English of this Kingdom; showing, That whereas a late
conspiracy of Treason is discovered, of ill affected Persons of the old Irish,
And that thereupon, a Proclamation was published by Us, wherein among other
things, it is declared, That the said conspiracy was perpetrated by Irish
Papists without distinction of any; And they doubting by those general words
of Irish Papists, they might seem to be involved, though they declare
themselves confident, that We did not intend to include them therein, in regard
they are none of the old Irish, nor of their faction, or confederacy; but they
are altogether a verse and opposite to all their designs, and all others of
like condition: We do therefore, to give them full satisfaction, hereby declare
and publish, to all His Majesty's good Subjects in this Kingdom, That by the
words, Irish Papists, We intended only such of the old mere Irish in the
Province of Vlster, as have plotted, contrived, and been actors in this
Treason, and others who adhere to them; And that We did not any way intend, or
mean thereby any of the old English of the Pale, nor of any other parts of this
Kingdom, We being well assured of the fidelities to the Crown, And having
experience of the good affection and service of their Ancestors in former times
of danger, and rebellion; And We further require all His Majesty's loving
Subjects, whether Protestants, or Papists, to forbear upbraiding matter of
Religion, one against the other. And that upon pain of His Majesty's
Indignation.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 29, of October. 1641. R.
Rantlagh, R. Dillon, Anth. Midensis, Ad. Loftus, Geor. Shurley, Gerard Lowther,
L. Temple, Fr. Willoughby, Ja. Ware.

God save the King.
Imprinted at Dublin by the Society of Stationers.


