TO THE HONORABLE COMMITTEE AT BVRY.
The humble PETITION of the chief Inhabitants of the Liberty of St. Etheldred
and of Hoxon Hundred, in the County of Suffocke, on the behalf of themselves
and others well affected:
Shows,
THat we do with much thankfulness acknowledge the great care and industry
you have taken for the quiet and prosperity of this County, whiles others have
bin torn and broken with oppression and destruction. And as for that, so now
for setting on foot so good a work as the necessary arming of the well
affected people, and the just discovery of the other, lately manifested by your
commands and Directions sent to the several Hundreds. A Work (we confess) of
singular use, not only for the preservation of our Selves in quietness and
tranquillity, but even for the putting an end to the bloody Distempers of the
Nation, which our sad Hearts mourn to see. In which Commands and Directions of
yours, We do humbly observe that there is not such a sufficiency and fullness
of Authority and Directions given, as is requisite for the transacting and
carrying on so great a Work with power and effect, with equality and proportion
upon all: Without which, We humbly conceive the willing party will be
discouraged, Contentions arise, and the Design lost in the Execution. For the
seasonable prevention whereof: That the Burden may be equally and indifferently
borne by all, That every one that injoyes a part in the Felicity and Peace of
the County, may likewise bear a part in the defense and saving of the County,
We do humbly Offer to this Committee these Desires and Considerations
following:

1 We humbly desire that in this Time of danger, all Men well-affected from the
age of sixteen to sixty, in this County may forthwith be put into Arms,
disposed and cast into Companies and Troops both of Horse and Foot, Commanders
in chief, Captains and other Officers nominated and appointed over them, and
to be listed and exercised this winter season; The Abler sort to find and serve
on Horse, the residue on Foot.

2 We desire that all men of ability may Arm themselves, at their own charge;
And for others that are not of ability, We desire they may be Armed with
Muskets and other useful weapons out of the Magazines of the County, and out
of the Arms that have or shall be taken from Malignants and disaffected.

3 And seeing that Malignants and disaffected persons are not to bear any
Arms in this Business, and yet altogether unreasonable, they should be
exempted from the Burden, We desire that all such may be taxed a full
proportionable part in money to this Service, and also all others of
abilitythat shall not bear Arms in this Business; All which may go toward
the Arming of the poorer sort, that are not able to Arm themselves, and yet
are willing to do service in this Cause: And what these shall fall short; to
be supplied either out of the sequestered Estates of Delinquents, or at the
general and equal charge of the Hundred or County.

4 We desire that a full and sufficient power and Authority may be given for
the calling of all Men together within their several Hundreds or Divisions,
and to take the subscriptions of such as are willing, and to compel others
that are not, and to tax and proportion as well such as shall be found
Malignant or disaffected, as also all others of ability that shall not bear
Arms in this Business, and that in case of Refusal or refractorines, some
penalty may be inflicted.

5 Seeing it is commanded that a discovery should be made of the ill-affected
Clergy and others, and we having also observed by sad and long experience what
prevailing influence the bold Doctrines and Conversations of such have had, and
even still have into the minds and affections of weak and unstable people,
which is yet more evidently confirmed by such parishes where such are, We
desire some power and Authority may be given for the calling in of some fit
persons out of every parish where such are to testify in that behalf, that
there may be a more full and thorough Discovery made of such, then as yet has
been.

6 We desire that this honorable Committee would be pleased to use some speedy
and effectual means for the Representing these our humble Desires either to the
high Court of Parliament, or to our Noble and Highly Honored Major General of
the Associated Counties, for the full and powerful Authorizing and
establishing of these things whereby they may be put in Execurion before the
winter season be over (which passes swiftly) that We may be able to rise as
one Man, to defend Our Country from invading, or to assist our Brethren
bleeding in the field. And your Petitioners shall not only pray for the
felicity of this vigilant Committee, but shall be ready piously to Sacrifice
our Lives in your Defense.

This Petition was Subscribed by 2000. hands at least.



SIR,
I Have here sent you a Copy of a Petition, which is this day presented to the
Committee at Bury, and from thence to the Earl of Manchester (of which
presenters, though unworthy, I am one) and now on the way to Cambridg to the
Earl, it was consented to and subscribed by 2000 hands of able and sufficient
men, with much alacrity and willingness, who I believe confidently will spend
their last drop of Blood in defense of the Parliament and famous City of
London: I have sent it you up to publish the same, it may be it will comfort
your City to see others of your mind; I believe it will be at the Parliament
about Friday at the furthest, for a confirmation of our disires: it was drawn
by many able Gentlemen and Divines, and the same petition is now on foot in
Norfolk, and you will hear of it the next week, I believe by that time the
report is come at Oxford, the Cavaliers will have no great mind to visit us as
they much threaten, I speak of the least: I am sure more subscribed then I
mention, and Multitudes more would have done if we had had time.

Your most affectionate friend, E. I.
December. 12. 1643.
London, Printed for Robert Bostocke, 1643.


