REASONS WHY THIS KINGDOM, AS ALL OTHERS: AND THE PARLIAMENTS And People of
this KINGDOM, As all Others, Whether CHRISTIAN OR HEATHEN: And especially such
as hold Predestination ought to Adhere to their Kings, Whether Good or Bad.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1642. With Lisence.

Reasons why this Kingdom as all others, and the Parliaments and People of this
Kingdom, as all others, etc. ought to adhere to their Kings whether good or bad.
FIrst because Kings are Elected and called of God in Christ before the
Foundation of the World, to the Office, Dignity, and Vocation of Kings, to
govern his Church, Kingdom and People, while the World endures. Nor can the
wisdom or Power of Men make, prevent, or alter Kings or Times, as appears by
the Scriptures ensuing.

Thou shall make him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose, Deuteronomy.
17.15. I will send thee a Man out of the Land of Benjamen, him shall thou
Annoint, 1 Samuel 7.16. See, this is the Man of whom I spoke to thee, he shall
rule my People, verse. 17. I will Rent out of the hands of Solomon, and will
give ten Tribes to thee, 1 King. 7.31. And Kings shall be thy nurcing Fathers,
and queens thy Narces. Thou shall know I am the Lord thy God, Esaias 49.23. It
was the Ordinance of the Lord that he might perform his saying which he had
spoken to Ahijah the Shunomite, 1 King. 12.15. The name of God be Praised for
ever and ever, for wisdom and strength is his, and he changes the times and
seasons he takes away Kings, he sets up Kings, Dan, 2.20. Hear ye, O
Isles, hearken ye People from far, the Lord has called me from the Womb, and
made mention of my name from my Mothers belly, Esaias 49.1. He has chosen me
before Saul. According to the foreknowledge of God the Father, 1 Pet. 1.2. He
has chosen us in Christ before the Foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1.4. That
the purpose of God might remain according to Election, Romans 9.11.

Secondly, Because this Kingdom, as all others, and the power and glory
thereof, is the Right and Inheritance of God in chief, as appears by the
conclusion of the Lords Prayer. And he only gives the deputation thereof to
those whom he has Elected, and called thereunto, and endued with gifts and
graces suitable to that calling, to rule and govern the same; by which gifts
they are made and known to be other Men, then any other of any inferior
calling, and such as to whom only God has imparted and communicated, not only
the Titles and Attributes of his own Prerogative, as those of Kingdom, Power,
Might, Majesty, Honor, glory, etc. which he forbids to be given to any
other Creature, and which holy Men and Angels have refused to accept or to give
to any but Kings, as examples to us to do the like without fear or suspicion of
Blasphemy or Idolatry; but also the divine efficacy of His own Spirit, Majesty,
and Presence, That as the Devil is forced to fear and tremble, at the voice
and frowns of God; so are proud and rebellious men, though fair and ambitious
as Absalom, or wise and politic as Achitophell, often astonished and confounded
with the Speeches and Countenances of Kings. Let the observer thereof, that
finds his Reason already captivated, consider the Scriptures ensuing.

The Kingdoms of the World are our Lords and his Christ's, and he shall reign
for evermore, Revel. 11.15. He is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, verse.
16. Your God is a God of Gods, and King of Kings, Dan. 2.47. The most High
bears Rule over the Kingdom of Men, he gives it to whom he will, Dan. 4.22.
Has not the Lord Anointed thee to be Governor of His Inheritance, 1 Samuel
10.1. Then the Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shall
Prophecy with them and be turned to another Man, 1 Samuel 10.11. Then the spirit
of God came upon Saul, and they that knew him wondered, saying, What is come to
the Son of Kish^ 1 Samuel 11.6. and 1 Samuel, 10.15. And Saul was afraid of David,
because the Lord was with him, and was departed from Saul, 1 Samuel 18.12. Then
Saul saw and understood that the Lord was with David, verse. 28. I have said ye
are gods, and ye all are Children of the most High, Psalm. 82.6. O King, thou
art a King of Kings, for the God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, power,
strength, and Glory, Dan. 2.37. The most high God gave thy Father a Kingdom,
and Majesty, and Honor, and Glory. And for the Majesty that he gave him, all
People, Nations, and Languages trembled, and feared before him; he put to death
whom he would, whom he would he set up, and whom he would he put down, Dan. 5
27. I Counsel thee, keep the Kings command, and that in respect of the Oath of
God, Eccles. 8.2. Submit, etc. to the King as Supreme, etc. Fear God, Honor
the King, 1 Pet. 2.13 14. Not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake.
Romans 13, 5,

Thirdly, Because it is a damnable sin, proper to this later and most erring
age to think, much more to speak, and much more then that to write, and
persuade others to speak and write evil of Kings, or which is worse, to
slander them, and worst of all to rebel, or, but to take defensive Arms
against them, though upon apparent force much more upon suggested fears and
presumptions. Wherefore let him that is so full of Reasons that he thinks it
reasonable, that if he should suspect his Wife when she deserves not, he may
provoke her to sin when she would not; consider what it is to distrust the
Kings Justice, or rather Gods providence and to provoke both or either to
anger. The Scriptures ensuing will partly tell him.

If thou have thought evil of the King, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, Prove.
30.32. Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People, Acts 23.5. Where
the word of a King is there is power, and who may say unto him, what do thou?
Eccles. 8.4. Who therefore resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God,
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Romans 13.1.2. But
there shall be false teachers among you, which privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies and bring upon themselves swift damnation, and many shall follow their
destructions, etc. 2 Pet. 1.2. These filthy Dreamers despise Dominion and speak
evil of Dignities, Jude 8. They shall perish in the gainsaying of Core, verse.
11. Presumptuous are they, self-willed, and shall utterly perish in their own
corruption, 2 Pet. 2.10.12. My Son hear no more the Instructions that
causes to err from the words of knowledge, Prove. 19.27. Thou shall not follow
a multitude to do evil, neither agree in a controversy to decline after many
to overthrow the truth, Exodus 23.2. The fear of a King is like the roaring of
a Lion. he that provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul, Prove.
20.2. My Son, fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
seditious, Prove. 24.21. As a Coal makes burning Coals, and wood a fire, so
the contentious man is apt to kindle strife, Prove. 26.21. When the wicked are
increased, transgression increases, but the Righteous shall see their fall,
Prove. 29.16.

Fourthly, Because the observers Reasons too weak to Jobs, and the Parliaments
wisdom too short of Solomon's, and all humane inventions put together, will
never serve to circumscribe Kings or to reform them, otherwise then God shall
be pleased by his own providence and our Prayers to direct his Anointed, of
whom he is never careless; nor is it but arrogance and folly in men
(especially Subjects and Servants) to assume such wisdom or power, as to
attempt such designs, as partly may appear by the Scriptures ensuing.

The Lord is the strength, he is the saving strength of his Anointed, Psalm.
28.8. He is the tower of Salvation for his King, and shows mercy to his
Anointed, 2 Samuel 24 51. I will beat down his foes before his Face, and plague
them that hate him; his enemies will I cloth with shame, but upon himself
shall his Crown flourish, Psalm. 89.23. and 132.18. There is no man upon the
Earth that can declare the Kings matter, Dan. 2.10. The Heavens height, and the
Earth in deepnesse, and the Kings heart can no man search out, Prove. 25.3. The
Kings heart is in the Hands of the Lord as the Rivers of Waters, he turns is
whithersoever it pleases him, Prove. 21.

The secret which the King has demanded can neither the wise, etc. declare to
the King, but there is a God in Heaven that reveals secrets and shows the
King Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the later days, Dan. ^.27.28. As for me
this secret is not showed me for my wisdom that I have more then any other
living, but only to show the King the Interpretation, and that thou might
know the thoughts of thine Heart, verse. 30.

Has not God made the wisdom of this World foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.20. I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the understanding of the
prudent, verse. 29.

I am counsel and wisdom, I am understanding and I have strength, by me Kings
Reign, and Princes decree Justice; by me Princes Kule, and all the Nobles, and
all the Judges of the Earth, Prove. 8.14.15.16. The unthrifty man and the wicked
man walks with a froward mouth, he makes a sign with his eyes, he
signifies with his feet, he instructs with his fingers. Lewd things are in
his heart, he imagines evil at all time, and raises up contentions, Prove.
6.12.13. But my Lord the King is as an Angel of God, 2 Samuel 19.27.

Fifthly, Because to Rebel against the King or to desert him in things good or
indifferent, is to renounce God and his Ordinance, Christ his Commandments and
examples, and the Apostles and Martyrs whose conquest were sufferings, even the
most ignominious and cruel deaths, and to become the son of Beliall, that is,
the Devil, Gods first Rebel, with whom Saint Paul asks what agreement has
Christ, etc. and to perish with such as did so. Such were they that said of
Saul. How shall he save us? 1 Samuel 10.26. Such was She^ the son of B^chri, that
first said, Every man to his Tent O Israel, 2. Sam. 20.1. Such was Naball the
rich fool, of whom his servants said, Evil will surely come upon our Master,
1 Samuel 17.25. Such were they that followed Jeroboam, whom I believe the
observer calls his Israel, and his Robbini, whom he will not have called
Roundheads; but such David called Thorns, that should be thrust away, 2 Samuel
24.6. And so they proved Thorns to prick one another, every sucessor King for
the most part thrusting his Predicessor from his Throne by treason and
rebellion, until God at last thrust them and their People under the Assirian
captivity, whence they never returned; For God said I will no more have pity
upon the House of Israel, but I will utterly take them away, Hosea 1.6.
Hereupon I wish such observing Israelites as put us so much and so often in
mind with the deposition of King Richard the second, to observe and remember
also, that though Samaria went under the name of Israel, after their defection
from Roboam, until their destruction in name and liberty under the Assirians.
It was but a nest of Hydra's and a stage of Rebellions, treasons, wars,
famines, and all kinds of calamities all that while. And so, though England was
Governed under the name of Plantagenett, after the declension from King Richard
the second, till the redemption under King Henry the seventh; it was but a
Labyrinth of Divisions between the Families of York and Lancaster all that
while, from the like of which miseries, O Lord save thy People and bless thine
Inheritance.

Sixthly and lastly, Because this Kingdom ever did adheare to Kings; And no
Parliament (as the observer says truly in that point) did ever desert them,
but did confide in them and hold themselves so bound by Gods Commandments and
the Fundamental Laws of England, as appears by the few collections ensuing.

The King is a mixed Person, because he has both Ecclesiastical and Temporal
Jurisdiction, Sir Edward Cook. lib. de Jure Regis Ecclesiastico, fol. 28.
relating to 10. H. 7. 18.

By an Act of Parliament made 24. H. 8. It is declared, That whereas by diverse
old and authentic Histories and Chronicles, It was manifestly declared and
expressed, that the Realm of England is an Empire and so has been accepted in
the World, Governed by one supreme head and King, having the dignity and
Royal estate of the Imperial Crown of the same; unto whom a body po^^^ique,
compact of all sorts and degrees of People, divided in terms and by names of
Spirituality and Temporality, been bound and ought to bear next to God a
natural and humble obedience; he being also institute and furnished by the
goodness and furtherance of Almighty God with plenary, whole, and entire
power, pre-eminence, authority, prerogative and Jurisdiction, to render and
yield Justice and final determination to all manner of folks resiant within
this Realm, in all causes, matters, debates, and contentions. See the Statute
at large.

The King who is the Vicar of the highest King, is ordained to this end, that
he should govern and rule the Kingdom and People of the Land, and above all
things, the holy Church, and defend the same from wrong-doers, and root out
workers of mischief. See King Edward the Confessor his Laws before the
Conquest, c. 19.

The persuading or withdrawing the Subjects obedience from the King, is Treason
by Common Law without controversy, says Sir Edward Cook in his said Book, de
Jur. Reg. Ecclesiastico. fol. 38. a.

It appears by the ancient Common-Laws of this Realm, by the resolution and
Judgment of the Judges and Sages of the Laws of England as by authority of
many Acts of Parliaments ancient, and of later times, that the King is the
only supreme governer, as well over Ecclesiastical Persons and in
Ecclesiastical causes as Temporal within this Realm To the keeping of which
Laws both the King and the Subjects are sworn. Sir Edward Cook in the same
Book, fol. 40. b.

The queens power within her Realms and Dominions, is the highest power under
God, to whom all men in the same Realm and Dominions owe most Loyalty and
Obedience before and above all Potentates in Earth. See queen Elizabeth's
Injunctions to her Clergy and Layitie Land Statute made the first of her Reign
to that effect.

If any man imagine the death of the King Prince, Princess or any hear
apparent to the Crown, or kill the Kings Messenger in his Message or any one
that rides with men to aid the King or if any man affirm by writing, or other
Act, that the King is not supreme head of the Church of England, or if any
imagine to deprive the King of his estate Royal or of the Titles of his
Realm. It is high Treason. Robert Brook Sergeant at Law and Recorder of
London, in his Reading upon Magna Charta. c. 17. see his Book in Print, fol. 1.

If any keep War against the King in his Realm, is high Treason by Statude, 25.
Edw, 2. Let us hear the end of all, Fear God, for this is the whole duty of
man. Eccl. 12.13. Collected by I.I. a faithful Subject to his King and
welwisher to his Parliament, to the use of all true Protestants.

FINIS.

