An Addition to the Relation of some Passages about the English-Irish-Army,
before they came to the siege at NAMPTWICH.

Wherein are set down the Occurrences at Hawarden Castle.

Done for the satisfaction of some Gentlemen, and upon their request.

Published by Authority.

Job 20. 4; 5. Know thou not this of old, since man was placed on the earth;
that the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite lasts
but for a moment.

Psalm. 60. 12. Through God shall we do valiantly; for he it is that shall
tread down our enemies.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostocke, dwelling at the Sign of the King's Head
in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

To the Commanders, Gentlemen, Ministers, Soldiers, and Inhabitants in the
Garrison of Namptwich.
GIve me leave to grasp you within one Dedication, whom God has joined in the
co-participation of the same mercies. You may look upon your late deliverance
and victory, as upon the liberal return of millions of prayers. I need not
recall the expression. Besides those scarce numerable you had nearer home;
greater distance of place did not put you out of the reach of thousands more.
There were those that could not compose themselves to rest at night; before
they had vented some breath in sighs to God for you, and their eyes were no
sooner open in the morning, but they were directed to Heaven for you; Heaven
had no quiet, nor God any rest, till you were delivered. Me thinks the mercy
it self, had you no other information, would tell you there was wrestling with
God for the procurement of it. That God should bury your bullets in their
bodies, who would have sheathed their swords in yours, and give you their
Ordnance and Ammunition, who were so bold in their demands of yours; it is a
goodness beyond your largest hopes. Had there been but a raising of the siege
alone it would (I believe) have abundantly satisfied the most (...) desire of
your selves or your wellwillers. How should you take up the expression of Ezra,
now thou have given us such a del^verance as this, should we again break thy
Commandments. Y^u may, nay you will have need of God again; therefore let him
not hear an oath amongst you, nor see any more iniqu^tie in the Camp. It Is
true, you were valiant; but who made you so? and you played the men for your
people, and for the City of your God; but who helped you to do so? was it not
God? I am confident you will not deny it. You have seen how powerful and
trusty He is, and that He is a present help in time of trouble.

Being (unexpectedly) taskt with the composure of this Relation, to draw it up
out of what intelligence was to be had, by them to whom the care of it was put
over by a sacred Authority; I was loath it should come to your hands without
some testimony of my respects to you. I hope your memory will not need the
help of this mean record of the Lords mercy to you; yet your wonted favor
makes me to promise my self these poor papers acceptance, which you may
please to receive from

Your servant to pray and do for you to his power, P. J.

A Relation of Occurrences at Hawarden-Castle, betwixt the Parliaments Forces,
under the command of Sir Thomas Middleton, Major General of Northwales, and
the English-Irish Army then newly come over.
AFter the Parliaments Forces had made their way into Wales, by forcing their
passage at Holt Bridge, and were possessed of Holt and Wrexam, with all the
Countries of Denbighshire and Flint near about those places, the English-Irish
Army came over and landed at Mostyn. They staid not long there; but marched up
to the Castle of Hawarden, and because they had intelligence it was unprovided
for necessaries for a siege by some of our false friends, they (for expedition
sake) hastened a party to us; who (our horse having too suddenly disserted us)
were in the Town adjoining to the Castle when we thought them further off, and
there surprised our Major (Commander in chief) and took him prisoner, some
soldiers they basely slew when they could make no resistance against them
being then unarmed men; then they sent us a summons by word of mouth by a
Trumpet, to which we returned this answer, which though set down in the former
relation cannot be spared hence, because of dependency of what follows upon it.

GENTLEMEN,
WE are heartily sorry that you have made such an exchange of Enemies to leave
Irish to fall upon English, and Papists to fall upon Protestants; we had hoped
the blood of that noble Gentleman Sir Simon Harcourt, and the many thousands of
Protestants who have fallen by the fury of those bloody monsters of Ireland,
could not have been so soon forgotten. What course the Court of England runs,
how destructive to the Protestants, and favorable to the Papists you cannot
but know with us, by sad experience; And therefore we desire (before you pass
further) your thoughts may make a pause; lest you find that God of the
Protestants against you, whom you have hitherto found miraculously for you* We
fear the loss of our Religion, more then the loss of our dearest blood; do
not, we beseech you, desire us to betray it and our selves. We hope your second
thoughts may take off the edge of your former Resolutions: However, we are
resolved to make good our trust, and put our lives into the hands of that God,
who can, and we hope will secure them more then our walls or weapons.

November. 21. 1643. John Warren. Alex. Ellot.



The Reply of Lieutenant Colonel Marrow.
GENT.
IT is not for to hear you preach that I am sent here for, but in His
Majesty's name to demand the Castle for His Majesty's use, as your allegiance
binds you to be true to him, and not to inveagle those innocent souls that are
within with you; so I desire your resolution if you will deliver the Castle or
no.


Our Answer.
SIR, We have cause to suspect your disaffection to preaching, in regard we
find you thus employed. If there be innocent souls here, God will require
their blood of them that shed it. We can keep our allegiance and the Castle
too, and therefore you may take your answer, as it was in English plain enough
before. We can say no more, but Gods will be done.


When the body of the Irish Army (whereof we had but a party before) drew up
before the Castle we received this summons.

To the Commander in chief, in the Castle of Hawarden.
FOr to avoid the effusion of Christian blood, especially Protestants, which
you profess your selves, we must require you in His Majesty's name to
surrender to the Kings use (whose sworn servants we are) this Castle, now in
your custodies, we promising upon our reputations, to admit you such honorable
quarter as is fit for Soldiers, either to give or take, and that we have your
immediate answer; but if we find you obstinate, and that you draw blood from
us, we shall revenge it in the same manner as we did the blood of Sir Simon
Harcourt, which you in your letter put us in mind on, presuming we have forgot
it, which was of above 300. persons in Karrickmayne, not one soul was left
alive.

November 22. 1643. Mic. Ernly. Ric. Gibson.

We are not ignorant of your wants nor of the small hopes you can have of any
relief, that can disturb or hinder our proceedings.




The Answer to Sir Michael Ernly and Colonel Gibsons summons.
GENT.
WHen we need your mercy expect us to seek it, but as yet we do not, and hope
we never shall do; were our necessities far greater then they are, we would
bear them, and we know we have friends to relieve us, able to equal far
more strength then we can yet see come against us. Whatever old wives may tell
you our provision will outreach your patience of a siege; however since we find
not that peaceablenesse with you we expected, we shall by Gods help keep off
your threatened revenge, we are loath to shed the blood of any of our
Countrymen; but better they bleed then the Kingdom perish, and they must be
the Authors of their own ruin if they set upon us, we must still retain our
old resolutions, and when we lose our lives, you may gain the Castle.


The next day came in the Lord Capell, with some additionall Forces, and sent
us this summons follovving.

The Lord Capels summons.
Whereas the Castle of Hawarden has been summoned by Sir Michael Ernly for to
be by you surrendered for his Majesty's use, which you have refused to perform,
contrary to your duty and allegiance; I being now come to join my Forces, with
those in his Majesty's service, here, being by your own Messenger whom I have
taken, well assured of your wants and necessities; do summon and require of you
the said Castle presently to deliver into my hand, for his Majesty's use; with
this assurance, that if you do speedily obey this summons, you shall have
liberty to depart with your lives; so if you shall hold out until by force or
other means I gain the same, or you be enforced to quit it, I shall afford no
quarter to any one person among you: Hereof I expect your immediate answer.

Dated the 24. of November. Ar. Capell.


The Answer to the Lord Capels summons.
My Lord,
ALL this a do might be spared: our greatest want will be of Ink and Paper to
answer your demands, if you multiply Parles: if you continue the Siedg, we shall
drive that fancy of our necessities out of your head: the Messenger (we are
assured) could acquaint you with no want of ours, unless you force him to say
what you please. Sir, spare your paper and use your weapons, and we will use
ours, and make good the Castle were your forces ten times more then they are.
Quarter we have been told over and over again, we shall have none, but when it
comes to that need, we will sell our lives dearly by the help of God.


Captain Sandfords Summons.
Gentlemen,
I Presume you very well know or have heard of my condition and disposition,
and that I neither give nor take quarter, I am now with my firelocks (who never
yet neglected opportunity to correct Rebels) ready to use you as I have done
the Irish, but loath I am to spill my Countrymens blood; wherefore by these I
advise you to your fealty and obedience toward. His Majesty, and show your
selves faithful Subjects by delivering the Castle into my hands for His
Majesty's use. In so doing you shall be received into mercy, etc. Otherwise if
you put me to the least trouble or loss of blood to force you, expect no
quarter for man, woman or child. I hear you have some of our late Irish Army
in your company, they very well know me, and that my firelocks use not to
parley. Be not unadvised, but think of your liberty, for I vow all hopes of
relief is taken from you, and our intents are, not to starve you, but to
batter and storm you, and then hang you all, and follow the rest of that
Rebel crew. I am now no bread and cheese Rogue, but as ever a Loyallist, and
will ever be whilst I can write or name

I expect your speedy answer this tuesday night at Broadlane Hall, where I am
now your near neighbor.

Thomas Sandford.

The superscription of this letter, To the Officer commanding in Chief at
Harden-Castle, and his consorts there.

This we counted unworthy any other answer then laughter and contempt.

Captain Sandfords other Message.
Gentlemen,
I Admire your obstinacy, thus long to refuse mercy. I send you this, not by
way of Parley, but to tell you, no relief can (or dare approach you; and that
your Masters, who left you there, are so dispersed, that neither the one or the
other are) or will be (before you starve) able to help you, or send you
succor. I have entertained two honest Welshmen, that three nights since ran
away from you to do His Majesty true service under my command and this night I
apprehended one Thomas Platt, who as he said made an escape to prevent
starving, by them all I am certified of your misery, if you like your present
condition, remain where you are and feast your bodies with your boyld corn,
and glad your souls with a draught of your unwholesome water. I would not
advise you to entertain a better condition, because I take you to be men
desperately disposed, and not capable of comfort; only this to answer your
question of my not being a Soldier, by to morrow I doubt not but to have a
mine ready to remove you (through the Air) from your present posession, to a
habitation that shall answer your desert. Pray Gentlemen mis-censure me not,
for I am no bragadocio, but real in thought, word and deed toward His
Majesty, and my words and actions were framed in one mold; yet Christianity
invites me to pity you, and once more to summon you to your fealty, and to
render your selves and the Castle into (if not my custody) the posession of
Colonel Davies or Colonel Mostyn, who do command now in chief in this our
Leaguer. Once more neglect not your lives and (as you may deserve) Liberty; I
am confident of your men, that if they may but hear my last and this letter
read publicly, they will throw your incendiary over the walls, and I doubt not
but some The Captain of the Regiment.
of you will do that duty to save him hanging, and then deliver the Castle,
and thereby purchase your pardons; Gentlmen the Lo. Capell is very gracious,
and you have kind mediators here. This from your near neighbor,

From my trenches, this December. 1. 1643. Thomas Sandford.
If you please to be informed that Relief cannot come to you, send out one of
your Sergeants, who shall have a Pass to and from Wrexam, of the truth to
inform you.



The superscription of this Letter, For the Officer in Chief now in the Castle
of Harden, and to his Associates there.

Our Answer.
SIR, big words will not take Castle, where men have ^he possession of them. We
will not beleev our friends are so dispersed upon your testimony, but must accept
of your proffer of one of our own, to go instead of Wrexsam to Holt, and
thence to satisfy us of the estate of matters; your mines we fear much what
as your words, that is, just nothing at all. The Soldiers have heard your last
and this, which made them mirth. We desire you will sit by and let the
Commanders in chief treat. The Incendiary you talk of slights, your loud
slanders and threats, and knows, that if you doom him to a halter, a better of
your own will be found out to meet with the like censure, our food is better
than such as your halfe-starved Soldiers can get, and their drink and ours are
much alike. If we find our selves neglected by our friends, we shall the more
suddenly and easily surrender, but never but upon honorable terms, we will
rather turn carcasses than slaves, and die honorable, rather than live to
shame; we desire we may have a Sargeant of yours for one of our own, who is to
go upon this employment, we desire to know whether things may stand as they do
during the parley, or whether we shall on both sides follow our work.


His Reply.
Gent.
YOur letter we have perused, and only two lines therein we think fit to be
answered, and in a word thus we resolve; your Sargeant shall have liberty to
enquire after your hopes, and a Sargeant of ours shall rest with you till he
come back, but upon this condition that he shall return within four and
twenty hours, in the mean time take your course by way of hostility, for
our men cannot be idle, neither must we sleep till you have received your
reward due unto you.

Thomas Sandford Captain of the Firelocks.


When we upon the return of our Sargeant understood the departure of our
friends out of the Country, so that there was no expectance of relief, and
our Soldiers were impatient of longer wants, having had but one meal a day
from the first day of the siege, we were necessitated to send this message.

To the Commander in chief in Hawarden, and the rest of the Gentlemen there.
Gent.
WE understand our friends have removed from the Holt, and that is all our
intelligencer could know, being so narrowly observed; but whether they make any
preparation for our relief we know not. Our condition cannot be so bad as
theirs in Holt Castle was, yet (blessed be God) we are able to continue such a
time wherein there might be a strange turn of things again on our side,
however if we may have these following propositions granted, we shall surrender
the Castle. 1 That there may be a mutual exchange of prisoners since we entered
this Country, which we believe will not be found disproportionable. 2 That we
may have honorable quarter, to march away bag and baggage, with our Colors
flying, and match lighted, and all the Arms and Ammunition in the Castle. 3
That we may have a safe convoy to the next Garrison we shall make choice of in
Cheshire or Shrop shire. 4 That we may have such carriages as may be for our
use. Your refusal or delay of the grant of these propositions will but create
further troubles to your selves, for we tell you once more, we will either
depart, or dye honorably.



To the Commanders in chief in Hawarden Castle.
Gent.
I Have received your propositions, and if you please to deliver up the Castle
upon these conditions following, well, if otherwise, etc.

1 I will give you fair quarter for your lives, only those that have formerly
served the King, and revolted from him, shall refer themselves to my mercy.

2 I will admit of no Colors, Arms or Ammunition to be carried out of the
Castle, only such as are Officers shall march with their swords; for other
baggage I will permit none to pass.

3 You shall have a safe Convoy to Namptwich or Wem, or any other Garrison
within two days march.

4 If you will deliver the Castle to morrow by nine of the clock, I shall
punctually perform all these conditions, if you refuse, I will deny all
further treaty.

Mich. Ernly.

The Answer.
SIr, we must be driven to far greater necessities before our soldiers will
part with their Arms; We little thought of so strange Return of those
reasonable Propositions we sent: We desire you will be pleased to make a review
of them, and let us find more satisfaction, or otherwise we call God to
witness, we will make you keep a cold Christmas, and then make spoil of that
we can here, and so dye in the throng of our enemies, if they stand in our
ways. Sir, we will be u^ed like Soldiers, or else our Arms shall fail us,
if your after thoughts afford more reason, we shall be glad; but if otherwise,
we shall not care if you spare your Treaty.


The next Morning Sir Mich. sent to speak with some of us, whereupon Captain
Ellot, and the Chaplain of the Regiment went to him: he told them he was to
go back to Chester, and desired to draw the matter to some agreement:
Whereupon, they wished him to propose such honorable terms as they might
yield to, and see the faces of their friends without blushing after; he said he
would, and thereupon said he would allow half Arms, two Colors of three; to
march away with one flying, and the other furled up: Also two Trunks to the two
Captains, of what they would make choice of in the Castle, provided, It should
be at his choice to let them pass, or give 20 l. for them: 1 Trunk of Books
for the Chaplain of the Regiment; All the Horses in the Castle save one, which
Sir Mich. should choose out of them, a Convoy to Wem or Namptwich. These
propositions they refused, and so broke off, and returned to the Castle. There
they called the soldiers together, and told them they would not offer that
dishonor to the meanest soldier, as to yield he should march without Arms.
But some of the soldiers impatient of further wants, which were like to grow
upon them, said they would call for quarter over the Castle-wall, if we came
not to agreement: Whereupon we were glad to condescend (though far against the
mind of some) to Sir Michaels propositions, which he swore should be
punctually performed. The next Morn we were to depart the Castle, where the
Captains Trunks were rifled, as soon as they were brought out of the
Castle-gate, and the soldiers disarmed, and all within the Gentlemen's view,
who were at the agreement, only the Chaplain had 8 l. composition for his
Trunk. These things would be strange (if any thing be strange amongst them) and
what through flatteries and violence to our men, we got not a fourth part of
them out of that Country. These doings may discover (if others did not) the
temper of the men, and help to raise our thankfulness to that God who has
delivered us from them.

You have here only a paper-scuffle, and indeed there was little else betwixt
us. Thus was much ink spilt, but little blood, they not adventuring an
assault, and we only issuing once out of the Castle, at which time we beat off
one of their Guards, and took a Drum, 2 Halberts, 2 Muskets, and some Wallets
of provision which they outran. Sometimes they would about 10 or 11 a clock at
night give us a volley of shot under the Castlewall; but being answered, they
hasted home to their Burrowes or Earth-workes again: We slew and wounded about
12 of them, and they killed one of ours, and wounded another. Thus have you the
relation of this matter, which was once thrown by, but is now fecht abroad by
such who must not be denied it.

Upon the victory at Namptwich, one of their Commanders being taken prisoner,
seeing their Colors carried before them, said, We were not wont thus to follow
our Colors, to whom a Gentleman replied, you were wont to fight against
Papists.

FINIS.

