(...) OR Gods Mercy for Man's Mercy. Opened in a SERMON at the SPITTLE, March
31. 1657. Before the Right Honorable the Lord Major, the Aldermen, etc.

By Thomas Jacomb Minister of the Gospel at S. Martins Ludgate, London.

Hebr. 13.16. But to do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.

2 Cor. 8.9. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty, might be
made rich.

(...) Chrysostom. Eclog. de Eleem. l. 6.

Pauperes -- remuneratorem nobis faciunt Dominum, qui se pro paupere obligandum
obtulit.

Ambros. Offic. l. 2. c. 25. LONDON. Printed for Philemon Stephens and are to
be sold at the gilded Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

To the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT TITCHBVRNE Knight, Lord Major of the City of
London, and to the Right Worshipful the Aldermen.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
YOu were pleased to favor this Sermon with your serious attention in the
preaching of it, and after with your Candid acceptance; which goodness of
yours does as much encourage me, as your Authority does command and oblige me,
to make it public.

If any should say to me, as Joab once said to Ahimaaz, Wherefore will thou run
my Son, seeing thou have no tidings ready? (or at least not fit for the
Press;) I have nothing to reply for my Vindication, but obedience to your
Honors command, and the necessity and excellency of the Subject which is here
handled.

I hope that Sermon which begs charity for others, will find some charity for
it self, which indeed it needs very much, for it is full of wants and weaknesses.
But such as it is, he commits it to God, and presents it to you, who is

Yours in all Offices to serve you THO. JACOMB.

Gods Mercy for Man's Mercy.
Opened In a SERMON at the Spittle, March 31. 1657.
Matthew. 5.7. Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy.


ALthough the Sun in the Firmament is always very glorious, yet it is observed,
that this excellent creature, is most glorious in the Morning when it rises,
and in the Evening when it sets. The Application of this to Jesus Christ in his
Ministry will hold true in a very great measure; for though all his Sermons
were highly spiritual and of transcendent worth, yet above all, the First and
the Last seem to have the pre-eminence; (if we may in this without boldness
make any comparison.)

The First you have laid down here by this Evangelist, in this and in the two
following Chapters; which is so full and comprehensive, that it contains
Perfectum vitae Christianae modum (as Augustine speaks) It Is a Summary of all
practical Religion, August. do Sermon. Dom. in Monte. John 13. etc.
a perfect Model and Platform of all Christianity; that as in the Last Sermon
you have the sum of the Saints privileges, so in this you have the sum of the
Saints duties. In hoc quintum caput irruerunt immundi porci M Luther, f. 7. in
Praesat. ad Enar. in c. 5. ad Matthew.
Duties, I say; for what is here handled, is not in a way of Counsel only, to
some, that do aspire to perfection, and would supererogate (as the Papists
would teach us in their Duodecim consilia Evangelica) but in a way of precept
or command as reaching to all Christians.

This Sermon begins with that, which all men dedesire to end with, and that is
Blessedness. And our Savior does therefore begin with this, that he might the
better insinuate himself and his doctrine into the hearts of his hearers, Enar.
in c. 5. ad Matthew. (...). Chrysostom. To. 1. in N.T. Hom. 15. in c. 5. ad Matthew.
he making it hereby more amiable and less grievous to them, (as Chrysostom
observes. Blessedness is that which all desire, but few know, and fewer pursue
after in a right way. The old Philosophers like the blind men in Sodom groped
for this door but could not find it; they did beat their brains to come to the
knowledge of true happiness, but with all their digging could never spring the
Mine where this treasure lay. De Civit. Dei l. 19. c. 1.
Augustine out of Varro tells us, there were no less then 288 Sects amongst
them about it: Jesus Christ has told us in a few words, what it is, and where
it lies. That what the learned Mirandula says of Truth, may here be applied to
Blessedness. Philosophia quaerit, Theologia invenit, religio possidet
The Philosopher seeks it, the Divine finds it, the true Christian enjoyes it:
or, (as we proverbially express it,) They beat the Bush, and we under the
Gospel get the Bird.

And yet if we look into particulars, we shall find nothing here in this
discourse of our Savior but Paradoxes; Quis unquam vel cogitare potuit, quod
in paupertate sita esset faelicitas, V. Avendan. in Matthew.
for he calls that Blessedness, which the World calls Misery; and Christ's
Benjamin is the Worlds Benoni. Blessed are the poor in spirit; Blessed are they
that mourn, Blessed are they which hunger and thirst, etc. Blessed are they
which are persecuted. This is strange doctrine! How can these things be? Are
these your blessed men? Is this your blessedness? then say carnal men, take it
to your selves, the Lord deliver us from it. Oh, what an incompetent Judge is
Carnal Reason in the things of God! If that might here pass judgment, all
this of Christ would be blotted out, and instead thereof such as this put in:
Blessed are the rich; Blessed are they that laugh, that feed delitiously, and
swim in the streams of pleasure, etc. The Lord rebuke this Satan of Carnal
Reason!

This Ladder of happiness (the foot whereof is on Earth, Genesis 28.12.
but the top reaches to Heaven) is made up of Eight Rounds, which are like the
Eight Steps to the going up of Ezekiels Temple. Ezekiel. 40.31.
The Naturalists, when they would speak a quality very intense, they call it
Calor ad Octo, or Frigus ad Octo. Without levity I hope I may allude to it in
this case: Would you speak a man very happy, blessed in the highest degree of
blessedness, say he is Beatus ad octo, or one that has an interest in these
Eight Beatitudes.

I have singled out one of these to be the subject of my Discourse this day, at
this solemn Anniversary Meeting. And I hope my Sermon will be seasonable, a
word fitly spoken, Verbum super rotas, Prove. 25.11.
(as the Hebrew carries it.) This day is Dies Pauperum, this Text is Scriptura
Pauperum. The poor man's Day, and the poor man's Text will suit very well.
Blessed are the merciful, etc.

The Text is made up of Mercy, it is filled with it: It Begins with Mercy, it
Ends with mercy: Blessed are the merciful, there it is mercy in a way of Debt;
they shall obtain mercy, there it is mercy in a way of Grace. In the former it is
man's mercy to Man; in the second it is Gods mercy to man.

In the words, Vid. Pureum in locum.
say the Popish Writers, there is, Meritum viae and praemium Patriae (for thus
they divide all the Beatitudes,) but here the foundation is written. Plainly
thus, you have in them.

1. A Proposition. 2. The Proof or Confirmation of this Proposition.
A Proposition, Blessed are the merciful.

The confirmation of this, For they shall obtain mercy. (...); the word is very
full, I know not well how to express it; they shall be made mercy, mercy all
over: 1. Tim. 1.13.
As Paul speaks of himself, I was a Blasphemer, etc. But I obtained mercy;
(...); that is, from top to toe I was nothing but mercy, I was a very mass of
mercy. So here.

Further, Sub-divisions would be but vain, and further, Explication
unnecessary: passing by therefore all that is Praeliminary, I come to the
point, which shall-take in the Sum of the Text. It Is this.

The merciful man is a blessed man, Doctr.
and therefore blessed, because he shall obtain mercy.

In the prosecuting of which, I will

First speak to the Subject, The merciful man. And then Secondly to the
praedicate and confirmation of the proposition, this man is blessed; and
therefore blessed, because he shall obtain mercy.

I begin with the First. Misericordia. est aliena miseriae in cord nostro
compassio. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 9. c. 1.
The merciful man may be thus described, He is one, Who has a tender
compassion toward others in misery, and does endeavor to his utmost by all
ways and means to be helpful to them, for the bringing of them out of their
misery.

I infer four things out of this description.

Mercy is a Relative act; an act, or that which relates to others. God has his
works ad intra and ad extra; Quia misericordia est compassio miseriae alterius,
proprie misericordia est ad alterum non autem ad seipsum nisi per stmilitudmem.
Aquin. 2a 2ae. q 30. art. 1.
some are terminated in himself and go no further, but some are Relative and
transient, which reach to the Creature: So it is with us; we have some acts
which are proper to our selves, being bounded and terminated in our own
persons; there are others which relate to our Brethren, and fellow creatures;
of this nature is Mercy.

Misery is the proper object of Mercy: and indeed if there was no misery, there
could be no mercy, for misery is the foundation and the object of mercy. As we
say concerning God: Had there been no misery in the Creature, there might have
been Grace, but not properly mercy, because that necessarily presupposes
misery. Had Adam stood in the state of innocence, there would have been room
for grace but not for mercy in a strict sense. It Is grace only to the standing
Angels: if God should take a fal^en Angel out of Hell, there would be mercy
also as well as grace, because they are in a state of misery. And so it is in
the case I am upon; If our Brethren were under no sufferings, under the
enduring of nothing that is evil, under the wanting of nothing that is good,
here might be love, but not mercy properly, because this does connote and
involve or imply a state of misery.

proper vital act of mercy is compassion; every grace has its essential main
act by which it is distinguished from other graces, Adherence the essential act
of faith, submission the essential act of patience, etc. And so in mercy,
Misericors dicitur aliquis quosi habens miserum cor, quia scilicet affiicitur
ex miseria alteriper tristitiam ac si esset ejus propria miseria. Aquin. 1. p.
Q. 21. A. 30. Homo sum, humani a me nihil alienum puto. Terent. Romans 12.15.
Exodus 2.6. Luke 10.33. Matthew. 9.36. Et passim. Psalm. 112.4.
that has its proper act, and that is compassion: The merciful man is the
compassionate man; he resents the miseries of others, as if they were his own,
his heart does yern over his Brethrens calamities, his very bowels are stirred
within him for those that are afflicted, he mourns with them that mourn, and
sympathizes with them that are in distress. This mercifulness was in Pharaohs
Daughter, when she saw the child in the Ark of Bulrushes (a very sad Cradle)
and that the Babe wept, the Text says, She had compassion on it. And so in the
good Samaritan when he passed by the poor man, who had fallen amongst thieves,
and saw him stripped of all and wounded, this merciful Samaritan had compassion
on him. And very much of this pity was in our Lord Jesus Christ, as the Gospel
holds it forth in several places. I say this is the very soul of mercifulness,
an inward sense and a deep compassion of the troubles of others; David puts
them together, He is gracious (that is, merciful) and full of compassion.

Fourthly, the fruit and result of this compassion is this, the merciful man
sets himself to do good to those, whose case he does thus commiserate. Jam.
2.16.
Mercy is an active and a communicative thing. He that is truly merciful does
not take up with a few good words, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled,
this kind of charity is very cheap and very common) nor with a few sighs;
True indeed, such a man's condition is very sad, I pity him with all my heart:
the merciful man goes further, what is there to be done for this poor man, can
I do nothing for him? If I can, Head, and Heart, and Hand, and Purse, all shall
be laid out for his good. Luke 10.34.
The Samaritan had compassion on him whom he saw in a sad condition, and how
did that work? He bound up his wounds, putting in oil and wine, and set him on
his own beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took care of him, etc. This in
General for the merciful man, and for the nature of mercifulness.

That I may open this more particularly, I must distinguish of mercy. There is
Misericordia spiritualis, and Misericordia temporalis; mercy to the Soul, and
mercy to the Body. Spiritual mercy which streams out in spiritual things to
the soul; and Temporal mercy, which runs out in temporal things to the body.
The Text takes in both of these branches, or mercy in the utmost latitude and
highest elevation of it.

The first of these is far the highest, even mercy to the soul; As the Soul is
infinitely more precious then the body, (for what is the Cabinet to the Pearl,
what is the piece of Clay to the Spark of eternity?) So that mercy which
reaches to the soul is infinitely higher then that which reaches to the body.
Humanity will draw out the Latter, but it is Grace only will draw out the
former. Morality will pity the Beggar, it is grace only, will pity the
sinner.

First, there is Misericordia Spiritualis; The spiritual merciful man does
lay out his compassion in such acts as these. If he sees any in a Natural
unregenerate estate, without God, and Christ, his soul bleeds over such, Hebr.
3 2.
and his hearts desire is that they may be converted. If he meets with any that
are ignorant, as it is said of Christ, He has Compassion on such, and he will
instruct them in the mysteries of the Gospel. Do any err from the truth, Gal.
6.1. Vera just^t a non habet dedignationem sed compassionem. Greg^r.
he will not Separate from them, and cast them off, but rather he will labor
to bring them back again by sober and mild arguing. If any be overtaken with
sin, he will reprove with all meekness; not being censorious and rigid and
harsh, (...) Matthew. 28.26.
but covering and reprooving infirmities with a spirit of Love. If injuries be
done to him, he readily passes them, by, forgiving that he may be forgiven, and
forgiving pence because God has forgiven thousands, millions to himself. If he
sees any that are sad and dejected, he will endeavor to comfort them,
especially those that lie under a wounded Spirit, as knowing that of all
afflictions this is the most intolerable. Prove. 18.14.
The spirit of a man may sustain his infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can
bear? Oh, the merciful man pitties these indeed, goes and sits with them,
confers with them, prays with them, spreads the promises before them, to
support says and Hope. This is the spiritual merciful man. The Schools
express all the branches of this mercy in one Verse.

Consule, Castiga, Solare, remitte, Fer, Ora.

Misericordia Temporalis, mercy that flows out upon the outward man in the
things of this life; and this is the mercy which this Day leads me to speak
of. This lies in our visiting the sick, in our feeding the hungry bellies, in
our clothing the naked backs, in our communicating out of our fullness to them
that are in want. They that thus do, are the (...) in the Text. Such an one was
Job. take but one place. Job 31.16, etc.
If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the
widow to fayl, or have eaten my morsel my self alone, and the fatherless
has not eaten thereof; If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any
poor without covering; If his loins have not blessed me, etc. Then let mine
arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone. Lukd
19.8.
Such an one was Zaccheus, a man low in stature but high in grace, Luke 19.8.
He gave the half of his goods to the poor. I would some amongst us would
give but the twentieth part; but it is so far from half, that it is just nothing.
I might give several instances of this, both out of the Scripture and also out
of common Authors, but I hasten to that which I most aim at.

I have done with the first thing propounded; I come to the second. The
merciful man is blessed. I mean, the charitable, compassionate man to the poor
(for I will limit my self only to that branch of mercifullnesse) he is
blessed: So says the Text, and you may believe it, for Christ spoke it. And
the Scripture elsewhere speaks the same, Blessed is he (says the Psalmist)
that considers the poor. He that has mercy on the poor, Psalm. 41.1. Prove.
14.21. Prove. 22.9.
(says Solomon) happy is he. And again, He that has a bountiful eye shall be
blessed, for he gives of his bread to the poor.

Not to cite more places, I will a little enlarge upon the Argument in the
Text, the merciful are blessed, How does that appear? Such, shall obtain
mercy. Charity to men is always crowned with mercy from God; They that open
their hands of bounty, to them God will open his hands of mercy; and that in
abundance too, they shall have the Sea for the drop, Quoniam super ipsos erunt
misericordiae. Tremel.
the Sea of Gods mercy for the drop of their mercy; Plenty of mercy shall be
given out unto them, as the Syriack renders the words. Let me open this in a
few particulars.

They shall be under a special providence for their protection; And this
reaches both to their persons, and to their estates. For their persons; In the
midst of all dangers and troubles, God will keep merciful men even as the
Apple of his own eye. Psalm. 41.1, 2. Qui apud mensam moratur, and paupert
cibat, illi vita prorogatur. In Talmude Buxt. Synag. Jud. c. ^0. (...) Chrysostom.
Hos. 5.12, 14.
Blessed is he that considers the poor; Blessed, wherein? The Lord will
deliver him in time of trouble; The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive;
And he shall be blessed upon the earth; and thou will not deliver him into the
hands of his enemies. They may rage and plot against such a one, but God will
hide him in the hollow of his hand, and he shall be safe. And there is a
special providence over his estate too; His house shall not he consumed with
fire, his wealth shall not diminish in his hands; what he has he shall keep;
the little he gives secures and sanctifies the whole lump; God will not be to
the charitable man either as the Lion, or as the Moth: (that is) he will
neither suddenly take away his riches from him, nor yet cause them to consume
and rust no man knows how. Pror. 28.27.
He that gives unto the poor shall not lack, but he that hides his eyes
shall have many a curse; God will sooner or later blast this man's estate,
because he does so little good with it; Nay, seeing says God you grudge me a
little in the relieving of the poor, I Will serve my self, and take all from you.

Merciful men's prayers shall be answered. He that hears the needy man's
prayers God will certainly hear his. Thy prayers and thy Alms are come up
for a memorial before God; Acts 10.4.
Said the Angel to Cornelius. Prayers that are mingled with acts of mercy do
certainly mount up to Heaven. Isai 58.7.9.
Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall
say, Here I am. Then, when? If thou deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring
the poor that are cast out to thy house; if thou see the naked and cover him,
Non impetrabit de divind pietate aliquid qui ad precem pauper is non fuit
humanus. Cypr. de Op. and Eleem. Prove. 21.13.
and hide not thy self from thy own flesh. The uncharitable hard-hearted man,
let him pray never so much, all his prayers are lost, God regards them not. Who
so stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, and
shall not be heard.

God will return to the merciful man what he gives to the poor; he will
reward him in kind; that look what ever it is that he bestows, it shall be
in the very kind made up to him again, many have found this to be very true;
(...). Chrysostom. Prove. 11.24.
in the morning they have given may be five shillings, and before night God
has brought them in unexpectedly twenty for it. The best way for a man to
increase his estate is charity; money here like the widows oil, the more it is
powered out, the more it does increase. There is that scatters and yet
increases, and there is that withholdeth more then is meet, and that tends
unto poverty. There is a secret blessing upon the merciful, that they shall
wonderfully prosper even in the things of this life. Thou shall surely give
him, Deuteronomy. 15.10.
and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him; because that
for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all
that thou put thine hand unto. If God do not return your mercy in the very
kind, he will do it some other way; The charitable man makes God to be his
creditor, and he will surely pay what is lent to him. A gift to the poor is a
loan to God, and he is a faithful play master. Prove. 19.17.
He that has pity on the poor lends unto the Lord, and that which he has
given will he pay him again. And therefore says the wiseman, Cast thy bread
upon the waters, Eccles. 11.1.
for thou shall find it after many days.

Fourthly, God will deal with him, as he deals with others; for that of our
Savior holds true in all cases, With what measure ye mete, Matthew. 7.2. Prove.
11.25. 1 sal. 18.25.
it shall be measured to you again. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he
that waters, shall be watered also himself. With the merciful, thou will show
thy self merciful. He that shuts up his bowels to his brother, God will shut up
his bowels unto him; but he that is pitiful and compassionate, shall find the
same at the hands of God.

shall have mercy for their posterity; their children shall be blessed for it,
when they are dead and gone. Mercy is entailed upon the charitable man's
children. What is given to the poor, is a childs portion put into the Lords
hands to be kept for him. Psalm. 37.26.
He is ever merciful and lends; and see what follows, And his seed is
blessed. When David had received kindness from Jonathan, see how he desires to
vent his love upon his posterity; Is there not any yet of the house of Saul, 2 Samuel 9.3.
that I may show the kindness of God unto him? God will make enquiry after the
children of merciful men, and they shall be blessed for their parents sake; he
will not save them for the Fathers grace, Romans 1.17.
no, (The just shall live by his faith) but he will give them many outward
blessings here for the Fathers charity. The Widow of Sarepta relieves the
Prophet, and God by the Prophet raises up her child for her. 1 Kings 17.20.


Sixthly and lastly, merciful men shall have mercy, at the great day of
judgment, a sentence of life shall be passed upon them, and a crown of glory
given them for their reward; at the great Assize of the World the process
shall be by acts of mercy, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Why so? For I was
an hungered, and ye gave me meat, Matthew 25.34, etc.
I was thirsty and ye gave me drink, naked, and ye clothed me, etc. The
merciful man's reward is sure, He shall in no wise lose his reward. Vid.
Chrysostom. Ho. 23. Eclog. de Eleemes. Matthew. 10.42.
And as it is sure, so it is great, for it is eternal life.

These things I pass over as briefly as I can, because I hasten to the
Application -- you have the second thing dispatched, and that is the
Blessedness of merciful men, with the proof and confirmation of it, such shall
obtain mercy.

For the preventing of mistakes, and for the further stating of the point, I
will lay down two Propositions.

First is this; it is not mercy Ex merito, but Ex pacto, or it is not mercy Ex
debito, but Ex gratia. Nullo modo nostra misericordia, etc. Vsque adeo tamen-ut
pro uno teruntio centies mill aureos, proque uno haustu aquae frigida, regnum
coelorum polliceri non dubitet. Luther. Quisquis tibi enumerat merita sua, quid
tibi enumerat nisi munera tna. Aug. Conf. l. 9 c. 13. Eleemosina securitatis
nostrae salubre praesidium, medela peccati, etc. Cypr. very high de Op. and
Eleemos. Via Pamel in lo.
The merciful man shall have mercy, not because he has deserved it, but
because God has promised it. Merit? away with it. Alas, when we have been
drawn out in charity to the utmost, should we give all our goods to the poor,
yet there is nothing merited at the hands of God. Do we not give of his own?
What do we give for him, but what first we have received from him? The servant
that follows his Master, at his Masters command gives the Beggar an alms of
mercy; does this servant merit any thing, who gives nothing but what is his
Masters? And so it is here. Let Grace be never so high, Obedience be never so
high, and Mercy to the poor never so high, yet the reward is reckoned not of
debt, but of grace. I confess the Fathers before the Controversy of Merit was
started, spoke very high in this point, but they are to be understood in a
found sense, and Cum grano salis.

The Second Proposition is this: Every merciful man man shall have mercy, 2 Ep.
John 3.
but not all the same mercy. There is a full reward. There is the mercy of
Earth and the mercy of Heaven, the blessings of the Throne, and the blessings
of the Footstool; Bowel-mercies, and Bounty-mercies. A mere moral man may be a
merciful man, this man shall have mercy for it, but it is nether-spring mercy
only, God will bless him in his estate, Matthew. 6.2.
name, relations, and this is all. There are others now in the Covenant, united
to Christ, acted from a saving principle, aiming at high and spiritual ends;
these now shall have mercy in the highest degree, Heaven and Glory, the Kingdom
prepared from all eternity, (yet, not immediately upon the account of their
mercifulness, but as this is the fruit or evidence of the truth of Faith, for
that indeed is the grace which has this immediate influence upon future
blessedness.)

Having thus run over the Doctrinal part, I now come to make some practical
improvement of it.

Inference: If the merciful be blessed, what are then the unmerciful and
uncharitable? Qui proximo misericordiam ostendere recusat, praeter iram and
perpetuam indignationem nihil consequetur. Luthers Prophecy.
They are cursed. Such as have no compassion to the poor, let them starve and
perish, 'Its all one to these hard-hearted wretches; let such know there si a
curse hanging over them, and God has no mercy for them. I fear the terror of
this may reach to very many in this City, in this Nation; whom God has blessed
with plentiful estates, and they have abundance, but wherein are the poor the
better for them? Either as covetous Misers they lock up all in their Coffers,
or they prodigally cast their estates away in superfluities, in gaming,
building, feasting, apparel, thousands go out upon back and belly, not a
Farthing to a poor member of Christ. Nay, Pr^v. 17.5. Isai 3.15.
there are some so far from helping the needy, that they mock at them, or they
grind the faces of the poor, and make them the objects of their pride and
cruelty, rather then of their pity and mercy. I denounce this day a woe against
such, which they shall never escape. I would have them seriously to consider
but three places of Scripture. That of our Savior, Matthew. 25.41 etc.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: Why is this dreadful sentence pronounced? For I was an hungered, and ye
gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; naked, and ye clothed
me not, etc. That of James, Jam. 2.13.
He shall have judgment without mercy, that has shown no mercy. Judgment
without mercy: in plain English, that is, Hell and condemnation without remedy.
That parable of Dives and Lazarus. Luke 16.
The rich man lived in pleasure and fared deliciously every day, poor Lazarus
lays under the Table and he is not minded; well, see what comes on it; Father
Abraham have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his
finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. The rich
man is now the beggar, and what does he beg for? But a very small thing, but
a drop of water, and yet that is denied him. He had stopped his ears to the
cries and tears and groans of poor Lazarus, and now in his torments the ears
of God are stopped to his roarings. (...). Vid Plura in Chrysostom. T. 6. Hom. 63.
(...). Basil.
Had Lazarus had more of Dives his mercy, Dives had had more of Gods mercy. Oh!
that unmercifull men would tremble at these things, what will the hoording up
of their money be, to the loss of Gods Love, the forfeiting of mercy, the
barring up of the door of grace, and the undoing of their souls to all
eternity.

exhortation, and here let me press this Mercy upon you. 'Twas said of
Chrysostom that he was, A Preacher of Alms, the poor man's Preacher, (and
indeed how many Homilies has he wrote upon this subject, and how does he
enforce and urge charity in all his writings.) I desire this day according to
my slender abilitys to be so too. Never had we more need to press men to acts
of Charity, then in this Iron age upon which we are cast; Matthew. 24.12.
wherein love is grown so cold; we live in hard times and generally we have
hard hearts; The times are hard, trading is low, losses are great, burdens are
high, many familes ruined by the late wars, and men's hearts are hard too; Mercy
to the poor runs very low. Our Forefathers that lived before us, how
bountiful and charitable were they; we have standing monuments of it in
Colleges, in Hospitalls, etc. And we have cause to bless God for them, for
though they are dead and gone we reap the benefit of their good works; Many
bellies that otherwise would Starve are filled by them, many backs that
otherwise would be naked are clothed by them, many children that otherwise
would be lost are comfortably educated upon that provision which they have
left; But now we may complain with the Prophet; Isai. 57.1.
Merciful men are taken away. In our times we are so far from erecting such
monuments of mercy, that we are rather for the pulling down of these, as being
Popish, unnecessary, and I know not what. And they that do not go so far in
this horrid inhumanity to take away what is given, yet they will out of their
fulness add nothing for the further promoting of the works of charity. I
might very much enlarge in the bewailing of the decay of mercy, and the
close-fistedness of men in these times when we gather for the poor, are not our
Basins empty? Have we not many members in our Congregations very low, and the
rich regard them not. Are there not many godly families that want bread and
have no supplies from our plenty? Do we relieve the distressed widows, and
fatherless? Oh that I might prevail with you this day, to be more merciful, to
broach the vessel as it were, that charity to the poor might have a vent. To
many of you I may say as Paul does in the like case, 2 Cor. 9.2.
Touching ministering to the Saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you,
for I know the forwardness of your minds; but such are very rare.

I will divide my discourse into three Heads.

1. I will speak to them that are rich. 2. To you the Right Honorable
Magistrates of this City. 3. To you the worthy Governors of the Hospitals.
First, I begin with you that are Rich. I believe I speak to many such, and I
wish I spoke to more, that all the rich Men of the City were present to hear
what I shall say. God has blessed you with much in this world, be ye merciful
to the poor. The Jews have a Proverb, That mercy is such an excellent duty, Si
etiam gladius acut us appositus esset collo hominis non tamen dabet cessare a
miserico, dia. Buxtorf. Florileg. Hebraicum. p. 193.
that if a sword shoud be set to the throat of a man, that must not deter him
from mercy. This is the duty that I am to charge upon you; I say charge upon
you; do not mistake me; I do not come to desire this of you as a courtesy, I
do not beg this of you as a favor, but in the name and authority of Christ I
command and charge you to be good and bountiful to the poor. So the Apostle
bids us, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.
Charge them that are rich in this world. Charge them? What or wherein? That
they do good, that they he rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate. 'Its a notable place for rich men, Prove. 5.15, 16.
that of Solomon, Drink waters out of thine own Cistern, and running waters out
of thine own Chanel. Let thy Fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of
waters in thy streets. Two things here are set before you. Drink waters out of
thine own Cistern, (that is; enjoy the comforts wherewith God has blessed you;
there are some that are Inopes in copia, some as the Poet speaks, -- Queis non
conceditur uti: In all their fullness they are in straights, Job 20.22.
not enjoying what they have, grudging to themselves every thing; they will
want any thing rather then part with a penny for it, hide-bound miserable men,
who are not only unmerciful to others, but even to themselves; these do not so
much possess their wealth, as their wealth possesses them: here is Money
without a Man, Ego malo virum qui pecunia ege at, quam pecuniam quae viro.
Themist. in Tully l. 2. de ^ffio. Eccl 5.18, 19.
(as the Orator expresses it:) There is often a Man without Money, and
sometimes Money without a Man, that is, there is wealth enough but there is no
heart to take the comfort of it. Now says the Wiseman, Drink waters out of
your own Cisterns, take the sweetness of what you have; for it is good and
comely for a man to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor
that he takes under the Sun all the days of his life, which God gives him;
for it is his portion, Every man also to whom God has given riches and wealth,
and has given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to
rejoice in his labor; this is the gift of God.

But then he goes on; Let thy Fountains be dispersed abroad, etc. Enjoy what
you have, but do not engross all to your selves; make the best of your
comforts, but then communicate of them unto others. Deuteronomy. 15.11.
The poor shall never cease out of the Land, therefore I command thee, saying,
Thou shall open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor and to thy needy
in the Land.

I will endeavor to set this home by several Considerations.

All is nothing without mercy: you may pretend to grace, grace is nothing
without mercy. Knowledge without charity, Romans 2.20. James 3.17.
it is but (...), a form of knowledge; That wisdom which is from above, is first
pure, etc. full of mercy and good fruits: True saving heavenly knowledge does
always work purity toward God, and charity toward Man. Without mercy your
love is nothing. 1 John 3.17.
Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up
his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? That Is
a strange contradiction indeed for a man to say he loves God, and yet does not
relieve and pity his poor distressed brother. Faith without mercy is nothing,
where there is not giving and forgiving (which two things comprehend in them
all mercy) there is no faith unfeined and saving. What does it profit, my
brethen, 1 Timothy 1.5. Jam. 2 14, etc. Mors fidei est separatio charitatis.
Bernard.
though a man say he has faith, and have not works? can faith save him? If a
Brother or Sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of you say,
Depart in peace, etc. what does it profit? Even so faith if it has not works
is dead being alone. A wordy charity does no good to others, and a barren
merciless faith does no good to our selves. The Papists say we are
Solifidians, they may as well say we are Nullifidians; for Solifidians are
Nullifidians. I know not what your practices are, but I am sure our principles
are not for this Solifidian way, which is so reproachfully and falsely cast
upon us. All your duties are nothing without mercy; Vid. Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Hom.
(...). Isa. 58.7, 8. (...) etc. Basil. l. 1. Ho. (...).
prayer, hearing, nay fasting, all is vain without this. Is not this the Fast
that I have chosen? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry? and that thou
bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou see the naked, that
thou cover him? and that thou hide not thy self from thy own flesh. Basil
speaks of some with their (...) unchargeable or uncharitable religion; they
fasted, they praid, but no mercy to the poor, what were they the better for all
their duties? By the way; I do not wonder we have so much of this (...),
because we are now for (...); 1 Cor. 9.18,
they that will give nothing to a Minister, to whom it is an act of justice,
will certainly give but little to a poor Christian to whom it is an act of
mercy. But to return: In a word, All your Religion is nothing without charity:
(...) Justin. Mart. in Coho^t; ad Graecos.
for Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father; is this to visit
the Fatherless and the Widows in their affliction: Religion has its upward
duties, toward God; its inward duties, toward a man's self; its downward
duties, toward our brethren: if we come not up to these, all our religion is
but an empty profession, which will come to nothing.

Mercy is one of the great duties of the Gospel; Matthew. 23.23.
It Is amongst the (...), the weighty matters of the Law, as Christ tells us. Do
not say this is a low duty, a moral duty, we may dispense with it. He has
showed thee O man what is good, and what does the Lord require of the, but to
do justly and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? When the
Pharisees were troubling themselves about shadows, our Savior brings them to
this as a Substantial duty, Luke 11.41.
But rather give Alms of such things as you have, and behold all things are
clean unto you. What one duty is there that is more frequently commanded, then
this of mercy; and what duty is urged with sweeter promises, with more terrible
threatenings then this is?

Mercy is very pleasing to God. To do good and to communicate forget not, Heb.
13.16. Phil. 4.18.
for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Paul tells you, it is an odor of
asweete smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God. But this head was
so fully and excellently amplifyed yesterday by my reverend Brother, that I
cannot, Ineede not add any thing more upon it.

nothing makes religion more lovely to the world then acts of mercy; this puts
a fair gloss upon your profession, and renders it very amiable and acceptable
unto all. If you pray, may be carnal men will jeer you; If you be holy, the
world will hate you (but be holy for all that, Gods love is better then the
worlds hatred.) But if you be merciful and charitable, all men will honor
you, and speak well of you, He has dispersed, Psalm. 112.9.
he has given to the poor, His horn shall be exalted with honor. I fear
professors are very wanting in this duty, they do not hereby make the ways of
God lovely as they should do: What do men say their's one indeed hears much,
professes much, prays in his family, but he will wrack his poor tennants as much
as others, and is as uncharitable as others. This is a Scandal to the Gospel.

Mercy is a debt; and therefore be merciful; You are angry with those that
will not pay their debts, pray do you pay yours. Mercy it is a debt I say; a
debt to God, a debt to man. Are you full, give to them that want, it is not
simply a gift it is but what you owe. Prove. 3.27.
Withhold not good from them from whom it is due, (Says Solomon) what is
necessary is your own, what is Superfluous is not. You are with all your plenty
but Gods Almoners; the Almoner is not faithful if he do not relieve the poor,
he is bound to it, for what he has from the King, is not for himself but to be
laid out upon them. Why does God give so much to you, not that you should hoard
it up, and let it lie moulding in your Cheests; (...). Chrysostom.
not that you should lay out all upon your selves, much less prodigally wast
it in the gratifying of your Lusts, No, God gives you so much that you may give
out to others that want; The Jews were wont to write upon the poor man's box,
The Box of righteousnesse^; not only because of Gods righteousness to repay
what is given to the poor, but in reference to our selves, it is but righteous
that we who have, should communicate to them that have not. Are we not
entrusted with all for this very end? Are not the poor, our brethren, our
fellow creatures, have we not all the same flesh, Eandem cutem though not
Eandem vestem, shall we hide our selves from our own flesh; did not he that
made them make us? Is not all the difference made by God? Isai. 58 8. Job
31.15. 1 Cor. 4.7. Indignum credens ab homine peti quod Dii dedissent. Plin. in
Paneg, ad Traj.
In temporalls as well as in Spiritualls that is true, Who makes thee to
differ from another? And what have thou that thou did not receive? And if so,
it is but righteous that we should supply them in their necessities. Pliny
relates of Trajane the Emperor, that he thought it an unworthy thing, that any
should so much as ask him that which the Gods had so freely given him. Oh let
not us be base and niggardly to our brethren, when all is so freely given us by
God.

Be merciful and the poor will requite you: How? Silver and Gold they have
none, Acts 3.6.
but Such as they have they will give you, they will pray for you, and that is
better then any other requital whatever. If you Minister to them in your
Temporalls, they will minister to you in their Spiritualls; I speak here of
those, that are Godly. There are many poor christians that never go to God, but
they say, Lord bless such a man, such a woman, bless them and theirs for they
are very good to me. 2 Timothy 1.16.
The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me.
The Churlish Nabal, Deutr. 15.9.
the prayers of the poor are against such a one; and that is a sad thing. Beware
lest thin eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou give him not, and
he cry unto the Lord against thee. How can that man prosper, that has the
people of God praying against him; how can that man do otherwise then well, who
has the people of God praying for him. Noli despicers inopem qui cum sibi
pauper sit, facere te divitem potest. Casar.
Of all Enemies a praying Enemy is the worst Enemy, and of all friends a
praying friend is the best friend. Do not (says an Ancient Father) despise
him, who though he be poor, himself yet can by his prayers make thee rich.

What you do to the poor you do to Christ. If Christ was on earth again, would
you not show love to him? Says Christ, (...). Ch^^s. (...). Matthew. 26.11.
Matthew. 25 4^.
The poor you have always with you; and what you do to them you do to me, I
take all that, and put it upon my score, it is all done to my self. Verily I say
unto you, in as much as ye have done it, unto one of the least of these my
brethren, you have done it unto me.

I might add many considerations more, to quicken you to the duty. Exodus, 34.6,
7. Et passim. Luke 6.36.
As the Nature and example of God? He is merciful, rich in mercy, full of
compassion, abundant in goodness. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father
also is merciful. Does not this mercy of God run out upon you in broad
streams? Does he clothe you, can you see a poor creature naked, and do nothing
for him? Has he elected you to life, given you the pardon of sin, will you
grudge to give a piece of bread, your mean and scant mercy who are made
partakers of so high and glorious mercy? Put on (says the Apostle) as the
Elect of God, Col. 3.12.
bowels of mercy, what ever others are, the elect of God must be merciful;
Gods love is a strong incentive to ours; Bid God pity us in our blood, we must
certainly pity our brother in his Tears?

Charity to the poor it is your bill of exchange; pay down your money here, and
you shall receive it again in glory, Fac tibi possessionum terrestrium Ghristum
participem, ut ille te sibi faciat regnorum caelestiu^ cohaeredem. Cypr. Luke
6.38.
not in kind but in that which is far better. It Is the best expression of
your Thankefullnesse to God for his blessings to you. What need I speak more?
The text is full, Be merciful, and you shall obtain mercy; Mercy for your
selves, for your children, mercy in this life mercy in the life to come; Give
and it shall be given to you, good measure pressed down, and shaken to gether,
and running over, etc.

I hope these Arguments will prevail with you. For Gods sake, for Christ's
sake, for the Gospells sake, for your own sake, as well as for your brethrens
sake, be tender and compassionate and charitable to them that are in distress,
you have many objects of mercy, many opportunities of doing good: Oh that you
had but hearts to do good. If what I have spoken, do not work upon you, this
Sermon shall rise up in judgment against you; and then you shall know God has
no mercy for you, if now you have no mercy for your Brethren.

Before I pass off from this Use, I must answer a few Objections that are in
the hearts and mouths of many against this duty. To reckon up all would be
endless; I will only pick out some of those that are most common.

uncertain times, (...), etc. Basil l. 1. Ho. (...).
and all that we can get is little enough to lay up to secure our selves
against days of trouble. Wars may come again, and trading may cease; what will
become of us then, if we have not a good stock before?

I confess God has cast us upon days of distraction, and what time may
produce we know not: But I say, the rather be charitable. Give a portion to
seven, Eccles. 12.2.
and also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth.
Would you be wise to provide for a time of trial? in your prosperity remember
the poor; come what will come, do thus, God will see you shall not want. Luke
16.9.
This is to make friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness; thus you make God to
be your friend, and can you fear so long as God is your friend?

We are not able: None more willing then we, but we are not able.

Not able: Indeed you are to be pitied! simplexne furor sestertia centu^
Perdere et horrenti tunicam non reddere servo? -- Juven. Sat. l. 1.
not for the scantness of your estates, but the coldness of your charity. Not
able: Take heed of saying so, lest God make you so indeed. Not able: What, so
many hundreds, it not thousands, per annum? such stocks, such trading, such
purchasing, and yet not able? You can find a thousand pound for a purchase;
Non habet in foelix Numitor, quod mittat amicos. Quintillae quod donet habet --
Juven. Sat. 6. Vid. Bafil. Ho. (...) Very elegantly. Necessitates infi^atae
sunt, tribu^a sunt gravia, fiscalia explicare non possumus, etc. Ambros. 'Ov
(...). Chrysostom. Habet semper unde det qui plenum pectus habet charitatis. Aug.
and if we come for Twenty Shillings for a poor Christian, then, not able? Ye
can throw away a great deal prodigally upon a Feast, a Suit, a House, a Hawk,
may be upon a Whore; but when it comes to a business of charity, then you can
pretend inability. Ambrose speaks to this; Come to some men, Pray give
something to the poor; Alas we cannot, Taxes are high, and Customs are high,
we have many occasions for our money. These do not consider says he, that The
salvation of the soul is to be preferred before all. Away with all these
excuses, there is money enough in the Coffer, if there was but more charity in
the heart: but the short and the long on it is this, you are covetous and
sordid-spirited men.

great charge, and many children to provide for, and we should wrong them by
this bounty.

Vid. Cyprian de Op. and Eseem. fully to this Object.
not so; God will bless your children for your mercy, they shall have the more
for it. Would you secure and improve their Portions? put something into Gods
hands for them; what ever becomes of the rest, that shall be safe.

to waste and diminish our estates.

Esto intrepidus, esto securus, finir^ non potest, unde in usus Christi
impenditur, unde opus caeleste celebiatur. Cypr. de Op. etc.
as I have shown you already: No man shall be the poorer at the years end for
what he lays out upon the poor; you shall have your money again, and
improvement for it too. I have read of Tiberius the second, Partner with
Justinus in the Empire: this man was very famous for his bounty to the poor;
insomuch that his Wife was wont to blame him for it: and speaking to him once
how he wasted his treasure this way; he told her, Cluver. Epit. P. 405. Non
defuturam dixit fisco pecuniam, quoad ipse secutus Christi praecepta, in coelo
thesauros colligeret, egenorum fovendo defectus. Fertur de Rege quodam Anglo,
etc. Bonav. in 6. Luc. Fullers Eccl. Hist.
He Should never want money, so long as in obedience to Christ's command he did
supply the necessities of the poor. And presently see how Providence ordered
it; immediately after he had given much in this way, Under a Marble Table which
was taken up, there he found a great treasure, and news was brought him too of
the death of one Narses, a very rich man, who had given all unto him. Shall I
tell you a fine Popish story, which Bonaventure relates more generally, but you
have it particularly and fully set down in a late Writer of our own. King
Oswald sitting in his Palace on Easter day, and being at dinner, with a Bishop
with him, he was told, that there were many poor waiting at his Palace-Gates:
Upon this he commands all his meat from his Table to be carried to them, and a
great silver Charger to be broken in pieces, and given to them. The Bishop
laying hold on the Kings hand, says thus, May this hand never be consumed:
And, say the Papists (believe them if you will) so it fell out; for the Corpse
of this King being long after taken up, when all his other parts were consumed,
(...), etc. (...) Chrysostom.
his hand was as found as ever. I judge this to be one of their Fables: but my
Application is true; Sure I am, that estate shall never wither that is improved
in ways of charity to the poor. But, I refer you to what was laid down in the
Doctrinal part.

shift is this. We will do thus and thus when we dye: then we will build
Hospitals, and then we will give such Legacies to the poor. But pray let us alone
till then.

Then dye as soon as you will, and the sooner the better; if you will do no good
in your lifetime we have then more reason to pray for your death, (...) Basil.
then for your life. But is it not better to be like the Tree, that stands and
yet yields fruit; Is it not better to be like the Sheep that do good whilst
they live, rather then like the Swine, that are good for nothing till they dye?
Is it not better fot you now to bestow your charity, when you your selves may
see it running in the right channel, then to stay till you be dead, when
perhaps the Executors may be nothing but the Executioners of your wills. But
the Truth is, we look but for little from you; Pliny speaks of a Tree, the
Leaf whereof was as big as a Target, but the fruit no bigger then a Bean. And
such a business is death-bed-charity, They that will do great things then, it
often falls out, they do nothing at all, (or as good as nothing at all.)

And so much for the objections also.

I hope you are now brought to ask me this question, wherein would you have us
to express this mercy, or what object will you direct us to for our charity?
If so, let me tell you, here are famous objects before you this day, the famous
Hospitalls of this City, the Corporation for the poor. Here your charity is
needed, here it will be readily received, and here it will be faithfully
improved. Here you see the high charity of them that lived before you; Here you
have foundations not to be parrallel'd in the whole world, Vid. Aquin. 1 a. 2
ae.
Cajetanes Mons pietatis is but a Mol-hill to what you have here; For shame,
when your Forefathers have done so much, do not you hold in your hands and do
nothing at all, These great lamps call for a great deal of oil; our misery
is. The Lamp grows greater, and the oil does not increase with it. We need go
no farther then to these Foundations to prove the decay of charity. Dr.
Hackwels Apolog. for Provid.
A learned man writes a book to prove there is no decay in Nature, but who can
deny but that there is a decay in Charity? Men before us had enough of it to
build, and we have scarce charity enough to support that with a little cost,
which they erected with vast treasures.

One tells us it was the use of the Roman Censors once a year to call the
Cittyzens before them, M. Rogers good Sama^it. p. 80.
to take an acount how the laws were observed in all their Provinces. A
messenger being commanded to call the Good-men before them, he goes to the
Tombs of those who in their Life time was most renowned; and calls them by
their names, summoning them to appear before the Censors; Being reproved for
so doing, he answered, sickness and age had worn out all the Good-men of the
City, and there was none left that was worthy of that name. The Application is
too obvious; should I be commanded to call in some charitable men before you, I
must go to the Graves of our old Benefactors, for truly in our days there are
very few such to be found amongst us. I speak this to your shame; and therefore
you rich Cittyzens and others, go home and open your purses, and send in
something to these Merciful plantations, of which you see there is so much
fruit reaped.

I have pitched upon this because of the day; I might instance in other
objects, but I must contract. I have spoken to you as rich men: Be merciful;
Munetarius pauperum, and egentium candidatus sic festinet ad coe^u^, Hieron.
In the practice of this duty go on toward glory, you shall not be the worse
on earth, you shall be infinitely the better in Heaven, for what you do to the
poor. 2 Cor. 9.8, 10, 11.
I Will conclude this head with that of the Apostle, where he is treating upon the
same Argument; And God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye
always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work.
(As it is written he has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor, his
righteousness remains for ever. Now he that ministers seed to the sower,
both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase
the fruit of your righteousness.) Being enriched in every thing to all
bountifullness, which causes thorough us thankesgiving to God. And take that
other place too, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.
in another Epistle, Charge them that are rich in this world, etc. That they do
good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate; Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

Branch of the Use.
I shall now address my self to you, the Right Honorable Magistrates of this
famous City. And give me leave to press the duty in hand upon you, Be ye
merciful and very merciful. I beg mercy of you not only as you are rich men,
but as you are Magistrates; you must not only open the purse, but also improve
your power in a way of mercy. Do not mistake me, I do not desire mercy of you
for the guilty, but for the needy. I would not have you to blunt the sword of
justice, or to abate your severity, in the punnishment of sin and offenders,
for here it is August. Veniam prestare illicitis, non est misericordiam
praestare, sed justitiam misericordia non tenere. Hilar.
Misericordia puniens and crudelitas parcens. There Is abundance of sin amongst
us, which certainly the Magistrate is to punnish, Theft, Drunkenness,
Adultery, profanation of the Lords day; Go on I beseech you, and let those who
are guilty of these abominations find no mercy from you: Omnes hominines qui
de rebus magnis acturi sunt, ab ira and misericordia oporiet esse va (...).
Cato in Sallust. Job 29.15. Psalm. 82.3, 4. Job 29.12.
And when you are upon the Bench in capital matters, and notorious sins know no
mercy, but only to punish. All that here I ask of you is, that you would be
merciful to the poor; that you would be eyes to the blind, and feet to the
lame; that you would judge the cause of the needy, and defend the poor and the
fatherless, and stand up in the gate for them that have none to help them. Take
heed of oppressing the poor, and of discountenancing the poor man's cause, when
ever it comes before you. Many Widows and Orphans depend upon you; to be
faithful to your trust in reference to them, will be a high act of
mercifulness. Exodus 22.22, 23, 24.
Ye shall not afflict any Widow or fatherless child. If thou afflict them in
any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry; and my
wrath shall wax hot and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be
widows, and your children Fatherless. God does in a special manner interest
himself in the concernements of the widows and Fatherless, and they that
wrong them, he will certainly meet with, in some remarkable judgment, either
upon themselves or upon their posterity. But as for you, I bless God, and
rejoice in it, I may herein speak to your commendation for your great care and
fidelity in this business; yet I hope you will pardon me for hinting this to
you as an eminent piece of Mercy. I could lay before you other excellent
Channells for your mercy to run in, but I will not be either too bold, or too
tedious.

3 Branch of the Use.
But a word to you the Worshipful Governors of the several Hospitalls, and
the Trustees in these Corporations of Charity, and I have done with this Use.
As you are to improve and to receive the mercy of others, so you are to put
forth your own mercy. Shall I exhort you to be honest and faithful in your
trust? I need not, your integrity is abundantly known herein. To rob the
Hospital is an unpardonable theft, the stones in the walls shall cry out
against such; but who is there that knows you, and does not also know that you
detest a thing so base as this is.

There are but two things that I shall say to you.

First, Grudge not your pains in acts of mercy. I suppose attendance upon your
trust may cost you much time, and much pains, and take you off from your own
occasions, and be to your own private prejudice, but go on and be diligent in
so good a work; the blessing of the poor will be upon you, Job 29.13.
the blessing of the God of the poor will be upon you; your pains are full of
mercy, and your mercy shall be full of profit. How can you be employed better,
then about the lives and livelihoods of thousands that do wholly depend upon
you?

And Secondly, let me say this to you, that others may be encouraged to these
noble acts of charity; Be careful in all things to keep punctually to the wills
of those who are Donors and Benefactors. What a barbarous thing is it to
infringe the wills of them that are dead? And besides that, how has the
charity of some men been damm'd up in these times, upon this very cause, that
we are so bold in streining, and perverting, and flatly contradicting the wills
of the deceased? I could give you instances, but I forbear.

I have been very long you see in this Use of Exhortation: there are one or two
more yet behind, which I will dispach very briefly, and so conclude.

The third Use is for direction: And here I will give you some short Rules, for
the guiding of you in the practice of this duty of mercy.

The first Rule is this, Give that to the poor, which is honestly gotten: Do
not bring to God Holocaustum exrapina. Quaerit Deus dona non spolia (says
Ambrose.) 'Twas a notable speech of Selimus to one of his Bassa's, Dr. Harris
upon the Beat. p. 179.
who exhorting him to do something in a way of charity, to erect Hospitals out
of the estates of the Persian Merchants, wrongfully taken from them: Selymus
answers thus; (...), etc Chrysostom.
Would thou that I should bestow other men's goods wrongfully taken from them,
upon works of charity and devotion? assuredly I will never do it, nay rather
see they be again restored to the right owners. This Turk is a shame to many
Christians; they will get estates Per fas and nefas, they care not how; and
then they quiet their consciences with this, They will set up some Monument of
their charity, out of their unjust and oppressive gains. This may be for the
good of others, but themselves shall never be the better for it. Zaccheus gives
half of his goods to the poor, Luke 19.8.
and if he had wronged any he makes restitution. This is an excellent pattern
for your imitation; be merciful to them that want, but then be just to them
that you have wronged; Non reminitur peccatum, nisi^^ restituatur ablatum. Aug.
remembering always that of Austine, No restitution, no remission. Bring not a
gift to God, the foundation of which was laid in thy brothers tears: Give that
which is your own; first be honest, and then bountiful.

Secondly, 2 Rule. Psalm. 112.5.
Let your charity be ordered with conscience and discretion. A good man shows
favor, and lends, he will guide his affairs with discretion. This wisdom and
conscience lies chiefly in the right objecting of your mercy. Take the poorest,
take the best, and make them the objects of your pity. I say, the poorest,
those that are in the greatest necessity, in the first place relieve them.
Donant iis qui maxim donare possunt, hi viscatis hamatisque muneribus non sua
pronunt, sed aliena corripiunt. Plin. Ep. l. 9.
Some will give that they may receive, this is complementing: some will give to
those that can make a good shift in the world, and neglect those that are ready
to starve, this is indiscretion. And then I say give to the best; some are very
unblameable in their conversation, painful in their callings, modest in their
behavior, such as are ashamed to make known their wants, and yet God keeps
them very low: oh be merciful to such; but especially do you see any that fear
God, be sure you show mercy to them. Gal. 6.10.
As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good to all men; especially unto
them, who are of the household of Faith. Here your charity will be most
acceptable to God, and most profitable to your selves; for such will requite
you with their prayers, not only with a common outward God bless you, but their
very souls will go out to God for you.

Thirdly, 3 Rule.
Do not limit your selves too much in Mercy. Let it be full and large and vast,
if your abilityes will permit. proportion of your mercy. You that have much,
must give much. Your charity must be suitable to your Ability; A rich man may
give much, and yet be counted by God an unmercifull man, because he gives not
according to what he may, and ought. Remember that of the Apostle, 2 Cor 9.6.
He which sows sparingly shall reap sparingly; and he which sows
bountifully shall reap bountifully.

continuance of Mercy; be constant in it, persevere and hold on: As the poor
will never cease, Eccl. 11.2. Gal. 6.9. 3. These 3.13.
so your pity must never cease. Give a portion to seven and also to eight. Be
not weary in well doing, ye shall reap if you faint not.

Acts of mercy; abound in all the fruits of mercy. There Is mercy in giving,
come up to that. There Is mercy in lending, come up to that. Lend to the poor
and look for no improvement; Loan ex pacto, or ex faenore to the poor,
certainly that is Vsura mordax, condemned by all. There Is mercy in buying of
and selling to the poor. Amos 8.4, 5.
Many in this City make the Ephah small, an the Shekell great, they will buy
of the poor very cheap, taking the advantage of their necessity, but they will
sell to them deer enough; this is sinful. But these things I do but touch upon.

Object of your mercy. Such a man is my enemy, shall I do good to him? Prove.
25.21, 22. Nec ita clauden i est res familiaris, ut eam benignitas aperire non
possit, nec ita reseranda ut pateat omnibus; modus adhibeatur, isque referatur
ad facultates. Cicer. Humanitati dandum non ipsi homini. Arist. Tanquam
homines, non tanquam homini. A. Gel. p. 236. 4. Rule.
Yes, If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat, and if he be thirsty,
give him water to drink; for thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and
the Lord shall reward thee. But such an one is an idle fellow, a common Beggar;
shall I relieve him? The Ancients were so much for mercy, that they are very
high in this point. I will not enlarge upon it: I Will only say this, Here do only
what necessity requires and no more; and what you give to such, give as to the
Nature not as to the man, or give as to the man, not as to the person. It Is
easy to press the duty of mercy, but to determine what must be done either as
to the measure, or as to the object, that is difficult, and every man must here
make the decision himself according to his own judgment and conscience.

Fourthly and lastly: In all your mercy let there be sincerity, cheerfulness,
thankfulness.

First, be sincere in what you do; All your mercy if it be not upon a right
end, is nothing; It Is very hard to keep mercy unstained by Hypocrisy; many are
seeking their own applause, when they seem to act for their brothers good.
Therefore says the Apostle, He that gives let him do it with simplicity. Romans
12.8.
Our Savior in this Sermon obviates the pride and hypocrisy of men in their
acts of merry. Mat. 6.1, etc.
Take heed that ye do not your Alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise
ye have no reward of your Father which is in Heaven. Some are like the Hen,
that cannot lay an Egg but she falls a cackeling; they cannot do something
charitably, but all the Parish, must know it; But thou when thou do Alms,
let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does, That thine Alms my be in
secret; and thy Father which sees in secret, he shall reward thee openly.

Secondly, what you do, do it willingly and cherefully; Let not your money come
from you like fire out of a flint, as though it was forced from you, but let it
flow out like water out of the fountain. 2 Cor. 9.7.
Every man according as he purposes in his Heart, so let him give; not
grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver. God commands not
only the matter, but also the manner of the duty; Deuteronomy. 15.10.
Thou shall surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou
give unto him.

Thirdly let thankefullnesse run thorough all your mercy; Bless God, you are
not the beggar; that you are not the needy man, that you have so much plenty
when others are in so much want; I say be very thankful, that you are the
giver and not the receiver, Acts 20.35.
For It Is a more blessed thing to give then to receive; And that providence
which sets your brother low for the drawing out of his patience, sets you thus
High for the drawing out of your thankefullnesse. Be not wanton, be not
disdainful under your fulness, but rather be very humble and thankful.
Pride and unthankfullnesse will soon make you as poor as others are.

fourth Use shall be for comfort to merciful men. Is not the promise in the
Text sweet, Hos. 10.12.
that is yours. Ye sow in mercy and you shall reap in mercy; your bowels are
enlarged to men, the bowels of God are enlarged toward you. I speak to some
I know, who do sincerely and conscientiously lay out of their plenty to the
poor; if they see a distressed creature, especially if they see a distressed
Saint, they cannot hold their hands from mercy; Go on thus doing, and know, You
shall obtain mercy; Mal. 3.16.
God keeps a book of remembrance for all your disbursements to the poor. Heb.
6.10.
He is not unrighteous to forget your labor of Love. How sweet will that
sentence be at the great day, Come ye blessed of my Father, Matthew. 25 34.
inherit the kingdom prepared for you. How many hearts do you rejoice now, and
how will God fill you brim full with joy in the day of your Account. Say not
it is but little you can do. The Widows mite was accepted. Mark 12.43. Matthew.
10.42. Non quanto sed ex quantu^ Cypr. (...). Chrysest. 2 Cor. 8.12.
A cup of cold water shall be rewarded. It Is not how much, but out of how much,
that God looks at: it is not the quantity, but the sincerity that pleases God.
If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has,
and not according to that he has not. You are of all men most ready to give,
and most backward to take the comfort of your giving. Oh, that I might prevail
with Muckworms to be more bountiful; and oh that I might prevail with them that
are merciful, to be more cheerful: Do not you despise that mercy, which pleases
God, and refreshes so many poor creatures: Forget all in a way of merit, but
yet take the comfort of what you do in a way of duty. There Is a time coming,
when you shall stand in more need of mercy from God, then any poor creature
here can stand in need of mercy from you; then you shall have it: Is not your
condition good? Mercy from God is the sum of all your desires, you shall find
it in great abundance for your mercy to your Brethren. And yet let me tell you,
you are come up to that which is higher then all this; To give your money to the
poor is much, 2 Cor. 8.5.
but you have given your selves to the Lord, that is a great deal more. What
have you left your selves? your goods are given to the poor, your selves are
given to God; what have you more to give? Be of good comfort, you give your All
to God, and he will give his All to you.

for the poor, let me now speak a word to the poor. The Sermon that I have
preached will please you very well, for you love to hear of the Duty of the
Rich, but you care not to hear of your own. Rich men must be merciful, that
you like well, you hope to be the better for it in outward things; 2 Thessalonians.
3.10.
He that will not wot work let him not eat, was the Apostles command: Idleness
and Laziness is the sin of many that are in want; if they would but work they
might eat their own bread, 8^ 12.
and not be chargeable to any. Whence is it that we have so many Vagrants and
Beggars amongst us? Ephesians. 4.28.
Whence? It Is from Idleness; They go from house to house, and are supplied by
the mercy of others, and this slothful life pleases them very well: There are
others will take a little pains, but when they have got a little money,
presently they go to an Alehouse and there drink it away, and so their wives
and children may starve, if they be not relieved. These are base wretches, and
I beg no mercy for such, but what (as I said before) absolute necessity does
require. Severity to these, either to make them to take pains, Benefacta male
locata, malefacta arbitror. Ennii dictum. Commended by Tully, l 2. de Offic.
Severity to these, either to make them to take pains, or to let them be
pinched under their necessities, is the best mercy for them. God never enjoined
mercy to encourage idleness, but to support weakness. And therefore this is
the first thing; you that are poor, if you have no Calling put your selves into
one, if you have a Calling, walk in it with all diligence and honesty, and then
see if God does not raise up friends to help you.

humbly, and civilly, and respectfully to the rich. To be poor and saucy too is
a very unlovely thing. Mercy is a debt to you, honor and due respect is a debt
from you; which is held out not only by the light of Scripture, but by the very
light of Nature.

right manner, and upon right principles. Do not go and tell the rich, there
ought to be a parity, and why should they have so much, and you so little? for
God has made a difference in the persons of the world, in the things of the
world, and to level persons and possessions is directly contrary to the order
and institution of God. Do not go to set up a community, upon the mistaking of
that in the Apostles days, when all things were common; Acts 2.44.
for the breaking up of the enclosure of property is sinful, and tends to all
confusion and cruelty. Do not go to the rich, and impudently demand relief from
them; Prove. 18.23.
it is your due, but yet the poor must use entreaties. Importunity is tolerable,
but impudence is loathsome.

be ye merciful to them. There Is mercy lying upon the poor as well as upon the
rich. Do they open their hands to you, do you go to God in prayer and open your
hearts for them; Charity they give to you, you must return prayer to them; Lord
such a man is good to me, be thou good to him, and requite him all his love
sevenfold into his own bosom. This is the best expression of your
thankefullnesse, and the best way to have their mercy yet to run out more
freely upon you.

curse and swear and fret at them, (as two many profanely do) but quietly
wait tell God incline their hearts to show favor to you.

be not ye unmercifull to your own souls. Though you be very low, do not sin;
put not forth your hands to steal, Prove. 30.9.
do not go to help your selves by any indirect ways, (which is the Devils
temptation to the poor;) do not fret and murmare at the providence of God; Do
not neglect your eternal salvation; This is to be unmercifull to your own
souls. Whatever others do for the body, do you mind the soul. Mat. 5.3.
Are you poor in estate, be also poor in spirit? Are you poor in this world, be
rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom? James 2.5.
So be, and so live, that whatever becomes of you for the mercy of men here you
may inherit the mercy of God hereafter unto all eternity.

FINIS.
Page 4. line 7. read rotten for written.


