IVSTICIA PRESIIGIOSA, OR IVDGES TVRNED IVGLERS.

Supplicating for the common good, the House of Commons in Parliament, against
a greevance, none more common by contempt of their just Order, and for
vindication of their Justice, and raduced by these desperate Malignants into
Injustice, and despicable imposture, by color of executing such Order, whereof
there will need no other Constat then their own Records, digested into eight
Article, of Impeachment. In this Petition annexed.

Discite Iusticiam moniti, etc. LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDC. XLIIII.

Burgo. de Southwarke.
The Inn called the Wallnut-Tree, the third part of the The Subject of his
jagling.
16. houses called the Wallnut Tree, held in Capite by Knights service.

CVtberd Beeston in 22 Eliz. seized in feesimple of these The Title
houses Devised 2. parts thereof into 3. parts to be divided to George Ward in
Fee upon condition for charitable uses, leaving the third part to descend to
Agnes Brook his heir general, who in 26. Eliz. by fine and conveyance
assured her 3. part in fee expectant upon her decea^e to Robert Smith the
elder, and Frances his Wife, whereby this third part is s^tled.

Cutberd Ward Son and heir of George Ward the Devisee entered into the 2.
parts, and in 16. IAC, died leaving srew. his his sister and heir now wife of
Richard Cosford.

Agnes Brook, Beestons heir entered into the 2 parts for breach of the
condition, and 14. IAC. dyed without heir, whereby the 2. parts escheated to
His Majesty, who emised the same for 48. years to Arthur Yorth, who together
with Robert Smith Son and heir of Robert Smith the elder, and Frances his
wife were Tenants in common of their said respective parts, upon their said
several Titles, until Cosford by color of his Title to the two parts, has
outed the petitoner Smith from his third part in Midsummer Term was
twelvemonth by illegal proceeding in the Exchequer, in a suit for the two
parts between the said Cosford and Yorth, wher^unto the Petitioner neither was
party, no^ his third part in question, as by the proceedings in particular here
related appear.

Justicia Prestigiosa, OR, Judges turned Iuglers. To the Honorable Assembly of
the COMMONS HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT.
Aeneid Et vacat Annals Anglorum audire laborum.


The humble (...) of Robert Smith tending to Refo^^ation of a grievance so
public that (...) King nor Subject having possessions but are concerned
therein, not containing matter of Law to amuse this Honorable Assembly, but
(...) and juggling demonstrable by a Record of division of sixteen Houses by
Commission of the Court of Exchequer, against Sir (...) Davenport Knight, Lord
chief Baron, Baron Trever, and Baron (...), of the said Court, Richard Co^ford
and his Councillors, whereby the third part of the Houses being the
petitioners inheritance divided from the other two par^^ of the said sixteen
houses, and as a third part so enjoyed these ten years (...), and not claimed
by any; is ^^oducted from the Petitioner, and In return natura not to be found.

Showing that the Petitioner being seized in Fee, of the third part of these
sixteen Houses into three parts to be divided, called the Wall Nuttree in
Sotthworke, as Tenant in Common with Arthur Torth, His Majesty's Lessee of the
other two parts, one Richard Cosford in 2. Car. exhibited his English Bill into
the Exchequer against the said Yorth, thereby claimeing in right of his Wife
the two parts, and questioning the validity of an inquisition, whereby his
Majesty was entitled to the two parts: and because (...) Writ of partition lay
in the King^ case obtained Or^er 18. Movemb. 7. Car, for a Commission by a Jury
impannelled in due form of Law, to set our and divide these 16. houses in
three equal parts, whereby 15. of them were set out for his Majesty's two
parts, and the sixteenth and ^ast house in the deviso^ named the Wall-Nu^tree,
in the Tenure of Robert Willmott, of 35. l. yearly Rent was set out for the
third part of the said sixteen houses, as by the Com. returned by the
Commissioners, and Jury of Record, in the (...).

That 2d Iunij 11 Car. the Court upon full hearing, having discovered The
proceedings, or Iu^gling.
a pract^co in Cosford and his Co^ncell: for that C^sf^rd by Order of 31. Ian.
5. Car: (...) barred to proc^ed or qu^stion the said Inquisition, did not
witstanding 18. Nov. 7. Car: being two years after, upon wrong in^orming the
Court by his Council, that he only claymed the third part of the said 1^.
houses, and the defendant the said other two parts obtain Order for setting the
said 15. houses, as the two parts so divided in the defendant, and the said
Messageth third part in him the said Go^ford, whereby the Petitioner no party
to the suit, nor his said third part questioned, was not with (...) by
Injunction of the Court owted for three years, from the said Message his third
part. Ordered upon the said 2d of June, 11. Car: that the Petitioner should be
forthwith restored to the said third part, of the said 16. houses, and to the
(...) profits thereof, wrongfully withheld by Carford, by color of such
Injunction, notwithstanding any fo^mer Order, and in pursuance of that Order,
C^sford by a relative Order of 6. (...) 12, Car: stood committed for breach of
the said final Order, of 2. Iuni^, 11. Car: and until he yielded obedience
thereunto.

That (...) Order, the Petitioner was by another (...) Order (...) 14 (...),
(...) Car: restored to the said Message his third part, by an Injunction to the
Sheriff, which having (...) quietly seven years, and probably presuming of no
farther (...), by like practices did improve it by building to the double (...)
of the other (...) part (...) Cosford about the beginning of this Parliament,
or (...) for the two parts, (...) (as by the (...) appeared) (...) another like
ow^er of the Petition from the said Message, upon his said claim, to the said
two parts in his Petition to this Honorable Assembly, having obtained some
opinion or Resolve of this house, inabling him to prosecute for trial of his
Right to the said two parts at Common law, and thereupon two deriveative Orders
of the Exch^quer upon his old Bill, the one of 8. Iulij 17. Car: the other of
1. Febr. 17. Car: for him to seal a Lease upon the two parts for trial of his
Title, in that Court by an Ejectment, whereunto the Defendants were to appear
gratis and plea^, the said Cosford in abus^ and contempt of both Cour^s and
Order thereof, did not seal such Lease upon any the said fifteen houses the
two parts, as by both Courts he to stood ordered, (...) upon the said Message,
the third part so divided restored and improved by the Petitioner, then in
possession of the said Willmott, Tenant of all the 16 houses the three parts.
And in Hillary Term was two year having declared in the said Court in the
name of his Loss. Banfield against the said Willmott so handled the matter
between them, by collution for their own ends, to place the trial upon a
wrong house, that albeit, by neither of th^se Orders, nor any other Order or
Process, Wilmott was not bound either to appear or plead to such action, yet
both appeared gratis, and by color of the said Orders pleaded thereunto, and
so farther proceeded that in the beginning of Midsummer Term then next
following, by color of a Judgment had in that Action, the said Wilmott was
ev^^ed, and the said Lessee of Cofford put (...) possession by the sheriff,
this Petitioner thus being the second time outed from the said Message, and so
remaining to his damage of 200. marks.

Further showing that before any trial by such contempt and collusion the
Petitioner in prevention of this last Ow^er in March was two years, caused
C^sforid to be apprehended by the Warden of the Fleet, by force of the said
Order, of 6 (...) 12. Car: until he yielded obedience to the said final Order
of 2d. 11 Car and permited the Petitioners quier, enjoying the said Message,
and payment of the said mean profits, but being brought by Heb-Corpus before
Baron Weston, was by him (...) larged upon his bond to appears in Faster Term
then next, at which time upon his appearance he was discharged without any
obedience to the said final Order, or any other cause appearing in the said
Order of discharge, of 29. Apr. 18 Car:

That in farther prevention of the said last ow^er, and diverse 29 Apr: 18. Car.
days before the trial, the Petitioner moved the Barons in C^urt for
Recommitment of Casford, until he yielded obedience to the said final Order
of 2d. Iunij. But the Barons, averring point blanck contrary to the said Record
of Devision, that that the ^ryall was for the two parts 13. Maij 18. Car.
Ordered the said trial to proceed upon the then next Friday, whereby the
Petitioner was so owted again from the said message his third part. 13 Maii.
18. Car.


Whereby it appears that by these two several contempts, and abuses of both
Courts by the Parties to this suit upon a Bill of 20. years antiquite
exhibited for the two parts but never proceeded to trial, or ^^all decree;
that the Petitioner no party to the suit, nor his third part ever questioned in
either Court, yet by contempt and abuse of both Courts and Orders aforesaid,
has to the high dishonor of both Courts by imposture of the Barons evidenced
by the said Devision, the only Liber ^udex of the parts, been thus often turned
from a Tenant in Common, to a Tenant in several, and to no Tenant at all.

The offenses charged for which the said Barons hereby appear worthy to be
censured are;
FIrst for arrogating to themselves Iu^licature of Land not within the
jurisdiction of that Court, to hold plea being no part of His Majesty's Revenew
but the Petitioners inheritance, and so adjudged by them as appears by the
said final order of 2 Iuvij.

2. For evi^ting him by that order of 18. Nov. 7 Car. upon bare information of
Council not presidented by any other Court of Justice.

3. For twice evicting him from Land not in question before them.

4. For evicting him being no party to the suite.

5. For enlarging privately a Deliuquent committed for contempt of an equitabl^
Order by themsel^es in open Count upon full hearing by a Common Law of Haib.
Corpus, and afterward discharging him as aforesaid. not unlikely that
incong^uous Painter in Horace, Humano capiti etc.

6. For their bold and untrue averment of the parts contrary to the said
devision, and whereupon the Order of 13. Maii 18. Car. for the second onster
was grounded.

7. For evicting the Petitioner the second time by color of the said Resolve
of Parliament made thereby a stall for corruption and injustice.

8. Lastly ejucting him by the said Order 13. May 18 Car. from that Messages as
part of the two parts whereunto by the said finell Order of 2d. June, they had
formerly restored him as the third part in one and the same devision, Secum
dissidentes, by a Mod, Ajun^ modo negant.

The damages sustained by wilful ruins and felling away the very P^sts and
materials by Cofford during the three years, he held the Inn after the first
onster. -- 300 l.

The mean profits for those three years after the rate in the division of 35
l. yearly Rent ordered by the said final Order of 2d. Inn, to be restored --
105 l.

The mean profits since the last owster for a year and quarter at 65 l. Per
aunum -- 080 l.

The charges unnecessarily expended in a sui^e of fifteen years continuance
in matter and fair practice so little concerning the Petitioner. -- 500 l.

His most humble prayer for himself is that according to that just Order of
2d. Inn. (whereto no exception has been taken) he man be restored to the said
Message with the said damages, and costs wherein if Cofford prove insolra^t,
that by reason of such illegal enlargement ^(...)^ said Barons, as Par^icipes
(...), may be responsall and that however Coffords Co^^ell by impu^ity thus
licenc^ate in their wrong information and by Affid appropria^i^g the cause,
though also Barons in expectation may escape the sword of Justice, yet that the
plaintiff termed by Master Attorney, Noy cerdo negotiator, or Cobbler of the
Wall, Nutt-Tree, who for refusing a Dicker of Leather for his Tittle to the two
parts, was thought fit to be banished, may now be banished for making no better
use of his Bill.

And how ever Iuridicis erebo fisco fas vivere rapto, may perhaps seem to
Gent. of the long Robe false or scandalous, yet upon Oyer of these Records, it
will fall out too true, that these three met upon this division of three where
wrong informing the Court by the Lawyers, belying the Innocent Record by the
Iu^ges; The Devil Moderator so well agreed the case between them, that this
Naboth was thus twice disseized by a Court of Justice.

And certainly Right Honorable if Ex prescripto Mosaico, the judgments of
men be the judgemen^s of God, and Munera o^^acant (...); be po^itive against
these (...), thus twice lost in premo numero imparium, and if dissolution of
States and injustice are so (...), that because Omnia Roma venalia, Iugu^th in
Salust truly denounced against that great Mistress of the world, Vrbem ci^o
p^ritu^am, a sufficient Caveat for Devisis or be Brita^^ against their fel^^
devisions and distractions, h^d the Masaicall lapidacon Perstian excoriation,
the Roman Insuision, or (...) exocculation, for such occaecation been put in
execution against our Municipall Scarlets lately noted, more licenciate then
Civillians, who although also wading in these lay stalls of Augeus (silly men)
in their sentences never dared traduction of Justice beyond matters opineable,
whereas those bold Barons in defiance of God and Nature throwing at no less
the^ all, thus have with their Religion (...) the visuall sense, becoming
thereby Stocks, and Subjects of scorn to, Martialls mugiles Raphanique,
Nominall Actors of injustice in Mercurius Britannicus, and by Bishop Hall,
Cambrobritanous Owen, and indeed by every weltch Epignani^^st, expanded the
only persons, who by their devisions make all their Terms Hillary, although to
the ruin and dishonor of this otherwise most fl^^rishing State, wherein how
deeply they have offende^^ both divine and humane Laws, and for the common
good what exemplary punishment shall be thought fit and agreeable with their
demerits, the Petitioner humbly leaves to the high wisdom of this most
Honorable Assembly; For whom he will pray.

In libera civitate Augustus voluit etiam linguas esse liberas.
FINIS.

