NINETEEN ARGUMENTS, PROVING CIRCUMCISION NO Seal of the Covenant of Grace.

WHEREUNTO, Is annexed; The unlawfulness of Infants Baptism upon that ground.

Written by R. J.

GAL. 5.2, 3.6. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing.

For I testify again to every man that is Circumcised, that he is a debtor to
do the whole Law.

For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by love.

ROMANS 2.26, 27. Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the
Law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for Circumcision?

And shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge
thee, who by the letter, and circumcision do transgress the Law?

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1645.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader;
THe Author of this Treatise (Mr. R. I.) being beyond Seas, and some friends
of his, and the Truth, deeming these Arguments of his to be solid, and
conducing to propagate the Truth, the Author being known to be learned, J have
adventured (though without his knowledge) to make them public. The Copy being
Transcribed by a bad Scribe, so that there are sundry mis-spellings and
oversights.

J shall desire thee with a favorable eye to bear with. Jf delay might not
have brought in danger, J should have sent forth this, and the other Treatises
in more exactness; But thou must remember we come out of Egypt in haste.

Farewell. Thine C. B.

Nineteen Arguments, Proving Circumcision no Seal of the Covenant of GRACE.
BEcause that of CHAMIERUS is acknowledged, Sacramentorum nulla necessitas nisi
ex iustitutione Divina; There is no necessity of the Sacrament, but by Divine
Institution: Some therefore observing how Christ's institution of Baptism,
Matthew. 28. Mark. 16. yeildeth no foundation for the Dipping of Infants, but
imployeth an absolute prohibition of any such practice; whereby the Ordinance
is profaned in a prodigal abuse, without, and against the will of the
Testatour; and have ceased upon that Law of Circumcision, Ge^. 17.10.11 (which
is styled elsewhere in the Law of Moses, Joh. 7.23.) as the best foundation for
besprinkling of Babes, in an Apish imitation of that Gospel-dipping, which was
instituted by our Savior, for the more effectual ingrafting of Believers into
his own death: And the rather do they fasten upon it; Because finding it to be
a seal of that Promise which was made to Abraham and his seed, and denying that
Promise to be a Covenant of Grace and remission of sins, they conclude it
belongs in like manner, to all Believers of the Gentiles, and to their
children; who are to have the same Seal unto them by Baptism (as they call it)
which came in the Rome of Circumcision, as they contend. To this purpose, Blake
page 14. viz. Upon this ground, Infants under the Law were to be circumcised,
and upon the same ground, are Infants now to be baptized, etc. Again, what can
Baptism sign and seal, but the righteousness of Faith? This Circumcision did
sign and seal to Abraham and his posterity, etc.

So CHIDLEY. Baptism being come in the room, etc. Seals up one and the same
Covenant of life: And therefore as Circumcision, etc. so Baptism is to be
administered upon Infants of Believers. Chidley page 39. If therefore it be
proved that Circumcision did not seal the promise or Covenant of Grace, and
Remission of sins; then this their foundation is very false and fantastical.

viz. Not to be administered to some evidently within the Covenant of Grace, as
to LOT, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. And yet necessarily to be administered to others who were
not within the covenant of Grace, and known to be so, as to Ishmael, etc. Joh.
5.6, 7, 8. Jer. 7.25, 26. Therefore Circumcision cannot be the Seal of the
Covenant of Grace, and Remission of sins.





But Circumcision binds unto the Law, Gal. 5.3. And becomes altogether
unprofitable in a man not keeping the Law, Romans 2.25. Therefore Circumcision
cannot be the Seal of the same Covenant with Baptism; which apparently
discovers all such Obligations and conditions: As appears by Paul's
Epistles, exhorting unto duty from the benefit received; but never urging to
the keeping of the Law, as a condition necessarily required; that we may hold
or reap the benefit of the Covenant. The proposition will appear more clearly,
if you examine Acts 13.39. Where any Idiot may observe, that if Circumcision
had sealed the same promise of Grace and Remission of sins, whereby all that
believe are justified (as Dipping does) then that assertion of the Apostle had
been false; viz. From which ye could not be justified from the Law of Moses:
For seeing they were circumcised by the authority of that Law, Joh. 7.23. It
must needs follow (according unto these men) that by the true sense and right
use of Circumcision, they might have been thereby justified, as well as by
faith in that Gospell-promise, which there he largely opens, Acts 13.32,
33.38. Forasmuch as the Righteousness of God had been revealed in both, for
the salvation of every Believer; as Paul speaks, Romans 1.16, 17.



But the Apostle would not call God to record a lie, Acts 22.26. And yet he
never declares this either to Jews or Gentiles. And therefore it can be no
Seal of the Covenant of Grace and Remission of sins.

It may be, some juggling Artist, will endeavor to deny the latter part of the
Assumption; by assuring the contrary by Col. 2.11, 12.

The Apostle does not there so much as once intimate, Answer.
that Circumcision was an old Seal of the Covenant of Grace or that Baptism
came in the Rome of it: But his scope is, to arm them against the undermining
of Philosophy, or worldly Elements, verse. 8. Whereof Circumcision is one, Gal.
4.3. And this he does, by showing how complete and perfect they were in Christ,
verse. 9, 10. So that they needed not to run once to any rudiments of the world,
for their further perfection; seeing they had the body and substance of all
these shadows, by being buried by Dipping into the death of Christ, verse. 12,
13, 14. 16, 17.19, 20, 21. Now what consequence is there, to say; Believers
being buried with Christ by Dipping, have the very substance of all which was
in any wise signified, or represented by Jewish shadows; And therefore are
thereby exempted from all such Ordinances, concerning meat, drink, or
holidays, etc. verse. 14.20. Ergo, These shadows did seal the Covenant of
Grace and Remission of sins, to all that were under them: Which is most false.
For diverse things under the Law have been significant, which yet did not seal
the Covenant of Grace to any soul in particular. And for Circumcision, though
the Apostle here, verse. 11. As the Prophet elsewhere, Jer. 4.4. In doctrine or
exhortation, have used such a spiritual Allegory, as alludeth to the carnal
right; yet neither of them (I think) do speak of the carnal right as a proper
sign peculiarly instituted, to signify the spiritual Circumcision: And
though it were declared a sign, that God does circumcise our hearts (as you
see the Sabbath in a sense little different, Ezekiel. 20.20) yet that does not
prove it a Seal of that Covenant of Grace, whereby our hearts come to be
circumcised, with the Circumcision made without hands, Jer. 31.33, 34. As
Dipping is declared to be, etc. But the next will make this more evident.



But the Apostle has constantly inculcated it, enmity to the Covenant of
Free Grace, etc. Phil. 3.2. With Gal. 5.2. With chap. 2. verse. 3, 4. The
nullity of it also, etc. Gal. 6.15. 1 Cor. 7.19. Without any insinuation of its
ancient right use, etc. Ergo, it was never any Seal of the Covenant of Free
Grace and Remission of sins, etc.

Melchisedech, etc. Not be called after the Order of Aron; where he takes it
for granted, that in such matters, even God himself multiplieth nothing without
necessity.

The Assumption is as evident. Assump.
For if Circumcision were a Seal of the same Covenant of Grace and remission of
sins, to all Believers and their Infants; (which Dipping confirms to those
who rightly receive it: Then what needed those who had the Covenant of Grace
already sealed unto them by Circumcision, but especially their Infants (as
those fond opinionists do groundlesly affirm) be sealed again by Dipping, or
Baptizing, seeing the former Seal left a visible or practical sign and
Character in the flesh? Whereas the latter of Baptism, leaves no impression
at all, but proves unto Infants an unprofitable Seal, being unto them
afterward a thing much more uncertain, then the promise it seals; nay why
did not Peter represent unto those nricked penitenciaries, Acts 2.7. The right
use of the old seal for their present consolation, but peremptorily point them
to the use of a new seal, without acquainting them at all with any abolition of
the old; had they been seals of one and the same Covenant, even one and the
same Sacrament, but only for change of the Element, as some with sottish
confidence do aver, then how could he without rashness in such a trouble of
their spirits, urge them unto a needles innovation? Nay how did he so slight
the former, as to take no notice of both their confines, nor make them perceive
the passage from the one to the other, but simply sway their conscience before
he dye, settle or satisfy their judgments.

Abraham and his seed, should now abrogate the use of Circumcission, whereby it
was sealed, and upon this erronions supposall, that the Covenant of Genesis 17.
sealed by Circumcision was all one with Genesis 12.3. The Apostle had not omitted
(according to his duty and usual Custom, 2 Timothy 25. (Cor. 9.19) By gentle
remonstrance, to give them full satisfaction, concerning the abolition of the
old seal, and the introduction of the new, without any such passionate clamor
against the use of circumcision as pernicious, and destructive to the Gospel
which he taught Gall. 2, 17, 18. with Gall. 5.10.

But the spirit does use the promise of Grace and remission of sins as the best
argument to overthrow the Doctrine of circumcision and the practice of it, as
does appear by Paul's argument, Assum.
Gal. 3 8, 9, 10. 13, 14. with Genesis 12.3. His argument is thus, if the free
promise of blessing by remission of sins be received by faith, then the
practice of Circumcision is pernicious, which by binding unto the Law, Gall.
5.3. Brings under the curse, Gall. 3.10. To which those our opinionists would
have replied; No Paul, not so, for we hold circumcision to be or to have
beeen, a seal of that blessing or righteousness, which is by says: And if
so; then ought Paul to have showed the abolition, and not to have so manifestly
impunged the very nature and condition of it, as pernitiously opposite to the
very Gospell-promise every where; so that he makes that of Genesis 22.18. To be
an argument also against the doctrine, and use of Circumcision, as the
understanding may observe from Gall. 3.16.18.25. with Cor. 4.3.

Ergo, the promise of bless^dness^ by remission of sins. Genesis 12.3. Is far
different from that Covenant of Genesis 17.7.8. Which was sealed by Circumcision.

Abraham and his seed, and now by the faithful and their seed, is false
against the Scripture: but this opinion makes even the spiritual blessings
Ephesians. 1.3. to be holden in fee-taile by etc. therefore it is a false
Commandment against the Scripture, the proposition is proved.

Abraham, John 1.12.13. Neither will it avail them to say as Mr. Perkin^ on
Gal. 2. That a man is two ways considerable either as a son of Adam and so
he begets Children of wrath, or as a believer, and so his faith intitleth
his seed also to the same heavenly inheritance, by virtue of the promise. Genesis
17.

No man does beget children as a believer, Answ.
for then every believer even the Eunuch. Acts 8. Should have done so, but man
propagate^ only as the son of Adam, and if this promise concern believers as
begetting Children. Then though the Children be unlawfully begotten, even
bastard borne, to no earthly Inheritance, by our common Law* yet through their
parents Faith, and the promise they are borne to, an heavenly Inheritance, from
the which they cannot fall but by actual infidelity or disobedience, and so
stand in no need of the se^le especially of Baptism, which is mearely
theoreticall or doctrinall in the very form and Circumstance of it, till they
be able to understand, to say nothing that this contradicts the very text
Romans 9 8. Where he makes a spiritual use of that tipicall singling out the
seed of Isack. for the land of Canaan, viz. the Children of the flesh are not
the Children of God, except they be by the word of promise begotten
spiritually, as Isack was by promise borne carnally Gall. 4.28, 29 Neither can
any with color of reason contend, that God by his Testament thus bequeatheth
and sealleth this blessing unto them that they shall admit and receive with
consent unto all thankful acknowledgement and return, then it is theirs till
they do reject it; and by consequence, the spiritual blessing descend upon
the seed of the Faith^ull, dying before years of discretion, after the manner
of temporal lands holden in a Fee-taile.

That which raises the preferment of the Jew far above the spirits intimation,
answering to the very question concerning the profit of Circumcision: David
himself con^esseth: Psalm. 147.19, 20. by which means also the fi^^t proffer
of Grace was made unto them, Luke 24.46, 47. with Act. 13.46. But all this does
not to the born Jews seal the Covenant of Grace, no more then our having of
the Scriptures, does seal Remission of sins to every soul now born in England;
whereas the advantage of the Jew, and p^ofi^ of Circumcision, by this opinion
should have been incomparab^e; and not to be paralleld by any outward
privildge: in that all born Jews dying before the same or after Circumcision,
were deified and assuredly saved. And so that which the Scripture has hid in
God with some appearance of the general hope for consolation of parents, should
have been confirmed unto them by particular assurance.

Therefore this opinion must needs be a false and erroneous conception forced
upon the Scripture, etc.

Paul's beleiving wife have an Idolatrous husband, which will not suffer the
Infants to be dipped, the Covenant of Grace is disanulled to them both: And
whether she ought to kill her child, let them determine, who plead for bloody
violence to be inflicted on some by the au^hrity of Moses his Testament Pact.
But the Covenant of Grace is no such, but a mere Testament, bequeathing freely
matter of benefit, to all who receive; and admit it by Faith only: Therefore
Circumcision cannot be a seal of that Covenant of Grace.

That which necessarily imployeth falling from Grace, Argum.
these men cannot deny to be a false and wicked opinion.

But this conceit, Assump.
etc. necessarily implies falling from grace; for either it belongs to them
in general, viz. If they will believe it, and so the promise of remission of
sins belongs to every man alive, Mark 16.15. or it appertains to them and
their children in special: till by actual unbeleise, and disobedience, they
fall away and reject it. And so if there be no falling away, all their nation
as well as ours, must needs have been saved. Ergo, these men cannot deny it to
be a false wicked opinion, Romans 9.27. The assumption is more evident amongst
us, where all are dipped, by virtue of that Covenant, Genesis 17. because they are
Abraham's seed; which yet they cannot be, except they be born christians: Gal.
3.29. neither young nor old can be Abraham's seeds, except they be Christ's first.

If the Covenant of Grace and Remission of sins was never intailed upon any man
and his seed,

But antecedent, Assump.
if true that the Covenant of Grace was never intayled, etc. seeing it always
relates unto faith only in all partakers, Genesis 12.3. with Gal. 3.8, 9. Heb. 4.
Acts 27.17, 18. Romans 3.25. Romans 4.22, 23.24. Heb. 3.14. Now by these men's
fantasy, they were made partakers of Christ by Jewish generation, and
circumcision; as their own Infants are supposed to be by birth and baptism:
whereas the Scriptures witnesses, no promise of Grace and Remission of sins,
but only to the personal beleivers.

If here any object, Acts 10.43.
Acts 2.39.

I answer, that only concerns the promise of the spirit; which was revealed
by Joel, cap. 2.28. and does follow the receivall of the Gospel: Ephesians. 1.13.
Gal. 3.14. as shall be plainly and clearly proved to any opposite, though it
need no proof; being evident from Peter's whole speech, and the verse preceding
the Text: therefore the consequence is true also, that Circumcision could not
be a seal of the Covenant of Grace.

First that of Paul, Object.
Romans 4.11. where it is styled a seal of the righteousness of Faith.

First, Answ.
it was not given to strengthen the weakness, but to honor the strength of
Abraham's Faith. And therefore does the Apostle, Romans 4. beat them often from the
use of circumcision, as being nothing but a fleshly badge, bearing witness to
the spiritual, eminency of Abraham's faith, he being thereby as it were marked
out for an exemplary pattern to all believers, as father or chief of them.

Those which are but any whit acquainted with the Greek tongue, do know (...)
signifies an exemplary note to make any man or thing illustrious, and (...) is
used in that sense, to enoble by some especial note, to which purpose that may
be pertinent, John 6.27. God the Father is said to seal him, making him
illustrious by all manner of testimonies. Now ponder well that this sign was
not given to him merely, because he was faithful, for then it should have been
unto Noah long before, or at the least to Lot now* as well as to Abraham; much
less was it given in any relation to his weakness* seeing that he was so strong
that he staggered not: Rom 4.20. and therefore not as a seal to confirm, but as
a badge of honor for to credit, as this coherence does conclude; but though it
were a special favor marking out his faith as exemplary, yet its nature and
institution shows that it confirms nothing to him and his seed, but the
land of Canaan: Genesis 13.15. with cap. 17.8, 9, 10. and Psalm. 105.11. and Acts
7.5.8. where all may observe it a seal of a covenant concerning an outward
blessing, Genes. 28.41. distinct from that Gospell-promise, Genes. 12.3. which
is received by Faith only: Gallathians 1.8.9.14. Genesis 15.5, 6. with Romans
4.13.18. Gallathians 3.16.19. Now that Circumcision is no seal of the
righteousness of Faith I will prove it byan unanswerable argument, viz. if
Circumcision bea seal of the righteousness of Faith in their sense, then the
Inheritance comes as well by the Law, as by the Promise; the reason is,
because Circumcision is nothing: and by consequence no seal at all, except a
man keep the Law: Romans 2.25. 1 Cor. 7.19.

But that the Inheritance should any way come by the Law, as by the Promise, is
most contrary to Paul; Romans 4.14. where he makes all concurrence of the Law
inconsistent with Faith, and the Promise, so far as it concerns our
eternal inheritance. And therefore that sense is blasphemously contradictory
to Paul's discourse, and destructive to the pure doctrine of Justification; now
whereas some have conceited that Circumcision* did over and above its ordinary
use, seal to the Jews in general, that Christ should descend of them or their
seed, in whom only Believers should be saved, whether they were circumcised or
nor.

It sealed no such matter at all, so that if there had been no other
Gospell-promise besides, Answ.
Genesis 17. they must have sought salvation in the Law, and by the Law only:
Gallathians 5.3. 1 Corinthians. 7*19. Acts 15.10. Romans 2.25. shows the perfection
of a Believer, buried by dipping into the death of Christ, unto which by
Circumcision they could not aspire unto. The reason of Chamieras, as is most
unworthy the wit and judgment of so learned and voluminous a writer, for (quoth
he) that Covenant whereby God promises to be a God to them and their seed,
must needs be a covenant of grace and remission of sins, because, (as he
thinks) God cannot be so but in Christ only.

It is apparently false, Answ.
Psalm 50.1.8.9. there being diverse relations whereby God is styled the God of
people, besides that of remission of sins through Christ. Thus he is styled
the God of the spirit of all flesh. Numb. 16.22. And as he is styled the
Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10 so why not the God of all men, though not by
remission of sins in Christ but merely in relation ^o some other of his works
or attributes; especially by this typ^call relation wherein he so often calls
them his people, when they were his enemies: and he giving out the bill of
divorce against them. Hos. 4.6. with Mich. 6.3, 4, 5. And had not his outward
covenant in some sense entitled them unto God, they could have been no figure
fit for ensample to the antitype, even the true Israel of God under the new
Testament: Gal. 6.16. Pet 2.9. 1 Cor. 10.6.11. with Jer. 13.11. where you may
note also that those who would make circumcision a figure of dipping, gain
nothing by it for be* sprinkling of Babies; for then it will follow, that as
none were to be circumcised, but the seed of Abraham; with Srangers,
Prosel^^es, and Slaves b^nght with money: so none are to be dipped but those
who believe the doctrine of the Gospel, Mark 16.17. or else prosesse the same
Faith. And as the seed of Isaac and of Jacob only were called to inhe^^t in
Canaan, so those only who have believed through grace, Acts 18.27. as the
Eunuch, Acts 8.38. and not such as Simon Maguc, Acts 8 13. who counterfeit the
same confession, shall inherit the heavenly Canaan. I hope the godly wise will
conceive, that though the Covenant were the same, and the Sacrament also; but
only for change of the Element (as the Baby sp^inklers bear people in hand) so
authorizing the profane abominable abuse of Zaedobiprisme, by the command for
circumcision; yet upon that c^nceit (if it were granted) no such conclusion can
truly be drawn to the absolute dishonor of Christ, and contradiction of his
express Will and Testament. But that foundation being rotten and false, then
all the building must fall. And I doubt not but all men of apprehension will
easily discern from the precedent arguments, how the Apostle in all his
disputations against circumcision yields it. And by consequence that covenant
of Genesis the 17. As a privilege pecultar to the natural seed of Abraham,
Romans 2.17 25. the chiesest profit whereof was their, being born and bred under
the Oracles of God, Romans 3.1.2.

But that spiritual (so different from the carnal) Genesis 17. Acts 7. Covenant
of blessing or righteousness by remission of sins, Genesis 12.3. with cap. 15.6.
Paul alleges and proves promiscuously, or without difference, Romans 3.21,
22, 23, 24, 25. appertaining unto the uncircumcised also, Rom, 4.3.4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12. wherein he leaves Abraham no seed but spiritual, Gal 3.7,
8.29. acknowledging neither natural Jew nor son of Abraham, but only those
who are made so by the will of God through the word of truth, John 1.12, 13.
with James 1.10. compared with Romans 2.28, 29. Luke 19.9. And as the Scripture
vehemently rejects all concurrence of works in Justification so does it as
plainly abtenounce all Birth privilege: John 1.13. Ephesians. 2. John 3.5.6. as no
way intitling to, much less in eressing in the benefit of the covenant of
grace, or promise of salvation. Now to convince any considerate man of this,
there is one or two argument truly, a Podescticall and as unanswerable as any
of the former.



The undeniable reason of this Proposition is, from a principal granted by
all, who have any light either of natural reason or dialect call learning;
oppotsia non possunt eidem attribui, secundum idem, ad idem, codem tempore;
things opposite: viz. to seal righteousness and forgiveness of sins, and
to bind unto the Law, Gal. 5.3. can never be attributed to one and the same
thing; as namely circumcision, Secundem eidem: in respect of one and the same
part, viz. the spirit or conscience; ad idem: in relation to one and the same
persons, they are therefore Fathers, eodem. tempore at one and the same time;
whether after the Law, or under it.

But circumcision in its true nature and use, Assunsp.
was an intolerable yoke both to the Jews, and their fore* fathers. Acts
15.10. Ergo, it could never be in its true nature and use, any seal of
righteousness, or of the covenant of grace, or remission of sins; for then it
should be matter of benefit, and not matter of burden, which the Scripture
sets in opposition incompatible; making them to be really, and essentially
different. For what is by its own nature a burden or bondage to the spirit, is
formally different from that which is a matter of pu^e liberty and benefit to
the spirit; as the seal of righteousness is, and must always be, Romans
6.4.14, 15. compared with Romans 7.1.4.5*6.

to believers, the only thing whereby boasting was excluded; then that Covenant
of Genesis 17. cannot be the same with that new Testament of grace and remission
of sins, whereof Christ is the mediator, Heb. 8.

For then circumcision should not have occasioned (as Paul grants) it did,
Reason.
boasting, but have utterly disanulled all disdain toward the uncircumcised;
as the law of faith, and covenant of grace, are declared to do: Acts 10.15.28.
with cap. 15.9. where Peter affirms circumcision to make such a difference,
as the law of faith does destroy, abolish, and disanull; Romans 3, 27.

But the covenant or law of circumcision, Assump.
was the only thing whereby boasting was occasioned, Romans 2.17.25. with cap. 3
12. and the law of faith the only thing whereby boasting was excluded, Romans 3,
27. Therefore the covenant of Genesis 17. cannot be the same with that covenant
or new Testament, whereof Christ is the Mediator.

If any object that Christ is called the Minister of circumcision, Object.
Romans 15.18.

He was made the servant of circumcision, Answ.
when he was made of a woman, and so made under the law, Gallathians 4.4, 5.
that suffering, Gallathians 3, 13. as a cursed sinner by the imputation of our
iniquities, he might confirm the truth of God, and the promises made to the
Fathers; Genesis 12.3. Acts 13.32. with Hebrews 9.14, 15. Romans 15.8.



But the covenant of Genesis 17. which is ratified by circumcision, Assump.
differs from that of Ier. 31.33, 34. with Heb. 8.6. which is confirmed to
every believer by Baptism. Gallathians 3.17, 27. with Isai 42.6. and Acts 2 38
cap. 22 16 First in the object, for that of Genesis 17. respects the carnal
seed in their generations, verse 7 9. But that Genesis 12 13. and Ier. 31
respects the spiritual seed only; Gallathians 3.7, 8, 9: Secondly in matter
for that of Genesis 17 contains an outward blessing, concerning the
possession of and protection in an earthly inheritance, verse 8. cap. 28.4.
Acts 7.5.6. whereas this Covenant of grace, Isa. 42.6. contains spiritual
blessings only* Ephesians. 13. even Remission of sins; Romans 4.6, 7, 8, 9. the free
donation of an undefiled inheritance following upon the same, Acts 26.18.
Thirdly in the form, for that of Genesis 17. is only Pactum, a certain pact
suspended altogether upon a legal duty or condition, exacted under penalty of
severe temporal punishment, Genesis 17.10, 11, 12, 14. whereas this is
Testamentum, a Testament bequeathing all benefit, Heb. 8.12. but requiring
nothing besides faith which it also begets, Acts 26.18. with cap. 18.27.

Fourthly in their ends, for that of Genesis 17. was together a national Church,
Deuteronomy. 4.34. with v. 37. Ier. 13.11. God has assayed to take unto a nation,
etc. And because he has loved their Fathers, therefore he has chosen their
seed called the Church in the wilderness, Acts 7.38. which people were
carnally or typically holy, Exodus 19.6. with Esai 9.2. Acts 10.28. appointed to
a typical land which God had espied out for them, Ezekiel 20.5, 6. holden under
the carnal rites and typical ordinances imposed on them by way of burden,
till the time of reformation, Heb 9.10. with Gal. 4.9. where circumcision is
reckoned as a beggetly Element, that so they might be a type of figure of every
true visible Church of Christ under this new Testament, Deuteronomy. 7.6. with Ephesians.
1.3.4.

But the end of this Covenant is to gather visible Churches of Christ, which
being begotten by the Gospel, are by dipping entered into the communion of
Saints; Holden by any visible society of believers meeting in one place, as you
may see in the Church of Corinth: Chap. 6.11. with cap. 12, 13. and cap. 11,
20. cap. 14.23. the Churches of Galatia which were after the same manner
begotten, Galathians 4 26.31. And those who are thus begotten, are by dipping
admitted to all the benefits of a visible Communion: Acts 2.41, 42. which
visible Churches through the washing of water and the word, become true
Antitypes really answerable to the nation of the circumcised: and are,
Galathians 6 16 styled the true Israel of God; yea a chosen Generation, and an
holy nation; 1 Pet. 2.9. which being born of the mortal seed, are begotten to
an undefiled inheritance as appears from such places, 1 Peter 2.9. with
chapter 1.23. and 3, 4. Galathians 6.16. Ephesians 5.26, 27. Therefore were
they a figurative people full of types for examples to any Church of the
Gentiles, which had believed through Grace: 1 Corinthians 10 6 with Acts 8.37.

Lastly, they differ in the effect; for that of Genesis 17 depending on
circumcision is a beggarly rudiment, Galathians 4.9. which by binding unto the
Law, Galathians 5.3. gendereth unto bondage only, Gallathians 4 25. never
yielding any ability to perform; whereas that of Jeremiah 31 33, 34 is the
very same with Galathithians 4 26. which following with Grace, gendereth unto
Liberty; Galathians 4 31. from all guilt of sin and legal bondage:
Galathians 5 1. with Hebrews 10 15, 16, 17, 18. unto which the Law of
Circumcisicion engages, yea and this ministers the spirit, Gal. 3.8, 9, 14.
so that every one to whom this Covenant is confirmed by the Ordinance of
dipping according to Christ's Will and Testament ( Non ponenti obicem, as they
say) if he be no hypocrite, then every such person so dipped has truly put on
Christ, Gal. 3.27. is washed from all his sins; justified, and sanctified: Rev.
1.5. with 1 Cor. 6.11. and has some measure of faith. Romans 12.3. according to
the true tenor of that Covenant, which God who cannot he has confirmed in
Christ; so that where there is a lawful subject of Baptism void of hypocrisy,
there is a Jew in heart and spirit, Romans 2 29. to whom according to Gods
purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 19. all the benefits of the new Covenant are
absolutely confirmed by dipping, which is therefore truly called the laver of
Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost; Titus 3.5. being always
(except the subject be unlawful, or an hypocrite) accompanied with renovation
of mind, as appears from Gal. 3.27, 28. with Col 3 17. But though the
subjects of Circumcision be lawful, and without hypocrisy; yet does it not make
him a Jew, in heart and spirit: much less does it absolutely confirm the
benefit of the new Covenant unto him, Romans 2.28. But here we need not require
the subject to be without hypocrisy, for the arrantest and most apparent
hypocrite of the whole nation was a proper lawful subject of that Ordinance of
Circumcis. Ioh. 5.6, 7, 8. compared with that of Ier. 7.25, 26 Ergo, these 2
Covenants of Genesis 17. Ier. 31. are not only really, as some Sophisters grant
and say, but formally and ess^ntiall^ different.

By this last argument any may understand how gross^ly they pervert the words
of the living God, Ier. 23. even of the Lord Jesus Christ, our only God and
Savior; who would have the Commission of Christ, Matthew. 28. Mark 16. to be a
continuation of that Covenant, Genesis 17. by which command only the Ministers of
Christ have power and authority to besprinkle babes, so blasphemonsly exalting
the servant above? his Lord, in making him to supply the effect of Christ Jesus
his Testament, by directing to the due administration of the Ordinance of
dipping, in the house of him who is the Son and only Master; Heb. 3.1, 2,
3.5, 6. where you see verse 5. that Christ was to interpret Moses, but why? or
how Moses should tell us the meaning of Christ's Testam^nt, I could never yet
understand. Again, why did the spirit of Christ which was in Jeremiah, 1 Peter
11, 12* tel^ us of a new Covenant; Ier. 31.33.34. And yet never once insinuate
how it was, but a renovation of the old Covenant. Genesis 17. with a little
alteration in the change of the Element only: viz. dipping for circumcising,
upon which the Apostle Paul never puts himself to business: Gal. cap. 1.
cap. 2. cap. 3. cap 4. cap. 5. cap. 6.17. Though upon his foolish supposall, it
had been the only point requiring his pains for clear proof against the
opposite Jews,

Thirdly, when Christ ascended on high and gave gifts, etc. for the gathering
or instauration of the Saints: Ephesians. 4.8.11, 12. By what Spirit, Reason, or
dialecticall dream, can any conclude that the true Ministers of Christ,
without and against their Masters commission, were obl^ged to make Saints by
besprinkling the babies of all believing Gentiles; by that command of Genesi^
17.9, 10. If after examination we still remain blinded by such a ridiculous
babble, endeavoring to bury the truth, by shuffeling plain things into
difficulty. Then shall I cease to vvonder at those who are so taken with the
vain and fantastical superstitions of Popery, or else be sealed with Mahomets
fopperies.

The Church of Ephesus ^s commended, Rev. 2.2. for trying those that say they
are Apostles, and are not; oh that our Professors would try their Ministers
whether they come in by Scripture rules, and observe Scripture rules and
commands: if they do not they are false Ministers, and liars against the
truth. And to that end let them prove that those doctrines they teach, are the
doctrines that Christ and his Apostles taught and practiced, or they are other
if not contrary; and then see the danger of teaching them, Gal. 1.8, 9. And
that Baptism is a doctrine, see Heb. 6.2. we ought to avoid those that bring
doctrine contrary to that received from Christ and his Apostles, Romans 16.17.18.
we are to contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude verse 3.
Christ bids teach and baptize, Matthew. 28.19. They will baptize, and then teach.
Christ says, he that beleiveth and is baptized, Mark 16.16. They will baptize
and then make them beleeveyrs if they can. Christ says, teaching them to
observe whatsoever I command; Matthew. 28.20. They will observe what is right in
their own eyes, Philip says to the Eunuch desiring to be baptized of him, if
thou beleivest, thou may; Acts 8.37. So faith is required of those that are
to be baptized which children cannot have in an ordinary way: Romans 10. 14.17.
Now children are not capable of being wrought upon by the word, and for any
secret work, secret things belong to God, but things revealed to us and our
children.

See 2 Epist. John v 7. and from v 5.10. v. 11. who now is an Antechrist? the
Papists as well as we confess Christ to become in the flesh, who then deny it?
they that do not set up Jesus the Christ King, Priest, and Prophet of his
Church; will not be ruled by his laws, submit not to his teaching, make him
not the only Priest and sacrifice, these deny Christ to be come in the flesh,
and therein are Antichristian. 1 John 4.3. The Papists deny him in his Priestly
office, and I wish too many others do not in his Prophetical and Kingly
office; see the danger of it, Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19 Acts 3.23. Luke 19.17, It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 12.29.

Oh that the Lord would persuade his people to search the Scriptures
diligently, that they may not hang their religion upon any creature so long as
I did, least they smart so severely for it as I have done; for he will not only
render vengeance to them that know him not, but to them which obey him not; 2
Thessalonians 18. The Lord in mercy awaken his people for Christ his sake, AMEN.

Ergo, That ought not to be; The Minor is thus provided: That which is an
action of Religion performed, and not one jot or tittle of the word requiring
the same, that makes the traditions of men of equal authority with the Law of
God: but the Baptism of Infants, though of believers, is an action of Religion
supposed to be performed, and not one jot or title of the word requiring the
same: Ergo, the Baptism of infants though of believers, makes the traditions
of men of equal authority with the Law of God, and consequently ought in no
wise to be.

Ergo, The Apostles were prohibited from baptizing any that were not first
taught, if the Apostles were prohibited in the negative of Christ's command
touching Baptism from baptizing, any that were not first taught either by
themselves or others, then ought not the infants no not of believers, to be
baptized, because the Apostles or other Ministers could not, nor cannot know
them to be so taught in their infancy; seeing they make no profession of faith
and repentance. But the Apostles were prohibited from baptiz^ng any that were
not first taught, either by themselves, or other* in the negative of Christ's
command touching Baptism, by consequence of the former argument: Ergo, The
infants though of believers, ought not to be baptized.

Ergo, the Baptism of infants ought in no wise to be. The proof the minor.
That which is administered upon a supposed interest in the covenant of Grace
without Faith in the person so interested that overthrowes the nature of the
covenant of grace, because persons have interest therein no otherwise then by
Faith, Romans 4.16. Gallathians 3.9.29. any thing else concluded so, makes the
promise or covenant void, Romans 4.14. Gal. 3.18 But the Baptism of infants
though of believers, is administered upon a supposed interest in the covenant of
grace; without faith in the person so interested, ( viz the faith of their
parents) Ergo, The Baptism of infants, (though of believers) overthrowes the
nature of the covenant of grace, and consequently ought in no wise to be.

Ergo, it ought in no wise to be. If the matter of the church be only regenerat
persons, and the matter of the visible Church such only as appear so by the
profession of faith and repentance, then to baptize infants; is to contradict
this, and to overthrow the nature thereof; seeing they are borne in sin and
make no appearance to the contrary: but that they so remain. But the matter of
the Church are only regenerate persons, John 3.3.5. and the matter of the
visible Church only such as appear so by the profession of faith and
repentance, as all the Epistles of Paul written to the Churches do prove: Romans
8.15. 1 Cor. 4.15. as these instances instead of many do make it appear.
Therefore to baptize infants (though of believers) is to overthrow the nature
thereof, and consequently ought in no wise to be.

Ergo, it ought in no wise to be The minor is thus proved: That which is an
action of Religion done, and no faith in the person of the doer, required in
the doing of that thing, that makes Religion to subsist in the deed done; but
the Baptism of infants, though of believers, is an action of Religion
performed, and no faith required in the person of the doer, in the doing of
that thing: Ergo, the Baptism of infants, though of believers, makes Religion
to subsist in the deed done in the time of the Gospel, and consequently ought
in no wise to be.



That practice which is grounded upon the typical seed, which typed out Christ
the true promised seed, and ceased at his coming: that practice now in respect
of the ground of that practice, reviveth Iudaisme in the Type, and denies
Christ the truth of the type, to become in the flesh. But the Baptism of
infants, though of believers is grounded upon the typical seed which typed out
Christ the true promised seed, and ceased at his coming, Gal. 3.16.19.
Therefore that being practiced, now reviveth Iudaisme in the type, and denies
Christ the truth of the type to become in the flesh, and consequently ought in
no wise to be.

Ismael and Esau as well as to Isaac and Jacob; and all in this respect being
bu^ flesh, born in sin and children of wrath, John 3.6. Psalm. 51.3. Ephesians. 2.3.
Therefore to baptize infants, though of believers, is to make the world and the
Church all one, and confounds the distinction that ought to be betwixt them,
and consequently ought not to be.

But circumcision, Object.
the ordinance of entering persons into the Jewish Church, was administered upon
persons from the some common cause above, mentioned; and yet it did not make
that Church and the world all one, nor yet confound the distinction that was
betwixt them, and the world, therefore the consequence does not follow.

The Church of the Jews did not differ from the world, Answ.
in the same causes that the christian Church does: for they were a nation
separated and set apart by God by the covenant of circumcision, Acts 7.8. from
all other nations; to worship at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 7 6, 7, 8. and 12.6.13.14.
John 4.20. But the christian Church are part of the same nation, begotten and
born by the immortal seed the word and spirit of God, John 3.3.5. James 1.18.
1 Pet. 1.23. to the says of the truth. Romans 11.20. Gal. 3.26. by which only
they have right to baptism, Acts 8.37. and 10.47. and 11.17. and are to shine
as lights before the world in the places where they live, Ph. 2.15.16. 1 Pet.
2.12. And hence it follows, that although circumcision according to Gods
command, did from such common causes enter persons into the Church, and yet did
not confound the distinction, they being a distinct nation from the rest of the
world; yet, if persons of the same nation without any command from God be
baptized, and thereby entered into the Church from common causes belonging to
the world, such as are above mentioned: That necessarily makes the Church and
the world all one and confounds the distinction that ought to be betwixt them,
and therefore the objection from circumcision is nothing to hinder the former
consequence, but that it remains firm and sound.

Rome, and Papists; ought in no wise to be, Rev. 18.4. But the baptism of
infants, though of believers, does so: therefore it ought in no wise to be. The
second Proposition is thus proved, wheresoever the baptism is one, the Church
and people are one; But the Papists and Romes baptism, is one with the infants
baptism, though believers. Therefore the baptism of infants makes one with
the Church of Rome and Papists.

That the Papists and Romes baptism, is one with infants baptism, though of
believers; I prove because they baptize infants, and there be some believers
amongst them, else God would not call them from them, Rev. 18.4. Whose infants
are there baptized; but especially because there is no difference in infants,
as infants, unless God make some difference; now there is no difference known
between the believers infants, and the Papists infants: and we are all born
Papists by nature, and what hinders that we are not all Papists? but
conversion, or education, or outward restraint, and what was it that brought
all to be Papists at first, from Apostolical, to be Apostaticall; but the
baptizing of infants? whereby religion came into act before it was wrought in
the heart, and so they became christians in name, and were indeed against
Christ in nature; and so were Antichristum, and so were a Church of Christ in
name, and a great one too: yea. a catholic one though against Christ, and so
Antichristian in nature; and thus they looking upon one Minister as chief,
whom they made Pope, he must needs be Christ's Vicar in name, though he were
against Christ indeed: and so the Antichrist who when they had made him, they
must needs adore and worship him, and all the world wonders and worships this
beast; so he compels all by fraud and force to be of his Church, both great
and small: Rev. 13.16. And besides, all that are baptized, are supposed to be
believers, but all Papists are supposed to be baptized; Therefore all Papists
are supposed to be believers. And then to baptize the infants of Papists, is to
baptize the infants of believers, and and there is no difference in baptism
then one in Church fellowship with them which ought in no wise to be; therefore
infants, no not of believers, ought not to be baptized.

FINIS,

