REGALES APHORISMI: Or A Royal Chain Of GOLDEN SENTENCES, Divine, Moral, and
Political, as at several times, and on several occasions they were delivered
by King JAMES.

Collected by certain reverend and honorable personages attending on his
Majesty.

London Printed by B. A. and are to be sold at his house near the Upper-Pump in
Grub-street, 1650.

portrait of James I Whem earth nor air, whom neither Tweed nor Thames.
Could circle in: Lo here the shade of James.
His brow most royal, as his heart most plain,
His faith most pure his works were Sovereign.
His leisures cried all factions down, and schisms,
And all his words almost were Aphorisms.


To the truly Honorable, and noble minded, Thomas Draper, Esquire.
SIR,
TO speak of Kings, was heretofore a task of as much difficulty as danger: but
to receive what Kings have written, or what Kings have spoke, especially when
their words have aimed at a public end, as the advancement of the peoples
happiness, or the suppressing of enormities, is a work not only safe but
honorable; their precepts oftentimes being as powerful as their examples: for
the words of illustrious personages, do carry with them a secret attraction,
and leave a deeper impression when the greatness of their persons is attended
with the greatness of their Virtues. Indeed to speak or write well is the
common happiness of great men, who in the height of an extraordinary fortune,
for the most part do express the height of an extraordinary understanding. The
letters of Phalaris are at this day extant, and report him louder for his
Valor, Knowledge, and Magnificence, than Perillus Bull could for his cruelty.

But I shall here present you with a nearer, and a more graceful prospect; The
selected sayings of a King, who in the memory of many yet living reigned over
this nation. A Platonic King, if we may trust the approbation of the age but
immediately before us. A King who by his own books provided better for the
title of a happy memory, than many of his Predecessors who left it to the
flattery of the times, and the vanity and complement of custom. I shall here
give you a sight of what sayings at several times did fall but carelessly and
without premeditation from him, which being as short as they are acute, and
acute as they are grave, I hope may not unfitly be termed Aphorisms: to speak
more were to anticipate your understanding. I leave therefore the book to your
acceptance, whose accurate judgment, can examine and advance an Apothegm, and
whose candor can pardon an error* if perchance in this recollection any error
be slipped into it by the sudden unadvisednesse of him who is.

Sir, The most humble of all that serve you. W. Stratton.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
THis Book has a pre-eminence above any other which as yet has ever been
published in King James his name. For though the other books were dictated by
him, and some passed more immediately under his own hand, yet these Apothegms
proceeded immediately from his own voice; and as the voice is the more
immediate Organ, and more near of kin unto the soul than the hand is, so this
book does carry a more lively representation, and of it self does justly claim
an entertainment suitable to those exquisite indowments which gave breath unto
that voice. Here you may observe him to breath a new, not in his Parks, either
in the height of his pleasure, or his passion, or when the season was too
moist, but in that excellence of understanding with which, for the most part,
he was always accompanied: Amongst other Apothegms observe only this, which as
yet has never been committed to the Press, and it is reserved on purpose to be
in this place inserted, which is, that when his Majesty demanded of Gondomar
what where the consultations of the deliberate States in Holland, Gondomar
replied to his Majesty, that his intelligence did only represent them to be
busy in the overthrowing of the two vast and most exorbitant powers of this
world. viz: The power of the Devil, and the power of Kings. King James made no
answer at all unto it, but by his silence seemed not to controvert it, and by
his smile to allow and to own the Apothegm. For your better satisfaction, I
have here given you these selected sayings in distinct numbers; you will find
weight in them, and such a measure of understanding, that I believe in one
piece is no where else to be found.

Yours W. S.

Royal APOTHEGMS Both DIVINE and MORAL.
1
HEaven is governed by order, and all good Angels there; Nay, hell it self
could not well subsist without some order: and the very Devils are are divided
into Legions, and have their Captains: how can any society then upon earth
subsist, without order or degrees?

2
That no man can tell what part of the meat which he eats turns to
nutriment, and what to excrement: but it is the Divine power, which appoints
and orders the same.

3
That the often mentioning of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Scriptures, is
to signify, that we should celebrate the memory of good men above others, and
of all, men above beasts, etc.

4
That it is termed in Scripture, the God of Abraham, etc. some infer thereupon,
That these Fathers are yet living in the flesh, because it is said, that God is
the God of the living, and not of the dead, etc.

5
Upon discourse of the strictness of the Civil Law, touching the power of
women's accusations in matter of Bastardy; His Majesty made mention of one that
himself knew, that would not acknowledge to have had any child in her husbands
life time: yet after his death above three years, she produced a son to inherit
her dead husbands estate, and proved the same to be his, which he never knew,
nor owned in his life time: and for her excuse in concealing the same in his
life time, she cited his jealousy, and other dangerous humors in him, for
which she durst not make known that ever she was with child by him. And thi^ is
the usual custom of such as live at their stipends, and keep houses by their
husbands allowance, where their husbands are not themselves.

6
That all humane Laws cannot be perfect, but that some must rest in the
discretion of the Judge, although an innocent man do perish thereby; as his
Majesty further conceived, that a Jury may cast upon evidence, and a Judge may
give a just sentence, and yet the party innocent.

7
That it were better twenty innocents did suffer, than to have all dishonest
men go free.

8
That there is many ways to find out truth besides evidence of real witness;
to wit, the fame and report of the delinquent: whereupon, Master Hugh May
replied, and mentioned Master Haddocks good report and opinion conceived of him
in Oxford, and yet was found at last a great offender: whereupon his Majesty
replied, the case was not after his meaning; and thereupon insisted further* to
exemplify his offense, confessing the same to be high and capital in respect
of God and man (meaning Master Haddock who preached in his sleep,) First that
his Majesty did God and the Country good service in discovering that man.
Secondly that his practice was diabolical, and a new way to sin that his
Majesty never heard of before. Thirdly, that he did therein practice against
God himself, in that he did endeavor to make his own inventions as the Oracle
of God, and by that means to bind men's consciences thereunto to believe.
Fourthly, that his Majesty discovered him by his own papers and notes which
were brought unto the King; the which Master Haddock confessed to be his own
handwriting, and the notes of the sermon which (men say) he preached in his
sleep: but for answer thereunto, said, he only noted his Sermons first in
writing, and so in the night dreamt thereof, and of the same thing he had
penned before: but by this answer his Majesty convinced him upon his own
experience, concerning dreams and visions in the night; that things studied or
mentioned in the day time, may be dreamt of in the night, but always
irregularly without order, but not as his Sermons were, both good and learned;
as in particular in that very Sermon which he preached before his Majesty in
his sleep, concerning David's waters, etc. Psalm. 69. wherein he treated, first,
Physically, then Theologically, which is not usual in dreams so to do. Fifthly,
that Master Haddocks sin, being granted for liberty and good, then would all
capital sins have been protected and allowed; as Blasphemy against God, Treason
against the King, Slander against any man, etc. and what not? and at last all
defended under color of being asleep. Sixthly, that in all his Sermons, he had
always some sayings in defense or in excuse of the Puritans.

9
After the discourse ended concerning Master Haddock, as aforesaid; his Majesty
proceeded to mention his great trouble with that Sect in Scotland, and could
never yet reduce the Ministers from slandering in their Sermons openly; and
would tell him the offenses of his Servants by name; as if you keep such a one
(naming him) God will bless you; but if such a one (naming him also) you
cannot prosper.

10
That he has been constrained to make answer to Preachers in the midst of
their Sermons; who digressing from the word of God, have told him openly before
his own face, of certain communications wherein he has not pleased their
humors, although it had been privately done by me unto them, etc.

11
That for twelve years together in Scotland, he prayed on his knees before
every Sermon, that he might hear nothing from the Preacher, which might
afterward grieve him: but since he came into England his Prayer has been to
edify of that which he heard.

12
The thing only which without intermission we are bidden to do, is to pray:
For as for other things they have their own time, but Prayer is never out of
season.

13
We should not be like the Puritans in our Prayers, who speak to God as to
their fellows, and sit at Christ's table as with their companions: Let us join
reverence with the sweet confidence we have in Gods love.

14
Bread without the staff of bread, which is Gods blessing, is no bread; for
without this, even although it be in our mouths, we shall die for hunger, like
the miserable rich man, that in his grratest abundance of all things, died for
want.

15
We pray in in vain God to save us from temptation, if at every occasion we run
into it: Like one who voluntarily sticks in the dirt, and cries for help from
those that pass by.

16
How can we paint Gods face, when Moses, the man that ever was most familiar
with God, never saw but his backp^rts?

17
Put case the Cross had a virtue of doing miracles, as Peter's shadow had; yet
does it not follow, that it is lawful to worship it, which Peter would never
accept of.

18
If the Pope may err as a man, but not as a Pope, I would know, why the Pope
does not instruct or reform the man, or wherefore the man does not require the
Popes instructions!

19
They are fools, who because it is said, Examine your selves, and come, will
not communicate till they be, as they think, perfect; forgetting that Christ
came into the World, not for the healthful, but sick; and that we come unto
that Table, to be refreshed with that spiritual food, bringing nothing with us
but a purpose to amend.

20
The wisdom of a King is chiefly seen in the election of his Officers, as in
places which require a peculiar sufficiency, not to choose them that he affects
most, but to choose every man according to his proper fitness.

21
Virtue is easier than Vice; for the essential difference between Vice and
Virtue, is Truth and Falsehood; and it is easier and less pains to tell truth
than a lie: And for Vices of the senses, Custom is all in all; for to one that
has lived honestly, it is as much pain to commit sin, as for another to
abstain.

22
It is likely that the people will imitate the King in good; but it is sure
they will follow him in ill.

23
I have been often deceived, yet will I never leave to trust; neither shall the
falsehood of some, make me think there is none honest.

24
All that ever writ of Christ, said, he was an honest man: they had so much
natural sight, as to see his civil goodness; but they wanted the supernatural
to perceive his Godhead.

25
The same sentence with diverse Relations, may be both Holy and Divelish.

26
I wonder not so much that women paint themselves, as that when they are
painted, men can love them.

27
Of all the numbers of men that have been slain in War, not the tenth part have
been fighting, but flying.

28
Parsons errs in his Resolution, in making the difficulty of our Salvation to
lie in the hardness to find Gods mercy; when indeed it consists only in the
right seeking of it: for then the other is sure.

29
God has distributed his benefits so equally, that there is no Country which
excels not all other in some thing; so that as it borrows, so it lends:
so in men, there is no one excels so in one thing, but has need of another
wit in some other: From these two proceeds all trassick and society.

30
The Art of Physicians is very imperfect; for I doubt not, but for every
Disease there is in Nature a several Simple, if they could find it out: so that
their Compounds do rather show their ignorance than their knowledge.

31
The Devil where he cannot have the whole, seeks ever to get one part of the
Soul, either the Will, or the Understanding, which he may come easiest by: as
in Protestants the Will, in Papists the Understanding: A learned Papist, and an
ignorant, are of two Religions.

32
The Papists Religion, is like Homers Illiades of the siege of Troy, or Virgils
Aeneads of the beginning of Rome; both of them had a foundation of truth, so
had the Papists the Bible: but they have all added so much that the first truth
is almost lost.

33
Doctor Baily, holding conference with the King touching the Popes arrogance,
alluding to Christ's answer to his Apostles, He that desires to bear rule, let
him be the least among you; and therefore the Pope does sometimes colourably
term himself, Servum Servorum, etc. To which the King replies, that by such
argument or inference, he could prove the Pope to be humbly minded; to which
the Doctor answered, that he did not always so account himself, save only when
he had purpose to delude or deceive; otherwise he esteemed himself Dominus
Dominantium, etc. His Majesty's determination on the point, was, that the Popes
calling himself Servus Servorum, etc. was rather in a more strict and peculiar
sense, as that he was Servus Petri, etc. sive Mariae Virginis, etc. and so by
consequence, Servum Servorum Dei, etc. toward all other Dominum Dominantium,
etc. So likewise to be a professed Catholic, is to be a Christian; but to be a
Roman Catholic, is it which marreth the matter. It was the reproof of the
Donatists, which were accounted Catholics, but confined their profession into
one corner of, Africa. So also the Romanists, whereas the true Catholic is
universal.

34
That whereas our Savior says, It is as easy for a Camel to pass through
the eye of a needle, as for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
etc. The Pope perverteth that saying; for that none shall have no Pardons but
such as pay for them; so consequently, the rich are more easy to enter into
Heaven than the poor, because the one can have pardon when he will, but the
other is not able to purchase it: and thereupon his Majesty concluded the Pope
to be justly called a Merchant of men's souls, as it is set forth in Revel. 18.
etc.

35
That it is a Maxim in the Romish Religion, declared by most of their own
writers. That the Pope may, if he will, at one Mass, free all the souls out of
Purgatory. His Majesty's inference on this position, was, with abnegation of
the Popes Charity, and admiration of his unparalleled cruelty, that being
granted to have power so to do, does not, nor may not apply his will unto it.
If it were possible for one man to free all the world from hell, ought he not
to do it? etc.

36
God never fails of his Word, but where he threateneth ill to man, as in
punishing Ninivie; but always performs where he promises good, that, or
better, as he promised to Abraham and his seed, everlasting earthly
blessedness, and instead of that gave them heavenly.

37
Not only the Deliverance of the Jews, till they came to the land of Promise,
but even their daily Preservation was miraculous: for there was never any noted
plague in Jerusalem, though it stood in a hot Climat, which had it been, would
have endangered the whole Nation, it being to assemble thither twice every year
of necessity.

38
Men are often in arguing, carried by the force of words further asunder than
their question was at first, like two ships going out of the same Haven, their
journies end is many times whole Countries distant.

39
Cowardice is the mother of Cruelty; It was only Fear that made Tyrants put so
many to death, to secure themselves.

40
That fashion among the Romans of killing themselves, was falsely called
Fortitude; for, it was only to prevent the power of Fortune; when indeed,
Virtue lies within quite out of her reach. Nor can any man be overcome but of
himself; and so most truly were they, when they fled to Death for a refuge
against Death.

41
It is easier to reclaim a man from any Heresy, than to convert an Atheist to
the Truth: For to believe, is the first degree common to all Religions: and an
Atheist is to be brought so far, before he come to choosing.

42
All Gods miracles are above Nature, but never against Nature; for that were to
destroy his own work, which he cannot do; but he may excel it: Therefore the
miracle of the Papists Transubstantiation being against Nature, is false.

43
Types are the Images of the mind, which God allowed the Jews to keep them from
Images of the sense, and to show them, that his worship was to be in Spirit and
Truth.

44
The Church at Rome, fell at first from her purity into infirmities, then into
corruptions, then into errors; and lastly, into abominations: God still
punishing sin with sin.

45
Most Heresies have proceeded from mingling Philosophy with Religion; from that
and Policy, have all the Papists errors risen: when Christ tells them, that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

46
We cannot conceive Eternity, but by Faith; we cannot understand what God is,
and of that ignorance comes all sin; for surely if we knew him, we would not
offend him.

47
Men as often fall out about small things; as great, because after the first
contradiction, they maintain themselves, not the thing.

48
Before Christ came, it was enough for the Fathers to believe only; since,
they must believe and understand both.

49
Those Princes which seek to secure themselves by blood, shall find, that the
more they kill, the more they have need to kill.

50
The Church is to be believed in the interpretation of the Scripture, but not
directly against it; for when it differs from that, it is no longer the Church.

51
There are three kind of Wisdoms that use to be in Kings, A sanctified Wisdom,
A Wisdom which oftentimes strains it self to a less evil, so to avoid a
greater; And a Wisdom of falsehood: the first is both lawful and necessary; the
second is lawful, but not necessary; the third, neither.

52
All Governments howsoever in their Constitutions, in their practice tend to a
Monarchy; And wheresoever the better sort of the people bear rule, there is
always some one that resembles a King amongst them: yea, though in the State
of Venice, the Duke is but as it were a dead name; yet were it impossible that
their Commonwealth should long uphold it self without him.

53
That a Monarchical Government by secular Kings and Priests, is the only
Ordinance of God; and the Republics but only a depraved institution of man
for depraved ends, as appears manifestly by the whole current of Scripture,
even from Adam to the primitive Church after Christ, etc.

54
That God in his wisdom approved no fitter nor safer means to rule his people,
but by such an institution.

55
That from the beginning, there was instituted heads over every Family, over
the good and bad, as Seth and his posterity, Cain, Lamech, even to the Deluge:
after that the 12 Patriarks were as secular Princes, as free as I am here, and
more too; for they had potestatem vitae and necis in themselves without any
Jury; after them the Judges, and so absolute Kings, with a promise that the
Scepter should not depart, etc. And so after Christ to this very day. Besides,
among heathen and savages by natural instinct they ordained Kings and Princes.
Among beasts they have a King, and so among birds; the Deer has his Mr. of a
herd; the smallest creatures have their chief: What shall I say then to such as
will have no concordance with God, with men, with beasts, inferior Creatures,
with devils, nor any, but with themselves? and are all for a Republic, in all
which I have said, there is no mention made of a Republic, as if it were a
strange thing to God himself.

56
That his Majesty did think, many here in England, did wish their estates were
lying by Amsterdam; which thing the King did also wish to such.

57
That in Venice, which is governed by a Republic, they do create no honors,
or dignities, but a Merchant of Venice, which is seldom, etc.

58
That the Mothers and Nurses do call their children in reproach, Barons, which
is with us a style of honor, etc.

59
That the Pope does create Knights as a secular Prince.

60
That the honor conferred upon any Centurion abroad, is there with no esteem;
but the King has made many Knights of them here.

61
That no jurisdiction elective, as Emperors, Kings, Princes, etc. is any
honor or precedence to any of the allies of him elected, but personal to
himself.

62
That to have employment in any Republic, in that state is dangerous; for do
he well or ill, he is sure to rue it, and he speedeth best that does worst;
like a Scottish tale I have heard of, one that never sped well among the
Lawyers when he had a good cause, because he then least suspected it, and the
other side bribed; but when his cause was ill, he then also bribed, and
countermanded; and so the greatest carried it for the most part: even so in
Republics.

63
That the Agent here for the Venetians, although he presented to the King a
letter from their Duke, subscribed with his own hand, with addition of all his
titles, and the Kings inserted; yet at the delivery, no mention made of the
Duke himself, not so much as commendations; but Our Republic greets you, etc.

64
That the King in his reading, could never yet truly find, what the name of a
Cardinal was, and yet he has sought much for it, unless it were a Cardo on
which the wheel moves, etc.

65
That in the primitive Church of Rome, they were inferior to Bishops, and were
but seven in number, as Parsons of the seven Churches mentioned about Rome: but
how they come to place them before Bishops, and make of them Princes, and
Potentates, and how they become the Electours of the Papacy, I cannot get to
know.

66
That it is strange the Pope should create his own makers and electors.

67
That in attainder and trial of innocents, wherein is scruple the Justice of
our State proceeds slowly, etc.

60
The preservation of the Bible is miraculous, that it should remain pure, and
entire, after it had passed the hands of Infidels, which sought to destroy it;
of Heretics, which sought to pervert it to their own advantage.

69
No indifferent gesture is so seldom done without sin as laughing; for it is
commonly raised upon things to be pitied; and therefore man only can laugh,
and he only can sin.

70
God made one part of man of earth, the basest element, to teach him humility;
his soul proceeded from the bosom of himself, to teach him goodness: So that
if he look downward nothing is viler: if he cast his eyes to heaven, he is of a
matter more excellent than the Angels; the former part was a tipe of Adam; the
second of Christ, which gives life to that which was dead in it self.

71
Much money makes a Country poor, for it sets a dearer price upon every thing.

72
At what time the Gospel did flourish, all kind of learning did even abound,
and upon the decay thereof, there came a vail of darkness upon the face of the
earth: the reason is a part of Religion, but Error and superstition is the
safer by ignorance.

73
A lie of error is a fault of credulity not of falsehood: but a presumptuous
lie, is that which makes a man, as God made the world of nothing.

74
All Gods actions are for our good, either spiritually or temporally although
we cannot comprehend them at every time.

75
There is not that thing upon the earth, (that well examined) yields not
somewhat worthy of knowledge; that divine Artizan that made them, never
fashioned any thing unprofitably, nor ever set forth any of his workman-ship
without some inward virtue.

76
The gifts of the mind are not easily obtained, you must practice them with
great pain and difficulty, and good reason, for it were pity such
pretiousnesse might be had for the taking.

77
It must needs show the Papists religion to be ill, that they would plant it by
liberty and War; whereas the true Catholic religion rose by fasting and prayer.

78
Whatsoever is spent in earthly vanities, they either die before us, or shortly
follow after us, for all pleasures that are sensual, and have not reference to
the main end of man's creation (which is the service of God are vain, and of no
importance, but mere foolery.

79
When God destinates a man to do good, he makes every opportunity and occasion
(though it seem never so harsh in man's eyes) to turn to his good, and Gods
glory: but when God leaves man to himself, he makes more opportunities than he
finds, and without occasion, takes occasion to work his own ruin, to his own
shame.

80
It is good to propound to man Fame, Greatness, Honor, and Estimation, for
wading to find these, he may happily meet with Honesty, Temperance, Fortitude,
and Patience; and many times they that will not undergo actions for Virtues
sake, will for Ambition.

81
An ill name may be free from dishonesty, but not from some folly; we should
not only be free from sin, but from suspicion; for it is not enough to be well
lived, but well reported; and oftentimes weighty matters are as much carried by
reputation as substance.

82
Misfortunes are not acceptable in any kind, yet those are endured with most
ease, that come rather by destiny, than by deserving.

83
In experience it is good to be neither pinching nor prodigal, yet if means
allow it, rather thought a little profuse then too sparing, but the best way
is, to make ability (which must always be measured, by the just rule of our
proper revenue) our compass to sail, and line to walk by; and for extraordinary
expenses we must limit them by the worth of the occasion; for in matters that
return not we may be more magnificent.

84
He is not worthy to command others that cannot govern his own affections and
unreasonable appetites.

85
No text of Law can be so certain; wherein, the circumstances will not make a
variation.

86
Justice should be blind, and friendlesse, it is not by it, that those that are
in authority, should reward their friends, or cross their enemies.

87
Though outward Peace be a great blessing, yet it is far inferior to peace
within, as civil wars are more cruel and unnatural than wars abroad.

88
All Virtues turn to vices, when they become the servants of impiety.

89
All complainers be naturally given to exagerate their own griefs, and
multiplies thereupon, as Papists do in England.

90
As a thing which is good ought not therefore to be abused; so ought not the
lawfulness of a good thing be forborne, because of the abuse thereof.

91
Every man ought to discern wisely and truly of every Virtue and vice,
according to the true qualities thereof, and not according to the vain conceits
of men.

92
Indifferent things if they be necessary as; food, sleep, and such like, in the
qualities or form of using them, may smell of Virtue or Vice, and be great
furtherers to any of them.

93
If our whole life were divided into four parts, three of them would be found
to be consumed on Meat, Drink, Sleep, and unnecessary imploiments.

94
There is great difference betwixt Justice and Equity, for Justice by the law
gives every man his own, and Equity in things Arbitriall, that which is
meetest for him.

95
Drunkenness has a beastly Vice, and has this property, that it is one of
those vices which increases with age.

96
Medicine has that virtue, that it never leaves a man in that state wherein it
finds him.

97
We should press to win God by importunity, if we obtain not at the first; and
if we be not heard, should think, that that which we seek is not for our good.

98
A small sin wilfully committed, is far more grievous before God, than a
greater committed in a sudden passion, when conscience is a sleep.

99
That the King vowed never to be of that Religion, where so gross an opinion
as Transubstantiation was, so ignorantly maintained, while God kept him in his
right wits.

100
To manifest the grossness of their error in their opinion of
Transubstantiation; The King had heard of a Jew, that once stabbed the bread or
wafer, and some affirm there issued our perfect blood, which among them is still
kept, and they permit sometimes mice and rats to eat it, etc. now consider how
disproportionable a thing is it after consecration (if it be the very body, as
they aver) that they should allow a Jew to crucify him again, and also for
mice and rats to eat our Savior. His Maj. did vehemently inculcate the
grosnesse of this error; and furthermore said, that Belarmine was much
troubled about this point, whether the bread and wine, although much taken
together, do turn to corporal nutriment or not, or transubstantiated as
aforesaid, and then a greater error follows.

101
That it was strange to look into the life of Hen. 8. how like an Epicure he
lived.

102
It was once demanded by King Hen. 8. of one, what he might do to be saved? who
who answered, he had no cause to fear, having lived so mighty a King, and done
so many worthy acts in his life time; but oh, said he, I have lived too like a
King; which King James inferred was like no King; for the office of a King is
to do Justice and equity, but he only served his sensuality like a beast.

103
That the Preacher Preaching out of the 29 Psalm, That I offend not in my
tongue, etc. he could have wished, might have been before so many women,
because they are most unruly therein.

104
That it was strange to note, that although all the members of a man declined
by age, yet the tongue never, etc.

105
That although old men and women, were prone to give ease to all their other
members; yet then the tongue most wanton, and coveting talk, etc. The Palsy of
all diseases most maimeth the tongue, and yet improveth its tatling or unruly
motion, etc. This was his Majesty's reply to Dr. Mountain then Bishop of London.

106
That upon report made to his Majesty of a Goose that loved a man, that it
would never be from him wheresoever he went, and upon occasion would guard him
from offense, etc. Whereupon his Majesty remembered that Goose of the Capitol;
and further said, he thought it as easy to prove the descent of the foresaid
Goose, from that Goose of the Capitol, as the Heralds now do prove the descent
of many Gent. of these times.

107
That in the direct worship of God himself, we ought to be guided by the Word
of God, as he prescribes in the same, and not otherwise, etc. as also in the
matter of Sacrifices; but in the form and order of Ceremonies, that indeed is
solely left unto the Church, but not the immediate worship, we may not therein
follow our own wills; that is the main difference between the Church of Rome and
us, if we may use a Will Worship, then they are in the right; but if we may
not, then we are in the right.

108
Words are not the difference of good men and bad; for every man speaks well:
therefore how noble a thing is virtue, when no man dares profess any thing
else.

109
I love not one that will never be angry: for as he that is without sorrow, is
without gladness: so he that is without anger, is without love.

110
There are degrees of men in respect of one another, in respect of God all are
equal; all are to use like duty, like reverence, toward him: all are alike
beggars Gods door.

111
We are departed no further from the Church of Rome, than they from their first
Jesus.

112
Give me the heart of a man, and out of that, all other his deeds shall be
acceptable.

113
In clothes, I would have a fashion should choose a man, and not a man the
fashion.

114
It is one of the miseries of man, that when he is full of days, and near his
end, that then he should love life most.

115
It has like operation to make women learned, as to make Foxes tame, which
teaches them to steal more cunningly. The possibility is not equal; for where
it does one good it does twenty harm.

116
Parents may forbid their Children an unfit match, but they may not force their
consent to a fit.

117
No Country can be called rich wherein there is war; As in the Low Countries,
there is much money; but the Soldiers have it in pay from the Governors, the
Boors have it for victuals of the Soldiers, the Governors have it from them
again in taxes: so there is no Center, no Honor.

118
No man gains by War, but he that has not wherewith to live in Peace.

119
God accepts the intent before the deed; for if a man do justice because he
would be counted just, and not for Gods glory, but because he stands answerable
to God, if he do otherwise; or if he punish a man rightly, but withal satisfy
his own malice; both these are abominable: if he give Alms only for his
reputation sake, this is a wicked deed; because there is Nullum medium,
whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

120
No man shall do ill, that thinks ere he undertakes, what the end will be, not
what his passion would have it to be.

121
Time is the essence of many Laws, so that a King may do well at diverse times,
both in making and marring the same law.

122
I should think it a sign that God loves me not if I should kill a man by
chance, I would most unwillingly do that ill which it lies not in my power to
amend.

123
I do not think the greatest Clarks are nearest Heaven, much of their knowledge
is superfluous; For Bellarmine makes 400. questions of faith, and not ten of
them which roucheth our Salvation to understand.

124
Many have attempted to make glass malleable, and so Gold artificial, but both
in vain; for God does ever Cross the invention of man, least he should rejoice
in his own work.

125
The persons of all men are to be alike. Equal to us, and our hate or Love,
should only go according to their Virtues or Vices. These bonds of kindred
should only command us in all Civil duties, but not our judgments. And
particular injuries should only make us hate that particular deed, but not the
doer in general.

126
Men of high understanding, as they do many things above the common strain; so
they often fall into greater errors, than those of meaner capacity, which in
all their actions, will rather do nothing faulty than any thing extraordinary,
being of a temper better mixed than the former.

127
The Devil always avoids the mean, and waits upon extremities; so has he
sought to divide the world betwixt Atheism, and superstition.

128
All extremities come round to one end, the simple obedience of the Papist, and
the no obedience of the Puritan; the one breeds confusion, the other Ignorance,
and security.

129
The end of the Law is to punish sin when it is committed; But to keep it from
being committed, it cannot; As the Pope, which thinks by allowing Fornication
to avoid Adultery.

130
That the wearing of Leeks on Saint David's day by the Welch-men, was a good,
honorable, and commendable fashion; seeing that all memorable acts have by
their Agents something worn for distinction, and also to preserve the memory
thereof unto posterity; even as the Passover was to the Jews; that when their
children should ask why they went girded, with staves in their hands, they
might show them the cause, etc. So the Welchmen in commemoration of the great
fight by their black Prince of Wales, do wear leeks, as their chosen Ensign.

131
That an infallid thing may be discerned and known by a fallid means; as for
example, our senses are fallid, but by them we know many things infallid, etc.
whence the Papists infer, that because the Church is visible, therefore the
chief Head must be visible: The universal Church consists of two parts, one
visible, the other invisible; to wit, a visible body, and an invisible Spirit;
and therefore the chief Head of the Church should rather be invisible: but we
grant many visible Substitutes over the Church, as subordinate Rulers under the
chief.

132
His Majesty observed a queint Interrogatory put to a jealous Lover, out of
that famous Comedy of Ignoramus, the which his Majesty highly commended; viz.
whether he desired most, or rather to be termed, Publius Cornelius, or
Cornelius Tacitus. In further approbation of which Comedy, besides in
opposition and dislike of another Comedy, performed and acted before his
Majesty by the Scholars of the University of Oxford, that as in Cambridg one
Sleep made him Wake, so in Oxford one Wake made him Sleep.

133
Concerning that saying, That the gates of hell shall not prevail, etc. that
therefore their Church of Rome cannot fall, because of the certainty of Gods
promise to his Church, which they falsely attribute unto themselves. The
question only remains in the circumstance of time, as between their Church,
and the true Church, to wit, whether it be already past, or shall be hereafter;
for they deny not but there shall be a general defection, and Antichrist shall
be revealed, etc. but they deny it yet to be; and we say it is already past,
and fulfilled in themselves. But his Majesty's absolute determination on this
point was, The question between them and us, to be the same which is yet
between the Jews and Christians; for they deny not but that a Messiah and
Saviout must and shall come, and yet have him in a daily expectation; but the
Christian holds that he is come already, and has been in the world, and has
performed all things preappointed of God his eternal Father; even such, or the
very like, is the question between the Papists and Protestants, concerning the
right and true worship of that Messiah. The Church Militant his Majesty
compared to the Moon, so full of changes; his reason for this opinion he gave,
was, for that he could not see a Church in any place peaceably settled, but
before he could duly consider thereof, he forthwith perceived the face of it
changed, except it were those of Germany, and the low Countries, as the
Lutherans, and Calvinists.

134
God is never better honored, than in giving him true worship, and in loving
good men. The King at that time declared himself resolved always to kneel at
the Sacrament, and that for to testify his humility toward God, being a King,
and the rather for example sake to others that are set under him: he said he
would not retain willingly a Gout in the knee, alluding to Doctor Lawds Sermon,
a little before made upon that subject. His Majesty confessed the Gout in the
knee very troublesome and offensive indeed, and that by a particular experiment
of his own, upon an accidental hurt which he received on his foot at Newmarket,
being to receive the holy Communion on Christmasse day following, and resolved
to take the same kneeling, as aforesaid, provoked his whole body into a very
great sweat and anguish, and therefore concluded the Gout in the knee to be a
main impediment for sacred Duties, and so conceived it the easier way to sit,
and then the mind might have the better opportunity to rove and wander after
other profane and wanton cogitations: His Majesty did acknowledge that we
could never do too much worship toward God; should we not (said he) exceed the
Turks? who in their false worship do fall often flat on their faces, and rise
often in the night to perform false worship; and this they are enjoined to do,
or otherwise they account themselves damned: he confessed that too much worship
might be rendered to our Lady and other Saints, but doubtless never too much to
God, and Christ his anointed. On the contrary, his Majesty's opinion concerning
the essence of Gods Deity, and how some will seem to flatter him, etc. And
thereupon commended a translation, that was so direct, as it described God as
he was; for he cannot be flattered. As for example, God is said to be
Omnipotent, it is true; yet there are some things that he cannot have done as
he would, in respect of man's depraved nature. Again, he made all things; true,
all that we can behold: but there was a place in which he was before he made
the world. Again, it is said, that he is every where; true, but as a King is by
his Ambassadors, not personally every where. Again it is further said, that
God is unchangeable; yet it is also said many times that he repents, and
therefore though Kings may sometimes be flattered, yet God never can.

135
That he did not know nor read of above three Jews converted in 20. years.

136
That the Turk sent him Embassage since his coming to England, to follow the
steps of Queen Elizabeth, and not to profess Idolatry, for that would
overthrow his Crown.

137
That the Turks will not suffer the Jews amongst them to sacrifice, for that
was flat against their laws: As we will not suffer the Papists to worship the
Mass, because against our Laws.

138
That the Jews had been so bitten with punishments for Idolatry, that they
would never endure any show of it.

137
That the religion of the Turks was composed of the Jewish religion, of the
Christian, and of the Arians; and policy thereof, was to draw infinites of
people to his subjection, that were uncertainly affected; as in the
Low Countries they use diversities of religions to strengthen their power, but
this was observed by the King, to be a strange policy.

140
That he confessed the Turk to be the greatest Prince in the world; and yet
that he did not command the tenth part of them which professed Mahometism.

141
That there was ten of his religion to one that professed any kind of
Christianity, and therefore the Popes universality convinced.

142
That through the diverse compositions of the Turks religion, a great part of
the world was infected, as both the Indiaes, America, Persia, etc.

143
The King professed that he would choose rather to turn Turk, than in some
fables believe Bellarmine.

144
That a German was naturally most constant to himself, for although he could
well fashion himself to any Country he traveled into, yet returning home to
his own, he would appear to any man's judgment, nothing changed from the manner
and condition of his own Nation, and so in him is most truly fulfilled Coelum
non animum mutant qui transmare currunt; but with the English, or any other
nation, for the most part it is not so.

145
That he often heard the Lord of Northampton say, that a Frenchman, though never
so grave and sober of countenance, yet at one time or other would have his
frisk of vanity.

146
That Tobacco was the lively image and pattern of hell; for that by allusion,
it had in it all the parts and vices of the world, whereby hell may be gained;
to wit, first it was a smoke, so are the vanities of the world a smoke and
vapor. Secondly, it delights them who take it, so do the pleasures of the
world delight the men of the world. Thirdly, it makes men drunken and light in
the head, and so do vanities of the world men are drunk therewith.' Fourthly,
he that takes Tobacco, says, he cannot leave it, it does bewitch him; even so
the pleasures of the world make men loath to leave them, so they are for the
most part so enchanted with them. Besides the former allusion, it is like hell
in the very substance of it, for it is a stinking loathsome thing, so is hell;
it goes in at the mouth and out at the nose, so does the smoke of hell through
the body and head.

147
That he has heard an old Minister say, touching conformity, that it would be
a scandal for himself to conform, yet will allow that his son may do it, as if
he living a fool all his life, desired so to die.

148
That no man can thrive that keeps a whore at rack and manger, to wit,
openly, with justification. That to rove is proper to express the action of
the body, but to rave is an action of the mind.

149
That miracles are now used and maintained among the Papists, to the end to
confirm a false belief on Saints, according as at first Christ used miracles,
to cause and confirm a true belief on himself.

150
Evangelikes are not Evangelists.

151
That he is not of opinion that all speeches in Scripture touching beasts or
fouls, by allegory does agree with the proper and peculiar natures of them; as
of that, Be wise as Serpents; or that comparison of Job to the Ostridge, that
seems to neglect her young by leaving her eggs in the dust, which is not the
proper nature of them, as has been approved by Barbary-Marchants that have
seen them: but it seems so outwardly, because she hides her eggs in the sand,
and so removes a little from them, but surely for no other end but to protect
them, that at the time of need, and in the hatching to break the shell, which
of it self cannot.

152
That there was never any noted Heretic, but the sect of him were much more
heretical.

153
That he could find more arguments in the Papists work for the Pope, than the
Pope himself could do.

154
That the Canonists are the very Devils of all the rest.

155
That Peter seeing Malchus his Kinsman witness against him, made him fear the
more, and so denied his Master.

156
Thar if they had accused Christ of riot, the same witness would have proved
matter to declare his Divinity, in healing his ear again.

157
To commit a sin against the letter of the Law moral, is greater than a sin
against the consequent; as for example, Adultery is a greater sin than
Fornication.

158
That he styled a book once sent him, by the name of Melchisedeck, being
without beginning or ending.

159
That he reads more Papists books than Protestant, and from thence finds
matter to confirm him in the Protestant Religion.

160
That taking all things to the straight tenor of the written letter, is the
matter of jar betwixt the Puritans and Us.

161
That Henry the fourth of France would have sent Cardinal Peron to convert him,
the which he denied, for that he held him weak and shallow; and refused to lose
a heavenly crown for an earthly.

162
That he would not admit a public disputation between twelve Papists, and
twelve Protestants, himself being chosen Umpire; because he might lose more,
that would not be satisfied, than he could win, although the Papists side were
convicted.

163
The true Protestant Religion stands like a virtue between two vices, Popery
and Separatism: That, an extremity, in the excess; this, in the defect: that
aims at the confusion of the State; this makes confusion in the Church. Let
that Prince that desires the welfare of his Kingdom, crush the power of the
one, and curb the malice of the other: so shall his Church be peaceful, his
State honorable, and on his head shall his crown flourish.

164
Let every Prince that loves rest, make war his last refuge: A desperate remedy
is unseasonable, but where the disease is desperate: Be the war never so just,
the effect is miserable. Far safer is a certain peace, than an uncertain
victory; that is concluded by reason; this by fortune.

165
It is safer for a Prince to trust Providence and a weak Army, than to
strengthen it with foreign forces: Yet when his necessity borrows their
presence to compass a Conquest, let his wisdom purchase their absence though
at a high price. He that entertains Auxiliaries, holds a wolf by the ears.

166
As it is a stain to the honor of a Prince to break his promise: so it is no
less blemish to the wisdom of a State, not to prevent the means of breaking
it. To take too open notice of a Princes infirmities, if guilty, fills him with
desperate Rage; if not, with implacable Revenge.

167
Let not the civil discords in a foreign Kingdom encourage thee to make
invasion: they that are factious among themselves, and jealous one of another,
are more strongly prepared to encounter with a common enemy: those whom civil
commotions set at variance, foreign hostility reconciles. Men rather affect
the possession of an inconvenient good, than the possibility of an uncertain
better.

168
Let no price, nor promise of Honor bribe thee to take part with the enemies
of thy Prince: Assure thy self, whosoever wins, thou art lost: if thy Prince
prevail, thou art branded for a Rebel, and marked for death: if the enemy
prosper, thou shall be reckoned as a Traitor, and not secured of thy life. He
serves his Kingdom that destroys a Rebel; and it is a common thing for him
that loves the Treason to hate the Traitor.

169
Although a wicked King is sent by God for a curse to his people, and plague
for their sins; yet it is not lawful for them to shake off that curse at their
own pleasures, that God has laid upon them.

170
The safest guard a King can have, is the love of his subjects, his greatest
honor their prosperity.

171
As Law is to a well governed Commonwealth, so are good orders in Household
government, without which, no household can stand.

172
Though Moses were instructed, inspired, and conducted by Almighty God himself:
yet, he refused not the good counsel of Iethro, for the manner of his
government, which also Almighty God allowed in him.

173
It is a certain rule in all dark Prophesies, that they are never clearly
understood till they be accomplished.

174
Many respects may lawfully let in admission, that will not be sufficient
causes of deprivation.

175
No wise man can think him a fit man to counsel him, or to govern under him,
that cannot govern himself, and his own family; and therefore Basilius advised
his son, to take such Counselors, who had given proof and experience of their
wisdom, in the good conduct and direction of their own affairs.

176
Emulation is the bait of Virtue; for looking into the sweetness of the
reward, men undertake the labor.

177
It is less difficult for persons of indifferent estates, to make their choice
of friends, than for great men; yet, only safe to poverty; for there, he must
be in love with himself, or nothing.

178
Better it is that matters be not stirred at all, than after they be once a
foot, and in motion, to give the truth leave to lie gasping and sprangling,
under the violence of a Foreign faction.

179
Sometimes there is as good use, to be made of dishonest, as honest friends;
for poisons are as necessary as wholesome simples, if they be in a hand able to
prepare them.

180
Suggestions are needless from abroad, when the mischief is felt at home.

191
Although particular men of all profession of religion, have been some thieves,
some murderers some traitors; yet ever, when they came to their end and just
punishment, they confessed their fault to be in nature, and not in their
profession; the Roman Catholics only excepted.

182
The friends of a private Fortune, are less dangerous; in greater, there is
more gain, and so more loss: he that stands without, stands naked, and subject
to every storm: who underpropped, so long safe; but no sooner loosened, but
ruined.

183
To answer an improbable imagination is to fight against a vanishing shadow.

184
It is a true saying, that alleged kindness upon noble minds, does ever work
much.

185
Too much suspicion begets treachery, and an obstinate belief is dangerous
folly.

186
For a little money a man may have more from the Pope, than ever God promised
by his grace to grant, a remission of all sins past and to come.

187
Present crosses are but preparatives to them we may feel.

188
Let no man think that he may frame and make his wife as he pleases, that
deceived Solomon, the wisest King that ever was.

189
It is wisdom for him that sits at the helm of a settled State, to demean
himself toward his subjects at all times, so, that in hard times they may be
willing and ready to serve his occasion: He that is only gracious at the
approach of danger, will be in danger, when he expects deliverance.

190
In all designs, which require not sudden execution, take mature, and serious
consideration, and weigh the convenients, with the inconvenients, and then
resolve; and having resolved, neither delay the execution, nor bewray thy
intention* He that discovers himself till he has made himself Master of his
desires, lays himself open to his own ruin, and makes himself prisoner to his
own folly.

191
Liberality in a Prince is no virtue, when maintained at the subjects unwilling
cost: it is less reproach, by miserableness to preserve the popular love,
than by liberality to deserve private thanks.

192
It is the excellent property of a wise Prince, to use war as he does Physic,
carefully, unwillingly, and seasonably; either to prevent approaching dangers,
to correct a present mischief, or to recover a former loss. He that declines
Physic, till he be accosted with the danger, or too much weakened by the
disease, is bold too long, and wise too late: that peace is too precise, that
limits the justness of war to a drawn sword, or a blow given.

193
Let that Prince that would beware of conspiracies, be rather jealous of such,
whom his extraordinary favors have advanced, than of those, whom his
displeasure has discontented: these want means to execute their pleasures; but
they have means at pleasure to execute their desires. Ambition to rule, is more
vehement than Malice to revenge.

194
Before thou undertake a war, cast an impartial eye upon the occasion. If it
be just, prepare thy Army, and let them all know, they are to fight for God and
thee: It adds fire to the spirit of a soldier, to be assured that he shall
either prosper in a fair war, or perish in a just cause.

195
He that is not a Philosopher governs by guess, and will prove a dangerous
Statesman, for when uncontrouled affections meet with high fortune, they
commonly begin tyranny and oppression.

196
The difference between the godly, and ungodly is, that God does visit the
ungodly by punishments, names of Plagues, Curses, and destructions; as the
plague of Egypt, the curse of Cain, the destruction of Sodom; but the
righteous, when he does visit them, his punishments, corrections,
chastisements, and rods, which proceed from instruction, not destruction, to
purge them, not to destroy them.

197
It is not sufficient for him that already has enough to defend him from
baseness and want, only to eat, and drink, and make an even reckoning at the
years end: for, that is baser then baseness: no, let him do his Country
service, and purchase honor to his house; for we are not in the the world for
fruition, but for action.

198
There is no difference between common Lovers, and common Whores, they both
flatter, and make the name of love their bands, to serve their particular
pleasures.

199
As man's nature is not only to strive, against a present smart, but to revenge
a passed injury; so we see, that malice has a longer life than either love or
thankfulness has: For, as always we take more care, to put off pain, than to
enjoy pleasure; because the one has intermission, and with the other we are
satisfied; So it is in the smart of injuries, and the memory of good turns;
Wrongs are written in marble, benefits are sometimes acknowledged, requited
rarely.

200
Allms-deeds merit nothing at Gods hands, yet they make him our debtor,
according to his gracious promise.

201
Presumption is ever apt to draw comfort from the vast Ocean of appetite; but
discretion from the sweet springs of opportunity.

202
He Councels best that prefers the cause of God before any particular.

203
Where good men are afraid, to call a vice by the proper name, it is a sign
that the vice is common, and that great persons (whom it is not safe to anger)
are infected therewith.

204
He that knows not the true grounds of an evil, cannot help it but by change,
which is a dangerous guide of a Common wealth.

205
Conscience, not grounded on knowledge, is either an ignorant fantasy, or an
arrogant vanity; in one extremity the Papists err, in the other the
Anabaptists.

206
Correction without instruction is mere Tyranny.

207
God which is the great Lawmakers, by his Laws prevents sins, to the end that
punishments may be inflicted on it justly, as to avoid Idolatry, he forbids
the making of Images: He that cannot live chaste let him marry.

208
False miracles, and lying news are the food of superstition, which by
credulity deludes ignorant people.

209
God who calls his elect unto himself, to make him enjoy heaven, compels none to
make defection from himself: Nam perdicio tua, ex te Israel.

210
Time the mother, will bring forth Verity her daughter, in due season to
perfection.

211
Riches are desired of wise men, only to keep them from baseness, and to
exercise charity.

212
A good Pastor is the Physician of the soul, and ought to apply his doctrine
according to the tenderness or hardness of the conscience, for want of which
discretion some men's zeal has done hurt.

213
It is a point of wisdom to maintain the truth with as little disputation as
may be, least a good cause be marred with ill handling.

214
The best Laws are made out of those good Customs, whereunto the people are
naturally inclined.

215
Gross and brutish errors are sooner reformed than meaner escapes, for so much
as the one cannot be defended without impudency, whereas the other admits some
color for excuse.

216
It is not lawful to use unlaw full instruments, were it for never so good a
purpose; for that Axiom in Divinity is most certain and infallible, non est
faciendum malum, ut bonum inde eveniet.

217
Valor is overcome by weakness, but being too much prized, it turns to
unbrideled fury.

218
It is neither safe nor honorable for a Prince to buy his Peace, or take it up
at interest. He that has not a sword to command it, shall either want it, or
want honor with it.

219
It is very requisite for a Prince not only to weigh his designs in the
flower, but likewise in the fruit: he is an unthrift of his honor, that
enterprises any design, the failing wherein, may bring him more disgrace, then
the good success can gain him honor.

220
It is much conduceable to the happiness of a Prince and the security of his
Kingdom, to gain the hearts of his subjects: they that love for fear, will
hardly be induced to fear for love: it is a wise Government which gains such a
Tie upon the subject, that he either cannot hurt, or will not: but that
government is best and most sure, when the Prince commands with love, and the
subject joys in his obedience.

221
Let every soldier arm his mind with hopes, and put on courage: whatsoever
disaster falls, let not his heart sink: the passage of providence lies through
many crooked ways; and a despairing heart is the true Prophet of approaching
ruin. His actions may weave the webs of fortune, but not break them.

222
It is the part of a wise Magistrate to vindicate a man of Power, or State
employment, from the malicious scandal of the giddy headed multitude, and to
punish it with great severity: scandal breeds hatred, hatred begets division,
division makes raction, and faction brings ruin.

223
The strongest Castles that a Prince can build to secure him from domestic
commotions, or foreign invasion is the hearts of his loving subjects and the
means to gain that strength, is in all his actions to appear for the public
good; studious to contrive and resolute to perform.

224
It much conduces to the publick-weal, either of a Principality, or Republic,
not to suffer the money and treasure of a State, to be engrossed into the hands
of few: money is like muck, not good, unless it be spread.

225
It is a necessary providence in a Prince to encourage in his Kingdom,
Manufacture, Merchandise, Arts and Arms. In Manufacture lie the vital spirits
of the body politic; in Merchandise, the spirits natural; in Arts and Arms
the animal: if either of these languish, the body droops: as they flourish the
body flourishes.

226
It is more dangerous for a Prince to violate his laws, then his subjects: they
are liable to punishment and punishment satisfies, and satisfaction cures and
rectifies the breach: But in him, the wound ranckles for want of cure: that
however a Prince begins to break his own laws, and ancient customs, his State
begins her ruin.

227
If thou chance to entertain any foreign Soldiers, into thy Army, let them
bear thy colors, and be at thy pay, lest they interest their own Prince:
Auxiliary Soldiers are most dangerous: a foreign Prince needs no greater
invitation to seize upon thy Country, than when he is required to defend it.

228
Be cautious in undertaking a design upon report of such as are exiled their
Country, lest thou come off with shame, or loss, or both: their ends expect
advantages from thy actions, whose miseries lay hold of all opportunities, and
seek to be made whole upon thy ruin.

229
Many do deceive themselves, in saying, they care not for the Father or Mothers
curse, so they deserve it not: But beware, you must not invert the order of
nature, in judging your Superiors, chiefly in your own particular; for ever
the blessing or curse of the Parents, has a prophetic power joined with it.

230
Beware of swearing and lying, though but in jeft; for oaths are but an use,
and a sin clothed with no delight or gain: and therefore the more unexcusable,
even before men.

231
The Devil never assails a man, except he find him either void of knowledge, or
of the fear of God.

232
If a man shall once take upon him to call that light, which God calls heavy;
that sin venial, which God calls grievous; measuring any one sin by the
measures of his lust and appetite, and not of his Conscience; what shall let
him to do with the next that his affections stir him to? the like reason
serving for all, and so go forward till he place his whole corrupted affections
in Gods room.

233
As none can be Scollars in a School, and not be subject to the Master thereof,
so none can study, or put in practice the circles and art of Magic, without
committing any horrible defection from God.

234
Treasurers and Ushers, are commonly hated in Court, because of necessity they
must give denials and disgraces.

235
The honor of a King stands in the multitude of the people; and his strength
and safety in the love of his subjects.

236
They are not fit for the Court, that are either obstinate in opinion, or
uncourteous in carriage: wherefore the noble mind is most fit; for they are
always more courteous to take things in good part, than the baser sort.

237
The glory of a Kingdom is a pious and potent Prince: the strength of a
Prince, is a religious and a loyal subject: the happiness of a subject is a
long settled, and a well established peace, the fruits of that peace is plenty,
and al worldly felicity.

238
It is the part of a wise Counsel, to use all means for the preventing
jealousy between the King and his people, as the greatest evil in a
Commonwealth, and the deadliest enemy to affection and obedience. Griefs are
more troublesome in the apprehension than in the sense: Evils that are felt,
are far more curable than those which are feared.

239
As unity within it self felicifies, and perpetuates; so civil discord
demolishes, and destroys the very being of a Commonwealth. A Kingdom that is
divided cannot stand. It is better for a State to admit of two inconveniences,
than one such mischief; and more honorable to comply with some loss on both
sides, than by weakening one another to give advantage to a foreign enemy. That
body is in great danger that bleeds inwardly.

240
Let that Kingdom which has enjoyed a long peace, expect a hard bargain in
the next war: long settled humors give foment to the distemper when it breaks
forth, and prolongs the cure when it seeks remedy: No surfeit so mortal, as
what proceeds from the security of a long continued peace.

241
Every Age breeds some exorbitant Spirits, who turn the edge of their own
sufficiency, upon whatsoever they can devour in their ambitious apprehensions,
seeking rather a great than a good fame, and holding it the chiefest honor to
be thought the wonder of their times; which if they attain unto, is but in the
condition of Monsters, that are generally much admired, but more abhorred.

242
Friendship is of that nature, as it always desires to be entertained with
mutual good offices; therefore we must not suffer it to grow cold; for
coldness is a degree of deadness.

243
They that are to make demands or requests to their friends, must regard how
the same may stand with the safety of their friends, that their motions and
requests may stand with their honor and surety to accord unto it.

244
The cause of assembling all Parliaments, are two; for Laws, or Money; the one
being the sinews of peace, the other of war.

245
Good purposes as well in Princes, as private men, have many hinderers;
therefore, when the commodities, or discommodities of taking or refusing are
once thoroughly weighed, a speedy resolution is the best to cut off such
inconveniences, that delay of time commonly brings.

246
As the natural body is delighted in change, so is also the politic body
greedy of alteration.

247
As a whole man meanly able, may do as much as a halfman better able; so an
inferior wit bent and conversant upon one subject, shall many times with
patience and mediation, dissolve and undo many of those knots and doubts, which
a greater wit distracted with many matters, would rather cut in two, then
unknit.

248
Such as are bent to hold with the difficulties of effecting any thing, are
commonly against it.

249
Many neglect the wisdom, to maintain themselves, that God has bestowed upon
them, and so worthily suffer by their own folly.

250
In civil actions he is the greater and deeper politic, that can make other
men the instruments of his will and ends, and yet never acquaint them with his
purpose, so as they shall do it, and yet not know what they do; than he that
imparteth his meaning to those that he imployeth.

251
God made angels pure minds bodilesse, beasts bodies mindlesse, but man both
body and mind, the Horizon between both.

252
Errors by mistaking, should not be too rigorously censured, but errors that
be wilful, should not be spared.

253
The duty of a Magistrate consists in three especial points, in ruling,
teaching, and judging, that he be wise to govern, virtuous to give example, and
impartial to judge.

254
If thy strength of parts has raised thee to an eminent place in the
Commonwealth, take heed thou sit sure; if not, thy fall will be the
greater: As great worth is a fit matter for glory; so glory is a fair mark for
envy. By how much the more thy advancement was thought the reward of desert, by
so much thy fall will administer matter for disdain. It is the fortune of a
strong brain, if not to be dignified as meritorious, to be deprest as dangerous.

255
It is the duty of a Statesman especially in a Free State, to hold the
Commonwealth to her principles, and first form of government, from the which
the more she swerves, the more she declines: which being declined, she is not
commonly reduced, without that extremity, the danger whereof rather ruins than
rectifies. Fundamental alterations bring inevitable perils.

256
Let not the proceedings of a Commander, though never so commendable, be
confined to all times; as these alter, so must they: if these vary, and not
they, ruin is not far off: he least fails in his design that meets time in its
own way, and he that observes not the alteration of the times, shall seldom be
victorious but by ch^nce: but he that cannot alter in his course according to
the alteration of the times, shall never be a Conqueror. He is a wise
Commander, and only he, can discover the alteration of the times, and
proportion his proceedings according to the alteration he discovers.

257
Necessity of fighting doubles courage in the soldier, and an impossibility of
escape adds spirit to the coward: it is great wisdom in a Commander, always
to leave a Port open, to encourage his enemy to flight: it is better to build
him a silver bridge to invite him to go, then bul-warks of earth to necessitate
him to stay.

258
It is the part of a wise Commander, not to suffer his soldiers to fall to the
spoil till his conquest be perfected, being the ready way to snatch victory
out of his hands: he that takes up the stakes ere the game be done, lays them
often down again with shame and disadvantage.

259
The greatest weakening to an army is disorder: the greatest cause of disorder
is want of pay; by reason whereof the soldiers either mutiny or revolt: Let
that Prince that would be obeyed in his Commands, not suffer a greater power in
the Camp then himself: the powerfullest Commander in an Army is necessity.

260
It is great wisdom in Counselors of State to make have, leisurely: State
alteratious are best graduall; it is less danger to anticipate occasion then
to foreslow it. To reap in a right season makes a full Barn, and a rich Farmer.

261
Those counsels are best carried, which the enemy rather finds by execution,
than relation, and which trust not to any, without whom they may be put in Act:
as expedition is the life of Action, so society is the life of consultation.

262
Prepare to war when thou propoundest for peace; otherwise thy peace will be
hardly obtained, or too highly prized: What ere thy first Article be, let
disbanding be the last; A cunning cur though he wag his tail, will show his
teeth; the best Treaty is with a drawn Sword, and the safest peace is concluded
under a Buckler.

263
The Alchymists from a true position do produce a false assumption to maintain
their practice; as for example, Every creature or thing has a natural
inclination to the perfection of the same kind; as poor silly Worms by change
of climate may become Serpents; and in all Minerals the perfection is gold, so
all inferious metals have inclination to gold, which is but (as we say) the
quintessence, fat, or cream of other metals, and not consisting in any vein of
it self. Now from this general position, the Alchymists with a certain
composition with other metals (most having some gold in them) do think to
ripen them into gold by Art, as men may do the other fruits of the earth; which
is no certain rule, and therefore a false assumption from a true position.

264
That many learned writers have recorded things for truth, which experience
has falsified; as for instance, His Majesty gave his own experience touching
the worms found in a Stags head, which are reported to die if put into water,
but will live in wine, the which being tried, they live equally in both.

265
Sir Francis Kinnaston by experience falsified the Alchymists report, that a
Hen being sed for certain days with gold, beginning when Sol was in Leo, should
be converted into gold, and should lay golden eggs: which being tried, was no
such thing, but became indeed very fat. His Majesty's answer and conceit
thereupon was, that surely somewhat was omitted in Sir Francis his experiment;
to wit, he wanted faith to believe, as himself did always in the like, or such
matters: but one thing more might have been added, more amply to satisfy the
experiment; if the Cock had been first sed with gold, and afterward have trodden
the Hen, might happily have suceeded better.

266
That it is as absurd and wicked to account the Virgin Mary the Queen of heaven
(according to the Popes doctrine) because she is the natural mother of our
Lord, as to think there is a Goddess, because we have a known God.

267
That the Virgin Mary was more happy in bearing Christ first in her heart by
faith, than in her womb.

268
That he did believe, that Christ did affect and love her while he was on the
earth more than any other woman, as he had reason; but not as he was God, but
as he was man, the son of her flesh. This does not derogate from her due
estimation, but to nullify her power now with Christ in heaven, as well as of
all other Saints, to remit and get pardon for sin.

269
Whether boldness or bashfulnesse did soonest prevail in Court? His Majesty's
opinion was, that bashfulnesse did; alluding to the Lord Duke of Buckingham,
who at his first coming to Court, exceeded in bashfulnesse; and when his
Majesty first cast his eye upon him, the Lord of Arundel being asked by his
Majesty, what he thought of him? he answered, that his blushing bashfulnesse
was such, as he thought he would do but little good in Court favors.

270
That if there were no other quarrel between the Papists and Protestants, but
the number of Sacraments, he would himself be a Papist; for he held it not
worth the quarrelling: as appeared by a tale of two friends in Scotland, being
great in friendship, and in the cup falling out about that subject, the one a
great Papist, the other a Protestant; so they fought, and were both slain; a
third said, before he would have lost his life in that quarrel, he would have
divided the seven into three and an half.

271
That many things in Religion, were rather carried by man's opinion, than
perfect intention to the truth.

272
That himself would not condemn any thing for heresy that had been anciently
confirmed by an universal consent.

273
That of extreme Unction, as of other things used by that Church of Rome, he
was of an indifferent opinion, so it might be continued according to the first
intention, and so of many other things with them.

274
That of his wife, the Queen Anne deceased, (he spoke to his own comfort) that
she would often say unto him, Look you keep your self in the right way; for I
am resolved to follow you whithersoever, even to the brink of hell; for I am
within your charge: saying withal, that all good wives should never forsake
their husbands in any thing, being required by them, not directly against God,
not for any disease or sickness whatsoever.

275
That he would never believe any news in verse, since the hearing of a Ballad
made of the Bishop of Spalata, touching his being a Mattyr.

276
That he would never use other argument to convince the Papists of their
opinion of miracles, but by their own doctrine, whereunto most of their
miracles are altogether repugnant: as for example; A fable they have, that the
Picture of our Lady should stir, etc. their doctrine is, that their Images are
but representative, etc. Now what disproportion appears between their opinion
and doctrine?

277
To bestow benefits on the bad, makes them worse, and vilifieth the reward of
the virtuous.

278
Clemency is a divine instinct, and works supernatural effects.

279
By the Devils means, Devils can never be cast out; and therefore they are
fools, who to cure a disease cast on by a witch, seek the help of some other
witch, whereas prayer and amendment of life is the only cure.

280
It is the part of a well advised State not to entrust a weighty service, unto
whom a noted injury, or dishonor has been done, and not first righted: he can
never be a zealous performer of service, the height of whose expectation can
rather recover a lost name, than can gain a fresh honor.

281
It is the property of a wise Commander not to read books so much as men, nor
men so much as Nations: he that can discern the inclinations, conditions, and
passions of a Kingdom, gains his State or Prince a great advantage both in
peace and war.

282
If thou art called to the dignity of a Commander, dignifie thy place by thy
Commands; and that thou may be the more perfect in commanding others,
practice daily upon thy self. Remember thou art a servant to the public weal,
and therefore forget all private respects: remember thou art a Champion for a
Kingdom; forget therefore all private affections, either of love or hate: he
that would do his Country right, must not be too sensible of personal wrongs.
He that would be remembered in the rols of honor, must it count it no dishonor
to forget himself.

283
In the tender of an oath of Association or Covenant, behave thy self wisely:
either take it not, or being taken break it not: Wit may find out niceties to
wrest it, but no just arguments to avoid it; an oath is taken not in the sense
of him that takes it; but of him that takes assurance by it.

284
In Domestic Commotions being doubtful which side to take, if the cause be
religion, thou need no counselor: If merely civil let the Scriptures and
reason direct thee: However, there is a way presents it self to thy wisdom,
whereby, if thou have an estate, thou may make it sure whosoever wins, and
make thy one Stake sure whosoever loses. Capiat qui capere potest.

285
The lower sort of people are desirous of novelties, and apt for change;
weighing government with the scales of their own fortunes: they are to sensible
of evils in present to fear worse in future: let such know, they move in their
particular Orbs, not in the common Sphere; and that the alteration of the
heavens makes no star greater: which way soever the change moves, a Cobbler
shall be but a Cobbler still.

286
It is high wisdom in a Prince to weigh the several actions of his
counselors: for the want whereof so many good Princes have both lost
themselves, and ruined their Kingdoms: it is a common thing, to mask private
ends, under public pretenses: it is better for a State to have a wicked Prince
of a good nature, than a good Prince with such Counselors.

287
It is very requisite for a Prince to have an eye: the Clergy are elected, and
come in by the collation of him or particular Patrons, and not wholly by the
people; and that their power hold dependence, not from foreign authority: it
is dangerous in a Kingdom, where the Crosiers receive not power from the
Regal sword.

288
It is a perilous weakness in a State to be slow of resolution in the time of
war: To be irresolute in determination, is both the sign, and ruin of a weak
State: such affairs attend not time: let the wise Statesman abhor delay, and
resolve rather what to do, than advise what to say; slow deliberations in a
quick business are Symptoms, either of a faint courage, or weak forces, or
false hearts.

289
If a Conqueror has subdued a Country or a City abounding with pleasure, let
him be very circumspect to keep himself and soldiers temperate: pleasures
brings effiminacy, and effiminacy fore-runs ruin: such conquests without
blood, or sweat, sufficiently revenge themselves upon the heads of their
intemperate Conquerours.

290
It is a dangerous sign of approaching ruin in a Republic, when religion is
neglected, and her established ceremonies interrupted. Let therefore that
Prince or State, that would be potent, be pious, and that they may punish
profaneness the better, let them be religious: the joy of Jerusalem depends
upon the peace of Sion.

291
It is dangerous for a Prince to use ambitious natures, but upon necessity,
either for his wars to be skreens of his danger, or to be instruments, for the
demolishing insolent greatness: And that they may be the less dangerous, let
him them, rather out of mean births than noble; and out of harsh natures,
rather than plausible; and always be sure to balance them with those that are
as proud as themselves.

292
Let Princes be very careful in the choice of their counselors, choosing
neither by the greatness of the beard, or the smoothness of the face, nor by
the form of the head, but by the squarenesse of their actions: let them be
wise, but not crafty; active without private ends, courageous without malice;
religious without faction; secret without fraud; one better read in his Princes
business, than his nature; and a riddle only to be read above.

293
Let him that desires to enjoy happiness in a State, reverence good things
past; submit to lawful things present; be provident for things future: let him
wish for good Princes: if good, prize them without satiety; if bad, endure them
without rebellion.

294
Before thou build a Fortress consider to what end; if for resistance against
the enemy, it is useless: A valiant Army is a living Fortress: if for
suppressing the subject, it is hurtful: It breeds jealousies, and jealousies
beget hatred. Howsoever, if thou have astrong army, it adds nothing to thy
strength: if thy army be weak it conduces much to thy danger: the surest Fort,
is the hand of thy soldiers; and the safest Citadel, is the hearts of thy
subjects.

295
It is a Princely Alchimy, out of necessary war, to extract an honorable
peace; and more beseeming the Majesty of a Prince, to thirst after peace, than
Conquest: blessedness is promised to the peacemaker, not to the conqueror:
it is a happy State whose Prince has a peaceful hand, and a martial heart;
able both to use peace, and to manage war.

296
Let not a Commander be too forward to undertake a war without the person of
his Prince: it is a thanklesse employment where mischief attends upon the best
success, and where (if a Conqueror) he shall be in danger, either through his
own ambition, or his Princes suspicion.

297
When the humors of the people are stirred by discontents, or grief, it is
wisdom in a Prince to give them moderate liberty to evaporate: he that turns
the blood back too hastily, makes the blood bleed inwardly, and fills the body
with malignity.

298
If having levied an army, thou find thy self too weak, either through want
of men or money, the longer thou delayest to fight the greater the incovenience
grows: if once thy army falls a sunder, thou certainly losest by delay; where,
hazarding thy fortunes betimes, thou have the advantage of thy men; and may
by fortune win the day: it is less dishonor to be overcome by force than
flight.

299
It is the part of a wise Commander in wars, whether offensive, or defensive,
to work into the breasts of thy soldiers, a necessity of fighting: necessity
of the action takes away the fear of the act, and makes bold resolution the
favorite of fortune.

300
Clemency and mildness is most proper for a Principallity; but reservednesse,
and severity for a Republic; but moderation in both: Excess in the one breeds
contempt, in the other hatred; when to sharpen the first, and when to sweeten
the last, let time and occasion direct thy judgment.

301
Be not covetous for priority, in advising thy Prince to doubtful attempts,
which concern his State: if they prosper the glory must be his; if they fail,
the dishonor will be thine: when the spirit of a Prince is stopped in the
discharge, it will recoil, and wound the first adviser.

302
If being Commander of an army, thou espiest a gross and manifest error in thy
enemy, look well to thy self, stratagem is not far off: he that sets his Queen
in palpable danger, may chance, at next remove, give thy King Checkmate: he
whom desire of victory blinds too much, is apt to stumble at his own
destruction.

303
It is very requisite for a Prince that desires the continuance of peace, in
times of peace to encourage and make much of his Commanders: When brave spirits
find neglect to be the effect of quiet times, they devise all means to remove
the cause, and by suggesting inducements to new wars, disturb and unsettle the
old peace, buying private honor with public dangers.

304
It is the height of a provident Commander, not only to keep his own designs
undiscoverable to the enemy, but likewise to be studious in discovering his: he
that can best do the one, and nearest guess at the other, is the next step to
a Conqueror: but he that fails in both, must either ascribe his overthrow to
his own folly, or his victory to extraordinary providence.

305
Let States that aim at greatness, beware lest new gentry multiply too fast,
or grow too glorious: Where there is to great a disproportion betwixt the
Gentry and the common subject, the one grows insolent, the other slavish: Where
the body of the Gentry grows too glorious for the Corslet, there the heads of
the vulgar was too heavy for the Helmet.

306
Upon the beleaguering of a City, let the Commander endeavor to take from the
defendants all scruples which may dis-invite them to a necessity of defense:
Whom the fear of slavery necessitates to fight, the boldness of their
resolution will disadvantage the Assaylants, and deficilitate their design:
Sense of necessity justifies the war, and they are hopeful in their arms,
which have no other hope but in their arms.

307
It is good for Princes and States (if they use ambitious men for their
advantage) so to order things, that they be still progressive, rather than
retrograde. Where ambitious natures find open passage, they are rather busy
than dangerous; and if well watched in their proceedings, they will catch
themselves in their own snare, and prepare a way to their own destruction.

308
Expect the army of thy enemy, on plain and easy ground, and still avoid
mountainous and rocky places, and strait passages, to the utmost of thy power:
it is not safe to pitch any where, where thy whole forces cannot be brought
together: he never deserved the name of good Gamester, that hazards his whole
rest upon less than the strength of his whole game.

309
It matters not much whether in government, thou tread the steps of severe
Hannibal, or gentle Scipio, so thy actions be honorable, and thy life
virtuous: both in the one, and in the other, there is defect and danger, if not
corrected and supported by the fair repute of some extraordinary endowments: no
matter black or white so the Steed be good.

310
It is not fit that any thing should succeed well with the wicked, for it is a
punishment of his fault.

311
As it is a principle of nature, that putrefaction is more contagious before
maturity than after; so it is a position of Moral Philosophy, that men
abandoned to vice, do not so much corrupt manners, as those that are half good
and half evil.

312
The end of man's Creation is not for the slaughter; nor education of Arms, to
make men cast-aways.

313
Virtuous men will use their education military, as wise men do their weapons,
for ornament amongst their friends, against their enemies for defense.

314.
Those actions that are intended for opinion, are carried with more ceremony
than ordinary.

315
Dolus versatur in generalibus. Generals dwell too much in the air; therefore
he that will not be deceived, must descend to particulars.

316.
When Jupiter speaks, he uses to join thunder to it: so a King should not
speak, except he maintain it by action.

317
Christ recommends unto us the wisdom of Serpents, not thereby to deceive or
betray others, but to arm our selves against the deceit and treason of
Hypocrites.

318
There is a heaven and a hell, Praemium and Paena, for the Elect and the
Reprobate: but how many other rooms there be, we are not on Gods Council.

319
Prayer, is one of the worthiest actions we do; for we speak with God, and as
it were enter in a reasoning with him, it brings down God from heaven, and
makes him to grant our will, and dwell with us, and we with him Eternally.

320
Of temporal goods, we should pray only for those that are necessary for our
being, or at least, wel-being; and not for those things that are for Luxury and
Superfluity; for such are commonly baits to sin: But if God grant us also
these, we should be thankful, and soberly use them according to our calling.

321
It was never found, that blood and too much severity, did good in matters of
Religion; God never loving to plant the Church by violence and bloud*shed.

325
The whole Scripture chiefly contains two things, a Command, and a
Prohibition; to do such things, and to abstain from the contrary; it is our
duty to obey in both.

326
It becomes every Officer and Commander, to know what belongs to his place, and
not to encroach upon his Superiors; so shall good order be best kept in a
great Family.

327
It is the safest way in a martial expedition, to commit the main charge to
the hands of one: companions in Command begets confusion in the Camp. When two
able Commanders are joined in equal Commission, each is apt to think his own
way best, and by mutual thwarting each other, both give opportunity to the
enemy, and make destraction in the Army.

328
Let that Captain who is appointed for the guard of an assaulted City, avoid as
a Rock all manner of confusion: when a multitude takes arms without order, that
City becomes ruinous, without redress.

329
If like Manlius thou command stout and great things be like Manlius stout
to execute thy great commands; it is a foul blemish in Sovereignty, when the
will roars, and the power whispers: if thou can not execute as freely as thou
command, command no more than what thou may as freely execute.

330
If one party desire to obtain any thing of the other, being in a mutual
difference, let him (if occasion will bear it) give him no time to advise
himself: Let him endeavor to make him see a necessity of sudden resolution,
and the danger of either denial or delay: he that gives time to resolve,
teaches to deny, and gives warning to prepare.

331
Let not the Army at the first encounter, be too prodigal in her Assaults, but
husband her strength for a dead lift: When the enemy has abated the fury of
his first heat, let him then feel, thou have reserved thy forces for the last
blow: So shall the honor he has gained by his valor be turned to thy use,
and increase the glory of thy valor. Foregames when they prove, are speediest;
but After games if wisely played are surest.

332
It is very requisite for a well advised Republic to cast a strict and serious
eye upon those that seek favor by thy service: some seek it in a public way,
some in a private: The first brings honor to a Republic and ought to receive
encouragement: The second is very pernicious, and dangerous, and ought to be
rewarded with severe punishment: that brings forth glory and emulation; this
popularity, and faction, (and if not punished) ruin.

333
Let not the covetousness of a Captain purloin to his own use, or any way
bereave the soldiers of any profit due unto their services, either in their
means or spoils. Such injuries (being quickened by their daily necessities) are
never forgot: What soldiers earn with the hazard of their lives (if not
enjoyed) prophesies an overthrow in the next battle.

334
If a Prince would have virtuous subjects, let his subjects have a virtuous
Prince: so shall he better punish the vices of his people; so shall they
trulier prize virtue, and follow it, being exemplified in their Prince.

235
It is the part of a wise Commander, to cast an eye rather upon the actions,
than the Persons, and rather to read men in their merits, than in Ladies
letters: he that for favor or for base reward prefers a soldier, betrays his
Kingdom for a bribe, or sels his honor for a kiss.

336
Where order and fury are well acquainted the war prospers, and the soldiers
end no less men than they begun: order takes spirit of fury, and fury takes
rules of order: but where order is wanting fury runs mad; and when fury is
wanting order lies dead: in the absence of order fury runs her own way; and
being an unthrift of her own strength, fails in the first Assault, and cravens:
and such, beginning more than men, end less than women.

337
It is the quality of a wise Commander, to make his soldiers confident in his
wisdom, and their own strength: if any danger be to conceal it; if manifest,
to lessen it: let him possess his Army with the justness of the war, and a
certainty of the victory: a good cause makes a stout heart, and a strong Arm;
they that fear an overthrow are half conquered.

338
It is requisite for a General to mingle love with the severity of his
discipline: they that cannot be induced to fear for love, will never be forced
to love for fear: love opens the heart; fear shuts it: that encourages; this
compels: And victory meets encouragement, but flees compulsion.

339
In two degrees stands the whole service of God by man, interior upward by
prayer, exterior or downward by works flowing there from, before the world.

340
He that nourishes a faction between his servants in his own family, does
nothing else but help to set his own house on fire.

341
Although we are not stocks nor stones not to feel calamities, yet we should
not suffer the feeling of them, so to overrule and astonish our reason, as it
may stay us from taking the best resolution, and using thereof, for remedy that
can be found out.

342
Age is venerable, not in respect of the appearance, but in respect of the
annexion; because wisdom commonly accompanies such a presence.

343
The Devils are like the Pest which smites those surest, which flies it
furthest, and apprehends deepliest the peril thereof.

343
Alexander was not thanked and commended for conquering the world, but for
doing it before thirty years old.

344
It is the greatest decay to youth, either not to endure good advice, or not to
believe it, until their peril and overthrow make them see it to their shame.

345
It is no power inherent in the Circles, or in the holiness of names of God
used blasphemously, nor in whatsoever rites or ceremonies, that either can
raise any infernal spirit, or limit him perforce within or without such and
such Circles; but it is the craft of the Devil, the father of lies, who having
first of all prescribed that form of doing, feigning himself to be commanded
and restrained thereby, will be loath to pass the bounds of those injunctions.

346
Continual experience proves that idleness is ever the greatest spur to Lechery.

347
Man being compounded of all the four complexions, whose father are the
elements, although there be a mixture of them all in all the parts of the body,
yet must diverse parts of this Microcosm or little world of ours, be diversely
more inclined, some to one some to another complexion, according to the
diversity of their use: that of those discords a perfect harmony may be made
up, for the maintenance of the whole body.

348
It is a thanklesse and a dangerous office, to make an award betwixt two
differing States, wherein as thou shall seldom content above one party, so
thou shall often displease both: it is a bad service; wherein whilst thou
endeavourest to make two friends, between themselves, thou gainest two enemies
to thy self.

349
It is more dangerous for a Prince to be disdained by his subjects than to be
hated: hatred admits fear, and fear forces loyalty. But disdain excludes both
love and fear, and consequently dissolves obedience. That Prince that is hated,
is in his high road to ruin; and he that is disdained is at his journeys end.

350
There be three sorts of Government, Monarchical, Aristocraticall,
Democraticall: And they are apt to fall three several ways into ruin; the
first by Tyranny; the second by Ambition; the last by tumult. A Commonwealth
grounded upon any of these, is but of short continuance; but being wisely
mingled, either guard the other and makes the government exact.

351
Before thou undertake a war let thine eye number thy forces, and let thy
judgment weigh them: if thou have a rich enemy no matter how poor thy
soldiers be, if courageous and faithful. Trust not too mch to the power of
thy treasure, for it will deceive thee, being more apt to expose thee for a
Prey, than defend thee. Gold is not able to make good soldiers, but good
soldiers are able to find out gold.

352
If the Territories of thy equal enemy are situated far south from thee, the
advantage is thine, whether he make offensive or defensive war; if North the
advantage is his. Cold is less tolerable than heat. This is a friend to
nature, that an enemy.

353
It is not only uncivil but dangerous for soldiers, by reproachful words,
to throw disgrace upon an enemy: Base terms are bellows to a slaking fury, and
goads to quicken up revenge in a fleeing foe: he that objects a Cowardice
against a failing enemy, adds spirit to him to disprove the aspersion at his
own cost: it is therefore the part of a wise soldier to refrain it, or of a
wise Commander to reprove it.

354
Let that Commander, which desires to give a fair Account, be very strict both
in punishments and rewards, and proportion them according to the merits of the
deserver, and the fault of the delinquent: let the service of the one be duly
rewarded, lest thou discourage worth, and the demerits of the other strictly
punished, lest thou encourage vice: the neglect of the one weakens an army; the
omission of both ruins it.

355
If tbou desire to know the power of a State, observe in what correspondence it
lives with her neighbors. If it make alliance with the contribution of money,
it is an evident sign of weakness; if with her valor, or repute of forces, it
manifests a native strength: it is an infallible sign of power to sell
friendship; and of weakness to buy it. That which is bought with gold, will
hardly be maintained with steel.

356
If thy two neighboring Princes be at variance, show thy self either a true
friend or a fair enemy; it is indiscretion to adhere to him, whom thou have
least cause to fear if he vanquish: Neutrality is dangerous whereby thou
becomest a necessary Prey to the Conqueror.

35
It is a greater argument of a Princes wisdom, not only to choose, but also
to prefer wise Counselors: and such are they, that seek less their own
advantages than his; whom wise Princes ought to reward, lest they become their
own carvers, and so of good servants become bad Masters.

358
It is very dangerous to try experiment in a State, unless extreme necessity
be urgent, or popular utility be palpable. It is better for a State to connive
a while at an inconvenience, than too suddenly to rush upon a reformation.

359
If a valiant Prince be succeeded by a weak successor, he may for a while
maintain a happy State, by the remaining virtue of his glorious predecessor:
but if his life be long, or dying, he be succeeded by one less valiant then
the first, his Kingdom is very likely to fall to ruin. That Prince is a true
father to his Country that leaves it the rich inheritance of a brave son. When
Alexander succeeded Philip, the world was too little for the Conqueror.

360
It is very dangerous for a Prince or Republic, to make continual practice of
cruel exaction; where the subject stands in the sense or expectation of evil,
he is apt to provide either for his safety, either from the evil he feels or
from the danger he fears, and growing bold in conspiracy makes faction, which
faction is the mother of ruin.

361
That Prince who stands in fear more of his own people then of strangers, ought
to build fortresses in his land. But he that is more afraid of strangers than
his own subjects shall build them more securely in the affections of his people.

362
Carry a watchful eye upon dangers till the come to ripeness, and when they
are ripe let loose a speedy hand: he that expects them too long meets them too
late; and he that meets them too soon-gives advantage to the evil. Commit
their beginning to Argus his eyes, and their ends to Briareus his hands, and
thou art safe.

363
Of all difficulties in a State, the temper of true government most felicifies
and perpetuates it. Too sudden alterations distempers it; too contrary destroys
it. Had Nero turned his Kingdom as he did his Harp, his harmony had been more
honorable, and his reign more prosperous.

364
If a Prince fearing to be assailed by a foreign enemy, has a well armed
people, and well addressed for war, let him stay at home, and expect him there.
But if his subjects be unarmed, or his Kingdom unacquainted with the stroke of
war, let him meet the enemy in his quarters: the further he keeps the war from
his own home the less danger.

365
It is great prudence in a Statesman to discover an inconvenience in the
birth; which, so discovered, is easy to be suppressed. But if it ripen into
custom, the sudden remedy is worse than the disease: in such a case better to
temporize a little, than struggle too much. He that opposes a full-aged
inconvenience too suddenly, strengthens it.

366
Let a Prince preserve himself in the favor of the people, more than the
great-ones: they are many; these but few: these cannot be satisfied upon easy
terms; whereas they are content with small matters. Moreover, the Prince is
necessitated to live always with the same people, but may do well enough with
the same Great-ones: tumults in a State, are more dangerous than ambition.

367
If thou endeavourest to make a Republic in a Nation where the Gentry abounds,
thou shall hardly prosper in that design: and if thou would erect a
Principallity in a land where there is much equallity of people, thou shall not
easily effect it: the way to bring the first to pass, is to weaken the Gentry;
the means to effect the last, is to advance and strengthen turbulent and
ambitious spirits: so that being placed in the midst of them, their forces may
maintain thy power, and thy favor may prefer their ambition: otherwise there
shall be neither proportion nor continuance.

368
It is more excellent in a Prince to have a provident eye for the preventing
future mischiefs, than to have a potent arm for the suppressing of present
evils: Mischiefs in a State are like Hectic fevers in a body natural; in the
beginning hard to be known, but easily to be cured: but being let alone a
while, more easy to be known, but harder to be cured.

369
If a Kingdom be apt to rebellion, it is wisdom to preserve the Nobility and
Commonalty still at variance. Where one of them is discontented the matter is
not great; the Commons are flow of motion if not quickened by the Nobility: the
Nobility weak in power if not strengthened by the Commons: then is danger, when
the Commonalty troubles the water, and the Nobility steps in.

370
He is said rightly to serve his Country whose body executes what his wisdom
plotteth.

371
Common affability is commendable and not to be misliked, so it reserve the
state of the party; otherwise it is not humility but baseness.

372
Sauces, are more like medicines than meat, and they serve only for the
pleasing of the taste: and not for satisfying of the necessity of nature.

373
We ow all men salutation and a cap, but not familiarity; for except we be sure
their worthiness deserves it, we betray our selves.

374
Whatsoever God does by a Medium, must know an end, what immediately belongs to
eternity.

375
The Slanderer and he that defires to hear lies, are whelps of a litter; the
one has a Devil in his tongue, and the other in his ears.

376
Fortune has no power over wisdom, but of sensuality, and of lives that swim
and navigate without the loadstone of discretion and judgment.

377
The disposition of wicked men are perverse, Coaction must force them to
goodness, and correction restrain them from wickedness.

378
Man's happiness does rest in the managing of his own time, so that every man
may be blessed and rich in perfection, if his own dissoluteness, and
unthriftinesse incurs not the contrary.

379
All qualities without the direction of virtue, profit not, but overthrow their
possessours.

380
When the mouth of Lazarus was shut his soars spoke for him; so when we cannot
use our hands in defense of our Country, we should lift them up for our Princes
protection.

381
If he be to be pitied, that bestows half his patrimony in hobbi-horses, then
much more they, who having but a little time dedicate half to sleep and
idleness.

382
As troubles come for exercise of virtue and increase of merit, so affliction
sends many to prayer and fasting, and few men seldom do well, except necessity
enforce them; for hunger and poverty makes men industrious, and the laws make
them good.

383
As the servants of God are known by humility and charity, so the servants of
the devil are known by pride and cruelty.

384
The confession of our sins do no less honor God, than his glory is blemished
by Commission.

385
Suspicion is no where so conversant and powerful as among Princes, unto whom,
to say rightly, it rightly belongs: For howsoever they are they have enemies;
if good, envious; if evil some that lay hold upon that occasion; yea, even
their friends are doubtful, not being easy to be discerned, whether lovers of
themselves or of their fortunes.

386
To pray to the Lord with the lips for any corporal benefit, and yet to have
the heart fixed in confidence of any natural means, is a kind of spiritual
adultery.

FINIS.

