JOYFUL NEWS FROM THE KING, And His Majesty's Remonstrance and Resolution
touching the Army; Delivered to Captain Hatfield on Saturday last in the Isle
of Wigbt, to be communicated to all loyal and faithful Subjects, and
dispersed throughout the several Counties within the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales. Also, a Fleet at Sea near the Isle of Wight, and their
Design to rescue his Majesty from the Army. And terrible News from
Westminster. December. 4. 1648.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE printer's or publisher's device

London. Printed for J. Baitman. near Temple Bar, 1648.

JOYFUL NEVVES FROM THE KING Declaring His Majesty's Resolution concerning the
Army, and the bloody proceedings in the Isle of WIGHT.
Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty having seriously perused the Remonstrance of the Army, finds it to
be of so high a nature, that He cannot but stand amazed at the sense, scope,
and method thereof and does declare, That He should rather sacrifice His life,
for His People, and a good Conscience, than be guilty of the Engagement of
modelling and establishing a new Government; but withal remonstrates, That He
approves of their Proposals for rectifying the Law, and purging the abuses and
errous thereof, for the ease and liberty o^ His people, desiring that all their
Results and Consultations may redound to the honor of these bleeding Nations,
etc.

And his Majesty has further declared that (notwithstanding the present
distr^ctions, and dissolving of the Treaty, yet) He desires from His very heart
and soul that the peace of His Kingdoms may ^e^ speedily established, and the
liberty of the Subject preserved und unviolated, whatsoever becomes of Him, etc.

Col. Ewers uses his Majesty with much civility and respect, and the
deportment of the Soldiery takes deep impression in his Majesty's heart, which
causes a great change and alteration in his Majesty's Royal Breast, and it is
hoped few days will produce a convincement from his Majesty of all his former
errors.

Diverse shipping lie hovering upon this Coast, and it is supposed they would
fain attempt a design for rescuing the King from the power and protection of
the Army, but strong Guards are placed and much vigilance used for the defense
and safety of this Island.

Carisbrok Castle 3 December. 1648.

The further Demanus and Resolution of the Army.
Whereas we arr full of sad apprehensions concerning the danger and evil of
the treaty with the King, and of any accommodation or restitution of him
thereupon, We did by our late Remonstrance upon the Reasons and Grounds therein
expressed, make our application thereby unto the presen-House of Commons, that
the dangerous evil of that way might be avoided, and the peace of the Kingdom
settled upon more righteous, safe and hopeful grounds, viz. a more equal
dispensing of Justice and Mercy in relation to things done or suffered in the
late wars, and the establishing of the future Government of this kingdom upon a
safe succession and equal Constitution of Parliaments, and that (for the
ending of present, and avoiding of future Differences) to be Ratified by an
Agreement and Subscription of the people thereunto. Which things we pressed in
the way of Reason and Persuasion only, that they might be duly and timely
considered. But to our grief we find, in stead of any Satisfacton or a
reasonable answer thereto, they are wholly rejected, without any consideration
of what ever Reason or Justice might be in the things set forth or propounded
therein; for what less can be understood, when the things propounded were
mainly for the avoidance of evils appearing in the Treaty with the King: And
seeing the prevailing part of those, to whom we did apply, to have as it were
their eyes wilfully shut, and ears stopped, against any thing of Light or Reason
offered to them, we find no place left for our former charitable or hopeful
apprehensions, concerning their error in such evil ways; but remaining fully
assured of the danger and destructivenesse thereof, as to all those public
ends for which they were entrusted, and also of the just advantage and
necessity which lie in the things we have propounded and insist on, we now see
nothing left, to which their engaging and persisting in such ways, and
rejection of these better things propounded, can rationally be attributed less
then a treacherous or corrupt neglect of, and Apostasy from the Public Trust
reposed in them; although we could wish from our souls, we might yet find the
contrary.

Therefore it is our hearts desire, and shall be our endeavor, that so much,
both of the matter and form of the present Parliamentory Authority may be
preserved, as can be safe, or will be useful to these ends, until a just and
full Constitution thereof, both for matter and form (suitable to the public
ends, it serves for) can be entroduced.

And therefore first, it should be great rejoicing (if God saw it good) that
the majority of the present House of Commons were become sensible of the evil
and distructivenesse of their late way, and would resolvedly and vigorously
apply themselves to the speedy execution of justice, with the righting and
easing of the oppressed people, and to a just settlement of the Kingdom upon
such foundations as have been propounded by us, and others for that purpose,
and would for the speedier and surer prosecution of these things exclude from
Communication in their Councels, all such corrupt and Apostarized Members as
have appeared hitherto, but to obstruct and hinder such matter of Justice,
Safety, and public interest, and to pervert their Councels a contrary way and
have therein so shamefully both falsified, and forftied their Trust,

But however if God shall not see it good (to vouchsafe that mercy to them and
the Kingdom) we shall secondly desire, That so many of them as God has kept
upright, and shall touch with a just sense of those things, would by
protestation or otherwise, acquit themselves from such breach of Trust, and
approve their faithfulness, by withdrawing from those that persist in the
guilt thereof, and take such a posture, whereby they may speedily and effectually
prosecute those necessary and public ends, without such inteeruptions,
Diversions, or depravations of their Council from the rest, to their endless
trouble, and hazard of the Kingdom as formerly, and for so many of them, whose
hearts God shall stir up thus to do.

We shall therein, in this case of extremity, look upon them as persons having
materially the chief Trust of the Kingdom remaining in them, and though not a
formal standing power to be continued in them, or drawn into ordinary
Presidents; yet the best and most rightful that can be had, as the present
state and exigence of affairs now stand; And we shall accordingly own them,
adhere to them, and be guided by them in their faithful prosecution of that
trust, in order unto, and until the introducing of a more full and formal power
in a just Representative to be speedy endeavored.

Now yet further to take away all jealousies in relation to our selves, which
might with hold or disccurse any honest members from this courage, as we have
the witness of God in our hearts, that in these proceedings we do not seek,
but even resolve we will not take advantages to our selves, either in point of
profit or power; and that if God did open to us a way, wherein with honesty and
faithfulness to the public Interest, and good people engaged for us, we
might presently be dischargeed, so as we might not in our present Employments
look on, and be accessory to, yea supporters of the Parliament, in the present
corrupt, oppressive and destructive proceedings, we should with rejoicing, and
without more ado embrace such a discharge, rather then interpose in these
things to our own vast trouble and hazard; so if we could but obtain a
rational assurance for the effectual prosecuting of these things, we shall
give any proportionable assurance on our parts, concerning our laying down of
arms, when, and as we should be required.

But for the present as the case stands, we apprehend our selves obliged in
duty to God, this Kingdom, and good men therein, to approve our utmost
abilities in all honest ways, for the avoiding of these great evils which we
have remonstrated, and for prosecution of the good things we have propounded;
and also that such persons who were the inviters of the late invasion from
Scotland, the Instigaters and incouragers of the late insurrections within this
Kingdom, and (those forcible ways failing) have still pursued those wicked
designs by treacherous and corrupt councels, may be brought to public justice
according to their several demerits. For all these ends we are now drawing up
with the Army to London, there to follow providence as God shall clear our way.

Both Houses having debated the Armies resolutions the well-affected party
voted, that they should be satisfied in all things by them desired; but diverse
dissented, and (as is said) have dese^ted the House.

VVestmin. 4. December. 2648.

FINIS.

