The Best Fee-Simple, Set forth in a Sermon at St Peter's in Cornhil, before the
Gentlemen and Citizens Born in the County of Nottingham, the 18. day of
February, 1657.

Being the Day of their Public Feast.

By Marmaduke James, Minister of Watton at Stone, in the County of Hertford.

MATTHEW. 13. 45, 46. Again, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant man,
seeking goodly Pearls, who when he had found one Pearl of great price, he went
and sold all that he had, and bought it. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for J.
Martin, J. Allestry, T. Dicas, and sold at their Shop at the Sign of the Bell,
in St Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

To the Right Honorable, And his Countries Worthy Patriot, HENRY, Lord Marquis
of Dorchester, etc.
My Lord,
I Will not injure your Lordships Temperance, in giving you a Surfeit of the
Feasts of the Ancients; their kinds, Military, Civil, and Sacred; upon Births,
Marriages, Covenants, Travels, Inaugurations, nay, Cutting of Teeth.
with some common (yet proper too) Feasts at their first flesh-breaking. The
Scripture gave the Jews their Regalim: (...) Buxt. Syn.
And Primitive Christians had their Agapae: And, through your Lordships
quickening and encouraging influence, our Countrymen too, for these three years
past, have been no Heteroclites from good Presidents in their Yearly Meetings,
Copied out from our own, and other Nations.

Many actions that seem petite, are great in consequence (as small Stars have
mighty influence.) This mingling, helps humility: Cael. Rod. Antiq.
and uniting, symbols frugalility: this Traffic of hearts, amicability: from
these Associations, men deriving a respect one for another, as the Loadstone
and Needle do by contact: Thus Men (like Virginal-jacks) are tied together by
the Teeth: and Bag-pipe like, commonly make best Music, when they are first
blown full.

Yet all this is but a Herd at Pasture (for Beasts can claw one another) till
the Mind and Soul be contesserate: For though some Seraphique Fantastiques,
would have the Soul, like the Philosophers Sphere of Fire, to eat nothing; yet
this is found a popular Error, as well as that of the Camelion: Dr Brown.
for she has a mouth, nay two for failing, placed indeed somewhat strangely; one
in the Ear, Herodot.
the other in the Eye. To treat which came in that first Course at the
Egyptians Table, A dead man's Scull.
viz. A Head that spoke without a Tongue. Buxt. Syn^. (...) Jos. contr. App.
The Jews Chidoth, as appears by Sampsons Riddles (at his Feast:) Our Saviors
Parables at his Swain Entertainments: Nay, our very Cheese-trenchers have got
the parings of old sentences on them, as if thereby they intended to Preach at
Dinner. It was then very fitting at a Feast of Christians, the Soul should be
caressed, and first served with her spiritual Viands; which was the true
occasion of both these Sermons: the Publication whereof (as additional to what
is said elsewhere) is no more, then by the Simposiaque Laws, as it were to pass
the Censor: Pancirol.
and as Fronts and Porches are usually set before Buildings, fairly Adorned
with some Great Coloss, or Giant, Bowing under their pretended Weight; so are
these Epistolary Praeludiums prefixed, which do no less Attaque commonly some
Fair Name; with this difference only, That there the House sustains the Sampson
that seems to pillar it, but here the Patron does reallize the contrary.

And now my Lord, I am like the Sun in his Perigee, or slow Motion, at my
hardest task: to account to your Lordship, why Conon, or his Rape, should be a
Person, or Present for the Court: How a Pilot, so obscure for parts, and so
little known for Person, can vouch so high a Name: Or that this Freight, that
consists neither of the Gold of Ophir (to wit, any deep Speculations) nor so
much as the painted Peacocks of Eloquence, should yet so boldly address to an
English Solomon.

In this great strait (my Lord) if the Queen Reason should seem to withdraw her
presence for a while, I am supported by the mission of her next Attendant, and
principal Lady of Honor, I mean, Excuse.

For grant it true, that the Comets only shine for Emperors, and Princes; yet
the Fixed Stars do influence the despised Peasant as much as them; and and the
meanest Swains are in^^qual Wardship with them, to the brightest Angels.
Gafferel.
Let the Talisman Professors mourn over their lost Art of attracting the virtue
of a Star, to Constellate a Vegitable therewith; yet we of inferior Orbs are
comforted by what we see the Chemists do, viz. Extract the sweetest Virtues
better by course Dung, then by the Suns most Noble and Fiery Beams.

And certainly, Honor, the Jewel of the High can be Forged ^nly (like Jewels)
by the black hands of those below, in whom it seems more Fountainously to
reside, then in the persons honored; insomuch, Arist. Eth. l. 1.
that the very ^eity it self, ^lled with all perfections, wanted this, till a
Creation: As the Longitude of the Earth is taken by Eclipses, Carp. Geog.
just so (methink^) Your Orators obscurity does give aim to take the Dimensions
of Your Lordships Excellence.

Neither should this seem strange in him, though Cloystered up at home, and
removed far from the practical knowledge of your Lordships actions, any more
then the man immured from visibility in his dark Optic Cell, is helped by that
Blackness, through the little ^unnel in his Window, to Landscape all those
floating Figures, and flying species, Aquil. Opt.
that seem to lose themselves in the wandering Air.

And though (My Lord) Munificent Bounty, with Learned and unparalleld Charity,
concentring in a Person Nobly streaming from Ancient Progenitors, sets You up
to shine in an high sphere; Yet alas! the dire blasts of Envy often waste
those Lights, Torching in a blustering Air, while blind Vaults preserve the
burning Lamps for many Centuries: Plin. Not. Hist.
If such effect should from these papers happen, how much should he rejoice in
that obscurity that preserves Your Glory? That, as a Corpse wrapped up in Balm,
and Spice, by the Retaliating power of Your Name, will be kept sweet, and
whole, in despite of the teeth of Time and Envy: For, though the Tropicks and
Poles move on their own little ones; yet in Mensuration, recourse must be had
to the greater Circles: So men's valuations passing by these Atoms of Work and
Person, shall take the Rise of their Judgments from the greatness of Your Noble
Protection.

Yet besides these wide shoes, Lasted for many Feet, there are some more proper
for mine; I being a poor twig of that Corporation, that drew much sap from the
Roots; and so long joyed under the shades of Your Grandfather, of Dear Memory,
and your late Departed (the Vespatian of that Town and Country) Brothers
Boughs; Amor ac deliciae humani generis. Suet. in vit. Tit. V^sp.
both whose Fruits there (when other Families are consumed in the Maw of Time)
in the peoples choicest affections will be preserved. And now (My Lord) we Your
Countrymen look upon You as that Sun, into whose bosom their flames have shed
their lights; as sometimes the expanded streams of Brightness came in, and made
a Periwig of Glory for Heavens greatest Luminary, on the fourth of the
Creations day: of which we are daily more assured, whilst by Your great
Humility (though an Eagle of the highest Air) yet You disdain not to fly in the
Train of the meaner Birds of your Country, to perch with them, and feed in
their Avearies (their late Feasts) and show them an example of imping their
large Plumes, in pious, and charitable extensions, toward the feathering, and
feeding of many other naked and hungry Birds of the same Covie. Among others,
your Orator is in Arrears, as for your Attendance on, and Countenance,
encouraging his work; so for something hid in the bowels of the subject of both
his Discourses.

The first represented David, a great Man, putting himself into Gods Inns of
Court, and there Professing himself a Student of the Divine, as you in great
Condiscention have done of the Common Law. Thy Testimonies I have etc.

The second showed Jesus Christ, that Lapis Theologicus (as the Scripture calls
him) in whose quest we never labor in vain; Destined by Heavens College of
Physicians to be Bruised, nay Calcind to Dust, and burnt up in the Furnace of
his Fathers wrath; that so the World might boast at last of an Universal
Medicine, for all Patients whatsoever. Thus have we seen Blood issuing from one
part of the Body, stopped by opening the Cock, and letting the Sluice fly from
another Vein. It pleased the Lord to bruise him.

In which Noble Science as in all others, the End crownin the Action, is not
obscure to the very Hospitallers, who pray that your Lordship may amply receive
your Fees from Gods (not earthly, but) heavenly Angels: And if your Lordship
(as it is not doubted but you do) to the Law and Physic, and David's study of
Gods Testimonies, and Isaiahs sublime Chemistry, you will without all
peradventure be Entitled by posterity, the English Trismegistus.

But I am afraid, lest dealing too long in Physic, I should make your Lordship
a Patient: If any thing in these Sermons, or this Epistle be ill resented, as
Luther was said by some to call S. James Epistle, Camp. dec. rat.
Epistola straminea; well may be sit down quietly then with a worse character
of his, that desires to be numbered amongst the faithfullest of them that honor
your Lordships Virtues, and is in the work of the Gospel,

Your Honors most humble and faithful Servant, Marmaduke James.

Right Honorable, and Beloved,
THe shortness of the days, the coldness of the season, and the remoteness of
our Country, has prevented, I suppose, the supplies intended for you; which
has occasioned my being here upon short warning to serve you this day, as one
out of due course, both besides yours, and my own expectation; which I trust
will plead excuse, if you have not a discourse so well digested, as so
honorable, and solemn an Assembly might seem to challenge.

Concerning our Country, much more cannot be presumed as additional to what
has been spoken in the two years past, without some injury to the bounds of
modesty and truth, which by no means ought to be offered from the Pulpit: yet
me thinks it is not handsome, that such a Solemnity as this is, should pass
without some glance at least upon the present occasion, which in a particular
or two, I shall (by Gods assistance, and your patience) dispatch.

The first is, that not many years past, you heard from a learned Person, that
in the Memorables of our Country, there was none found that had possessed the
chief Magistracy of this City: But now behold one in the Chair, that is not
only by his Office Gods Steward, and the Protectors, and this great Cities,
but your Countries Steward also; an Honor that few Countries in England of
late years have arrived to, viz. That a Steward has been their Supreme
Magistrate.

The next thing that I would commend to you is, two places of Scripture, which
I seldom read, but the fresh thoughts of Nottingham, and Nottingham-shire come
in; both of them are in the Psalms spoken of Canaan, and Jerusalem. That of
the Country, in the 144th Psalm the four last verses, That our Sons may be as
plants, our Daughters as corner-stones, our garners may be full, our sheep
bringing forth thousands in our streets, our oxen strong to labor, and that
there be no complaining in our streets; happy are the people that are in such a
case -- yea, happy is the people whose God is the Lord. The other is spoken of
the City, in the 48th Psalm the three last verses; Walk about Zion, tell the
towers thereof, mark well her bulwarks, consider her palaces, that you may tell
it to the generation following -- for this God is our God for ever, and ever,
etc. In these two Scriptures you have a description, and a correction; when
David had described the prosperity of the Country in their Sons, Daughters,
Sheep, Oxen, Plenty, Peace, he begins to pronounce prosperity upon them; but
as one that had forgot himself and left out the main, he corrects himself; yea
rather, happy is the people whose God is the Lord. Just thus in the other
Scripture, when he had described the situation, beauty, and strength of
Jerusalem, he brings in the presence of God one would think strangely, and
independently, as the complement, perfection, and summum totale of all that
Cities happiness; for this God is our God for ever, and ever. Truly, Gentlemen,
this is the work that you and I have to do this day, viz. to look upon all the
reported beauties and virtues of your Country, but as so many single figures,
till God the eternal Circle of Blessedness be added to them to make up the sum:
and therefore let it be our joint prayer, that God may be our God, and our
Countries God for ever, and ever.

It is no difficult matter to show, that the obligements of God are as much
upon you to be his people, as ever they were upon Judah, and Jerusalem: to
tell you, (if time would give leave) that your Country does match the Land of
Canaan in plenty, and pleasures, and how far that Town of Nottingham does run
parallel with Jerusalem. Was Hierasalem set upon precipitious hills, and is
not Nottingham so? and as the mountains stood about Jerusalem, Psalm. 125. do
they not so about Nottingham? and as there were two famous Ascents in
Jerusalem, Mount Moriah, upon which the Temple stood, and Mount Zion, where
stood that lofty Tower of David, incomparably perching over City and Country,
and is it nor so in Nottingham? where, upon one high rock, as upon another
Moriah, stands that fair Church (if my rule fail not) some cubits bigger than
the Temple; and upon another, yet higher mountain, (like that of Zion) stands
that ancient Castle, over-topping Town and Country, the lowest stone whereof
(before it is dismantling) was higher than the top stones of many others in the
Land; whose climbing Towers, situate upon those perpendicular rocks, did
ascend to such a stupendous height, like another Zion, as if the Spectators
should believe that they intended to peer into the clouds, or to pick a quarrel
with the Moon. Upon the highest part whereof, in the beginning of the past
miserable broils, was the Standard Royal, of unhappy, and too late, (alas!)
too late lamented Majesty lifted up; which Castle, had not the divisions been
homebred, might have said unto all her Enemies, as sometimes the Jebusites,
trusting to the strength of Zion, jeeringly told David; That they would set up
the lame and the blind to keep that Tower against him. Further I could tell
you, how that crystalline River Trent, like another Jordan, or that little
River Line, like that Brook Kydron, trilling down by the foot, and as it were
washing the toes of that Jerusalem, do sport their streams in the laps of
those Virgins meadows, whose beds (without a metaphor) are green, over whom
this fair Town sits as the delicate Spectatress, smiling upon the scene, while
the hills crowd upon her shoulders, as if over them they would steal a sight of
those Valley delightful pleasures: and to conclude, like another Jerusalem,
at what a distance does She present to the gazing traveller a stately and
majestic Aspect? upon whose forehead, as upon a Jewish frontlet in Capital
letters, seems to be written that of the Psalmist, Walk about this Zion, mark
well her bulwarks, consider her palaces, that ye may tell it to the generation
following, etc.

But why lose we time in spoiling the goodly face, and native beauty of that
Town and Country, by the vain depictions of foolish Art? those that are
doubtful of the truth of these things, have such an answer ready, as sometimes
incredulous Nathanael received from non-plus't Philip about the person of
Christ in the first of John, Let them go and see. But here (Sirs) lies not our
business, which is at this time to endeavor, that as God was in Judah, and
Jerusalem, so he may be the God of our Countrymen, and their guide unto
death. But (alas, Sirs!) as the ignorance of God in many parts of our Country,
has formerly been too apparent, and much lamented; So now in these days of
light, and reformation, so called, it is sad to hear of those monsters in
Religion, I mean the Seekers, Ranters, and Quakers, how they have over-spred
the beautiful face thereof. Just as the Sun, when he displaies his pleasant
spring beams upon Orchards, and Gardens, and thinking thereby to warm, and draw
forth the fruits of the earth for the comfort of man: then do the snakes,
adders, and such poisonfull creatures come forth of their holes, turning up
their bellies, and beaking themselves in the sweet beams thereof; So has this
Vermin crept abroad in our Country, to the disparagement of the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ shining on them: and though it is out of question that
the Devil, and the Jesuit is at the bottom, yet many well meaning people, that
both some of you, and I know, are led away with those pernicious errors, who
are to be pitied, and for whom we should have continual sorrow in our hearts,
for these our Kinsmen (as the Apostle speaks) according to the flesh, that have
a zeal of God, Romans 10.
but not according to knowledge.

I need not tell you that the soul of man is a precious thing, and the loss
thereof sad in any Country: Yet me thinks in the aguish parts of Kent, and
Essex, where I have seen sometimes a whole Parish sick together, the souls that
miscarry thence, seem but to go from Purgatory to Hell; But those that perish
out of Nottingham-shire, go from Heaven to Hell; And Thou Capernaum that art
exalted to heaven, shall be cast down to hell; and as sometimes when that
mighty tyrant Nebuchadnezzar fell, the nations flocked together, Isa. 14.10, 14.
and wondering said, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble? that did
shake Kingdoms? Art thou also weak as we? Art thou become like one of us? So,
when a soul miscarries out of Nottingham-shire, me thinks in melancholy
Visions, I see those Infernal Spirits flocking about it, and saying, What art
thou fallen from thine Excellency? Art thou come from those pleasant
mountains to these Stygian Lakes? from that Lightsom, and ambitious Air to
these darksom Cells? Art thou also weak as we? Art thou become like one of us?

The serious consideration of these things has put me upon a plain practical
Sermon, lately delivered to my people in the Country; which God grant may be
preached more to your hearts, than ears; and that I may (though the
unworthiest of Gods Servants) be as a guide this day to lead you from your
earthly, to that Jerusalem that is above; and from your pleasant Ur of the
Chaldees to the Land of Canaan, to that Country, and those Cities that have
foundations, whose builder and maker is God, and whose rock is Christ.

This is life eternal (says S. John) to know thee the only true God, and him
whom thou have sent; and therefore have I taken a Text which holds out to you
the knowledge, both of the Father and the Son, and that in the most excellent,
and saving act, that ever was done for the children of men.

ISAIAH 53.10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to
grief; when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his
seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper
in his hand. THese words do contain that eternal Covenant which was made
between God the Father, and the Son, for the redemption of mankind, wherein
you have the Work, and the Wages.

The work, or what Christ was to do, or rather suffer, was death, When he
shall lay down his soul an offering for sin.

The wages is laid down in the latter part of the verse, in these three
particulars: First, he shall see his Seed; Secondly, He shall prolong his
days; Thirdly, The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. These two I
shall open a little to you, and first of the first.

We read in the verse before the Text, it is said, that he had done no
violence, neither was there deceit in his mouth, yet it pleased the Lord to
bruise him. This was strange, yet, that a just, and a righteous God should
greatly delight (for so the word signifies) to bruise an innocent person. (...)
All that I can say to it is, that the heart of God was so set toward mankind
to save it, that it became unto him a very pleasant thing to limit his own Son
in order to that salvation. But lest that God, while he is thus merciful unto
man, should seem cruel to his Son, there are two things in the text, which
clear up the justice of God. The first is, that it was done with his own
consent; and therefore it is read by some Translations, Si posuerit animam pro
peccato. If he will lay down his soul an offering for sin. Et volenti non fit
injuria. Secondly, that he should not be without some remuneration for this
work; for he shall see his seed, prolong his days, and the pleasure of the
Lord shall prosper in his hand.

If he will lay down his soul, etc.

May some man say, was it a question? did God the Father, or did the Prophet
that writ this, doubt of this thing? No, beloved, but it is usual to express
the great Acts of Christ the Mediator by an If, thus speaking of his death
says he, If I be lifted up I shall draw all men after me. Of his ascension,
Jo. 12.32.
If I go, it is to prepare a place for you. Jo. 14.3.
Non contingentium eventus, sed conditionem pacti certis sime implendi
significat, says one very well: which manner of expression does not signify
the contingency of the event, but points out the nature of a covenant. Thus
much of the first. The next thing which is the wages promised, is in three
things; first; he shall see his seed: which is a Metaphor drawn from plants,
which being ripe, do scatter their seed for the propagation of their kind; thus
from one grain of wheat sown, does arise up a whole ear, which being sown
again thence arises many more, till a whole barn is filled with the increase
of one corn. Christ was that grain of wheat cast into the ground, and dying,
has brought forth a plentiful crop of Christians; this expression therefore
does import the plenty of the Christian Church. Now the Analogy holds in these
particulars.

First, as one corn brings forth many; so from one Christ has sprung up many
Christians.

Secondly, as the seed that comes up is specifically the same with that that
was sown, and is so like it, both without and within, that it cannot be
distinguished from it; so are Christians like unto Christ without, and are
therefore said to be conformed to his Image, within, says the Apostle, Little
Children of whom I travel in birth, till Christ be formed in you? Thirdly, as
the seed sown, though it be pure seed, there arises up with it many weeds, as
Poppy, May-weed, Tinetare, Cattailes, etc. Which on the one hand either starve,
or on the other burn up the seed. So in the Church of Christ are there many
weeds of profane Persons, on the one hand, and Heretics on the other, which
much injure the Church; for where God has his Church, the Devil will have his
Chapel: Master (says he) did thou not sow good seed in thy Field? Mat.
13.27.
whence then are the tares? Why says he, the evil one has done it.

Fourthly, Though the Seed be sown pure Seed, cleared and winnowed, or screened
from all chafe, and rubbish; yet it grows up with stalk, ear, spire, and,
blade mufled as it were about with chafe; So though Christ was a pure Corn,
yet that Seed, those Christians that spring from him, grow up with stalk,
spire, and blade; that is, with sinful corruptions, blades indeed that war
against the soul, which is invelloped and set round about with infirmities.
Heb. 12.1.
Not to be too Postillous.

Lastly, Seed is of a perpetuating nature; As we see from the creation of the
World to this day, there is nothing of those vegitables lost, which God created
at first; because every thing has a Seed, a string, or shadow, whereby it does
propagate its kind. So is it with the Seed of Christ, which never did, not
never shall fail totally, from the beginning of the World to the end thereof;
and though the Archers have shot at this Joseph, and sorely wounded him, yet
has his bow abode in strength, Genesis 49.^3.
and thus, Sanguis Martyrum est Semen Ecclesiae; the blood of the Martyrs has
been the Seed of the Church.

Secondly, He shall prolong his days. Some men may say, how is that possible
that he that was Eternal with his Father should have his days prolonged? This
phrase therefore is spoken to Christ as Mediator, Isaiah 9.6.
alluding to the Seed of Abraham under the Jewish Pedagogy, which worshipped
God under diverse Shadows, Ceremonies, and carnal Ordinances for a time; Now
says God, if thou will dye, Heb. 9.10.
thou shall pur an end to those shadows, and shall have a people to worship
thee in Spirit, and in truth to the end of the World, and from thence to
eternity. Burnt offerings and sacrifice thou would not have, but a body thou
have prepared me. Psalm. 40.6.


Thirdly, The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand: Which is, the
work of man's redemption shall certainly be accomplished; the same thing for
which it is said, It pleased the Lord to bruise him, etc. This is that which is
meant by that which Christ almost every where expresses; He was come to do not
his own will, but the will, and pleasure of his Father: And hence it is that he
said, He had not lost one that his Father had given him, but the Son of
Perdition. And those last words of his, when he gave up the Ghost, Consummatum
est, it is finished, it is done, Jo. 17.12.
it is done.

These words thus opened, you see the highest Mercy, and the highest Justice
kissing each other; Justice, in that man having finned, man must suffer, though
it be the Son of God; Romans 3.25.
That he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus: Mercy
every word in the Text is big withal, as David said, Thy mercy is over all thy
works: Psalm. 145.9.
even as oil that being put into milk, or wine, or water, swims at the top, so
mercy seems here to have got above justice, triumphing over it.

First, It pleased the Lord, etc. It seems then there was no necessity in God
to save man, only it was his pleasure, so that the redemption of man is
resolved into the same account that his creation was; Rev. 4.11.
for thy pleasure they are, and they were created.

Secondly, It pleased the Lord. It seems then there was no prevised merit in
man; nothing in man to attract the affections of a God to him, only it pleased
the Lord.

Thirdly, to bruise; not by one blow to crush him, as Corn under the millstone,
but by a gradual death, to bruise, or pound him as Corn in a mortar, as a man
of sorrows, to be worn away by degrees; by a living death, or a dying life;
for so it is rendered, Conterere eum in infirmitate.

Fourthly, Him, viz. that was the Son of God. God has many Sons; some by
creation, as the Angels; some by adoption, as the Saints; but he has but one
Son by generation, and this was he; so, God so loved the World, Jo. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.

Fifthly, His soul. Not only his body, but his soul; the greatest part of man's
sin lay in his soul; and therefore his greatest sufferings were in his soul: or
else what meant those Grumi, those great drops of blood? Why else so troubled?
so heavy unto death? many Martyrs that have not had the thousand part of his
strength, have gone to the place of execution, as to the bride chamber, kissing
the chain, and stake, and hugging death (as it were) about the neck with joy;
because their sufferings were only in the body, when their souls were
comforted: the soul of Christ's sufferings was in his soul.

Sixthly, For sin. First, that he knew not. Secondly, that he hated. Thirdly,
for sin in the indefinite, that is, all sin, none excepted. Hence it is that he
was called a Winebibber, a friend of Publicans, a Traitor, a Conjurer, one that
dealt with Devils; It Is true, unjustly by man, but justly by God; because he
had taken the sins of such miscreants upon him: Mary Magdalen had seven Devils,
and yet saved by Christ.

Lastly, If you look upon all those promises which the Father made to his Son,
(viz.) He shall see his seed, prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand. These I say deeply looked into, prove more redundant
to the advantage of the Church, then of Christ himself; as if the Deity could
look besides it self as the highest end, and was resolved to make man the
treasury and the store house of all his loves; which stupendous mercy the
Angels are said to stoop down (as the original bears it, 1 Per. 1.19.
) wishly to look into.

You see we have here a large Field; but my purpose is to point unto you only
one plain proposition, Doct.
which you hear of every day (viz.) That the Lord Jesus Christ has laid down
his soul an offering for the sin of man, or Christ died for the sins of his
people.

That he died; is plain, or else, why did the Earth tremble? and why did the
Sun hide his face, as if he was ashamed to see what was done to the God of
Nature? and why did the graves open, and the bodies of the dead arise, and
walk up and down the holy City?

That he died for sin, is as plain; for there is no death without sin: Romans
6.23.
The wages of sin is death.

That he died for the sins of man, is still as plain; for he had no sin of his
own: it is confessed on all hands, that he had done no violence, neither was there
deceit in his mouth. Esaias. 53.9.


That he died as an offering for sin, is most apparent: I might give you an
hundred Scriptures; but shall one for all; And walk in love as Christ has
loved you, Ephesians. 5.2.
and has given himself an offering, a sweet smelling Savor. As if the Apostle
should say, before Christ died, all the World stunk in the nostrils of God;
such stinking, and poison us vapors did the sin of man send up to Heaven: but
after Christ died, then was the Scene changed; the World began then to smell
like the Spring of the year, of Hony-Suckles, and Violets, and Roses: He gave
himself an effering, a sweet smelling Savor: And indeed he was the substance
of all those typical offerings, and Sacrifices, which were from the beginning
of the World; for they were either of things without life, or things that had
life; he answers them all.

Things inanimate were either dry, or moist; if dry, as the show bread, then it
was broken in pieces (for an offering was ever the destruction of the thing
offered) Thus Christ was broken; It pleased the Lord to bruise him, (says the
Text) This is my body that was broken for you: Things moist, those were either
wine, Mar. 26.26.
or oil, and they were poured out before the Lord; thus it is said, that he
poured out his soul unto death. Isa. 12.53.


If of things that had life, then was the heart blood taken from them; for
without shedding of blond, there was no Remission: Thus was Christ said to be a
Lamb slain from the beginning of the World: Heb. 9.22.
Hence it is that John the Baptist upon the sight of him says, Rev. 13.8.
Behold the Lamb of God, Jo. 1.29.
that takes away the sins of the World.

The Lamb of God; why not the Bullock, the Goat, or the Ram, or the Calf of
God? seeing all these were Sacrificeable Creatures; not only because (as some
would have it) a Lamb for innocence, though that be true; nor only as others,
the substance of that typical anniversary Lamb, the Pascal Lamb; but because
the Lamb was the daily standing Sacrifice of the Temple; every morning, and
every evening through the year was there a Lamb Sacrificed at the Temple, as
the standing Propitiation for all Israel. Thus much for the Doctrinal part, We
come now to the application.

Papists, when they tell us that a man may not only merit for himself, but
supererogate for others? and poor ignorant people amongst our selves, who think
to be saved by their good meaning, by their good thinking, and by their good
serving of God, as they say; it is true, these are good things, and to be
encouraged, but not trusted unto in point of justification. We are all, Isa.
64.10.
says the Prophet, as an unclean thing, and our righteousnesses as filthy
rags: our best actions are rags, but pieces of that perfection the Law
requires, there is no whole cloth in them, they fail in their quantity: again
they are filthy rags, polluted with original sin, and so fall short in their
quality, and alas! how are these things to be trusted to?

It was the Law when any brought his sacrifice unto God, Deu. 15.19, 21. verse.
He was to bring the firstling male of the flock, but if it were halt, or lame,
or blind, or had any blemish, he was not to offer it unto the Lord. What do
these men do that trust to their own works, but bring the halt, and the lame,
and the blind, when there is a firstling male in the flock, whose soul was
made an offering for sin?



It is with a man in the state of sin, as with one looking through a
Prospective Glass, while he looks at the wrong end, things that are great, and
nigh, seem little, and afar off; but when he looks through the right end, then
things appear in their dimensions at the very end of the Glass: Just thus it is
while a man is in the state of sin; though his sins be great, yet they seem
little, and afar off is the danger; Psalm. 10.5. verse.
Thy Judgments, says David, speaking of the wicked, are far out of his sight:
even as the Stars, though they be bigger then the Earth, seem, but by reason of
their distance, like the snuff of a Candle. But when a man begins to turn unto
God, then those sins that formerly he has accounted little, begin to appear in
their dimensions, and affrightingly to stare him in the face. Well Christian,
has God turned the right end of the Prospective to thee? has he awakened thy
Conscience? has he written such bitter things against thy soul, that thou now
beginnest to read the sins of thy youth upon the Curtains of thy bed, and upon
the windows of thy house? I mean, that every Circumstance puts thee in mind of
thy sinnings against the Lord.

What do thou see? above, an angry God; below, a gaping Hell; on the one hand
Conscience, on the other Satan to accuse thee? O direct thine eyes to this
offering, to this lamb of God; that is a beloved, and an only begotten Son;
slain for sin in the indefinite; for all sin, that thou may receive comfort
from him.

Ah Sir, says the soul, I am a great sinner; you know not what a sinner I have
been, and of how scarlet a dye my sins are. Why Christian, if thy sins be
great, this offering is so. Sure I am, they can be but Infinite; this offering
is so. Ah but says the soul, if I had but a promise that God did in particular
belong to me, I could believe this offering able to take away my sin: Why
Christian, thou have all the promises that Abraham, David, and Daniel, and
Paul, and Peter, and all those blessed Creatures, are now set down in heaven
by; thou have the same promises that Idolatrous Manasseh; persecuting Saul, and
diabolical Mary Magdalen, are carried to Heaven by. How particular would thou
have the promises? This is my body which is broken for thee; what would thou
have more? If thou do think Christ an hard-hearted Savior, yet thou do not
think him a fool; Is it imaginable think thou, that he should be at all this
cost and smart to redeem a soul, and then refuse it when it comes unto him?

To conclude, meditate upon these two Scriptures, John 6.37. He that comes unto
me, I will in no wise cast out. John 17.37. In the last day, the great day of
the feast, Jesus stood and cried, if any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink.

Mark how emphatical these words are; in the last day, As if they were the last
words that Christ should speak; the last words of a dying man are hearty words.
The great day of the feast; That is, of the Tabernacles, when the Tribes were
met in Jerusalem, when there was a whole Kingdom in one City, Jesus stood and
cried, at other times he used to sit, and preach: But now he stood, and cried;
If any man thirst, Luke 5.3.
let him come unto me and drink, etc. If any man, though a great sinner, be he
Jew or Gentile, Turk or Christian; If he thirst, without all restriction,
without all limitation, Let him come unto me and drink.

Judas? that cruel Pilate? those hard-hearted miscreants, the Jews, for putting
so innocent a person to death? Alas Christian! it was not Judas, it was not
Pontius Pilate; but it was thy sin, and my sin, that procured it. Sin was that
which put upon his head a Crown of Thorns, that spat upon his blessed face;
the Spear that pierced his side, Sin was the nails that fastened him to the
Cross; what remains then, but that he that loves the Lord Jesus should hate
Iniquity? Nevertheless, says the Apostle; the foundation of God abides sure;
2 Timothy 2.13.
let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. The like
Scripture we have in the fifth of the Ephesians the 3 verse, Let not
fornication, uncleanness, etc. be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints.
Let it not be done amongst you, is good counsel may some men say; nay let not
it be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints. It is said of Alexander, That
he had a Coward in his Army, whose name was Alexander; sending for him said,
What? art thou Alexander, and a Coward? either change thy name, or thy nature;
either be not a Coward, or be not Alexander. What? a Christian, and a
Whoremaster, a Drunkard, a profane Swearer, etc? Non been convenient nec in una
sede morantur; these things seem to be incompetible in the same subject, and
inconsistent with that love which a Christian professes to bear unto this
Savior that dyed for sin. If a woman having her husband murdered by an
Assassinate, should take that knife imbrued with the gore blood of her husbands
heart, and kiss it, and put it in her bosom, and say, this knife will I keep
in my bosom all the days of my life; surely you would say this woman never
loved her husband, was guilty of the blood of her husband; Thus the Apostle
sets forth the monstrous nature of a wilful sinner, Of how much sorer
punishment, says he, Heb. 10.29.
shall he be worthy of, who has trodden underfoot the Son of God, has counted
the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, etc.

The Heathens, such as Socrates and Cato, might by moral reasons cause a
stupefaction of their sins; but the true mortification of sin arises from
the death of Christ; and certainly, no consideration under heaven does more
prevail with a gracious heart then this.

I have some where met with a story of five Christians, who used to confer
Notes about this point: says the first, When I am tempted to sin, I think of
the shortness of life, and uncertainty of the time of death, and this makes me
to live every day as if it were my last day.

This keeps me from sin, says the second, I think of the Anomy, Ataxy, that
confusion, darkness, that is in sin, when I think of the great and glorious
God, prescribing a rule unto his Creatures, whose will is nothing but reason for
their good, giving them being, and well-being, that they might observe it: Now
to see a man thus carried in Gods arms, to spit in his face, methinks it is
such an unthankful and unworthy thing that I cannot but hate it.

But says the third, when I am tempted to sin, I think of the day of
Judgment, and methinks I hear that voice of the Archangel, with that Father,
always sounding in mine ears, surgite, and venite ad judicium, Arise ye dead
and come to Judgment: and methinks I open the Casements of Hell in my
meditations, where I see Cain, and Judas. and Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, etc.
and all those children of perdition, in those bloody flames out of extremity of
torments, cursing the day of their birth, the God that made them, and the womb
that bore them, and the breasts that gave them suck, this makes me afraid to
sin against him.

Says the fourth, I think of the Joys of Heaven; methinks there I see meek
Moses, faithful Abraham, patient Job, etc. and all those children of
blessedness, that by faith and obedience do now inherit the promises; And this
does wean my soul from sin. These are all good Considerations.

But says the last, which is best of all: when I am tempted to sin, I go up
to Mount Calvary, and there methinks I see a sweet Savior hanging upon the
Cross, stretching out his Arms to Jew and Gentile, as if he would grasp in all
the world to salvation; There methinks I see his bloody temples, hands, side,
and feet; There I see him sweating, and sighing, bleeding, and crying, and
dying under the weight of my sins: Oh says he, this is such heart-conquering
love, that I know not how to sin against it. This is that kindly repentance
which God has promised to his people; Zach. 10.10. Hos. 14.8.
That they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn for him as an
only Son: When repenting Ephraim shall see this, he shall say, What have I to
do any more with Idols?

If Christ has given himself an offering for us, why then should not we give
up our selves an offering for him? 4thly.
It is but reasonable service, says the Apostle, as reasonable as an eye for
an eye, a tooth for a tooth; Romans 12.1.
but alas! men are very delatory about this work. The Covetous person says,
Let him but obtain an Estate of so many thousand pounds, then he will repent,
and turn to Christ: The voluptuous, would reserve one seven years longer to
enjoy the pleasures of sin; and then he will offer himself to Christ. Most
men defer this to old age, and death; but consider with thy self Christian,
has Christ made it his first work to dye for thee? and will thou make it thy
last work to come to him? Has he given himself to death for thee? and will thou not give up thy self to life for him? Do but consider the Advantages that
thou will have by this Act: Many are the expressions in Scripture, which set
forth the relation betwixt Christ and his Church: But there is none wherein the
Spirit of God more delights, then that of marriage. Now there are three things
(to name no more) which a woman that is well married receives from her husband.

First, There is an exemption from all her Debts. If so be she was five
thousand pounds in debt before and the Bailiffs come and arrest her, she tells
them, that she is not responsible, she is now under Covert Baron; and that lis
feminae non intenditur, is a maxim in the Law. Thus a believer pleads against
his sins, when Satan, and Conscience come to arrest him; Its true says he, I
was Gods debtor, but now my condition is changed; truly I am not responsible, I
am under the coverture of the Lord Jesus: Go sin, Go Devil to him that is my
spiritual husband, to him that has lead captivity captive, and that is now set
down at the right hand of God; he will pay you every groat, or else he will
show you those acquittances that he took out for my sin at his resurrection.
Blessed is the man (says David,) Psalm. 32.1.
to whom the Lord imputes no sin. He does not say, to him that has no sin: for
there is not such a man in the World; but the man to whom the Lord imputes no
sin.

Secondly, A Wife partakes of all the honors, and riches of her husband: first
the husband is the fountain of honor to the wife; if the husband be a King,
she is a Queen; a Marquess, she is a Marchioness; a Knight, she is a Lady, etc.
Thus what Christ is in point of honor, his people are. What was the native
honor of Christ, but to be the Son of God? why so are they; Beloved says the
Apostle, 1 John 3.2.
We are now the Sons of God, though it does not appear what we shall be, etc.
Though we be not glorified Sons, yet we are Sons as truly as he. What honor
had Christ by Office? why he was a Priest, a Prophet, a King: so are they; Who
has washed us in his blood, Rev. 1.5.6.
and has made us Kings and Priests unto his Father, etc. And that not in a
metaphorical, but a real sense, for every good man is a King; he has got some
victory over his corruptions, Et fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit
maenia, he is a stronger King that conquereth himself, then he that conquereth
a City; and he is a Priest, he can pray unto God for himself, family, friends,
neighbors, etc. and God hears him.

Again, he is instated in all the riches of Christ; As where the husband has a
shilling, there the wife can say, is her six pence or groat for her benefit;
the riches of Christ I have not time to open to you, temporal, spiritual,
eternal. They would require a large discourse; only take one place of
Scripture, which is the magna Charta of a Christian; 1 Cor. 3.22.23.
Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the World, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all things are yours, and you are Christ's, and
Christ's is Gods.

There was a difference amongst the Corinthians about their Preachers, some was
for Paul, Paul say they was a most excellent Preacher, that Preached in the
evidence and demonstration of the Spirit of God; 1 Cor. 2.4. Acts 18.24.
But says another sort we like Apollo best, for he is a Rhetorical man, and
mighty in the Scriptures, and he worked the best upon our affections; but says
the third we are for Cephas, he is an excellent Casuist, and he resolves our
doubts the best; Why says the Apostle, will you like Children divide your own,
they are but your Chaplains; Chaplains might the Corinthian, say, these are fit
to be Chaplains to the greatest Emperors in the World; why? says he, the
World is yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the World, etc. but what
good will the World do us (might the Corinthians say) if we cannot live to
enjoy it? why (says he) life is yours. But what good will the World do us when
we come to dye? why (says he) death is yours, that is for your advantage; but
what will become of us after we are dead? All things to come (says he) are
yours: But might these Corinthians say, blessed Apostle, show us the writings
and the conveyances of this estate; tell us, how we hold it, that we may not
live upon fancies, and build Castles in the air: why says he, you-hold in
Capite, you hold of the Heir apparent of Heaven, and Earth; for you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods: the Argumentation seems to run thus, you know
Corinthians, that God has all things; well, that is true; you know that Christ
is Gods Son and Heir, and therefore he has all things; well, that is true
also; and you are Christ's spouse, and therefore for your good, you have all
things.

The third, and last thing is, Those Comforts that flow from their Union with
Christ. As a woman that loves her Husband, receives more joy from the personal
fellowship and acquaintance with him, then from all his Estate besides; so
great are the Comforts that are received from Christ; which must needs be
inexpressible, seeing the union from whence they flow is so great, that the
most gracious and learned men in the world do not fully understand it in this
life, which appears by that speech of Christ to his people. Matthew. 25.34, 35.
Come ye blessed of my father, for I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was
naked, and you clothed me; I was sick, and you visited me. Then shall the
righteous answer, when did we see thee hungry, naked, or sick, and visited
thee? As if they should say, we confess Lord, that we have seen thy poor people
hungry, naked, and sick, and we relieved them; but did we do it to thee? to
very thee? Yes, says Christ, you did it to me, to very me; you have not yet
understood the near relation that is betwixt them, and me; for in that you have
visited them, you visited me, etc.

To conclude all, as the Love and Care of a friend or Father shows it self
most toward death, so we find the heart of Christ how it stood toward his
people in that famous prayer before his death; That they all may be one, John
17.21, 22, 23.
as thou father art in me, and I in thee; and the glory which thou gave me, I
have given them, that they may be one even as we are one: I in them, and thou
in me; that they may be made perfect in one: that the World may know, that thou
have sent me; and have loved them, as thou have loved me. See here what variety
of expressions is used; thou in them, and I in them; and thou in me, and I in
thee; backward, and forward; as if no one expression was able to set forth this
Union. Me think this is like the speech of some young Heir, that having taken a
wife against his fathers consent, brings her in his hand to him, and says,
Sir, I confess this woman is below me in birth, breeding, portion, etc. But I
have set my heart upon her, and have taken her for my wife, now good Sir, as
ever you hope to have comfort of your Son, that you will own her as your
Daughter, else what good will my life do me? That the same lodging, diet,
respect, attendance, may be given to her, that is given to me; and that she may
as truly in all respects be taken for your Daughter, as you have taken me for
your Son; and that not privately only, but that all the Servants of the House,
and all the Tenants may see, that you have loved her, as you have loved me;
that all the World, says Christ, may see that thou have loved them, as thou
have loved me. I have done, the Lord give a blessing.

FINIS.
The Everlasting Covenant.

As it was Delivered in a Sermon at St Paul's, before the Gentlemen and
Citizens of Nottinghamshire, upon the 2d of December, 1658.

Being the Day of their Yearly Feast.

By Marmaduke James, Minister of Watton at Stone, in the County of Hertford.

1 COR. 2.7. But we speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery; even the hidden
Mystery, which God ordained before the world unto our glory. LONDON. Printed
by J. M. for J. Martin, J. Allestry, T. Dicas, and sold at their Shop at the
Sign of the Bell, in St Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

To all my very much Honored Friends and Countrymen, the Respective NATIVES of
the County of NOTTINGHAM.
More especially, To those of the two late Solemn Meetings: And in particular,
To the Right Honorable, Sir John Ireton, Lord Mayor of the City of London;
John Jews Esquire and the r^st of the worthy Stewards for the two last Festivals,
held in the Years 1657. and 1658.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe first of these Sermons being Copied out the last Year for the Press, after
serious perusal, the Request for publication seemed to flow rather from a good
opinion of, then any real worth I found therein: and further, being discouraged
by this foolish, and Voluminous Age, wherein every man almost (abounding in his
own sense) if the product of his thoughts amount but to the worth of an Egg, is
restless till he cackles it to the Press; the abhorrency from which practice
did make abortive that Intention.

Yet afterward being wearied with the many Why-nots both of City, and Country
Acquaintance; I almost repented the retracted purpose; and beginning to reflect
upon the Mode of the Times, found my self in an error, if the Directions of
that Wise Man of France to his Scholar be true, Charron.
to wit, That it is a great point of Wisdom, most precisely to obey the Customs
of the place and age wherein we live, to prevent misprision and popular
disdain, however irrational they may seem to us.

And truly Gentlemen, if you could read that honor I bear You in my heart, You
would easily believe your Entreaty to have the force of a Command upon me,
though it were to much inconvenience: yet in the circumstance give me leave
ingeniously to tell you, that I choose much more gladly to embrace the motion of
the Press, then to endure the shock of another years Interrogatories; and the
rather, because I have not found, either since the revival of your late
Meetings, or in times before their adjournment by unhappy War, any thing extant
from our Country of this nature* which presumes the Virtues, and Beauties
thereof are not ordinary, in that that comely Dame, and keeper of the virtues,
Modesty I mean, has hitherto been so strangely prevalent.

For the last, my notice (through failed expectation) being small, and secular
diversions then upon me great, gave but one free day to recollect my self: and
I trust a good interpretation will be admitted, in that this Gospel-Text
(seeing Necessity has no Law) at that pinch was ready; otherwise a Text
calculated for all the Countries under heaven.

Plainly as it was Preached, you have it Printed, without any alteration, save
only the particulars in the Analogy of the seed; which was then named, but the
prosecution nipped off by the coldness of the season: Wherein you have, as from
the Father, the highest contrivance of heaven to be at peace with man: so from
the Son, an example of eternal admiration, in the acts and sufferings of his
love to effectuate that Design for you. There seems to remain nothing more, but
that you in a double sense Brethren, after the exemplar of this love, may learn
to love one another: and to the end that the great acts of this love, both of
the Father, and the Son, may be sealed to your souls by his holy Spirit, Let
all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away
from you, with all malice: and be ye kind one to another, tender hearted,
forgiving one another; even as God for Christ sake has forgiven you. That ye
may be united and carried together in the bonds and arms of that last-born, 1
Cor. 13.13.
but never dying Grace, to your heavenly Country: where her twin-sisters,
Faith, and Hope shall cease, but that of Love abide for ever: Which is the
hearty Prayer of him that is your most humble and faithful Servant and
Countryman in the work of the Gospel,

M. I.

PSALM 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever, for they
are the rejoicing of my heart.
THis Psalm is the most excellent Psalm of David: excellent for the length of
it, consisting of so many Octonaries, or parts, as there are letters in the
Hebrew Alphabet; excellent for the matter of it, all the parts of verses
thereof conspiring with one consent to set out the dignity of the Law of God;
And indeed there seems to have been all divine frames upon David's heart when he
writ this Psalm: Sometimes we find him in such raptures, as if he was already
set down in glory; sometimes prostrate upon the earth in humble and penitential
confessions of sin, and deprecations against them; sometimes we find him upon
his legs, looking backward and forward; forward, telling us what he would do
for time to come, Having sworn, I will perform it, Psalm. 119.106.
that I will keep thy righteous Judgments; backward, telling us what he had
done in times past, to which this verse is to be referred, Thy Testimonies have
I taken, etc.

These words contain David's profession of that high esteem he had of Gods
testimonies, and the reason thereof; the profession in the former part of the
verse, Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever; the reason in the
latter part of the verse, for they are the rejoicing of my heart.

The first of these which is David's profession, my purpose is to open to you,
as the doctrinal part; the other, in the application of our discourse.

The first which is David's profession, is one entire proposition, in which we
have, as in every proposition, these two things considerable: First the subject
or matter treated of, which is in the word Testimonies, set forth by their
relation unto God, Thy Testimonies.

The second, is the predicate, or that which is spoken of that subject, that is
the word Heritage, set forth by its duration, An heritage for ever.

And first of the first: This word Testimonies is that that is sometimes
called, The Word of the Lord, The Way of the Lord, Psalm. 139.9.
The Will of the Lord; sometimes, Psalm. 143.10. Psalm. 119.1.
The Law of the Lord, The Commandments of the Lord; sometimes, The Fear of the
Lord, The Statutes of the Lord, Psalm. 119.6. Psalm. 19.9.
The Judgments of the Lord; sometimes, Psalm. 119.8.
The Testimonies of the Lord. And it is observable, Psalm. 119.13.
that though there be an hundred threescore and sixteen verses in this Psalm,
yet there is not above two of them wherein one of these nine words is not named.

Some one may say, Object.
What Is the reason that David should use so many words to express one and the
same thing? Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora, says the
Philosopher.

Truly (Sirs) I know not what better answer to give, Answ.
than that it is the property of Love to give several Epithets to the object
beloved: thus when Christ was in love with his Spouse; Thou art, Cant. 5.2.
says he, my fair One, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled, Cant. 6.1, 10.
terrible as an Army with banners. Thou art my fair One; I, but what if she be
fair, if she be not chaste? Thou art my undefiled; but what if she be fair,
and chaste, if she be a scold, a vexsome? I, but thou art my Dove, without all
gall, without all bitterness; but what if she be a Dove, if she have never so
much meekness, if that arise only from flegmacy and baseness of temper, that
she is sola socordia innocens; no, she is full of spirit, life, and majesty,
she is terrible as an Army with banners. Thus as Christ delights himself with
various titles, to set forth the several excellencies of his Church, so it is
with David; his heart is so in love with these Testimonies, that he knows not
what to call them, Statutes, Laws, Commandments, Judgments, etc. Sometimes
when he considers of them, in regard of the Author, the great God, from whence
they came; thus he calls them, The Word of the Lord, The Way of the Lord, The
Will of the Lord; when he considers the divine sovereignty that they have over
all Gods rational Creatures, Angels and Men; thus he calls them, The Law of
the Lord, the Commandments of the Lord; when he considers that great respect
and reverence that a gracious heart yields unto them, thus he calls them, The
fear of the Lord; when he considers their stability, and duration, as those
things which God has ratified for ever; thus they are called, The Statutes of
the Lord; when he considers that great decision, and determination, that they
shall make at the last day concerning the quick and the dead, thus he calls
them, The Judgments of the Lord; and last of all, considering that
testification that these make concerning God and man, as I shall show you by
and by, thus they are called, The Testimonies of the Lord; Thy Testimonies have
I taken, etc.

It is observable, that David delights more in this word than in any of the
rest, and by these Testimonies is meant the Word of God at large, but more
strictly the Moral Law, or the Law of the Ten Commandments. You know, when God
gave the Law, he writ it upon two Tables of stone, and those two Tables are
called, Exodus 31.18.
The Tables of the Testimony: Then God took those Tables of stone, and put them
into an Ark, Exodus 25.22.
and that was called, The Ark of the Testimony; Then God took that Ark, and put
that Ark into a Tabernacle, Number. 1.50.
and that Tabernacle was called, The Tabernacle of the Testimony; so that this
was so famous a Testimony, that it calls every thing Testimony that touches
it, and gives a denomination to every thing that comes nigh unto it; and it may
be well called a Testimony,

Sinai, Exodus 20.29.
the mountain smoked, and the earth trembled, and there was great thundering,
and lightening, and the sound of the trumpet, and hundred of thousands of
people that fled from it, saying, Let us not come near him, lest we die.

Genesis is a Testimony of Gods power, in making the world of nothing; his
Justice, in drowning the world with water; his mercy, in saving Noah and his
family, etc.

The book of Exodus is a Testimony of that curious and stupendous providence,
that God exercised over his Church, in bringing her out of Egypt through the
red sea, and that vast howling wilderness into the land of Canaan, and so of
the rest.

Whosoever shall not receive you, Mark 6.11.
nor hear my words, shake off the dust off your feet for a Testimony against
them: and thus have we dispatched the first thing propounded, What is meant by
Testimonies, and why so called.

We now come to the second, which is the predicate, or what is said of these
Testimonies, that is, they are An heritage for ever; yet before we come to
that, we may a little take notice of the copulation of these two together, in
that word taken, which some read chosen, both the lections being emphatical
enough to David's purpose.

If the first, I have taken thy Testimonies, then thus, as if David should have
said, I perceive the Lord has a mind to give these blessed Testimonies to his
Church, the greatest gift that ever he shall bestow, except it be the Messiah
to come, and seeing that the Lord has a heart to give, for my part I am
resolved to have a hand to take, I have taken thy Testimonies: or thus, I have
chosen thy Testimonies; As if he should say, The Lord has laid before me two
excellent things: Here are my Crowns and Kingdoms on the one hand, and his
Testimonies on the other; and if he would put me to my choice which I should
choose, and which refuse, incomparably have I chosen his Testimonies as an
heritage for ever.

An Inheritance.

This is the highest expression almost that David could use, to testify his
respect to these Testimonies; he had been a long time lifting and heaving at
an expression, but did never hit it till now: In his younger time (I suppose it
was that) he compares it to honey, Psalm. 19.
and the honeycomb; Sweeter are they also than the honey and the honeycomb:
honey is a fine thing, but money is better; money buy will honey, and sugar, and
a hundred things more; money answers all things; now David goes a little
higher, and compares it to silver, but silver may be drossie, Psalm. 12.6.
seven times purified in the fire: I, but there is a finer thing than silver,
and that is gold; Psalm. 19.10.
why, faith he, It is much more to be desired than gold, yea than fine gold:
I, but yet there is a finer thing than Gold, that is, Diamonds, Pearls, and
Rubies, They are more precious than Rubies; Prove. 3.15.
but yet suppose a man has silver, and gold, and rubies, yet he may not have
all riches; there are Cattle, Camels, Horses, Sheep, and Oxen, these were the
ancient riches of the world, Psalm. 119.14.
I have rejoiced in the way of thy Commandments above all riches. But yet
there is one sort of riches that is the sweetest of all riches, that is spoil;
when a soldier overcomes his enemy, and has the pillage of the field, or
falls into a Garrison and takes the plunder thereof, this is of all riches the
sweetest; for here is a double lust satisfied at once, not only Covetousness,
but Revenge, Psalm. 119.162.
Thy Word have I rejoiced in more than in all spoil. But yet (Sirs) suppose a
man has silver, and gold, and pearls, and diamonds, and all riches, and all
spoil: Suppose a private man should arrive to an estate of twenty, thirty,
forty, fifty thousand pound; Pray (Sir) says he, can you help me to a
purchase, I would fain have an Inheritance? Alas! these things may be taken
from me in a night, I would fain turn my personal into a real estate, have an
Inheritance settled upon me to descend to my posterity after me; now David is
come to the height of what a mortal man could express, Thy Testimonies have I
taken as mine Inheritance for ever. An Inheritance then is that summum totale,
that dimensum, that lot, that portion, or proportion of estate a man enjoyes in
this world, whether it be bequeathed by gift, or descend by succession, this
we call an Inheritance: now God, who has given the world to the children of
men as an Inheritance, has reserved a special spiritual portion for his
people; in allusion to which it is called, An Inheritance, which is no less
than heaven, and glory, and that it might be sure to them, he has conveyed it
all manner of ways.

In whom we have obtained an inheritance being predestined. Ephesians. 1.11.


Fear not little Flock, Luke 12.32.
it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom.

That has begotten us to an inheritance incorruptible. 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.
Hence it is that all the children of God are said to be the firstborn; there
is no younger brothers in heaven, to every son he allows the liberty and the
privilege of primogeniture to the general Assembly and Church of the
firstborn. Heb. 12.22.


I, Object.
but some will say, What is all this to our purpose: we know indeed that
heaven is a glorious inheritance; if David had said, The kingdom of heaven O
Lord, the kingdom of thy Glory, I have taken for an inheritance, that might be
easily understood, but that he should say, Thy Testimonies are my inheritance,
that we cannot understand?

It is true indeed, Answ.
that heaven is the actual inheritance of Gods people, but it is as true, that
the Word of God is their virtual inheritance; these testimonies are the deeds
that convey this inheritance, and how ordinary is it amongst men to call such
the inheritance? If one of you come with a breviat to a Lawyer, and he be
dissatisfied in any thing, Pray (Sir) says he. will you show me the
inheritance, that is, the main deeds that leads to the inheritance: and we know
that many times these old dusty moth-eaten papers are as much worth as a whole
Country: Now an inheritance does but these two things.

etc.

etc.

David knew what he said, Psalm. 19.11.
Moreover by them is thy servant warned, and in keeping of them there is great
reward: That reward is no less then Heaven it self: Hence it is that the Word
is so often called The Gospel of the Kingdom: Yea, The Kingdom of heaven it
self: Repent, Mat. 4.23.
Mat. 24.14.
for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand: Mat. 4.17.
The Kingdom of God is come unto you. Hence Paul, Luke 10.9.
when he bids farewell to the Ministers of Miletus, I commend you, says he, to
God, and the Word of his grace, Acts 20.32.
that is able to give you an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified;
giving thanks unto God that has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light: Not only in the light of glory, but in the
light of grace, and of these Testimonies; For thy Law is a light unto my feet,
Psalm. 119.105.
and a Eamp unto my paths. And thus have we done with the second thing
propounded, to wit, What is meant by this Inheritance, and in what sense these
Testimonies became David's Inheritance, and so we come to the improvement of
all by way of Application.

so long as God has an Heir, a Child upon earth, it is impossible to destroy
this Book, this Inheritance: Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before one jot,
Matthew. 5.18.
one tittle shall pass from it.

David prizeth above all his Crowns; but let him say, Psalm. 116.7.
Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.

of the Prophet Jeremiah, Ierem. 2.5.
What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone away from me?
What evil (Christian) have thou ever found in this Book, that thy soul should
loath it? What is the reason? Is it that of the Poet? Inopem me copia fecit:
Has plenty made thee poor? Or, Has the abundance of this spiritual Manna
given thee a surfeit? Or is it that of the Philosopher, Nimis sensibile destruit
sensum? Art thou blind by looking upon the Sun? Or has the glorious light of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ put out men's eyes? Well Sirs, Let others do what
they will, you that are my Countrymen, you that fear the Lord amongst them,
hold fast this Book; for it is your life, and the length of your days; and when
any one attempts to seduce you from it, say unto him, as Naboth did unto Ahab;
Ahab was a King, 1 Kings 21.3.
and he proffered a valuable consideration, and it was but for a temporal
inheritance, God forbid that I should part with the Inheritance of my
forefathers: Have all my Progenitors lived upon this estate, and shall I now
debauch it? God forbid: There is Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Job, and David,
and Daniel, and Paul, and Peter, and Latimer, and our Countryman Cranmer; and
all these Patriarchal men, and thousands more that are now sat down in the
Kingdom of Glory by virtue of this inheritance: God forbid that ever we should
part with the inheritance of our forefathers. And that I may fasten this
Exhortation upon you, we shall a little open to you in the conclusion of our
discourse the famous example of David: It is to be considered either first in
the Practique, or secondly in the Theory of it: The Practique is considerable,
either first what the temporal estate that David had, was: Or secondly, what of
these Testimonies David knew. For the first, I believe that David had the
greatest estate that ever mortal man had, except it was A dam in innocence: I
know the story of Darius, Alexander, Caesar, Charlemaine, and those great and
mighty men upon the earth, yet, under favor, David seems to transcend them, if
these three things be considered.

David had a considerable breadth of ground over which he ruled; he ruled over
Palestina, which was sometimes the seat of seven Kingdoms, over the Philistims,
over Ammon, Moab, Amaleck; etc. and if you compare 2 Samuel 8. with the History
of Josephus, you will find him to be Lord of the greatest part of the Eastern
world: But

What Nation (says Moses) is there in all the world so great and so glorious
as thy people Israel? There was but one people in all the world that was the
Lord's people, and David was their King, and God's King: He was not Rex
Diabolorum, as they say the King of England was; the King of Devils: Neither
was he Rex Asinorum, as they say the King of France is; the King of Asses:
Neither was he Rex Hominum only, as they say the King of Spain is; the King of
men: But he was Rex Sanctorum, the King of Saints, wherein he assumes the very
Title of God, Rev. 15.3.
O Thou King of Saints!

David and his Posterity; We think an estate surely settled, that is entailed
upon the Crown; but alas, that Crown may fall in four or five hundred years,
and then what becomes of that Entail? But David's estate was by God's Oath
entailed upon the Son, Once have I sworn by my Holiness unto David, Psalm.
89.36, 37.
that his Seed shall be as the Sun before me, and as the faithful witness in
heaven. If you lay these things together, what an estate had David? Nay rather,
what a heart had David to slight all these, for these Testimonies! We have not
a drop to his bucket, to his Ocean, and yet alas, how do our small estates draw
our hearts from these Testimonies! Let us mourn over this distemper. Again,

David had: David had but eight books of the Scripture; the five books of
Moses, Joshua, Judges, and Ruth; this was all that David knew: David had the
Law it is true, but he had none of the Gospel, none of the Evangelists, or
Apostolical Epistles: David had the Law, but he had not any of the
Commentators, none of those Prophets called great or small, lived in his time:
I dare be bold to say, that that first Sermon of Christ in Matthew. 5. is worth
more then all that David knew: David had the Letter that kills; but you have
the Spirit that gives life: David saw through a Glass, 2 Cor. 3.18.
darkly; but you with open face behold the glory of the Lord: David lived in
the Dawning of the day; but you in those times when the Sun is in the full
Heavens, in its Meridian: O what would David have said, if he had seen the
things that we see! as Christ speaks, Mat. 13.17.
Many righteous men have desired to see the things that ye see, and have not
seen them.

Well Sir, if you lay the greatness of this estate with the littleness of
David's knowledge concerning these testimonies together, for, sic magna parvis
componere solemus, you will find him a famous example, and worthy your
imitation: But if any one should say, what is the reason, or what was there
that David saw in these testimonies, to lead him to his choice from so great an
estate? You have it in these words, For they are the rejoicing of my heart. And
thus am I come to the second particular, and the last thing, that is, the
Theory in David's example; For they are the rejoicing of my heart; wherein you
have three things insinuated, First says he, they are my Joy: Joy is that
flower that grows out of every good; and so far do we account any thing good,
as it is joyful to us; As if David should say, I profess I have found more joy
in these Testimonies, then ever I did in my Crowns and Kingdoms: It is a
mistake, when men think that a religious life is a sad, melancholy, cynical
life; It is true, the life of a Christian is a life of temptation, affliction,
a life of sorrowing, and tears for sin; and yet it is a joyful life: for we
find joy in our very sorrows: As dying, and behold we live; 2 Cor. 6.9.10.
as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. The Apostle brings in sorrow with a
sicut sicut Dolentes; as sorrowful, as if our sorrows were not real sorrows,
as if they were but Analogical or similitudinous sorrows; But our joy real,
vere semper gaudentes, always rejoicing: and truly, if you look upon all the
sons of affliction in Scripture, you will find they had their time of joy;
poor Joseph that was so innocently cast into the dungeon, and those heavy irons
laid upon his young and tender legs, the text faith, Psalm. 106.18.
the very irons went through his soul, yet he had his time of joy; and David,
after he was hunted by Saul, like a Partridge upon the Mountains, had yet his
time of joy; And Job, after Satan had discharged all the arrows of his wrath
upon him, had his time of joy; And Paul, in the midst of those many deaths, he
was, as sorrowful, but always rejoicing; men may think what they will, but
the state of a Christian is a joyful state, for they are the joy, etc.

for they are the joy of my heart; As if David should say, my Crown, and
Kingdoms, Wives, and Children, they are the rejoicing of mine eyes, of my
sensual and bestial parts, but truly my rational and deep joys, they are from
thy Testimonies, for they are the rejoicing of my heart. It is one thing to be
merry ore tenus; this the men of the world have: it is another thing to be
joyful; this only the Saints have; As the Poet speaks of the river Nilus, that
it is very deep, and the waters are very swift, and yet a by-stander would
scarcely think they did move at all: The joys of a good man are deep and swift
joys, and yet to others they are scarce seen to move; there was such a
difference in David's comforts as there is betwixt the dew and the groundraine,
you know Sirs, that in a hot parching season, if there comes-a cool night, and
a fine dew upon the grass in the morning, it is a great refreshing; but alas!
when the Sun is up an hour or two, that dew is gone; but if there comes a
ground-rain that lasts for eight and forty or threescore hours, that reaches
the root of the grass and trees, what a new face does it put upon the
Creature? The comforts that David had from Absalom, Amnon, Tamar, and his
temporal concernments, were like the dew, for an hour or two, but then were
scorched; but the joys he had from these testimonies, are like unto the
ground-rain, that reached his heart root; for they are the joys of my heart.

David does place all the springs of his comforts in these testimonies: For
they, They are the rejoycings of my heart. As if a good man should fetch all
his comforts from these testimonies: and certainly we forget our selves when
we do otherwise, and therefore it is that God does usually blast all the other
objects of our joy; Son of man, I will take away the delight of their eyes;
Ezekiel. 24.25.
their Sons and their Daughters: and why? because they were the delight of
their eyes: Jonah greatly rejoiced under the Gourd, and the Gourd withered; God
does usually disappoint us in our comforts, that we might fetch them from his
testimonies. We read that the Disciples came to Christ, and told him what brave
fellows they were: Lord, Luke 10.17.
say they, the very Devils are subject unto us. Well says Christ, Go on, tread
upon Serpents, and Scorpions, and cast out Devils; yet one thing let me tell
you, do not rejoice in these things: no, might they say, if ever mortal men had
cause to rejoice, we have: Have we not the power of God upon earth? the very
Devils are subject unto us; No says Christ, do not rejoice in these things*
why, what then must we rejoice in? that your names are written in Heaven.

I dare be bold to say, that no man ever yet entered into Heaven, whose name was
not first written in this book; in the book of the Promises, in the book of
Life; hence it is that you shall seldom read of these testimonies, but there is
joy with them: if this word be preached, there is great joy; Acts 8.8.
when Philip preached the word in Samaria, there was great joy in that City: if
two Christians do confer upon this word, there will be strange motions of
heart: Luke 24.32.
Did not we feel our hearts burning within us, when he spoke unto us?

If a man (one of these long winter nights, when he cannot sleep) does but
think of these Commandments, there is great joy; O how do I love thy Law, it is
my meditation day and night. Psalm. 119.91.
If a man does but put forth his hand to execute one of these Commandments,
there is great joy: Prove. 21.15.
It is a joy to the just to do judgment, What joy have they that keep thy
Commandments? And truly Sirs, there is one convenience in these, above all
other comforts; that they stand by a man, when others fail him: If a man has a
beautiful wife, towardly children, a great estate, and if God throws this man
into distress, they do but tumble upon him, like an old house upon his head,
and then it is his misery that he cannot be miserable himself, but he must make
all his sweet relations miserable with him: but these Testimonies stand by a
man in the saddest hours: This David well knew, when he made his choice, as
appears by two verses in this Psalm.

Thy Statutes have been my Songs in the house of my Pilgrimage: Psalm. 119.54.
Where was it that David was a Pilgrim? You know that David was a banished
King, he was hunted by Saul out of Palestina, fled to Achish, King of Gath, 1 Samuel 21.12.
poor man! lept out of the frying pan into the fire; at home he was pursued as
a Traitor; abroad, was apprehended as a Spy; truly, it was a very fad
condition: where was his support now? Why, says he, Thy statutes have been my
songs in the house of my Pilgrimage. The other is this.

I had then perished in my afflictions, Verse 92.
had not thy Law been my delight. I had then perished, when was that? Very
probably at Ziklag: Ziklag was the greatest distress that ever we read David
was in; Ziklag was a Frontier Town belonging to the Philistims, and there they
suffered David to live; 1 Samuel 30.
the Amalakites came and take away all their stuff, children, wives, and
concubines, bag, and baggage, burnt the City with fire, and the worst was, that
his own soldiers mutined against him; nothing would serve them, but the
stoning of David: the Text says, That he wept, till he could weep no more:
But at the last he comforted himself in the Lord his God (poor man! little had
he else to comfort himself in) that is, there was some Statute, some Judgment,
some Testimony of the Lord that came into his mind at that time, that did
comfort him: I had perished in my afflictions, had not thy Law been my delight.
O happy is that man that has an interest in these Testimonies, to comfort him
in the saddest hour.

It is the usual custom at these Yearly Meetings, to speak somewhat of the
Country, the Soil, Situation, Antiquities Commodities, and Memorable Accidents
thereof: How laudable this custom is, I shall not here dispute, but do purpose
not to practice much of it at this time; for all them that are here present
this day, are either of the Country, or strangers: If the first, I can but tell
them what by experience they better know; which seems to me, but as the
carrying of coals to Newcastle; or the lighting of a candle to the Sun. If
strangers, they are prejudiced with the knowledge of that love every one bears
to his Native Country, and they will think that we read them a Lecture more
through the spectacles of Affection, then Judgment; and besides, the
Memorables of our Country were so well reaped the last Year, that passing what
was then delivered, the gleanings will scarce be a handful to present you
withal; and repetita sordent: You had then at large the Chronological and
Geographical Description of it, M. Fuller.
by him that is the Camden of our age for Antiquities, and our English
Demosthenes for Eloquence; neither is it consistent with the modesty of my
Years and Parts, to attempt the polishing of that which he has perfected; or
with my trembling hand, to draw a line after that Apelles: Let it be the
practice of others at these their Anniversary Meetings, to Paint over their
dirty and sickly Countries, and by scraping here and there a clean bit
together, to flatter and befool their Country-Citizens, with the figmentitious
Landskips of their Countries Beauties: Our Country needs no commendation,
that is all commendation; her praises are in the Gates; and fearful I am to
enter the Confines of Her, being conscious to my self to be more able to sully
and darken the Beauties thereof, then to express them; yet that She may not be
altogether passed over in silence, give me leave to tell you a story of a
Learned and Observant Traveller, much redounding to the honor of our Country;
and they say, sometimes a By-stander sees more then the Gamester.

Long since in Cambridge, I was acquainted with a young Gentleman, whose
addictions were to Geography and Travels; whom after many years spent beyond
Seas, it was my happiness to meet with, soon after his recess into England; and
enquiring concerning some Italian Cities, and others of Fame in other
Countries, which we much hear and read of; he affirmed, the magnificence and
stately Buildings of some, the Riches and Trade of others, the pleasant
Situation of others, etc. But since my return, said he, I have been in your
Country of Nottinghamshire, and spent some time in the curious observation
thereof; and do seriously profess, that for Delicacy of Situation, and for all
kind of Conveniences respecting the life of Man, I never saw the like; and
where, if the concernments of my Estate and Friends would admit, I could desire
to live and die in, above any Country that ever I yet saw in the European world.

A Country, in respect of the Sandy and Foreftical part, affording such variety
of pleasures; of so dry, pleasant, and healthful an Air, in respect of the
other called the clay, and its contiguity to the rich Vale Belvoir, all sorts
of grain and corn, in respect of that famous River Trent, abounding with
variety of Fish and Fowl, and the fertile Pastures upon her banks, with all
sorts of fatted Cattle; a Country where the rates of all things carry that
moderation, as not so low to be contemned, nor so high as to be refused; A
Country, not only replenished with wood for the Chamber, but that light and
lasting culinary fire, the pit-coal; watered with the streams of Trent, and
other Rivers; blessed with sweetness of Air, and richness of earth; as if all
the Elements did conspire to make her people happy.

In the Southwest whereof, sits the fair Town of Nottingham, delicately (like a
Lady upon the Rocks) in collem sub montibus, the best of all scituations, says
the Naturalist, her chair being flanked with the Hills, East, West, and North,
to keep off those churlish winds that might give her a cold in her Neck; her
beautiful Face only displaid to the warm Southerly Sun, where she beholds from
on high the flowery Meadows, and the Trental streams, with no small delight; a
Town situate so near the River, that she may have the conveniences of
Prospect, Fish, and Navigation; and yet at such a distance, as that she is
exempted from the crude, raw, and Aguish vapors thereof; the only
inconveniences attending such sweet Streams; over against whom, after that
silver streamed River Trent, has with mavelous celerity posted out of
Staffordshire, begins here to halt, and demur upon her motion, and by various
Meanders and twining circuitions, making one mile three, as if she did greatly
delight her self in the views and counterviews of that beautiful Country, and
the Metropolis thereof: And thus we take our leave of that fair Country, and
Town of Nottingham, which Drayton calls The Norths Imperial Eye, and which
indeed (considering her lofty Elevation, from whence she looks into all her
Neighboring Countries) may rather be compared unto Wisdom in Prove. 3.
stretching forth her hands unto them, and saying, Come unto me all ye simple
ones, and ye that lack understanding; for at my right hand is length of days,
and upon my left hand, riches and honor.

It was a witty and a close answer that was sometimes given by an accomplished
Prelate of this Land to a foolish King thereof; who upbraiding his height in
Church and State, with the meaness of his descent, to wit, that his Father was
a Tailor; made this reply, That if his Majesty had exceeded his Father, as much
as he had done his, he had bin the bravest Prince in Christendom. The Solution
is this, That if our Countrymen did exceed other Countrymen in their works of
Piety and Charity, as far as our Country exceeds other Countries, you would be
the bravest men this day upon the British earth: But alas! it is a sad, an
ancient observation of Divines, That those Countries into whose bosom God has
poured the greatest of these blessings, have been most unmindful of him.

Some think that God would have Abraham from Ur of the Caldees, as if the
delicacy, pleasures, temptations of that place, were inconsistent with that
height of Piety that God would have the Fathers of the Faithful trained up
unto; and certain I am, that Aamah, Zeboim, etc. and those other famous
infamous God-forgetting Cities, were upon a Plain, which was like unto the
Paradise of God: I would not here be mis-interpreted, as if I came to upbraid
our Countrymen; it is an ill Bird that defiles her own Nest; but out of love,
in majorem cantelam: for these things that are written, were written for an
example to you in that delicate Country, that you might take heed: Though truly
Sirs, let me be so far bold to tell you, It is a wonderment to some, to hear
what other Countries have done at these their meetings, and nothing is extant
from ours; neither is it to be doubted, but that there is as great a materia of
goodness in you, as in any other of your Neighbors: Is there not some
honorable person or persons of our Country, the fame of whose Learning, Piety,
and Charitable Actions of all kinds, is gone out through the Land? And for
ought I know, the rest of you in your inferior Orbs are like minded; for
generous Ayrs breed generous Dispositions; but as Physicians say, That though
blood be the life of the Body, yet the strongest Constitutions do the soonest
perish by the redundancy thereof: So Gentlemen, if these Meetings be longer
continued, and nothing done, the fears are, lest that your Charity should die
of a Plurisie, I mean, for want of evacuation.

If it shall here be demanded, What is that good desired? I dare not be so
saucy as to prescribe to your Wisdoms; pressed I am much to speak, and yet afraid
to speak: four and twenty miles have I come to serve you. this slabby weather;
if I should now offend you, how sad would my return be home again? Extremo actu
deficere turpissimum est: I shall only add one instance, and leave you to spell
out the rest: Are there not some of you of our Countrymen Citizens here? I know
there are, to whom God has given great Estates, and little or no Issue; that
may as truly say (if they would speak their Consciences) of the River Trent, as
ever Jacob did of Jordan: Cen. 32.10.
Over this Brook came I with this Staff, and behold the Lord has made me two
Bands. And Jacob arose, and built there an Altar unto the Lord. I have done,
the Lord give a blessing.

FINIS.

