A just VINDICATION of the Reputation of Mr. WHITE Alderman of the City OF
EXON, In Answer to a Scurrillous Pamphlet called the Visible Vengeance, etc.
Wherein is discovered the many falsities and untruths in that Relation attested
under the hand of his own servant that was with him in his journey till the day
of his death: As also a true Relation of the sad accident that befell him, with
the Circumstances thereof.

They whet their tongue like a Sword, and bend their Bows to shoot their
arrows, even bitter words, That they may shoot at the perfect Psalm. 64. 3. 4.
To him that is afflicted pity should be showed from his friend, but he
forsakes the fear of the Almighty, Job 6. 14. LONDON, Printed for John
Rothwell, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Sun and
Fountain in Paul's Churchyard, 1649.

Courteous Reader,
IT is no new thing for the servants of God that have in any eminent way
opposed the iniquity of the times in their Generation, to be hated while they
live, and to be reviled and reproached at their death by the tongues, and pens
of lewd and profane spirits, In all ages (says one) there are not wanting
some qui sceptice and scabiose de bonis loquantur. This has been the lot of
this pious Magistrate of the City of Exon by this false and malicious
Pamphleteere, who has patch't together a bundle of untruths to make up his
accusation and charge him (as will appear in the sequel) that he may hereby
not only harden his own heart, but others also in their desperate Malignancy,
sucking poison out of every sad accident to increase their venom, and to
strengthen themselves in their evil ways, but thus it has and ever will be,
that those that seek occasion to stumble at (by the just hand of God) shall
find enough to harden themselves by to their own destruction. Let not the
Saints of God be troubled at it, if they see reproaches cast upon their
brethren in their life, or at their death, its their duty to keep themselves
innocent, and it will be comfort enough when they are so; we must be content a
while here, (if God will have it so) that our good names as well as our bodies
(like the Corn) must dye, and rot awhile before they rise up again, and
appear more glorious, the servant is not greater then his Master, Christ
himself was called a Beelzebub while he lived, and suffered upon this very
point, (as this servant of God does) as a malefactor, when he dyed, because he
was cried out against as an enemy to Caesar.

Reader, were the person so well known to thee, as he was in the place where he
lived, it were needless to make reply by way of Vindication to so scurrilous a
paper, for what is there charged upon him cannot at all be credited by any
sober spirits that knew him, only considering that it is every Christians duty
to endeavor what he can, to Vindicate the reputation of the innocent,
(especial such as were public persons that cannot clear themselves) as also
because strangers now adays are too apt to entertain a belief of that which
is asserted in Print and not contradicted, but chiefly that the mouth of
inquity may be stopped, and that none from this sad act of Providence may take
occasion to harden themselves in their Malignancy (against which the Majesty of
Heaven has so visibly appeared, and which seems to be the errand of this
lying imputation) I shall

1. Give thee a true Character of the man what he was who is thus aspersed.

2. A true relation of the sad accident that befell him in his journey to
London, attested under the hand of his servant that was with him, that hereby
(comparing it with the seurrilous Pamphlet) thou may see how wickedly and
basely he is wronged.

1. As for the Character of the man it is well known, That he was a pious man
and a good Magistrate that punished sin impartially without respect of persons,
one that has both done and suffered much in person and otherwise to further
the work of Reformation in a right Parliamentary way, he was no enemy to
Monarchy; nor no friend to Malignants to uphold arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government, he was equally averse to Sectaries on the one hand as to Malignants
on the other, very sparing in his speeches to his very friends; and therefore
very unlikely to be so rash; violent and reproaching in his language of the
King before strangers, yea and that such as were so vile and wicked (as those
were that were in the Wagon with him;) as will appear in the narration; he
was of a more sober spirit then to use such bitter revilings and more wise then
to speak before so rude a people; as is well known, to those that knew him, and
therefore the more wicked was the Pamphleteere that belies him so much in Print
to his defamation.

2. Take a brief yet true Narration of his journey and the sad accident that
besell him attested under the hand of his own servant that was with him in his
journey till he dyed. Which is as follows.

A brief Relation of certain passages which happened unto my Master Mr. Walter
White in his journey from his Son in Law Mr. William Whites house toward
London until the time of his death.
MY Master intending a journey for London, hired two horses of one Pain a
Waggoner belonging to the Town of Poole in the County of Dorset, who was to
bring the said horses on the 20. th of November last past, to the house of Mr.
William White at Hampreston, but then brought but one, promising at Ringwood
five miles further on the road, he should not sail of the other, but my Master
coming to Ringwood in expectation of this other horse sound the Wagon indeed
there, and going toward Rumsey 15 miles from Ringwood, but the Waggoner (who
made the promise) not yet come, and when come had not yet provided the other
horse, so we were forced to stay there till he procured the horse, and by this
time the Wagon being near two hours before us ere we could overtake the
Wagon, it was by six horsemen driven out of the road and robbed in the new
Forest, 5, or 6 miles from Ringwood. Being come to Rumsey, (for till then we
knew not of the accident) the Waggoner (finding his goods so mixed that he could
not discern one man's goods from another,) resolved to return, and would not let
us have his horses according to agreement, being thus disappointed, with much
difficulty (after one whole days stay at Rumsey) got horses to carry us to
Winchester, and there not being able (after trial) to get horses to carry us
through to London, my Master was necessitated to put himself into an Hampton
Wagon, the Master whereof lived at Eason two miles from Winchester, whether we
went on Saturday the 26 of November. and 27 set forward in the Wagon with four
other passengers (very lewd people as we afterward found) one man and three
women, we lay that night at Odium the next morning being gone near 3 miles on
our journey, coming into a bad way, the driver of the Wagon drove on the side
of a bank, the Wagon being heavy laden, leaning much to the one side broke the
pin which held it, and the wheels together, and so fell over my Master having
a box by his left side, fell on that, and the passengers on him, which bruised
him very much, yet he lived near 18 hours afterward, and 14 hours in perfect
mind; he dyed Wednesday morning 29 of November. 1648. After the death of my said
Master, the Jury and Corroner sitting upon him, found the aforementioned box to
be part of the cause of his death, and so indicted it. Christopher Door.

Now if thou please to peruse the Printed Papers relation, you may easily see
the falsities therein contained which is as follows, Friday the first of this
instant December 1648. One White who was last year Major of Exeter, being upon
the Road between that City and this of London in a Wagon of Exater, and twelve
other passengers in it, near Bagshot, began an invective and bitterly rayled
against his Sacred Majesty, using many vile and reproachful speeches against
him, which when some of the company resented, and seemed to dislike in a rage
of much sinful passion, he stuck not to say, That hanging was too good for the
King, and that if he were buried alive, it were a death good enough for him:
and added rather then it should be undone, he would be ready to do that
himself, which words were scarcely by him uttered, when the Wagon was with
the passengers in it suddenly overturned, and this blasphemous wretch White
killed outright, without leave of one words speech, not one of the rest (his
man excepted who was a little bruised, it may be suffering for his relation to
so wicked a Master) being in the leastwise hurt.

What things are false in the printed relation of my master Mr. Walter White
his death.
He dyed the 29. th of November 1648. whereas the Pamphlet says, the first of
December.

2. He received his fall out of an Hampton Wagon one mile on this side
Hartlerow in the Parish of Hartlewinkay; the Pamphlet says 'twas out of an
Exter Wagon near Bagshot.

3. In the Wagon were but six Passengers with himself, the Pamphlet says
twelve.

4. The day before he sell, he reprooved the rest of the Reader thou may
perceive what a stranger he was to this sad accident which he relates.
passengers for their wanton and lasoivious discourse (which discourse was most
abominable) but that day in which he received his hurt did not speak -- one
word of the King or of any State business; the Pamphler says that he used
many vile and reproachful speeches against the King.

5. He lived after his fall near 18 hours, and in perfect mind above 14
hours, the Pamphlet says he was killed outright.

What is here testified by me is the truth. Christopher Door.

Reader, by this relation and the many untruths therein, thou may easily
perceive of what stamp the Pampleteere was of, and how much he resembles him
that is a liar and Ioh. 8. 44.
the father of it, one would think so short a relation could hardly be stuffed
with so many untruths, It evidently appears, he was not only a stranger to his
person, but to this sad accident that befell him, yet deals with him as the
Barbarians at Melita with Paul, (though a stranger also to them) yet when the
Viper was on his hand presently cry out that vengeance will not suffer him to
live; Its a very ill but a very common thing to Judge of persous and of causes
by the success, man is apt to think them the worst who suffer worst, and that
they have sinned most that have suffered most and have most sorrow, surely he
has borne our griefs and carried our sorrows yet (we did esteem him)
stricken, smitten of God and afflicted, Fsa. 53. 4. Luke 13. 2 3.
say they of our Savior. I confess great afflictions carry a charge of
wickedness upon the afflicted, but it is by them that judge only by sense. The
Pamphleteere tells you immediately after his narrative, that the Judgments of
God are a great deep, which indeed the Scripture shows, Psalm. 36. 6. Ecel. 9.
8.
and had he considered it as he ought, it might have silenced his revilings,
for indeed here all things happen alike to all, as to the wicked so to the
Righteous says Solomon; I would not hereby take thee off Reader from observing
the just judgment, of God, but take heed of being too critical and censorious
in the particular application of them; indeed if men have been impions and
abominable in their lives (which none can fasten upon this reproached Citizen)
and God had in the very act of sin cut him off, here might have been some place
for an ecce digitus Dei, but to draw uncharitable and ungodly inferences merely
from the untimely deaths of men, becoms not a sober spirit but is contrary not
only to Religion but even to civility also; It was indeed an aggravation to his
sad affliction that he fell into the company of such barbarous and unclean
people; which because he sharply reprooved them for their uncivil and wanton
discourse while he lived, they would be sure to bespatter him with lying
reproaches at his death, so Prove. 9, 7.
true is that of the wiseman here, he that reprooveth a scorner gets
himself a blot.

Reader I will not trouble thee further in replying to so bitter and malicious
a paper, as may appear by his language and misapplications of Scripture,
especially that with which he closes up his railing discourse, 2 Samuel 16. 9.
As for those places of Scripture that he uses or rather abuses in his
application of them, you know they are the common texts which the Malignants of
these times have frequently in their months to deceive simple souls, and to
prop up a tottering and dying cause, which God has once and again so visibly
declared against, were they not hardened in their iniquity, they might see it,
and repent, they are glad to catch at any thing that may support them in their
sinking condition, and nourish that radical hatred that is in them against the
cause of God and his people. That which I have written has been only to
Vindicate the slandered reputation of this worthy Citizen, whom we are bound to
honor, and to satisfy the sober minded; As for others that are set upon
reviling (whose tongues are bent like bows for lies) I know nothing will stop
their mouths. I shall close therefore with that 14. Hos. 9. The ways of the
Lord are right, and the just will walk in them, but transgressors shall fall
therein.

FINIS.

