A JUDICIOUS VIEW OF THE BUSINESSES which are at this time between FRANCE and
the House of AUSTRIA. Most useful, to know the present posture of the affairs
of all Christendom.

Translated out of French, by a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Anchor in the Lower walk in the New-Exchange, 1657.

A CHARACTER OF this Work.
THis is the Map of the present interesses of Princes, the quintessence of the
History of five or six Ages, and of as many Kingdoms; the State-resolve of a
deep and consummate Politician, perfected by the perusing of many Volums of
Histories, and by the experience of many years.

I am inclined to believe that these were private Notes of some great
Statesman, gathered for readiness in his public employments. And, that they
were published without his name, makes me suspect that they came out without his
leave. Howsoever, this is a Treasure for all that desire to know the world, and
penetrate into the inside of businesses; a help of memory for them that have
read many Histories, and an ease of labor for such as want leisure to read
them.

The true case of the businesses which are at this time between the two Houses,
of France and Austria.
PREFACE.
THe two Houses of France and Austria, are the greatest and most important of
Christendom, and such as draw to their motion all the other Crowns. Between
these two Houses there has been many Wars, Alterations, Treaties, Truces,
and Peaces, since the rising of that of Austria; of which we may assign the
beginning at the marriage of Maximilian, Son to the Emperor Frideric 3. with
Mary the inheritrice of Charles, the last Duke of Burdundy, Prince of the
seventeen united Provinces of Netherland, dead before Nancy, in the year 1477.

For the intellience of all their Divisions, Truces, and Alliances, I frame
this discourse which shall consist of five Chapters.

In the first, The whole state of Europe shall be set down, the several
Princes thereof, their Religion, and what neighborhood and dependence they
have among themselves.

In the second, It shall be examined by what degrees the House of Austria is
entered into the Empire, and into all those great estates which she now enjoys
by her two Branches of Spain and Germany.

In the third, The differences between the two Crowns shall be discussed; what
right the House of France has in Catalonia, Portugal, Navarra, Naples, Milan,
etc. Also what claim the House of Austria has to Burgundy, Britain Provence,
etc. These are those disputable Rights which have begot so many Divisions and
Wars between the Princes, and an unreconcilable hatred between the Nations.

In the fourth Chapter, The businesses shall be presented, which past between
the two Kingdoms, from the Treaty of Arras, in the year 1435. to the Treaty of
Vervins, in 1598. Wars, Battles, Treaties, Truces, and Peaces.

The fifth, shall relate all that past from the Treaty of Vervins, till now.

CHAP. I. The Princes that govern Europe
Paragraphe I.
EUrope, the least of the three parts of the world known to the ancient
Geographers, and the most Northerly, but the most populous, and that within
which almost all Christendom is comprehended, has on the South the
Mediterranean Sea, and part of the Ocean, and begins at the Cap St. Vincent, in
the extremity of Portugal, in the Kingdom of Algarba, near the Strait of
Gibraltar, where the Mediterranean Sea begins, which takes several names, as it
touches upon several Provinces, as Spain, France, Italy, Sicily, Greece. The
Isle of Candie is the utmost of Europe that way, and it is divided from Africa
by the Mediterranean Sea.

Eastward ascending to the North, Europe is bounded again by the Mediterranean
Sea, under the names of the Aegean Sea, called now Archipelago, Hellospont now
Burdanelles, or the Strait of Gallipoli, Propontis now Mar de Marmora,
Bosphorus, Thracius now the Strait of Constantinople, Pontus Euxinus now the
black Sea, or Mar major. Higher it is bounded by Meotides Paludes, and the
River Tanais, now Don, remounting to its spring. And thenceforward a line is
imagined drawn to the North, butting either at the Golph of St. Nicholas, or
some such other place thereabout, in the great Duke of Moscovia's Country: for
that nothern Tract unknown to ancient Geographers is yet so little known, that
the limits of Europe that way, could never be well assigned.

On all the East Side, Europe neighboureth upon the great Asia, and is
Occidentall to it.

On the North-side, ancient Geographers have set no limits to Europe, but have
comprehended these Nothern extremities either under the name of Hyperborean
hills, although there be no hills in that Tract; or under the name of Mare
Glaciale or the frozen Sea, which we may take from the Golph of St. Nicol^s; or
the mouth of the River Oby, unto the Sea which is about Norway and Finmarch,
and so toward the Isles of Freezland and Island. On that side, Europe buts
upon the Pole, and is not near any considerable Lands, some few Islands only,
ill inhabited, as Nova Zembla, and Niewland.

On the West Side, Europe has the great Ocean, from the Isles of Freesland and
Is-land, to the Cap of St. Vincent, which is the extremity of Portugal. And
that Ocean takes diverse names according to the diverse Countries that it
touches; as the Britannique Islands, Norway, Denmark, Germany, Holland, Zeland,
Flanders, the Strait of Calais, the coasts of Normandy, Britain, Poitou,
Saintonge, Guienne, the golph of Bayonne, the coasts of Biscay, Gallicia,
Portugal, Algerke, to the Cap St. Vincent.

These are the limits, and as it were the four walls which enclose all that is
comprehended under the name of Europe. The length whereof may be taken from the
Cap St. Vincent, to the golph S. Nicholas, or the mouth of the River Oby, which
is two thousand French common leagues, or as far northward as one will. The
breadth, from Morea, toward the Isle Cythera, to the North toward Finmarch
and Lapland, which is twelve of fifteen hundred leagues.

A more exact description of the Topography of each Country is not for this
place. Here only we will enumerate the States, contained within that extent,
and that but in the great; as much as is necessary to understand that which
belongs to the two Houses of France and Austria, the most considerable of
Europe, of Christendom at least.

We shall be begin that enumeration by the West, and from thence passing to the
East, we shall turn to the North, and there end.

Paragraphe II.
The first Prince on the West of Europe, is the King of Spain, who bears the
name of the House of Austria, besides that which he has in Africa, and in the
East and West Indies. Besides a number infinite of Islands, Caps, and Havens,
from the Isles Azores, to the Cap of good hope, and from that Cap to the
extremity of the East, toward the Molukes and Philippine Islands.

1. That which he holds in Europe, is comprehended in that Peninsula enclosed
within the Ocean, the Med terranean Sea, and the Pyrenean hills under several
names of Kingdoms, as we shall say in the following Chapter. And these
distinguished into three general Jurisdictions, of Castilia, Arragon, and
Portugal. It is true that since the late Wars, the revolts of Portugal and
Catalonia, have clipped so much of his Domtnions, and the French have taken from
him the County of Roussillon.

2. Upon the coasts of Spain, he possesses the two Baleares, Mallorca, and
Minorca, and the two Islands in old time called Ophiusae, now Ivica and
Fromentera.

3. In Italy, he has all the Kingdom of Naples, which is almost the half of
it; and the most Easterly part from Cajeta or Fondi, to the golph of Tarento,
and the Strait of Messina.

4. In the same Italy, he has the Duchy of Milan, with the territories of
Pavia, Tortona, Cremona, etc.

5. Upon the coasts of the Tuscan Sea, he has Final, Piombino, Porto Hercule,
and Orbitello. Of late, the Prince of Monaco has shaken off his yoke. In
Toscana, the great Duke of Florence does him homage for the Commonwealth of
Siena, and owes him service.

6. In that Sea about Italy, he has the Isles of Sardima, and Sicily, and is
sovereign of the Isle of Malta (which the old Geographers reckon among the
African Islands). The great Master of that Island, owes him some homage for it.

7. In the Celtique Gaul he has the Franche County, or the County of
Burgundy; and in the Duchy of Burgundy, he has the County of Charrolois.

8. In the Belgique Gaul, he has possessed, till the end of the last age, all
that was comprehended under the name of the seventeen Provinces. He keeps to
this day the Dutchies of Luxemburg and Limburg, the Duchy of Brabant, but
pared about by the loss of Maestritcht, the Bose Breda and Bergupzom; part of
the Duchy of Guelders, the Counties of Namur, Hainant, Artois, and Flanders,
all maimed with the loss of some limbs, by our late Wars. Also the Marquisat
of the holy Empire, which is Antwerp, and the Principality of Mechlen: The
remnant of these seventeen Provinces, is in the hand of the States of the
united Provinces, besides that which the King of France has taken.

In all that large extent of Lands, the Spaniard suffers the exercise of no
Religion but the Roman. Though he go for a great sovereign, yet many of his
Lands depend from oother Princes. The Sea of Rome has great pretenses upon the
sovereignty of Arragon: Heacknowledgerh without contradiction, the sovereignty
of the Church over his Kingdom of Naples: Yet it is pretended that he owes the
same homage for Sicily. For the Duchy of Milan, and other Lands, which he
holds in Italy, he must acknowledge the Empire, from which he has received the
investiture of the same. Franche County, is an imperial fee; as also the
Provinces of Netherland not depending of France, did owe homage to the Empire:
And in the year 1608. when the truce was made between Spain and Holland; these
two States disputing of their sovereignty in the first Article, the Emperor
Rodolphus framed an opposition against that Article, and claimed the
sovereignty as belonging to the Empire, but the Treaty past without any
reflection to that claim. Finally, although the Spaniard acknowledge our Kings
no more, neither for Flanders nor for Artois, it is not well resolved yet, by
what right he has shaken off the yoke; and the French pretend that the
Treaties of Madrid, Cambray, and Crespy in Valois, which contain that cession,
have not been authorized by the general States of France.

The King of Spain being possessor of such a great extent of Lands, is a
neighbor to most of the Christian Princes, as will be showed more at large in
the second Chapter, and has always some difference with them. The now King of
Spain, is Phillip the IV. of the Roman Religion.

Paragraphe III.
Here we will look upon the King of France, whose state is comprehended in the
old Gally, Narbonensis, Aquitanica, Celtica, and Belgica; yet does he not
possess them all: the whole Narbonensis belongs to him, excepting Avignon,
Nice, Savoy, Geneva, and Orange. The whole Aquitanica is his, since the small
principality of Bearn (which with small reason has been pretended to be
sovereign in her Rights and Customs) has been united to the Crown, and began
to have the same Prince, by the coming of Henry the fourth to the Crown. The
whole Celtica belongs likewise to the King of France, excepting only the
Franch County, and the imperial Town of Besancon.

Of the Belgica, the King of France has the least part, The I Will of France,
Pays de Caux Boulonnois, Picardi, Beau-voisis Champagne, Brie; And by good or
bad title, the Towns of Mets, Thoul, and Verdun; of which in the first
invasion, he declared himself Protector only. By the late Wars, he has made
himself Master of most part of Lorrain, of the Town of Brisach, and of other
Towns of Alsatia, beyond the Rhine.

The subjects of the King of France, are commonly Roman Catholics, yet
Protestants are tolerated in the State.

The King of France is neighboring upon Spain, by the Pyrenean hills. On that
side the French and the Spaniards have not much troubled one another but of
late years, in which the French have unfortunately attempted Spain about
Fontarabie; but fortunately about Roussillon and Catalonia. But about the Low
Countries, and Franche County, which lie open to both the Nations, there has
been much stir and action.

On the side of Provence and Daulphine, the Duke of Savoy is neighbor to
France; for Savoy and Piemont join to the foresaid Provinces. The County of
Avignon belonging to the Pope, is enclosed within Provence. By Daulphine, the
French touch the Commonwealth of Geneva. By the Country of Bresse, and the
Bailliages of Gez and Verromey, they enter within Switzerland, into the Canton
of Berne. By Champagne they have the Duke of Lorraine for their neighbor; but
now they are possessed of his Country. So all their neighbors are weak, the King
of Spain excepted. The present King of France, is Lewis the XIV. of the Roman
profession.

Paragraphe IV.
In this Paragraphewe will set down all the Princes contained within the
ancient Gauls, besides the King of France.

1. In Gallia Narbonensis, the Duke of Savoy holds the Duchy of Savoy, the
Countries of Chablais and Tarantaise, and the Town of Chambery; and upon the
Sea coast near the River of Var, the Town and County of Nice, which was
sometimes a member of Provence, and being upon the River of Var, it is partly
in France, partly in Italy.

2. The Pope holds the County of Venaissyn or Avignon, an ancient member of
Provence, with the four Bishoprics belonging to it, Avignon, Carpentras,
Cavaillon, and Vezon. There also is Orange, belonging to the House of Nassau.

3. The City of Geneva with her Territory, made her self a sovereign
Commonwealth about the year 1535. when the Duke of Savoy, the Bishop of
Geneva, and the City being in contention about their right, the Citizens
changed Religion, forced the Bishop to fly, and shut their Gates against the
Duke of Savoy. But indeed that Town, and all the other States, were pieces
depending from the Empire. But the Emperors power being by succession of time
confined within Germany only, retain almost nothing out of it, but the shade
of their ancient authority.

4. In the Celtique Gaul, Franch County belongs to the King of Spain,

5. The City of Besancon, enclosed within Franch County, is an imperial City.

6. Then many little sovereign Princes; the chief of them, the thirteen
Cantons of the Suitzers, enclosed within the Alps, between Franch County and
the Rhine. Of them, four are Protestants; Berne (which alone is almost as large
as all the others) Basel, Zurick, and Schaffouse, which is a Town beyond the
Rhine. Seven Catholic (as they style themselves) two greater, Friburg and
Soleurre, and the five little Cantons, Uri, Switz, Underwall, Lucerne; and
Zough, and two half Catholic, half Protestants, Glaris and Appenzel. All
these Commonwealths making one body of State, have their Associates; the Abbot
of Saint Gall, the commonalties of Valley, and the Bishop of Sion, with some
other Towns, and beyond the Rhine, the three Leagues of the Grisons.

7. To these add many pieces about the Rhine, which are held to be parts of
Germany, as the County of Montbeliard, which the Kings of France have bought of
late years of the Dukes of Wirtinberg. Alsatia beyond the Rhine, which did
belong to the House of Austria, and consists of imperial Towns, and other
Towns which the King of France now holds. Then the Palatinate on this side of
the Rhine, which is now partly in the hands of the Spaniards, partly in that of
the King of France and the Protestants.

8. The Duchy of Lorrain, which before acknowledged the Duke, is now almost
altogether in the King of Frances his hands.

9. The principality of Liege, is depending from the Bishopric thereof.

10. The Duchy of Juliers, and great part of the Duchy of Cleves, now divided
between the Dukes of Newburg, and the Marquess of Brandenburg.

11. The Archbishopric of Treues on both sides of the River of Mosella.

12. The seventeen Provinces of Netherland, four of which are Dutchies,
Brabant, Luxembourg, Limbourg, and Guelderland. They belong to the Spaniard,
part of Guelderland excepted, and some Towns of Brabant; the Marquisat of the
holy Empire, which is the Town of Antwerp. Seven Counties, Namur, Hainault,
Artois, Flanders. These four are in the hands of the Spaniard, excepting that
which the French hold in Artois and Hainault; and the sluice and other places
which the Hollanders hold in Flanders. The three other Counties are, Zeland,
Holland, and Zutphen. There are five Lordships more, Mechlen which the Spaniard
holds, and Utrecht, Overissell, West-Friesland, and Groaning, which are possessed
by the Hollanders. All these are commonly called the seventeen Provinces of
Netherlands, and the Belgique Gaul, although some of them be out of the extent
of Gaul, and beyond the Rhine, as Overissel, Friesland, Groaning, and part of
Guelderland. All these estates contained within the extent of Gaul, are of no
great importance, neither are they able to resist the French, excepting those
that are in the hand of the Spaniard, or protected by the Empire. To these,
Cambray must be added, an Imperial and Archi-episcopal Town held by the
Spaniard.

Paragraphe V.
Here let us enumerate all the Princes contained in that great Peninsula called
Italy, between the golph of Venice, the coasts of Genoa, Toscana, Naples, the
golph of Tarento, the Jonique Sea, and the Alps. Within that extent there are
many Princes; the most considerable are six.

1. The King of Spain holds the Kingdom of Naples, the Duchy of Milan, with
some places upon the Sea coast, and the sovereignty of the Town of Siena.

2. The Pope with the Church of Rome, besides the sovereignty over Naples and
Parma, holds in proper dominion above three hundred miles in length, and a
hundred in breadth, beginning from Caieta to Ferrara, and to the Country of the
Venetians. He possesses the whole Latium, commonly called Campagna di Roma,
where the City of Rome stands, part of Toscana, with the Territory of St Peter,
the Towns of Perousa, Viterbo, Orvietta, the Duchy of Spoleto, where Marca d'
Ancona is seated; the Duchy of Urbin, lately devolved to the Sea of Rome, by
the extinction of the family of the Roveros which held it in fee; the Towns of
Bolonia and Ravenna, the Duchy of Ferrara, returned to the Church under Pope
Clement the VIII. an. 1598. by the extinction of the lawful males of the
family of Est. Also in the Kingdom of Naples, the Duchy and Town of Benevent.
In these Countries there is above fifty Bishoprics, and above a million and a
half of inhabitants.

3. The Commonwealth of Venice possesses (besides the city of Venice seated
within the Marshes of the Mediterranean Sea) within the continent of Italy,
Histria, a Peninsula; the Countries of Friuli, called in old time Forum Julii,
Padua, Vicenza, Verona, Brixia, Bergumo; and out of Italy from Histria, to the
Commonwealth of Ragousa, almost all that is on that coast of the golph of
Venice, where the Towns of Zara Sebennico, Spalaro, Cataro. And every were
Venice bordereth upon the House of Austria, and shareth with it the Countries
of Dalmatia and Slavonia. In the Mediterranean sea, Venice holds the Isles of
Corfou, Zante, Cephalenia, Cerigo, and the great Island of Candy, now disputed
to them by the Turk, and even before the Turks invasion, Candy called it self a
sovereign Commonwealth, acknowledging for their head Francisco Erizzo, of an
ancient family. In the year 1470. one of his Ancestors being Governor of the
Isle of Negrepont, was taken by the Turks, and sawed in two, contrary to the
faith given to him.

8. The great Duke of Toscana is possessed with the estate of three ancient
Commonwealths, Pisa, Florence, and Siena; his Territories run along the coasts
of the Toscan Sea, where he has also the Isle of Elva. The now Duke is
Ferdinand II.

9. The Commonwealth of Genoa, possesses almost all that which is
comprehended under the name of Riviera di Genoa, and Liguria. They hold also
the Island of Corsica.

6. The Prince of Piemont is the same as the Duke of Savoy; He holds in Italy,
Valdosta, Vercellois, Piemont, the Marquisat of Salluces. The now Duke is
Charles Emanuel.

Besides these six considerable Princes, there are some of a lower form.

The Duke of Mantua, whose Country is compast by the Venetians on the one side,
and the Duchy of Milan, and the River of Po on the other.

The Duke of Modena and Rhegio, which is an imperial Fee, held by the remnants
of the family of Est or A^estini.

The Duke of Parma and Placentia, who besides that Fee of which he was invested
by Pope Paul the III. has, or claims as a proper inheritance of the house
Farnesi, the Duchy of Castro in Tescana near Rome, out of which he was lately
expelled by the Pope.

The County of Mirandola, held by the family of Pici.

The Duchy of Montferrat, sometimes the patrimony of the house of the
Paleologi, is at this time in the hands of the Duke of Mantua. There stands
Cazal of St. Vaast, the so much disputed place.

The small Commonwealth of Luca in Toscana, between the two States of Florence
and Genoa.

Besides these, two estates are attributed to Italy, though far from it; the
one is the Commonwealth of Ragousa in Slavonia, upon the Golph, in old time
called Epidaurus. It is sovereign, yet pays to the Turk her next neighbor, a
tribute of fifteen thousand Sequins yearly.

The other Estate is Malta, with the next Island Goza, possessed by the Religion
of Saint John of Jerusalem. But that Prince has but the shade of a Sovereign,
being as for his person a Religious depending of the Pope, and punishable by
the Pope, and the Island of Malta, acknowleding the King of Spain as a
dependence of Sicily.

In all these States of Italy, there is no exercise of any Religion but the
Roman.

Although all these Princes will be acknowledged Sovereign, there is none
properly so but the Pope, the Venetians, and the Commonwealth of Genoa. All
the others are either Imperial Lands, as Mantua, Milan, Montferrat, Piemont,
Modena, Mirdndula, Florence, or depend of the Pope, as Naples, Sicily, Parma,
and Placentia.

Paragraphe VI.
In the end of the Golph of Venice Eastward, lies Greece, possessed by the Turk,
who holds all that was comprehended in the names of Peloponnesus, Achaia,
Epirus, Macedo nia, Thracia, with the great City of Constantinople. Nearer to
the River of Danubius, and above the mountains of Thracia, he hold Bulgaria
and Servia, which were the ancient Misiae, Bossena, great part of Hungary, as
far as Gran, or Strigonium, near the Town of Commorra, and part of Slavonia
and Dalmatia. By those more Occidentall Countries, he touches the Lands of the
Venetians, and the the House of Austria. Beyond Danubius, he is acknowledged by
the three Vaivodes, or Princes of Transylvania, Moldavia, and Walachia.

The Turk holds also all the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, from Candia to
Pontus Euxinus. Beyond the mouth of Danubius, and the coast of Pont Euxin, he
holds as far as the River Tyrus or Niestra; And higher in Taurica
Chersonesus, the Town of Cafa, in old time Theodosia. His Dominion on that side
buts upon the River Tanais, where his Frontier is the Town of Assou, taken
about ten years ago upon the Muscovite. In all that Tract, though the Turk and
the Mohammedan Religion govern, most part of his People profess the Religion of
Christ under the Patriarch of Constantinople. Yet there are many of the Roman
Religion in Hungary, Bossena, and Servia. Transylvania is Protestant.

Paragraphe VII.
Above Pont Euxin toward Meotides Paludes, there is a great extent of
Countries bordering upon Podolia and Muscovia. And within that Sea is that
Peninsula, sometimes called Taurica Chersonesus, now Precops. All that Tract is
called Tartaria Precopensis, or the Crim Tartar; or about four hundred years
ago, a Herd, for Army of Yartars, invaded that Country. It is now one of the
considerable States of Europe, possessed by a Mahumetan Prince, named Cantemiro.
It bordereth upon the Turks toward Pont Euxin, and is in league with them.
Westward it joins with Poland, Northwards with Muscovia, and has War almost
continually with these two Nations.

Paragraphe VIII.
Beyond the dominions of Poland, there is a River called Danambra, in old time
Borysthenes, which severeth Sarmatia, (now called Poland) from the old Scythia
Europea, which comprehends that large tract of Land between Borysthenes and
Tanais, and Northward unto the frozen Sea. This is that great Estate of
Muscovia, denominated from the Capital City Mosko; The Prince, the great Duke
of Moscovia, besides that part of Europe, stretches his Dominion very far into
great Asia. He that reigned when the Author writ this Book, which was in the
year 1644. was Michael Fedorowitz, who was elected in the year 1612. In the
confusion of Civil Wars after the extinction of the antitient Royal Family.
That People is Christian, but of the rudest sort, acknowledging the Patriarch
of Constantinople. Westward they join with Poland, Southward with the Crim
Tartar, and with each of them have always some war.

Paragraphe IX.
All the Country from the River of Odera, in Germany, or at least from the
River of Vistula, or Weissell, as far as Borysthenes, and Northward as far as
the point of the Baltique Sea above Livonia; All that Country, I say, called
anciently Sarmatia, contains now the Kingdom of Poland, consisting of the
greater and lesser Poland; Russia alba, the Country of the Cossacks; Podolia,
and other Provinces with the great Duchy of Lituania near Borysthenes. That
State of Poland, whose capital City is Cracovia, joyneth Southward with the
Lands of the Empire, and Hungary so much as belongs to the House of Austria,
and with Transylvania and Moldavia; Eastward it joines with the Tartar and
Moscovite. The Court of Poland has been of the Roman Religion hitherto: What
it will be hereafter the success of the present Wars will show. That State
tolerates all sorts of Religions. Livonia or Liefland in the Baltic Sea is
accounted as an appurtenance of Poland. Yet, because three Estates meet there,
Poland on the South, Muscovia on the East, and North, and Sweden on the West;
it is always disputed between these three Crowns, and is the occasion of great
Wars, which were appeased in some part by the peace between Poland and Sweden,
An. 1635. but newly revived.

Paragraphe X.
By an arm of the great Ocean, that Mediterranean Sea of the North is formed,
which is called the Baltique Sea: There the Dominions of Sweden and Denmark are
seated, two considerable States.

The Kingdom of Sweden comprehends great part of the ancient Gotthia, the Town
and Duchy of Stockholm, the great Duchy of Finland, and Northward Botnia,
Scrifinia, and other unknown Countries. The present King is Carolus Gustavus,
by the cession of his Cosen- German, Christina Daughter to the famous Gustavus
Adolphus. The whole Kingdom of Sweden is Lutheran: Yet in the North, there is
some remnant of the ancient Idolatry of Pagans.

The other State is that of Denmark, composed of the Hanse Teutonique, called
anciently Cimbrica-Chersonesus, which is a corner of great Germany, containing
the Duchy of Holstein, Juitland, and Schleswick. A second part of that Estate
lies in Islands, the chief of them Zeland, where Coppenhagen is seated, the
Capital City of the Kingdom. The third part is in the Peninsula of the
Baltique Sea, and herein the Kingdom of Norway and Finmarch. To that State also
belong the Islands of Friesland and Island, far in the North. They are all
Lutherans. The strength and wealth of that Kingdom, lies in the passage of the
Sund, which makes it considerable to all that traffic to or from the Baltique
Sea.

Paragraphe. XI.
From thence sailing Westward, one comes to the great Brittanique Islands, of
which we that inhabit them, know more then this Author; and therefore leave
that little which he says of them.

Paragraphe XII.
Being now come to the West, we meet with the most considerable piece of
Europe, which is the Empire of Germany. The Empire begun by Julius Caesar, but
founded by Augustus, possessed all the known Countries of the West. But was
greatly diminished about the year of our Lord 400. for then by the incursions
of the Goths, Ostrogoths, Alans, Huns, Herules, Vandales, Frankes, and others;
many States were founded. And finally, the Empire ceased in the West,
altogether in the year 445. by the death of Augustulus, and the whole Empire of
the West was divided into many States.

In the year 800. the Empire of the West begun afresh in the person of
Charlemaigne, who under that name, possessed all the Gauls, part of Spain,
almost all Italy, the great Germany, Hungary, Slavonia, part of Poland and
Denmark, and other Northern Countries. But his posterity having degenerated,
that Empire went from his Family about the year 912. and after a long dispute
about it, between the Italian and German Princes, Oath Duke of Saxony made
himself Master of it: And from that time, that which remains of the Empire,
has continued in the hands of German Princes.

That which is called the Empire at this day, has more shadow then substance.
I call a shadow all the pretenses of the Emperor out of Germany, which are
worn out with age and lost, or remain with small vigor, as the pretenses of
Sovereignty over the Princes of Italy and the Low Countries, Savoy, Franche
County, Besancon and the like. In Germany he has some real and effective
power. Germany at this time comprehends all that Country between the border of
Hungary and Poland on the East, the Baltique Sea and Denmark on the North, the
Germanique Sea and France on the West, and the River of Rhine. and the Alps on
the South. Neither is the Emperor absolute every where, or in the most part of
that large space. For it is divided into ten Circles, or great Provinces, which
have a proper right to assemble themselves to look to their own businesses, and
send Deputies to the general Diets of the Empire. And in every one of these
Circles, there be many free Cities, and many Secular and Ecclesiastical
Princes.

The chief are the seven Electours, three Ecclesiastical, the Archbishops of
Mentz, Collen, and Treues, four secular, the Count Palatine, the King of
Bohemia, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenhurg. And next to
these the Duke of Banteres, the Duke of Wirtenberg, Luneburg, Mechelburg,
Brunswick, the Lantgrave of Hesse, and many others. But above all these houses,
that of Austria is considerable, of which we must speak in the next Chapter;
for, besides the title of Emperor by election, now continued in their family
for many descents; they possess their ancient Patrimony, Austria, Stiria,
Carinthia, Carnia, Tirolis, Elzas. They hold also Bohemia and that little part
of Hungary, which remains unto the Christians. All Germany is divided between
Papists, Lutherans, and Calvinists. These three and the Mahumetan, and the
Greek Religion, are the principal Religions known in Europe.

CHAP. II. By what degrees the house of Austria is come to those great Estates
which it possesses.
IT is certain, that among the Christian Princes, the two most considerable
Families are those of France and Austria. And although it be known that the
house of France has all the Prerogatives of Antiquity, Nobility, and Glory
above the other; yet that of Austria is more powerful for extent of Lands, and
multitude of People; and is invested with a more eminent quality, which is the
Empire. But, because they hold it only by Election, they have that pre-eminence
but for a time; so that the Family of Austria from a Sovereign, may become a
Subject; which can never happen to the Sovereigns by succession, but by the
ruin of the State.

Now, because these two Families draw to their motion, the most part of our
Christian Western world, and that since one hundredth and fifty years the house
of Austria has taken a stupendous growth: It will be to good purpose to
examine in this Chapter her Birth, Progress, and Greatness. For we shall not
need to speak of the greatness of France, which is a grounded Monarchy of
twelve hundred years standing. But it is but of late that the house of Austria
dares claim equality with the house of France.

Paragraphe I.
Yet so much we will say of the house of France.

1. It is certain that this Kingdom was erected out of the ruins of the Roman
Empire, in the year 419. Pharamond was elected King by the Frankes, beyond the
Rhine, in the Country of Sicambria, which is Guelderland, Uretcht, Freeseland,
and other Countries thereabout. But neither he, nor his Son Clodion the
Chevelu, past ever into France for any thing that we read; but sent forth their
Armies to conquer it. Merovee the third King, was the first that came to Paris
and took it, and settled himself with the Frankes in Gauls. From him was the
first race of French Kings denominated, and called the race of the Merovingians.

2. Clouis the fifth King, was converted to the Christian faith in the year of
Christ 500. and brought the French State to great splendor, by the expulsion
of the relics of the Romans, near Soissons, Laon, and Reins, by the Conquest
of Gaul, Aquitanique, and by the defeat of Alaric, and the Kingdom of the
Goths. The Sons of that Clouis about the year 527. conquered the state of the
Burgundians, or Bourguignons: So that race of the Merovingians, about the year
of 530. was possessed of all the Gauls, yet divided into Tetrarchies by the
children of Clouis, and again by their descent.

That race with the Gauls held great part of Germany, and having done great
services to the Church, and protected desolate Popes, got from them the name of
most Christians, and eldest Sons of the Church. When that title was given them,
we cannot precisely tell; yet Saint Gregory who lived in the year 600. says,
that the King of France is as eminent above other Kings, as every King is above
his Subjects.

That first race kept long the fierceness of German-barbarousnesse, and about
the year 650. after the death of Dagobert, they degenerated to idleness, and
so continued for a hundred years, which gave occasion to the Mayres of the
Palace, to incroach upon the Sovereign Authority. Among whom Charles Martel was
most eminent, who having defeated the Sarrasins near Tours, and killed three
hundred threescore and six thousand men, and relieved the Pope against the
Lombards; raised much the honor of France and his own, but to the destruction
of the first Royal line, which ended in the degradation of the unfortunate
Chilperic, in the year 752. having subsisted 333 years.

5. The second race much more illustrious then the first, began in the person
of Pipin, Son to that Charles Martel. A valorous and fortunate Prince, devoutly
addicted to the Roman See. He received Pope Stephen the first into France, and
put down Adolphus King of the Lombards, who persecuted the Pope. But his Son
Charlemagne raised the State of France more then any. For he conquered great
part of Italy upon the Lombards, and quite destroyed them An. 774. overcame
the Saxons, and other Nations of Germany, conquered part of Spain upon the
Saracens, and made himself master of most part of the old Empire of the West,
and so was crowned Emperor of the West, An. 800. And three years after, limits
were set in Italy, between the two Empires of East and West; Nicephorus being
then Emperor of the East. And the bounds were the Rivers of Lyris now
Garigliano, and Aufidus now Lofanto, both in the Kingdom of Naples. So that
excepting the farthest part of Italy, part of Spain, and the Brittanique
Islands, divided between many petty Kings, he was possessed of the whole Empire of
the West.

6. These first Kings were very liberal to the Sea of Rome. Pepin, and
Charlemagne, gave them the Exarchat of Ravenna, and other Lands which the Popes
pretended to have been taken away from them by the Lombards. Lewis the Meek,
who succeeded his Father Charlemagne, confirmed and amplified that gift An.
817. the Charter whereof Baromus has published, taken from the Vatican, as he
affirms. Lewis the Meek dying An. 840. left the State of France in a great
height, possessed of the Gauls, Germany, Italy, and part of Spain. All other
Princes compared to the French Kings, were mean fellows.

7. Lewis the Meek left three Sons, Lothaire and Lewis by his first wife, and
Charles the Bald from Judith his second wife. These three Brothers for three
years contended about their partage, the law of the eldest being not then in
use among them, till that cruel battle of Fontenay near Auxerre was fought,
where above a hundred thousand men were slain, and especially much Nobility
and Gentry whereby the State was weakened, and the Brothers were forced to come
to an arbitrament; That Lothary the eldest, should have all the Lands beyond
the Rivers of Scaldis and Mosa, as far as the Rhine, namely the Provinces of
the Low Countries, Liege, Treues, Juliers, Luxemburg, Lorrain, Alsatia, and
others. Also that which lies beyond Saone and Rhosne, namely, Franch County,
Savoy, Daulphine, Provence. Also as much of Italy as was left to the Emperor
of the West, by the partage with the Emperor of the East. This was the share
of Lothary the eldest, who took with it the Title of Emperor. Lewis, the
second Brother, had all that their Father held in Germany, and there was called
Germanicus. To the third, Charles the Bald, France was left, much about as it
is at this day, enclosed within the narrow Seas of England, Scaldis, Mosa,
Saone, Rhosne, the coasts of Languedoc, and the Pyrenees. That partage of the
three Sons of Lewis the Meek, An. 843. is the most remarkable date of the
French History. Then was that great Monarchy cut in shreds, and the greatness
of France humbled, the name of which remained only to the proportion of a
third part. And from that time, the French State thus clipped has remained with
little alteration. Only we have lost Flanders and Artois, and many times the
borders of the Kingdom have been changed toward Mosa and Scaldis. But in
recompense we have got Daulphine and Provence, beyond the ancient bounds.

8. As by this partage the State of France remained very much diminisht, so the
French Kings lost the name of Emperors, which nevertheless Charles the Bald
took since. But his Descent being fallen to idleness as the first Race; the
State of France thus shortened, lingered among many civil broils and
misfortunes, till the year 987. when that race ended, having subsisted about
235 years.

9 Hugh Capet, head of the third Race, was descended as it is thought, from an
ancient House of Saxony planted in France, by Wittikind the Saxon of the race
of that other Wittikind, a Saxon Prince who so long made head against
Charlemagne. This third race began to reign in the year 987. It is that which
this day subsisteth, and besides her ancient Nobility before she was Sovereign,
has now held the sovereignty above 660 years, and besides innumerable
victories obtained over her neighbors, made great Wars against the Infidels in
the East, and in Spain, and against Heretics in all the Provinces of Europe,
keeping still a great respect to the Sea of Rome. All these ways she has
maintained her self in the prerogative of precedence and glory above all
others. And although he that bears now the quality of Emperor, go before the
French Kings, because he retains the name and place of those great Monarchs of
all the West, yet he has neither right nor pretense over the Kings of France;
yea, Mr. de Breves, in the Appendix of the Negotiation of the East, added to
the History of his voyage, says, That in Henry the 4ths time, he had the
precedence before the Ambassadors of the Emperor Rudolphus, at the Porta of
the great Turk, who judged that the precedences of Christian Princes, in
relation to the Church of Rome, and the Popes, were of no consideration at his
Porta, where the strongest and the most courageous finds most favor. Also
whereas the King of France was then in War with the House of Austria, he would
not give his enemy any advantage over him. Neither do the Turks acknowledge the
Emperor but as King of Vienna, but have a great esteem for the French Kings.
But without insisting upon the History of their third Race now reigning, or
making Panegyricks of their glory; we will say that next to the precedence
which they give to the Emperor lawfully elected, they have it over all the
Sovereigns of Christendom.

Paragraphe II.
Now to understand the Origin, progresses, and rising of the house of Austria,
we must observe,

1. That the Empire which was left (as we said) unto Lothary, the eldest Son of
Lewis the Meek, subsisted (though weakly) in the house of Charlemagne, till
about the year 912. when Lewis the last of that race being dead, there was a
great contention between the German and Italian Princes, whereby the Empire
was in confusion above fifty years, until Otho the Great, Duke of Saxony
invested himself of that quality, made himself Master of Germany and Italy,
the only remaining pieces of the Empire, in the year 963. and ruined all his
competitors. This Otho I. was Father of Otho II. and he of Otho III. after
whose death the Germans assisted by Pope Gregory the V. who himself was a
German, took upon themselves the right of creating Emperors. And from that
time all that have peaceably reigned have been Germans, because the Popes
having made themselves Masters of a great part of Italy, have done their utmost
to expel the Emperors out of it, and confine them to Germany.

2. As in France, by the idleness of the last Kings of the 2d Race, the
Governors of Provinces made themselves Masters of them, and became Dukes and
Earls. Likewise the idleness of the successors of Charlemagne in the Empire,
and the confusions risen in Germany, after the extinction of that Race, gave a
beginning to so many Fees both Secular and Ecclesiastical which are now in
Germany, the Governors having made themselves Lords, and laid the foundation
of the great Houses now in being. Which nevertheless have gone through many
changes, some families being extinct, and some Fees sold, transported, or
confiscated. Among these families, one of the chief, and indeed the most
remarkable at this time, is that of Austria.

3. The French Kings of the first Race, possessing a Kingdom of vast extent,
which they divided into Ostrick and Westrick. Ostrick which by corruption and
French termination, was called Austrasie, was the Eastern part, and
comprehended the Countries toward the River Msa, and beyond the Rhine, and as
far as Hungary, Westrick, which by corruption was called Neustria,
comprehended the Western part, from Mosa toward Britain. These names were long
preserved, even to the age of Charlemagne, and being lost by the new partage
between the Children of Lewis the meek; yet the name of Neustria stuck long to
the Western part, which is now called Normandy (for Britain was a State by it
self.) The name of Ostrick being lost by the same partage, remained
nevertheless to the most Eastern part, and the next to Hungary, and is that
which we call Austria, a word corrupted from Ostrick and Ostenrick, and is that
Province seated upon Danubius, where the Capital City of Vienna stands.

4. In that Country Otho the III. about the year 1000 established Leopold a
Marquis, that is a keeper of those Marches against the ordinary excursions of
the Hungarians. That Leopold is the head of the first House of Marquisses since
Dukes of Austria which continued, till a certain Friderick who went to the War
of Naples against Charles brother of St. Lewis, and being taken with Conradin a
competitor of that Kingdom, was beheaded with him.

By his death without Children, Austria returned to the Empire. But Wenceslaus
King of Bohemia, sought to join it to his State, and sent thither his Son
Ottocarus, who having conspired against the Empire with the Hungarians, was
degraded and put to death by the Emperor Rudolphus, of whom we are now to
speak.

5. By the death of the Emperor Friderick the Second, the great enemy of
Popes, which was about the year 1231. the factions were so great about a new
election, that there was an Anarchy of twenty years and above, under these
titular Emperors, William Earl of Holland, Richard of England, and Alphonsus
of Spain. In the end, after many assemblies and contentions, the Electors gave
their Votes to Rudolphus Earl of Habsburg, who was acknowledged by the whole
Empire. That Election was in the year 1255. five years after the death of St.
Lewis. Philip le Hardy then reigning in France.

6. Between Basel and Soleurre, Cantons of Switzerland, there is Triestein
Castle, the Lords whereof had the Title of Counts, and by the women inherited
the County of Habsburg, and took the Title of the same. Of that House was this
Rodolphus (before whom there is no certainty of the History of their House) who
by his virtue was elected Emperor, An. 1275. and dyed in the 1291. The Duchy
of Austria being then vacant, and Ottocarus the Bohemian having invaded it, and
made a league with the Hungarians against the Empire, Rodolphus divested him of
it, and slew him; and An. 1282. invested his Son Albert in the same. In that
Albert we must take the birth of the house of Austria. And although that Albert
was also Emperor from the year 1298. till 1308; yet his descent returned not
to that quality, but 130. years after, and went for Princes of the Empire, as
other Imperial Families; Only in the time of Pope John 22. there was a great
contention for the Empire, between Friderick of Austria, and Lewis of Bavieres.
The whole Pedigree of that house, is to be seen in the Tables of Bertius, from
the Creation of Rudolphus of Habsburg, An. 1275. to the year 1438. when the
Empire entered so into that hause, that it did not come out since.

Paragraphe III.
So much is known then, that the house of Austria by the death of Albert the
first, lost the Empire and fell back into the State of a private principality;
and that less considerable then the houses of Saxony, Bavieres, and
Luxemburg, which furnished many Emperors, and so it continued till the
Emperor Albert the II.

Sigismond the Emperor, of the house of Luxemburg, was Son to Charles the IV.
Emperor and Grandchild to John King of Bohemia. And that Charles the IV. was
he that made the golden Bull, and established a certain form of Imperial
elections. This Charles was Grandchild to the Emperor, Henry the VII. head of
the house of Luxemburg. Sigismond had no male issue, and gave his only
Daughter Elizabeth to Albert of Austria; who after the death of his Father in
law, was elected Emperor, An. 1438. and this house has ever since kept the
Empire.

From that year these Emperors reigned. Albert the II. who reigned two years,
Friderick the III. his Cousin who reigned 53 years. Maximilian Son of Friderick,
who reigned 26 years. Charles the V. who reigned 36 years. Ferdinand I. brother
to Charles, who reigned 9 years. Maximilian Son of Ferdinand, who reigned 12
years. Rodolphus II. Son of Maximilian, who reigned 36 years. Matthias brother
to Adolphus, who reigned 7 years, Ferdinand II. Cousin to the two precedent
Emperors, who reigned 19 years. To him succeeded his Son Ferdinand III. who is
the tenth of that house from the year 1438. To which if you add the Three of
ancient date, there have been thirteen Emperors of the house and name of
Austria.

That house may be considered, either in her Patrimonial estate which she held
in Germany before her greatness; Or in her great rising, which sprung out of
three heads.

1. The marriage of Maximilian with Mary, the Inheritrix of the seventeen
Provinces of Netherlands. Franche County, and the goods, not masculine, of the
house of Burgundy.

2. The marriage of Philip, Son of Maximilian, and Mary of Burgundy, with Jane
the Inheritrix of Spain, and by consequent of Sicily, Naples, and the West
Indies, and soon after of Portugal, and the East Indies.

3. The marriage of Ferdinand, brother to Charles the V. with Anne the
Inheritrix of the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungaria. The great estate of that
house being accrewed to them by these ways: We will speak here of the
Patrimonial Dominions of the house of Austria, reserving the rest for the
following Paragraphes.

The Patrimony of the house of Austria wholly seated in Germany, and upon the
River Danubius; has on the South the Mountains of Tirolis, and toward the
Rhine Alsatia, Bounded Eastward with Hungary and Poland, Southward by the
Venetians, Westward by the Switzers, and Northward by many Princes of Germany.
That Estate is composed with many pieces, which were united in one body as it
follows.

1. The Emperor Rodolphus of Habsburg, having overcome and slain Ottocarus,
Son of Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia, gave to his Son Albert the Duchy of
Austria, where Vienna stands, the Duchy of Stiria, where the Town of Gratz
stands, the Lordships of Carniola and Windismark; otherwise the March of
Slavonia, and Portenan in the Country of Friuli, wherein the house of Austria
is a neighbor to the Venetians. This is the first Patrimony of the house of
Austria, of which Albert was invested by his Father at Ausburg, by the consent
of the General States of Germany.

2. In the year 1283. Henry Marquess of Burgan in Suevia, between Vlm and
Ausburg, being dead without Children, the same Emperor Rudolphus gave that
Marquisat to his Son.

3. Albert the III. Duke of Austria, Grandchild to the first Albert, was made
Heir with his brothers of the Duchy of Carinthia, and the Duchy of Tirol
within the Alps near Italy; by Margaret, Daughter to Duke Henry as her
nearest kinsman, by their Grandmother Elizabeth, Sister to the said Henry, and
Wife to Albert the first; and because the house of Bavieres laid a claim to the
County of Tirol, the said house renounced it by agreement, Ann. 1362.

4. The County of Ferretta, is a little Country above the French County, near
Basel, and on this side of the Rhine. It came to the house Austria, by Jane
Wife to Albert the II. Duke of Austria, Daughter and Heir of Ulrich, Earl of
Ferretta, about the year 1358.

5. Leopold Duke of Austria, bought of Agon Count of Friburg, in Brifgau,
toward Alsatia, the Signory of that Town, and some other toward the Grisons.

6. Friderick the third, in the year 1458. after the death of Ulrich Count of
Cibey, dead without Children, seized upon that County, and united it with the
Duchy of Stiria.

7. Maximilian the First, in the year 1501. seized upon the County of Goricia,
vacant by the death of Count Leonard. So all these pieces make up the ancient
Patrimony of Austria, which has many times been distracted and divided, for to
make Portions to the youngest. And yet at this time the County of Burgau is in
the hands of a Branch of that house which bears the Title of Marquesses of
Burgau. And the County of Tirol belongs to the children of the late Archduke,
Leopold, brother to the Emperor Eerdinand the II.

Paragraphe IV.
To make up the greatness of Austria, six of the gr^^test houses of Europe
have met in one; Aus^^ia, Burgundy, Castilia, Arragon, Hungary and Portugal.

1. Of that of Austria, we have spoken before.

2. The house of Burgundy was founded in the person of Philip, fourth Son to
King John of France, who dying in the year 1363. left to his Son Philip the
Duchy of Burgundy. He and his three Successors, John, Philip the Good, and
Charles slain before Nancy, gathered many Provinces by Marriages, Purchases,
Gifts, and Usurpations; whence that great Estate of the house of Burgundy was
framed, four main pieces whereof depended from the Sovereignty of France:
Namely, the Duchy of Burgundy, the County of Flanders, with the Towns of Lilo,
Doway, and Orches, the County of Artois, and that of Charalois. The rest he
held from the Empire, Franch County, the four Dutchies of Netherlands,
Luxemburg, Limburg, Brabant, and Gueldres. The Counties of Hainault, Namur,
Holland, Zealand, Zutfen, Mechlen, West-Fresland, Over-Issel, and Groninghen.
And in the year 1528. the Bp. of Utrecht yielded to the Emperor, Charles the
V. the Lordship of Utrecht, and his claim in Over-Issel, because he was not
strong enough to maintain it against the Duke of Guelders his Enemy.

After the death of Charles, killed before Nancy, Mary his only Daughter,
p^etended to his whole succession; But Lewis the XI. King of France, seized
upon the Duchy of Burgundy, pretending that it was a masculin fee, given by
King John to his Son Philip le Hardy, for him and his Heirs Male; for the
reasons which we shall represent in the following Chapter. All the rest by
right remained with Mary of Burgundy, even the County of Charolois almost
enclosed within the Duchy of Burgundy, although the French would have it to be
a fee of the same Nature, as the Duchy. Yet because it was found that it had
been purchased from the house of Armagnae, by the Dukes of Burgundy, it was
left to Mary; And since that time, during the civil confusions, and the Wars
with Spain, the French having seized upon it; yet they restored it to the house
of Austria, by the Treaty of Vervins, Ann. 1598. saving only the resort and
dependence upon the Parliament of Dijon

3. The house of Castilia is an offspring of that of Navarra: For Sanchez King
of Navarra, divided all that he held in Spain to his three children. Garcias
the eldest had Navarra; Sanchez King of Navarra, divided all that he held in
Spain to his three Children, Garcias the eldest had Navarra; Ferdinand,
Castilia; and Ramires, Arragon. Of these Kings, the lives and actions must be
seen in the History of Spain. In the year 1472. that House fell to Isabella,
sister to Henry the IV. called the Impotent. Isabella was married to Ferdinand
King of Arragon. From that marriage issued Joane the second Daughter and Heir,
which brought all these Estates to the House of Austria by her marriage with
Archiduke Philip. These Estates contained the two Castilia's, Gallicia, Leon,
Asturia, Biscay, Mursia, Cordova, Andalusia, Estremadura. Since that time an.
1492. under the conduct of Christophorus Columbus, the Castilians discovered
many Islands of West Indies, Hispaniola, Cuba, Jaimaica, and others. Americus
Vespucius, discovered the Western continent, an. 1500. Fernando Cortez, subdued
the great State of Mexico, an. 1518. and Francis Pizarro the Perou, an. 1525.
All that, is comprehendedunder the name of Castilia, and is fallen to the House
of Austria by that marriage.

4. As for Arragon, many Kings reigned in it of the line of the foresaid
Ramires; and that family past through many changes. In the end that estate fell
into the hands of Ferdinand the Catholic, at the same time that the Kingdom
of Castilia fell to Isabella whom he married. So his estate came to consist of
four parts. 1. Of the patrimoniall inheritance of his House, Arragon,
Catalonia, Roussillon, Valentia, Marjorca, Minorea, Ivica, Fromentera,
Sardinia, and Sicily. 2. The Kingdom of Naples, which he took from the French,
An. 1503. as we shall say afterward. 3. The Kingdom of Granada, which he and
his wife Isabella got from the Saracens, Anno 1494. 4. The Kingdom of Navarra,
out of which he dispossessed John of Albret, An. 1512. All these Estates fell to
his Daughter, married with Philip Archduke of Austria. 5. Hungary had her
Kings, well known in the Histories, especially since the year 1000. the time of
King St. Steven. That family fell to that of the Kings of Naples, descended
from the Royal House of France, by the marriage of the inheritrice of Hungary
with Charles the Lame, Son to Charles, brother to St. Lewis. Finally, after
many great changes, that Crown fell to Lewis the last King of Hungary and
Bohemia, slain by the Turks in the battle of Mohats, An. 1526. He dying without
Children, the Crown fell to his sister Anne, whom Charles the V. her brother
in law presently caused to be married to his brother Ferdinand. So the two
Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary entered into the House of Austria. To Bohemia
were annexed also Moravia, Silesia, and the two Lusatia's. Under the name of
Hungary, was contained also Transylvania, with part of Bulgaris, Croatia,
Slavonia, Dalmatia. But the greatest part of these is now in the hand of the
Turks.

6. The State of Portugal began about the year 1090. in the person of Henry, a
French Prince of the House of Burgundy, and continued among many changes to the
death of King Sebastian, An. 1579. after whom in the reign of his great Uncle
Cardinal Henry, there was a dispute between many contenders for the succession.
But Philip the II. King of Spain, got it by Arms, An. 1580. claiming right to
it by his Mother Isabella, Daughter to King Emanuel, for the reasons which we
shall speak of in the next Chapter. From that Kingdom depends that of Algarba,
the Towns of Ceuta, Tanger, and Marsagan in Africa. An infinite number of
Islands and Caps, from the Cap of good Hope, the Kingdoms of Congo, Angola,
Bresia; And beyond the Cap of good Hope, an infinite number of Towns, Isles,
Countries, and Forts, as far as China, and the extremity of the East. All that
is comprehended under the name of East Indies, discovered at several times
since. Vasco Gamma, a Gentleman of Portugal past the Cap of good Hope, An.
1497. under Emanuel King of Portugal. It is then by the right of Isabella, wife
to the Emperor Charles the V. that the great Estate of Portugal was devolved
to the House of Austria. To which Estate they have since added several pieces
by conquest or otherwise.

Charles the V. got the Lordship of Utrecht from the Bishop, as we said before.
The sovereignty of Flanders and Artois, was appropriated to them (as they
pretend) by the Treaties of Madrid, An. 1525. Of Cambray, An. 1529. Of Crespy,
An. 1544. The same Charles got the Town of Mastricht, An. 1530. although the
Bishop of Liege pretended the half of it to belong to his jurisdiction. In the
year 1530. he invested Ludovic Sforza with the Duchy of Milan, upon condition
that if he dyed childlesse, Philip the II. King of Spain should succeed him,
which happened five years after, An. 1536. he got the Duchy of Guelders, the
County of Zutfen, and the Lordship of Groaning, by a Treaty with Charles, the
Duk of Guelders, who dyed an. 1538. An. 1543. he made himself Master of the
Town of Cambra, as Protector of that Imperial Town, which being since got by
the French, and lost again, was confirmed to the Spaniards by the Treaty of
Vervins.

An. 1538. the same Charles having got the Town of Siena, gave it to Cosmo Duke
of Florence, to be an homage for it to the King of Spain, paying six thousand
Ducats of entry at every change of Duke.

Philip the II. King of Spain, took from the Turks, an. 1554. the Fort of
Fignon, Veles, and Gomera, in Africa. An. 1571. he wrested the Marquisat of
Final from the House of Carreto. Philip the III. took from the Moors in
Africa, the Towns of Arrach and Mamora. These are the principal pieces of that
great State of vast extent. And I think one may truly say, that the House of
Austria holds more ground then ever any Prince did: But these pieces being
scattered, that State is not strong, glorious, and form dable according to its
extent.

That House of Austria was divided into two branches, the Spanish and the
German, between Charles and Ferdinand brothers, and successively Emperors,
Sons to Archiduke Philip, and Jane of Spain. Charles was the head of the
Spanish branch, which holds in Europa, and out of it all that we said before.
Ferdinand, brother of Charles, was the head of the German branch which now
holds the Empire. To him Charles yielded the ancient patrimonial Estate of the
House of Austria, within the limits of Germany. The same Ferdinand by his
marriage with Anne, inheritrix of Hungary and Bohemia, united those two Crowns
to his States. These two Branches at this present hold these Estates, saving
that which Gustavus the King of Sweden has taken from them, and what the
French have got in these Wars from the Spaniard. In the Low Countries,
Hesdin, Arras Bapaume, Landrecy, Thionville, Quesnoy, etc. Toward Spain the
County of Roussillon and Perpignan. Then the Catalonians have revolted and
given themselves to the French. Portugal also has shaken the yoke, and chosen
a King of the House of Braganza, Of elder date, part of the LowCountries have
cantonned themselves, and are now Sovereigns. The Turk has got the most part
of Hungary; and Transylvania acknowledges no more the House Austria.

CHAP. III. A discussing of the Rights now in dispute between the Houses of
France and Austria.
THe contentions between these two Families these 150 years, and of the
Nations subject unto them, especially the French and the Spaniards, comes not
only out of natural antipathy and contrary inclinations, but chiefly out of
the pretenses that the one house has upon the other. For, as between private
persons, so among Princes, the neighborhood of grounds breeds quarrels. And
these several pretenses yet undecided, ought to be examined, to know the
ground of all the late and present Wars. Of these, large volumes of Histories,
and Polemical writings might be, and have been, written; but here I undertake
no more, but faithfully to set down the grounds of pretenses on both sides.
Which though I will do briefly, and summarily; yet will I omit nothing
essential and fit to decide the differences. To do this orderly, we will divide
this Chapter into two points. The first, of the pretenses of the house of
Austria upon France. The second, of the pretenses of France upon the house of
Austria.

First Point, The pretenses of the house of Austria, upon that of France.
ALthough the house of Austria, both the Spanish and the German, have pretenses
different from that of the Empire, which they hold only by Election, and upon
Condition of yielding, and depositing it again in the hands of the Electours,
after the death of each Emperor; Yet their interesses are now so united, that
the Imperial rights, and those of the house of Austria can hardly be separated.
Wherefore we will examine them together.

All the pretenses of that Family, are either upon the Sovereignty of the
Kingdom of France, or part thereof; especially upon the propriety of Province,
the Duchy of Burgundy, the Towns of Mets, Thoul, and Verdun, the Towns upon
the River of Sum, and the Duchy of Britain. These must be examined.

Paragraphe I. The pretended Rights of the Empire, upon the Sovereignty of
France.
Concerning that Right, now stale, and indeed ridiculous; four things are to be
considered.

1. The Roman Empire which began in Julius Caesar, or Augustus, comprehended
indeed all the West, and herein the Gauls. That Empire was made up of the
ruin of many Nations, by right or wrong. Howsoever long prescription, and the
consent of Nations, with the extinction of the royal Families, made up a
reasonable right, which continued in the Roman Emperors, till the year of
Christ, 400; when by the inundation of many Northern Nations; Goths, Vandales,
Franks, and others; the whole Empire was dismembered, and the several
Conquerors of each part made themselves Sovereign. So did the Franks in Gauls.
A beginning not to be excused of violence and usurpation. But the ruin of the
Romans, prescription, and the consent of the conquered people did since
authorize their dominion, and toward the end of the first age of these
invasions, they were all justified, and the Conquerours remained just
possessours, especially when the Roman Empire ended in Augustulus, An. 475.

And when Charlemagne restored the Western Empire, an. 800. that promotion did
not alter the former Title he had to the Kingdom of France. It was but a Title
of honor, which he, and after him his Son Lewis the Meek possessed, with that
of King of France. Afterward, by the partage made An. 843. between the Sons of
Lewis the Meek; each of the three brothers had his portion independent from the
others, and Lothary the Eldest, who had the Title of Emperor, pretended no
right over Charles the Bald, who had France for his Portion, much as it is now.
Since which time, all that would ascribe any Superiority to the Emperors, over
the Princes of Christendom, that are acknowledged Sovereign, have with good
reason bin hissed out as ridiculous. Only the precedence was left to the
Emperor as the eldest among the brethren. But the subjection which he yields
to the Pope, and the small right which he retains over the Lands and Princes of
the Empire, weaken his authority very much, and make it unworthy of that
precedence over all the Princes of Christendom. Wherefore he does not stir
those ancient pretenses over all the Kingdoms of the West.

2. Some Germane Historians, as Trithemius, Lazius, Munster, Fiesdorpius make
the house of Habsburg (which is that of Austria) to descend from the first race
of the French Kings; a fable invented since 120. years, and newly taken up
again by the flatterers of that house. Especially by Fiesdorpius, a name either
true or forged by the Spaniards.

To understand this, we must know that the Kingdom of France was often divided
into Tetrarchies under the first race, Kings of Paris, of Orleans, of Soissons,
and Mets. In the last of these, Brunehault reigned with great power, that
abominable woman so much renowned in our Histories, which confounded and
destroyed that house by her ordinary murders. That State of Mets being fallen
into the hands of two brothers, Thierry and Theodebert, who contended for it;
Therry joining with his Grandmother Brunehault, overcame Theodebert in battle,
and put him cruelly to death. And by Brunehaults order, the two Sons of
Theodebert were slain in her presence. This Tragedy was acted An. 617. But
these Historians, to flatter the house of Austria, say, that of these two Sons
of Theodebert, the one, called Sigebert, escaped the hands of his great
Grandmother, and fled into Germany to Godfrey and Genebald, Dukes of Franconie,
his Uncles by the Mother, by whose intercession he obtained of Lothary King of
France, his Cousin, some lands in Switzerland, upon condition that he should
renounce all his rights to the Crown of France. That he or his Son, or one of
his more remote descent built the Castle of Habsburg, and founded that family.
And upon that account, the house of Austria descends from that of France.

That relation is a blind tale; for all ancient Historians affirm, that both
the Sons of Theodebert (and he had no more) were slain by Brunehault. And the
first that mentions that escape of Sigebert, is Trithemius, who lived about six
score years ago. And as it is false, it is ridiculous in the ordinary
vicissitude of the affairs of the world, and the continual changes of
Possessions, to set up Titles after an interruption of a thousand years. For,
upon that account, there is no Prince in Europe, but may be degraded, and no
mean man, but may be entitled to some principality. It is with great reason,
that the Title of prescription is every where preferred before all Titles. And
though the tale were a true story, that Rodolphus of Habsburg, the head of the
house of Austria, was descended from the Family of Habsburg by the women; his
masculine extraction was from the house of Tiestein. So this pretense is so
ridiculous, that it is not worth speaking.

3. The branch of the house of Valois has continued from male to male from
Philip de Valois, who came to the Crown, An. 1328, to the death of Henry the
Third, An. 1589. males failing in that branch, the Crown by the fundamental
laws of the Land was to pass to the next branch of the Males, which was that of
Bourbon, and so did in the end. A Title so known to all the French, that even
in the heat of the War of the League, against the honse of Bourbon, as
professing a contrary Religion; yet they crowned the Cardinal of Bourbon, and
called him Charles the Tenth.

In these confusions, Philip the Second King of Spain, seeing the party of the
League inclined to the Election of a King, claimed the Kingdom for his Daughter
Clara Eugenia Isabella, as Daughter of Elizabeth of France, his third wife,
sister and Heir of the three last Kings, Francis II. Charles IX. and Henry III.
and of Francis Duke of Alenson, the eldest of three Sisters; of which the
Second was Claude, married to Charles Duke of Lorrain; and the third was Queen
Margaret, wife to Henry the Fourth, then only titular King of Navarra. He
alleged then that representation being a good Title by the Laws of France,
his Daughter entered into all the rights of her Mother Elizabeth, which should
have inherited of her brothers; and that her right extended even to the Crown,
as the Patrimony of her Family; That the pretended Salique Law of the French
was imaginary; yea, and against Nature, against Humanity, and the right of
Political successions, which require that all Inheritances may go to the next
Heirs. And though that Law had force among the French, that his Daughter being
not a subject, nor borne in France, could not be tied by these municipall Laws.
That between Sovereigns, the Law of Nature, not the particular Laws of Nations
should be the rule. That all Laws of Nature reject this principle, that the
successions should be for males only, as though females were unreasonable
creatures; or the excrements and sweepings of mankind, and no part of human
society.

When the States of the League were assembled in Paris, An. 1593. some
unadvised and rash heads moved the Election of a King, and the excluding of the
house of Bourbon, which stirred the Parliament to make that famous Arrest for
the maintaining of the Salique Law, to which the wisest of the League yielded.
Philip the II. of Spain, in that Assembly of the States, set up his Daughters
Title, and presented her to be Queen. But presently perceiving the weakness of
that Title, and the aversion of the French, from the Government of a woman; he
offered to marry her either with a Prince of the house of Austria, or with one
of the House of Lorraine; Whose imaginary rights were at the same time pleaded.
And to strengthen all these rights, he said, that the Election by the States
would supply all defects in the Right of succession.

It appeared, that Philip acknowledged the weakness of his Daughters right,
since he presented her to be elected. The Salique Law is fundamental in
France, wisely instituted, and observed twelve hundred years together.

As for Philips allegation, that Princes are not to be tied by municipall Laws,
but by the Laws of Nature, it is utterly false. For in the discussion of the
rights of all Sovereigns, the municipall Laws are always examined; and none
can have right to an Estate from which he is excluded by the Law of the Land.
The decision of all suits for Estate, is taken out of the customs of the Land
where the Estate lies; but where those customs written or unwritten are
wanting, the case is to be decided by reason only. The French think they have
both Law and Reason on their side: Howsoever, that Isabella in whose favor
that Right was set up, dyed childlesse, an. 1633. Whose right, if she had any,
should be devolved since to the Children of her second sister Katherine, wife
to Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, from whom all the House of Savoy that now is,
is descended.

4. Besides these imaginary Rights to the whole Kingdom, the Empire has a
weak pretended right to some parts of it. Whereupon we must observe, That by
the partage between the Sons of Lewis the Meek, 843. all the Countries that lie
between the Rivers of Rhosne and Saone, and the Alps, viz. Provence,
Daulphine, Savoy, and Franch County, remained Imperial Lands. And the French
Kings in the second Race, yea, and very far in the third Race, pretended
nothing to them till Daulphine came to them in the time of Philip de Valois,
and Provence, in the time of Lewis the XI. And that part of the Empire being
held by Lothary the eldest Son of Lewis the Meek, and after him by his Son
Lewis the Young, who dyed without Heirs Male, a State was erected in favor of
his Daughter Hermengard; between these two Rivers and the Alps, which was
called the Kingdom of Arles; or the second Kingdom of Burgundy, which
continued under its proper Kings (whose pedigree was fully described by the
Historian Du Chesne) unto the death of Rodolphus the last King, who dying
without issue, an. 1036. left his Estate to the Emperor Conrad the II,
surnamed the Salique, who had married his sister Grisel, or (as some say) was
his Nephew by her.

By that gift, besides the ancient pretense of the Empire upon that Kingdom,
at least for the sovereignty, the Emperors became Masters of the same both by
sovereignty and propriety, and annexed it to the Empire; At which time the Arch
bishop of Treves took the name of Cnancellor, per regnum Arelatense. But the
Authority of the Emperors coming to a great decay out of Germany, especially
during the Wars between the Emperor Henry the IV. and the Popes; four
Principalities were framed in that Kingdom of Arles, of the Counts of Provence,
the Dolphins of Viennois, the Counts of Moriurre, called since Dukes of Savoy,
and the Counts of Rurgundy, which without question depended from the Empire as
long as there was any vigor in it: But time has worn out that title, and
prescription is past uponit; not to be broken, and the old title revived,
unless the Emperor will together question most part of the Principalities of
Italy, and the East and North Gauls.

Of these four Principalities, that of Savoy subsisteth to this day. Franch
County is fallen to the House of Flanders, and so to the house of Austria.
Daulphine was given to Philip de Valois by Imbert Dolphin, about the year
1343. And Provence to Lewis the XI. an. 1482. by Charles Count of Maine, Heir
to Rene King of Naples, and Duke of Anjou. All these changes and gifts as for
the propriety only, the Sovereignty being still pretended by the Emperors,
which they may well be accounted to have lost, by weakness, desertion, and by
prescription, as many other Principalities at this side of the Rhine. Besides,
the French Histories relate that in the year 1377. the Emperor Charles the IV,
being come into France to visit King Charles the V, gave to his God-son
Charles, who since was Charles the VI, the right which the Emperors pretended
in Daulphine, which was no great gift. And Theodorick a Niem, an Historian of
that age, says, That the same Emperor being come to Avignon to visit the
Pope, gave to Lewis Duke of Anjou, brother to Charles the V. of France, the
whole Kingdom of Arles, which had been under the jurisdiction of the Empire,
in recompense of the magnificent entertainment which the said Lewis gave him at
Villeneufue near Avignon. So all these Rights of the Empire, are lost either by
prescription or donation. These are all the rights that can be imagined to be
pretended by the Emperors and the House of Austria, upon the Sovereignty of
France.

Paragraphe II. Of the Rights pretended upon Provence.
Let us now examine some pretenses of the House of Austria, upon some Dutchies
and other Dominions in France, beginning at Provence.

1. I showed before, how Provence before the partage between the Sons of Lewis
the Meek, (a fundamental and famous Date in our History) was part of the
Kingdom of France; And when it was divided into Tetrarchies, it was a member
of the Kingdom of Mets, Austrasia, or Burgundy. But when (before that famous
division) all France was reunited in the second Race under these two great
Princes, Pepin and Charlemagne, Provence was a part of it.

2. By the partage between the Sons of Lewis the Meek, Provence, with all
that was beyond the Rivers of Rhosne and Saone, was cut off from the portion,
given to Charles the Bald, and was since called the Kingdom of Arles. All
these pieces given to Lothary the eldest brother, were called the Empire, and
Imperial grounds; and to this day the Lands beyond the Rhone toward Italy, are
called Terres d' Empire, Lands of the Empire, and the Lands at this side Terres
de France, French Lands. Since that partage, the Emperors have always
pretended a Sovereignty to those Countries, a right strengthened by the
donation made of the propriety of it, to the Emperor Conrad the Salique, by
his Uncle or Brother in law Rodolphus the last King of Burgundy.

3. Lewis the II. Emperor, Son to that Lothary, left but one Daughter called
Hermengarda, which being incapable of the Title of Emperor, had instead of it
that Country between the Rivers of Saone and the Rhone, the Alps, and the Sea;
which Dominon was erected to the Title of a Kingdom by Charles the Bald, King
of France, and Emperor in favor of that Hermengarda, whom Bozon one of the
Court of Charles, and his wives kinsman took away. These two Bozon and
Hermengarda, gave a beginning to that second Kingdom of Burgundy, or the
Kingdom of Arles, about the year 875. which continued under these Kings among
many alterations to that last Rodolphus, an. 1036. All that time Provence was
part of that Kingdom of Arles.

4. Which Kingdom being extinct in that Rodolphus, and united to the Empire by
Conrad the Salique, shortly after by the weakness of the Emperors, and the
disorders risen in the Empire; four Principalities were framed out of it, as we
said before. That of Provence, under the title of a County, was the most
considerable, as being full of good Towns, and of great commerce, by reason of
the Sea. It was possessed by the family of Berengers, with the title of Counts,
whose History was written by Nostradamus.

5. That House of Berengers kept the County of Provence till the time of St
Lewis, when Raymond Berenger the last Count left four Daughters, the eldest
whereof Margaret was married to St Lewis. The three others were also married to
Sovereign Princes, Eleonor to Henry the III. King of England; Fancy to Richard
his brother, who was since created King of the Romans; and the fourth Daughter
Beatrix, to Charles Count of Anjou, brother to St Lewis. Raymond dying an.
1231. left that Beatrix Heir of all his Estate, leaving Legacies only to the
three others, to each three thousand marks. Another Raymond Count of Thoulouse,
would have taken away that Beatrix to marry her: But St Lewis prevented him,
sending an Army into Provence, and taking her gave her to his brother Charles
to wife, to whom he gave the County of Anjou. And thirty years after, the same
Charles was invested by the Pope, with the Kingdom of the two Sicilies, as we
shall see hereafter.

The County of Anjou returned to the Crown of France, being given as a portion
to Margaret, Grandchild to that Charles, who was married to Charles Count of
Valois, Father to King Philip de Valois. And many years after that first
Branch of the Kings of Naples, and Counts of Anjou, pretended no right to that
County, it was given to Lewis, brother to King Charles the V. who founded the
second House of Anjou, now erected to a Dukedom. But the two other pieces of
that Estate, which Charles brother to St. Lewis enjoyed with his wife Beatrix,
which was Provence, and the Kingdom of the two Sicilies remained always
united: and the Kings of Naples and Sicily, whether of the first House of
Anjou, or of the second, or of the family of Arragon, have always claimed a
right to the County of Provence; so that Naples and Provence go under one
right, as we shall more fully expound when we shall speak of the claim of
France upon Naples.

6. Jane, Queen of Naples, of the first house of Anjou, went out of Italy, An.
1379. with Pope Clement VII. and retired to Avignon when that great Schism
began, which contitinued forty years. Since which time, although there have
been many disputes for the succession of Naples, between the Families of
Charles de Duras, the Dukes of Anjou, and the house of Arragon, and that
portion of Italy past through many changes; yet Province into which that Jane
retired, was soon after put in the hands of Lewis, first Duke of Anjou, brother
to Charles the V. and both he and his descent enjoyed it peaceably, without any
disturbance from the houses of Hungary and Arragon, who were fighting for the
Kingdom of Naples, although both pretended that Province belonged to them by
the same right. But the convenience of the place, as lying under the wings of
France, which might assist it at any time, kept the possession thereof to the
house of Anjou. And finally, from the house of Anjou it past to that of France,
being left to Lewis the XI. by Charles Count du Main, Heir and Nephew to Rene,
titular King of Naples, and real Possessor of Province. Lewis the XI. though
he knew the right of the French in Naples, which his Son Charles the VIII. and
his other successors have pursued; yet he neglected it, and contented himself
to take Provence. By this discourse, it appears that who so has the lawful
Possession of the Kingdom of Naples (which we shall examine afterward) has
also a lawful right to Province.

7. Besides that claim of the Possessors of Naples upon Province, disputable
between that house first of Anjou, and that of Arragon and Austria; there is a
more particular claim of the Dukes of Lorraine against the French Kings, Heirs
to that Charles du Main. The Lorriners pretend that Rene having a Daughter
named Yoland, from which the house of Lorrain is descended, could not lawfully
dis-inherit his Grandchild, to give his Estate to Charles du Maine his Nephew.
To which the French answer two things.

1. That Province was a purchase of Rene, who could dispose of it.

2. And that Province uses the Civil or Roman Law, by which testaments are
free. But the discussion of that point, is for another place.

Howsoever this remains, That the Dukes of Anjou, and the French Kings after
them, have peaceably enjoyed the County of Province above 270. years, and the
invaders of Naples never had any thing in it: Which indeed, hinders not, but
that they may have a right to it. But the reason whereby we shall exclude them
hereafter from any right to the Kingdom of Naples, will serve also to invalid
their claim upon Province.

Paragraphe. III. Of the Duchy of Burgundy.
1. The Burgundians came out of Germany, or some other Nation of the North, in
that great inundation of Northern people over the Roman Empire, about the year
400. founded a State under the name of the first Kingdom of Burgundy, about the
Rivers of Saone and Rhone, and near the Alps: And that State having begun An.
407. was ruined by the children of the great Clovis about the year 527. and
lasted about six score years.

2. Since which time, under the first race of the French Kings, Burgundy was
part of the Kingdom of Orleans; some part of it also belonging to the Kingdom
of Mets, and Austrasia. And in the end, the Kingdom of Mets and that of
Burgundy, became all one, till by the partage between the children of Lewis the
Meek, that part of Burgundy, which is beyond the River of Saone, remained with
the Empire, and in the portion of Lothary the eldest Son. The other on this
side of the River of Saone, was allotted to France, and was a considerable
member of the same. Before the institution of Fees, made in the beginning of
the third race; Burgundy was governed by Dukes, and three Brothers of Hugh
Capet, the first of that race, held it. But the last of them, Robert, was
divested of them by his Nephew, King Robert, Son to Hugh Capet, and it was
reunited to the Crown. All that was before the two Families of Burgundy, of
which we are to speak to discuss the right which the Spaniards pretend upon
that piece of the French State.

3. So then from the beginning of the first Race, two Royal Families have
possessed the Duchy of Burgundy. The first began by Robert, younger brother to
King Henry the First, and Son to King Robert. To him his brother Henry gave
that Duchy, in the year 1032. That Family continued from Male to Male, without
any interruption of Female succession, until the death of the last Duke
Philip, dead without issue, An. 1362. Then King John at that time reigning in
France, seizd-upon that piece as an apanage; so the French call the Portions of
the Sons of France, which are to return to the Crown, when Heirs Male fail.
That apanage then being returned to the Crown, King John bestowed it in the
same nature upon his fourth Son Philip. This was the head of the second house
of Burgundy, which had four Dukes only successively. This Philip called le
Hardy, invested by his Father, then John, the third Philip le Bon, the last
Charles killed before Nancy, An. 1477. who left his Daughter Mary his
universal Heir. She was married to Maximilian of Austria, since Emperor, and
so carried all her estate into the house of Austria. From that marriage came
Philip Archduke, married with Jane, Inheritrix of all Spain; and by her had two
Sons, Charles the V. and Ferdinand, Emperors, founders of the two Families of
Austria that now reign.

4. After the death of Charles, killed before Nancy, Lewis the XI, seized upon
the Duchy of Burgundy as an apanage of France, returning to the Crown.
Although Mary and her Husband Maximilian alleged, that the Duchy had been
given to Philip the Hardy, by his Father, King John, as an absolute gift,
without any restriction of masculine descent. That question, though agitated on
both sides, will always remain undecided. The French Kings maintaining
themselves in that possession. Charle; the V. Grandchild to that Mary,
grounding himself upon that right, which we will declare afterward; required
by the Treaty of Madrid, that the Duchy of Burgundy should be restored to him
as his by his Grandmothers right, and taken from her by Lewis the XI. But after
the return of Francis the I, that Treaty was declared void, as being contrary
to all right of Nations, which disannull Treaties made in Prison, and extorted
by violence, and contrary to the Municilpal Laws of the State of France, which
constitute the Kings to be always Minors: that is, incapable of absolute
disposition, as for the alienation of their Dominions. So the Article of that
Treatise, concerning the restitution of Burgundy remained null, though signed
by the King. Besides, the States General of the Kingdom protested to the King,
that it was never in his power to alienate any Province of his State without
their consent. Which last opposition was of such force, that since neither in
the Treaty of Cambray, nor in that of Crespy in Valois (in which several
pieces were yielded unto the house of Austria) any mention was made of
Burgundy. Yet the Kings of Spain take still the Title of Dukes of Burgundy. So
much for the Fact. We will now examine the right.

5. It must be acknowledged that the severity of Apanages for the Males only,
to the exclusion of Females, is not in use among the French but since the time
of Philip de Valois, who began to reign An. 1328; for remounting higher to Hugh
Capet, we find not that exclusion of Females from successions, saving the
ordinary preference of the Males before them. And the Females were admitted
Heirs, in all kinds of estates, whether given by the King, or by others. Yea,
many times the houses of the Sons of France have ended in Females, that have
transported their Estates to other Families; as it appears in that of Dreux of
Vermandeis, of Courtenay, and of others. But since the time of Philip de
Valois, no Son of France had any apanage but upon that condition. Which is
evident, in that all the apanages are returned to the Crown by the extinction
of Males, to the exclusion of Females, as those of Anjou, Berry, Alanson, and
others. Yea, although that first house of Burgundy be much antienter, and has
begun almost with the third race; yet as it was the first, and most important
apanage, we have in the History thereof an example of the exclusion of Females
and settling the inheritance in the Males. Hugh the IV. of that name, Duke of
Burgundy had three Sons, Eudes his eldest, John Lord of Charrolois, and Robert
the II. Duke of Burgundy. Eudes was married in his Fathers life time, died
before him, and left three Daughters, Joland, Margaret, and Alice or Alix; John
the second Son was married, and died likewise before his Father, leaving a
Daughter Beatrix of Burgundy, Lady of Bourbon. This was the Lady who being
married with Robert, Son to Saint Lewis, gave a beginning to the house of
Bourbon. When Eudes the IV. died, it seemed that the Daughters of the First or
Second of his Sons should have inherited by the right of representation of
their Father; but they were excluded from it by their Uncle Robert, who enjoyed
it, and his Heirs Male peaceably, though these four Daughters had been married
in great and potent houses.

6. Philip the last Duke of that Race being dead, King John took the Duchy in
his Possession; yet did not reunite it to the Crown, but presently gave it to
his fourth Son, Philip le Hardy, whom he especially loved, because he had saved
his life in the battle of Poitiers, though he was then very young. He gave it
him by a long Charter, which indeed contains not in express terms the
exception of Female Heirs; but conferrs it upon him with the same rights by
which himself came by it, and by which he possesses it. Terms which have
caused difficulty, because John could be said to succeed to it by two rights;
the one as King, the other as the next Heir-male of the last Duke. If he
succeeded to it as King, the Duchy being an apanage, returning to the Crown in
defect of Heir-Male, then without doubt it was settled upon his Son Philip as a
masculine apanage, both because his Father gave it him with the same right by
whch himself had got it. And because the severe Law of Apanages was already in
use from Philip de Valois, Father to John, and never was interrupted since.

7. But King John (say the Spaniards) inherited of the last Duke as the next of
blood, and his Heir, ab intestato, because it appears in the Genealogy of
that first Race of Burgundy, that Robert the II, he that had excluded his four
Neeces, was Father to Hugh the V. who dyed without issue, and of Eudes the IV.
both successively Dukes of Burgundy. This last was Grandfather to Philip the
last Duke, who ended the masuline line. But that Robert the II. had three
Daughters besides Margaret wife to King Lewis Hutin, whence came the house of
Navarra, Jane wife to King Philip de Valois, and mother to King John, and Mary
wife to Edward Count of Bar. They say then, that after the death of Philip the
last Duke. King John took that Duchy by the right of his mother Jane, which
right he transported to his Son Philip le Hardy, without any mention of
masculine apanage, whereby they will have it evident, that femals may inherit it.

8. Against that pretended right which was very much disputed in the Treaty of
Madrid, the French have strong exceptions.

The first is, That from the time of Philip de Valois, within which that gift
was made, no Son of France had any great Apanage but with that restriction,
against which whatsoever King John may have said or done (and he was a very
imprudent and rash man) he could do no valuable deed to the detriment of the
State, or against the fundamental Laws.

The second Reason is, That since we see by the example of Hugh the IV. that
females are excluded from that succession, we must acknowledge that John did
not succeed by right of his mother, but as King, receiving an apanage devolved
unto him.

The third Reason is, That King John was not the next Heir in blood, for by
proximity of blood, the children of the eldest Daughter, which was Margaret
wife to King Lewis Hutin should have succeeded, not King John, who was Son to
the second. Now that succession fell when that wicked man Charles King of
Navarra, Grandchild to that Margaret was in his strength, who if there had
been any life in that title, would not have failed to have set it up; for
Burgundy was better then all his Navarra, and the rest of his estate. And yet
that stirring man did not stir that point, or it was so slightly, that he
left off presently; but hotly pursued a recompense for the Counties of
Champagne and Brie, which by right belonged to his mother Jane, Daughter to
Lewis Hutin, Son to Jane Countess of Champagne and Brie, Queen of Navarra,
wife to Philip le Bell. By all this it is evident, that the Duchy of Burgundy
was settled upon Phillip le Hardy his Son, in the nature of a true masculine
apanage.

Paragraphe IV. Of the Towns of Metz, Thoul, and Verdun.
By the partage so famous among the Sons of Lewis the Meek, an. 843. it is
certain that all that was beyond the River Mosa toward Germany, was cut off
from that which retained the name of Kingdom of France; and that these three
Towns remained Imperial. But Mosa being the bound of these two States, the
Empire and the Kingdom; yet by an infinity of Wars, Usurpations, and
Treaties, that bound and other limits between the two States were often
changed. In the time of the weakness and declination of the House of
Charlemagne, most part of the Cities and Lordships of the Empire, did canton
themselves, and made themselves particular Dominions under the protection of
the Empire, and some remained free, others were subjected to especial Lords,
some Lay, some Ecclesiastical. All these make up now the great body of the
Empire: Of that nature were these three Towns, Metz, Thoul, and Verdun, upon
which the French Kings pretended no right till the time of Henry the II.

An. 1550. the Protestants of Germany called Henry the II. to their help,
against the Emperor Charles the V. Henry sent them great Auxiliary forces by
Ann de Montmorency Constable of France, who in his way seized upon Thoul and
Verdun, and put Garrisons into them to assure the passage of the French Forces
into Germany. The Government of Thoul was given to Monsieur d'Esclavoles,
Lieutenant of the company of the Duke of Guise. And Charles Cardinal of
Lorrain, was restored to his Lordship, annexed to the Bishopric of Verdun, the
King retaining the sovereignty for himself, which he thought he could lawfully
do, because the Lord of it was his subject, and had an estate in France; and
because the Emperor was his declared enemy, whose Estate he might invade. In
the same expedition the Constable seized on the City of Metz, which the
Emperor Charles the V. besieged toward the end of the year 1551. but in
vain, since which time the French have enjoyed these three Cities; yet finding
their right some what weak, they used it at the first with great moderation,
calling themselves only Guardians and Protectors of the same, till Lewis the
XIII. caused them to be altogether incorporated with France, and in them has
established a sovereign Court of Parliament.

Indeed these three Towns have of long continuance been Imperial, and being
got by subtilty, upon pretense of the surety of the passage, the right of the
French Kings in them should be much more disputable then in many other places,
as themselves have confessed in many of their instructions for the general
Treaties. Yet it may be said for the French, that Henry the II. took them as
his enemies estate, when he made War against the Emperor. That the Emperor
never made since any stipulation for the restitution of them in any Treaty.
That the rights of the Empire on this side of Rhine, are so vanished and lost,
that the Countries seem now to be primum occupanti. That Holland, also
Lorraine, Switzerland, Savoy, Franch County, Daulphine, Provence, were
Imperial Lands; and yet all these are slipped from the Empire by a prescription
grounded upon the weakness and neglect of the old Sovereign. Also that the
French Kings at the first, declared themselves only Protectors and Guardians
of these Towns: which if afterward they have incorporated to their State, it
was by the consent of the people, seeing themselves deserted and neglected by
the Empire. Finally, in that point the French think they may use the right of
Represals. And that if the Emperor and the House of Austria should do them
right about all their pretenses, there would be some reason why the Emperor
should be contented about these Towns.

Paragraphe V. Of the Towns on the River of Sum, and other contained in the
Treaty of Arras.
The four Dukes of the last House of Burgundy, were Philip le Hardy, John,
Philip le Bon, and Charles.

John, after the death of his Father Philip le Hardy, an. 1404. caused great
troubles in the State of France, and caused his Cousin German, Lewis Duke of
Orleans to be slain, an. 1407. whence sprung those great Divisions and Wars
between those two Houses, of which the Histories are full. That John was slain
at Montereau foult-Ronne, by the command of Charles the Dolphin, an. 1419. His
Son Philip de Bon, pursued with great power and eagerness the vengeance of
that death, made league with the English, and distressed very much the Kingdom
of France. In the end seeing himself ill used by the English, he grew weary of
their alliance, and ashamed of the harm which he had done to his Country. Being
then contented to agree with the King, he met with him at Arras, An. 1435. This
was called the Treaty of Arras, a fundamental piece of the History of that
age, and the following. By that Treaty, after that King Charles the VII. in as
little dishonorable terms as might be, had asked pardon for the killing of
Duke John, when he was Dolphin, they agreed about many other Articles, and the
King gave many pieces belonging to the Crown. The chief were these.

1. He transported to the Duke, and to his Heirs lawfully begotten, the Towns
and jurisdictions of Peronne, Roye, Mondidier, to hold them by homage from the
Crown, and in Title of Peerdom, to depend of the Court of Parliament of Paris.

2. The County of Artois was restored unto him on the same Title, with all the
impositions amounting to fourteeen thousand Livers. per an. But of the rights
of France upon the County of Artois, we shall speak hereafter.

3. He transported to the said Duke the Towns of Saint Quintin, Corbi, Amiens,
Abbeville, Dourlans, Saint Riquier, Crevecoeur, and all the other Towns,
Castles, and Lordships seated upon the River of Sum on both sides, together
with the County of Ponthien, and other Lands adjacent to the County of
Flanders, and Lands of the Empire. All these Towns, Castles, and Lordships,
redeemable with the sum of 400000 Crowns. Upon that Treaty all these Towns were
delivered to the Duke of Burgundy, and all the time of Charles the VII. nothing
was altered in this agreement.

Lewis the XI. came to the Crown. An. 1461. who being unthankful and
malicious, although he had great obligations to the house of Burgundy; yet as
soon as he came to the Crown, he conceived a great aversion against Charles
Count of Charolois, Son and Heir to Philip le Bon, and would recover all those
pawned Lordships, arguing the Treaty of Arras, of nullity and invalidity,
maintaining that his Father could not alienate so many pieces belonging to the
State, against the fundamental Laws. To disingage these Lands, he laid great
impositions upon the people, till he had raised the four hundred thousand
Crowns, which he caused to be brought to Abbeville, and delivered unto the
Duke, who soon after delivered all those places unto him. Charles Count of
Coarolois took that so heavily, that he almost died for sorrow, and conceived a
mortal hatred against the Lord of Crovi, whom he accused to have advised his
Father to it. And it was one of the causes of the War of the public good;
which having been carried with various success, till the Treaty of Conflans,
near Paris, 1465, the fourth Article whereof was, that the King should give
again to the Count of Charolois, all the Towns seated upon the River of Sum,
lately redeemed with 400000. Crowns, to enjoy them all his life time, and
besides that, should give him the County of Guines for himself and his Heirs
for ever. This Charles, who was since Duke of Burgundy, enjoyed these Lands,
though not without Wars and Divisions, against Lewis the XI. Finally, Charles
being dead before Nancy, An. 1477. Lewis the XI. did suddenly invade the Duchy
of Burgundy as a masculin apanage, returning to the Crown, and all the Towns
upon the River of Sum, which the French have kept ever since. Neither can the
house of Austria pretend any just right to them as Heir of the house of
Burgundy; both because Charles the VII. had not power to alienate these parts
of his State (as his Son Lewis the XI alleged) and because all these Towns
had been alienated upon condition of redemption with a certain sum, which was
paid by Lewis the XI. unto the Duke Philip. And if they were restored to the
Count of Charolois, it was for his life only; Wherefore Lewis did not seize
upon them, but after the death of Charles. At which time also he took Arras, of
which we will speak hereafter.

Paragraphe VI. Of the Duchy of Britain.
The right of the house of Austria to the Duchy of Britain, has more ground
then any of the former, and gave matter to many disputes, especially in the
time of the League; the King of Spain, Philip the II. representing the rights
of his Daughter Isabella, both to the Kingdom, and especially to that Duchy.
And when the Duke of Mercoeur, who had cantonned himself in it (finding
himself too weak to maintain his own pretense to it, which was upon another
ground) threatened to give entrance to the Spaniards into the Duchy, La Guesle
the Kings Attorney General, made a long speech to defend the Kings right, of
which the summary is this.

1. That Francis the II. the last Duke of Britain dying An. 1488. left two
daughters, Anna and Isabella. The second died young. The eldest, Anne, had the
whole succession, and was married first to Charles the VIII. of France, by whom
though she had many children, none outlived the Father: Who being dead, she was
married with his successor Lewis the XII. by whom she had two Daughters,
Claude married to Francis the I. who by her had Henry the II, who was Father to
three Kings, Francis the II. Charles the IX, Henry the III. and to Francis Duke
of Alanson, all which left no issue. He was Father also of Elizabeth the Third,
Wife of Philip the II. King of Spain, who by her had the Infanta Isabella, Wife
to Archiduke Albert, and Princess of the Low Countries, died An. 1633, and
Catherine, Duchess of Savoy.

2. By the death of Henry the III, all the masculine Race of Valois was
extinct, and the next Heir of that house was Infanta Isabella, daughter to
Elizabeth the eldest Sister of Henry the III. So if there was any Estate in
that house inheritable by women, it belonged to Isabella without question.
Philip the II, dealing for his daughter after he was once satisfied, that his
pretense to the Crown of France in her behalf was ridiculous, asked that at
least the Duchy of Britain should be restored to her, as the Estate which her
great Grandmother Anne of Britain had brought to Lewis the XII, an Estate which
often had past to Females, saying (as it was true) that she was the next in
blood.

To these allegations these answers are given.

1. That the Duchy of Britain had been inserapably united with the Crown, by
the coming of Henry the II. to the Crown; for it is a fundamental rule among
the French, that a King coming to the Crown, uniteth unto the same all his
Estate, both Paternall and Maternall.

2. Besides that tacit and municipall right, to which all contrary pretense
must yield; there was an express union made An. 1532. at the request of the
States General of Britain, by Francis the I. upon condition, that the Dolphin
should take the Title of Dolphin of Viennois, Duke of Britain; which was then
practiced in the person of the Dolphin Francis, but was since neglected. That
au thenticall union of Britain with the Crown, cannot be disputed, since the
consent of the whole Province did intervene, and that in all public
businesses, all private rights, must bow and yield to the public good, Salus
populi suprema lexesto.

3. Besides, ever since John of Montford by the battle of Auray An. 1364.
remained Master of the Duchy, and excluded Jane his Cosen-German, Wife to
Charles de Blois, objecting that she was a woman, and that women were not
capable Heirs of Estates of that nature; Since that time, I say it may be
affirmed that Females were excluded from the succession of Britain. And that if
Anne, Wife to the two Kings, Charles the VII. and Lewis the XII. was admitted
to it, it was by toleration; For by right, after the death of Francis the last
Duke, the Duchy was devolved to the Crown. And truly, Francis the last Duke,
by his great revolts, had given sufficient cause to the Kings of France, his
Sovereigns to deprive him of his Estate.

4. The French also may here set up the right of Aubeine, which excludes
strangers, and admitted none but regnicolae, inhabitants of the Kingdom to
successions. Which must especially be observed in great Estates and most of all
in those that owe a liege homage. For whereas the Duke of Britain did owe
personal service to the King; how can a woman born in Spain, tied with blood
and interesse unto a house always jealous, and often declared Enemy of the
State of France, perform that part of her duty to the Crown? a duty absolutely
necessary for the preservation of the body of the State unto which the
establishing of all Fees must have regard.

6. The French may deal besides with the house of Austria by right of
represals. For since that house withholds so many Dutchies, and Counties from
the Crown of France, without any recompense or satisfaction; they think not
themselves bound to give ear to their pretenses upon so little ground.

Second Point Of the third Chapter. The pretenses of the house of France, upon
that of Austria.
A Book was published An. 1634. entitled Inquisition of the rights of the King
and Crown of France, upon the Kingdoms, Dutchies, Countries, Towns, and
Countries usurped by foreign Princes upon the most Christian Kings, composed
by Cassan the Kings Advocate in the Fresidial of Beziers; wherein all that we
have to say of this matter, is fully and curiously set down: Which though we
will but summarily relate; yet we hope to add something to it both for order
and matter. We will stand here only upon those rights which are disputed
against the house of Austria, and the Empire; both because it is our present
business, and because all other claims are stale and of small importance.

All the pretenses of the French upon the possessions of the house of Austria,
are either ancient and almost worn out, as the pretenses upon Castilia,
Portugal, Arragon, Catalonia; or later and important, upon Dominions to which
they maintain their rights, and claim them from time to time, to hinder a
prescription; joining to their claim active prosecution by arms.

Though I might omit those first pretenses as too stale, yet I will here set
them down among the rest, for the information of curious Readers.

All the pretenses either new or old of the French upon the Spaniard, are
either within or without Spain.

In that Peninsula, called Spain, enclosed within the great Ocean, the
Mediterranean Sea, and the Pyrenees, since the invasion of the Saracens, an.
713. there has been a great number of petty States under the Title of
Kingdoms, Dutchies, Counties, etc. into which that great Province was divided,
either by the Moors when they conquered the Land, or by the Christians when
they reconquered it; and it is but a hundred and fifty years, since there was
yet five remarkable distinct soveraignties in Spain, Castilia, Arragon,
Navarra, Portugal, and Granada, four of which Castilia, Arragon, Navarra, and
Granada were united by Ferdinand the Catholic. Portugal came to the House of
Austria, an. 1580. under Philip the II. (for here I speak not yet of the
revolt of the Portugais and Catalans, which has cut off two considerable limbs
of that great body, of which we will say more before we have done) This is not
a fit place to examine how these several States were founded, and how united
as they are now. We consider only that there be six pieces within Spain, upon
which the French have pretenses, Castilia, Portugal, Navarra, Arragon,
Catalonia, and the County of Roussillon. And out of Spain they claim a right to
the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, the Duchy of Milan, the Commonwealth of
Genoa, and the Counties of Flanders and Artois.

Paragraphe I. Of the Kingdom of Castilia.
The Saracens Moors, having invaded Spain an. 713, were manfully opposed by
two Catholic Princes, Inigo Imenes, surnamed Arista, Count of Bigorre, who
conquered upon them part of the Pyrenees, and founded the little Kingdom of
Suprarba, called afterward Navarra. The other Prince was Don Pelagus, Uncle or
Cousin to King Rodriguez, dispossessed before by the Saracens. This Prince
founded a Kingdom toward Asturia, called Gallicia or Leon, or the Kingdom of
Oviedo. He, and his Descendants, and people, stretching themselves toward the
plains, recovered the Country as far as the Strait of Gibralter, and built
many Castles upon their Frontier to keep out the Saracens. Whence the Country
was called Castilia, which remained under the subjection of the Kings of
Oviedo, till the year 896. when the Castilians incensed against their King
Frocla, who had usurped the State of his Nephews, cantonned themselves, and
chose two sovereign Judges. The two first were Nugno Rasuro, and Flavio Galvo.
But about 40 years after, an. 939. Sanchez King of Oviedo and Leon, made
himself Master of Castilia, and reunited it unto the Kingdom of Oviedo where
it remained, till Dom Sanchez, surnamed the Great, King of Navarra, who had
Castilia by his Wife, made that famous partage between his three Sons, giving
Navarra to Garcias his eldest Son; to Ferdinando, Castilia and Leon; and to
Ramires his bastard, Arragon. That partage was about the year 1036. which is
the date of the birth and distinction of those three States in Spain. From that
Ferdinand King of Castilia, descended long after Alphonsus the IX. the Father
of three Children, one Son called Henry, and two Daughters, Blanch and
Berengera. Henry reigned after his Father, and dyed without issue. Blanch was
married to Lewis the VIII. King of France, and was mother of St Lewis.
Berengera was married to Alphonsus the IX. King of Leon.

After the death of Henry, Blanch as the eldest, was the undoubted Heir of
Castilia, and Beringera had no right to it being the youngest. Yet because
Beringera was within the Country, and Blanch lived in France very far, she
seized upon the state, and with it invested her Son Ferdinand, although many of
the Grandees opposed it, standing for the right of Blanch, which caused great
troubles till St. Lewis to whom Castilia belonged after his Mother, thus
composed the difference.

Ferdinand, the usurper of Castilia over Blanch and St Lewis, was Father of
Alphonsus the X. King of Castilia and Leon, against whom St Lewis having an
Action for Castilia one of the two Kingdoms, married his Daughter Blanch,
Granddaughter of Blanch the inheritrice of Castilia, an. 1267. with Ferdinand,
surnamed, De la Cerda, eldest Son to that Alphonsus the X. By the contract of
marriage, it was agreed that S. Lewis yielded all his rights over Castilia, to
his Daughter Blanch, and her Children after her; upon which conditions
performed, France lost her claim upon that Kingdom; but that Ferdinand de la
Cerda dyed before his Father Alphonsus, and his younger Brother Sanchez usurped
the Crown, depriving his Nephews, Sons to Ferdinand and Blanch, of their right.
From that usurper Sanchez, all the Kings of Spain to this day are descended.
From the dispossessed Children of Ferdinand and Blanch of France, is descended
the House of the Dukes of Medina Coeli, who retaining still the memory of that
degradation, and of their birthright over the family of Sanchez, make their
protestations at every change of State, that if the family now reigning should
fail, they might enter upon their right.

Out of that discourse, four things do result for our purpose.

1. That after the death of Henry King of Castilia, all the right of the
Kingdom belonged to his sister Blanch, and after her, to her Son St Lewis; and
that Berengera the younger sister of Blanch, and her Son Ferdinand, were
usurpers.

2. That St Lewis indeed yielded his rights by the contract of marriage between
Ferdinand de la Cerda, and his Daughter Blanch. One might say, that it was more
then he could do; for the rights of the Crown cannot be alienated. But they
had not then such absolute maxims, and were not so jealous as now of preserving
the union of States, which in those days were often divided, exchanged, bought
and sold. And St Lewis sufficiently perceived the impossibility of governing
the French and the Castilians together.

3. But that Cession was conditional, requiring that the Children of Ferdinand
and Blanch, should inherit the Crown. That condition having been violated by
the usurpation of Sanchez, younger Brother to Ferdinand, and the poor Princes,
Children to Ferdinand and Blanch, being disinherited and proscribed, that
cession of St Lewis becomes void by right, and the claim of the French might be
good, if it was not somewhat too old.

4. At least all that Right of St Lewis remains with the descendants of
Ferdinand and Blanch, the Dukes of Medina Coeli, for they have double right,
the one from Ferdinand, as elder Brother to Sanchez; the other from Blanch, to
whom her Father St Lewis had conferred his right. And if the House of Medina
Coeli would prosecute it, they should be well grounded, and the French Kings
might defend their claim very justly, as their successors and fetching their
right from them.

Paragraphe II. Of the Kingdom of Portugal.
Portugal, a part of the old Lusitania, is one of the Provinces of Spain, near
the great Ocean under Gallicia, between the Rivers of Duerno Minio, and Tajo:
To which also belongs a little State, called the Kingdom of Algarba, which is
the point of the Cap St Vincent, next to the Isle of Cadiz, and the Strait of
Gibraltar. That Country was wasted and conquered by the Saracens, as the rest
of Spain, by that great inundation of those barbarous Nations, an. 713.

All the Christian Princes, and all the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdoms of
the West, (even after the time of Charlemagne, and Lewis the Meek, who were
there in person) very willingly went to make War in Spain, against these
Saracen Moors. Especially an. 1090. a little before the enterprise of the holy
War, Philip the I. reigning in France, and Alphonsus the VIII. in Spain; many
Princes and Noblemen confederated themselves, and went into Spain against them.
The most eminent was Henry, of the first Royal House of Burgundy; for although
there has been much dispute about his Origin, now all Historians acknowledge
that he was Grandchild to Robert, Brother to King Henry the I, who had Burgundy
given him for his apanage. This Henry of Burgundy, having done great exploits
against the Moors, married Teresa, natural Daughter of Alphonsus, who gave
her for her portion the Towns of Coimbra, Braga, and others in Portugal, with
forces to conquer the rest, of which he quitted himself so well, that he
expelled the Infidels from great part of Portugal, of which he was called Comes
or Count, and no other title did he bear all his life time. He dyed an. 1112.
and left a Son named Alphonsus, who took Lisbone, and much Country besides, and
was called the first King of Portugal, an. 1139. From that Alphonsus is
descended the whole House of Portugal, till the death of Henry the Cardinal
King, an. 1580. at which time Portugal was united with Spain.

The great difficulty about the succession of that Kingdom, whether it belong
to the house of Spain, or to that of Braganza, or to that of Parma, is nothing
to this purpose. It has wearied the reasoning of the greatest Politicians for
threescore years, and finally has ended in a general revolt of Portugal, and
a bloody War. Certainly, although such as are most jealous of the growth of
Spain, will vote for the House of Braganza, and that of Parma, the question is
not without difficulty.

But France has a further pretense to the Kindom of Portugal, for which we
must remount higher. Alphonsus the II, King of Portugal, had two Sons, Sanchez
the II, surnamed Capel, and Alphonsus. Sanchez reigned after his Father, but
with small vigor, and was despised by his subjects. Alphonsus living then in
the Court of St Lewis, where he received much honor, as being his kinsman by
Blanch of Castilia the Kings Mother. By his means he married Mahaut of
Dampmartin, Widow to a Prince of the blood, an. 1235. and by her had Children.
The people of Portugal weary of their King Sanchez, desired Alphonsus to come
home, and take the tuition of the State, which he did, leaving his wife Mahaut
in France. And his Brother being degraded and himself made King, he forgot his
wife and children in France, and married Beatrix, natural Daughter of
Alphonsus the IX King of Castilia, who gave her for her portion the Kingdom of
Algarba. Because his first wife was living, that 2d marriage was accounted
unlawful; yea, Alphonsus was excommunicated for it by Pope Alexander the IV.
and hated by all the Princes; and Mahaut coming into Spain, made a heavy
complaint against him. Who was so hardened in that sin, that he protested that
if a hundred wives would have him, he would marry them all. Yet being a great
Warrior, and a wise and prosperous King, he maintained himself by the love of
his subjects, insomuch that Mahaut being dead, the Bishops of Portugal obtained
his absolution of Urban the IV. and the confirmation of that second marriage of
which he had Children. One of them, and his successor, was Denis, Alphonsus
being dead, an. 1279. From that Denis are descended all the Kings of Portugal
to this day.

Some of the French Historians affirm, that Mahaut had two Sons by Alphonsus
in France, the one that dyed young, the other Robert, from whom the whole House
of the Counts of Bullen is descended, which fell to Magdalen de la Cour, wife
to Laurens of Medicis, by whom came Katherine de Medicis, mother of the three
late French King, Francis the II. Charles the IX, and Henry the III, after
whose death (by the substitution set down before in the contract between her
and Henry the II,) the inheritance of Katherine came to her Daughter Queen
Margaret, first Wife to Henry the IV. That Queen made the Dolphin of France her
Heir, who since was Lewis the XIII.

When the dispute for the succession of Portugal was open, after the death of
Henry the Cardinal King an. 1530, Katherine Queen of France, among other
pretenders to that Crown, set forth her claim by Belloy, Advocate General in
the Parliament of Toulouse, who pleaded that from the marriage of Alphonsus and
Mahaut, a Son was born called Robert, and had succeeded in all his rights, that
Beatrix was the Concubine, not the wife of Alphonsus; and that the Pope could
not legitimate Denis born of adultery, to the prejudice of Robert the true Heir
of Alphonsus. Also that all the Kings that had reigned since Denis for three
hundred years, made no prescription, because there can be no prescription for
the right of Kingdoms. That right being propounded to the Estates of Portugal,
was found too old and stale, and injurious to all their Kings; neither did they
make any account of it. Besides, the Spanish Historians affirm, that Alphonsus
had no issue by Mahaut, and that among the protestations which Mahaut made in
Portugal against Alphonsus, there is not one word of the injury which he did to
her children, which she would not have forgot if she had had any: Yet that
right may be defended by the testimony of the French Historians, and by this
true allegation, that neither a bastard nor his Descent can prescribe against
the lawful Heirs.

Paragraphe III. Of the Kingdom of Navarra.
An. 713. when the Saracens in vaded Spain, Inigo, Ximenes, Arista, Count of
Bigorre gave a beginning to the little Kingdom of Suprarba within the
Pyrenees, which a while after having spread into the vales, took the name of
Navarra or Navierras, which in old Spanish signifies plain grounds. It is
certain, that two generous Princes, and great Catholics resisted the Saracens
in the very beginning of their invasion. Pelagius toward the Astures which are
Leon and Gallicia, and this Ximenes Arista toward the Pyrenees; though the
date of the Conquests of this Ximenes be not so certain; some Historians make
him latter. Upon which one may read the History of Navarra written by Favin.

2. These Kings of Navarra in their beginings, made many Conquests over the
Saracens; and that Family continued to Sanchez the great, who about the year
1035. shared all his Estates among his three Sons, of whom the eldest Garcias,
had Navarra; to whom many Kings succeeded, till that State fell to the house of
France, by the marriage of Philip le Bell, with Jane Inheritrix of Navarra,
Countess of Campagn and Brie, to whom Lewis Hutin, King of France and Navarra,
succeeded in her Estates. But he having no child but a daughter, called Jane,
which could not be Queen of France, he left her Navarra; and so that State was
soon separated from that of France. That Jane married Philip of the Royal
branch of Eureux.

3. By that marriage, the house of Navarra became a Royal French house; but
the nature of that Crown being to fall to women, as the other States of Spain,
it passed not long after into the Family of Arragon by marriage, and so again
into the Family of Castilia, and again into the Family of Foix, after this
manner.

4. Charles the III. King of Navarre, Grandchild to that Jane, daughter to
Lewis Hutin had one only daughter called Blanch, married to John, Prince and
afterward King of Arragon. From that marriage came Charles Prince of Viana,
who got a great, but an ill renown in the Histories of Spain, for making War to
his Father, and maintaining himself against him in his State after his mothers
death. That Prince of great learning and courage, died a batchelour. The two
other children of John of Arragon, and Blanch of Navarra were two daughters.
The eldest Blanch of Arragon, who having been married with Henry the IV. King
of Castilia, surnamed the Impotent, was separated from him, by reason of his
impotency, and died without issue. The other was Eleanor, wife to Gaston the
IV. Count of Foix, who after the death of her Father, Mother, Brother, and
Sister, succeeded to the Kingdom of Navarra, and united it to the house of
Foix. She enjoyed it but two months and a half, and died, An. 1469. Her eldest
Son, Gaston Prince of Viana, being already dead, and having left, by his wife
Magdalen, daughter to Charles the VII. of France, two children, Francis
Phoebus, who succeeded his Grandfather in the Kingdom of Navarra, but enjoyed
it but four years, and died unmarried, and Catherine de Foix, who succeeded him,
and married John d' Albret, Son to Alen d' Abret, a man of great note in
Gascony, but not of a sovereign house; yet descended from that Amani d' Albret,
who in the time of Charles the V. of France, married Magaret of Bourbon, Sister
to Jane, Queen of France, and raised his house to a great splendor by that
royal alliance, and advanced much the party of the French against the English.

5. John of Albret, and Catherine de Foix, had a Son called Henry, who was King
of Navarra, and married Margaret, Sister to Francis the first of France, by
whom he had Jane, Inheritrix of Navarra; Jane being married to Antony of
Bourbon, was by him Motherof Henry the IV. of France, Father to Lewis the XIII,
and Grandfather to Lewis the XIV. Thus that house of Navarra was united with
two great houses in France; yet not Royal, that of Foix and that of Albret, and
after to the Royal house of Bourbon, and became so powerful in France, that
her possessions from these three houses much exceeded the Kingdom of Navarra.
Hence it is manifest, how the last Kings of Navarra by the interesse of their
Alliance, and Estate were obliged to follow the party of France. Now it happened,
An. 1510. after that Lewis the XII. had humbled the Venetians by the victory of
Aignadel, and brought terror among all the Princes of Italy, that Pope Julius
the II. fell out with Lewis, and prosecuted the quarrel with such animosity, (
Lewis on the other side, being as fierce as he) that the contention grew almost
into a Schism: Julius excommunicated all that took part with Lewis, and put an
interdict (as they call it) upon their Estates. Lewis maintained himself
against his fulminations, both by an Assembly of his Prelates at Tours, who
cleared the obligations of the Kings conscience, as his History speaks, and
especially by arms, whereby he represt all the invaders of his State, and put
them to the defense of their own. But John d' Albret, and Catherine of Navarra,
were expelled from their State by Ferdinand the Catholic, who making a show
to pass into Guienne to join with the English, and seize upon the Kingdom of
France, by virtue of the Papal interdict, suddenly turned upon Navarra, and
took it, An. 1512. both because John d' Albret was united with the French King,
who was a rebel against the Church, and an Enemy to the English, with whom
Ferdinand had alliance; also because the Spaniards hold that there was a tacit
agreement between the Kings of Spain, not to suffer that any of the Spanish
Crowns should fall into foreign hands, or into houses not sovereign, as those
of Foix and Albret. As the reason and pretense of that invasion, was leight and
groundless, the French stand to their right to this day, against that
manifest, invasion, and hinder the prescription by arms Treaties and
Protestations.

Paragraphe IV. Of the Kingdom of Arragon.
Cassan in his Book of the rights of the Crown of France, with more zeal than
judgment will ground those rights upon conquests 800. years old, and ancient
expeditions of the French Kings into Spain, where they took some Towns of
Navarra, Arragon and Catalonia, not considering the many changes of successions
in so many years. The Conquests of Catalonia and Arragon by Charlemagne, give
to the French no more right there in these times, than those of Caesar in
France to the now Emperors.

The rights of the French over Arragon, Catalonia, and Roussillon, which have
some ground, may be reduced to two heads.

The first is how Charles Count of Anjou, Brother to Saint Lewis, was invested
with the Kingdom of the two Sicilies, against the children of the Emperor
Friderick the II. Peter, King of Arragon, who had married Constance, daughter
to Manfred, bastard of Frederick, claiming that Kingdom from his wife, made
those bloody Sicilian Vespers An. 1281. An action which did incense the whole
Christendom against that Peter, well surnamed the cruel; Pope Martin the IV.
especially a Frenchman by Birth and affection, who excommunicated Peter, and
put his Kingdom in interdict. Not only by the general maxim of the Popes,
that in certain cases they have power over the temporals of Kings; but because
Arragon has been, of great antiquity, a Fee of the Church of Rome. So the Pope
dealt with that perfidious King as Sovereign of Arragon. To that purpose he
sent a Legate into France which offered the Kingdom of Arragon to King Philip
le Hardy for his Son Charles, Count of Valois. Whereupon Philip assembled the
States General at Paris, accepted the Popes gift, and undertook the War
against Peter; took Arragon, Gatalonia, and Valentia, and invested his Son
Charles with these Kingdoms, paying five hundred Livers yearly to the Sea of
Rome. It is true that after these Conquests, King Philip, as he returned into
France, dyed at Perpignan, and the French soon after lost all that Country. Yet
their right, if they had any by the donation of the Pope, remained as good as
before.

But the Spaniards contradict that right, saying, that in the time of the
greatest confusions about that quarrel, a marriage was made between that
Charles de Valois pretended King of Arragon, and Margaret daughter to Charles
the II, King of Naples. To which Margaret the Counties of Anjou and Maine were
given for her portion (which had been in the possession of Charles brother to
St Lewis, and by him united to the Kingdom of Naples) with this proviso, That
though Margaret should die without issue, Charles should possess these
Counties, yielding all his right and claim to the Kingdom of Arragon, which
Charles did, and so that great difference was ended.

The second head whence the claim of the French upon Arragon does arise,
regards the second House of Anjou. The second Son of King John of France, was
Lewis, who was invested with the Duchy of Anjou; A Prince well known in
Histories, as he that was made regent of France, in the Minority of Charles the
VI. and after invested with the Kingdom of Naples by Queen Jane the first; a
right which he prosecuted, and perished in the prosecution. But he left the
title to his Children. His Son Lewis the II, married Yoland daughter to John
the I. King of Arragon, and of Yoland of Bar his wife. The eldest sister of
that Yoland, wife to Lewis the II, of Anjou, which was Jane Countess of Foix,
being dead without issue, and no child remaining of John of Arragon, but that
Yoland Duchess of Anjou, she was the undoubted Heir of that State; but her
Uncle Martin, Duke of Montblanc, seized upon it. Lewis sent the Bishop of
Couserans to represent his right. And when after the death of Martin, he would
dispute his right by the sword, he was persuaded to put the business to an
arbitrament; for the Peers and people of the Kingdom of Arragon, had chosen
arbitrators to umpire the business between Lewis and Martin, and examine the
claims of other pretenders. And though the Umpires were almost all Arragones,
they would not pronounce any thing, so that quarrel remained undecided. And
after the death of two Martins, Father and Son, the Arbitration being renewed,
nine Arbitrators deferred the Kingdom to Ferdinand Brother to Henry the III.
King of Castilia. That sentence was confirmed by the Antipope Benedict the
XIII. who being forsaken almost by all the world, had taken sanctuary in
Arragon. Against the nullity of that sentence, the Children of Yoland, Lewis
the III, of Anjou and Rene, did protest. Yea, the Children of Rene make War in
Arragon, to recover it in the time of Lewis the XI, of France; but they were
constrained to forsake all, and Arragon remained with the usurpers unto this
day. Yet I see not that the French urge much that claim, being somewhat too old
to be now revived.

Paragraphe V. Of Catalonia.
The like may be said of Catalonia, which is a great Province of Spain, bounded
on the East and South with the Mediterranean Sea, and on the other sides with
Valentia, Arragon, and Roussillon. It was both before the Romans and under
them, part of Hispania Tarraconensis, as Arragon and other Countries near the
River of Ebro. Since which time being conquered by the Gotths and Alans
together, it was called by them Gottalania, which name was since corrupted to
Catalaunia. It was under the Kings of the Gotths, till the invasion of the
Saracens, an. 713. who made themselves Masters of it, as of most part of Spain;
But Charlemagne took it from them, and all the Country near the River of Ebro,
about the year 800. expelling Zaron the Moore out of Barcellona, and put a
French Garrison in it; not long after he gave it to Bernard, who was the first
Count of Catalonia, and was a powerful and considerable man in the Court of
Lewis the Meek; and the Counts of that Province, who then were but Goverours,
were a long time ordinary Courtiers and Attendants of the French Kings. But by
the idleness of the last descent of Charlemagne, the Governors of Provinces;
and of this among the rest, made themselves Masters.

About the beginning of the third Race of the French Kings, the Family that
ruled in Catalonia, was that of the Beringers. And that County was always
separate from the Kingdom of Arragon, till the year 1131, when Don Alphonso
King of Arragon, surnamed the Bellador, because he fought twenty two battles,
being dead without issue, the people of Arragon took Ramires out of the
Cloister of St. Pontius of Tomieres, where he had lived forty years a Monk,
because he was of the Royal blood, and Son to Sanchez Ramires, King of Arragon.
He was married by a dispensation of Anaclet the II, Pope, or rather Antipope,
and had a Daughter named Petronilla, married to Raymond Berenger, Count of
Catalonia. So Arragon and Catalonia were united, and never separated since.
James King of Arragon, an. 1320. by the advice of the State of the Land, made
the Law of union of the three Provinces, Arragon, Valentia, and Catalonia, not
to be possessed separately any more. Together with that Law, Catalonia agreed
with the King of Arragon, that she should have her forces and privileges
apart; and that the Kings of Arragon, who took only the title of Counts of
Catalonia, should oblige themselves by oath to observe that condition. This
precaution of the Catalans has justified their laterevolt, which the most
conscionable among them have yielded unto, acknowledging that their King had
violated that Treaty.

It is a constant truth, that all that time, from the conquest of Charlemagne,
Catalonia, was a Fee depending from France; Charlemagne made the first Counts
of it, who were his Courtiers. The first upon whom it was settled, as a French
Fee, was Geffery le Velu, invested by Charles le Gros, an. 885. And Bera Count
of Catalonia, being accused of felony before Lewis le Begue offered to purge
himself by a Duel after the manner of the time, in which being overcome, he
was deprived of his Fee, and another invested with it.

All that time also, all the public Acts of Notaries in Catalonia, were done
in the name of the Kings of France, which is an undoubted mark of Supremacy,
and all the Kings of Arragon, Counts of Catalonia, did homage for it to the
Kings of France, till the year 1181. and in the beginning of Philip the
Conqueror, when Alphonsus King of Arragon called a Council at Tarracona, a
Town of Catalonia, where under color of conscience and respect to Religion, he
caused an Order to be made, that from thenceforth the years of the French
Kings should no more be put in the Deeds and Contracts of Catalonia, but the
years of Christ. And the same King having neglected that homage to the Kings
of France, that right was lost under Philip Auguste, Lewis the VIII. and St
Lewis, the claim only remaining. In which consideration, likely the Princes of
Arragon were educated in the Court of France; one of them was James, who lived
in the time of St. Lewis, and had been educated with Philip le Hardy, who being
come to visit that King, and having given him his sister Isabella to wife; the
Spaniards say, that by reason of that match, and the cession which James made
to Philip of the Town of Monpellier, and of some other Lands which he possessed
in Languedoc; the said King Philip quitted all his right of supremacy over
Arragon and Catalonia. That Treaty was an. 1270, by which the Spaniards
conceive that they have shaken the yoke of French Sovereignty. But whether that
Treaty be valid or no, either for the fact or the right, that cession being
above 380 years old, it seems authentical, and the French have given over that
claim.

But they have another of latter date. For by reason of the massacre made in
the Siclian Vespers, an. 1281. Peter King of Arragon, Count of Catalonia, was
excommunicated, and his Lands put in interdict, and given to Philip le Hardy,
by Martin the IV, Pope, or to his Son Count of Valois; but that right being the
same, as the right which the French claim, or did claim upon Arragon, of which
we spoke lately, we will not here repeat.

So the French rights over Catalonia, are reduced to these two heads. The first
is taken from the conquest of Charlemagne, the estabishing of Counts and
Governors in the same, the homage done to the Kings of France, the years of
their reign ascribed in their deeds both private and public. The other is the
same, as is pretended upon Arragon. Of both, the French make no great account.
Only because of late years, Catalonia has shaken the yoke of the Kings of
Arragon and Castilia, and have given themselves to the French; it may be
disputed, whether the French King may use any of these old stale Titles, or
whether he must ground the justice of his possession upon the donation which
the Catalans have made to him, holding themselves free from the obedience of
the Spaniard, by reason of the infraction of their privileges. Certainly in
all particular Treaties, the unobservation of the conditions, freeth the
parties from the obligations of the contract. But as for Soveraignties, and the
mutual obligations of Kings and Subjects, many will reason otherwise; saying,
that although the obligation be mutual as for the conscience; yet as for the
retrocession and the penalty attending the breach of the obligation, it does
not reach to Kings, whose actions are not censurable by the people; not by the
nature of the contract which is mutual and reciprocal, but for the danger of
the consequence which might authorize revolts. Others also will say, that a
Country giving her self to a Prince, what privileges soever the people
reserve to themselves by contract, they are all lost when they enter into
subjection, which by its nature makes a man subject to another man without any
exception, when the public good is concerned; and that those privileges by
that subjection, pass into the nature of mere liberties and concessions of
Princes, which they may stretch, diminish, and overthrow, according to their
discretion. Certainly in all these contentions between the people, and the
Sovereign passion and interests bear a great sway, and make conscience plead on
both sides. But any reason will pass when there is strength to back it.

Paragraphe VI. Of the County of Roussillon and Sardinia.
That little Country at the foot of the Pyrenees, and near the golph of Leon,
was anciently part of Languedoc, and for a long time past through the same
fortunes and changes. It was for a great while part of the County of Beziers,
and Duchy of Narbon. Then it came into the hands of particular Counts, which
failing, the Country fell to the Counts of Catalonia. How, and in what time
precisely, I find not. Only I find that in the time of St Lewis, Alphonsus his
Brother, Count of Toulouse, and the King of Arragon, being in suit about the
County of Roussillon. St Lewis was chosen Umpire, as bearing himself for
Sovereign of both, who therefore ought to be their Judge, and he did adjudge it
on the King of Arragon against his own Brother. It seems that holy King
acknowledged the justice of their possession. For as that County was united
with that of Barcelonia, it was held also by the same right.

Since the union of these with the Crown of Arragon, it ran the same fortune
with Arragon, and was conquered by Philip le Hardy, by virtue of the Interdict
of Pope Martin the IV. Philip died at Perpignan, and soon after, all was lost,
and quited by Charles de Valois his second Son. But of that right, and all the
pretenses of the house of Anjou upon Roussillon, as upon Arragon and Catalonia,
the French themselves make no great account.

But upon Roussillon, the French have a Title altogether singular. John King of
Arragon, that lived in the time of Lewis the XI. of France, being in War with
his subjects of Arragon and Catalonia, as maintainers of his Son, Charles
Prince of Vienna, and the true Heir of Navarra against him, and finding his
Subjects too hard for him, as assisted by Henry, King of Castilia; desired
Lewis the XI. to assist him, which he did with great might, having sent him a
good Army under the conduct of Charles d' Armagnac, Duke of Nemours, who
confirmed the Crown to John, and composed the difference between him and his
Subjects. At which time, John engaged the County of Roussillon, and the Town of
Perpignan unto Lewis the XI. for three hundred thousand Crowns which he
borrowed of him. Lewis, notwithstanding many treacheries and attempts of the
Arrogenese, maintained himself in that Country, and Charles the VIII. his Son
after him, until the design of the Conquest of Naples.

It was in the year 1492. that Charles the VIII. began the enterprise of
Naples. And fearing least Ferdinand, King of Arragon, Son to that John would
assist the house of Naples, which was a branch of that of Arragon; or should
enter into France in his absence, he returned unto him that County of
Roussillon, gratis; not quitting, but not demanding the three hundred thousand
Crowns; the King of Arragon having promised, and sworn upon the holy Cross, and
upon the Gospels, that he would serve the King against all his Enemies in that
expedition of Italy. The Governor of Perpignan did not yield, but after many
iterated commands, seeing the importance of that restitution, and fearing the
infidelity of Arragon. The French Historians blame James Maillert, a Franciscan
Friar, Confessor to Charles the VIII. saying, he was won by Ferdinand to
persuade the King to that restitution. But Ferdinand instead of helping Charles
in his expedition of Italy, helped his Enemies in Italy, and disturbed his
enterprise of Naples. Since which time, the French have often redemanded that
County, as not redeemed with the three hundred thousand Crowns, and
represented that they were circumvented by Ferdinand; but in vain, till finally
the sword has done what reason and justice could not. Perpignan being
besieged, and taken by Lewis the XIII. of late years.

Thus of those six rights which the French pretend within the limits of Spain.
Those of Castilia, Portugal, and Arragon, are old and stale. That of Navarra is
in its full force by their ordinary protestations. That of Catalonia and
Roussillon are no more pretended rights, the French having the real possession
of them.

Paragraphe. VII. Of the Kingdom of Naples.
Out of the limits of Spain the French have three great pretenses upon the
house of Austria. 1. Upon the Kingdom of Naples. 2. Upon the Duchy of Milan,
and the Commonwealth of Genoa. 3. Upon the Counties of Flanders and Artois.
Because they pretend that these rights are in their full force, they must be
exactly examined. We will begin at Naples.

1. That part of Italy which is beyond Capagna de Roma, and comprehends these
ancient Provinces, Samnium, Appulia, Hydruntum, Magna Graecia, Campania,
Calabria, and others; all these, I say, which is well nigh one half of Italy,
make up the Kingdom of Naples.

Compania, now Terra di Lavoro, the River of Aufidus, now Ofanto in Puglia, and
the River of Liris now Cantigliano near Capua, were made the limits between the
Empires of the East and West, An. 803. Nicephorus then being the Emperor of
the East, and Charlemagne of the West. So that part of the Kingdom of Naples,
and all that is on this side of the two Rivers remained with the Empire of the
West. The part beyond them with the Island of Sicily, remained with the Emperor
of the East.

Not long after, the Saracens invaded Italy. The height of their fury, was
about the year 850. and in the parts about Sicily, and Sicily it self, where
they settled themselves. And for many Ages, those Countries were the sad stage,
where the Latins on the one side, and the Greeks on the other, and the
Saracens enemies to both, acted a bloody Tragedy.

2. About the year 1000, forty Norman Gentlemen returning from the Pilgrimage
of the Holy Land, gave a powerful assistance to the Christians of the Kingdom
of Naples against the Saracens, and being returned home, undertook not long
after an expedition to Naples with more might, under the conduct of Tristan
Cistel, a Norman. These gave the beginning to the State of Naples, partly by
conquest, partly by marriage, under the names of the Counts of the Cross of
Puglia, and Dukes of Calabria, and in time advancing their conquests as far as
Sicily, they were crowned Kings of the same. To that Family of Normans,
succeeded that of the Germans in the persons of Henry the VI. and Friderick the
II, Emperors and Kings of Naples. That Friderick being fallen into the hatred
of the Sea of Rome, which is Sovereign of that Fee, he was deprived of that
State. After his death his Son Conrard, and his bastard Manfred, and Conradin
Son of Conrard, having labored to maintain himself in it; finally the house of
France was called to it after this manner, about the year 1262.

3. By the falling out of all these Princes with the Popes, great confusions
happened in Italy. The Pope Innocent the IV, weary of the German race,
presented the Kingdom to Saint Lewis for his brother Charles, Count of Anjou,
and Provence, who was reputed a great Warrior. And two years after, Urban the
IV, invested them with it, An. 1264. That Country which he held from the
Church, contained the Kingdom of Naples, and the great I Will of Sicily, and was
called Sicilia ultra and extra Farum, because of the Far or Straight of
Messina, which separates the I Will from the Continent. But that Country was so
given him by the Pope, that he was first to conquer it before he could enjoy
the gift. Great Wars he had against Manfred, bastard of Friderick the II.
Emperor, and against Conradin the Emperors Grandchild, whom he took in
battle, and beheaded him; A bloody execution, which caused much animosity, and
Wars, between that house of France and the relics of the house of Suaben,
which was Constantia, daughter to Manfred, wife to Peter, King of Arragon; who
to avenge the death of that King Conradin, his wives Cousin, and to repress the
insolence of the French, was the Author of the bloody Sicilian Vespers, whereby
the French were utterly expelled from Sicily An. 1261. and Sicily remained in
the power of the house of Arragon; and since, although many Wars and Treaties
have intervened to reunite these two States, they have always been separated,
till the house of Arragon has got the Dominion of Naples. Wherefore we will
speak no more of Sicily, which the French lost in effect, in that massacre, and
since quitted their right to it by several Treaties.

4. But as for the Kingdom of Naples, that French Family of Charles d' Anjou,
was settled in it, from the year 1264. until the death of Jane the II, An.
1435. in all 171. years, We intend not to relate that History, but only to
observe these things which concern our present purpose.

First, that Charles the Lame, the second King and Son to that first Charles,
married Mary, inheritrice of Hungary, and so these two Kingdoms were united.
Of their Children, the eldest Charles, surnamed Martel, had Hungary for his
portion, and from him some Princes of Hungary are descended. The second Son was
Lewis, who would be a Franciscan Friar, and was Bishop of Toulouse. The third
Son Robert, inherited the Kingdom of Naples. There were more brothers who
had several apanages. But it was not this Robert that continued the line of
the Kings of Naples. He was Father to Prince Charles, who dying before his
Father, left a Daughter, that famous, or rather infamous, Queen Jane the First,
that ruled that State almost forty years.

Next, it must be known that this wicked Jane, lascivious and cruel, so far
as to strangle her Husband Andrew, a young Prince of that other Branch of
Hungary, filled her Kingdom with great troubles by her wickedness. Toward
the end of her reign, an. 1378. happened the great Schism of the Church, when
Urban the VI, being made Pope by violence, many Cardinals elected in his stead,
Robert Cardinal of Geneva, who took the name of Clement the VII, Queen Jane
being an enemy to Urban, who was born her subject, declared her self for
Clement. Her crim whereby she had put her Husband to death, had been long
covered by an accommodation made by Clement the VI, who appeased Lewis the
great, King of Hungary, Brother to Andrew, whom Jane had strangled. But Pope
Urban the VI, to be avenged of Jane, stirred again the House of Hungary against
her, and a Prince of that House, named Charles de Duras, came and besieged her
in Castello del Ovo at Naples, took her and strangled her, an. 1382. in the
same place, as some say, where she had strangled her first husband.

3. But the same Princess seeing that Urban invited the house of Hungary to the
conquest of Naples, called to her help King Charles the VI, of France, an.
1380. by the advice of Pope Clement. And by his leave, (for he bore himself
for her Sovereign) she adopted Lewis Duke of Anjou, brother to Charles the V,
of France, and head of the second house of Anjou. He was at that time Regent of
France, in the minority of King Charles the VI. From that adoption the French
fetch their right in the Kingdom of Naples, for from the offspring of that
Lewis, the French Kings have inherited.

4. Charles de Duras, after he had strangled Queen Jane, seized upon the
Kingdom, and reigned in her stead, and after him his two Children; first
Ladislaus, whom the French Historians call Lancelot, and Jane the Second. They
three held the State 53. years, from the year 1382. till the year 1436. But
because Jane the first, a little before her death, had adopted Lewis Duke of
Anjou, that house of Duras had continual War with the house of Anjou. Lewis
the I. came to Naples and there dyed. Lewis the II, his Son, had great Wars
with Ladislaus, and for a time was Master of the Kingdom. That Ladislaus being
dead without issue, an. 1414. his sister Queen Jane the Second, succeeded him,
as bad a woman as the first Jane, for impudicity and extravagancy. She being
degraded by the Pope, Martin the V: and Lewis the III, Grandchild of the first
Lewis of Anjou, named by him to reign in her place; she adopted Alphonsus King
of Arragon and Sicily for her Son, with whom that Lewis the III, had great
Wars, and had sometimes the better, sometimes the worst. But Jane being of an
inconstant spirit, despised Alphonsus, being altogether governed by her
favorite John Carraciolo, which Alphonsus not able to bear, made himself
Master of the City of Naples. Upon which she cancelled her will made in favor
of Alphonsus, and instead of him, adopted Lewis the IV. of Anjou, who before
was her enemy. That adoption made an. 1422. is the second ground of the claim
of the French to Naples, and the seed of so many Wars and Calamities, and of
the greatest divisions between the Houses of France and Spain. The Spaniards
maintaining the first adoption as valid, because Alphonsus, though accused by
Jane of ungratefulness, upon which she grounded the disanulling of his
adoption, did nothing (as they say) against the respect due to his adoptive
Mother; but only went about to repress the extravagancies of that
light-brained woman, to have that part in her affairs which by right belonged
to him, and especially curb the insolency of Carraciolo, who kept a scandalous
familiarity with that woman. The French say, that the second adoption is of
more validity: That the cause of ungratefulness is sufficient to break an
adoption: That Alphonsus misused his adoptive Mother, seized upon the City of
Naples, besieged her, and kept her shut up, and did all acts of Sovereign, to
her contempt and disgrace.

5. This Lewis the IV. Duke of Anjou, having recovered Naples, enjoyed it with
some peace together with Jane, but dyed before her, an. 1434. Because he left
no issue, she adopted his Brother Rene Duke of Anjou, and her self soon after
dyed. But Rene being then kept prisoner by the Duke of Burgundy, he could not
go to receive his inheritance. His wife Elizabeth went, but too late, though at
the first she got some advantage. In the end Alphonsus remained Master, and the
party of Anjou was quite expelled out of the Land. Only Rene kept the
possession of Provence, which was an appurtenance of that State: for since the
first adoption of Lewis the I, Duke of Anjou, by Queen Jane the I. that second
house of Anjou, had kept the possession of Provence. Neither did Charles de
Duras, nor his Children, nor Alphonsus, possess any thing in it.

6. Rene dying an. 1480. although his Daughter Yoland Duchess of Lorraine,
had left children, he left the inheritance of the County of Provence, and of
his Rights upon Naples. Charles Count du Maine, Son to his brother of the same
name and title. And Charles dying likewise without issue, left Lewis the XI,
his Heir in all his states, and the Kings of France successors to Lewis. Lewis
neglecting to go to Naples held by Ferdinand, bastard of that Alphonsus, and by
his Children, contented himself to hold Provence. But his Son, Charles the
VIII. undertook the conquest of Naples, an. 1493. and after him, Lewis the XII,
and Francis the I. In the next Chapter we shall see the several Wars,
Partages, and Treaties, between these two Houses for that Kingdom

So all the Rights of the House of France to the Kingdom of Naples, are
reduced to these heads.

1. The investiture by Urban the IV. in favor of Charles brother to St Lewis.
A weak Right if it were alone; the French Kings having not succeeded to that
family by kindred; for all that belongs to any branch of the House of France,
does not therefore belong to France.

2. The Adoption of Lewis the first, of the second house of Anjou, by Queen
Jane the I. by the counsel and leave of Clement the VII. who was acknowledged
by France for a true Pope. By that adoption the right of Naples fell to the
house of Anjou, of which the French Kings have inherited.

3. The two adoptions made by Queen Jane the II. first of Lewis the III. Duke
of Anjou, and after him, of his Brother Rene.

4. The will of Charles Count du Maine, who named Lewis the XI. his heir both
of Provence, and of his right to the Kingdom of Naples, and his successors,
Kings of France after him.

Paragraphe VIII. Of the Duchy of Milan.
After the wrack of the Roman Empire, an. 400. all the Countries about the
River of Po, toward the Alps were taken by Theodorick Goth, and kept by his
children, till about the year 550. that they were recovered by Belifarius and
Narses, two Captains of the Emperor Justinian. But soon after the same
Countries were won by the Ostrogoths, Kings of Italy; and again by the
Lombards, who settled a great State there, and maintained it till the time of
Charlemagne, who destroyed it, an. 774. After which time all the Towns of those
parts were Imperial, belonging to whosoever had the Empire of the West. The
house of Charlemagne being degenerated and having lost the Empire, after the
year 900. the Empire was disputed between the Italian and the German Princes
for 50 years. In the end the Germans having prevailed in the person of Otho
the I; and the Emperors his successors having chosen the seat of their Empire
in Germany, and being at odds many times with the Popes, their power sensibly
decayed in Italy, and great part of the Towns of Lombardy slipped out of their
Dominion, and chose to themselves Italian Lords, the Emperors retaining the
shadow only of Sovereignty. Many also chose liberty, and a Popular State, as
Siena. Pisa, Florence, Genoa, and others. In these confusions the City of Milan
was usurped by the Viscounts of Angleria, a small place in the Duchy of Milan,
who maintained themselves about six hundred years under that name and quality of
Vicounts, until the year 1497. that the Emperor Wenceslaus (not Friderick, as
Gassan says) erected Milan into a Duchy. The first Duke was Galeas the III.
who had married Isabella daughter to John, King of France.

That Galeas had three Sons, John Maria, that succeeded him and died without
issue, Philip Maria that succeeded his brother, who likewise died without
issue, leaving a bastard daughter named Bona, married to Francis Sforza, a
Soldier of Fortune, but a gallant man. That first Duke Galeas, besides these
two Sons had a daughter called Valentina, married to Lewis, Duke of Orleans,
Son to Charles the V. King of France, an. 1398. Her Father gave her the County
of Ast for her portion, with a Million of Livers wherewith the County of Blois
was bought, Chasteauduro, Soissons, and other Lordships. And by the contract of
Matrimony, it was declared, that if the masculine line of Galeas should fail,
Valentina and her children should succeed in the Duchy. It is true that this
clause had this great defect, that the Duchy being established a masculine
Fee, Galeas could not make it feminine without the Emperors leave, which was
not demanded, because the Empire was then vacant by the degradation of
Wencestaus, whom the Electors deposed for his idleness. But it is pretended
that the Pope Benedict the XIII. who then had his See at Avignon, approved that
contract; for that right the Popes challenge in the vacancy of the Empire.

Howsoever John Maria, and Philip Maria, being dead without lawful issue, none
had more right to that succession then the children of Valentina. But that
succession fell in the heat of the confusions of France, under Charles the VII,
when the two Sons of Valentina, Charles Duke of Orleans, and John Count of
Angoulesme, were Prisoners in England, where the eldest remained five and
twenty years, and the second well nigh thirty. In that long time it was easy
for Francis Sforza, who had married Bona the bastard, daughter of Duke Philip
Maria, to make himself Master of Milan, of which he procured, and obtained the
investiture from the Emperor Friderick the IV. This Francis Sforza had two
Sons, whom he left to the tuition of his brother Ludovick Sforza, so famous in
the History of Milan, who having made away his pupills, seized upon the State
of Milan, and was expelled out of it by Lewis the XII. King of France, and
since was taken and carried to Loches, where he died in Prison. He left two
Sons, Maximilian, who was restored by the Switzers, and since taken by Francis
the I. and died in France. His other Son was Francis Sforza the second, who
died without issue, 1534. So that house of Sforza's maintained the usurpation
of Milan well nigh a hundred years among many wars and divisions; the lawful
right remaining still in the house of Orleans, with the possession of the
County of Ast, which is part of that Duchy.

But that right could not be prosecuted, 1. In the desolation of the house of
Orleans, and the great divisions between that house and the house of Burgundy,
2. In the long inprisonment of the two Princes of Orleans, 3. In the great
troubles of the State of France almost all the reign of Charles the VII. 4.
Besides Lewis the XI. had many other businesses all his time. Neither did he
love the house of Orleans, and the Princes of his blood; And of all things he
hated the Wars of Italy, whither he would never go, neither for the conquest
of Naples, nor for the receiving the City of Genoa that gave her self to him.
5. All the time of Charles the VIII, was spent in Civil Wars, or in the
Conquest of Naples. And Lewis the XII, Grandchild of Valentina, comeing to the
Crown, an. 1498, had no more in the Duchy, but the County of Ast, the rest
being held by Ludovick Sforza, Son to the invader Francis, and himself invader
of the State of his Nephews. But Lewis following his right, comes to Milan,
takes it and expells Ludovic, who returning not long after, enters into Milan,
but there being suddenly invested by Lewis, he is taken, carried into France,
where he dies a Prisoner, Lewis remaining Master of the Duchy. But because
Ludovic had two Sons protected in Germany by the Emperor Maximilian I. Lewis
to strengthen his right, made means to win the Emperors favor, of whom in
the end he obtained two investitures of that Duchy. The one An. 1506 for Lewis
and his children, and lawful Heirs, and Lewis for the acknowledgement of this
investiture, paid him sixty thousand livers, and promised to give him every year
a pair of golden spurrs at Christmas. Also in that investiture, the exclusion
of Sforza is precisely expressed, and a marriage concluded between Charles the
Grandchild of Maximilian, who since was the Emperor Charles the V. and Claude
the eldest daughter of Lewis the XII. which also was comprehended in that
investiture. The other was an. 1509. whereby the same Emperor confirms the
former investiture, with a condition of the marriage between Charles and
Claude, which indeed was not effected, but that hinders not the validity of the
investiture, which was absolute, the first at least. By virtue of that right,
Lewis remained possessed of that Duchy; but toward the end of his reign,
Maximilian Sforza was put in possession of that Duchy by the Switzers, by the
consent of the Emperor Maximilian, who was displeased that Claude, promised to
Charles his Grandchild, had been married to Francis, who after was Francis the
first King of France, which he took for an affront, and this was the first seed
of the jealousies between the two houses of France and Austria.

Francis the first having regained the Duchy, and taken Maximilian, neglected
to do homage to the Emperor; and a while after Charles having succeeded his
Grandfather in the Empire, the animosities grew to a great height betwixt these
two Princes, and they became implacable, fighting with great might about Milan,
till that, by the Treaty of Madrid, Francis the first yielded his right, as we
will relate in the next Chapter.

To sum up the pretenses of the French upon Milan; They are grounded, 1. Upon
the contract of marriage of Valentina, who is substituted Heir of the Duchy,
the lawful Heirs male failing; and the contract is valid, as confirmed by the
Pope in the vacancy of the Empire. 2. The investiture given by the Emperor
Maximilian, in favor of Lewis the XII. and his Heirs; yea of Claude and her
children. 3. The second investiture, an. 1509. 4. Francis the I. having yielded
all his rights by the Treaties of Madrid, Cambray, and Crespy, as we shall see
afterward; one may say that (besides the nullity of that cession, by the right
of the Kingdom) Francis may have quitted the right that came to him by his
great Grandmother Valentina; but that he has not quitted that which came to
his children by Claude his wife, who being daughter of Lewis the XII. had for
her and her issue the right of investiture both of 1505. and 1509. which her
Husband could not take from her. And Francis made use of this reason among the
nullities which he objected against the treaty of Madrid. In what time these
cessions were made, and of what strength they are, the next Chapter will show.

The Commonwealth of Genoa had also some dependence from the Kings of France.
That City with the Country depending from it, having shaken the yoke of the
Emperors (as the other Commonwealths of Italy, while the Italian and German
Princes were contending for the Empire) formed itself into a most flourishing
State. In the Wars of the East, and Conquests of the Holy Land, Genoa was very
considerable, no less than the Venetians and Pisans, possessed many Countries in
the Levant, the I Will of Chio, the Town of Capha upon Mar Major, in Taurica
Chersonesus, and others. But the Commonwealth being weakened by the jealousies
of two potent Families, the Fregosi and the Adorni, the State submitted it self
unto Charles the VI of France, an. 1390. who taking them under his Protection,
sent to them the Marshall of Boulicaut, who received their Oath of fidelity.
But great confusions being risen in France, by reason of the weakness of
Charles the VI. for 29. years, by the invasion of the English, and by the
extremity that Charles the VII. was brought to, that right over Genoa was
neglected. But in the year 1458. the same Genoese being oppressed with their own
divisions, sent Peter Fregosa into France to Charles the VII. who received them
under his protection, and sent them John Duke of Lorrain, eldest Son to the
Duke of Anjou. And after Charles the VII, having again given themselves to Lewis
the XI, some Historians say, that he neglected that Conquest, so that they were
forced to submit themselves to John Galeas, Duke of Milan. Others say, that
Lewis the XI invested that Galeas in the Lordship of Genoa, upon condition of
doing homage for it to the Crown of France. And Charles the VIII. passing to
the Conquest of Naples, invested against Ludovick Sforza in the same by the
Treaty of Vercel, an. 1494, he paying thirty thousand ducats of entry, in
consideration of the auxiliary forces which Ludovick promised unto Charles for
the Conquest of Naples. After Charles, the City of Genoa remained subject to
the Kings of France, as Dukes of Milan, and Lewis the XII, made a triumphant
entry into it, and received of them all the honors and deferences of Subjects
to a Sovereign, an. 1502. and gave them a Governor, John of Cleves his
Kinsman. But an. 1527. while Charles the V, and Francis the I, were in the heat
of their quarrel, the City of Naples being besieged by Monsieur de Lautree,
Andrew Doria of Genoa, subject to the French King, and General of his Fleet,
being ill satisfied of Francis the I, revolted from him, turned to the
Emperor, and was the cause of the loss of Naples. The Emperor to win him to
his service, offered him la carte blanch, that is, what conditions soever he
would have. The first demand of Andrew was the liberty of his City, which he
obtained, and it was freed from all subjection to the Dukes of Milan. But if
the French have any right in the Duchy of Milan, they have the like in Genoa;
for Charles the V. could not cut off that limb from it, fince it did not
belong to him.

Paragraphe IX. Of the Counties of Flanders and Artois.
These two Counties were anciently before the conquest of the Romans, parts of
Gallia Belgica, and so under that Empire, and under the first and second race
of the French Kings, till that famous partage of the children of Lewis the
Meek, an. 843. when the River of Scaldis being set as a limit of that which
belonged to Lothary, the Emperor on the one side; and Charles le Chauve on the
other, that Country remained within the partage of the last, who was King of
France, and contains a great extent of Land beyond the River of Sum, near
the Rivers of Scaldis and Lis, butting upon the Ocean. And because all that
Country was full of Wood, which made it be called Sylva Carbonaria,
Charlemagne, about the year 771. placed there a Governor whom he called the
great Forester of Flanders. So also were his successors called, and were not
very considerable.

The first that erected this Country into a County, was Charles le Chauve, an.
850. or thereabouts. The first Count was Baldwin, surnamed Bras de fer or
Iron-arm, for his great exploits against the Normans, then barbarous and
infidels, who coming from the North, infested those coasts both by Sea and
Land. This Baldwin stole away Judith Daughter to Charles le Chauve, and widow
to an English King, which action at the first moved Charles to a great wrath
and hatred against him. But Judith having appeased her Father, and Baldwin
being very necessary for the defense of those Countries against the Normans, he
recovered the Kings Grace, and it was upon that reconciliation, that he was
made Count of Flanders. So that Baldwin is the head of that house of Flanders
and Artois, which then were but one Province.

1. All that Country remained thus united in one County, till the year 1180.
when Philip August King of France, married Isabella Daughter of Baldwin the IV.
Count of Hainaut and Namur, and of Margaret of Flanders. For Philip of Alsatia,
Count of Flanders, uncle to Margaret, to show his joy for that high alliance,
gave her the Country of Artois, consisting in the Towns of Arras, Bapaume,
Saint Omer, Air, Hesdin, and some others which Philip August enjoyed, and his
Sons after him, till Lewis the VIII, gave the Country of Artois to his third
Son Robert, for whose sake his brother St Lewis erected the same into a County,
of which this Robert did him homage, and that house of Artois was a Royal house
for a long time after. Thus Flanders and Artois had their several Counts and
Lords, as most of the other seventeen Provinces of Netherlands.

2. King John of France having given to his fourth Son Philip, the Duchy of
Burgundy, because he loved him dearly, he procured a great marriage for him,
matching him with Margaret of Flanders, only Daughter of Lewis the III. Count
of Flanders, and of Margaret of Brabant. That Princess was held the richest
match of Europe, for she was Heir not only of the Counties of Flanders,
Burgundy, Artois, Nevers, Retel, and other great Lordships, but was also
apparent Heir (from her great Aunt by her Mothers side) of the Dutchies of
Brabant, Lothier, Limburg, and the Marquesat of Antwerp. That alliance made an.
1356. was the beginning of the greatness of the house of Burgundy. For that
Philip, and his three successors, John, Philip, and Charles, united all these
great States, which afterward fell into the House of Austria by marriage, as
we have represented before.

3. Although the propriety of those two Provinces, Flanders and Artois, came to
the House of Austria by the match of Mary of Burgundy with Maximilian; the
pretenses of the Crown of France upon that propriety, being quitted by the
reddition of the Town of Arras, an. 1435. Yet the sovereignty thereof has
remained with the French Kings, until the Cessions by them made of the same by
several Treaties, of which the first was that of Madrid.

That sovereignty is proved by seven Reasons. The first is, The homages which
the Counts have always paid to the Kings of France for these Counties, and
the investitures which they have taken from them of the same. The second, That
the Kings of France have judged of the Counts of Flanders as Sovereigns, and
given them Laws. The third, that they decided of peace and war in Flanders,
even against the will of the Counts. The fourth, That they have given grace to
Flemmings as their Sovereigns, and punished them of their rebellions. The fifth,
That it was especially promised and agreed, that the Flemmings should resort to
the Parliament of Paris. The sixth, That the Kings of France have protected as
Sovereigns, the Counts of Flanders. The seventh, That they have confiscated
the County for Felony. Briefly, the Kings of France have exer cised all Acts of
Sovereignty in Flanders and Artois, a thing never brought in question or denied
before Charles the V. who being promoted to the Empire, and fallen to great
Wars against Francis the I. was delinquent in that duty, and obtained the
cession of that right by diverse Treaties.

4. It is then a known truth, that Flanders and Artois did belong to the
Sovereignty of France, and that the question is only, whether the cession made
at Madrid was just and valid. Upon which the French say,

1. That Charles the V, being born a subject of France at Gant, in the County
of Flanders, committed the crime of Felony by his Wars against his Sovereign,
whom also he took and kept prisoner, which was often upbraided to him; yea a
sentence of the Parliment of Paris, intervened against him, whereby he is
deprived of his Lordships depending of the Crown of Ftance for crime of Felony;
so that being a Felon against his Sovereign, he had no right either to treat
with him when he kept him prisoner, nor any way oblige him.

2. The cession made by the Treaty of Madrid, was invalid by the Law of
Nations, as done by a man kept in prison.

3. That cession made at Madrid, and in other Treaties, is null by the
fundamental Laws of France which prohibit the alienation of the Sovereign
rights of the Crown, especially without the consent of the States General, who
never ratified all those Treaties. And in effect, the Parliaments by their
sentences, the Peers of the Kingdom by their Votes, and all the learned and
judicious by their discourses have condemned those Treaties. And to this day
the Flemmings and Artesians are accounted Regnicolae, and have no need of
letters of Naturalization.

CHAP. IV. Wars, Agreements, Treaties, between the houses of France and Austria
about their pretenses, from the Treaty of Arras to that of Vervins.
WE have seen how by the History, and by Reason, the two Houses of France and
Austria will ground their several pretenses. As the differences between private
persons beget suits in Law, which end in the sentence of a Court; so the
jealousies between these two great houses have begot Wars, which have ended in
Treaties: Yet so that the Wars have begun afresh after. These Wars have been
many, especially since the promotion of Charles the V to the Empire, an. 1519.
For the Kings of France, who without contradiction had the precedence before
all Christian Monarchs were grieved to see a Count of Flanders, and an Heir of
the house of Austria, a small Province of Germany advance himself so far as to
offer to step before them, and (as many think) to affect the Empire of all
Europe.

To understand all these Wars, Truces, and Treaties; the History must begin at
the Treaty of Arras, an. 1435. For although these six houses, Austria,
Burgundy, Hungary, Arragon, Castilia, and Portugal, the limbs of that great
Colossus of the now house of Austria, were then several houses; yet that
Treaty will serve to see how the house of Burgundy is fallen into the house of
Austria, and how their greatness began. Here then let us say in brief, what
Wars and Treaties have been between these two houses since the Treaty of Arras,
an. 1435. to that of Vervins, 1598. We will divide this into many Articles,
according to the most remarquable dates, touching only the most principal
points, leaving the rest to the general History. 1. From the Treaty of Arras,
Ann. 1435. to the marriage of Maximilian of Austria, with Mary of Burgundy,
1477. 2. Thence to the death of the Emperor Maximilian, 1519. 3. Thence to the
Treaty of Madrid, 1525. 4. Thence to the Treaty of Cambray, 1529. 5. Thence to
the Treaty of Crespy, or Saint John des Vignes, an. 1544. 6. Thence to the
Treaty of Chasteau in Cambresis. 7. Thence to the death of the Duke of Alencon,
and the beginning of the League, 1584. 8. Thence to the Treaty of Vervins, an.
1598.

Paragraphe I. From the Treaty of Arras an. 1435. to the marriage of Maximilian
and Mary of Burgundy.
In all that time, which was not yet the time of the greatness of Austria, the
French Kings had nothing to do with that Family, which in that period of years,
enjoyed the Empire in the persons of Albert, and Friderick the III. They had
also little to do with the Kings of Castilia and Arragon, which were then two
several States. But much they had to do with the Dukes of Burgundy, founders
of that greatness of Austria. Of which this is the summary.

1. Philip le Bon after he had brought the State of France into great
distress, and given it for a prey to the English, to avenge the death of his
Father John, slain at Montereau Fautyonne, an. 1419; Finally being ill
satisfied with the English, was forced to agree with Charles the VII, who had
killed his Father, which he did by the Treaty of Arras, an. 1435. whereby
Charles gave to Philip what we said before, Peronne, Montdidier, and Roye, the
County of Artois, the enjoying of the County of Bullen for his life, also all
the Towns of the River of Sum, redeemable with four hundred thousand Crowns,
and promised to join to the Duchy of Burgundy, the Counties of Mascon, Chalons,
Langres, Bar sur Siene, and Auxerre for ever, reserving the resort of these
jurisdictions to the Parliament of Paris. This Treaty raised very much the
house of Burgundy. After which, Philip was a loyal friend and servant unto
Charles, and helped him to expel the English out of France. Neither did he
meddle with the first falling out of Charles with his Son Lewis the Dolphin
(who was since Lewis the XI.) which division was called, La Ligue de la
Praguerie. And all the reign of Charles nothing confiderable happened between
these two houses but that toward the end of Charles, Lewis the Dolphin, having
withdrawn himself discontented from the Court, and lived a while in Daulphine,
When the King his Father would have apprehended him by the Count of Dampmartin,
he fled into Flanders, where he was received with great honor by Duke Philip,
who assigned him the Town of Guenep in Brabant, to keep his Court, where he
lived six or seven years, till the death of his Father, an. 1461.

2. Now comes the reign of Lewis the XI, who had so much to do with the house
of Burgundy, but nothing with that of Austria, and little with that of Arragon
and Castilia. Historians observe, that Philip Duke of Burgundy, and his Son
Charles Count of Charrolois accompanied Lewis into France, and were present at
his coronation. And that Lewis at the first was very great with the Count of
Charrolois; but that soon after that friendship was separated, by reason of the
great antipathy of their humors, and because while Lewis was retired into
Flanders, they had been too much acquainted with one another conditions, which
brought them to a mutual contempt. Also, because Charles had a suspicion that
Lewis had plotted against his life, and because Lewis would have brought the
Gabell (or impost of salt) into Burgundy, which the Duke did oppose. Then the
sudden redeeming of the Towns of the River of Sum, for which Lewis paid the
four hundred thousand Crowns, incensed the Count of Charolois very much. These
were the causes of the great hatred between these two houses, which the house
of Austria inherited together with the Estate. Hardly indeed could these two
Princes agree; for Lewis the XI was malicious, disobliging, and dissembled; and
Charles Count of Charolois was peevish and arrogant, and followed no Law but
his own will. That hatred brought forth the War of the public good, as they
called it, in which Charles had the better. That War ended in the Treaty of
Conflans, whereby it was covenanted that the King should restore to Charles all
the Towns of the River of Sum, redeemed not long before, to enjoy them all
his life, and that he should have the County of Guines for himself and his
Heirs for ever.

3. John King of Arragon; was assisted by Lewis the XI, and the said John sold
or pawned unto him the County of Roussillon for three hundred thousand Crowns.
This is the ground of the claim of the French to that County.

4. Henry the IV, King of Castilia, and John King of Arragon being in War,
because Henry maintained the people of Arragon against their King, and about
some Towns, Lewis the XI was chosen Umpire, and went to Bayonne, where he saw
the Castilian on this side of the River of Vodazo, and upon the Lands of
France. That enterview made them despise one another, for Henry was an ill
favored and ill behaved man, of little wit, and was altogether governed by the
Count of Lodesme. Lewis used a short and coorse habit, and wore a little
leaden, Our Lady, at his hat. The vanity of the Count of Lodesme seemed
ridiculous to the French. He crossed the River in a boat, with a sail of golden
cloth, and wore pomps garnisht with precious stones. Ever since that enter
view, the two Nations have despised one another.

5. After the peace of Conflans, the divisions were renewed between Lewis and
the Count of Charolois, because Lewis cozened his brother Charles, gave him
Normandy, and presently took it from him, banished him into Guienne, far from
the other Princes, with whom he was in League, and gave him a little Country
under the specious Title of Duke of Guienne. This angered the Count of
Charrolois, and increased his jealousies. Philip Duke of Burgundy dies an.
1467. Charles succeeds him.

6. This new Duke of Burgundy is much considered in France, by reason of his
great Lands, and turbulent spirit. All his time he was in Wars with the King,
and brought the English into France. The King also did raise him Enemies, which
his own rashness did multiply. He was defeated by the Switzers at Granson and
Morat, and killed before Nancy, an. 1477.

7. After his death, Lewis took the Duchy of Burgundy, and Provinces annexed to
it, given by Charles the VII, to Philip le Bon, as a masculin apanage, with the
Towns upon the River of Sum, which Charles was to hold all his life, not
leave it to his heirs. He seized also upon the Town of Arras, upon which he
pretended a right. He did his utmost to catch Mary the inheritrix of Charles,
and desired the people of Gant to deliver her into his hand, or make her marry
Charles the Dolphin, but they protected her, and soon after Maximilian of
Austria married her.

8. In Spain, after the enterview of the two King, Lewis of France, and Henry
of Castilia, and the sale or pawning of the County of Roussillon, King John of
Arragon, seeing that Lewis had arbitrated in favor of the Castilian, and had
sent John Duke of Calabria for the conquest of Arragon, took his time when the
leagues in France were strongest against the King, to make Perpignan revolt
against the French. The Garrison retired into the Citadel, and made it good
till the Town was besieged by Lewis, and constrained to return to his obedience.

Paragraphe II. From the marriage of Maximilian with Mary, unto his death.
This period of forty years comprehends four reigns of the French Kings, the
end of Lewis the XI, Charles the VIII, Lewis the XII. and the beginning of
Francis the I: in which space the greatness of the House of Austria was
founded by her union with that of Burgundy, and then with Castilia and Arragon.

Under Lewis the XI.
Since the death of Duke Charles, three remarkable things happened under Lewis
the XI. Mary inheritrix of Burgundy, whom her Father had promised to many
Princes, in the end was married to Maximilian of Austria, an. 1478. Lewis would
have her for Charles the Delphin, but he was but six years old, and she above
fifteen years elder then he. That preferring of Maximilian before Charles, was
the cause of many evils to France.

1. The loss of all that Mary possessed, which might have been united with France.

2. The increase of the house of Austria, which began then to be jealous of
France, which she was very far from before that alliance.

3. Great Wars and endless envy, by the neighborhood of these two great
Houses. That marriage lasted but four years, Mary dying of a fall from her
Horse as she was hunting; She left two children, Philip Archduke of Austria,
Father to Charles the V. and Margaret.

2. By the jealousy risen between France and Austria by that marriage, and
incensed by the revolt of the Prince of Orange, a great Lord of Franch County,
they broke into open War, and the battle of Guinegast was fought, of which the
event was so uncertain, that both parties ascribed to themselves the victory.

3. Mary of Burgundy being dead, the Flemmings, especially the Gantois always
mutinous, would expel Maximilian, and dispose of Mary's Children. They married
Margaret to Charles the Dolphin, and appointed for her portion the County of
Artois, Franch County, and other Lands. Margaret was then but two years old,
and Charles twelve. But Charles being married since with Anne Duchess of
Britain, Margaret was sent back to her Father Maximilian, which was a new cause
of jealousy between these two families. This Margaret being separated from
Charles, was married to John Son of Ferdinand of Arragon and Isabella of
Castilia whom she never saw: Then she was for the third time married with
Philibert the II, Duke of Savoy: They say of her, that she was three times
married, and dyed a Virgin.

Under Charles the VIII.
1. Charles the VIII, had civil Wars against Lewis Duke of Orleans, the Duke of
Britain, and others which ended by the battle of St. Aubin; after which Charles
married Anne the inheritrix of Britain: whereby he offered two affronts unto
Maximilian; the one, that he sent him back his Daughter Margaret, withwhom he
had bin married seven or eight years; the other, that he married her with whom
Maximilian was married by Proxy, for in Britain all the Proclamations were
then made in the name of the Duchess, and of the Archduke of Austria. Upon
which Maximilian made War against Charles, and took the Towns of Arras, St
Omer, and other places which the French held as yet in Artois. But a Peace was
made an. 1493. by which Charles was within four years to restore the Franch
County, and some Towns which he held in Artois, unto Philip the Heir of
Netherlands, Son to Maximilian.

An. 1494. Charles restored to Ferdinand King of Arragon, Perpignan and the
County of Roussillon, though he received not the three hundred thousand Crowns
which it was pawnned for. The reason why Charles did so, we have declared
before.

3. The same year was the expedition of Charles the VIII, into Naples, against
the house of Arragon. To that which we have said of that quarrel, this must be
added. Alphonsus who was adopted by Queen Jane the II. and in the end expelled
the house of Anjou out of Italy, left Naples to Ferdinand his bastard, saying,
that he could lawfully do it, because it was his own conquest. The house of
that bastard enjoyed it after him, and had four Princes, Ferdinand the Bastard,
Alphonsus his Son, Ferdinand his Grandchild, and after him Friderick, uncle to
this last Ferdinand, and brother of Alphonsus.

Although that House of Bastards enjoyed Naples, the Kings of Arragon would say
that it was by their toleration, because Alphonsus King of Arragon, who had been
adopted by Jane the II. had conquered Naples with the Arms, the Blood, and the
money of Arragon, and that he ought not to have left it to any but hisbrother
John, King after him of Arragon. Wherefore Chapter VIII. fearing lest Ferdinand
King of Arragon Son to John, should disturb his conquest of Naples, either to
assist that Bastard House, or to make it his own conquest, restored unto him
the County of Roussillon, gratis, upon Ferdinands promise, not to disturb him,
yea and to help him; but Ferdinand broke his word with him. What was the right
of Charles, was showed before.

Charles with great expedition past through Piemont, Milan, Pisa, Florence,
Rome, got the Kingdom of Naples without difficulty, and governed it without
prudence, and instantly lost it by the ill behavior of his Ministers, which
got him the hatred of the Neapolitans. A league was made by the Pope, the
Venetians, the King of Naples, and the Duke of Milan, not only to stay his
conquests, but to stop his return, and destroy him in Italy. The General of
the Army of the league, was Francesco Gonzaga, Marquess of Mantua, who gave
battle to the King at Fornova, which the King won with great glory. Being
returned into France, he prepared to return into Italy, but dyed in that
preparation.

Whilst Charles was about the conquest of Naples, Lewis Duke of Orleans, who
soon after was King of France, stayed in his County of Ast, and renewed his
claim to the Duchy of Milan, possessed by the usurper Ludovick Sforza the
murderer of his two nephews. As long as Ludovick kept good intelligence with
the King, Lewis Duke of Orleans, durst not attempt any thing against him. But
after that Ludovick had made himself one of the league against the King; Lewis
possessed himself of Novara, a Town of the Duchy, which presently was besieged
by Ludovick and recovered, excepting the Castle.

Under Lewis the XII.
In sixteen years that Lewis reigned, he had Wars with Philip of Austria,
Ferdinand King of Arragon, Ludovick Duke of Milan, and the Kings of Naples, of
the Bastard branch of Arragon.

1. An. 1499. Philip Archduke of Austria, did homage at Arras in the hands of
Guy de Rochford, Chancellor of France, for the Counties of Flanders, Artois and
Charolois, a solemn action done with great pomp, and many formalities.

2. In the years 1499. and 1500. Lewis conquereth the Duchy of Milan from
Ludovick, loses it by the return of Ludovick out of Germany, regaines it by
taking and imprisoning Ludovick, and by the chase which he gave to his Sons
Maximilian and Francis.

3. From thence he goes to Naples, conquers it from Friderick, the last King
of the Bastard branch of Arragon, who puts himself into the Kings hands. The
King recompenceth him with the Duchy of Anjou, a pension of thirty thousand
Crowns, and the first place in the Council. Ferdinand King of Arragon, seeing
that bastard branch failed, renews his pretenses to. Naples, Lewis compounds
with him, and they share the Kingdom. The King of Arragon has for his part
Calabria, and Puglia, the rest remains to the French. But soon after, upon
some differences which arose between the French and the Spaniards, for the
confines of the Country of Abruzzo, and some Salt Pits, the grand Capitan
Gonsalvo de Cordova, takes arms and expells the French, an. 1503.

4. The Emperor Maximilian, after the year 1593. seeing the house of Sforzas
degraded from Milan, but two Sons remaining, threatens Lewis of the Imperial
Ban. Lewis appeaseth him, and obtaines the investiture of the year 1505. and
promises his daughter Claud to Charles Duke of Luxemburg, who since was
Emperor. But soon after Lewis, who loved dearly Francis d'Angoulesme his
Cousin, and first Prince of his blood, made him marry Claud, by the counsel of
the great men of his Kingdom, notwithstanding the promise made to Maximilian.
This angered very much Philip Father to Charles, who would have taken a revenge
of that wrong, had he not been prevented with death, an. 1506. He had married
Jane the great inheritrix of Spain, by whom he had many children.

5. Yet Philip before he dyed, reconciled himself with Lewis, yea, and
recommended to him the tuition of his Son Charles, which Lewis accepted, and
gave him Antony de Ceures Lord of Crovy, for his Governor, a wise Knight, who
formed that young spirit to great businesses in which Charles excelled
afterward.

6. An. 1507. the City of Genoa which had been conquered with the Duchy of
Milan, and where Lewis had made a glorious entry, revolted from him. Lewis
passes into Italy, and brings her to subjection. It was at that time that
Ferdinand of Arragon returning from his new conquest of Naples, saw Lewis the
XII, at Savone, a Town of the Territory of Genoa. In that enterview, Ferdinand
who was then King of two little Kingdoms only, both depending from the Sea of
Rome, refused always the honor and the precedence which Lewis would give him,
as it is usual to do to strangers when one is at home, even to inferiors. He
would salute Lewis at his rising, and attended him going to Mass. Lewis,
whenever he gave to Ferdinand the precedence, made him understand that he did
it out of civility, not out of duty. Go before (said he to him) for if I were
at your house, and in your Country, I would in the like case do what you would
desire of me; but because you are in my Country, you shall do so, for it is my
will, and I beseech you so to do. That might be done then without prejudice,
when the House of Arragon was far under the splendour of that of France, and
was not so arrogant as now. How such another encounter should be ordered in
these days in point of civility, it is more then I can determine.

An. 1508. the league of Cambray was made, of Pope Jule the II. the Emperor
Maximilian, Lewis King of France, and Ferdinand King of Arragon, and Naples, to
beat down the arrogance of the Venetians, who during the confusions of Italy,
had incroacht upon all their Estates, the patrimony of the Church, the Empire,
Milan, and Naples. Whence followed the battle of Aignadel, which Lewis won of
the Venetians, which made him so glorious, that the Popes and the Princes of
Italy grew jealous of him. Ferdinand leaves the alliance of Lewis, who had
restored unto him all the Towns which the Venetians held in the Kingdom of
Naples, and made war againsT him, Lewis wins the battle of Ravenna against the
Pope and the Spaniards, an. 1512.

8. Pope Jule the II, being declared enemy to Lewis, and all his adherents,
among whom was John d'Albret, King of Navarra, Ferdinand invaded Navarra, an.
1512. The Switzers, set on by the Pope, expel the French from the Duchy of
Milan, and set up Maximilian Sforza, Son to Ludovic. The English and Maximilian
being confederate, come into France and besiege Terovenne; Lewis comes to
help, and gives the battle which was called of the Spurs, because though the
French at the first resisted manfully, yet they were put to the worst, and
forced to make more use of their Spurs then Swords.

Finally, although Lewis had won the battle of Ravenna, an. 1512. he saw
himself expelled out of all Italy, and the House of the Sforzas, restored at
Milan before he dyed, which was an. 1515.

Under Francis the I.
In the beginning of his reign, he found the House of Austria in the hands of
Charles, then of the age of fifteen years, who possessed all the Low Countries by
his Father Philip of Austria, and the Kingdom of Castilia from his Mother Jane
of Arragon. Maximilian was yet living, enjoying the Arch-dutchy of Austria. His
other Grandfather, Ferdinand was King of Arragon and Naples, both very old and
broken. Charles was their Heir apparent.

1. Francis the I. coming to the Crown, received the homage of the Count of
Nassau, in the name of Charles, Count of Flanders, and Artois, to whom he
promised Renee, second daughter to Lewis the XII. But that marriage was not
fulfilled. He confirmed also that peace with Ferdinand, which Lewis the XII.
had made a little before he died.

2. His next work, was the Conquest of the Duchy of Milan. He passes into
Italy, and wins the battle of Marignan in Piemont against the Switzers, who
had undertaken to maintain Maximilian Sforza in his new possession of Milan,
which they had got for him. He gets Milan. Maximilian Sforza yields himself to
him for a Pension of threescore thousand Crowns, and retires himself into
France. This was the third time that the French had got Milan of the Sforzas.

3. Francis and Charles being both young, and ambitious, it could not be
expected that they should long live in peace, because Charles being born a
subject to France, kept Navarra, which the house of Albret had lost for
adhering to France; Then Ferdinand had expelled the French out of Naples,
wrongfully say they. This Ferdinand died an. 1516. and Charles inherited all
these great States, exalted to the height of greatness, wanting nothing but
the Empire and Austria, which his Grandfather Maximilian left him by his death
three years after. In the birth of these two eminent powers, which have cost so
much, blood and tears to the Christian world, before they had conceived that
great hatred which was between them after; the Deputies of both sides met at
Noyon, and this was called the Treaty of Noyon, an. 1516, where it was
concluded, that Francis should yield all his rights in the Kingdom of Naples
for a yearly pension of a hundred thousand Crowns. 2. That Charles then called
the Archiduke, should marry Lovise, the eldest daughter of Francis, instead of
Renee, sister to the Queen Claude. 3. That the Archduke should restore the
Kingdom of Navarra to Henry, Son to John d' Albret, or in defect of it that he
should otherwise content him within six months. The King and the Archduke swore
that Treaty, and give the one to the other, the order of Knighthood. The King
that of St. Michael, the Archduke that of the Golden Fleece, made an alliance
for ever; and to confirm it, promised to have an interview at Cambray. But
Ferdinand being dead soon after, Charles made have to pass into Spain to take
possession of his Estates, and neglected the Articles of Noyon, especially the
restitution of Navarra.

4. Yet for three years after, nothing was stirred on either side, because
Martin Luther having alarmed all Europe with his Doctrine, the Pope Leo the X
procured a general truce for five years among all Princes. But Maximilian the
Emperonr being dead, an. 1519. and Charles being increased with the inheritance
of Austria, and the Title of Emperor; Francis the I. conceived a great
indignation, that a vassal of his should have been preferred before him to the
Empire, which he had been a suitour for with great earnestness; which
jealousy would never suffer these two Princes to agree.

5. Each of them had a great Minister of State by their persons, Francis had
Artus Gouffier, Sieur de Boissi, Great Master of France. Charles had been bred
by Guillaume de Crovy Sieur de Ceures, whom Lewis the XII. had recommended to
him. These two foreseeing the misfortune which the ambition of these two
Princes was drawing upon Christendom, resolved to meet to make a peace, and
alliance for ever. Montpelier was the place chosen for that meeting. But as
soon as Boissi was come, and began to treat with Ceures, he fell into a fever
and died, leaving that great work imperfect, which no body since was able to
finish.

Paragraphe III. From the death of Maximilian, an 1519. to the Treaty of Madrid
an. 1525.
By the death of the Emperor Maximilian, Charles was made possessour of
Austria, and the Empire, being possessed before of the Inheritances of Burgundy,
Arragon, and Castilia. A greatness which swelled his mind, and made him loose
his respect to Francis. He complained that Francis had taken Claude from him,
the eldest daughter of Lewis the XII, which was promised to him. Francis
redemanded Navarra, Naples, and the homages for the Counties of Flanders and
Artois, which Charles took to be too low for the quality of an Emperor.
Charles also complained that the Duchy of Burgundy, the Patrimony of his
Grandmother Mary was kept from him, and the Duchy of Milan belonging to the
Sforzas, and to the Empire.

The great fire of War which lasted forty years between these two houses, brake
out upon a very slender occasion. Robert de la March Duke of Bovillon, adjudgd
by the Peers of his Duchy, which pretend themselves to be Sovereigns, the Town
of Hierges in Ardennes to the Prince of Chimay, of the house of Crovi, against
the Lord d' Esmeries; to whom the Emperor gave a writ of relief, although
Robert pretended the judgment of his Peers to be Sovereign. Robert incensed
against the Emperonr, made his address to Francis the I, and offered him his
service. The King received him courteously, yet forbad his subjects to assist
him, not willing to break with the Emperor. But Robert, proud to have the
protection of France, denounces War to the Emperor, who was then at Worms
to pacify the troubles rising in Germany about Luther, and attempts to
surprise some places in Luxemburg. But the Emperor presently seizes upon the
Estate of that little Prince, and constrains him to ask him pardon; reproaching
Francis in an odious manner for receiving his rebellious subject. About the
same time, Francis upon the inexecution of the Treaty of Noyon ( Charles
refusing to make restitution of Navarra to Henry d' Albret) took the quarrel
of that dispossessed Prince, and sent Andrew de Foix, Lord de Esparre, brother
to Monsieur de Lautre into Navarra, where the French did some exploit at the
first, but were soon repelled by the Spaniards. Charles takes that enterprise
for an infraction of the peace between the two houses, though it was but a
succor given to a confederate of France, to prosecute his rights. He makes
great preparatives of war, makes Leo the X, break with France, and join with him
promising that after the Conquest of Milan, he would give to the Church the
Towns of Parma and Placentia, members of that Duchy, to which the Popes had
some old pretense.

Such was the origin of the first War between Francis and Charles, an. 1521.
The first three or four years there were great exploits in Champagne, in
Navarra, in Provence, and in the Duchy of Milan. In Tierasche the Emperor
took Mouzon, and besieged Mezieres, which Anne de Mommorency, who since was
Constable of France, and Chevalier Bayard defended bravely. And Francis took
Bapaume and Landrecy from the Emperor, and gave him the Chase.

In Navarra the French had advanced but little in the years 1519. and 1520. But
in the year 1521. the Admiral of Bonnivet besieged Fontarabie and took it, and
made Monsteur du Lude, Governor of the same, who being besieged a whole year
by the Spaniards, defended it with great valor, till la Palisse since Marshall
of France made them forsake the Siege. But Frauget an old Captain being made
Governor instead of Lude, he delivered it basely to the Spaniards, for which
he was degraded of Nobility. With this the French lost all Navarra, and never
came into it since.

For Milan, Francis having given the Government of it to the Constable Charles
de Bourbon, he removed him and gave it to Lautree, of the house of Foix, a
great Captain in the field, but an ill Politician in a State. He so misused
the people of Milan, both by himself and by his brother the Marshall de Lescun,
and together was so ill assisted with money from the Court, that the Emperor
had an easy entry into the Country. Milan is taken, and plundered by the
league of the Pope and the Emperor; and the French expelled out of the Duchy.
At which they say, that the Pope died for joy, an. 1621. Soon after the battle
of la Bicoque was fought, which the French lost by the stubbornness of the
Switzers. Lautree being returned into France, the Admiral de Bonnivet was sent
to Milan, where he did no better, and was forced to forsake all. In that
retreat Chevalier Bayard was killed, an. 1523. These prosperities of the
Emperor were much helped, by the revolt of the Constable of Bourbon, 1522, who
was incensed by the little account that Francis made of him, the incroaching of
the Duke of Alanson, and the Marshall of Bonivet upon his Office of Constable,
by the Kings favor; the hatred of Lovise the Kings mother, and the Chancellor
du Prat against him; and the small justice which he expected in a suit which
concerned almost his whole Estate. Being turned to the Emperors party, he
helped him to conquer Milan, and to give the chase to the Admiral of Bonivet,
past into Provence with the Imperial Army, besieged Marseille, where he is
repulsed by Renso de Cera a Roman Baron, and Philip de Chabot that kept it for
the King. He repasseth the Alps, and the King after him, who coming to Milan,
recovereth presently the whole Duchy, Pavia only accepted.

While Francis is besieging Pavia defended by Antonio de Leva, Charles de
Bourbon brings Troops out of Germany to relieve it. The battle of Pavia is
fought, where the victory being already on the Kings side, he would follow in
person the Enemy which was retiring, and had no sooner overtaken them, but he
was taken by them, an. 1524. upon Saint Mathias day. Francis having been kept a
while in the Castle of Pissigi^un, is carried into Spain, and there kept
Prisoner. His Kingdom labors for his deliverance and for peace. This brought
forth the Treaty of Madrid, an. 1525, where Gatinara Chancellor to the
Emperor, and John de Selva first President of Paris, who were the two learned
among the Deputies, disputed at several times the rights of their Masters.
Selva claimed Naples, Navarra, and the Soverainties of Flanders and Artois.
Gatinara claimed the Duchy of Burgundy, and the Duchy of Milan which the
Emperor then possessed. In the end, the Treaty of Madrid was made, where among
other things it was concluded Febr. 14. 1525,

1. That within the 20. day of the month of June next, the King will put the
Durchy of Burgundy into the Emperors hands, with all the appurtenances and
dependances thereof, and all that he holds of the Franch County.

2, That he shall renounce the Sovereignty of that Duchy and County, and of
the Counties of Flanders and Artois.

3. That he shall renounce all his claim to the Kingdom of Naples, the Duchy
of Milan, Genoa, Ast, Doway, L'Isle, Tournay, and Hesdin.

4. That the King with all his power shall procure that Henry d' Albret, forsake
his claim to Navarra in the Emperors behalf; or if Henry refuse it, that the
King shall not assist him with his forces.

5. That the Emperor shall likewise disclaim all his right to the Counties of
Ponthieu, Bullen, and Guines, and to the Towns of Montdidier, Roye, Peronne,
and other Towns and Lordships of Picardy.

Paragraphe. IV. From the Treaty of Madrid, to that of Cambray.
That period contains but four or five years, in which many considerable
things did happen.

1. The King is delivered out of prison, giving his two Sons for Ostages, the
Dolphin Francis, and Henry Duke of Orleans, goes to Bayonne and Bordeaux,
stays at Angoulesme and Cognae, accompanied with Charles de Lanoy, Viceroy of
Naples, to be present at the execution of the Treaty. But that Viceroy saw in
short time three actions repugnant unto it.

1. The first that the King having caused the Articles to be read in presence
of the States of his Kingdom, they told him that they were unjust, contrary to
the fundamental Laws of the State; and that he was not obliged to observe
them, although the King did protest of his willingness to see them observed.

Two things made these Articles unjust; 1. The right of Nations, whereby all
Treaties made by one kept in prison, are accounted void as extorted by
violence. 2. The fundamental Laws of the State, by which the King is always
a Minor, as for the alienation of the royal patrimony.

The second opposition to the Treaty in the presence of the Viceroy of Naples,
was that the Deputies of the Duchy of Burgundy protested before the King, that
he could not alienate them without their consent, and refused to submit
themselves to the Emperor.

The third, That he saw a league made at Cognac, for the expelling of the
Emperor out of Italy.

The Emperor having made himself formidable to all Princes, to the Italians
especially, and going about to divest Francesco Sforza from Milan, which he had
conferred upon him after the battle of Pavia, the Pope Clement the VII, King
Francis, the Venetians, the Switzers, the Florentines, make a league which was
called the Sacred league, to deliver Italy from oppression, without naming the
Emperor, who also in a scorn was invited to make one in it, upon condition
that he should restore the two Sons of France, suffer the Duke Sforza to live
in peace, and give over the siege of the Castle of Milan. By that league the
War was to be maintained with common charges. And because the Italian Princes
might be afraid of the power of the French in Italy, no less then of that of
the Emperor; King Francis was to renounce his right to the Duchy of Milan in
favor of Sforza, for a pension which should be arbitrated by the Pope and the
Venetians, not under fifty thousand Ducats. That the County of Ast should
remain to the King, with the Sovereignty of Genoa, under the Government of
Antonio d' Adornas, with the title of Duke, if he would subscribe to that
league. The Kingdom of Naples was to be put into the Popes hands, he paying for
it sixty thousand Ducats of yearly pension. That league was published and
proclaimed at Cognac, in presence of Lanoy, to whom the King made excuses for
the inexecution of the Treaty of Madrid, showing how he was disabled and
declared Minor by the State.

3. Lanoy being returned into Spain, presently the War of the league begins in
Italy, at Milan, at Rome, and at Naples. At Milan, the Duke of Bourbon General
of the imperial Army, besieged Francis Sforza, whom the league had taken in her
protection. Sforza is constrained to surrender the Castle and retire into the
Army of the league, the General whereof was Francesco Maria, Duke of Urbin.
The Duke of Bourbon having taken Milan, goes straight to Rome, takes it, and
is killed in the assault. The Cardinals are imprisoned and ransomed.

At the same time Lautree was at Naples with an Army, and laid a strait siege
to it by Land. And Andrew Doria with the Galleys of France besieged it by Sea.
Yea, he won a battle by Sea, in which Moncado Viceroy of Naples was slain. But
being ill satisfied of King Francis, who denied him the ransom of Prisoners,
and used him with contempt, he turned to the Emperor, and relieved Naples with
victuals by Sea. And Lautree presently after happening to die, the French lost
all in Italy, and the Emperor settled himself in it with more power. He
restored the Duchy of Milan to Sforza, and made him marry his niece Christina,
daughter to the King of Denmark. Yet he cut off from that Duchy the
Commonwealth of Genoa, which was made Sovereign at the request of Andrew Doria.
He confirmed also Parma and Placentia to the Popes.

4. While this War was in Italy, King Francis made a league with Henry the
VIII. of England, and both declared War against the Emperor, who having said
to the Herald of France, that his Master was not in a condition to declare
War against him, till he had disingaged his faith and fulfilled his promises,
which if he repented of, that he should return into prison to make a new Treaty.

King Francis exasperated with these words, declared in presence of all the
Court, that he would satisfy the Emperor by a Duel, and sent him a challenge,
saying, that the Emperor lied, if he said that he had broken his word. The
Emperor, though he made a show to answer the challenge, kept himself still to
his answer, that King Francis was not in a condition to require satisfaction of
him, till he had discharged his promise. So all these threatenings vanished into
smoke.

5. While these Princes were thus contending, two great Princesses, Lovise the
Kings Mother, and Margaret the Emperors Aunt, were laboring for an
accommodation. By their means the Treaty of Cambray was made, which therefore
was called the Treaty of Ladies, it was in the year 1529. By that Treaty a
marriage was concluded between King Francis and Eleanor the Emperors sister,
widow to the King of Portugal; and it was agreed that King Francis should pay
two millions of Gold for the ransom of his Sons. And that he should disclaim
all his rights to the Counties of Flanders and Artois, and to the Duchy of
Milan, and (as some add) to whole Italy, which is like enough, since the
Treaty of Cambray changed nothing in that of Madrid, but that there was no
mention of the Duchy of Burgundy.

Paragraphe V. From the Treaty of Cambray, an. 1529. to that of Crespy, an.
1544.
By the Treaty of Cambray, War ceased between these two Princes, but not the
jealousies and hatred: Yet they kept peace till the year 1533. when Merville an
Italian Gentleman, the Kings servant, was condemned and executed at Milan,
because some of his servants had killed a man. But the secret and true reason
was, that the Emperor had complained to Duke Sforza, that this Merville was at
Milan as a Spy for the French, which was true; yea he was a secret Ambassador,
and Sforza had desired that he should not openly take the title of Ambassador,
for fear of offending the Emperor. That murder of Merville broke the peace;
for the King taking Arms to chastise Sforza, the Emperor also took arms to
defend him. It was at that time that King Francis instituted a new form of
Militia, which was called Legionary.

The Emperor also was incensed by the alliance which the King had made with
the German Princes Protestant (though perhaps that name was not yet in fashion)
who being persecuted by the Emperor for their Religion had their refuge to the
French King, as the ancient confederate of the Princes of Germany, for the
defense of the Rights and Liberties of the Empire. These Princes were the Dukes
of Saxony, the Palatine, the Duke of Bavier, the Duke of Wertenberg, the
Lantgrave of Hesse. Yea, he lent a hundred thousand Crowns to the Duke of
Virtenberg, who engaged to him the County of Montbeliard. But that engagement
was simulate, and Francis did very willingly assist the Enemies of Charles.
These were the motives and occasions of this War. Of which, these were the
chief passages.

1. Francis to pass to Milan, demands of Charles Duke of Savoy, passage
through his Country. The Duke denies it by the instigation of Beatrix of
Portugal his wife, sister in law to the Emperor, and very partial for him. That
denial cost the Duke the loss of all his Lands, both of Savoy and Fiemont,
which the King took, and kept them till the Treaty of Chasteau in Cambresis,
an. 1559. The pretense of that invasion was the right which Francis pretended
in these States from his Mother Lovise of Ravoy. A little before that invasion,
the Emperor seeing that thick cloud threatening Milan, himself returning from
Tunis with a weary and broken Army, sends to the K. propositions of peace, and
many fair words. Yet he stood so stiffely upon the Treaties before, very
advantageous for him, that the King would not hearken to him, perceiving that
ne would only protract the time till he had recrewted his Army. Besides Francis
Sforza being dead without children, at the same time the Emperor had seized
upon the Duchy of Milan. And it was reported, that he intended to bestow it
upon a Son of Portugal, his wives brother. For these reasons these two
Princes fall to action. The King conquereth Savoy and Piemont, and the Emperor
fortifies himself at Milan.

2. The Emperor passes into Italy, visits the Pope, Paul III, an. 1536, and
in prefence of the Conclave, inveighs against Francis, relating all that past
between them ever since they came to their States, reproaching him especially
for joining with the Princes of contrary Religion in Germany: And offers
three conditions to the King to choose which he would. The first was to give
the Duchy of Milan to the Kings third Son, the Duke of Angoulesme, not willing
to give it either to the Dolphin, or to the Duke of Orleans, for fear (said he)
of giving jealousy to the Italian Princes, if persons so near the Crown grew
so powerful in Italy, especially the Duke of Orleans, who had lately married
Catherine de Medicis, which had some pretenses upon Florence and Urbin. If the
King accepted that condition, he desired to know what assistance he would give
him against the Turk and the Heretics. The Emperors second offer was, to
fight a Duel with the King, either upon the Land or in a Boat. That he left to
the King the choice of the Arms; That the vanquished should give all his
forces to secure the sitting of a Council, and to make War against the
Heretics and Infidells. That the King should deposite the Duchy of Burgundy,
and himself that of Milan to be the price of the Victory. The third offer was,
that if the King refused these two conditions, he declared mortal War unto
him, till one of the two was made the poorest gentleman of his Kingdom. The
King purged himself to the Pope by letters of all the Emperors accusations.

The War grows hot in Piemont, an. 1536. Many exploits are done, Fossan is
besieged by Antonio de Leva for the Emperor, and taken. The Marquis of Saluees
leaves the Kings service and turns to the Emperor, who enters into Provence,
and besieges Marseille, but in vain, being defended by the Kings presence, and
by the generosity of Ann de Montmorency, who since was Constable of France. The
Emperor is beaten out of Provence. At the same time the Count of Nassan makes
some exploits in Picardy for the Emperor, takes Guise, besieges Peronne, but
is repulsed.

4. Jean Capell the Kings Attorney General, moves the Parliament that a process
be made against Charles as Felon, and Traitor against his Sovereign, of whom he
held the Counties of Flanders, Artois, and Charolois, in fee. The Court of
Peers hereupon assembled decree, that Charles should be cited with sound of
Trumpet, upon the frontier of his States, to appear before them. And he not
appearing, he was condemned, and his Dominions depending from the Crown were
confiscated. Presently after, the King took many places in Artois.

An. 1538. the Pope Paul the III. comes to Nice, where both the Emperor and
the King met also; the Pope communing separately with each of them, for he
could not obtain of them that they should see one another. Yet they concluded
a truce for ten years. That meeting being ended, the King returns into France,
the Emperor into Spain, but sees the King by the way at Acquesmortes; They
confirm the truce, and are civil one to another. Shortly after, the City of
Ghent being revolted, and having killed their Magistrates, Charles desires
Francis to give him passage through his Lands, which the King granted him. In
that passage the Emperor received all the royal honors. The King went to
meet him at Chastellerant. In that enterview, the Emperor gave the King some
hope to give him satisfaction about the Duchy of Milan.

6. An. 1641. the King sent Antony Rincot, a Spaniard that had taken sanctuary
in France, to the Turk, and Caesar Fregosa to the Venetians. Both were slain
upon the River of Po, going to Venice by Boat. This murder was done by the
order of the Marquess du Guast Governor of Milan, who hoped thereby to get
their Papers and Instructions, but they had been sent to Venice another way.
The Marquess was accused and convicted of the fact by those that executed it,
who were taken at Venice. Upon this the King breaks the truce of tens years.
The Dolphin, who was since Henry the II, falls upon the Roussillon, besieged
Perpignan, but is repulsed with loss. Charles Duke of Orleans, seizes upon
Lutzenburg. The Emperor on the other side makes a league with the King of
England, enters Picardie, besieges Landrecy, but Francis relieveth it, and
drives the Emperor from the siege: Barbarossa the Turk comes by Sea to the
Kings help, takes the Town of Nice, wastes those coasts of the Mediterranean
sea, goes away having done little good to the French, and ill satisfied of
them, having given a great matter of obloquy against Francis, to the Christian
Princes.

In Piemont, after many exploits on both sides, the famous battle of Cerisoles
was fought an. 1544. and won by the French, the French General being the Duke
of Anguien, the Spaniard, the Marquess du Guast.

At this time Ferdinand King of the Romans, brother to Charles the Emperor,
being sore pressed by the Turk in Hungary, sends a Dominican Friar, his Confessor
to Charles to exhort him to peace; Charles is persuaded to it, and Francis
also. Their Deputies meet at St. John des Vignes, in the Suburbs of Soissons,
and begin a Treaty which soon after was concluded at Crespy in Valois, of which
these were the chief conditions.

That Charles Duke of Orleans, the Kings second Son, should marry the Emperors
Daughter, or that of Ferdinand King of the Romans, at the Emperors choice
within six years; and for her portion, that the Emperor should invest the
said Duke with the Duchy of Milan, or the County of Flanders, or Charolois, or
Franch County, at the Emperors choice likewise. And that upon his investiture
with one of these, the King should renounce all his claim to all the rest, and
to the Kingdom of Naples. That till there were Children born by that marriage,
if the Emperor had before assigned the Duchy of Milan for the Ladies portion,
he should retain in his power the Castles of Milan and Cremona.

That the King should restore to Charles Duke of Savoy, all that he had taken
from him on both sides of the Alps; yet that he might retain the Citadels as
long as the Emperors kept the Castles of Milan and Cremona.

That both the Emperor and the King should restore all that they had taken the
one from the other, since the truce made at Nice by the Popes mediation. This
Treaty bears date of October. 18. 1544. and was executed, but the King restored
many more places then the Emperor.

Paragraphe VI. From the Treaty of Crespy 1544, to that of Chasteau en
Cambresis, an. 1559.
Francis outlived three years the Treaty of Crespy, all which time he had no
War with Charles, who had retired himself to Bruxelles. Francis being dead, his
Son Henry the II. succeeded him, who also had no War with the Emperor till the
year 1550. Two accidents made the old jealousy to break into open War.

1. The Pope, Paul the III. had invested his Bastard, Peter Lewis, Farnesio,
with the Towns of Parma and Placentia, which the Emperor had yieled to the
Church upon the claim of Leo the X. without much examining the Popes right,
only because it had been so covenanted when the Pope and the Emperor united
themselves to expel the French out of Italy, an. 1521. That investiture
troubled Charles afterward, who pretended, either that these Towns should
remain united to the patrimony of the Church, or that in case of alienation
they should return to the Duchy of Milan. Now this Peter Lewis, Farnesio,
having made himself odious to his subjects, by his cruelty and impudicity, was
slain by the people of Placentia, who put themselves under the Emperors
protection. At the same time Paul the III, being dead, Jules the III, that
succeeded him, maintained at the first Octavio, Son to Peter Lewis, in the
investiture of Parma and Placentia. But soon after repenting of that donation
which he saw to be displeasing to the College of Cardinals, joined with the
Emperor for the dispossessing of Octavio, who put himself in Henry the II, his
protection; and that King powerfully assisted him both against the Pope and the
Emperor, and was at such odds with the Pope, as to prohibit the bringing of
any money out of France to Rome. At which the Pope amazed, desired peace of the
King, and desisted to oppose Octavio, yea and caused the Emperor to restore
Placentia to Octavio, since which time Octavio and his successors have enjoyed
Parma and Placentia. At the same time the King protected also the Prince of
Mirandola, whom the Pope would oppress.

Before that time, an. 1545. the Emperor got a great victory over the
Protestant Princes of Germany. Their two chief men, Friderick Elector of
Saxony, and Philip Lantgrave of H^sse were taken prisoners. Whereby the
Protestant party was so humbled, that in the year 1550. they implored the help
of Henry the II, of France, who past into Germany to relieve them.

The Constable of Montmorency in his way seized upon the Towns of Metz, Toul,
and Verdun, upon the Rights which we have set down in the third Chapter. That
enterpize of Henry in favor of the Protestants, made the Emperor conclude a
peace with them in haste. So that the King being come to Strasburg, was desired
by them to return, because they were agreed with the Emperor. Returning from
Germany, he took many Towns in Lutzenburg, Rochemars, Danvilliers, Ivoy,
Bovillon. And the Emperor toward the end of the year 1551. besieges Metz, so
well defended by Francis Duke of Guise, that the siege was raised the first day
of the year 1552 Terrovenne is taken and razed by the Emperor.

The people of Siena fearing lest that Cosmo de Medicis, Duke of Florence,
should make himself Master of their Commonwealth, had put themselves into the
Emperors hands hoping that he would bring them in their liberty. But seeing
that he would bring them under the subjection of Cosmo, they called Henry the
II, to their help, who gave them Blaise de Montlue for their Governor, who
since was Marshal of France; in his Commentaries he has described how that
City was besieged. But in the end they were forced to submit to the Florentine.

In the year 1555. the Emperor Charles resigned the Imperial Crown to his
brother Ferdinand, and all his other Estates to his Son Philip the II. A Treaty
of Peace between Henry and Philip, was moved near Ardres, and perfected near
Cambray, an. 1556. for ten years, and sworn by the two Kings Feb. 6.

But presently after the death of Jule the III. and the Pontificat of Marcel
the II. which lasted but two and twenty days, the peace was broken upon the
Election of Paul the IV. a Neapolitan of the house of Caraffa, allied to that
of Melpha, which had always been of the French faction, and was odious to the
Spaniards, who used all their power to hinder his election; And when in spite
of them he was elected, they raised two powerful Families of Rome against him,
the Columna's and the Vitelli's, who revolted against the Pope, being assisted
by Philip. The King sends help to the Pope, so the Truce is broken. Many
exploits of Arms were done about Rome. But, October. 14. 1557, the Pope and the
Spaniard agreed, and Henry called his Army back.

But at the same time Philip having married Queen Mary of England, made his
wife declare War to Henry by a Heralt of Arms, who spoke to the King himself at
Reims, whence followed many various effects of war in Picardie and Champagne,
till the memorable battle of Saint Guintin lost by the French, an. 1557. where
the Constable was taken. But Francis Duke of Guise, newly returned from Italy,
revived the sad condition of France by the taking of Calais, Guines, the Land
of Oye, and the Town of Thionville.

The two Armies of these two Princes being both in sight one of another in
Picardy, near the River of Sum, the Constable of France and the Marshall
Saint Andrew, both Prisoners of the Spaniard, the Popes Nuntio and Christina
Dowagar of Lorrain, Cosen-german to Philip, manage a peace which was concluded
at Chasteau in Cambresis, in February 1559. By the first Article of that Treaty
the French King was to execute religiously all the Treaties made between
Charles the V, and Francis the I. (whereby they understood the cessions made of
Naples, Milan, Flanders, and Artois) unless the present Treaty did contradict
it; but that Treaty mentioned only the restitutions of the Towns taken on both
sides, and the rendition of the States of Savoy and Piemont to Philibert
Emanuel, Duke of Savoy. Also by that Treaty a marriage was agreed on between
Philip, then newly a Widower by the death of Queen Mary of England, and
Elizabeth daughter to Henry the II. which for that reason was called the Queen
of Peace. In the celebration of that marriage, Henry the II was slain.

Paragraphe V. From the peace of Chasteau in Cambresis, 1559. to the death of
the Duke of Alenson, 1584.
There was no open war between the two Crowns all that time which comprehends
the reign of Francis the II, Charles the IX, and great part of that of Henry
the III. But by the virtue of that Queen of peace, the Union was so great, that
the troubles of Religion being risen in France, Philip assisted the French
Kings with his Arms.

Under Francis the II.
In this reign of ninteen months, the History observes two notable things,
which are much for our purpose.

1. The State of France being in trouble at the entry of this reign, by the
great favor of the Guises, Unkles to Queen Mary of Scotland, wife to Francis
the II, and by the Queenmother Catherine de Medicis, who took the Regency of
the Kingdom to the prejudice of Antony of Bourbon, King of Navarra, and first
Prince of the blood of France after the Kings brothers, who being kept low, and
all the house of Bourbon with him seemed to threaten France of a Civil War.
Philip the II considering that State of France, sent to Francis the II a letter
which was read in the Council, whereby he said, that he had heard how some
great men of France being ill satisfied of the Government established by him,
his brother in law Francis, threatened his State of a Civil War. That he Philip
was ready to employ all his Forces, and his life, to make him obeyed as his
good confederate and neighbor, remembering the good instructions, and the holy
education which his Father Charles the V, had received from Lewis the XII, his
Guardian.

2. The house of Bourbon, being degraded from the rank it ought to have had in
the Court, Antony King of Navarra retired into Bearn; and when the Cardinal of
Bourbon, and the Prince de la Roche sur Yon, conducted the Queen of Spain to
her husband, he bore them company. Now because by the Treaty of marriage, that
Princess was to be delivered to Philip upon the frontiers of Spain, the Duke
de l' Infantasqua, and the Cardinal of Burgos came to receive her in the Abbey
of Roncevaux, which was in Navarra. There King Antony protested that the Queen
was not delivered upon the frontires of Spain, but in the heart of his own
Kingdom, that none should believe hereafter that Roncevaux did belong to the
King of Spain.

Under Charles the IX.
All this reign past among civil confusions about Religion, and scarce any
dispute was between the two Crowns. Yea Philip furnished Charles many times with
Forces to subdue his Protestant subjects. Only these things are to be remembered
for our purpose.

1. After the first peace with the Protestants, an. 1564, Charles made a
progress about his Kingdom, and saw his sister Elizabeth Queen of Spain at
Bayonne. There the Queen Mother had an earnest and secret conference with the
Duke of Alba. It is thought they agreed about a mutual assistance between the
two Crowns, against the Protestants of France and Netherlands; for in that year
1565. they began to stir in those Dominions of the Spaniard. Philip assisted
Charles with some Troops, which kindness Charles could not return, the fire
being kindled in all the parts of his Kingdom.

2. An. 1566. two things were near to have made a breach between the two
States. Bertrand de Montlue, whom his Father in his Commentaries calls,
Captain Peyrot, seeing peace in France, undertakes to make some conquest upon
the Sea, comes to the Isle of Madera, subject to Portugal, and desiring to take
water, is repulsed with Canon-shot, upon which he makes a descent into the
Island with strong hand, besieges the Town, takes it, but is slain in that
exploit. A complaint is made of this to Philip, as Uncle to the King of
Portugal, as an infraction of the Treaty, in which Portugal was comprehended.
Philip incenseth Charles against his own subjects about this, but the Admiral
appeaseth Charles, showing that it was but a misunderstanding among private
persons.

Another business of that nature was that of Gourgues. Dominique de Gourgues
was a Captain of Gascony, who in the Wars of Italy had been taken by the
Spaniards, and ill used in prison. To be avenged of them, he went to Florida in
the West Indies, besieged the Fort which the Spaniards kept there, takes it by
force, kills or hangs all the Soldiers, then returns into France. Of this,
Philip makes high complaint unto Charles, and Gourgues was in great danger of
his life; but he was protected by the Admiral of Chastillon, a Protestant, and
an enemy to the Spaniards. He represented unto the King, that it was an Act of
private revenge. Also, that a little before Melander, a Spanish Captain, had
expelled out of the same Fort in Florida: John Rebaut of Diepe, with five
hundred Frenchmen, whom he had killed or hanged every man with this
inscription.

Not as to Frenchmen, but as to Lutherans. The wisest French Historians
affirm, and so did Gourgues himself; That not any private revenge, but the
desire to punish that horrible treachery and murder upon his Countrymen, made
him undertake and atchieve that high enterprise.

An. 1570. Charles married Elizabeth daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, a
virtuous Princess, much beloved of her Husband. Shortly after Philip married
another daughter of the same Emperor. This double affinity did confirm the
friendship betwixt the two Crowns.

Under Henry the III.
Henry the III. returning out of Poland, an. 1574. passes through Vienna,
where he is well received by the Emperor Maximilian, although one of his Sons
had been Henry's competitor for the Crown of Poland. Yea, the Emperor gave him
wholesome counsels for settling peace in his State.

An. 1577. The Protestants of Netherlands being oppressed by the Spaniard, and
little helped by Matthias brother to the Emperor Rodolphus, whom both Papists
and Protestants had chosen for the expulsion of the Spaniard, the States of
those Provinces called Francis Duke of Alanson, the French Kings brother, who
in his way thither, made himself Master of the City of Cambray; but being ill
used by the Dutch, he returned home without doing any thing. But in the year
1583. he came again with the title of Duke of Brabant, and Count of Flanders,
but he made no long stay there, having made a malicious attempt upon Antwerp
and other Towns; and returning full of shame, he dyed at Chasteau Thierry, an.
1584. These enterprises of the Duke of Alanson, bred great jealousies between
the two Crowns, and were taken for a breach of the peace. Wherefore also Philip
assisted the League of France against the Royal house with great eagerness.

An. 1579. Sebastian King of Portugal being dead in Africa, Philip King of
Spain got the Kingdom, an. 1580. Among his Competitors was Antony bastard of
Lewis, Prince Constable of Portugal, but pretending himself a lawful Son, as
legitimated by the Pope Antony, expelled by Philip, retired into England, where
finding no countenance he passes into France, agrees with Katherine the
Queenmother, who (as I showed in the third Chapter) had great pretenses to the
Crown of Portugal; and for some Lands in Portugal which he promises her, she
gives him help, and raises an Army of Frenchmen under Peter Strozzi. They go
to the Terceras, where some Hands held for Antony, where they had very ill
success. That enterprise exasperated Philip very much, so that he was one of
the first that signed the League. Some think it began at the death of the Duke
of Alanson, when none remained of all the house of Valois but Henry the III,
who had no Children, and was not like to have any; and the house of Bourbon
(saving only the old Cardinal of Bourbon) was Protestant or favourer of
Protestants. This encouraged the Spaniard to trouble the State of France, and
the house of Guise to set up for themselves, under pretense of zeal of Religion.

Paragraphe VIII. From the death of the Duke d'Alanson, 1584. to the Treaty of
Vervins, 1598.
This date comprehends the end of Henry the III. and the beginning of Henry the
IV.

Under Henry the III.
Without examining the several designs of the League; this only we must
know, that after the death of the Duke of Alanson, the Duke of Guise having
formed the League, made a Treaty with Philip the II, of Spain, at Joinville,
whereby Philip promised him a monthly pension of fifty thousand Crowns to foment
the League, which being not openly against the King, but after the killing of
the Guises at Blois; and the King himself having entered into the League, under
the title of Holy league against the Heretics; the animosities and designs
of the King of Spain, against the State of France, were not plainly detected
under this reign.

Under Henry the IV.
Here the League did rage, and civil War was in all parts of France. In these
troubles Philip had a great hand, and Henry being once acknowledged King, was
eeven with him, and powerfully VVarred against him. But these things must be
seen in order.

Henry the III, being stabbed, an. 1589. after he had seen the revolt of most
part of his Kingdom; Henry the IV succeeded him, and is acknowledged by the
Protestants and part of the Papists. The Duke du Maine who kept Paris,
receives Baptista Taxis, and others for the King of Spain, who raise parties
for the degrading of the House of Bourbon, and the advancing of the League. In
March 1590. Philip publishes an Edict, whereby he exhorts all Catholic
Princes to join with him for the deliverance of Charles the X, (meaning the
Cardinal of Bourbon, whom the League had made King) to the exclusion of the
rest of the House of Bourbon.

The same year 1590. King Henry besieges Paris. Philip sends the Duke of
Parma out of Flanders with a great Army, who takes Lagny and raises the siege
of Paris. The next year after, the Cardinal of Bourbon being dead, the
Leaguers consult about the election of a King. Many of the Seize, that is of
the sixteen men that governed Paris, affected to the Spanish party, vote for
Philips Daughter, Clara Eugenia Isabella, of which claim we have spoken
before. But the Duke du Maine, who desired rather to have the Crown either for
himself, or for some of his house, protracted that business, and turned it
over to the States General of the League. And in the mean while sent President
Jannin into Spain, unto whom Philip promised all assistance to the League, upon
condition that his Daughter should be acknowledged Queen, either alone, or with
such a Husband as she should choose. That President returned, much offended with
Philips proceeding, especially because speaking of the Towns of France, he
would say, My City of Paris, My city of Orleans; and ever since solicited the
Duke du Maine to reconcile himself with the King.

An. 1591. King Henry the IV, besieges and presses Roven very sore. The Duke
of Parma returns, and makes him raise the siege. Before the Duke of Parma
came into France, he propounded two conditions to the Duke du Maine; the one,
that he should put the Town of La Fere into his hands, which he did, and the
Parmezan put a Garrison in it of four hundred Spaniards. The other, that he
should press the assembly of the States of the League, to declare the Infanta
Queen of France. Du maine promised him to move the Assembly about it, and gave
him hope that King Philip should be contented.

In January, 1593. was the opening of the States of the League, where the Duke
of Feria extraordinary Ambassador of Spain, declared his Masters zeal for the
defense of Religion, desired them to choose a Catholic King, and to preserve
unto the Infanta of Spain, the right she had to the Crown of France. Upon which
that famous Arrest or sentence was given by the Parliament for the maintaining
of the Salique Law. And though afterward the Spaniards proposed the marriage
of the Infanta with the Duke of Guise, or with Ernestus brother to the Emperor
Rodolphus, they were rebuked by the States, as making a proposition contrary to
the Salique Law. When they pressed again, that the Infanta should be
acknowledged Queen with such a Prince as Philip should name within two months,
they were answered, that when the States had chosen a Catholic Prince, if he
was not married, they would consent that he should marry the Infanta. But the
hope which Henry gave at the same time to the party of the League, that he
would come to their Religion, destroyed all these designs of the Spaniard, and
he was anointed King at Chartes in the beginning of the year 1594, and soon
after entered into Paris, whence the Duke of Feria departed with the Spanish
Garrison.

The same year The Duke du Main having lost Paris, and seeing the League
falling to pieces, went to Bruxelles, and asked succor of Ernest of Austria,
Governor of the Country, who sent Charles Count of Mansfeld into France.
Mansfeld takes la Capelle, and returns into Flanders. But Henry having laid the
Siege to Laon, Mansfeld returns, and in vain endeavors to make him raise the
siege. The King takes Laon, passes to Cambray, an Imperial Town which Balagni
held with the Title of Prince, since the first voyage of the Duke of Alanson.
The King confirms that principality to him, under the protection of France.

Toward the end of the year 1594. Henry having broken most part of the League;
declares War to the Spaniard by the counsel of the Duke of Bovillon, by
reason of Philips open enmity against him, and the assistance which he had
given to the League, and because he held from him La Fere, and La Capelle. That
Declaration being made to the Archduke Ernest, he answered, that he would send
word of it to King Philip; and a delay of two months being granted, War was
proclaimed by a Herald. The War begins. The Duke of Bovillon has ill success
in Lutzemburg. King Henry passes into Burgundy, makes his entry into Dijon,
notwithstanding the resistance of the Duke du Main, and wins the battle of
Fontaine Francoise in Burgundy, against the Duke du Maine, and the Constable of
Castilia. The Count of Fuentes takes from him Catelet, Dourlans, and Han, and
Cambray from Balagni. Marshall d' Aumont opposes the Spaniards in Britain,
into which they were let in by the Duke of Mercoeur, Governor of Britain for
the League, who had delivered Bla^et into their hands.

An. 1595. King Henry got his absolution from Pope Clement the VIII. The
Spaniards opposed it, representing Henry to the Pope as relapsed and
impenitent; but Du Perron and d' Ossat, since made Cardinals, overcame that
party.

In the year 1596. Charles de Casaut, and Lovis d' Aix Viguier of Marseille,
treat with the Spaniard to deliver the City into his hands. But Peter Liberta
kept it in the obedience of his Soverain Henry, and killed Casaut with his own
hand.

The same year Albert Cardinal of Austria, Governor of Netherlands, takes
Calais and Ardres, and Henry retakes la Fere. He makes alliance with Queen
Elizabeth of England, with the States of Holland, and with the Princes of
Germany.

In the year 1597. Ferdinand Teil a Spanish Captain, surpriseth Amiens, which
suddenly is retaken by Henry. Cardinal Albert in vain attempted to relieve it.

The year before, the Cardinal of Medicis, who since was Leo the XI. being in
France to procure the execution of the Articles promised by the King when he
received his absolution from the Pope, had been preparing his mind toward a
peace with Philip the II. who seeing himself very old and drooping to the
grave, sought to leave his Dominions peaceable to his Son, who was but weak in
body and mind. Henry also desired to give peace to his subjects, tired and
exhausted with continual Wars forty years together. So that Cardinal with
the General of the Franciscans, Bonaventure, Calatagirona a Sicilian, disposed
both the parties to a Treaty. The place was chosen for it at Vervins in
February, 1598. where a perpetual peace was concluded between the two Crowns.
And the Treaty of Chasteau in Cambresis, an. 1559. was confirmed with the
restitution of places on both sides; And the frontiers between the two States,
settled as they have been kept till the rupture of the year 1635.

There, upon the dispute for precedence of Ambassadors, the Legate devised this
expedient. He sitting under a Canopy at the boards end, set the Popes Nuntio
at his right hand, and after him the Ambassadors of Spain, John Richardot,
President of the Council of State in Flanders, John Baptista Taxis a Knight of
the Order of Saint Jago; and Lewis Verriken first Secretary of State in
Flanders. At his left hand were the French Ambassadors, Monsieur de Belliure,
and Monsieur de Sillery, of whom the first was over against the Nuntio, and so
preceded by one degree the first of the Spaniards.

CHAP. V. The Affairs between the two Crowns from the Treaty of Vervins till
now.
THat space of time we will subdivide into three.

1. From the Treaty of Vervins to the death of Henry the IV. 2. From that death
to the rupture between the two States. 3. From that rupture till now.
Paragraphe I. From the Treaty of Vervins to the death of Henry the IV.
After the Treaty of Vervins, the two States kept reasonable good intelligence.
Philip the II. died in the time of the Treaty.

The first difference between Henry and Philip the III King of Spain, was about
the Marquesat of Saluces, which Henry redemanded of the Duke of Savoy, who did
nothing but by the order of the Council of Spain; And the Spaniard would not
suffer the French to possess any thing in Italy. An exchange then was made of
Bresse for the Marquesat. Herein Philip did nothing against the alliance. For
the Duke having broken his word with Henry, Philip refused to assist him, and
to be a favourer of his perfidiousnesse, although the Count of Fuentes raised
great forces to assist him.

In the year 1602. was the conspiracy of the Duke of Biron. It was believed
that the King of Spain had a share in his designs. But the depositions of the
witnesses against him, speak only of Treaties and Intelligences with the Duke
of Savoy, and of the sharing of the State of France among the conspiratours.
Yet they said that Biron should have had the Duchy of Burgundy, Franch County,
and Bresse under the protection of the King of Spain. Fontanelles a Gentleman
of Britain, who was convicted to have been one of the conspiratours, for which
he was put to death, was accused to have treated with the Spaniard to deliver
the I Will of Tristan in Britain into his hands. But Henry, who had no mind to
break with Spaniard, would take no notice of that treachery.

The Spaniards pretense for these secret plots against France, was that Henry
assisted the Rebels of Holland with men and money. Which the Spanish
Ambassador having complained of, he answered that the money which he sent to
the Hollanders was to pay his debts, for moneys lent to him during the civil
Wars.

As for the French Soldiers that served the Hollanders, he could not hinder
his subjects to take party where they listed; and that some of them also served
the Archiduke. Howsoever that assistance was so resented by the Spaniards, that
they lost no occasion to stir disorders in France.

Many things happened in the years 1605. and 1606. which showed the enmity of
the Spaniard against France. As the Treason of Lost, Secretary to Mr. De
Villeroy, who had intelligence with the Ministers of Spain, and let them know
all the secrets of the Cabinet Council. He was discovered by one Rassis a
Frenchman, that had taken Sanctuary in Spain. Lost ran away, and in his flight
was drowned in the River of Marne, so no more could be known of that Treason.

Then the Lady Marquess of Vernuiel ill satisfied of King Henry, whom she
accused to have broken his promise to her, treates with the Spaniard, and
inveigleth into her treason her Father d' Antragues, and her brother the Count
of Auvergne, since Duke of Angoulesm. Their design was to retire to the
Spaniard, and to make one day that Ladies Son a stone of scandal unto France.
Being discovered, all three were convicted and condemned to death. But the King
gave them their grace.

In the year 1605. the relics of Birons conspiracy appeared in the Provinces
of Perigort Limousin and Quercy. All was done under the name of the Duke of
Bovillon. Whether the Spaniard had a hand in it or no, it was not known.

At the same time Mairargues a Gentleman of Provence treated with the Spaniard
to yield Marseille unto him. He was discovered and taken conferring with the
Secretary of the Spanish Ambassador, and put to death. This passage was near
to have caused a breach between the two Crowns, for the Ambassador of Spain
expostulated with the French King, because against the Law of Nations his
Secretary had been taken and committed to prison. The King justified the fact,
saying, that he was found monopolizing againsthis State. Nevertheless all was
suddenly appeased: Although at the same time another Treason was discovered, a
plot upon Laucate by two brothers Luquisses, who had been won by the Governor
of Perpignan.

In the year 1608. Henry the IV. mediated a truce between the King of Spain and
the Hollanders. At the same time the Morisco's of Spain secretly implored his
aid against the oppression of the Spaniards. But he sent them back, saying,
that he would not be the first that should break peace, but that if he was
compelled to make War, he might make use of their proffers.

Paragraphe II. From the death of Henry the IV. to the rupture between the two
Crowns an. 1635.
A year before the Kings death an. 1609. John William Duke of Cleves and
Juilliers being dead without issue left his succession disputable between the
Emperor Rodolphus who said it was devolved to the Empire, and the children of
four sisters of that Duke married in the houses of Brandenburg, Newburg,
Deuxponts, and Burgan. It was thought that the great Army which Henry had
prepared a little before his death was intended to assist these Princes against
the Emperor. It seems the Queen Regent knew so much, for when the Archiduke
Leopold had seized upon Juilliers after the Kings death She sent Marshall de la
Castre to assist these Princes, to whom he caused luilliers to be surrendered.
There the French had to do with the house of Austria, of the German branch.

In the year 1612. the two Crowns were allied by the marriages, of Lewis the
XIII. with Anne daughter to Philip the III, and of Philip Prince of Spain (who
is now Philip the IV) with Elizabeth eldest daughter of Henry the IV. And in
the year 1615. these marriages were accomplished at Bourdeaux. The world was
full of hope that this double alliance would strengthen the peace between the
two Crowns.

An. 1616 the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua being in War one against another about
Montferrat, the Kings of France and Spain intervened to make them friends. And
this was done without prejudice to the peace between the two States.

Valteline is a valley seated between Germany, the Venetians, the Duchy of
Milan, and the Grisons. It was in old time a part of the Duchy of Milan, or at
least an appurtenance of the same. And was engaged to the Grisons by Lewis the
XII. for four hundred thousand pounds arrear, due to them for their service in
the conquest of Milan, since which time it was subject to the Grisons. But the
differences of Religion intervening and the Grisons being turned Protestants
for the most part, Valtolina kept for the most part the Religion of Milan.
Which made them desire to shake the yoke of the Grisons and return under the
subjection of Milan, invited to it by the Spaniards. So that an. 1619. the
great revolt began, and the Valtolins expel the Grisons their Masters. Who had
recourse to the protection of France, by whom they held that Country. King
Lewis the XIII. sends Monsieur de Bassompierre into Spain to Philip the IV.
(for Philip the III. was lately dead) who granted according to the Treaty of
Madrid that all garrisons of strangers should depart out of Valtolina, and that
order should be taken for the maintaining of the Catholic Religion. The Duke
of Feria having refused to execute that command, and the Valtolins unwilling to
return to the obedience of the Grisons. King Lewis exhorted the Switzers and
Grisons to maintain their rights, and sent them an Ambassador the Marquis de
Coenures whom he made afterward General of their army and Marshall of France,
known by the name of Marshall d'Estree Then did the French and the Spaniards
fight, yet without breaking the Treaty of Vervins because both acted for their
confederates.

Pope Urban the VIII. having made himself Depositary of the principal places
of Val olina, sent his nephew Cardinal Barbarini into France an. 1625. who not
being able to make an accommodation, as pretending to deliver Valtolina from
the obedience of the Grisons, war began in Italy by the aliance made between
the French and the Duke of Savoy against Genoa which was assisted by the
Spaniard. Thus these quarrels upon the by, came very near to an absolute
rupture between the two Nations. For at the same time some Spanish ships
passing from Barcetona to Genoa and driven upon the coasts of Marseille were
arrested by the Duke of Guise. Of which the Genoese complained to the King of
Spain, whose Council irritated with these wars, and with the taking of many
places about Genoa, gave order that all French ships in the havens of Spain,
should be arrested, and all the goods of the French trafficquing in Spain,
seized upon. The Council of France to be even with them made two Edicts; the
one to forbid all traffic with Spain, the other to seize upon all ships of
Spain, Portugal, Naples and other places of the Spanish dominions; yet only by
right of represalls and for restitution of the goods taken from the French.

War continued in Piemont all that while, till the winter of that year 1625,
when the armies retired into garrisons. That winter Du Fargis the French
Emassadour in Spain began a Treaty which was called the Treaty of Monson in
Arragon, whereby without any Commission from his Master or his principal
Minister of State the Cardinal de Richelieu (as it was pretended) he did
greatly derogate to the right of the Grisons over Valtolina, making the
Valtolins well nigh Soveraines, taking from the Grisons all power to refuse the
Judges and that form of Government which the Valtolins would set up among
themselves. That Treaty was disavowed by King Lewis and the Cardinal who
commanded the Ambassador to reform it. Wherein so much tedious protraction
was used, that Lewis was in the end constrained to take upon him the protection
of the Valtolins, and sent them the Duke of Rohan who there continued the war,
even after the rupture between the two Crowns.

In the year 1628 Vincent the II. Duke of Mantua being dead, Charles Duke of
Nevers the next heir male succeeded; but the Emperor made some difficulty
about it because he was borne in France, and because he did not come personally
to him to render his homage. But besides his right of lapse for want of homage,
he set up the right of Duke Guastullo of the same house of Mantua, which yet
appeared at the first to be weak and of no force.

At the same time, the Duke of Savoy renewed his rights to Montferrat. So the
new Duke of Mantua saw himself almost swallowed up by the Emperor, the
Spaniard, and the Duke of Savoy. Yea Don Gonzales de Cordova besieged Cazal,
the old apple of discord between the houses of Mantua and Savoy. King Lewis,
resolved to maintain his subject and confederate, sends Bevron and Guron to
defend Cazal. Himself passes into Italy, forces Le pas de Suze, drives the
Spaniard from the siege of Cazal, and compels the Duke of Savoy to let the
Mantuan be in peace.

The Protestants in France being in arms, Rochel besieged, and their party
brought low, some say that the Duke of Rohan sent Clausel from Montpellier to
Madrid, to put the Protestant party under the protection of the King of Spain.
The History of Dupleix sets down the whole Treaty between the King of Spain
and the Duke of Rohan, whereby the Spaniard promises to assist Rohan with men
and money. But Lewis returning victorious out of Italy, suddenly overcame the
Protestant party, and forced them to receive peace. The Spaniard thought he
might as lawfully assist the Protestants of France, as the French assisted
those of Holland.

Whilst Lewis was busy about the pacification of his own State, the Duke of
Savoy renews his pretense to Montferrat, the Emperor sends Colalto against
the Duke of Mantua; and the Marquess of Spinola besieges Cazal, but in vain,
being well defended by Toiras, since Marshal of France. Lewis repasseth into
Italy, makes himself Master of Savoy and Piemont. The Imperial Army takes
Mantua, but all is pacified by the Treaty of Queyras an. 1631. and the Duke of
Mantua is settled in his Estate.

In that year 1631. Mary the Queen Mother of France retireth into Flanders.
The next year 1632. the Duke of Orleans her son does the like. Where getting
some Dutch and German troops he makes an inrode into France; and in the year
1633. he makes a Treaty with the Spaniard to enter into France with an Army.
All this without absolute rupture betwixt the two Crowns; Only the Spaniard
fomented the divisions of the Royal house of France.

Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sueden, after a long war against Poland comes into
Germany an. 1631. for the restitution of the Dukes of Meckelburg his kinsmen
into their Estates, out of which the Emperor had expelled them, and to restore
liberty to the Cities of Germany. Lewis jealous of the greatness of the house
of Austria, and having causes enough to ressent the wrongs offered to him by the
Emperor, made a Covenant with the King of Sueden for the defense of their
common friends oppressed, the safety of the commerce upon the Sea, and the
liberty of the States of the Empire. The King of Sueden promised the assistance
of his arms and his person, and the King of France a million of livers per
annum. Hence followed the great victories of Gustavus, till he was slain at
the battle of Lutzen in November 1632.

An. 1634. the Duke of Orleans leaves Flanders and returns to the King his
brother.

III. Paragraphe. From the Rupture of the peace till now.
These mutual offenses being accumulated, in the end brake into open war. It
was declared by the French by a Herald in Flanders in May 1635. That
declaration was grounded upon that old complaint, that the Spaniard aspires to
the universal Monarchy of Europe, and to devour all the Princes thereof; and
because the Spaniard vexed the confederates of France with wars, but more
particularly by reason of the imprisonment of the Archbishop of Treves who had
put himself under the protection of King Lewis. To all the complaints of the
French, the Spaniards have their answers, and have enough on their part to
complain. Howsoever this war has produced many great exploits on both sides,
in Germany, in Italy, in Flanders, in Spain. And though the fortune of war
have alternative successes, yet France had hitherto the advantage of that
bloody game, having stretched her dominions beyond the Rhine, united Lorraine to
the French Crown, got many towns in Flanders and Artois, Perpignan and the
County of Roussillon, and got a good footing in the Duchy of Milan. Besides
Catalonia, which has submitted her self to the Sovereignty of France. The
greatest loss of the Spaniard is that of Portugal by the practices of France,
whereby the King of Spain has lost Brasill, and the East Indies.

AN APPENDIX To the foregoing DISCOURSE; Showing the Dispute about the
precedence at the Council of Trent, between the Ambassadors of France and
Spain.
IT is certain, that before the formation of that great Colossus of the House
of Austria about the year 1520. the Kings of France were acknowledged the first
of Christendom next to the Emperors.

The pieces wherewith the greatness of Spain is made up, are Provinces most of
them feudatary of the Empire, or of France, or of the Pope; all these lately
gathered up. But France is of an ancient, entire, and independent greatness.

The Ambassadors of Charles the V. had the precedence every where before those
of France, because he was Emperor. But in the year 1555. when he resigned that
quality of Emperor to his Brother, and his other qualities and states to his
Son, perceiving that his Son wanting the quality of Emperor, could not keep
that pre-eminence, he used this artifice. A little before his retirement from
the world, he recalled from Venice his Ambassador, Francisco de Vargas, who
being an Ambassador of the Empire, had a precedence before the French
Ambassador. Then after the resignation of his States, he sent the same Vargas
to Venice again, as Ambassador for himself and his Son jointly, although in
effect Charles being divested of his dignities, Vargas was Ambassador of his
Son only, hoping thereby to deceive the Venetians and others, by sending the
same man. Vargas demanded of the Senate of Venice the same precedence which he
had before. To which Dominique, Bishop of Lodeva, Ambassador of Henry the II,
of France, made opposition, representing to the Senate, that Charles was no
more considerable in the world; that when the Ambassadors of the Emperor
Ferdinand should appear, he would yield to them; but that he would not yield to
the Ambassador of Philip, but in all occasions of audience, ceremony, visits,
and the like, he would take the first place, till the coming of the Imperial
Ambassadors. The Senate fearing some ill issue of this dispute, gave order that
the two Ambassadors should not present themselves at the ceremonies of the
Feast of St Mark; and so the matter remained undecided all the year 1557, by
the irresolution of that Commonwealth, and the simplicity of the French
Ambassador. But in the year 1558. Francis de Novailles, Bishop of Acs, having
succeeded that of Lodeva, renewed the dispute, and the Ambassadors of the
Emperor Ferdinand being come, he demanded to be maintained in his Rights, and
to have the first place after the Emperors Ambassador, and courageously took
it before Vargas; who seeing that the policy of Charles (who dyed at the same
time) took no effect, and that he was confidered only as Ambassador of
Philip, began to extol his Masters greatness, and number his States and
Soveraignties which he possessed in far greater number then the King of
France. Saying that these customs of honor and precedence, must alter
according to the time. That his Master was the greatest King of the world;
far more able to assist the Commonwealth with Arms, Men, and Money, then the
King of France. The Bishop of Acs stoutly resisted him, and obtained of the
Senate an Order whereby the precedence was adjudged unto him above the
Ambassador of Spain. About which, when the Spaniard expostulated very
earnestly, it was answered him, that the Commonwealth would not undertake to
examine the greatness of their Majesty's; but that they found in their
Records, that in all Acts both public and private, Ceremonies, Visits, and
Audiences, the Ambassadors of France had preceded those of Spain, and to that
received custom they would keep. This answer offended Philip, who upon that
called back his Ambassador. But Micael Surriano, the Venetian Ambassador in
his Court, defended the decree of the Senate of Venice, and in some sort
mitigated the displeasure of Philip, who yet in all occasions renewed that
dispute.

His greatest effort was four years after in the Council of Trent. To
understand the right of precedences of Ambassadors, we must know, that in the
Council there was three sorts of Assemblies; particular Congregations,
general Congregations, and Sessions. In the private Congregations, the Doctors
assisted with some Bishops, examined the questions of Faith and Reformation,
and there no Ceremony of precedence was heeded. In the general Congregation all
the Prelates assembled, the Legates were Presidents, every one kept his place of
honor: It was a public action where questions were resolved, the Legates
propounded that which was to be examined in the particular Congregations; every
Prelate had right to speak and to vote; Ambassadors of Princes had audience
after their Commission was examined, and that which was to be promulgated in
the following Session was there concluded; Ambassadors kept their place there
according to their rank. The Session was the solemn day, upon which after a
Mass of the Holy Ghost, and a Sermon of a Prelate, or some eminent man upon the
matter in question; the Prelate officiating, pronounced with a loud voice the
Decrees resolved, which the Fathers approved with a Placet. In these Sessions,
Ambassadors had also their place of honor, and at the Mass: That honor was
seen by the place where they sat, by the Censer, and by the Pax, which was
given them in the time of the Mass. Now whereas this Council was held at three
several times, under there several Popes, Paul the III, Jule the III, and Pius
the IV. In the time of Paul and Jule, Charles the V, was Emperor, whose
Ambassadors without contradiction sat above the French Ambassadors, who in the
sixteen first Seffions appeared very little, and no place was held there under
the title of Spain. Yet some things happened then which showed the eminency of
the French Kings above all others, next to the Emperor. In the Bull of the
Indiction of the Council Paul the III, dated an. 1542. the King of France is
named after the Emperor in express terms, and all the other Princes
comprehended in one general term, and that twice. Thus, Charissimos in Christo
filios nostros, Carolum Romanorum Imperatorem, and Christianissimum Regem
Franciscum, duo praecipua Christiani nomins firmamenta atque fulcra orare atque
obsecrare institimus. A little lower. Supra autem dictos, Imperatorem Regemque
Christianissimum, nec non caeteros Reges, Duces, Principes quorum praesentia si
alias unquam, hoc quidem tempore maxim, sanctissimae Christi fidei and
Christianorum futur a est salutaris, rogantes atque obsecrantes per viscera
misericordiae Dei, etc.

In the beginning of the Council, an. 1545. Francis the I, had appointed for
his Ambassadors, Claude D'Urfe Seneschal of Forests, Jacques de Liguieres,
President in the third Chamber of Enquests in the Parliament of Paris, and the
Deane, Peter Danes, since Bishop de la Vaur. But being informed by some French
Bishops that were at Trent, that there was little hope that the Council should
do any good, he called back his Ambassadors who did not appear in the Council.
Antony Filioly of Ganat, Archbishop of Aix in Provence was there for the King
who in the first Session, when public prayers were made for the Princes,
having required that the King of France should be named in express terms, as
he had been named in the Bull of the Indiction, the Legates eluded that demand,
and said, that the Fathers ought to be consulted about it, and none was prayed
for in express terms but the Pope and the Emperor; all other Princes were
comprehended in one general term.

In the year 1546. Francis the I, sent his Ambassador Peter Danes, Bishop de
la Vaur to the Council; At his reception, he made a fine speech, wherein he
represented the State of Christendom, and the great disorders crept into the
Church, even into the Court of Rome. At which when a certain Bishop did laugh,
saying, Gallus Cantat. Danes replied readily, Utinam isto gallicinio, Petrus ad
resipiscentiam and fletum excitetur. An Apophthegm which afterward was rife in
the mouth of the Fathers of the Council.

An. 1547. when Paul the III, to a void the plague and the war of Germany,
would remove the Council from Trent to Bolonia; the Legates consulting the
Fathers about it, said that his Holiness approved of it, Communicato etiam
consilio cum Imperatore, Christianissimo Rege, and aliis Regibus ac principibus
Christianis, which is another expression of the honor which the Council did to
the Kings of France.

But in the third Indiction of the Council under Pius the IV. an. 1561, in the
Bull of the Indiction, Pius the IV, uses other words then Paulus the III, and
Julius the III, had used before. Thus, Charissimos vero in Christo filios
nostros Romanorum Imperatorem electum, caeterosque Reges, and Principes quos
optandum sane esset Concilio interesse posse, hortamur and rogamus, without any
mention of the most Christian King. Philibert de la Bourdesiere, Bishop of
Angoulesm, Ambassador of France, in the Popes Court expostulated with him by
the Kings order for that neglect, with protestation that notwithstanding that
neglect, he would not hinder the progress of the Council; yea, that he had
commanded his Bishops to go to the Council. The Pope answered, that he had
charged some Cardinals to form the Bull, and that they had not heeded that
Pointillo; and that after they had named the Emperor, they had not judged it
necessary to name all the Kings, but had comprehended them under one general
name. The Ambassador replied, that it was a Prerogative of the Kings of France,
not to be comprehended under a general name. The Pope answered, that he could
not foresee all things, and that another time order should be given, that the
like error should not be committed.

In the year 1562, the 18. of May, Lewis de Saint Gelais, Lord de Lansac, came
to Trent, and three days after, Arnault Ferrier, President of the Enquests of
Paris, and Guy du Faur de Pibrac, chief Judge of Tolosa, sent by the King of
France, who were received with great honor by the Council; yea great part of
the Prelates subjects of the King of Spain went to meet them. But Ferdinand de
Avalo, Marquess of Pesquera, Ambassador to King Philip, went out of Trent
three days before, and retired to Milan, of which he was Governor, pretending
a fear from the Protestants of Daulphine and the Switzers, but in effect to
avoid meeting with the French Ambassadors, who took their place in the general
Congregation after the Imperial Ambassadors. Pibrac made a fine Oration,
wherein he spoke very freely against the disorders of the Church, the small
progress of the Council in such a long time, and for the liberty of voting in
the Council, which was not to be expected from Rome. He was seconded by the
two other Ambassadors, Lansac and Ferrier. The Pope complained of it, and said
that the King of France had sent not Ambassadors, but Advocates of the
Hugenots. And indeed the ill opinion which the Fathers of the Council had of
the belief of these three men was a cause why the Council and the Pope dealt
with them with more rigor. In the mean while the French Bishops came to the
Council, conducted by the Cardinal of Lorraine, who was most honorably
received by the Cardinal of Mantua, and the other Legates.

Soon after the coming of the Cardinal of Lorrain, Philip the II, having
called back the Marquess of Pesquera, sent to Trent another Ambassador,
Ferdinand Quigones, Count de Luna, who being gone to Germany before, to be
present at the Coronation of Maximilian, Son to the Emperor Ferdinand, would
know of the Fathers of the Council, what place they would give him. Upon which
the Cardinal of Mantua, the first Legate, having consulted with the
Ambassadors of France, and the Cardinal of Lorraine, he propounded unto them
this accommodation, that as for them they should keep their place next to the
Ambassadors of the Emperor, and that some other place might be found for the
Count of Luna, over against the Legates on the other side, or after the
Ecclesiastical Ambassadors, or in some other place out of the bench of the
Ambassadors. To which the French answered, that they were sent by their King
not to judge causes, or to decide of the Rights of King Philip, who was a good
friend and brother in law to their King, Charles the IX: but if any would take
their place, they were resolved to stand for it against all sorts of persons;
which if the Council denied them, they had order to withdraw with all the
French Prelates, and to protest of the nullity of the resolutions which should
be taken in their absence. To which the Legate answered nothing. That
declaration of the French, though generous, gave occasion to the affront which
soon after was offered to them in the Council; for they are censured by
posterity, for not requiring absolutely that the Spaniards should sit under
them.

An. 1563. The Legates fearing some division between the French and Spanish
Doctors about their order in speaking, gave order that without distinction of
Nations, every one should speak according to his seniority of Doctorship. But
because some among the French Divines had the seniority over the Spanish; these
made great complaints to the Legate, pretending that this preference of the
French, would be a prejudice against the dispute which the Count de Luna was
forming against the French Ambassadors. The Legates rebuked them, showing that
the Doctors, though sent by the Princes, did not represent their persons as the
Ambassadors did: and that the question was only of the seniority of the
degree, not of the preference of the Nations. Notwithstanding these
satisfactory Reasons, the Spaniards were angry, and threatened the Council of
their Kings displeasure, who should take off his protection from them.

The French seeing that the Spaniard stood upon points in such a clear
business, and that of Doctors they would make Ambassadors, did obstinate
themselves also to have the preference even in the disputes of the Divines. And
because the Popes delegates spoke first without contradiction, the French asked
to be admitted to speak next after them, which the Legates were constrained to
grant: and it was decreed, that after the Jesuit Salmeron, the Popes Divine
Nicolas Maillart Dean of the faculty of Paris, should speak; and that after
that, all should speak according to the seniority of their degree, which was
followed. Yet to content the Spaniards, it was enacted in the Register of the
Council, that the French Doctor had spoken the first by the right of his
seniority in the degree of Doctor, not by the preference of his Nation.

The same year 1563. upon Easter Day, the Count of Luna was received at Trent,
and in his entry mached between the Ambassadors of the Emperor, and of France.
This Ceremony past with much honor and civility between the two Nations. And
at the same time, the Cardinal of Lorrain writ to the Emperor perour Ferdinand
(who was at Insprugh in the County of Tirol, three days journey from Trent)
upon diverse affairs of the Council: and in the end of the Letter, desired him
to find some temper to lay down the dispute about the preference between the
two Crowns, so that it might not appear in the Council. But his Countrymen
blamed him for it, saying, that he ought not to have taken notice of a dispute
so ill grounded: Or if he had spoken of it, it should not have been to have
desired a temper, but to maintain his Kings right. The Emperor answered him,
that it belonged not to him to decide the disputes between the Kings of France
and Spain; but since he had desired him to speak his sense about it, if your
Ambassadors (said he) maintain their rank after mine, and that none take that
place from them; what does it import you what place be assigned unto the
Spaniards? A verdict ill taken by the French, who held it to be of a dangerous
consequence. For in an order of sitting, who so leaves his place (say they) is
thought to despise it, and to ask a higher, which cannot be done without moving
a dispute against those that sit in a higher seat.

The Count of Luna after that solemn entry, was hidden forty days, and
appeared not in any ceremony of public action, being in great perplexity how
to behave himself; sometimes he had a mind to enter into the assembly in the
midst of the two Ambassadors of the Emperor, who were enjoined to bear him
company; and after they had taken their place, stand by them till his
Commission had been verified by the Council, and then retire to his house. But
considering that this would not be a generous maintaining of his Masters
honor, he made means that the French Ambassadors should be desired not to
appear in the Assemby that day; which being denied him, he sent some Spanish
Bishops to the Legates, to propound unto them, that the secular Ambassadors of
Princes, should not enter into the general Congregations but the day of their
reception, but should content themselves to be present at the Ceremony, the day
of the Session, maintaining that it had been so observed in the Counsels
before. But all the Ambassadors of Princes having opposed that motion, he could
obtain nothing. Again, he caused some Bishops to propound some point to the
Congregation, at the discussion whereof, the French ought not to be present as
interessed parties; for example, to represent what damage would result to the
whole Church by a peace of the King of France with the Hugonots, or some such
thing. But all that being rejected, and the Congregation being put off from day
to day by his obstinacy; in the end that the businesses of the Council might
not be retarded: the Cardinal of Lorraine, and the French Ambassadors declared
to the Legates, that if they might keep their place immediately after the
Emperors Ambassadors, they did not care what place the Ambassador of Spain
should take.

The French to this day exclaim against that action of the Cardinal, and the
French Ambassadors, saying that it was a great weakness, and that they had
betrayed their Masters honor. Yea, the Fathers of the Council disliked it.
And when the Cardinal de la Bourdestere, Resident for the King of France by the
Pope, complained to him of that Spanish ambition, and novelty introduced
against all ancient orders: the Pope (it was Pius the IV.) answered, that he
should complain to the French Ambassadors, whose weakness he condemned,
saying, that although he had been solicited before and after the entry of Count
de Luna into Trent, to favor that design he had remained constant and
inflexible; and that he wondered how the French had so easily, yea so freely
yielded.

The day of the Congregation being come, and each Ambassador having taken his
place, the Count of Luna enters, stands over against the Legates, some what far
from the Ambassadors seat, presents his Orders, and declares his Masters will.
Then he protested, that although the first seat was due to him next to the
imperial Ambassadors, as representing the greatest Prince of Christendom, the
greatest Prop of the Courch etc. yet that he should bring no confusion to the
affairs of the Council, he desisted from that right; upon condition that this
his protestation should be inserted into the Acts of the Council; so that they
could not be printed, nor otherwise published without it; and that a Copy signed
by the Legates should be given him by the Secretary of the Council. Having
said these words, he went to take his place appointed for him, near the Table
of the Secretary of the Council.

The French Ambassadors sitting by the Imperial, answered, that if it was
thought that the place where they sat was not the most honorable next to that
of the Emperor, as it had been acknowledged in all the Council before, the
last of which were that of Constance, and that of Lateran, under Leo the X; Or
if the place assigned to Count de Luna, might be a prejudice against them, they
desired the Council to prevent it speedily by orders, commands,
excommunications, or other ways, practiced in such a case without acception of
persons. But because none answered any thing, and the Imperial Ambassadors
connived to that novelty (although their interesse was to hinder it, least
their place should be once disputed) they added: That without injury to the
honor of King Philip, and the alliance between the two Crowns, they protested
against that proceeding as unjust, requiring that their protestation should be
inserted in the Acts of the Council, and that a Copy of the same should be
delivered unto them.

None of the Fathers spoke one word upon these disputes. And the silence was
broken by a Spanish Doctor called Frontidon, who made a Latin Oration in the
name of Count de Luna, whereby he exalted the greatness of the King of Spain,
his zeal toward the Church and Religion, with such impertinent words, and so
much contempt of other Princes, that the Ambassadors of the Emperor made great
complaints about it to Count de Luna, who had no other shift to excuse it, than
saying that the Oration had displeased him more then any.

The Promoter of the Council having answered the Oration, suddenly the
Ambassador of Spain went out of the Assembly, not expecting the rising of the
Legates, to avoid a dispute with the French, and the same he observed in the
following Congregations, sitting by himself and going out alone.

But that Order could not be kept in the Church the day of the Session, because
the manner of sitting there was not alike, and some more precise ceremonies
were used about the preference, as that of the pax, and the censer at the
Mass. Wherefore the Legates consulted the Pope before the Session, and he being
won by the Spaniards, thinking that the French would again run into another
weakness, writ to the Legate that in the Session they should assign a place
apart to the Spaniard, and that the pax and the censer should be given to both
the Ambassadors at the same time; but that the business should be kept secret
till the point of the action, that the French might not storm at it.

The day of the Session being come, which was Saint Peter's day, the 29. of
June, after the Bishop of Valdaosta in Savoy had begun the Mass of the Holy
Ghost, presently a Chair of black Velvet was brought out of the Vestry, which
was placed between the last Cardinal and the first Patriarck, where Count de
Luna sat. The Cardinal of Lorrain with the French Ambassadors, made a great
noise about it, and rose to withdraw, when at the same time they heard the
order given about it, and for the Censer and the Pax. But for fear of troubling
the action, they contented themselves to protest against it, and to declare
that their Masters right did not consist in the equality, but in the
precedence. The Gospel being read whilst a Divine went up into the Pulpit to
make a speech, the Legates with the Cardinal of Lorrain, and the other
Cardinals, the Ambassador of the Emperor, and Ferrier one of the French
Ambassadors went into the Vestry; into which they called the Archbishop of
Granada, a Spaniard, and two French Bishops to find some accommodation. After
many disputes, and many goings and commings and messages to Luna, it was
concluded that the Mass should be ended without receiving the Censer and the
pax. After which, Luna came out of the Church with his Spaniards triumphing for
that first step so advantageous to his Master.

This action was very scandalous to the French; and the Legates not able to bear
the envy of it, were constrained to produce the command which they had from
Rome about it. The injury was more resented, because it was done to a King in
his minority (it was Charles the IX) and one that was afflicted with Hugonots,
and entangled in a civil War. The Cardinal of Lorrain writ very smart letters
to the Pope about it; yet without violating the respect due to him. But Ferrier
a violent and stout man, cried out every where, that unless at the next
public Mass the preference of the Censer and the Pax was given to his Master
he would protest aloud, not against the Legates, who had obeyed the Popes
Orders, nor against the Council, whose hands were manifestly bound, nor against
King Philip, who took his advantage where he might, nor against the Roman
Church, toward which he should never lose the due respect, but against the very
person of the Pope, whom he would prove to have bought the pontificat, and
would appeal from him to a lawful Pope, and to a true and free Council. And
that his Master would celebrate a National Council, as numerous and as
General at that of Trent. It is certain that Ferrier and Pibrac (for Lansac
was returned into France) had prepared a most bloody speech against the Pope,
and against that innovation. Ferrier was to pronounce it, and at the same time
command all the French Bishops and Doctors to leave the Council, with a
promise to return whenever God had given a lawful Pope to his Church, and
restored to the Councels their ancient and full liberty. The speech was
printed, but not pronounced. Ferrier spread it among the Fathers, because Count
de Luna boasted that the Legates had promised him that at the first Mass he
should be admitted to the equality of the Pax and Censer.

The Legates fearing, lest this quarrel should come to some sad issue, because
the Ambassador of Poland declared, that if the King of France should depart
from the obedience of the Council, the King of Poland would soon do the like,
and many other Princes; The Legates I say, and the wisest of the Council,
especially Madruvio, Cardinal of Trent, of the Imperial party, thought it
expedient that thereafter public Masses should be said without the Pax and
the Censer, and made Count de Luna approve of it. And the King of Spain hearing
all this proceeding, thought he had got a great advantage. But the Pope lost by
it, for the affront done to the French in that Council hindered the publication
of it in France.

Shortly after, the Cardinal of Lorrain retired to Rome, and Ferrier declaimed
in a general Congregation against abuses and disorders crept into the Church,
and spared no body. The Pope was much displeased at it, and to allay that heat,
sent the Cardinal of Lorrain to Rome with full authority to regulate all with
the Legates. He was present at the 24th Session held November 11. 1563. which is
of the Sacrament of marriage. And having received order from France to return
without delay with all the French Bishops, the Legates hasted to make an end of
the Council, and held the 25th Session which was the last upon the 3d. and 4th.
of December, in which Session, as in the precedent, the Ambassadors kept their
place. Luna sat by the Secretary of the Council. In the public Masses
neither Pax nor Censer was used. So the Council of Trent ended the 4th. of
December. 15 63. and the Cardinal Moron, at that time the first President, giving
his blessing to the Fathers, told them Post gratias Deo actas Reverendissimi
Patres, Ite in pace. And all answered, Amen.

But because it was the custom at the end of the Council, to make acclamations
to bless the Popes that had assembled it, the Fathers that had held it, and the
Princes that had assisted it, and protected the Church; the Cardinal of
Lorrain took himself the care to make them, and to pronounce them also; Which
he was blamed for, as taking upon him that care which less becoming his
Eminency, and more fitting for Deacons, Promotors, Secretaries, and Masters of
Ceremonies. Especially he was blamed because in the acclamation made for the
secular Princes, he forgot to name expressly the King of France, which had been
observed in the Bull of the Indiction, as we said before, and the omission
whereof in the calling again of the Council by Pius the IV, had caused so much
discontent and expostulation. Of this the Cardinal could not be ignorant, nor
pretend forgetfullnesse; since those acclamations were meditated and written
down.

There was two acclamations, the first for the memory of the dead, in which the
Cardinal forgot to express the names of Francis the I. and Henry the II, who
had contributed their care and their zeal for the good of the Council. The
second was for the Princes living, where he forgot Charles the IX, who had sent
his Ambassadors and his Bishops to Trent. So he forgot both the dead and the
living. That omission was objected to the Cardinal in the Kings Council. He
excused himself upon the fear he had to make a division between the two Crowns,
King Charles being yet in minority, in danger of a civil War, and of the
disorder which Germany was fallen into upon the quarrel of Religion; Whereby
the King might have need of Philip, whom therefore he would not provoke or
incense against France.

Thus that weakness which the Cardinal and the French Ambassadors showed in
the Congregations, Sessions, and Acclamations, having not with vigor enough
defended the right of their Masters, was defended by them with plausible
reasons; but, in effect, they opened the gate to the pretenses which the
Spaniards form at every meeting of public Assemblies, Processions, and
Ceremonies, against the French Ambassadors, who hitherto have stoutly defended
their right. At least they have kept the two essential points of precedence,
which are; first, never to have left their place, either second, when the
Ambassadors of the Pope and the Emperor were present, or first, when they
were absent. The other, never to have suffered or done any action which may be
interpreted to give an equality to the Spaniard with them. As for the order of
sitting, which should oblige the Spaniard to sit under the French; one can not
take him by the hand to bring him to an Assembly when he pretends sickness or
business. But if he appear in a public meeting, the French suffers him not
to use any action either of preference or equality.

Since the Council of Trent, the most famous meeting of the two Kings in the
persons of their Ambassadors, or rather the only, was that of Vervins, an.
1598. where the French had the precedence, as we showed before.

FINIS.

