ENOCHS WALK AND Change, Opened in a SERMON At Lawrence-Jury in LONDON, Febr.
7th. 1655. AT THE FUNERAL Of the REVEREND Mr. RICHARD VINES, Minister of the
GOSPEL. there. With a short Account of his LIFE and DEATH. With some Elegies,
etc. on his death.

By THO. JACOMBE, Minister of Martins-Ludgate in the City of London.

The Second Edition.

ZECH. 1.5. Your fathers, where are they? and the Prophets do they live for
ever?

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. Anno Dom. 1656.

To the Inhabitants of Lawrence-Jury, in the CITY of LONDON.
Honored, and Beloved in our Lord Jesus,
HOw many of our Stars in this City have of late fallen, or rather ascended
into a higher Orb, I nee^ not tell you: What is your duty under this
threatening Providence, you also know; and it will be well if you do it as well
as know it. The Eclipses of glorious lights-have been as frequent and as sad
with you, as any; and I fear (whatever the over-daring Astrologers of our
times do say from their Eclipses, to amaze and terrify us,) these do portend
something in a way of judgment. It Is not long since the violent axe bereaved
you of one; a milder blow from God Himself has now taken away another, the
Reverend Mr. Richard Vi^es, an able and godly Minister; a man of singular
worth; none but himself would deny it, none but himself could express it.

I here present you with the Sermon, which not many weeks ago I preached at his
Funeral. He was your Pastor, called and presented by your selves: whilst he
lived, ^e ^eceived much love and encouragement from many of you; since God took
him, your bounty and cha^ity has been highly expressed to his sad and mournful
widow, (for which I hope the Lord will abundantly requite you): whilst I
weighed these things with my self, I could not but make use of your Parochial
body in this Dedication. But (alas!) in so poor and worthless a Present, why
do I so much trouble you or my self about it?

Give me leave to tell you, I was very unwilling to engage in this work; for
though I looked upon it as very honorable, yet I judged my self every way
unfit for it. Importunity prevailed with me, and merely that; And now it is
done, let me assure you, many would have done it with more-ability, none with
more affection to him who was your precious Minister, my loving Countreyman,
and worthy friend.

I was forced into the Pulpit then, and now unto the Press, though I confess
more willingly, and with less reluctance; for though love to the person of the
deceased could hardly make me preach, yet that being done, love to his name and
memory did more easily incline me to print. I look for many censures, but I
must shadow my self under the name of Mr. Vines. Well, such as the Sermon is,
you have it; and this Epistle does not come to beg your Protection. (Alas, it is
below envy, who will meddle with so harmless and inconsiderable a thing) but
your Acceptance, (and I hope your candor) will run parallel with Gods mercy,
which accepts of goats hair, when no silver or gold can be brought.

For the matter here handled, it is weighty and very necessary. Mercy and Duty
are the two poles, upon which all Religion turns; you have them both here set
before you. Here Is your duty in a holy life, here is Gods mercy in a happy
death. If I be not mistaken, it may be a word in season to you. God has
endowed many of you with great parts and understanding; take heed of being
headstrong or top-heavy. Oh, walk humbly! God has blessed you with great
estates, you have pounds to others pence, bless God for it, but yet be above
all these things. Walk with God, and be Heavenly minded! your thousands will be
but ciphers when you come to die; your chests will not take away the fears of
a coffin. Oh, do not lose Christ and the Power of Religion in the crowd of
worldly emploiments. You are a people that make Profession of the ways of God;
look to sincerity. This is well; but see that Jacobs voice and Jacobs hands go
together. Let the great fervor of your spirits, appear in the interest of
Religion, and in the concernments of Gods glory. I might run over many things
which are here handled, which as I conceive, do hit you very right; (for indeed
this Discourse was not so much calculated for the meridian of the dead, as of
the living) Read and ponder, and the Lord give you a right understanding in
all things.

I have taken the boldness in the closure of my Sermon, to suggest a word or
two to you by way of advice, which the sad occasion leads me to Again and again
I would put you upon this, to look back upon the precious Labors of your
removed and dead Ministers, and live up to them. The Sower is gone, but yet the
seed may grow up. This your last deceased Minister was very averse to printing,
and we are very sorry for it; what good might the Church of God have reaped,
had he made public his excellent notions by printing, (which is (...)) yet we
are not under despair as to this, Clem. Alexand. Strom l 1.
but that by the help of his faithful and learned Mr. A Burgess.
friend, (once your Pastor too) some of his Papers may see the light. But
whether we have this mercy or not, you that were his Auditors and
Parishioners, do you live so holily, so spiritually, so firmly established in
the Truth, and especially in the Doctrine of Justification, (which he was
almost perpetually clearing up to you) that we may see his Sermons printed in
your Lives. That Is a blessed thing, when Ministers die, and their Sermons live,
and are made public in the carriage of them that heard them.

I thought to have inserted something here, concerning the suddenness of his
death, upon which may be, some are too forward to pass strange
Interpretations. And this I thought the rather to do, because I understand, in
his own Pulpit one lately gave this as his observation, that since ex tempore
prayer, he had observed there was more ex tempore death, then ever there was
before. But upon second thoughts I blotted out all this as very unnecessary. I
shall only advertise you of one thing in order to the Sermon, and I have done.
When I preached I resolved I would not be tedious, and therefore omitted many
things. Here I have taken the liberty to insert them, as being very necessary
to the subject in hand. And yet here too I have put them in with much brevity,
without any great enlargement, lest the work should swell to too great a bulk,
Ne duplo te oneret minus suavis oration, si and longa fuerit. Bern. de confid l.
1.
and so come to you rather as a Tractate then as a Sermon; or rather, lest it
should be doubly burdensome, by its prolixity and weakness too.

I commit you to God, and to the Word of his grace, praying that your Ministers
here may see your faces with joy, and that you may see their faces with joy at
the day of judgment. I am

Your Friend and Servant in Christ, THO. JACOMBE.
March 12. 1655.
TO THE Reader.
ALthough of late years, this City has been more freed then formerly, from
the frights of wars, the noisome pestilence, and outward scarsity, yet the
troubles of real Saints have been much increased, through the inundation of
errors, heresies and blasphemies, too much ^^ulged. And this has been no
small addition to our grief, ^^^t many faithful, fruitful, Orthodox Ministers,
eminent ^^^h for Learning and Piety, have by death been removed from (...) now
in the time when we most needed their counsel, ^^^ching and prayers, for our
present healing, and the preven^^^ of our future feared dangers.

Oh! how sad a sight is it, to behold our Pilots, our Steersmen ^^^ng dead upon
the deck, when the winds rise, the seas swell, (...) clouds blacken, and the
Heavens lowre, presaging approach^^^ storms: How awakening a Providence is
this, to have (...) quarters beaten up, and at the same time to see our Cap^^^s
and Standard-bearers laid lifelesse in the dust! We can^^^ without sorrow
remember the death of many of our Wor^^es, whose signal characters of deserved
commendation have ^^eady been made public for the use of succeeding Ages Dr
Gouge. M^ Gataker. Mr Whitaker. Mr. Robinson, etc.
. ^^^d this our late blow received in the removal of famous Mr. ^^^es, does
cause our former wounds to bleed afresh.

This Sermon preached at his Funeral, will give an account (...) his great
worth. Therein therefore we shall be the shorter, ^^^ugh by reason of our
intimate acquaintance with him, we ^^^ld speak very much* His natural acumen,
together with (...) acquired abilities were extraordinary. He was a smart
Disputant, as it was observed in many places with admiration^ viz. not only in
the Assembly of Divines against dissenting Brethren, but likewise at the
Conference at Vxbridge, and the Isle of Wight, about the Jus Divinum of
Prelacy, where some of his learned Opposites, still living, were very sensible
of his strength. He was a well-studied Orthodox Divine, his Ministry was solid,
pithy, quick and searching, as his most judicious Auditors in Warwickshire,
Cambridge and London will acknowledge. His Sermon preached at the Funeral of
the Right Honorable the Earl of Essex, does prove him to be an excellent
Rhetorician, an eloquent Orator. The Sermons preached before both Houses of
Parliament, do not only discover h^^ high parts, but do tell the world that he
was neither a flatter^^ nor time server. As he had a clear head, and could dive
dee^ into a knotty controversy, so he had ( Luther-like) an undaunted spirit,
and was not afraid of men, but could and would speak his mind in any company,
with brave metal and magnanimity. The great desige of his Ministry,
(especially toward his end) was to drive man out of himself, and to draw him
unto Christ; to discover the cheats of man's deceitful heart, and to throw down
all sandy foundations of hope of Heaven; to encourage an humble dependence upon
the Lord Jesus, a^ also to quicken inside holiness, with the Power of
Godlinesse^ in a Christian conversation.

And (to add that which was the Crown of all his other Excellencies) he was a
man of a right gracious tender spirit whereof this was one demonstration, (to
instance in no more that he resolved rather to suffer, by being turned out of
the Mastership of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, than to subscribe the Engagement
against his conscience. Yea, he was (of our knowledge) a hearty Presbyterian,
notwithstanding the many discouragements which are from every hand, cast upon
the death of this Worthy man, our much endeared Brother^ our words cannot
sufficiently express the grief of our own^ hearts; And, to move others to
mourning (besides sundry other Arguments which we will not mention,) we may
truly apply some of the passages of David's Lamentation) over Sa^^ and Jonathan.
Weep over Saul, who clothed you with scarlet, with other delights, 2 Samuel 1
who put on Ornaments of gold upon your apparel. The bow of Jonathan returned
not hack. They were stronger then Lions. How profitable and pleasant, how warm
in affections, how delightful in language, and how rich in notions was precious
Mr. Vines in his Ministry! and with what irresistible strength was he wont to
shoot arrows of conviction into the consciences of his Auditors? But alas
alas, Now this Champion, this Prince of Preachers is laid silent in the dust,
(with many other of our reverend deceased Brethren) never any more to awaken,
to warm, to encourage, to edify our souls by Ministerial endeavors.

Doubtless by these doleful dispensations, the voice of the Lord speaks to
the great City. Hear the R^d, Micah 6.9
and who has appointed it. And because there can be no evil in the City, and
the Lord has not done it, Amos 3.6
therefore the Prudent will lay these things to heart.

When the Ministers of the Gospel are decried as Antichristian by many, and
slighted as useless by the most, it is matter of Lamentation; and should be
for a Lamentation, that at the same time God himself does make such great
breaches, both in this City and several other Counties in the Nation, by taking
to himself so many, and men so transcendently famous, for their ability and
fidelity in the service of his Church.

And how can a gracious heart do less upon such sad occasions, then (groaning
out its grief at Gods foot) make serious inquiries, what may be the cause of
this his great displeasure? Deuteronomy. 29.24. Ezekiel. 20
As among the Israelites the Sabbaths cease^h because they were despised; so,
may not we suspect that the number of worthy Ministers in London and England is
much abated* because they are commonly undervalued? Isai. 5
The barrenness of Gods Vineyard provoked him to deprive them of the
influences of those clouds, which before had watered them. The Lord Jesus
threatened to remove the Candlestick with the light in it from the Church of
Ephesus, Rev. 2.4, 5 Amos 8.5. with 10.11, 12
because she had lost her first love. And heretofore, a famine of hearing Gods
Word was menaced, when holy Ordinances became burdensome.

These, and many more instances recorded in holy Story, do hint the causes of
divine displeasure, expressed by the death of so many worthy Ministers.

But it is much more easy in these our sufferings, to discover the hand which
inflicteth them, and the sins which procure them, then to prevail with people,
so seriously to set upon the work of Humiliation and Reformation, that the
Almighty may be pacified toward us, and that these our sad breaches may be
sanctified and repaired through his grace.

Herein, his Majesty help us and our Brethren in the Ministry, to be
successefully serviceable by our counsel, example and prayers, through the
prevalent Intercession of our Lord and Savior; in whom we are

Thy Soul-Friends and Servants, SIMEON ASH. EDMUND CALAMY.
March 10. 1655.
All Mr. VINE's Sermons are newly collected into one Volume, and printed for
Abel Roper, at the Sun against Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.

ENOCH'S WALK AND CHANGE: Opened in a SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL of the
Reverend, Mr. RICHARD VINES.
GENESIS 5.24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.


THis Chapter is a short, and yet a long History; it is called, ver. 1. The Book
of the generations of Adam; (that is) A Summary Description of the Genealogies,
Descents, Life and Death of the old Patriarks, who lived in the first Age or
Period of the world, Ushers Annal. de i. a mund. aetat Nisbets Script. Chronol.
from the Creation to the Flood (which space of time consisted of 1656 years,
according to the general Computation of Chronologers: so that the world was
then just as old from the Creation to the Flood, as now it is from he
Incarnation of our Lord to this Age.) Amongst these Ancients Enoch was one, and
one of the best too, A Star of the first Magnitude, for he stands here upon
record, commended for his walking with God.

In the Text you have him described, 1. By his Holiness or good Conversation,
He walked with God. 2 By his Happiness or blessed Translation; He was not, for
God took him.


I shall (before I fall upon the matter it self) premise a word or two
concerning the Person. For the Person, Enoch, know there were two of this name;
(...). Joseph. l. 1. c. 3.
one was the son of Cain, of whom you read, Genesis 4.17. And Cain knew, etc. and
he builded a City, and called the name of the City after the name of his Son
Enoch (which City, Henochia haec conditarum urbium quotquot unquam fuerunt in
or be terrarum prima and antiquissima putatur. Drus. Enoch cap. 3.
as Drusius observes, was the first that ever was built in the world). The
other was the son of Jared, of the line of Seth, of whom you read in this
Chapter, Genesis 5.18. And this is the Enoch the Text speaks of. How long he
lived, the 23. verse tells us, All the days of Enoch were 365 years: How he
lived, the Text tells us, as also what became of him after his thus living; He
walked with God, and was not, for God took him.

The New Testament also takes notice of him, you have him in Lukes Genealogy,
Luke 3.37. Jude speaks of him in his Epistle, Judas frater Jacobi parvam
quidem, quae de septem Catholicis est, Epistolam reliquit; and quia de libro
Henoch, qui Apoeryphus est, in ea assumit testimonia, cum plerisque rejicitur.
Hier. Catal. Script. Eccl.
(the Divine Authority of which is not to be questioned, because it mentions
Enochs Prophecy, (concerning which there are so many disputes amongst the
Learned) no more then some of Paul's Epistles are to be questioned, because
therein he cites common Authors, as Menander, Aratus, etc.) And Enoch also the
seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with
ten thousands of his Saints. Paul puts him amongst his Worthies, as to faith,
Heb. 11.5. By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was
not found, because God had translated him; for before his Translation, he had
this Testimony, that he pleased God. By the way, Where had he this Testimony?
I answer in my Text, for though in the Hebrew it is, He walked with God, yet the
Greek Version reads it, (...). Sept.
He pleased God; and the Apostle, partly to honor this Translation, and partly
for the great use of the Greek language in that Age, does here, and in some
other places, Vid. Capel. Crit. Sacr. l. 4.
leave the Hebrew and follow it; (yet from hence we must not infer, that
their Translation is Authentic, Amam Antibarb Bibl. l. 1. Err. 1.
and to be preferred before the Hebrew Text.) But here I digress.

Not to trouble you with the impertinent ridiculous fables of the Jewish
Doctors concerning this Enoch; this is clear of him, He was a good man; and
that too ( (...). Xenoph.
which adds much to his worth) he was good when the times were bad. R. Solomon
ait Enoch justum quidem fuisse, sed mente instabili, ac ad impie agendum
propensa, ac propterea Dcum celeriter ac praematura^ morte eum abstulisse.
Cartwr. in Genesis Vixit, dum vixit, laudabiliter, quanquam sunt qui eum
insimulant, levitatis and inconstantiae. Drus. Exibilandi Hebraei, qui tradunt
Henoch ante tempus raptum, quod levis and lubricus esset, adeo non pudet eos,
tam aperta mendacia divinare. M^lvend.
He was like a fish that keeps his freshness in falt-water; like a found body
that is healthful in a pesthouse; the world was now overflown with a deluge of
sin, and was shortly to be overflown with a deluge of waters; but now Enoch
walked with God, and he lost nothing by it, for he was not, God took him.

There is a future state for man, distinct from this present state. This is so
great a truth, that God would have it known in all Ages, and therefore till the
Word was written to reveal it, God will give some visible specimens of it. In
the times before the flood, Enoch shall be thus translated, as obses and testis
utrinsque vitae (so Tertullian) in the times after the Flood Elijah shall go to
Heaven in a fiery Chariot, (...). Theodorus Quaest. in Genes, (...). Data
sententia mortis voluit Dominus ducere homines in spem vitae, quod fecit in
patribus utriusque status, scilicet, Naturae, Legis, and Gratiae. Vnde in primo
statu dedit spem evadendi necessitatem mortis, and hoc est in Henoch, in Lege
in Helia, in tempore Gratiae in Christo. Aquin. Videntes Habelem justum a Caino
interfici, potuerunt aliqua tentatione vexari, sed cum postea pro sua fide and
pietate ita Henochum assumi viderent, statim judicare licuit, sanctos and
crucem and gaudia haec obituros, cum utrumque haec exempla ostenderent. Pet.
Martyr.
and so both Ages are instructed in this weighty and fund amental Truth. This
notion I had at first from a Divine of our own. But since, I find others before
him did touch upon it.

But I come to the matter here laid down, He walked with God, etc. Here is the
sum of man's duty, and the zenith of Gods mercy. Here is the morning of Grace,
and the midday of Glory. Here is the work of Earth, and the wages of Heaven.
Here is a Christians walk and rest, and both with God.

There are two General Propositions, or Doctrinal Observations that offer
themselves to us from the Text.

1. Propos. A true Christians life is a walking with God. Enoch walked with
God. 2. Propos. A Christians change is a going to God. He was not, for God took
him. Here is Holiness and Happiness meeting in a narrow room, sweetly kissing
and embracing each other.
I shall only speak to the first of these, and reduce the second under that, by
way of Motive.

A true Christians life (I say) is a walking with God. You have the same
Character given to Noah, Genesis 6.9. He was a just man, and perfect in his
generations. How does that appear? it follows, And Noah walked with God. Take
the phrase (...), in so many leters and syllables, it does not often occur in
the Scripture; but as to its sense, and genuine import, there are many
expressions which run parallel with it; but here I will not stay.

There are two things in the Doctrine.

1. A Christians life is a walking. 2. It Is not every walking, but a walking
with God.
I might put them together, but for method sake, I Will a little separate them:
and so my work shall be to show you, 1. In what respects a Christians life is a
Walking. Secondly, In what respects it is a walking with God. I Will name five
particulars for each. For the first.

Christians life is a Walking. His life is an active life. Non-dicitur Henochum
Deoastitisse, assedisseve, sed cum Deo ambulasse; certe igitur metu quodam,
etc. Sane Peripatetici sunt fideles quique. Bp. Halis Enochism. Prove. 6.10 Genesis
3.
Enoch did not stand still, or sit idle, or like Solomon's sluggard, lie upon a
bed of slothfulness. He walked. The new born man is the active man; he
bestirs himself in the great concernments of Gods glory, and his own good.
Grace is not an idle, sleepy, drowsy habit, but an active, lively, operative
thing: Religion does not make men loyterers, but laborers. In the sweat of our
brows the earth brings forth fruit to us, in the sweat of our brows we bring
forth fruit to God. The Christians life is a pains-taking life; none have so
much work as they, many duties to be performed, many ordinances to be improved,
a deceitful heart narrowly to be observed, many graces to be exercised, many
corruptions to be mortified, many enemies to be vanquished etc. Here Is work,
here is much work, here is hard work (Heaven work is hard work) here is work
wherein a man must be somewhat curious and exact, Phil. 2.12. Work out your
salvation, etc. Work, and work it out, (...). Homil. 8. in cap. 2. ad Philip.
(...) extremas summasque vires velut agonizantes exerite. Corn. A Lap.
(that is) with much accuratenesse and diligence (as Chrysostom expounds it.)
The whole life of a Christian is like walking in a journey, nay, it is not a
bare walking, but a striving, Matthew. 7.24. it is not a bare walking, but a
walking up the Hill; (for so your way to Heaven lies) nay, it is a running, nay,
it is like the running of a race, 1 Cor. 9 24. Hebrews 12.1. nay, highest of all,
it is set forth by the ultimus conatus, or impetus in the running of a race,
(...) pergit in Translatione a cursoribus sumpta; qui si quando summo and quasi
jam ultimo impetu nitantur, prono and quasi praesipiti corpore feruntur ad
scopum. Beza.
Phil. 3.14. reaching forth unto those things which are before. A Metaphor
taken from Horses or Men, who in their running, when they come near the goal,
or meta, they stretch forth themselves, and so put forth their utmost might.
All this sets before us the laboriousnesse, and painfulnesse of a Christians
life. This is the first thing which is held out in the metaphor of the Text;
The Spirit of God in Scripture delighting thus to express spiritual activity
and diligence, as Col. 2.6. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk
ye in him; and Gal. 5.25. If we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit;
(h. e.) if you have truly received Christ by faith, and have really a life
from, and in the Spirit; then walk, and be active, and active according to what
you profess is wrought in you.

walking: His life is a progressive life. Walking, it is motus progressivus. A
child of God is said to walk, because he goes forward in Heavens way; every
action in his life is as a step, a pace, by which he gets nearer to his fathers
house. Every day sin is more weak (like the house of Saul) Grace more strong
(like the house of David) affections more spiritual, duties more holy, love
more pure, prayer more fervent, the heart more humbled. Thus gracious souls do
walk, because they go from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. from strength to
strength, Psalm 84.7. He that has clean hands shall be stronger and
stronger, says Job, chap. 17.9. And says Solomon, The path of the just is as
the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18.
it is not perfectly light as soon as it is day; light comes in pedetentim, and by
degrees. The Christian is not perfect upon his Conversion, but he grows on
toward perfection, always filling up (...), that which is lacking in his
faith, 1 These. 3.10. perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. by
all Ordinances, by all Providence, growing till he come to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. and there be stops, and walks no
further, for that is his Non-ultra.

walking. His life is a regular and ordered life. Walking, it is motus ordinatus
and dispos^tus. It Is not a confused, but a regulated, and ordered motion. Such
is the life of every true Christian; he is none of those that live at random,
(...), in a disorderly manner, 2 These. 3.11. His conversation is an ordered
conversation. Psalm 50.23. To him that orders his Conversation aright, will I
show the salvation of Gods. He is one that measures and squares every thing by
the Line and Plummet. He walks (...), exactly. Ephesians. 5.15. By the rule of the
new creature, Gal. 6.16. And what is this rule? The Word, the sure, and holy,
and infallible Word; this is the Compass by which he steers, the Star by
which he sails. In matters of faith, in matters of practice, in credendis, in
agendis, still to the Law and Testimony, Isai. 8.20. What says the Word? Is
such a sin there prohibited? I must not meddle with it: Is such a Duty there
enjoined? be it never so contrary to flesh and blood, I must not balk it; and
so in every particular moral act. I may call a true Christian, a living Word,
or a living Decalogue. The Word is written in his heart, it is held forth in his
life. Phil. 2.16. Holding forth the Word of life. He does not only lay up the
Word of life in hearing, but he does hold forth the Word of life, in squaring
all his actions to it.

walking. His obedience is free and ingenuous. Walking, it is mot us spontaneus
and voluntarius. The truly regenerate Christian, whatever he does in the
service of God, he does it freely, not by force and compulsion, or a base
mercenary spirit, but from an inward principle of life and love. 2 Cor. 5.14.
The love of God constrains us. Oh blessed constraint! sweet is the violence
of love. Amor meus, pondus meum; eo feror quocunque feror, August. Love is the
golden weight that hangs upon the gracious soul, and this makes every wheel in
it to move, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy
power; in the Hebrew it is in the Abstract, willingnesses, Christ's people are
very willing in their whole compliance with the will of God. Xenocrates being
asked, What he could do more for his Scholars then others did for theirs? made
this answer, This I can do, says he, Vt id voluntate faciant, Serve in Virg.
Aeneid. 7.
quod alii jure coguntur. My Scholars shall do that willingly, which others
shall do only by compulsion. This is truly applicable to Christ; he makes his
people a willing people^ they are all Volunteers in his service; it is not
because they ca^^ot help it; no it is their choice, their delight, Psalm. 40.8.
it is not their necessity, but their option, Psalm. 119.30. I have chosen the way
of Truth.

even and uniform. Walking, it is motus aequabilis, it is not a motion by girds
and starts, but an equal, uniforme motion. Thus the child of God may be said to
walk, he is one that holds on with an even foot, with an equal and constant
pace, in the way of holiness, Psalm 119.112. I have inclined my heart to
perform thy statutes always, even unto the end. Mark these two expressions,
always, and even unto the end. The hypocrite runs fast at first, but it is too
swift to hold long, and therefore he gives out in a little time. Job 27.10
His Religion is soon out of breath. Will he always call upon God? The young
man makes much haste to Christ, but it lasts not. He runs away as fast from
him, as ever he runned to him. Hos. 6.4
Some men's goodness is but as the morning cloud, and as the early dew, which
is soon gone away. Here lies the excellency of the upright Christian, he is one
that holds out, he perseveres with an even tread, till he come to glory: where
you had him some years ago, there you have him still, always pressing after
perfection, but never changing so as to leave the good ways of God. It Is
Cajetans observation here upon Enoch: it is twice said of him, Bis de Enoch
dicitur (and ambulavit cum Deo) ad explicandum quod ab ineunte aetate profecit
in via Dei, and perseveravit proficiendo in eadem semper. Cajet.
He walked with God, ver. 22. and ver. 24. To hold forth this; (says he) He
began at first so to walk with God, and he continued to the end in that walking
with God.

I have shown you in what respects a Christians life may be said to be a Walk.
I now come to show you in what respects it may be said to be a Walk with God.
And that I shall also do in five things.

Walk with God, because he always walks as in the presence of God. To walk
with God, is as much as to walk before God. This was Gods charge to Abraham,
Genesis 17.1
I am God All-sufficient, walk before me and be thou perfect. This was Abraham's
practice; The Lord, before whom (...) walk, Genesis 24.40
will send his Angels with thee, etc. This was David's (...) solution, Psalm.
116.9. I will walk before the Lord in the (...) of the living; in the Hebrew
it is, before the face of the Lord. The real Saint lives as in the sight of God,
does all as in the sight of God, thinks as in the sight of God, trades as in
the sight of God, prays as in the sight of God, walks when he is most private,
as in the sight of God. As the Apostles in the execution of their ministerial
Function, they did all as in the sight of God;(...), 2 Cor. 2.17. He hopes to
see God hereafter, he knows God sees him here, (...) intime patientia. Vid.
Metaph. Explicatam in Beza in loc.
and he does all as knowing there is an All-seeing eye over him (that is) a God
to observe him, who is totus oculus, (as the Father calls him) in whose sight
every creature is manifest, all things being naked and opened unto him,
Hebrews 4.13.

walking with God, in respect of that fellowship and converse that he has with
God. Walking is a posture of converse. When two walk together, there is a
familiar intercourse, a mutual breathing out of love betwixt them. Psalm. 55.14.
We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company.
Thus it is with God and the believing soul, there is not a bare reconciliation
betwixt them (though that there must be too, for, Can two walk together unless
they be agreed? Amos 3.3.) but a friendly, familiar, reciprocal converse. God
converses with the believers. He spoke to Moses, as a man speaks to his friend,
Exodus 33.11. Abraham was the friend of God, Isai. 41.8. Jam. 2.23. The secret
of the Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. Prove. 3.33. what converse
more intimate, and carries more of friendship, then the imparting of secrets,
John 15.15. Christ promises to come to such, and to sup with them, Rev. 3.21.
John lay in his bosom. It Is a gracious Promise, that, John 14.23. My Father
will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him; Abode!
for what? surely for soul-ravishing communion. On the other side, Believers
converse with God. Truly our fellowship is with the Father and the Son. 1 John
1.3. This is better felt then expressed. To the people of God, holy Ordinances
are as so many Fields and Galleries, wherein they walk with God. How do they in
prayer unbosome themselves to God! Here are secret sins, will thou not subdue
them? here are secret doubts, will thou not resolve them? here are secret
wants, will thou not supply them? when they cannot go to a friend on earth,
they can go to God their friend in Heaven, and tell him their concernments,
where it is well, where it is ill, what pleases, what pinches, and the Lord makes
real returns of love and mercy to them; they are least alone, when they are
most alone; they aw the presence of God, and they enjoy the presence of God.
And this is as the morning of glory, the lower room of heaven, the praelibation
of the future joy, the everlasting Sabbath per Prolepsin (as some would have
our Sabbath to be, Vid. Gom^r. de Orig Sabb.
in the institution of it, before the fall of man, Genesis 2.3.)

walking with God, because his life is a raised, spiritual, heavenly life. He
walks with God, because he lives above this world; this vain world, this
deceitful world, this troublesome world, this defiling world. I do not wrong
it, it deserves all these Epithetes. It Is a vain world, vain in point of
duration, it passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. vain in point of satisfaction, it
cannot fill and satisfy an immortal soul, the banks are too big to be filled
up with a few drops. Isai. 28.20
The bed is too short, and the covering is too narrow; a Giant cannot lie upon
it. As nothing but Christ could satisfy God, so nothing but Christ can
satisfy the soul. In the fullness of this sufficiency they shall be in
straits, Job 20.22. Solomon had as much of worldly enjoyments, as ever any had,
and was as able to pass a right judgment upon them; and he tells us, The eye
is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing, Eccles. 1.8. No,
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, verse. 14.

It Is also a deceitful world; it promises much, it performs but little. Matthew.
13.22 1 Cor. 7.31 (...), fallit. Stapul.
God out-does his Promises the world is short of its promises, there is less in
the performance then there was in the promise: it is the best when we have it
not; for it is big in hope, little in hand; it is like Sodoms Apples, beautiful
to the eye at a distance, but when you touch them, they crumble to ashes. The
mistaken Traveller, when he is in the valley, and sees the high Hill, he thinks
it touches the very sky, and if he was but at the top of it, he should be able
also to touch it with his little finger, but (alas) when he comes there, he is
as far from the Heavens, as he was in the valley. Many in a low condition, if
they might be thus and thus, so noble, so rich, Sublimi feriam, etc. Oh, how
contented should they be! God lets them have that which they did desire, and
they are as far from what they promised to themselves, as they were before.

It Is a troublesome world; 'Its gall is more then its honey: it pierces men
through with many sorrows; it is not only vanity, but vexation: have all, it is
but vanity; want but a little, 1 Timothy 6.10.
it is vexation. Ahab is sick because he has not poor Naboths vineyard. Haman
wants but a knee from Mordecai, 1 Kings 21.4 Esth. 3.5.
and this imbitters all.

Nay, Lastly, (which is worst of all) it is a defiling world; It does but little
good to the body, and much hurt to the soul. It Is the root of all evil: you
cannot tell your money, 1 Timothy 6.10. Beatus qui post illa non abiit, quae
possessa onerant, amata inquinant, amissa cruciant. Bern.
but there is a filth, a soil left upon the fingers; The great defiling, is the
heart-defiling; if the world be there, it certainly defiles it with vile
affections, sinful lusts, excesses in carnal delights. And therefore, Christ
that loves to dwell in a pure heart, when the world comes in, he goes out.

Now (I say) a child of God walks with God, because he lives above this world.
He is crucified to it, and it is crucified to him, Gal. 6.14. It sees but
little in him, and he sees as little in it: and therefore the Christian and the
world are well-met, for they scorn each other; he is dead to these sublunary
things, Col. 3.3. he does not so much as look at them, (further then as they
are necessary supports, fruits of love, engagements to duty, objects of lawful
care and joy, and ladders by which a man may ascend to God, 2 Cor 4.18. He
keeps them all under his feet, Rev. 12.1. (that is right Christ in the heart,
the world under the feet; not the world in the heart, and Christ under the
feet; not laying Christ in the manger, and the world in the best room;) all are
to him but as a shadow, a kickshaw, a pageant, I comical show, 1 Cor. 7.31. and
therefore he joys as though he joyed not, weeps as though he wept not, (...)
uses the world as not using it, does all to it with a careless hand, but
serves God with all his might. I might here much enlarge. Take the man I am
speaking of, see what a raised, elevated life he lives. The judgment of the
world does not trouble him, the frowns of the world do not sink him, the smiles
of the world do not flatter him, the cares of the world do not burden him, the
snares of the world do not entangle him, the pleasures of the world do not
bewitch him. Pil. 3.20. Matthew. 6.21 Omnia praeter Christum ingenti laborant
parvitate. Nieremb.
In short, His conversation is in Heaven; his life is where his heart is, and
his heart is where his treasure is; as to earth, persons, and things, all but
loss, but dung to Christ, Phil. 3.8. Thus he lives above the world, even whiles
he lives in the world; and this is to walk with God.

a walk with God, for he is one that duly observes God in all the discoveries
which he makes of himself. Enoch walked with God, he took notice of God, and
made due observation of him. So that as the Christian walks with God in Gods
observing of him, so he walks with God in his observing of God.

To open this, you may know that God has made a fourfold discovery of himself.

1. In the Light of nature, that inbred light, which every man brings into the
world with him. All saving knowledge of God was lost in Adams fall, but there is
a general knowledge of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
(that he is, that he is thus and thus) which is engraven in every man, upon
the Law of his being, for though he has quite lost his Grace, yet he has not
quite lost his Reason. Take him in puris naturalibus, he is not rasa Tabula, a
mere vacuum, a white-sheet of paper, wherein nothing is written; something yet
remains, both in matters of knowledge, and in matters of practice; Vera est
sententia, nibil est in intellectu, quin prius fuerit in sensu, tametsi quaedam
notitiae nascuntur nobiscum, quas vocant (...). Me^anct. vol. 4. in disp. Non
est muta rerum Natura, sed undique loquax. Erasm.
he has some (...), in matters of knowledge, and a (...), Romans 2.15. in
matters of practice, and to these things he is not institutus, but natus, not
doctus, but factus, (as the Orator speaks) if there were no Scriptures to
reveal them, there is something innate with him, that would command his assent
to them.

Secondly, God has discovered himself in his glorious works, both of Creation
and Providence: the whole Creation is a silent Preacher of God, verbum visibile
(as Augustine speaks of the Sacrament) The Heavens declare the glory of the
Lord, and the Firmament shows his handy work, Psalm. 19.1. There is in the
very volume of the Creatures, the (...), Romans 1.20, For the invisible things of
him from the Creation of the world, are clearly seen, (how?) being understood
by the things that are made (what are those (...)?) even his eternal Power and
Godhead. The world is nothing but mundi statua (as the Platonists call it)
it is Gods great Library, as Basil calls it; it is the first Bible that God made,
Clem. Alex. It Is nothing but God manifested and drawn out, Vniversus mundus
nibil aliud est quam Deus explicatus. Cusan. Savonar. Tri. Cr. l. 1. c 1. Qui
fecit mundum creando, facit mundum quotidie regendo. Zanch. Qui curat Angelos
in coelo, curat vermiculos in coeno. Aug.
as the Cardinal Cusanus phraseth it; All the creatures are but as a ladder, by
which we may ascend to God, which whilst the understanding is fixed upon, in
Dei notionem quedammodo manuducitur and sublimatur. And so look upon the works
of Providence, there something may be seen of God. Non fecit and abiit, dixit
Philosophus, and recte (says Luther). God did not make the world, and then
leave it. No, he works still, John 5.17. My Father works hitherto. There is a
wise, governing, upholding Providence, which does reach to every creature, from
the ^^gel on the Throne, to the worm upon the dunghill. Let a man study the
Book of Providence, (especially in the mysteries and deep parts of it (for
there are (...), in the Works of God, as well as in the Word of God) he must
acknowledge a God, and this God to be wise, powerful, and good. 2 Pet. 3.16


discovered himself in his Word, and here he is d^awn at length (if I may so
express it with reverence.) Here you have him in a fuller, clearer character,
then in either of the former. That which you have there to be ghest at, is here
plainly laid down. There you have work for Reason, here for Faith; there you
must read with Spectacles, here the weakest eye may see God very legibly set
before it; there you have this, There is a God, etc. but here you have more,
This God is one in three, and three in one, a holy God, a just God, a God that
redeemed the world by his Son, etc. No light but Scripture light can discover
this.

discovered himself in his Son, and this is the highest discovery of all: John
1.18.
we know most of God in Jesus Christ, and therefore he is called speculum
patris, John 14.9. He that has seen me, has seen the Father also; The
brightness of his Fathers glory, Heb. 1.3. The very image of God, Col. 1.15.
And the glory of God is said to shine forth in the face of Jesus Christ; as the
glory of a man appears more in his face, then it does in all his body. You
will excuse this dig^ession, if it be so; but it is all to my present business.
In all these discoveries the good Christian observes God, and takes notice of
him, and he does this too duly, or in a right manner. How Is that? He observes
him affectionately, so as to love him; fiducially, so as to trust him; humbly,
so as to admire him; practically, so as to acknowledge him. 1. By fetching all
from him. 2. By ascribing all to him. Prove. 3.6.
3. By enjoying all in him. 4. By improving all for him. This is rightly to
observe God, to know him so as to glorify him as God, and this every
regenerate man does. Romans 1.21.


general and comprehensive.) A Christians life is a walking with God, his life
is a holy life. This was Enochs walking with God: He was a Cum hic Scriptura
singulariter de Henoch dicat. -- existimant aliqui Henoch sanctiorem quandam
atque eximiam and perfectissimam prae caetcris vitam instituisse, etc. Malv.
holy man. Holiness is a walk with God, for holiness is the very way of God
himself, and therefore he that walks in this way, walks with God, because he
walks in Gods own wya, Psalm 119.3. They also do no iniquity, they walk in his
ways. The good man walks with God, because he walks after God (as the phrase
is) Deuter. 13.4. according to the Summa est religio imitari quem colis.
Lactant.
Example of God, the Commands of God, he is a God-like man, one that does not
walk (...), as man, 1 Cor. 3.3. but (...), as God himself does walk (always
understand it pro modulo). His life is a blessed conformity to God himself, in
his Nature, in his Will, in his Works; he hates that which God hates, loves
that which God loves, does that which God does, this is Holiness, and this is
the highest walking with God. The learned Interpreters do generally explain
Enochs Walk by this notion. Pie and inculpate vixit. Vatab. Hoc dictum propter
ejus singularem sanctitatem. Bonfrer. Ex Dei praescripto vitam instituit mores
conformavit. Malvend. Ambulavit in timore Dei. Oncel.


I have dispatched the Doctrinal part, or the opening of the phrase. I now come
to Application.

1. Let us try our selves by this, whether we be Christians of a right stamp,
Use.
this is an excellent glass for us to see our faces in: if we weigh many
Professors in this balance, they will be found to be, not only light (for alas,
the best I fear are so much is wanting as to measures and degrees, even in
them,) but false and adulterate coin. Most men's religion is nothing, because
they do not walk with God; they are but nominal Christians, Christiani sine
Christo, (as Salvian speaks). I beseech you come to the Test, ad scrutinium,
try what you are, find out your state, what you are toward God, and for
another world. Are we true Christians, or only notional Christians? How shall
we find it out? By this, Do you walk with God? Let me tell you two things.

Enochs, few that walk with God, here and there one in a family, two or three
in a parish, Jer. 3.14.
the (...), the men of the multitude they go another way. Enoch was a man of
another spirit, a rare and choice spirit, a man by himself almost, as God
speaks of Caleb, Numb. 14.24. But my servant Caleb, because he had another
spirit with him, and has followed me fully. Indeed all men do walk, but how?
after the flesh, Romans 8.1. in the ways of their own hearts, Eccles. 11.9.
after their own devices, Jer. 18.2. after vanity, Jer. 2.5. after their own
ungodly lusts, Jude 18. This is far from walking with God, and yet this is the
course of the most in the world: the unclean man walks with his lusts, the
covetous man with his wealth, the voluptuous man with his pleasures, the
hypocrite with his formal duties, etc. Alas, with sorrow we may speak it, there
are but very few that walk with God, vix tot quot Thebarum portae, etc. This
path of holiness is an untrodden, unfrequented path by the generality of men.
Try your selves therefore where you walk, whether with the most, or with the
best. Mat 7.14.


according to his walking. It Is not Jacobs voice, that makes a true Christian,
a little religious talking, a parcel of fine words; God looks to the ways, not
to the words; to the walking, not to the talking. Nor it is not some particular
acts, that set a man right and straight, as to his spiritual condition. One
Swallow does not make a Spring; Vna Hirundo non facit ver.
some few good actions do not make a Christian. Wicked men in some particular
acts may be very good. Cain sacrifices, Ahab humbles himself, Jehu is zealous;
Genesis 4.^ 1 King. 21.^^. 2 Kings 10.16.
like the Dial, which though it stands, yet at some particular time once in the
space of twelve hours it will be right. And on the other hand, A child of God
in some particular acts may be very bad. Noah is drunk, David unclean, Genesis
9.21. 2 Samuel 11.4 Matthew. 26.74 Psalm. 73.15.
Peter denies his Master; etc. therefore no man is to judge by these, for then
he will justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous; but look to your
walking, the general bent and tendency of the heart, the scope and course of
your conversation; whatever this is, according to that God judges of you, Cant.
5.2. I sleep, but my heart waketh. Sometimes I turn aside for a pace or two,
but the great inclination of my heart, is to keep close to God. Here Is grace,
so God esteems it. The sum of all is this; you pray sometimes, and hear the
Word, and do good things; but is your walk with God, that the bias of the soul
stands toward God, the impetus of your spirits is after him, that there is an
habitual work within you, which turns the great stream of the heart toward
holiness? if so, you are Enoch's, real Saints: be of good comfort, your glory
is sure.

The main use shall be by way of Exhortation, to press this upon you, Use 2.
that you live this excellent life of walking with God. Oh that I might prevail
with some, to resolve in the strength of God, to set upon this walking. This
concerns us all: We that are Ministers, let us walk with God; as it is said of
Levi, He walked with God in peace and equity, and did turn many a way from
iniquity, Malachi 2 6. You that are private Christians, whether rich or poor,
high or low, do you walk with God? Great persons will not let mean men walk
with them, that is a posture of too much familiarity; but God is willing the
meanest creature should walk with him, and so converse with him.

In the prosecuting of this verse, I Will do two things. 1. I Will lay down some
directions. 2. Urge the duty upon you by some Motives.

In the Directive part, I Will speak 1. To the matter of your walking. 2. To the
manner of your walking. For the matter of your walking, I Will briefly run over
the particulars which have been mentioned, and press each upon you; Walk and
walk with God.

Walk and be active Christians. The Apostle exhorts Timothy, to stir up the
gift of God which was in him, (...) Est ignem cineribus conditum folle aut
flatu suscitare, ut reardescat. Corn. A Lap. Cant. 1.12 Matthew. 5.15
2 Timothy 1.6. I would press the same upon you. Have you grace? stir it up, put
it out into act, let your spikenard send forth its smell, let not your light be
concealed under a bushel. Corruption is active in the wicked, Grace should be
active in the good; shall they do more to dishonor God, then you to glorify
him? you have your grace for action, first for Romans 7.12 Paulum sepultae distat
inertiae celata virtus. Hor. De non entibus and de non apparentibus eadem est
ratio.
fruit, then for glory. As good no grace, as not to act it. The way to have
more, is to act what you have, Habenti dabitur, Matthew. 13.12 The active
Christian is the most excellent Christian. In fowls that go, the leg is best;
in fowls that fly, the wing is best; the exercise of the part makes the
difference. If you be idle, God will lose his glory; for as to men here, his
glory depends upon the acting of grace, Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine,
etc. The habit of grace brings glory to us, but it is the acting of grace that
brings glory to God. Your Savior acts his grace for you, do you act your grace
for him; he is always at work for you: the Heavens are always in motion, John
5.17
but the Earth stands still. Christ ever lives for us, we seldom live for him,
Heb 7.25.
the greater is our shame. Well, up and be doing, and the Lord will be with
you; your time is but short, your work is great, double your diligence, and be
very active. 1 Cor. 7.29.


Walk and be growing Christians, 2 Pet. 3. ult. Grow in Grace, and in the
knowledge, etc. Be like Ezekiels waters, which were first to the ankles, then to
the knees, Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5
then to the loins, afterward they were a river that no man could pass over:
Thus do you rise and increase in Grace, go from little to much, from sincerity
to perfection; let grace have its perfect work; whilst others are joining
house to house, Jam. 1 4 Isai. 5.8
growing in wealth, do you grow in grace; you cannot have too much of it: a man
may have too much of the world, he cannot have too much of grace: wicked men
grow worse and worse, do you grow better and better; 2 Timothy 3.13
your opportunities are admirable; if you stand still, who shall go forward? We
have many in these times, who are like the Sun in Joshuah's time, that stood
still; Josh. 10.12
many worse, like the Sun in Hezekiahs time, they are gone backwards many
degrees: Isa. 38.8
O Christians, take heed of this, and on the other hand make some progress in
the things of God; from babes in Christ, Heb. 5.13, 24
be strong men in Christ; from those that must be fed with milk, get your
senses exercis^d; from dwarfs be like the sons of Anak, in faith and holiness.

Walk, and be orderly Christians, keep to the rule in every thing be not
Antinomians in practice: Our doctrinal Antinomians are not many, our practical
Antinomians are very many; they dispute, and we practice; our heads oppose, our
lives embrace their dangerous opinion: Psalm. 50. ult.
Oh, let your conversation be an ordered conversation: An ordered Covenant
calls for an ordered conversation; our Grace in duty, must answer to Gods grace
in mercy. Your Covenant is ordered in all things, 2 Samuel 23.5. Let your
carriage answer to this Covenant. Do nothing, but be able to say, Here Is my
rule for what I do.

Walk, act from a free spirit, Psalm 51.12. Let your obedience be nothing but
(...), a labor of love: Heb. 6.10.
act not as slaves, but as sons; not to shun the rod, but to please the
Father; Though Heaven and Hell should be burnt up (as that famous Martyr said)
that there should be no punishment to affright you, no reward to allure you,
yet from an inward principle of love to the ways of God, walk in them; look
upon it as your meat and drink, John 4.34
to be doing the Will of your heavenly Father; Say, Lord, obedience is enough,
a sufficient reward to it self. This spiritual ingenuity will be your crown and
glory. Nothing commends an action (says Lactantius) so much as this. It Is the
will that is mensura actionum (says Aquinas) let a man do that which is never
so good, if he does it (...) and (...), 1 Pet. 5.2 Aug. Confess. l. 1. c. 12.
that spoils the action; for Nemo invitus been facit, etiamsi bonum est quod
facit (says Augustine.)

Walk, hold on with an even pace in the good ways of God. The even Christian
is the excellent Christian; when the pulse beats evenly, all is well. To be
sometimes up, and somes times down, sometimes hot, sometimes cold; this argues
a distempered heart: many are like your Jades, either they will gallop, or
stand still; either they will be very good, or nothing at all. Oh, that we
could get a fixed heart, Psalm. 57.7
to be constant and uniform in the whole tenor of our life! Thus I would have
you walk; but farther, walk with God: that is the second thing. And here,

First, Walks always as in the Presence of God, believe this as a truth;
wherever you are, God is with you. Sin may hinder you from his gracious
presence, but no place can secure you from his observing presence. Psalm. 139.7,
8, 9 10, 11, 12
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or, Whither shall I fly from thy presence?
If I ascend up into heaven, etc. It Is with God as it is with a Picture: if it be
well drawn, wherever you are in the room its eye is upon you. Thus it is with
the All-seeing eye of God, it is upon us wherever we are. 2 Kings 5.26
Went not mine heart with thee when the man turned again from his chariot to
meet thee? says Elisha to Gehazi. We think to carry things closely, but we are
foolish. God is privy to our very thoughts, to our greatest secrets and
retirements. This a child of God knows, and he would not have it otherwise.
Velleius Paterculus tells us a story of one Livius Drusus; There comes an
Artist to him, and tells him, if he pleased, he would so contrive his house,
that do what he would, none should see him; Vt libera a conspectu, immunis ab
omnibus arbitriis esset. No, says Drusus, but rather show your Art, make my
house so that all may see me, for I am not ashamed to be seen. Tu vero siquid
in te artis est, ita compone domum meam, ut ab omnibus conspici possit. I apply
it to a child of God. The Hypocrites torment is Gods Omnisciency and
Omnipresency, he would fain not be seen by God and men; but the upright man, he
knows God sees him, and he rejoices at it. Well, you believe this, live in the
practical consideration of it; what a world of sin would this prevent, if men
did but always set God before them! When Latimer heard the pen behind the
curtain, he answered very warily. The Romans, when they would not do an
undecent act, they would fancy a Cato, etc. a Fabius in the room. The Maid
would not gratify the lust of her unchaste suitor, till he could find a room
where God might not see them; and so she escaped his wicked solicitations.
Atheism is at the bottom of every sin, and this is one great piece of it; we
think God does not see us. And therefore work this home upon your spirits, and
whenever a temptation comes, crush it with this, How shall I do this under the
eye of God? Psalm. 16.8
The eye of man would keep off much sin in the world, and shall not the eye of
God much more? Walk thus, and you shall not be greatly moved.

walk with God; let your converse be with him: Let others please themselves in
their friends, in their creature-enjoyments, in their carnal converses, do you
delight your selves in God. Assuesce cum eo. Pagnin.
Let your fellowship be above: Acquaint thy self with God. and be at yeace, Job
22.21. A man may as really by prayer and meditation, and the Promises, converse
with God, as one man converses with another in a civil way. Why are you so much
strangers to it? Why so little with God? does not he usually give out that
which fills the soul with joy unspeakable and full of glory? 1 Pet. 1.8. Psalm.
63.3
Are not his visits better then life? Is not the heart ravished under the
tastes of his love? Is not the enjoyment of him infinitely above all comforts
here? Is he not willing to come to you, and to give out of his Loves? Why do
you not walk with him? why do you not converse with him here, with whom it
shall be your glory to converse hereafter? Cry out, Whom have I in heaeven but
thee? Psalm. 73.26 Psalm. 63.1 Psalm. 4.6.
My soul thirsts for thee. Many say, Who will show us any good? Lord, lift'
thou up the light of thy countenance upon me.

Walk with God, and live above this world. This is a hard duty, especially to
you here in this City, who have so much of the world; but let me prevail with
you to put it into practice. Psalm. 17.14 Jer. 17.13 Luke 16.25 Phil. 3.19 Heb.
3.1 Tit. 2.13. 1 Cor. 3.22 Mat. 6.20. 2 Pet. 1.4 Genesis 17.1, 7
Let those who have their portien here, whose names are written in the earth,
who have all their good things here, let them mind earthly things, and take
their fill of these dreggs; But you, the people of God, who have the heavenly
calling, great and glorious hopes, interest in Christ, treasures in heaven,
precious promises, an All sufficient God for your God; you must live a higher
life. If you be worldly, you debase God and Christ, the most excellent things
of grace and glory, nay, your own selve; for that Saint which does not live
above the world, lives much beneath himself. The Lapwing has a Crown upon her
head, and yet she feeds upon excrements. The child is heir to a Kingdom, and
yet he lies tumbling in the ashes. The true believer is highly-advanced through
grace; he is an heir, nay, a co-heire with Jesus Christ; Romans 8.17
for him to stoop to these beggarly enjoyments, it is much below him.
Christians, you have the Ocean, care not for the drop; the fountain is yours,
Jerem. 2.13
away with broken cisternes; you have the pearl, get above the dirt; (for so
the world is, but a cabul, a dirty thing.) 1 Kings 9.13
Mind it you may, in its proper place and sphere, keeping it under a due
subordination; but be sure of this, that you live above it. Let your thoughts
be above it. What? from morning to night, all the day long, thinking upon this
business and that business, this comfort, and that comfort? no room for
heavenly meditation? the thoughts are the spirits of the soul (as it were),
must all be spent in the worlds service? The thoughts are the wings of the
soul, will you never by them take a flight to heaven and heavenly objects? Let
your love be above it. Miser est omnis animus vinctus amiciti a rerum
mortalium- Aug. conf. l. 4. c. 6.
Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world; if any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. Let your desires
be above it. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches
certainly make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven,
Prove. 23.5. Let your comforts be above it, your hopes be above it, your
satisfaction be above it; be content with the worst of the world, be not
satisfied with the best of the world: be thankful for the crumbs of the world,
but do not take up with the crowns of the world. In a word, let your life be
above it: Be not conformed to this world, Romans 12.2. You live above it, when
you do not live according to it; and it is as hard, not to live according to it,
in the customs of it, as to live above it in the comforts of it. Thus I
beseech you walk with God: get your hearts loosened from all things here, and
live where you must die; I mean, live upon that now, which, if you would have
peace and comfort, you must live upon, when you come to die; say not of things,
as that profane man once did of persons, Cum is it is mallem vivere, cum illis
mallemmori; With riches I had rather live, with grace I had rather die.

Fourthly, walk with God, (that is) carefully and diligently observe God, and
ink notice of him in all the discoveries which he makes of himself. Study God
in his Word, in his Works, in his Son, in every thing, and by every thing, rise
up to a reverential, humble, practical acknowledgment of God: Trace him in all
his steps, and go as far as you can; and when you can go no further, then fall
upon the admiring of him; Oh the depth of the riches; both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! Romans 11.33.

In the Doctrinal opening of this particular, I laid down some practical Hints
about the due observance of God, to which I refer you, and shall not here
further enlarge upon it.

walk with God by being holy: I say, Be holy; 1 Pet. 1.15.
as he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy (and that too) in all manner
of conversation; in all your relations, in every condition, in your callings,
at all times; in all companies, in every turn of your life, (...).
in your whole carriage and deportment by ye holy. What Argument shall I use to
enforce this advice!

Be holy, for your God is Sanctitas Dei est universalis illius justitia seu
infinita, ac simplex Dei virtus qua sese ut summum bonum, omnisque boni fontem,
ali aque rectae suae rationi ac voluntati consentanea amat and dissentanea
aversatur. Gomar.
holy. Will you not be like your God? All people, whatever they pitched upon
for their God, were they never so ignorant, they would labor to be like their
god; nay, some would be Adulterio delectatur. quis? respicit Jovem, etc. Vid.
Jul. Firm. de er. Prof. Relig. Isai. 6.3.
vicious, because their gods were so. What a shame is it to us Christians, that
we are so unlike to our God, the holy and true God! Let us resolve in a blessed
imitation of God. All people will walk, every one in the name of God, and we
will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever, Micah 4.5. Be
holy, for Holiness is the very glory of God, Glorious in holiness, Exodus
15.11. It Is the glory of Christ. Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts: This
is spoken of Christ, for says John, John 12.41. These things, said Esaias,
when he saw his glory and spoke of him (that is) of Christ. Holiness is the
glory of the Gospel; by this you do adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, Tit.
2.10. Holiness is your own glory, here and hereafter. It Is your glory here, it
puts a beauty and excellency upon you: It Is called, Psalm. 110.3. The Beauty of
Holiness. It Is your glory hereafter, it certainly ends in glory. No seeing of
God without it, Hebr. 12.14. a certainty of seeing God with it. They that have
their fruit to holiness, shall have in the end everlasting life, Romans 7.22.

So much for the matter of your walking, I come to the second thing, to lay
down some Directions concerning the manner of your walking with God.

In the first place, you must walk humbly with God. It Is not thousands of Rams,
or ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, etc. These are not the things that God looks
for: He has showed thee, O man what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, Micah 6.8.
and to walk humbly with thy God? God loves the humble Walker. He Himself loves
to walk with such an one, nay, to dwell with him, Isa. 57.15. The proud man,
God sees him a far off, Psalm. 138.6. He keeps at a distance from him; and when
he does draw near him, it is not as a friend to walk with him, but as an enemy
he marches against him in battle array, to break him in pieces, so the word
imports, God resists the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. (...), ex-adverso quasi aciem
instruit. Gerhard. (...) a word hard to be opened.
Be ye therefore clothed with humility. Humility is the great Grace. Augustine
being asked what was the first Grace, answered, Humility; What Is the second,
Humility; What the third, Humility: It Is all in all, it is a prime and choice
grace, it is the crown, the ornament, the varnish of every grace, it is that
which makes every grace to thrive, nothing brings into the soul so much joy, as
Humility, for God loves to lay his wines in the lowest Cellars. Oh! labor to
act this grace, and to walk humbly. What is man that he should be proud? what
are the best of men, that they should be pufft up? what are you? a little dust,
Cum humilimus, cur non humilimus? Bern.
a little well-complexion'd dust, poor piles of grass, things of nothing,
finite drops, creatures, and sinful creatures too, meditate much upon this, and
upon the glorious Majesty of God, your infinite distance from him, this will
make you humble, this will draw out self-debasing, God exalting, grace-admiring
thoughts, Genesis 31.10.
(and there is humility) this will make you with Jacob to say, you are less
then the least of all Gods mercies, Job 42.6. Isaiah 6.5. Ephesians. 3.8, 1 Timothy
1.13.
with Job to abhor your selves in dust and ashes, with Isaiah to cry out,
unclean, with Paul, the least of Saints, and the greatest of sinners: and this
is rare walking.

uprightly, be upright and straight in your walking. Genesis 7.1.
I am God All-sufficient (says God to Abraham) walk before me, and be thou
perfect, that is, upright, for sincerity is all the perfection that here we can
arrive at. He that walks uprightly, Prove. 10.9. Ephesians. 6.5. Acts 2.46. 2 Chro.
6.14. Hos. 10.2. 1 King 18.21.
walks surely. What is it to walk uprightly? To have a single heart for God,
to walk with him in singleness of heart, with all the heart, as the Scripture
expresses it. A divided heart is a naughty heart, when men halt betwixt God and
Baal, betwixt Heaven and Earth, Grace and Sin, Christ has something, and the
Devil has something, here is hypocrisy; Take heed of this, God hates it; he
can pity a child though he stumbles and falls, but he abhors an halting
hypocrite. Let God have all, devote the whole man to him, have but Psalm. 86.11.
(...). Septuag. An hypocrite is (...) a double hearted man, James 1.8. Psalm
101.2. Prove. 10.29. Isa. 38.3.
one heart, for his service and glory; thus walk, and this shall be your
advantage, you shall have much of Gods presence, I will behave my self wisely
in a perfect way, O when will thou come unto me? You shall find the influences
of grace, to strengthen you to hold out in your walking. The way of the Lord is
strength to the upright. Upright walking will sweeten every affliction. See 2 Corinthians. 1.12. will sweeten death it self to you. It did so to good Hezekiah,
Remember, O Lord; how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart: In a word, thus walk, and God will deny you nothing: The Lord will give
grace and glory, Psalm. 84.11.
no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

Walk with God closely; I might here lament the loose walking of many
Professors in our age. What Is become of our close walking? the people of God in
former times, how strict were they, how circumspect; we have found out a
broader way to Heaven, then what they walked in. We may sadly complain, as to
the Power of Godliness, there is a mighty forsaking in this Nation. Remember
from whence you are fallen, and repent, Revel. 2.5.
set up again close walking with God, allow not your selves in the practice of
the least sin; flee from the very appearance of evil; 2 Thessalonians. 5.22.
omit not any duty, be it never so difficult; comply with every command, Luke
1.6.
let no temptations cause you so much as to step aside from God; thus do you
keep close to God, and he will keep close to you; 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
but if you forsake him, he will forsake you. And let me tell you this, every
departure from God will end in bitterness; Psalm 51.8.
if you leave him to gratify corruption, look for broken bones. God will
either make you walk closely or mournfully; which of the two is the better, do
you judge.

watchfully. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments, l^st he walk
naked, and they see his shame, Revel. 16.15. Matthew. 13. ult.
What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch, says Christ. In your walking, see
you be thus watchful. Your way is slippery, you may soon lose it; the heart,
like Balaams Ass, Numb. 22.^3.
will be flying out of the path, the Devil lays snares for you, many en mi^s
lie waiting for you, you had need look about you, and be careful what you do,
Keep thy heart with all diligence, Prove. 4.13.
says Solomon: Keep it as a Jailor keeps his close Prisoner, with a watchful
eye, for fear he give him the slip: where ever you are, there is a deceitful
heart within, a tempting Devil, and a flattering world without; look to your
selves and keep your feet when you go into the House of God, Eccl. 5.1.
when you go into your own houses: every place is full of snares, and therefore
in all places, and in all things watch. The heeedful Walker* is the sure
Walker. David neglecting this duty, 2 Timothy 4.5. Psalm 73.2.
his feet were almost gone, nay, in three or four eminent cases they were quite
gone.

walk with God unweariedly, take heed of tyring in the way of Holiness. The
Heavenly Orbs are in perpetual motion, and yet unwearied. The Sun has run his
course for some thousands of years, it is as fresh as ever it was. Oh, that
Grace might imitate Nature! Be not weary in well-doing, Gal. 6.9. 2 Thessalonians. 3.13.
you shall reap if ye faint not. What a shame is it to us? Wicked men are never
weary in the service of their lusts; and how soon are we weary in the service
of our God? We cannot spend a little time in prayer, but the duty grows
irksome, Mal. 1.13.
and in the general course of our obedience, we are ready to sit down almost as
soon as we have set out. Away with this slothfulness, hold out vigorously;
though work be difficult, though God does exercise you with much waiting, yet
be not weary.

Walk with God believingly. We walk by faith, in opposition to sight. Oh! that
we did walk by faith in opposition to carnal reason, to sinful dependancies,
to distrustful faintings. 2 Cor. 5.7.
In your resting (I mean upon Christ) is the act of faith, in your walking is
the life of faith. Paul tells us, Gal. 2.20
the life which he lived in the flesh, he lived by the faith of the Son of God.
The life of faith is a brave life, no life goes beyond it, but the life of
fruition, and that is Heaven. Christians, this life of faith should be twisted
into your walking with God. That which in the Text is called walking with God,
Paul calls faith (for however it is expressed in the Old Testament, in the New,
Paul will set it forth by faith; for so excellent was this Grace in his eye,
that he will set the Crown of all upon the head of faith) Heb. 11.5. By faith
Enoch was translated (that is) upon his faith: so then Enoch walked in faith;
imitate him, I beseech you, in this, walk in faith, or you will never walk
steadily: Sincerity keeps us from halting, Watchfulness keeps us from
stumbling, Holiness keeps us from wandering, Resolution keeps us from tyring,
but it is faith that keeps us from fainting. Psalm 27.3.
I had fainted, but that I verily believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living. Isaiah 26.3.
Are you weak? faith will reach you a staff, and that is God himself, upon
whom the sinking soul may stay it self. Are you scorched with heat in your
walking? faith will fetch cooling virtue from the Fountain Christ, to refresh
you. Does the difficulty and the tediousness of the way discourage? See, Hebr.
11.26.
says faith, There Is the recompense of reward, you will be at it presently,
Ephesians. 6.16.
hold out. Are you afraid of enemies? faith will shield you. Do you want
necessaries for your journey in your wildernesse-way? faith will go to Christ,
and fetch food, raiment, counsel, gold etc. 'twill bring in all provision
that is necessary. Are you troubled because you are alone? faith will bring
Christ, the promises to bear you company. Are you sometimes stung by the way?
John 3.14.
says faith, there is the brazen Serpent to heal you. Admirable is the use of
faith in a Christians journey; make it your Vade mecum, and all is well. Faith
will do strange things, 'twill lay you low, and at that same time 'twil lift you
up; 'twill make your condition good and bad by the same breath; bad as to weak
worthless self; good, as to God, to rich and free grace, faith will by the
same hand empty and fill; faith will make the Sun to shine, even when cloud
and darkness are round about you; faith will (like the Philosophers stone)
turn all into Gold. But I am got into an excellent subject, and I forget my
self.

nimbly; quicken your pace, and go fast in the way of God; strive who should go
the fastest, to be as the Disciple that out-ran Peter to the Sepulcher, John
20.4. I will run the way of thy Commandments; John. 20.4. Psalm. 119.32.
David would not creep to Heaven, but he would run to Heaven. What a shame is
it? many run to Hell, and we do but creep to Heaven; some make haste to get
wealth, Prove. 28 22.
and we are slow in getting glory. Let me tell you this, the faster you walk,
the sooner you will come to your journeys end. But if we go so fast, we fear we
shall be weary and faint; You have an excellent Promise to prevent this
objection. Isa. 40.30.31.
Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly
fall; but they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall
mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall
walk and not faint. Natural motion spends strength, but spiritual motion
increases strength, here the way to do much, is to do much. But they that would
go apace, Magno viatico breve iter vitae non instruitur; sed oneratur. Min
Foelix. Heb. 12.1.
must not burden themselves with any weighty things: the world is a weight, sin
is a weight Let us therefore lay aside every weight, and let us run with
patience the race that is set before us. There must be patience, because
sometimes the way is bad; and there must be running or nimbleness, because the
way is long.

cheerfully. Rejoice in God always; and again, I say, rejoice: Phil. 4.4.
The gemination of the command argues the difficulty of the duty, and the
excellency of the duty. God loves a cheerful giver, and he also loves a
cheerful liver. 2 Cor. 9.7.
Nothing does more honor Religion, then the cheerfulness of them that possess
it. Spiritus Calvinisticus est Spiritus Melancholicus.
Is not this one of the reproaches that wicked men cast upon the people of God?
they are heavy, sad, drooping, melancholy men, there is no mirth amongst them;
wipe off this reproach by a cheerful walking: I do not press upon you the
foolish, frothy, carnal mirth of the world, but that which is holy and comely.
Lift up your heads, give not way to dejectedness. The joy of the Lord is your
strength. Nehem. 8.10. Prove. 15.1.3.
By sorrow of heart the spirit is broken; it breaks the countenance, it
enfeebles the spirit; who should be cheerful if not you? Why art thou so sad
from day to day, seeing thou art the Kings Son, 2 Samuel 13.5.
said Jonadab to Amnon? Is God your Father, Christ your Savior, Heaven your
inheritance, Everlasting Joy your portion; notwithstanding all this, will you
be sad? But we are thus and thus afflicted. Be it so: Yet rejoice, your sin is
pardoned, this makes affliction to be no affliction. And the inhabitant shall
not say, I am sick; the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their
iniquity. sa. 33.24.
But we are often under the sad withdrawing of God. Be it so, yet rejoice. For
a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee.
But we are to mourn for sin. sa. 54.7.
True, but one duty must not justle out another. Even in this sorrow there is
matter of joy, and this sorrow is very well consistent with spiritual
rejoicing. Verus poenite^s de peccatis (...) and de do^^re gauder.
I might instance in other things; pray labor to be cheerful: it is not only
your privilege, but your duty; which if you will discharge (not from the
constitution or temper of the body, but) from Gospel-Principles and motives, it
will be highly pleasing to God, and much to the creduit of your profession;
Daniel with his pulse to look so well! Dan. 1.15.
surely there is something in it; when wicked men shall see you, though under
afflictions, to bear up cheerful, surely they will say, There Is something
excellent in Religion.

constantly and persveeringly. Indesinenter ambulavit. Jun.
Thus Enoch walked (as has been already hinted) it is not a turn or two that
will do the business; you must persevere in the way of Holiness. I beseech you
take heed of Apostasy, a sin never more common then in this Age; that indeed
if the Scripture was not very clear, as to this point, never was there so much
cause to question the truth of that comfortable doctrine of the Saints
Perseverance, Heb. 3.12. Heb. 10.3. Mat. 10.22. Revel, 3.11. 2 Epist. of Joh. 8.
as now. But there is no disputing from the meteor to the fixed Star. Hold on in
your way, do not depart from the living God. If any man draw back, my soul
shall take no pleasure in him. It Is your perseverance that must crown all. He
that endures to the end, he shall be saved. Recedente justitia recedat necesse
es and corona, Cypr. de Unit. Eccl. 2 Pet. 2.21.
Hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy Crown. Lose not that
which ye have wrought, but receive a full reward. Better ye had never entered
upon this walk, then not to continue in it; Can ye be better then in Gods
ways? Are Egypts onions better then Canaans grapes? Will you leave the joys
of holiness for the pleasures of sin? Are you not within sight of the place of
rest, and will you now turn back? Turpe est inextremo deficere. Luke 14.34.
will you repent of your walking with God when you come to die? if you leave
him, will you be any thing but salt that has l^st its savor, that is good for
nothing but to be thrown to the dunghill? The Lord, even God our Father, so
establish you, that you may so walk, and so run, 1 Cor. 9.24.
that ye may obtain.

I have done with the Directive part. I now come to the Persuasive part, to
exhort and press you to this blessed walkking with God.

To prevail with you herein, I might lay before you several Arguments, drawn
from the present state. As

safest walking; He that walks with God, he is under the Protection of Heaven,
nothing can hurt him; He shall dwell on High, his place of defense shall be the
munitions of rocks, Isa. 33.16. Psalm. 90.1. Job. 5.24.
He shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. His Tabernacle shall be in
peace.

safe protection, so there is abundant provision in this walking with God.
Here Is no danger to be feared, here is no good to be wanted. Psalm. 34.10.
The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall
not want any good thing: Bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure.
Isa. 33.16.


sweetest walking, What are all the joys of carnal men, to the joys and
comforts which are to be found in an holy life? Wisdoms ways are ways of
pleasantness, Prove. 3.16. Isa. 64.5.
and all her paths are peace. Thou meetest him that rejoices and works
righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways.

honorable and glorious walking. It puts a glory upon the creature to walk
with his Creator; as it is an honor to the beggar to walk with a King. Holy
men are glory it self. Upon all the glory shall be a defense. Isa. 4.5.
Faith puts a Glory upon the Person, and Holiness upon the Life.

pleases God. Enoch had this testimony, that he pleased God. Heb. 1.5.
His walking with God was pleasing God. I might very much enlarge upon these
and such other Arguments: but I pass them by, and shall only insist upon the
great Motive in the text: Walk with God on Earth, and live with God in Heaven.
And he was not, for God took him.

And so I pass from Enochs Holiness, to Enochs Happiness. Here I might enter
upon a very large discourse from this clause, but I Will only open the sense of
the words, and then show you what there is in them, to stir you up to walk with
God.

To all the rest its said, And he died, And he died, but here is a variation of
the phrase, (...)
He was not, etc. In the Hebrew it is, And not he, for God took him. Some make
the words to hold out Enochs death. And not he, (that is, he died) God took
him, (that is) away by a sudden and untimely death: And so it is parallel to
that, Genesis 42.36. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and Jer. 31.15. Rachel
weeping for her Children, refused to be comforted, because they were not, (
viz. they were dead) and so for the other expression, says Elijah, 1 Kings
19.4. It is enough now, Sumpsit eum Deus i. e. mortuus est. Aben-Ezra.
O Lord, take away my life. And thus the Jewish Doctors do expound the words.
But this is directly contrary to what we have in the New Testament, Heb. 11.5.
By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death. Oleaster says
from hence, it is probable he did not dye; and Drusius with his wit would
enervate the strength of the place, Drus. in Praef. ad Henoch Perer. de trans.
Enoch quaest. 1. Rivet Exercit. 49. in Genesis Non erat, quia non mori eum fecit
Deus.(...) Septuag.
by several evasions which he suggests, but both are censured; Pererius blames
the one, and Rivet the other.

In the general, all the learned agree in this, that Enoch did not die, but
that he was in an extraordinary manner translated hence, so the Targum renders
it; God made him not to dye: so the Septuagint, just as you have it. Heb, 11.5.
He was not found, for God had translated him. But if we come to particulars, we
shall find a difference betwixt the Protestant and the Popish Writers, and that
in two things.

1. As to the Place, whither he was translated. 2. As to his unalterable
permansion or continuance in that place, whatever it is.
Papists say, he was translated into Paradise, where Adam and Eve were put in
the state of their innocence. There Enoch and Elias, and some others, are
placed by God, there to continue in a very happy state for some time. Many of
the Papists themselves do not greatly fancy this opinion; for some of them do
agree with us, Rev. 2.7.
as to Enochs Translation into to the Paradise of Heaven, and others deny that
that Paradise into which our first Parents were put, is yet in continuance. No
'twas lost in the Universal Deluge. Percr. disp. de Enoch.
But others of them are very hot upon it, as Bellarmine, Lessius; Sextus
Senensis, etc. And some of the Ancient Fathers are of their side, Dicere Henoch
and Eliam non esse translatos in illum Para. disum terrestrem inibique versari,
est contra divinam Scripturam, and a fidei regula exorbitare. Sixtus Sen. Bibl.
l. 5. Annot. 36. Just Mart. Quaest. and resp. ad Orthod. in Resp. ad Qu. 85.

Dicunt Presbyteri qui sunt Apostolorum Discipuli, eos qui translati sunt,
illuc translatos esse Iren. Adv. Haeres. l. 5. c. 5.


Justin Martyr speaks expressly the same; so does Irenaeus and some others: and
the (...) Theodor. Qu. in Genesis Inter. 45.
rest of them generally speak modestly, as being rather for a sober silence
then a too curious inquiry into this secret, which the Scripture does not
clearly make out to us. (...). Et quae sequuntur. Chrysostom. Hom. 21 in Genesis
Quid de Hellia factum sit nescimus; hoc de illo tamen credimus, quod vera
Scriptura testatur. Aug. contra. Faustum Manich. Quo raptus fuerit Deus novit.
Cyprian.


Our Divines on the other hand assert, that Enoch was translated into Heaven,
the Coelum Empyraum, Gerh. l. 8. de Mor. 1.163, etc. Rivet. Exercit. 49. in
Genesis Mr. Perkins upon Heb. 11.5 Calvin seems to differ, Neque tamen in
coelelestem, gloriam translatus est; sed tantum praesentis vitae miseriis
solutus, donec veniret Christus resurgentium primitiae. Rivet givee you his
sense in these words, in Exercit. piius citata.

Peter Martyr also speaks ambiguously. Loc. Com. Cl. 32 c. 16. de raptu Heliae
and Henoch.


the place of the blessed, both soul and body, and that he is now there
immediately with God, in a state of blessedness and perfection. 'Twas with
Enoch in his Translation, as it was with Elias in his; but of him it is said, he
went up by a Whirlwind into Heaven, 2 King 2.11. thither therefore did Enoch go
also. Much is spoken for the justifying of this opinion though when all is
done, the judgment will not be under so full a command to assent to it,
because the word is silent, or at least does not speak so expressly to it. They
that will please to inquire further into it, may turn to the Authors cited in
the Margent.

Enochs Permansion, in that state into which he is translated. The Papists say
he did not die, but he shall come again, Nondum Henoch est mortuus, sed
morietur tamen aliquando, quia sententia, etc. Aquin in Com. ad ep. ad Hebr.
and then he shall be subject to death as others are; and at this coming he
shall appear with Elias, as the two witnesses that John speaks of, and so he
shall be slain. We say, he never died (against the Jew) and never shall die
(against the Papist) his Pass to glory was extraordinary, and so he falls in
with those whom the Lord shall find alive at his second coming they shall all 1
Cor. 15.51.
be changed, but they shall not die. It Is true, it is appointed to all men once
to die, but yet God can grant an exemption or extraordinary dispensation where
he will, Si quis illud Apostoli objiciat, constitu^um esse omnibus semel mori,
facilis est solutio, quod mors non semper sit Divortium animae a corpore, led
mori dicuntur, qui corruptibilem exuunt naturam, qualis erit mo^s ^^^um quos
dies ultimus superstite^ inveniet. Calv. ad loc. Romans 5.14. Id intelligi debet
de mortis jure in omnes; non quo^ Deus nullos a morte possit eximere. Rivet.
Moritu^ and qui de mutatur. Dras.
for he is not so thereby bound, but he can act as he pleases. And whereas it is
said, All have sinned, and therefore death has passed upon all; that is to be
understood in point of guilt, which makes all obnoxious to death, and to
deserve the inflicting of that as the punishment of sin, yet God may give a
relaxation out of his mercy and gracious Sovereignty. The objections of our
adversaries are not considerable further, then in what has been hinted, and
therefore I will not stay upon them.

Having thus briefly given you the sense of the words, I sha^ now draw out the
strength of them by way of motive to pres^ you upon this holy walking with God.
There are three thing that have a great emph si^ in them.

First, God took him. Secondly, God took him immediately. Thirdly, He was fit
for God.
God took him (that is) to himself, to be where h^ to enjoy his beatific^l
Presence in Glory. (...) Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. 1. c. 4. Hoc enim de Enoch
legimus aut Eliah; fed and tu rapieris in Spiritu. Ecce currus Eliae, ecce
ignes, etsi non videntur, p^^^^tur, ut justus ascendat, innocens transferatur,
and tua vita mori nescit. Ambros.
Enoch walked wi^^ God, and Enoch went to God. This is the happiness of ever
child of God that walks with him, whenever he dies God taken him. Enochs
passage was extraordinary: He was not, that wa^ to himself, but Enochs Glory;
for the substance of it, every holy man has it; God took him, that is a
happiness in common to all, of whom I am speaking. Let a true Christian go out
of the world which way God pleases; with God he is, with God he rests. Death
does but bring such into their Fathers Presence, that is all the hurt it does
them. Here in the body they are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. Phil. 1.23.
death brings them into the Presence Chamber; when they are dissolved, they are
with Christ. Is it so? who then would not walk with God? To be with God, I say
it again, to be with God, what tongue can express, what heart can conceive what
this is! It Is a blessed thing to be with the Angels (those that stand by, Zach.
3.7. Heb. 12.23 Matthew. 8.11.
as the Prophet speaks) with the Church of the firstborn, the old Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; the blessed Apostles; what is Paul in the Pulpit, to
Paul on the Throne, (and yet that was one thing which Austin would have desired
to see) but what is all this to be with God Himself? Revel. 7.17. 1 Cor.
13.9.10. Matthew. 25.23, 1 These. 4.17. Revel. 14.13. Psalm. 84.4. (...) 2 Cor.
4.17, 1 Cor. 13.11. Matthew. 7.23. 2 These. 1.9. Psalm. 16. ult.
what is the presence of the Star to the presence of the Sun! To be with God,
what is it? Never to sin more, never to sorrow more, to be made perfect, to
inherit his own glory, to have uninterrupted communion with him, to be at rest,
always praising God, pressed down with nothing but a weight of glory. I speak
much, and yet how like a child do I speak, (and well may I speak but so, when
Paul himself thinks he speaks but as a child, in the setting out of this
infinite glory.) Well, walk with God, and all this yours: when others are sent
away with a Depart from me, Tertul. Enoch translatus est in carne. Elias
carneus raptus estin coelum; nec dum mortui and Paradisi jam coloni, quod nos
imitamur jejunio illi possident Deiconsortio, etc. Hier. ad Pammach.
separated from the Presence of the Lord, you shall be with him, and lie in his
bosom, in whose Presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are
pleasures for evermore.

Secondly, God took him immediately. He was not put into some third place, a
Limbus Patru^^, an Abraham's bosom (distinct from Heaven) there to be a
Probationer or an Expectant of Glory, No! Enoch in his life was candidatus
aternitatis, after his Change, he was not candidatus gloriae, but possessor
gloriae. Thus it is with every holy Walker, He is not, and God takes him, as
soon as the breath is out of his body, immediately he is with God; it is short a
cut, from the sick bed to the glorious Throne. The body ind^ed, like ^li^ahs
m^re^l^, (...) a little behind^, to be looked up here in a C^binet of dust, but
the soul stays not, it ^akes 3. quick and straight ^^ight ^s God. The body
sleeps. Gerh. de morte in fine.
but the soul knows no such thing (they are asleep themselves that dream of
such a thing) it does not go to the pillow, but to the Rev. 7.9. Psychopann.
Luke 23.43.
white rob^s, it is Calvin's expression Verily, I say unto thee, to day shall
thou be with me in Paradise The Thief made Christ to wait long for his
repentance, bu^ Christ will not make him to stay a jot for his glory: it is bu^
crucified by man, and glorified by God. Will not this engage you to walk with
God? who can hear these things, and not be wrought upon? I beseech you thus
walk, and you have but one journey more, and that is to go to God, and that
shall be done in a moment; you go but slowly toward Heaven, you shall go apace
into Heaven. Sin hinders you in your motion in grace, nothing shall hinder you
in your motion to glory (i^ the soul may be said to move.)

Enoch was fit for God, or meet for God. He walked with God, and was not, God
took him. Here was nothing more to be done for Enoch. but to take him. We say
in Philosophy, God and Nature do nothing per saltum; it holds true here; God
does not take a sinner reeking in his lust, and presently make him an heir of
glory; no, God prepares him for it. ^ol. 1.12.
Giv^ng thanks to the Father, who has made us meet to be Partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light. The cloth will not receive the scarlet
tincture at first, but it must be prepared by some lighter colors; thus it is
here, first there must be the tincture of grace, so to make way for the
tincture of glory. If God should take one that was not an Enoch to himself, he
would long to be from him again, Heaven would be worse then Hell to him. Here Is
another motive then to stir you up to walk with God; then you are fit for God.
You must be prepared for Heaven, as well as Heaven i^ prepared for you. John
14, 2.
Thus you cannot be, unless you walk with God, for holiness is our idoneity, or
aptitude, or meetness for glory. Act. 1.15.
The unholy man is fit for hell, Judas went unto his own place. The holy man is
fit for Heaven, Enoch went to his own place. Be thus, and then say, Lord, I am
ready, my work is done, my heart is prepared, Come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22.20.
come and take me quickly.

The sum of all is this, Go home and be Enoch Walkers for the time to come; as
you desire to be with God in the Kingdom of Glory, walk with God in the Kingdom
of Grace. Thus live, and thus die.

Thus much for the second Use, Use 3.
I might add a third to help you in this walking with God. I have directed you
as to matter and manner; but some may say, what shall we do that we may thus
walk with God? It Is time to break off from this discourse, otherwise I might
enlarge upon these two or three particulars.

you must get out of a state of nature. Ephesians. 2.1.
Inanimate things do not move, motion is only proper to things that have life;
men in their natural estate are dead, they cannot walk; speak to them of this,
it is in vain, aliquid deest, as he said of the Statue, there wanted a soul,
here an inward principle of life. Opportet esse aliquid esse intus, as to this
walking with God. The Watch may go right for an hour or two, but 'twill not
hold if the Spring be amiss. Natural men may take a pace or two in the ways
of God, but they cannot walk unless the Spring he right, unless the heart be
renewed.

Serious consideration is very requisite to this walk. Ponder the path of thy
feet. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. Prove.
4.26. Psalm. 119.59.
The holy man is the considering man. He that is not much in the duty of
meditation, will be little in the way of holiness. Every day consider how you
walk, where you walk, what your temptations are, what snares are laid for you,
that you may avoid them, what your way is, that you may keep in it: this will
much help you in your walking with God.

take in the strength of God to enable you thus to walk; for you cannot walk
with God without God. Sine ipso cu^ ipso ambulare impossible est. Halls Enoch.
Jer. 19.23.
The way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his
steps. If God do not guide you, you will lose your way; if God do not
strengthen you, you will faint in the way; if God does not by the influences of
his grace, put you into the way, you will never get into it. Oh, pray that you
may thus walk, the more dependently you live on God, the closer you will walk
with God, the less there is of self, the more there will be of holiness. Now
the God of Peace, that brought again from the dea^ our Lord Jesus Christ, Heb.
13.20.21.
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in you
that which is wel-pleasing in his sight, ( viz. this holy walking) through
Jesus Christ, t^ whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

I have done with the Text, I now come to the Providence, the present
afflictive Providence, which is the occasion o^ this sad and solemn Assembly:
And that is the Death and Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Richard Vines, whose soul
is with God, whose body is with us now to be interred; confident I am, here are
many hundreds in this Congregation, that could drop many tears into that grave,
where this once useful body is now to be laid up as an useless piece of clay.

I shall not be long in this discourse; and before I enter upon it, I must tell
you that I am very sensible of my unfitness for this work, from first to last
and therefore with much regret and fear (the Lord knows) did engage in it. Alas
I am but a man of yesterday, Job 8.9.
a Novice, for me to do this las^ Office for such a man as our deceased Father
and Brother was* and that too in the presence of so many grave judicious,
learned Ministers, who may be my fathers, truly I blush at it but you may all
spare your censuring of me, for I do very severely censure my self. All this
had been prevented (t^ your, I am sure to my own great comfort and
satisfaction) i^ another darkish Providence had not interposed. There was
worthy person designed first to this work, one whose head an^ heart God has
inured to Funeral Sermons, one who was int^mately acquainted with him that is
dead and gone, and so ha^ been for many years, one who was as willing as fit
for the service, but he is at present Gods Prisoner, and dis^inable^ by
distempers of body: The Lord continue his life, that he may preach many Sermons
more, but no more Funeral Sermons for such instruments as this our brother was
if the Lord please. But we will leave the Apology, and come to the business
Another of the Chariots and Horsemen of our Israel is gone: 2 Kings 2.12. 2 Samuel 23.
one of the three, not one of the thirty, for he may well be put amongst the
first, as exceeding the most, inferior to none. We may this day say to God,
with an humble submission to him under his correcting dispensations, as to the
death of Ministers Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take away
Benjamin, all this is against me. Dr. Gouge is not, Mr. Gataker is not, Mr.
Strong is not, Mr. Robinson is not, Genesis 42.36.
my dear and precious friends, Dr. Hill and Mr. Whitaker are not, of late
worthy memory M. Marshal is not; all these are not, and now Benjamin is gone
too. These things are very sad, the Lord help us to lay them to heart.

Historical Narratives are very usual upon this occasion, I shall be very short
in mine.

Mr. Vines was born at Blazon in the County of Liecester: when he was of
competent age, he was sent to the University, where he continued for some years
a Student in Magdalene College. In which time he discovered much quickness of
wit, and pregnancy of parts, which though they made him lively and acute, yet
never sinful or profane (which is a great commendation, when we consider how
apt your hot wits are to boil up to a scum of frothinesse and profaneness.)

From the University he was removed to Hinckley in his own Country, where for
some time he was a Schoolmaster. And let this be no disparagement; I could
instance in rare instruments of Gods glory in the Church of Christ, who began
with that emploiment; but Mr. Vines is enough to himself, and may rather give
then take credit from any.

From thence he was called to the Ministry at Weddington in the County of
Warwick, where how diligent and painful he was in his work, it is sufficiently
known. Not bounding his parts and pains there, in the limits of a private
village, he undertook a Lecture every fortnight at Non-eaton, which he carried
on with much profit too, and much applause from his hearers; insomuch, that in
those days when preaching was a rare commodity, many both Ministers and
Christians would travel many miles to hear him.

The late and never enough to be lamented Civil war drawing on, he was forced
from his House and Charge, for his Preservation to go to Coventry: There he is
not idle, and the inhabitants were so affected to his Ministry, that they
earnestly desired him to sit down with them. And indeed it is pity* that great
lights should burn out in little rooms. The Parliament calling an Assembly of
Divines, he was nominated a Member of it, and deputed to have a share in that
work: And 'twas a mercy to the Church of God that he was so, for how much
service he did there in the matter of Church Government, may safely be
concealed, scarcely be expressed without offense.

This was the occasion of his coming up to this famous City: and here too, no
sooner was he come, but he had a call to Clements Danes, a very large and
considerable Parish. And how effectual his preaching there was to the good of
many. Some I am sure, in this Congregation can testify, not without many
tears, so much are they troubled at the drying up of those breasts, from which
for some years they had so wholesome nourishment.

Afterward he removed from thence to Watton in Hartfordshire, was also chosen
to be Head of a College in Cambridg* viz. Pembroke-Hall, who more fit for
learning, for a spirit of Government, for such a trust then he? there he
continued very useful and serviceable, till he was put out, because he would
not take the Engagement, I say, that Engagement which was a stone of stumbling,
and a rock of offense, to many tender conscientious Ministers in this Nation.

Raro solent ingenia insigniter foelicia robusta sortiri corpora, sic
dispensante. Natura ut quod animi viribus additum est, corporis detrahatur,
Erasm. in Ep. Praef. ad Aug. opera.
From being Pastor of Waetton he was invited hither to Lawrence Jury, and so
returned to London again: And here this famous light went out. Hence was his
last removal, viz. to glory. What his carriage and behavior was here, you know
better then I; and yet so much I know, that I dare confidently say, do but lay
aside ignorance and prejudice, and you cannot but bless God that ever be came
amongst you:

Long he had not been Minister here, but he fell into some decays and
abatements, both in his spirit and strength, continual pains in his head did
somewhat cloud him, but yet Carthage might be seen in the very dust of it. He
was formerly of a very strong constitution, but lately infirmities grew much
upon him, which he grapled withal some months together, till God sent his
messenger with a final Arrest to ^ake him away from us. At the Arrival of which
upon Monday morning, betwixt two and three of the Clock he ^ied, at the Age of
56. or thereabouts. We bless God he lived (...) long, we mourn because he died
so soon. And it is thought he hight have longer lived, had he wrought less; Job
14.14.
but why do ye speak of that? His appointed time was come.

And now we may bring my Text and the Providence together; or of our brother we
may say, He walked with God, Ut est mode stiae non agnoscere lauds hominum, it
a gratitudinis est non tacere viros, per quos numinis benignitas tanta commoda
largitur humano generi. Eras ib. John 5.35. Job 33 23. Acts 8.24. Ut v^sa
Aegyptiis erepta in usum Tabernaculi converti potuerunt, sic Literatum and
Philosophiae, studia, etc. Voet in orat Fun pro Schotauo. p. 16.
and he is ^ot, for God has taken him. Shall we leave him thus! A ^ttle I
beseech you of his worth: you have heard much from ^im, be willing to hear a
little of him, partly to work upon our thankfulness that you ever had him;
partly, to work upon your sorrow, that now you have lost him; but chiefly that
God may have glory in raising up such an instrument, ^o rarely qualified and
accomplished for his service, I shall ^o it very plainly; The Pearl needs no
Art, it is beautiful e^ought in its own luster.

He was a burning and a shining light; An Interpreter, one of thousand; of very
great and eminent parts, taller by the ^ead and shoulders then his ordinary
brethren; A man ^ighty in the Scriptures, another Apollos in that, exquisitely
accomplished in all parts of Learning; a perfect Master of ^he Greek tongue; a
good Philologer, an excellent Orator, fitness his curious and ingenious
Oration, at the Funeral of ^he Noble Earl of Essex, (in whose affections he
had a great ^^terest,) He was a ready and piercing Disputant, and so he
^pproved himself to admiration, in those two famous Trea^es, the one at
Vxbridge, the other at Newport in the Isle of ^ight. He was a solid and most
judicious Divine, who read such, and concocted what he read, one who was able
to give a ^eighty and pithy decision in any controverted point. He ^as a
notable Confuter of errors; He seldom spoke to them, ^ut he hit the bird in
the very eye, and made them die, not a ^ngring, but a sudden death. Tit. 2.2.
In the course of his Ministry ^e was highly Orthodox, sound in the faith,
very powerful, very spiritual, his whole design and drift in his preaching,
was to clear up that great doctrine of Justification (in which he was eminently
studied) to debase the righteousness of man, In cordemco iste unusregnat
Articulus, in quem fluunt and refluunt omnes m^ae Theologicae cogi rations d u
noctuque. Luther. Isa 50.4.
and to exalt the righteousness of Christ. He was one that knew how to speak a
word in season to wounded spirits. There was a great Mr. Angel of Grantham. 2
Cor. 11.23. Vultis ut Do minusmeos advenier s me offendatotiosum? Calvini
dictum Vid. Bcz. in vita Calv. Pasce ve. bo, pasce exemplo, pasce subsidio.
Pasce verbo praedicationis docte place exemplo converfationis sancte pasce
subsidio charitatis pie. Greg in Pastor,
Light; who is now with God, who being under a sore desertion, did receive much
comfort from him. His diligence in his work was great, in labors much, in
preaching much; and to the last his great weaknesses could not keep him from
his Masters work: that which would have made some kept their beds, could not
keep him out of the Pulpit. The day before he died, being the Lords day, here
he preached once, and administered the Lords Supper, and the day he died on, he
was to preach a Funeral Sermon at Clements Danes. As he preached, so he lived;
by his parts, he did (...), by his graces he did (...), what he preached to
others, he practiced himself, and was not like a way-mark, that shows others
the way, but never stirs it self.

For his natural temper, he was a man of a brave undaunted spirit. Some called
him Luther: indeed he was another Luther, he feared not the faces of any in the
discharging of a good conscience. In his carriage he was somewhat blunt and
inobservant, but not in the least proud or supercilious. He was so unblameable
and inoffensive, that nothing can justly be charged upon him. Two things I know
are in the mouths of many, His often removing from place to place; His
covetousness. For the former, there is no question, but that in some cases a
Minister may Vid Bowls. Past. Evangel. l. 3. c. 7.
remove, (though herein for the avoiding of offense, it concerns us to be very
wary). And as to his particular case, I understand what his grounds were in all
his removals, excepting only one, and am fully satisfied, that his removings
upon them were lawful and warrantable, and so I suppose would his censurers be
too, if they did but rightly understand how things were with him. For his
covetousness, I suppose, by this time, that reproach is washed off; by what he
has left behind him, it abundantly appears, His heart was not much in the
world, if it had, sure there would have been more of the world in his purse.
It Is not convenient to speak out particulars, but this I may confidently say,
There path not been a Minister of any repute in this City, for some years, who
died with so mean an estate as he; and indeed, if the truth was known, they
that censure him for this, would rather censure him upon another account.

But to shut up all. Take him as a Christian, he was another Enoch, a true
Walker with God, a very holy man; more I can speak of none, less I cannot
speak of him. Thus he was, but now he is not, he is gone, we shall never hear
him, nor see his face more. Oh! that is a cutting word. Acts 20.38.
His life was like Enoch's life, and his death very like to Enoch's
Translation. He died suddenly. He went well to bed, slept and died. His death
was a sleep indeed; being weary and spent with his work, God took him to
Heaven, there to give him a Cordial; from the Pulpit he went to the Throne; as
soon as he had ended his Sabbath here, he entered upon his everlasting Sabbath
in glory. He went warm from his work to his wages, That Is a blessed thing, for
a Minister to be found by death about his Lords business. His work was done,
he had finished his task, was weary and feeble. God his good Master takes him
to himself, crowns him with life and immortality, and in stead of hard labor
here, calls him to that joyful work of singing forth praises and Hallelujahs to
his God and Father. And here we leave him. God grant that hither we may follow
him.

May be some will go home and say, I have spoke too much. My conscience bears
me witness, I have spoke my heart, and what is the truth. He was a person of
so much worth, that he does go beyond all that I have spoken; for I may say of
him with the Comedian, De quo non possum it a magnifice loqui, Terent.
Id virtus quin superet sua. But others will say, I have spoke too little; that
I confess is a truth, but that is my weakness, not my fault. I must answer
this too with that of the Poet.

Lucan.
Quod si digna tua minus. est mea pagina laud,
At voluisse sat est. --
I shall crave leave to add four words to you, my sad and serious Auditors,
and so I shall dismiss you. I shall speak to you in a fourefold capacity; As
private Christians, As Ministers, As Parishioners, As Relations.

First, as you are private Christians; and in that consideration, let me hint a
few things to you.

Be deeply affected with such black Providence as this is. The loss of a
Minister is a great loss. The death of a private Christian is sad, the death
of a good Minister is more sad, but the death of a godly and able Minister,
such a one as our brother was, 2 Kings 2.12.
this is very sad indeed. My Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof. The more public is the loss, the more it is to be lamented:
Godly Ministers are men that are placed in a public Orb, and therefore their
loss is much to be laid to heart. What do you lose when you lose your godly
Ministers? consider what the Scripture makes them to be, Ezck. 3.17. 1 Cor 4 1.
1 Cor. 4.15. Mat. 5 14.
Watchmen, Stewards, Fathers, Lights, etc. and you will see you lose much when
they are taken away; and more then this, there cannot be a sadder presage of
approaching judgments to a Nation, then the death of such. When God pulls up
the stakes, he intends to burn the hedge; when the pillars are removed, the
house is like to fall; upon these and other motives, be seriously and deeply
affected with such dispensations as this is; God looks for this from you, and
his Providence call you to it: Isa. 57.1.
but woe unto us, The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart.

Secondly, Put away those things which cause God to shorten the lives of
painful Ministers. I might reckon up many; you cast dirt upon them, and God
casts dust upon them; you contemn them, and vilify them; it is one of the sins
of the age. Jeroboam made Priests of the basest of men; and now those that
serve in their stead, are made the basest of men. The Heathens will rise up in
judgment against us, Amongst the Egypt: Priests were (...). Diod. Sicul. Of
Alexander. See Jos. Ant, Jud l. 11 c. 8.
who always honored those that administered in the matters of their worship.
But I Will only instance in one thing: you are unfruitful and barren under all
the pains of godly Ministers: they preach in season and out of season, waste
their strength, spend their lungs, preach out their very hearts, and yet you
never the better: this makes God to take them away in judgment to you for your
unprofitablenesse. It Is your sin that hastens their end; if you did thrive
better, they would live longer.

Thirdly, when you mourn because so many are gone, be thankful because so many
are left. God has taken many Laborers out of his Vineyard in a little time;
but many are yet spared: It Is of the Lords mercy, Elisha is not snatched away
too. Well, Phil. 1.25.
they are spared a little for the furtherance of your joy and faith: prize
them, and profit by them, or else they also shall be removed from you.

Brethren and Fathers in the Ministry. Though I am but an Elihu, yet suffer
the word of Exhortation from me. Job. 32.6.
You see you are mortal as well as others, nay, indeed your lives are more
uncertain then others: your frequent labors, your consuming studies, your
spending emploiments drive you to the grave faster then others. The Prophets,
Zech. 1.5. 1 Cor. 15. ult.
do they live for ever? I would from hence stir you up to abound in the work of
the Lord, to improve your opportunities of service whilst health and strength
are afforded to you, to double your diligence, to work whilst the day lasts,
because the night is coming, when no man can work. John 9.4.
You are spared when others are taken away, there are fewer hands, you must be
the more diligent; this may be will hasten death, but this I am sure, it will
sweeten death, and make you go out of the world, if not with love from men, yet
with peace in your own consciences, 'twill be in the stead of a thousand
cordials to you when you come to die. Lord, thou know I have not been idle.
I have according to my poor talent glorified thee on earth, and now glorify
thou me, John 17.4.
etc. Be not too much cast down at the taking away of such eminent instruments
as this was, for God will raise up others; he never wanted instruments as yet
to do his work. If he take away an Eli, he will provide a Samuel; if there be
need of eminent instruments for the beating down of error, the holding up of
Truth. Such God will provide. He Will have an Athanasius for an Arius, an
Augustine for a Pelagius, a Prosper for a Coelestine, a Fulgentius for a
Faustus. I say, let us not be cast down, God will never want Workmen to do his
work: only let us make this use of it, we that are remaining Elisha's, to get
Elijah's spirit doubled upon us, to treasure up a large stock of grace and
knowledge, that we may be able to bear some considerable weight when old
pillars are gone; and to increase our diligence, as God increases our work.

Eclipse reaches further; yet it is darkest in your borders. God has smote your
Shepherd, and you are like to be for a time as a scattered flock; Zech. 13.7.
a Shepherd you may have again, but every Shepherd is not Mr. Vines: shall I
inminde you of two or three duties.

1. Bless God for that merciful provision which he has made for you, in a
succession of godly Pastors. Not many places in this City have been better fed
then you, to the praise of his Grace be it spoken.

Secondly, Study what is the meaning of God, in the taking away of your
Ministers so fast. Two you have lost in a little time, though by different
ways. The one burnt out like a candle, that has no more matter to maintain
its burning, the other was blown out. This our brother, now to be interred was
taken away by the Hand of God, the former Minister was taken away by the hand
of man, whether justly or not, the great day will discover, when Kings and
Parliaments must give a strict account, especially for blood, and that too
especially for the blood of precious Ministers.

Thirdly, Do not forget them, though you cannot enjoy them; Let the precious
truths they preached, always be sounding in your ears, Heh. 11 4. Heb. 13.7.
for though they be dead, they do yet speak. Remember them who have spoken to
you the Word of God, though now they are laid aside. You do remember them in
some sense, witness the large expressions of your love to the widows, which
the two last left behind them, which I cannot but mention to your praise, but
remember them further, so as to live according to that they have set before
you. This affection is the best affection, this will be their crown and yours
too at the day of judgment.

Fourthly, if I shall not presume too far, let me advise you to be careful in
your choice again; that when you shall come to that serious business, you may
pitch upon one, who by his Doctrine and Life, may build upon the same
foundation, upon which your worthy Pastors hitherto have done. My advice may
be will give offense, but I hope my prayer will not; I heartily pray, that God
will direct you herein to do that which may be most for his glory and your
souls good.

Lastly, I shall speak to you the near and dear relations of this our deceased
brother: you mourn, you have cause to mourn, mourn not as without hope, quietly
submit to God, who has put this cup into your hand. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. 1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord, be silent. He is gone, but whither? to be with God. He is not,
but he is; He is not with you, but he is with Christ. He is taken, but God has
taken him; He that gave, he took; say; (though it be hard) Blessed be the Lord.
If you loved me, you would rejoice, because I go unto my Father. Job 1. ult.
John 14.28.
He is better where he is, then where he was; for here a poor decaying man, but
there a glorious triumphing Saint. The Lord make up this great loss to you, to
the Parish, to the City, to the whole Church of God.

FINIS.
RICHARDVS VINES.
Anagramma. Charus Dei Sin.
UNa deest Anagrammate litera, sed tibi nullus
(O dilecte Deo) desideratur apex.
It Is true, our Anagram does limp a little
That speaks thy bliss; but it wants not a tittle.
William Spurstowe. D.D.

In memory of that eminent Servant of Christ, Mr. RICHARD VINES deceased,
lately the learned and faithful Pastor of Lawrence Church in London. Numb.
13.23.

A Ponderous Cluster once did give a taste
Of Palestines fertility and pleasure
To Zions Denizons, who in the Waste
Valued that Present as a royal treasure;
How fruitful was the Vine which bare that Clustre?
How fertile was the soil which bred that Vine?
How fragrant all its Vines then in their luster? Psalm. 16.6.

How sweet a Paradise was that holy Line?
Their Lines, I grant, were fair, our Lot is better,
Theirs but a type was of our Promised Land;
Their rich enjoyments were the bark and letter
Of what we look for in the Heavenly Strand. Micah 7.1.

But woe is me when Vines begin to fail,
Whence can we Grapes expect, or Cordials?
In howling Desert Zions Pilgrims quail
At the report of Babels towering walls.
How many Vines of late have been transplanted
From wilderness to Paradise? whose graces,
Whose gifts and pains we in our journey wanted,
Men of Seraphick principles and paces.
Their choice Perfections did in Thee unite,
As in a common Center all the Lines,
Both Nature, Art and Grace thy name make bright,
Each of them was a Vine, but thou art Vines.
Roger Drake, Pastor of Peter's Cheap.

RICHARDUS VINES. (...). Hic rarus Videns 1 Samuel 9.9. Agite, eamus ad Videntem,
nam qui Propheta hodie, antiquitus vocabatur Videns.
.
HIc est ille Videns, quo non est rarior alter.
Assertor Fidei; quo non nervosior alter.
Malleus Haeresium; quo non solertior alter.
Praeco Dei verbi; quo non divinior alter.
Nec vitae absimilis voci; non sanctior alter.
Huic plures, Deus alme, pares concede Videntes.
T. D.

Ad Tumulum Viri quam Clarissimi, RICHARDI VINES, Aulae Pembrochianae nuper
Praefecti. Malos Iambus enecat, beat bonos.
VIator! haud novum fero; fero malum:
Diu est, quod omne Triste non novum siet.
Jacet, sepulta Veritas; Sciens perit;
Diemque vidit ultimum Pius suum.
At Ilias mali sequuta tot mala:
In uno habemus omne. Vinius cadit.
Malo vel ausus esse saeculo Bonus:
Minusque dives esse, quam pius minus.
Frequenter Angliam dolere perfidam.
Solumque Patrium solebat (O potens
Fide!) imminente sistere a ruina. At heu!
Ruit Columna ponderi impar impari.
Ad haec: Sacrata Jura Numinis petens,
Amoris ille plenus in Deum, nisi
Sacrum, nihil dein sapit, nec appetit.
Quam in infimis morari, obire maluit;
Suprema quaeritans. Abit. (beata Mors!)
Modis oportet hisce Episcopum mori.
P.V. Th.B.

On his receiving the Lords Supper the day, (or rather some hours) before his
death.
STrange miracle! Elijah's blessed repast.
In forty days brought him to God at last.
But stranger this Our Vines to God does go
In some few hours, and without fasting too.
And yet in me, it shall no wonder move,
A Raven did bring that: but this, a Dove.
Delicious fare! He relished naught beside:
But tasting of it, liked it not; and di'd.
Yet stay, I Am out: for know, he is not dead,
But after such a Supper went to bed.
Pet. Vink. M.C. Land.

Upon the Death of so many Reverend MINISTERS of late.
STill we do find black Cloth wears out the first;
And fruits that are the choicest, keep the worst.
Such men? so many? and they die so fast?
They Are precious (Death) Oh do not make such waste.
Scarce have we dried our eyes for loss of one,
But in comes tidings that another's gone.
Oh that I had my former tears again,
(All but those few laid out upon my sin)
Had I an Helicon in either eye,
I have occasion now to verse them dry.
Triumph (Licentious Age) lift up thy Song,
Presbytery sha'n't trouble you e're long;
Those that tormented you before your day,
Are now apace removing out of the way.
Yea rather, tremble (England) stand aghast,
To see thy glorious Lamps go out so fast;
When Death (like Sampson) thus lays hold upon
The Pillars of the Church, -- the Building's gone.
When we do see so many stars to fall,
Surely, it boads the worlds great Funeral.
London, look to it, and think what Heaven is doing.
Thy flames are coming, when thy Lots are going.
Well may we all fear God intends wars,
When he commands home his Ambassadors.
That venerable Synod, which of late
Was made the object of men's scorn and hate,
(For want of Copes and Miters, not of Graces,)
Are now called up (with Moses) and their faces
When they return, shall shine; God sees it fit,
Such an Assembly should in glory sit.
The learned Twisse went first, (it was his right)
Then holy Palmer, Borroughs, Love, Gouge, White,
Hill, Whitaker, grave Gataker, and Strong,
Perne, Marshal, Robinson, all gone along.
I have not named them half: Their only strife
Has been (of late) who should first part with life.
Those few who yet survive, sick of this Age
Long to have done their parts, and leave the Stage.
Our English Luther, Vines, (whose death I weep)
Stole away (and said nothing) in a sleep:
Sweet (like a Swan) he preached that day he went,
And for his Cordial took a Sacrament:
Had it but been suspected, -- he would die
His people sure had stopped him with their Cry.
My blear-eyed Muse ('it is tears have made her so,)
Must wash his Marble too, before she go.
Upon the much to be lamented Death of the Reverend Mr. Vines.
ARt thou gone too (thou great and gallant mind)
And must such Sneaks as I be left behind?
If thus our Horsemen and Commanders die,
What can the Infantry do then but fly?
Oh divine Vines! Tell us, why would thou go,
Unless thou could have left thy parts below?
If there is a Metempseuchosis indeed,
Tell us where we may find thee at our need?
Who has thy Memory? thy Brain? thy Heart?
Whom did thou leave thy tongue? (for every part
Of thee can make a man) What if we find,
(As I Will not swear this Age will not change her mind)
Prelacy (though her lands are sold) revive?
Or Independency (who hopes to thrive
No where suit's Trump) should dare dispute at length?
Where have thou left thy Presbyterian strength,
With which thou got'st the Game, in the Isle of Wight,
Where the King cried, that -- Vines was in the right?
When Essex di'd (the Honor of our Nation)
Thou gav'st him a new life in thy Oration.
An expression in Mr. Vines Sermon on my Lord of Essex.
But when great Fairfax to his Fate shall yield,
Whom have thou left -- to fetch from Naisby field
The Immortal Turfe, and dress it with a story,
That shall perpetuate his name and glory?
Where Is thy rich Fancy (man)? To whom (beneath)
Did thou thy lofty and high strain bequeath?
Tell us for thy own sake; for none but he
That has thy wit, can write thy Elegy.
Till he be found, let this suffice, which I
Leave on thy stone. -- Here lies the Ministry.
R. Wild, Minister of Aynhoe.

In obitum Viri Doctissimi, pariter and pientissimi, RICHARDI VINES,
Summi Theologi.
QUae tenerum (quondam) solita est, and inutile gramen
Et flores agri, carpere falce levi,
Robora, sublimes CEDROS VITESque securi
Fatal, Nunc Mors Improba sternit humi.
Atque uno (ut miseros, and per compendia reddat)
Ict u, Stravit totum hoc genus arboreum.
En cui Robur erat QVERCVS, CEDRIque perennis
Durities, VIT IS Laetificae Bonitas,
Hunc celeri and caeco succidit Vulnere. Casum
Flebit Posteritas. Nos satis haud fuimus.
In English thus.
DEath, that was wont the tender grass to mow,
And crop with gentle Sith, the flowers that grow
In broidered fields, now fells our stoutest OAKS,
Tall CEDARS, CHOICEST VINES with fatal strokes;
And to complete our misery, at one blow
ALL these in ONE fierce Death did overthrow.
For Him in whom the STRENGTH of OAKS did rest,
BEAUTY of CEDARS, and of VINES the BEST:
By a swift secret stroke too, envious Death,
Out of our sacred Grove removed has.
Thus VINES cut down, and' cause we for his fall
Cannot lament enough, our children shall.
M.N.

Epitaphium, In Disputatorem acutissimum, Concionatorem foelicissimum,
Theologum Eximium, Dominum RICHARDVM VINES.
QUo disputante Nemo Nervosior
Et (...) Strophas solvere
Atque (...) capistrare potis mage.
Quo perorante Nemo facundior,
Doctior aut, Coelum effundere in Mortaleis
Sinus, aut Mortalia in Coelum Pectora.
Quo vivente Nemo charior
Aut suis, aut Amicis veritatis.
Quo moriente, Ah --
Desiderantur plurima.
Posuit Mat. Newcomen. Upon the much lamemed Death of that eminently
accomplished Man of God, Mr. Richard Vines, late Pastor of Lawrence-Jury,
London.
Jer. 24.3.
OF figs two baskets, and two sorts of Vines,
Some good, some bad I read; unlike their wines.
Deuteronomy. 32 32.
The Vine of Sodom, poisonous grapes which bears,
The Vine of Sibmah bleeding briny tears;
Esa. 16 8. Jer 48.32. 2 Kings 4.39. Hos. 101. Job 15.33. Esa. 5.2. Ezekiel.
17.6.7.
The wild Vine which the Prophets Pot did taint;
An empty Vine, the foul self-seeking Saint;
A blasted Vine, which unripe fruits did cast;
A sour grap'd Vine, unpleasing to the taste;
A bending Vine, constant to no one side,
But changing Lords and Faiths with every tide.
Such were the old false prophets, cursed souies
Which poisoned their times with Hell-brew'd Boules;
Such Hypocrites; such the Apostate Race;
Foul Covenant-breakers. Men of no heart, All-face.
Ezekiel 17 15.
None such was this our Vines. A better kind
Then those forenam'd you do in Scripture find.
Jer. 2.21. Genesis 49.11. Judge. 9.13. Psalm. 128.3. 1 Kings 4.25. Psalm. 80.15.
Ezekiel 17.8. John 15.
A noble Vine I meet with, a Vine choice;
A fruitful Vine, best Emblem of Increase;
A shady Vine, Ensign of public peace;
A Vine of Gods own planting; Goodly Vine;
Branches implanted in a Vine Divine.
Such was our Vines, whose noble fruit, choice shade
The gracious heart and spirit cheerful made,
A Branch of the True Vine, ingraffed, dressed;
By the Fathers hand, purged, made fruitful, blessed,
Joh. 15.1, 2, 5.
With many Clusters, full of such rich wine,
As did Brains, Hearts, and Lives of men refine.
Oh Noble Plant! Oh Plant of much renown,
Laden with so much fruit, as well might crown
A^ many Ministers, where such variety
Of Learning, Wisdom, Courage, Grace and Piety
Were managed with that skill, and so improved,
As made him honored, awed, reverend, loved.
England consider! Thy Vineyard fast declines,
Thy hedge is broke, wall fallen, thy choicest Vines
Transplanted are, now like an Heath forlorn
With stones thou covered art, over- run with thorn,
Esa. 5. Psalm. 80.13. Cant. 2.15. Psalm. 80.14.
Pestered with briars; the Beast, Fox and wild Bore
Do all assault thee, and will more and more.
But look down Lord from Heaven, and visit thou
This Vineyard ('it is thine own) in danger now;
Esa. 5.
The stones and thorns pick out; the hedge and wall
Restore, tower build; but above all
Esa. 27.3.
Let thy eye be upon it night and day,
Whatever may it hurt chase thou away.
To the Honorable Memory of Mr. Richard Vines.
BUt why so soon, why make such haste away?
Could thou not brook a little more delay,
And give some warning of so sad a blow,
No private, but a common overthrow?
As when the Fabric of some stately Tower
Comes near the period of its fatal hour;
Here shrinks a rafter, there a pillar groans,
And all the parts breath out their farewell moanes,
That so some just and seasonable fear,
May the indwellers for the stroke prepare.
And was it thine intent to verify
What we thought false, that Seraphims may die?
Sure could they die, just so they would lose their breath,
Nor would they pray against a sudden death:
What was the cause thou wast so hurried hence,
Nor with a moments stay would death dispense?
Was it because that restless hellish crew
Did with good Angels their dispute renew
'Bout Moses body, and the Archangel chose
Thee for his Second to confute his foes,
Or did those blessed spirits, (who use to pry
And search into the Gospel-mystery)
Come to a riddle, and resolved thus
To send for thee to be their Oedipus?
Were it not heathenish to apprehend
Mortals could to a Deity ascend,
I should expound thy sudden change to bliss
A token of thine Apotheosis:
As Romulus, when to be deifi'd,
He must to Heaven in a whirlwinde ride.
Or was it because had a more lingering death
Given timely notice of thy passing breath,
Such rivers would have flowen from mortal eyes,
As might the world with a new flood surprise.
Or else like Niobe: such had been our moan,
That all mankind had wept into a stone.
But now amazement did our tears suppress,
And made our grief the more, but danger less.
Foreign Geographers did once surmize,
That England had three Universities;
London was one: but now they will change their tone.
It Is now too true, England has less by one;
O you Caligula's, whose monstrous rage
Could wish that all the Levites of this Age
Had but one neck, that so one bloody sword
Might cut off all the conduits of the Word.
Forbear, it is done, and here does bleeding lie
As in a Map all Englands Ministry.
You brood of Munster, whose prodigious ire
Destines all Libraries unto the fire.
Surcease your barbarous rage, within one span
Here lies the ashes of the Vatican.
When Lambeth-Sea of Books was to forsake
Its ancient Seat, and a new Chanel take,
Our Senate did espouse those choice remains,
To Sion-House, Cambridge forbade the banes.
'Twas doubtful where that walking Library
Would fix: both places were resolved to try
Their titles, but at last did thus agree
To send it to the Universitie
Upon these terms; they should with Vines dispense
And send him hither for a recompense.
He was transplantad; Thus our common mother
Found one vast Library, and lost another.
Or if you please, you may compound it thus:
They got the shadow, th'substance came to us.
Some blamed the public body of the Nation
Because they did not call a Convocation;
They sent for Vines, and what need further cost?
In him a whole Assembly was ingrost.
It could not then be said to Englands shame
It has no Synods, for such was thy fame,
That in thy Head as in a Common Hall
They saw, they heard a Council general.
Some say that Englands present Ministry
Is nothing but an Antichristian fry,
Then sure thou was it the Pope, for 'twas confessed
Thou had all Laws in the Cabinet of thy breast.
But peace, my whining Muse, and say no more
Of unknown worth, conceal his hidden store.
Bury the rest, lest mortals too much prize
His sacred relics, and idolatrize.
Lest other Students, when his parts they hear,
Grow negligent, and sink into despair.
Do but name Vines, more need not be expressed,
Tagus and Ganges will report the rest,
Each echo at the mention of his name
Will be a sounding Trumpet of his fame.
Sure, that at Vxbridge will speak his renown
Oftener then the echo at Pont-charentoon.
Mat. Pool. Min. of M. Quern. Land.

On the sudden and unexpected death of that famous and incomparable Preacher of
the Gospel, Mr. Richard Vines.
I Am pleased much more to see a Vine, though weak,
Laden with clusters, and its branches break
With weight of Grapes, then view a sturdy tree,
Barren, though standing to eternity.
A knife that cuts the sheath I Will rather choose,
Though It wear apace, then that is not fit for use.
A brave man's gone, but this shall be my strife,
Just so to live, though so I end my life.
My Fancy runs too flat; for every line
Should yield a flavor of the sprightly Vine;
I would not drop a crabby tear on's Hearse,
Eager devotion martyrs him in verse.
Yet farewell mirth. Just reason for complaint,
When Vines are dead, no wonder if we faint:
Nothing but Cypress pensive heads shall dress,
The Vineyard is become a wilderness.
Sour grapes there are, I know, in every hedge,
But he who eats them sets his teeth on edge.
Thy grapes were ripe (pure soul) so that the Press
Was needless, since the streams of happiness
Ran from thee freely, and thou did distill
The blessed dictates of thy Makers Will.
For souls inflamed with lust; Thy Art divine
Afforded water when they longed for wine,
And where a soul lay prostrate with despair
Thy wine proved Aqua vitae, cordial, rare:
Milk unto babes, strong meat to manly stature,
Thy doctrine sympathiz'd with every nature.
Thus the Vine flourished, till a sovereign fate
In Paradise did it innoculate.
S. Jacombe, Mary Woolnoth Lombardstreet.

Upon the never enough to be lamented Death of the learned Mr. Richard Vines.
AMongst the throng of Mourners who do come
To wait upon the learned Vines his tomb;
Make room (I pray) for one, who with lame verse
Can only crawle to offer at his Herfe.
My muse (like Croesus son) was fast tongue-ti'd,
And had never spoke, had not his father di'd.
Let her but groan to ease her heart, and then
She shall give over, and be dumb again.
Oh you his people, let your sorrow swell
To floods of tears, which to'th'world may tell
Your loss, and when you have wept your eyes quite dry,
Let him be wept by your posterity.
How have we angered Heaven? what ugly sin
Has in this wretched City harbored been?
What whoredoms, murders, and Heaven-daring crimes
Have broken out in these debautched times?
That we should live to see the angry hand
Of God stretched out against our Church and Land.
Breaking our pillars down with furious haste,
Laying our well compact foundations waste.
Powerful Whitaker, whose incessant cries
Did reach the Heavens, and laid siege to th'skies.
Reverend Gataker; whose unfathomed brain
Did all the Arts and Sciences contain.
Laborious Robinson, whose care and pain
Was for immortal souls, not wealth or gain.
Stout-hearted Love, who durst defy the axe,
When others yielded like the melting wax;
These are no more, and to complete our woe,
Eloquent Vines stoops to deaths fatal blow.
Have patience (Gentlemen) and tithes abhorred
The Patron.
Will lapsed be unto the present Lord.
You need not beat your brains how to lay waste
Our pious Clergy; See, with speed they haste
To get into their Ark, before the cloud
(That gathers thick) pour down in showers of blood.
If thus our glorious Lights waste and expire,
For all our new ones we may sink in the mire
Of damned Apostasy, that horrid crime
Which threatens ruin to our present time.
Oh for an Atlas to uphold the Sphere
Of our reeling Church, which frighted. shakes with fear
I could my self turn Seeker, (but it is vain)
Another sturdy resolute Vines to gain;
He whose undaunted courage did contend
With blasphemies and errors to his end
No armed vice, or wickedness in buffe,
No scarlet sinners gown, or chain, or ruff,
Could fright him to base silence, no sweet bait
With a hook in it, but he scorned it strait.
Rather then swear, that which his soul did dread,
He lost his Headship -- would have lost his Head.
When England's Essex fell, our Nations glory;
Who but Seraphick Vines must tell his story?
The drooping State that did attend his fall,
When Lords and Commons wept his Funeral;
The mourning drum, the Lance and Ensigns trail'd,
The robes of honor all in Sables veiled
Did but affect the eye, 'twas only he,
Who tuned our hearts into sad melody:
His tongue and pen eternized Essex more,
Then all the trophies which his tomb then wore;
And this will sound our learned Vines his praise,
Louder then riming, or our crackling bays.
Thomas Playre. Gent.

FINIS.

