Justa sive Inferiae Regicidarum: OR, TYBVRNS REVELS.
Presented before Protector Cromwell, Lord President Bradshaw, Lord Deputy
Ireton. By Squire Dun, Mercury, and Chorus.
Mercury with a Pick-Ax to Coomwel. HEnce Caduce, that Sleep-powerful mighty
rod,
This Iron, shall disturb the guilty nod
Of these brass Sinners now inlaid with lead,
This be the Mace to these inglorious Dead.
Rise Noll from th'violated Arched Cave,
'Twas thy last Treason to usurp the grave,
Rouse up, and follow to my tripple Altar,
Where my grim Priest attends thee with a Halter.

Cromwell. Whose there? speak softly to my troubled ears,
Whose Drums beats still with jealousies and fears:
Restless Ambition how I find it true,
Not quiet yet, since yet the Fates parsue:
No Fury waked me in my Regal Dreams,
It Is infelicity is what it seems:
Imagination prompt'd me to be King,
It Is easy work, I have it in a string.
Here Is a triumphant Chariot without wheels,
Not subject to mad Fortunes giddy reels;
And here is three standing Crowns, whose massy weight
Will break the neck to this cursed politic pate.

Chorus. Four merry boys, and four merry boys,
And four merry boys are we;
As ever yet gang'd under
The Gallow, Gallow tree.

Mercury. This subtle Engine, whose fine active dust,
Though long interred, is free from Natures rust;
This slight Mercurial spirit made Nols son
(As if by Traduce) false Ireton
Leave thy invaded tomb, this sacred place,
Was nere deputed to so vile a race.
Rise treacherous relics follow, follow me,
Follow thy Father to the Triple-tree.

Ireton. By long possession settled in my urn,
I crave a privilege: Must I now turn
Tenant to Tyburn? must I quit my ground,
That have for every treachery a wound
Whilst I braved heaven, see the juster earth,
Disgorgeth her prodigious Rebel-birth:
So wasting, wily Foxes often are taken.
First eathed, then hanged, and so exposed to shame.

Chorus: Four merry boys, and four merry boys,
And four merry boys are we,
As ever yet gang'd under
The Gallow, Gallow tree.

Mercury. Come you loud Furies, beat the Tintimar
Such direful Notes, which the High Justice Bar
Can only president, this deaf Adder charm;
He Would hear no Reason, give him an alarm:
Get up bold Bradshaw, leave these blessed Ghosts,
Thy Grove and Walk's in the trian'gler posts,
There murmur sentences, be the disgrace,
And the ^^genius of that Justice-place.

Bradshaw You must not interrupt me, I pronounce,
The sentence of the Court (what means this bounce)
The Courts adjourned to Tyburn: hateful word,
Where Is Hackers Partisans, and Humphreys sword:
The Court does overruled it, I Will not stir,
I do affirm our Jurisdiction, Sir:
But Oh, the light appears, the hateful air,
Here Is Sledge and straw, for cushions, Velvet chair:
Thus as a Judas, hired to betray,
The price of blood finds me Akeldama.

Chorus. Four merry boys, and four merry boys.
And four merry boys are we;
As ever yet gang'd under
The Gallow, Gallow-tree.

Mercury. What shall I do to wake this ponderous lump,
Misshapen Parent of a monstrous Rump:
I Will call some spirit to imform this Mass,
The Armies Paper-mule, and Cromwels Ass:
Come out Tom Blunderbuss, this filthy Tun
Raise up with slings and bear't to Squire Dun.

Pride. Oh my recluded members, where away,
My Lordship cumbled down below a dray:
I gave the House of Parliament the lurtch,
And find no Sanctuary within the Church:
I, that profaned, and this abom'nates me,
But none was ever refuse to the tree:
My garbling Parliaments to him next dares,
My guts and garbage give unto the bears.
But stay, it is double costs, and double woe,
To pay the Surgeon and the Hangman too,
I had no Cear-cloth, so I Will keep my urn,
I see sometimes stinking will serve the turn.

Chorus. Four merry boys, and four merry boys, etc.


Squire Dun Oh Agitators, if now there be any
Have need of the Squire of the rope or his Zany,
Though quarters and heads are on several poles,
The Headquarters are at Tyburn Holes.

Four merry boys, and four merry boys,
And four merry boys are we;
As ever yet gang'd under
The Gallow, Gallow-tree.
London, Printed for R. B. 1660.


