A strange and terrible Sight foreseen in this Kingdom and City of London.
IT were a folly for me (thrice worthy Citizens) to make a long Oration of the
misery that both you in the City, and we in the Country have already sipped,
and are like to drink deep of ere long, unless some speedy course be taken
for our relief; for to tell you the plain truth, it has been told us so often
already, unless more or rather better means had been used for a redress.
Alas! pens are not instruments to offend Warriors, or to suppress their
violence; nil prodest ratio ubi vis imperat, reason is of little use where
force prevails; in downright terms, our pens have been too busy and our
swords too sloe; if we had taken every occasion to fight as we did to write,
the war (in all probability) had been put to an end long ere this time: I
will therefore forbear to tell you what miseries you have suffered, or what
means might have been used for your redress, least you say of me as our
Contry-men use to say of our forces, they come too late; or least you object
that against me as was against the Athenian Orator, discoursing at large of
Hercules valor; quis ignorant? who knows it not? but I will rather endeavor to
stir up your drooping hearts, and shake your drowsy spirits, by showing you
the misery which is like in a seven fold manner to seize upon you unles you be
active.

Cipio, though he had nothing but the endowments of nature, could prevail with
his Soldiers, who were but in the same sphere, having all of them the mere
principle of nature only to incite them: yet he in his extremity, used no
other argument but this, estote viri libertas agitur, play now the men, for
your liberty lies at stake: and he prevailed; did he prevail? and were his men
so stout for corporal liberty? what stoutnesse there should now be raised in
you (most noble Citizens) whose principals are far above the sphere of nature:
Alas! it is not your corporal liberty alone that lies at stake, but also that
which is spiritual; view but the worth of both and view the want, and tell me
where is a peasant in the world that would not rather choose to die then loose
them.

Your corporal liberty, is that whereby you freely enjoy all that is yours
without control of any; this is it whereby thou injoyest thy self as a
freeman; this is it whereby thou injoyest thy goods and whatsoever is thine
without control of any, or being engaged to any, and this is liberty: And
this same liberty your enemies fight for; but how? it is as they do protest,
they fight for the Protestant Religion; to destroy it; even so they fight for
your freedom; to take it from you and make you slaves; if ever they should
prevail, you might say to your riches, and to your pleasures, to your dainty
dishes, and to your sumptious building, as a Spaniard with one eye said to his
enemy, having put out the other, good night (says he) for I can see no longer;
so may you say to your gay clothes, and to your moneys, for if ever they
prevail, you are like to see them no more; you must bid your ultimam valo to
all your good company, you must take your leave of your soft beds; nay, I fear
you must take your last-farewell of your wife, of your pretty children, and of
your families. Ah! what sad sights would London see, in seeing them within her
walls; you Husbands should see your Wives ravished before your faces; you that
can now behold them comely and decent in aparrell, should then see them
disrobed, their aparrell pulled from their backs, and they glad to cloth
themselves in those dunghill-ragges put off from those filthy uncivil
wretches, which follow that noisome and that ungodly cursed crew. Ah Wives!
would it not be a sad sight for you to see your grave, and honest Husbands
insulted over by base unworthy fellows, to see them kick them, and beat them,
and dragge them up and down the streets; how would you endure it? to see your
decent Husbands, and your now well liking Husbands, all tottered in rags,
quaking for want of garments and looking pale for want of food and lodging, and
your enemies instead of relieving them, scorning at them and dispising them:
you would think it a very poor case when you must be compelled to live aliena
quadra, at another man's finding; but how much more straight and irksome will it
be to you, when you shall see others glutting themselves with your provision,
which you and your Family are ready to faint for, and your enemies drunk with
your drink, and you wanting it, and they sleeping on your beds, and you lying
on the floores. Ah Children! what torment will it be to you, to see your loving
Parents thus barbarously handled; it wounds my heart to think what will becoma
of you: Your homes will be the streets, the bulks your beds, your drink will
be mere water, and to be feared your food will be what you can beg of common
Soldiers. O heart of flint has he that cannot weep, to see the pretty
children shivering and quaking in the streets, to hear them crying out for
want of food and outward comforts: O doleful sight, to see the children
knocking at the prison doors inquiring for their Parents, and there to hear
what moanes they to each other make; the Parents shake their heads and wring
their hands, the children likewise cry to them again; they sob, and sigh, and
pine away, and none takes pity on them. O let me tell you Parents, Children,
Servants, all whatever you be, that bear the name or face of modesty or
honesty, your day of comfort's past when they possess your City, your night of
misery is come; and you must then shake hands and bid adieu to all your wonted
liberty and comfort; your feasting times will then be turned into fasting
times; your merry jesting times will now be turned into solemn mourning and
bewailing times; your drinking wine will then be turned into drinking water;
your honey will be turned into gall; and to conclude, your dainty walks will
be turned into dungions, and your curious music into gingling cheyns: View
but this monster well, and then tell me which of you but ha^ rather dye
valiantly, then live to see and to endure (...) horrid misery: Neither is this
the worst that I have told you, but which is grievousest to see, and heaviest
to be borne; you will assuredly be brought both you and yours into most hellish
darkness; I mean into spiritual thraldom. London has now the beams of
heavenly light, shining more clearly and more gloriously in it, then any City
in the World; never were there more famous Ministers in it since the World
stood then now at this present; never more plenty of Sermons then at this day;
never more days of humiliation then now; never were there more Bibles in the
City then now; never more liberty for Ministers to preach and people to hear
then now; never in a better way for Reformation then now: But should these
wicked creatures (as most certainly they will try) enter your City, your
glorious light would then be turned into hellish darkness; your Ministers that
now (to your comfort) you can see in the Pulpits, you will then (to your
sorrow) see in the dungions; instead of praying Ministers, and preaching
Ministers, and watchful Ministers; you will have drunken Parsons, and swearing
Parsons, and idle Parsons, and popish Parsons, and jeering Parsons against
Jesus Christ.

O what swarms of Euphrates vermin would be scravling and creeping in your
streets; instead of Sermons, you will have railing against Reformation, and
against Parliamentall proceedings and private fast days; you will hear Mass
instead of Gods Word, and Mass Priests instead of Ministers; instead of
singing Psalms, you will have singing of ballads and songs against the
Protestants, and poor praying Christians: O the oaths and those horrid
blasphemies that will then be belched forth continually: Ah Christians! you
must bid farewell Bible when they come into your City, you must never look to
see English Bible more, nor to read more of Gods Word; you must bid farewell to
all your godly company, and all manner of godliness in profession; never look
to meet more the Ordinances, or to have your sins reproved but be sure you
shall have your prayers jeered, and your fasting jeered, and your zeal scoffed
at. O Magistrates! O Ministers! O Ancient! O Grave! O Husbands! O Wives! O
Parents! O Children! O Masters! O Servants! O all and every of you that make
profession of Jesus Christ, and have entered into Covenant to fight for him, for
Christ's sake and his Cause sake, ponder of these things; and if the
consideration of these things will not move you to shut up shops, and come
forth unto the help of the Lord against the mighty, assure your selves your
posterities will rue it and Mero's curse will assuredly fall upon your head:
But many I know will say, all this that is spoken concerning the enemies
cruelty is but imagined, men are apt to speak the worst; sure they will not be
so cruel, say some.

Give me leave to answer; we usually say seeing is believing; but he that
writes these lines to you not only saw, but also felt their cruelty.

(...) their heavy bloes and bloody hands, I now do bear their blood^ (...)
their bloody and inhumane dealing, I saw them (...) mangle others, Gentlemen of
worth and quality, and yet they promised both me and them fair quarter.

I felt their punishment in hunger and cold, I felt their punishment in fetters
too, they bound my hands, my neck, and heels together, a punishment seldom
heard of for poor prisoners, especially for a Captain; yet this and more then
this I underwent; and more, I saw them strip men aged and young, they did the
like to women, maids, servants and children.

I saw the honest people wanting clothes; the women weeping and making
grievous moan to on another for want of bread to feed their children; I saw
them fire houses after that they had plundered them; I saw the people go with
bleeding bodies, and fainting hearts within them, to see their houses fired to
the ground, their goods consumed, and they, their wives, their children and
Families having no place to put their head in: O doleful sights to see, and
malencholy tunes to hear; I dare presume there is not a man in the City, if he
has but the least spark of good nature in him, if he did but see, the picture
drawn of their ill demeanours, but he would rather die then suffer them to
enter the City. I have not yet told you the worst; I have not told you of
ravishing women, neither did I tell you of killing maids, with that most filthy
usage.

Staffordshire women (can to their sorrow) tell you; thus we see what it is to
deal with strangers, we pull thereby strange punishments on our heads: This
rod was then north-wards, since it has been south-wards, and lately
west-wards and whether it will, rove we know not; but should it get within your
City, you would (I am confident) be the miserablest people under the Sun;
they do profess themselves very merciful in the midst of their cruelty; all
the cruelty they show in the Country is but as a spark to the fire, or as a
drop of the bucket, in comparison of that rigor that they would show to you:
They know that England had not been able to hold up hand against them, had not
you put your hand to the work: They know 'twas your money that maintained the
war against them; they know that you were the first moover in the work of
Reformation; they know that you opposed Bishops and Ceremonies; they know 'twas
you that caused that grand Traitor to be beheaded, and therefore you shall be
sure to drink deepest in the cup of their fury: I beseech God you never see
that day; for 'twill be such a time, as he will think himself most happiest
that can escape with his life; is it not time then that you should bestirre
you? you see how many false friends you have, how many ignoble spirits you have
had all this while under the pretense of honest men and friends to the public
cause, but now have slipped the collar you see how few cordial friends you have,
and how the Kings Army or rather the Queens Army grow more insolent every day,
and how they oppress the Country, and will you lie still? Up, up, brave noble
spirits, and lie no longer like the Ass under the burden of oppression.

You hitherto have been active, valiant and courageous men; up therefore like
your selves, take sword in hand most gallantly: Chronicle your names on earth,
in Heaven for ever, for fighting valiantly for the Lord of hosts against his
enemies; aged and young, masters and servants, mistresses and maids, it
concerns you all that wish well to the Protestant Religion, your King and
Country, one way or other, either by purses or persons, to help in this great
work; the virtuous maids and the young Gentlewomen of the City, show their
brave spirits in helping forward of this work.

Whose worthy praise none can express or write,
Though they should beat their brains both day and night.
But Tryton broach their names the western ways,
And Fame divulge thou it, to their high praise.
What is the matter (noble Citizens) that your hearts are down? do you give
the day for lost? do you think England is lost because Bristoll is lost.

Alas, Bristoll is not all our strength, nor all our forts, nor all our
garrisons; we have the beter cause, the greater side, and the honester men; the
passage to Heaven is clear for us, so that we can go thither and fetch what
we want, but it is shut to them. Our Parliament is standing, our Forts are well
managed; we have a pound for their shilling, twenty pieces of Ordnance for
their one, we have the Seas to our selves, and all the honest Christians with
us; and as for knaves and traitors going from us, lets never be sorry, for much
better is their room then their company: Seeing then we have a prize in our
hands, let us make the best advantage of it whiles we may, let us strive to act
effectually, study the best way, and ask the wisest counsel what to do in so
weighty a business.

Take that course that the Heathens were wont to take* when they went about any
weighty business, they still inquired at the Oracle; even so do you in this
weighty business of Jesus Christ, go first to God in humiliation and prayer;
Nineveh when it heard that its destruction was near took this course, and
prevailed with God; so do you get as they did a decree out, that all may
observe it, petition for a weekly fast; these ate extraordinary times, the
wicked they grow worse and worse, and therefore let us be better and better;
begin with God, and then strive to set your selves in order, for order is the
strength of an Army, and of a City, but disorder is the confusion of both; take
therefore away the causes of disorder, Malignants are the only cause of
disorder in a City or Army; strive therefore to find them out, give them the
Covenant, if they refuse to enter into covenant with you, let them not live in
the City with you, be they rich, be they poor, secure them, and banish them
never dispute this man is poor, and that man has children, cast them our
spare none, unmercifull and bloody is that pity that causes the downfall of a
City.

Endeavor to remove mutinous spirits, and faint-hearted cowards, from places
of trust in the Army, be he Colonel, Major, Captain, or any other Officer,
let no such person stay a day by your good will, in or amongst your soldiers.
You will not imagine what a great advantage it is, to have all encouraging
Officers in a Town. I know a little Town in England which lies northward, it
was within this six weeks besieged by the Queens Army, consistin^ of 6000.
men, there was not above 180. men in the Town that were Musqu^teeres; yet
these few fouhht with all that company, from six of the clock in the morning
till six at night, and then they scorned even when their muskets we^^ broke,
and the enemies entered to parle with them, but fought with them all along the
Town, and at last got into the Church and there they parled with the enemy and
got quarter; and those poor handful of men being backed on by their
Commanders, through Gods providence killed four of their Colonels fifteen or
sixteen of their Captains, and two Regiments were brought so lo that they
could scarce make 60. men apeece; it was verily thought that there were 1500.
killed and wounded by those nine score men, whereof my self was one; so that
resolute men in the work are very advantageous. But on the contrary, on coward
who through the perterbations of his mind, and quames of fear oppressing his
heart, making his eyes believe he sees a 1000. when he sees but a 100. making
him think every bush is a man, and every bullet that his enemy shoots goes
through his heart; this man is enough to put a hundred scruples of fears into
stout men's hearts, and so by consequenee to rout an Army or loose a Town, as
we have too late experience of it. Remove drunkards, and swearers, and scoffers
at Religion, for these men that will not keep touch with with God, be sure
they will break covenant with you if occasion be offered, which is not
unattempted till now: When you have removed disorder set your selves in order,
get your selves every one of you into a posture for war, get every Company
Captains, let every man list himself and get as good Arms as he can, that so
if an onset should be every man may do something, and fight in some order:
Look to your works, some say, that they are not of themselves as they should
be, get men of judgment to view them, for your Works are the strength of the
City, lose them and the City is lost; let all the ditches without be levelled,
have an eye to the men you trust in the Forts, see that they be religious and
well grounded men; I speak boldly and plainly after our Country manner,
because I know upon the safety of this City depends mediatly the safety of our
laws, our liberties, our lives, our Religion, our Parliament and our Synod:
You for (most noble Citizens a^ you tender these things, so show it in your
zealous contending for these things Wives put on your husbands to love
themselves, you and their children, and as they love you and would have you
safe, so let them use the means to keep you safe, to rise all in a body and
to fight against those cursed men that intend nothing but our destruction; up
quickly and be doing for the Cause, and the Lord of Heaven the moover of all
hearts stir you up to the work and prosper^ you in it, that we may see a
happy end of this unhappy war; and this shall not only be the prayer, but as
hitherto it has; so always it shall be the utmost endeavor of your poor
Servant,

J. J.

FINIS.

