A Justification of our Brethren of Scotland.
Under the Willow Tree.
1.
DEarest Jockey, we unto thee
Are beholden every way,
And yet some strive to undo thee,
But I now the truth will say.
Thou unto our aid came running,
Leaving thine own pleasant soil,
And thy Al^, that was a tunning,
In our most barren land to moile.
Wherefore we will ever love thee,
Over the shoulder, as they say,
But if thou come again, we will shove thee
Home, the clean contrary way.
We thee pray no more to aid us
In that kind thou did before:
For, we find thou had betrayed us,
Had we hearkened to thy lore.
2.
Yet in thee there is no more cunning,
Then in a devil of two years old:
Prithee come no more a mumming,
For we shall not our fingers hold.
We know well thou came hither,
Only our welfare to advance;
And therefore in the North did gather
All their plate and coin perchance.
We know well, our most dear brother,
Thou never meantst to sell the King;
But that thy love thou could not smother,
When we gold to thee did bring.
We thee pray no more to aid us, etc.
3.
Friendly neighbor, that have ever
Been a sure card at our need;
Though it has been our luck, never
To find thee false in word and deed.
Thou great good will do bear unto us,
Loving the ground whereon we tread:
But we pray thee truly show us,
Is It not for our English bread?
Alas dear soul, thou have we know well,
Been contented with all pain:
As thy deeds did lately show well,
To lose thy own land ours to gain.
But we pray thee no more aid us, etc.
Counter Tener.
WE will love thee, O dear brother,
And will never while we live
Thy good turns within us smother,
But will full requital give.
For thy aiding,
And persuading,
Thy assenting,
And thy entering.
We will give thee yet more money,
And will pay thee home, we swear,
With a Cornish hug, thou blew-cap Bonney,
We Will embrace thee, never fear.
Thou shall be incorporated
One with us, and we with thee,
When thy Presbytery is instated,
And Lay Elders ruling be.
For selling,
And rebelling,
For thy aiding,
And upbraiding:
We will make a rare exchanging,
And will give thee wheat for oats:
If in mean time there be no ranging,
And we do not cut your throats.
An English Dance to a Scottish Bagpipe.
A Hall, a Hall; let us dance, our task is done;
Thanks unto Lowdon, and to Hinderson:
Our bounds we will enlarge, our names advance,
While that the English to our bagpipe dance:
A Jig, a Jig, Edwards that Boanerges,
Is come, accompanied with Doctor B --:
Old G -- halts hither too, and Call --,
To try the case of the Presbytery.
Delicious Swads, that by the Rubric prate,
The Alphas and Omegas of the State:
Most holy Caterwaulers, that can pry
Into men's acts, by wits Stenographie.
Olimpick gewgawes, framed of pitch and tar,
Whose sayings still are found orbicular.
New-model'd Elders; whose brains are as dry
As blasted trees, or sand on mountains high.
Blow thy wind Instrument, about, about,
This music has enchanted, out of doubt,
The English Senate, that on so small ground
They gave to us two hundred thousand pound.
The while their Sovereign does drenched lie,
The essence of true griefs hydrographie.
Here comes too some o'th Army, whose intent
Is alike good to King and Parliament.
Why then dance ye together in a ring?
You hate the Parliament, and they the King.
And now we may prepare, unto our pain,
Scilla and Marius days to see again.
Let Samson turn these Foxes tail to tail,
They need no firebrarnds for to assail;
Their tongues are fired by hell, their hands do fall
More ponderous then Talus iron maull.
Their hopes and fears cannot rest, until the Fates
Do thrust them down to Proserpines black gates.
But when these Herod's show their cruelty,
The guiltless children every one must die:
But prudence through dark windings some may lead
Safely with Ariadnes clew of thread.
If all were like to them, where should there be
Saints for the heaven, for earth posterity?
Great Xerxes then might justly shed his tears,
And say, that all will die within few years.
The Daunian Wolves, Spartan Molossian Dogs,
The Marsian Boares, Arcadian Boares and Hogs;
The African may amongst us his monsters find,
His painted birds, and fowls of strangest kind.
But while your selves you weary, have a care
Of those that of you both so hated are.
Anno 1647.

