THE JUSTIFICATION OF A safe and wel-grounded ANSWER To the Scottish Papers,
Printed under the name of Master Chaloner HIS SPEECH: WHICH, (Whatsoever the
Animadvertor affirms) does maintain the Honor of the PARLIAMENT, and
Interest of the Kingdom of ENGLAND.

November. 23.1646.
Appointed to be printed, according to an Order of the House of Commons.



LONDON, Printed by A. Griffin. 1646.

The Justification of a safe and wel-grounded Answer to the Scotch Papers,
Printed under the name of Mr. Chaloners Speech; Which, (whatsoever the
Animadvertor affirms) does maintain the Honor of the Parliament, and
Interest of the Kingdom of England.
I Need not ask much who this Animadvertor is; for by his Text he seems to be
a malignant Divine, by his scraps of Greek and Latin some Pedagogue, by his
style no Englishman, and by the whole scope of his discourse an Incendiary. His
Text is Prove. 28.2. For the transgressions of a Land many are the Princes
thereof. By Princes, it is commonly thought, that he means the Members of
Parliament; but therein certainly he is much mistaken in the sense of the Text:
For if they be Princes, it was never the transgression of the Land, but the
transgression of the Prince of the Land, which made them Princes. And if they
be Princes, they are very poor ones, and by his ordering but of a very short
continuance; for he has no sooner begun his Sermon, but he forgets his Text,
and speaks of the Parliaments former low condition; whereas never any made it
solow as himself: for if a Member of Parliament could not be answered within
doors, there was never any one so bold until this present, that durst answer
him without; and the Parliament is low indeed, when a Member thereof cannot
assert the Votes of both Houses, but he must be called to an account by every
unknown person. But let him consider; if hereby he have not opened a door
for every Pamphleter to come in at, whereby some late printed Speeches will
hardly go Scotfree; for if a Principal cannot escape, what then will become
of a Deputy?

For the Gentleman that made this Speech (though he neither ownes the printing
nor Title page, yet) the matter of it he must justify, unless he will
deeline the interest of this Kingdom; But he being of that great Council the
Parliament, can spend his time better there, both for his credit, and service
of his Country, then by answering of every man's impertinencies. And therefore
give me leave, as unknown a person as this Animadvertor is, yet a better
English man, to tell him how inconsiderately he contradicts himself in the
very beginning of his discourse, when he assures you he will not presume to
intermeddle with any thing spoken within the walls; and yet he presently tells
you of something spoken there, (as he says) different from the Original;
whereby at the first dash he proves himself a notable Incendiary, and would
set jealousies and devisions betwixt the Members of the house of Commons, as if
there were Spies amongst them, and such who to maintain the Interest of
another Kingdom, were so vile and base as to be content to betray their own.

But I hasten to his Animadversions, where Goliath like he presents himself a
Champion to confound (if he could) not the Army, but the assertions of both
houses of Parliament. And first he says, that the Argument which the
Gentleman makes is mistaken, because he joyneth not the Covenant, Treaty, and
the Law of Nations with the interest which the Kingdom of Scotland pretends
unto the King; whereas these particulars are severally handled in the Scottish
Papers, and therefore must be answered severally; and the Gentleman has so
sufficienly by many Arguments cleared in the first place, that by the Law of
Nations the Kingdom of Scotland has nothing at all to do to dispose of the
Person of the King, he being now in England, as I am confident he will never be
able to disprove any part thereof whilst he lives.

The next exception which this Animadvertor takes, is against the distinction
of a King in abstracto, and concreto, and that Persona is not Concretum. Hereby
you may see how he is contented to pass over such things of most substance,
which he cannot answer, and to set up men of straw (to use his own words) for
himself to buffet.

This distinction of Abstractum and Concretum is as ancient as Logic it
self; but if he will believe no Logic but his own, let him look upon an
elaborate Book written by one very near and dear to some of the Scottish
Commissioners, called Lex and Rex, in the 29 question, page 265. and there he
shall find these very words, This is an evident and sencible distinction, the
King in Concreto, the man who is King; and the King in abstracto, the Royal
office of the King. And whereas it is affirmed that the honorable Houses do
state the question not upon the Authority of the King, but upon his Person, so
does the Gentleman likewise; and he concludes against any thing which has been
yet said to the contrary, that neither by Law nor Covenant the Scots have any
Interest to dispose of the Kings Person, he being now in England.

Thirdly he objects, that if the Kings Person be to be disposed of by the power
of that Country where he happens to abide, then if he were in Scotland he
must be disposed of by the power of that Country. This is confessed to be
true. And if he were now in Scotland, as he is an England, they had then the
sole power of disposing him. And I doubt not but they would dispose of him for
the equal good of both Kingdoms; wherein I should be so far from envying of
their felicity, as I should wish much good might he do them. But
notwithstanding all this the assertion stands good, that they have no authority
to dispose of him, (as they now do) in England.

In the fourth Animadvertion he makes the Gentleman speak what he does not;
for the Gentleman does say, that England is as distinct a Kingdom from
Scotland, as Spain; but he says not it is as distinct in Interest, as the
Animadvertor affirms. Yet, by his favor, the Interests are so distinct, that
neither the unity of one Religion, one Covenant, one King, one Cause, or one
War, can confound them. It is no longer then Philip and Mary's days, that
England and Spain had all the said Interests, (the Covenant excepted;) but yet
no English man upon pain of death, for all that, could sail into the Indies,
neither enjoy other privileges of Spain, no more then a Spaniard could do in
England. And for Scotlands entering into confederacy with Foreign Nations
without the approbation of England, the Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms must judge
of that; but neither any Treaty or Covenant yet made does give them interest
either in governing of our Militia, making of our Laws, or settling of our
Church Government, as it was once aimed at. In all which they have liberty to
advise, as also how the Kings Person may be disposed of for the equal good of
both Kingdoms; but the English only are to be sole Judges thereof, and to act
thereupon as they themselves shall think fitting. And so I think the
Gentleman has well provided for the Interest of England.

But now this Animadvertor begins to be so full of contradiction, that he
seems to be the very abstract of it; and thereupon cannot endure the word
concrete, and brings it in here once again, and would have an Ambassador
only protected by the Law of Nations, and is angry with the Gentleman because
he affirms that the Laws of England do protect him: What the Law of Nations
is, other then certain general principles of Justice which nature has
infused into all men, I see not; for I am sure, that all Nations did never yet
meet together to make these Laws, neither do they ever meet to punish them
when they are broken; but give me leave to tell this Animadvertor, that if the
Law of England did not concur with the Law of Nations in punishing such as
might violate the Privilege of an Ambassador, I know not to what Tribunal
that Ambassador could appeal; for the Gentleman faith truly in the
fourteenth page, That the English Nation being not subordinate to any power on
Earth, there is no power under heaven can judge them.

Neither has an Ambassador any privilege by the law of Nations, farther then
the particular or munificall law of that Nation unto whom he is adressed will
allow of.

For if an Ambassador will adventure to enter into a Country or State, with
whom his Master or Prince is either in actual War, or has not contracted
withal any confedracy, that Ambassador, is so far from being allowed any
privilege of an Ambassador as he may justly be imprisoned and adjudged as a
Spy, at least an enemy, and therefore no Ambassador of one Prince not in unity
or confedracy with another, can with safety enter into the other Princes
Dominions, without leave being first demanded and obtained, from whence it
follows that what privilege soever an Ambassador may pretend unto, it is not
the law of Nations, but only the particular contract, confedracy and agreement,
betwixt his Master and that Prince or State, unto whom he is sent that can
protect and defend him.

And whereas from the Gentleman's affirmation that no King can command any
Subject of his being out of his Kingdom, this Animadvertor will conclude, that
by the same reason the Parliament here cannot Command their Commissioners which
they may send into Scotland; but they must solely be disposed of by the supreme
power of that Kingdom.

In answer whereunto, It is not to be doubted, but that the supreme power in
Scotland has the General power in disposing of all persons whatsoever and
their estates there according to the Laws and customs of that Country, yet
not so neither, but that particularly every man by leave of those Laws and
customs may command his own Servant in his private affairs, and dispose of
his Estate as he shall think convenient, provided that such command and
disposal be not contrary to the said Laws and customs, so the Parliament of
England sending Commissoners into Scotland have power to command them in their
affairs, as well as any Master there can command his servant; and further as
any treaty or contract made, or to be made betwixt both the Kingdoms, has or
may hereafter ad or deminish from the said power.

Then he objects that if a King of Scotland coming into England before the
union should be a Subject of England. By the same reason the Prince of Wales
is now a Subject of France, and then his person is solely to be disposed of by
the power of France, and neither King nor Parliament have power to recall him.
To this I Answer as before that the Prince is now locally and pro tempore a
Subject of France and if he will not come home or the state of France will not
suffer him so to do, we have no Authority to compel him.

Now he argues from Analogy, that if no man can be Rex but in Regno, then
cannot the Parliament of England be acknowledged a Parliament but in England.
This is such a wild Argument that I can hardly catch it, For if all the Members
and Speakers of both Houses should go out of England, nay if they went but from
Westminster to Lambeth without a Legal adjournment thither, certainly their
meeting there maks it no Parliament. But as long as they meet at Westminster
without disolution or adiournment to any other place, their Commissioners in
any other Kingdom or state, are capable and may be admitted to propound,
declare, Treat, or conclude in the name of both Houses. But as if the
Parl^ament should go into Spain it is no Parliament there nor can give no
laws to them, no more then it can give them Laws whilst it resides here in
England, so a King of England being in Spain, though he retain his dignity,
yet he has no authority either to establish their laws, or stamp their
Coin, no more then if he were in England: And as other Nations may acknowledge
the Parliament of England to be a Parliament, though none of their Parliament,
so they may acknowledge a King of England to be a King (live where he list) but
none of their King, and as to them in way of protection and subjection (which
only makes a King) no King at all.

In the 9 Animadversion he would feign incorporate our Brerhren of Scotland
into our Parliament of England by making them our Fellows. But there be diverse
kinds of Fellows besides fellows at Football, I acknowledge the Scotts to be
our Fellows and equals, but not in making of Laws in England, nor of Judging
or executing of those Laws after they are made, and so they can no more dipose
of the King in England then come to our Parliaments in England.

Now for the story of King John, it will appear that the argument which the
Gentl. holds forth from the summons of King John to answer in France is very
material and proves apparently, that a King has no power to recall any of His
Subjects, they being out of his Kingdom: for King John not being summoned as
King of England, but as Duke of Normandy, a Subject of France, so was his
summons adjudged void, not because he was King of England, but because he was
in England, and not in France at the time of his summons. Neither can any man
see how this narration does strengthen the Scottish Papers, because the King of
Engl. who is the person here summoned, is at this time at Newcastle in Engl.
which place (though some of the Army there date their Letters from Newcastle in
Scotland) yet it was ingeniously confessed by the Scottish Commissioners as I
am informed at the conference, that it was as much English ground as Islington.
And therefore he being at this time Infra jurisdictionem Regni Angliae, and
extra jurisdictionem Regni Scotiae, the assertion is still made good, and the
state of Scotland, nothing at all to do with disposal of the Kings person.

And whereas the Animadvertor says, that the case is not alike, King John
being King of one Kingdom and Subject of another, and the person now in
question, being King of two Kingdoms: under favor though he have two
Kingdoms, yet he is not here as King of Scotland, but as King of England: For
if he were here in the Capacity of a King of Scotland he were a Subject, and
then you might know well enough what should become of the King of Scotland, as
you have formerly done of some of them, who yet have plotted less then others
have acted.

And whereas the Gentleman says, That these Kingdoms seem to contend not so
much who should have the Kings Person, as who should not have it. It must needs
be a great grief to both Kingdoms, that the Kings heart is yet so far from
being reconciled to either people, that they neither can have any joy or safety
in his presence. But whereas both Houses of Parliament have Voted the disposal
of the Kings person to be only belonging unto them, they did wisly and
uprightly in it: for as they did therein uprightly because of right and Justice
it does belong unto them, for they did noe less wisly, because they now see by
dear experience that his being where he is has been so little for there
Intrest, as since his being there he has made peace with the Irish Rebels,
sent his Son the prince into France, maintained strong Intelligence with
other Countries against them, and is daily flocked unto by Delinquents and
Incendiaries, insomuch as they receive little iesse damage thereby, then if he
were at the head of an Army of Cavaliers.

In the last place this Animadvertor when he cannot answer the Gentleman, then
he will slander him, and says he does this out of some Ancient discontent of
his against the King, certainly if he had not been discontented with the Kings
Actions long ago, he could hardly have been an honest man now: for with out
doubt all these wars, troubles and turmoyles which the Parliament and kingdom
have felt these five years last past have been occasioned from the many and
Just discontents at the Kings evil Government: And if this man be alone
contented, when all the kingdom has such cause of discontent, it is more then
probable that he is and has been one of the procurers thereof. It is a hard
case that a Member of Parliament cannot vindicate the Intrest which the people
of this kingdom have in the person of their King, or desire that great
Counsel to have a care of the safety of the Common wealth, but it must be
attributed to former discontents, and whereas he Recons up so many Oaths,
Protestations, Declarations and Covenants, made by the Parliament for the
safety of the Kings person, but never any mention at all of the safety of the
Commonwealth, it seems too much to savor of Malignity, and of some late
diipersed papers.

But as I could wish that this Animadvertor would remember how Kings are made
by, and for the people, but not the people either by or for the Kings, so he
would consider that the end of Government, is for the weal and safety of the
people and not of the King, further then his safety may be conducible to the
other. And if the Scots Commissioners did plainly affirm to the Committees of
both Houses at the Conference that they could not admit of the Kings presence
in Scotland because of the divisions and troubles of that Kingdom which he
might make such use of as to raise forces both against them and us, what could
this imply but that notwithstanding his person might be in safety in Scotland,
yet Scotland could not be in safety whilst his person was there. And if they
positively affirm it on their part, may not we make a question of it on ours?
And now I have answered all that this Animadverter can say, to the main of his
Animadversions, I will not give him over, until I see an end of what he can say
besides. And first how the Scotts may like the Gent. Speech for the matter of
it, it being as he says so malliable, I wonder no better a Hammer was put to
it: And if the Intelligent reader (as he says) be of the opinion that this
speech (which was delivered but upon once hearing of the Scottish papers read)
does notwithstanding very much fortify the said papers, how much more will the
House of Commons fortify them when they deliver in their Answer thereunto,
after due consideration had of every word and syllable. And whereas he doubts
whether it will have a favorable aspect from the Parliament, either for the
matter or expression. For the matter since the Gent. does but Assert their
Votes they would be very forgetful of their own interest if they should be
offended thereat, For the Acrimonious expressions I know of none, but could
have wished, that in diverse late printed papers some expressions and
prejudgements, how that disposing may be deposing or worse, might have been
altogether omitted, since the constant indulgence of the English Nation to
their Kings, far above some of their Neighbors never merited to be
dishonored, by such an unworthy conceit, and as the very stirring of this
Question tends to debates and differences, so will such provoking language but
increase and foment it.

Now to take my leave of this Animadvertor if he be a Divine, I shall desire
him to follow his preaching and give over States matters, ill becoming that
profession: If he be a Paedagogue that he will Lash his Boys and not
Parliaments If he be an Alien, he will go home to his Country since we have
Incendiaries enough of our own, from whom, and from all treacherous and underm
ineing designers. I will conclude with his own Letany,

Good Lord deliver us.
FINIS:

