JOYFVLL NEWS FROM IRELAND, BEING A RELATION OF a Battle which was fought
between the Protestants, and the Rebels of IRELAND, where the Protestants got
the victory, giving the Rebels a great overthrow.

Also how the Earl of Mackquere was taken prisoner.

Also the Copy of a Proclamation set forth by the Rebels.

With the warrantable and true discovery of the last Plot in IRELAND.

LONDON: Printed for John Greensmith. 1641.

Upon the 30th. day of October, being Saturday, did certain of the Rebels in
Ireland remove out of Armagh privately into the City of Dublin; but the day
before a Proclamation was set forth by the chief of the Rebels to this effect.

The Proclamation set forth by the Rebels.
Patricke Oneale chief Commander of the Catholic Forces in Ireland, does
publish and declare, That Irish Catholics are a Nation not conquered, nor
ought they to live under the Laws, that of late have been enacted: they ought
to have a free use of their Religion, without interruption, which they had now
cause to fear would be restrained, if not utterly taken away: therefore we
which are constant friends to the Catholic faith, proclaim to all our loving
brethren, that it is high time to stir, since it is of so great a consequence,
therefore all that wish well to the Catholic faith, let them now betake, them
to their Arms, and come now and assist us, who are now in the Field to defend
the Religion with our Swords, which has been established in this kingdom by
our worthy Ancestors: and hereby we shall put honor upon our Religion, and
make our names famous thorowout the Christian world; and if any of the
Catholic Religion shall refuse to assist us in this our just defense, let
them know they will be kept under like slaves, and draw upon them a curse from
all the Catholics in the world, and the curse of us Priests, and Friars, and
Soldiers. Given at the Council held the 29th. of October. in the County of
Monn^.

Patricke Oneale. Hugh Maymad^use. Father Patrick. Friar Dennis.


31. of October.
Upon the 31. of October. was a hard skirmish between the Protestants and Rebels
of Ireland, the Rebels being two thousand strong, Protestants but a thousand,
but yet of the Rebels were slain five hundred, of the Protestants forty.

1. of November.
Upon the first day of November: the Earl of Mackquere with certain other Rebels
were viewing of the chiefest Church in Dublin, where the Lord chief Justices
and Privy Council use upon Sabbath days to hear Sermons, certain Protestants
discovered the Earl, and presently got a strong guard, and took him with the
rest which were with him, and in stead of making him (as he intended to be)
Governor of Dublin Castle, they made him a Prisoner thereof, which is a great
discomfort unto the Rebels, some already have run away from their Commanders,
and are fled out of the Country, and the rest have very little courage to stand
in Rebellion any longer.

The Discovery of the Gun-powder-Plot.
After that the Earl of Mackquer was taken prisoner, fearing least any
Treachery should lie hidden in the Church, privy search was made, but a long
space it was before any thing could be discovered, at length they perceaved in
a hollow Place, smoke ascending up; anon they discovered a Fire, and an old
man setting by it, as if he were warming of his hands by it, which sight did
strike the searchers into great amazement, they went very softly, and the old
man not hearing of them, they caught fast hold of him, and binding of him fast,
they searched farther, and found out an Engine which was charged with two
hundred Bullets, but being discharged, it would have burned out into a flame,
which flame should have fired the Barrels of Powder and faggots which were
adjoining unto it, and the old man being fast aound, did confess unto them how
that he should have discharged the Engine himself, and should have been
destroyed with the rest, but as many Heretics as were blown up in the
Church, so many souls for his sake should have been released out of
Purgatory, as the Priests, Jesuits, and Friars did promise him; from whose
subtle and bloody Plots, good Lord for ever defend us.

FJNIS.
a city (Dublin?) under seige


