A COPY Of the LATE King James's Letter, Sent by the Earl of MELFORT to the
FRENCH KING, On the last SEA FIGHT.
And Published the next Day by the French King's Order.
Brother KING,
I HAVE with a degree of Resolution bore all the Disgraces it has pleased
Heaven to send me, whilst they reached me alone; but this last I confess, has
quite overwhelmed me: Nor can I ever forgive my self, since it so nearly
touches your Majesty in the great Damage of your FLEET; and since I am too well
satisfied, it is my Stars have occasioned this ill Success to a FLEET that has
been ever Victorious till they fought for my Interest, which forces me to
acknowledge that I do not in the least deserve the further assistance of so
great a King, who when he Wars for himself alone, is certain of Success;
therefore I beg of your Majesty, that you would forbear to concern your self
for a Prince so Unfortunate as I am: And give me and my Family leave to retire
unto a Corner of the World, where I may not any way be a hindrance to the usual
Course of your Prosperity and Conquests, which nothing but the Ill Fortune so
Inseparable from me, could ever interrupt; Nor is it just that the most
Powerful Monarch, and the most flourishing Kingdom in the World, should feell
my Misfortunes, for you are indeed too generous; and it is better that I alone
submit, till it shall please the Decrees of Providence to order otherwise, and
let that dispose of me how or where it will. I do assure your Majesty, that
with my last Breath, I shall acknowledge your assistance and Friendship; and
when I shall be from your Kingdoms, it will be my greatest satisfaction to
think that you will again resume the good Fortune, which (whilst my Interest
was not twisted with yours) you ever had against Yours and My Enemies.

Remarks on the foregoing LETTER.
ONE Use may very properly be raised from these Premises of information, Viz.
This plainly tells us the True Principle of the French Kings Assistance and
Friendship to the late King. and that it is Interest and only Interest is the
Powerful Motive, since he could make that ill use of his Friends Modesty, as to
expose a Letter to the World, that is indeed neither more nor less than a
Complement on the Blunder committed by the French King, for whatever those who
loose Spoons or Forks, may believe of the Influence of Stars, every body in
their Wits, will grant one Cannon is of more force than twenty Stars; and
methinks it is at the best but a poor come off, to make any ones Ill Fortune an
Excuse for his being overreacht.

London, Printed for A. Johnson, 1692.


