THE JUDGMENT OF Foraign Divines AS WELL From Geneva as other parts, touching
the Discipline, Liturgy, and Ceremonies of the Church of ENGLAND.

Whereunto is added A Letter from Mr. JOHN CALVIN to Mr. Knox, concerning the
English Common Prayer, after he had purused the same.

Now published for Public Information and benefit.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold in Westminster Hal, Pauls-Church-yard,
and Popes Head-Alley. 1660.

THE Judgment of Foraign Divines touching the Discipline, Liturgy and
Ceremonies of the Church of ENGLAND.
The Answer of the Ministers of Geneva to certain Brethren of the Church of
England concerning some controversy in the Ecclesiastical Policy.
BEing right earnestly and often required by certain dear Brethren of England,
that we should in their miserable estate give them some kind of counsel,
whereon their consciences might be staid, the judgment of many being therein
diverse; we did long defer the satisfying of their request upon weighty causes.
And we assure the Reader that even now also we most gladly would hold our
peace, were it not a matter of conscience to reject the suit of the Brethren so
often enforced, and with most grievous groanings renewed.

Of which stifned silence of ours these were the causes: First, As on the one
part we doubt not of the credit of the Brethren, as though they had not
sincerely described the state of the cause unto us, so on the other side it is
most hard for to suspect such things, so clean beside all Office of Bishops,
much less persuade our selves the same by such personages done.

And further, what men are we that we should determine upon such causes? Also,
if it were lawful for us either by authority, or else by consent or request of
either parties, to give sentence hereupon, yet were it a matter most wrongful,
either party not heard, or not present to determine.

Last of all, Fear mistrusted, least so great a mischief should by this our
counsel (how simple soever it is) rather become raw then skinned; it being a
sore of so desperate a nature, as that it seems to be, that prayers and
patience can only salve the same.

Seeing then that by the sundry requests of the Brethren, we are so hardly
persuaded, that of force we ought to give them some kind of advise: We do
openly protest, that we so give the same herein, as those that will not in any
wise prejudice the other party, muchless challenge to us a Justiciers room over
any. And all those men (into whose hands these do come) we do in the Lord
desire, that they be not herewith offended, but do persuade themselves that
these contents are both simple and faithfully written of us, as upon a
questioned cause granted, that the consciences of the Brethren which desire it,
might some way be better appeased, which to set altogether at naught were a
deed wholly void of charity.

Therefore the cause standing, as we are informed, we profess plainly and in
good faith, that our judgments over these questions are thus.

It is demanded, Whether we can approve this disorder in calling of men to the
function of the Minstry, which is, that the multitude of those which sue for
Order shall be enrolled in the Ministry, both without the voices of Elders, and
also no certain cure appointed them, but lightly examined of their lives and
behavior, to whom also at the lust of the Bishop shall liberty be given
afterward to preach the Word of God for a time prescribed, otherwise to
rehearse only the Church Service?

We answer, That such callings of Ministers, whether we answer them by the rule
of Gods express Word, or else by force of Cannons that are best tried and
allowed, are holden and esteemed of us altogether unlawful, albeit we know that
it is better to have half a loaf then no bread. But we beseech God with our
whole hearts, that it also will please him to bestow upon the Kingdom of
England also the same (that is) a lawful and ordinary calling of men to the
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments. For it being either kept out or hindered,
the benefit of the Doctrine of Truth, must of force by and by vanish away, or
else be held up by some means that is strange, yea, altogether ghostly and
supernatural.

Furthermore we do in Gods most holy Name, most humbly sue to the Princess
Sovereign Majesty, that with the whole force of her mind, she endeavor the
correction of this point, wherein the whole ground and stay of the Church of
England, and therefore of the Realm also does stand and persist.

And thirdly, we do with tears beseech both those high Personages that are of
her Majesty's honorable Council, and those which have succeeded in the place
of the Popish Bishops (undoubtedly through the special mercy of the high and
good God) that they out of the self-same place where overthrow and destruction
did issue, they should utterly destroy that tyranny which has thus cast down
headlong the very Christian Church, and we crave of them in the dreadful Name
of God, before whose redoubted throne of Judgment we all shall be arrested,
that with all consideration and mindfulness of the years past, and conscience
of their duty and charge, they will not flack to vow and betroth their whole
diligence, as well in ordering the means that may accomplish this thing, as in
persuading the Queens Majesty thereto, and that they cease not at all, this
thing being unachieved, chiefly seeing God has bestowed upon them, the
Princely Majesty of so singular a Mistress as from whose hands they cannot but
hope for all princely and excellent things, unless they list in their own case
to fail themselves.

But some will ask, how shall we do in this point, until then? Verily if the
case were ours we would not receive this ministry upon these conditions if it
were proffered; a great deal less would we sue for it. Notwithstanding, we
exhort these men to whom God has by this way made entrance to the enlarging of
the glory of his Kingdom, that in the fear of God they do courageously abide
therein, yet with the condition that it may be lawful for them holily and
religiously to exercise all their whole Ministry. And therefore may also
propound, and urge those things in their cures which do always appertain to the
advancement of the better estate therein. For otherwise, if they be forced of
this liberty, and so willed to wink at manifest abuses, that they should also
approve these things which doubtless ought to be redressed: what thing else can
we persuade them then that they should retire from this, to their private life,
rather then without conscience to nourish that mischief which does of force
draw with it the whole wasting and decay of all the Congregation? Yet we hope
that the Queens Highness, and so many honorable and good men will in such sort
plant their diligence, that rather privilege of liberty may be granted to the
consciences of so many godly and learned brethren, then that these horrible
evils should follow: To wit, that the Pastors of the flocks should be
constrained either against the soundness of their consciences to do that which
is evil (and so to be chained in other men's sins, or else to resign their
ministry, for that third necessity that will ensue this, which is, that
against the Princes and Bishops wills, they should exercise their office) we do
so much the more tremble at, because of those reasons which of themselves are
plain enough, albeit we do not utter them.

It is also desired of us to answer, plainly and truly, Whether we do allow the
distinction ordained in the wearing of copes and garments as well for the
common use, as for the ministry.

We therefore do flatly answer, the cause standing as we do understand, that
those men that are authors hereof do deserve most evil of the Church and shall
answer at the dreadful bar of Christ his Judgment. For although that we think
that that politic order whereby not Citizens alone, but also the degrees of
functions are marked and noted is not to be discommended, wholly a all: yet we
are of opinion that not every mark and note is straight way to be used. For put
the case that the Ministers were commanded to wear the pide coat of a fool, or
the garment of a vice in a play, were it not manifest scorning of the Ministry
so to do? And those that use these other garments and apparel commanded, do
seem verily to us to trespass somewhat worse then so, because that the Lord
has not only reared and set us this Priestlike apparel, as a toy to be laughed
at even of many of the Papists themselves: But it is also certain, that the
same is polluted and defiled with infinite superstition. But some men will
plead the antiquity thereof. Surely they are old, and yet the Apostolic
simplicity wherein the Church did flourish, is a great deal more ancient then
this. Also, if it please him to wade yet further to search about these matters,
it shall be easy enough to show that these things which after that, did serve
for the note and mark of the Ministry were first usual among the people, and
common. And therefore whence comes it, things being altered after so long a
season, that this foreign and strange guise should be retained.

Does it not come of a zeal both evil and unprofitable? But some men will say,
these things for all that are of the middle sort, and indifferent. We grant
indeed that they are such, if you will consider them simply, and in their own
nature, and apart from all circumstances; but who are they that will so weigh
and consider them? For these men that are yet Papists, what purpose soever this
civil Law does pretend are surely by this means established deeper in this
superstition which has so overgrown them. And these men that began so
earnestly to abhor superstition, that they now did detest monuments and
relics thereof. How much are they offended and wounded herein? As for those
which are further, and better learned, what fruit reap they thereof.

And further, is this difference and mark of the functions of such importance,
that therefore the consciences of so many should be troubled: especially seeing
the reason and purpose thereof newly set a broach is but drawn even from those
that are themselves the manifest sworn enemies to sound doctrine? What means
it also, that of those also that are termed to be Ecclesiastically brought up
and are in the Ministry not the smallest part are said to have their Papistry
in their breasts about with them? Is this the good hour wherein they shall
better profit by restoring of this attire? Or shall they not rather vaunt their
crests as in hope to have Popery restored again? If any shall object the
circumcising of Timothy, and otherlike examples: we right earnestly pray him to
consider what Paul would have said, if any man should have made this Law, that
every man that is in the Ministry of the Gospel, shall be constrained to wear
the Garments of the Pharisees, or that they in the apparel of profane Priests
should Preach the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments, and not only
circumcise their children, notwithstanding, that under some color of reason,
this civil commandment might set forth the same; yea to what end are these
things brought in? for howsoever they might at first be to lerated, till that
by little and little they might be taken away, yet being once removed out of
the Churches, we see not with what commodity they can be restored to their
possession again. Therefore we do eftsoons repeat that we before said, that we
cannot allow this devise, nor yet hope for any good to ensue thereof.
Notwithstanding, we will gladly give over this opinion, if we shall learn
better reason therefore. What then (will the brethren say on whom these things
are so thrown) judge you what we ought to do herein? We answer, that there
needs in this answer a distinction. For the case of the Ministers, and the
case of the people are not all one herein; Furthermore, many things may, yea,
and ought to be born and tolerated, which are notwithstanding not justly
commanded. First, therefore we answer, that albeit these things (as we judge)
are not rightly restored to their possession in the Congregations, yet, seeing
that they are not of those kind of things which are of their own nature impious
and ungodly, they seem to us not to be of such weight, that the Shepherds
should rather give over their functions, than receive the apparel, or that the
flock should refuse the public food of the soul, rather then to receive the
same from the Shepherds that is apparelled herein: only, that as well the
Shepherds, as their flocks may not sin against their consciences (so that the
purity of Doctrine it self remain untouched) we do persuade the Ministers,
after they have both before the Queens highness, and also before the Bishops,
set their consciences at liberty by modest protestation (as does appertain to
such Christians as seek not sedition and tumult) and yet grave according to the
importance of the cause, that they do indeed openly in their parish, still beat
upon those things that may serve to the utter taking away of the stumbling
block. And that as God shall give occasion they will wholly give themselves
both wisely and meekly to correct all those abuses, but yet to bear those
things which they cannot straight way charge, rather then forsaking their
Congregation they should give occasion to Satan, that seeking nothing else to
stir up greater and more perilous mischiefs then these. As for the people (the
doctrine remaining unhurt) we do exhort them that for all these things they
will diligently hear the same, to use the Sacraments religiously, and so long
to groan to God with earnest amendment of life until thy obtain of him that
which does appertain to the full redress and amendment of the Church.

But again, if that Ministers be commanded not only to tolerate these things,
but also that they shall with their subscriptions allow them as lawful, or else
by their stilness foster them, what can we else persuade them to do, but that
having witnessed their innocence and in the fear of the Lord tried all means,
they should give over their functions to open wrong. But our hearts betide us
of England much better things then these extremities.

It is demanded of us, what we do judge of the trolling and discanning of the
Psalms, crossing of those babes that shall be baptized, and of the demands in
baptism, also of the round unleavened waffer cake, and kneeling in the Lords
Supper.

We answer, that kind of singing seems to be the corruption of the pure
ancient Church service, and glorifying of God therein. And as for crossing of
babes, whatsoever practice there has been thereof in the time of old, yet is
it most certain that it is truly in these days through so late greenness of the
superstition so most abominable, as that we judge those men to have done
assuredly well that have once driven this Rite out of the Congregation, whereof
also we see not what the profit is. And we doubt not but the demands in
Baptism have crept into the Church upon this occasion, because that through
the negligence of the Bishops the same form of baptizing of children was
retained, which at the first rearing of the Primative Church, was to be used at
the baptizing of those that being of years did enter the profession of Christ.
This thing also we may perceive by many the like yet in use in the popish
baptism. Wherefore even as the cream and charm used in baptism are by Gods
Law abolished, although they were ancient, so wish we also these demandings,
being not only vain but foolish, should be also passed over, albeit that S.
Augustine himself does seem in an Epistle of his to sustain it by certain
devised construction.

The bread, whether it ought to be made with leaven or without, we think it not
greatly to be striven for, although we judge it morfit and consonant with
Christ's institution to have the bread at the Communion, which is used at the
common table; for why did the Lord use unleavened bread? because that in that
hour wherein he thought good to institute his holy Supper, not one man in all
Jewry used any other. Therefore it behooves us to restore the Jewish feast of
unleavened bread, or else must it be granted, that it is better to use the common
and accustomed bread of all Tables, according to the example of Christ,
notwithstanding that the bread that he then took was unleavened: For of the
practice of the Primative Church which the Greek Church does yet in this behalf
retain, we over pass to write of.

Furthermore, kneeling at the very receipt of the Sacrament, has in it a show
of Godly and Christian reverence, and might therefore in times past be used
with profit, yet for all that, because out of this fountain the detestable use
of bread-worship did follow, and does it in these days stick in many minds, it
seems to us that it was justly abolished out from the Congregation.
Therefore, we do beseech the most good and great God, that it would please him
to instruct both the Q. Majesty's highness, and also the Bishops with such
devise as shall be most needful for the perfect doing out of these filthes, and
that at once. In mean time, because these things, also are not such as are in
their own nature Idolatrous, we do judge that they ought so to be dealt with,
as we have advised in the things going next before.

It is demanded of us, whether we allow that Baptism which is administered by
Midwives?

We answer, that not only we disallow the Baptism as the rest of things before
spoken of, but that we do judge it also intolerable. For it is a thing that
has risen as well of ignorance of the very use or Baptism, as the public
ministry of the Church. We judge therefore that the Ministers are bound
sharply to rebuke this abuse, muchless ought they to hold this false baptism
for good and firm. the reason why the learned on our side have often declared.
And we are also ready when it shall be needful to declare.

It is also reported unto us, that the keys of binding and loosing are
practiced in certain courts of the Bishops, neither by the sentences and
judgments of Elders, which office that Church has not yet received, nor
acording to the word of God: But the authority of certain Lawyers and other
like, which is more, often times by the authority of some one man, and that
also for such kind of actions as are pure money matters, even as the misuse of
the same was in Popery.

Whereto we answer that it seems to us almost incrediable that any such
customs and examples (being most perverse) should be used in that Kingdom,
whereas purity and soundness of Doctrine is. For the right of excommunication
and binding of the offender shall be found never to have been before the time
of the Papists in the power and hand of one sole person, but did appertain to
all the whole Eldership, from which also the people themselves were not rashly
shut out. Because this also the Lawyers-like hearing of suits that appertain to
livings did fall to the Bishops charge altogether through abuse. For that place
wherein the Apostle talks of days-men, umpires at Corinth, is to no purpose,
whereas the Majestrate is a Christian: nor did the Apostle ever think to
burden the Eldership with the hearing of such mere civil causes. And it is
most certain, that the Bishops of the elder Age of the Church, have had the
determining of such controversies, not for any authority that they had therein,
but through the importunity of suitors, and that as houshoulders, umpires and
dayes-men also, notwitstanding among those men where this were showed unto,
those did most wisely govern themselves which chose rather to follow the
example of Christ our Savior, who refused to be the umpire in dividing of the
patrimony, or else judge in the matter of adultery, when both the same were
preferred unto him.

Therefore, if in England any thing be done contrary to this, surely we ought
to think that by such sentences and judgments, there is not any man before God
any more bound then by the Popish excommunications. And we wish that this
torment-house of consciences and loathsome profanation of the Ecclesiastical
and mere spiritual jurisdiction might by the authority of the Queens Majesty
out of hand be abolished, no otherwise then the marring of the very Doctrine it
self. And that Eldership and Deacons may be restored and set up according to
the word of God and canons of the pure Church, which thing, if it be not done,
verily we are sore afraid that this only thing will be the beginning of many
calamities which we would God would turn away from us. For it is most certain
that the son of God will one day from heaven roughly revenge these manifest
abuses, wherewith the consciences of our brethren are troubled, except speedy
redress be had therein.

In the mean whiles, the things which are not well done by the one party, may
be well enough tolerated (as we think) by those men which bear the thing which
they cannot change. Yet thus far, as that they allow not the thing it self for
good, but do only redeem their unjust disquieting by patience. But if so be
that they shall be forced, not only to tolerate this faction but also to
approve this excommunication as lawful, and be constrained to ask unlawful
absolution; to assent to this manifest abuse, we then exhort them that they
will rather suffer any kind of trouble then to do herein against their
consciences. But to what end is all this? For verily, we do promise our selves
much better things then these, yea, of all things the best even at this pinch,
especially of that realm, in which the restoring of Christian Religion has
been sealed and confirmed with the blood of so many excellent Martyrs also.
Only we fear this, least that which has befallen so many Contries should
happen to England, to wit, least because the due fruits of repentance are not
brought forth, the angry God should double our darkness, the light of his
Gospel being first taken from us. Of this contents are our daily Preachings in
our Congregations, and verily we think the same ought to be done of all
Ministers of Gods word, especially in these our days. That they chiefly set
forwards this principle of the Gospel which does anpertain to earnest amendment
of life. For this point achieved, undoubtedly the Lord shall give both counsel
and zeal and all things else which do necessarily appertain to the
accomplishment of the reparation of the Church, already begun. And before all
we do require, and with tears humbly crave, that our good and right worshipful
in the Lord, the brethren of the English Churches, all bitterness of mind set a
part, which we surely fear, after what sort it has on either fide forced this
evil, would patiently bear and suffer each other, so long as purity of
Christian doctrine it self, and soundness of conscience does remain, Willingly
to obey the Queens Majesty, who is full of compassion, and all other Prelates.
And finally, that with all concord minds in the Lord, if they manly set against
Satan, who seeks all occasion of tumult and infinite calamities: yea,
although they have not like judgment of all forts of Prelates at the first. For
this our writing God is our witness, does not tend to this purpose, that either
part should use it against other as that we should send it to you as an Apple
of contention: Although we have concerning these matters declared our
judgments, even simply, as upon a supposed case, (God is our witness) being
overcome with the continual suit of our brethren. And we join our daily
prayers to the groanings of all the godly on that side the Seas, that it may
please the most merciful God, having compassion on man's frailite, to direct the
Queens highness, and all the Nobles of the Realm of England. Also every
prelate; and finally cack workman of this spiritual building with his holy
Spirit most effectuously, so as the work of the Lord so often begun, and so
often stayed, may happily be set forward, to the great quietness and concord of
all men, not only the old stains in the doctrine it self and Ecclesiastical
discipline also, being at length utterly done out, but also all monstrousness
offerers, and which Satan newly seeks, to bring into the Church again, driven
away. which vouchsafe to bring to pass through his holy spirit, the most kind
father in Jesus Christ, his very son eternal and consubstantial with him, in
which persons, we profess one God, and not diverse, ought to be worshipped for
ever, Amen.

At Geneva the 24. October 1547. Your brethren in Christ to all your godliness
most assured, Theodorus Beza, etc. Jo. Gaiagnaezius. Ge. Favergius. Jo.
Parnillus. Slm. Golerlius. Cor. Barlierdus. Remundus Calvetus. Jo. Tremlerus.
Car. P. Kuds Faverius. Pet. Carpenterus. Hen. S. Nicolas Coladonus. Johan.
Pinaldus. Egid. Causcus. Vrb. Calvetus. Fransc. Portus. Abden. Dupleus.


A Coppie of the Letter sent to the Bishops and Pastors of England, who has
renounced the Roman Antichrist, and profess the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.
The superintendent Ministers, and Commissioners of charges within the Realm of
Scotland: To their Brethren the Bishops and Pastors of England, who has
renounced the Roman Antichrist, and do profess with them the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, desire the perpetual increase of the holy Spirit.
BY word and writ, it is come to our knowledge (reverend Pastors) that diverse
of our dearest brethren, amongst whom are some of the best learned within that
Realm, are deprived from Ecclesiastical function, and forbidden to preach, and
so by you that they are straight to promote the Kingd me of Jesus Christ,
because their consciences will not suffer to take upon them (at the
commandment of the authority) such garments as Idolaters in time of blindness
have used in their Idolatry, which brute cannot be but most dolorous to our
hearts, mindful of that sentence of the Apostle, saying, If ye bite and devour
one another; take heed least ye be consumed one of another. We purpose not at
this present to enter into the ground of that question which we hear of, either
part to be agitate with greater vehemence then well likes us: to wit, whether
that such apparel is to be counted amongst things that are simple indifferent
or not, but in the bowels of the Lord Jesus we crave that Christian charity may
so prevail in you, we say, the Pastors and leaders of the flock within that
Realm.

That ye do not to others that which you would not others should do to you. Ye
cannot be ignorant how tender a thing the conscience of man is. All that have
knowledge are not a like persuaded, your consciences reclaimes not at wearing of
such garments, but many thousands both godly and learned, are otherwise
persuaded, whose consciences are continually stricken with these sentences;
what has Christ Jesus to do with Belial? What fellowship is there betwixt
darkness and light? If Surpluce, Corner cap, and Tippit have been badges of
Idolaters in the very act of their Idolatry, what has the preachers of
Christian liberty, and the open rebuker of all Superstition to do with the
dregs of the Romish Beast? Our brethren that of Conscience refuse that
unprofitable apparel, do neither damn yours, or molest you that use such vain
trifles: If you shall do the like to them, we doubt not but therein ye shall
please God, and comfort the hearts of many which are wounded with extremity,
which is used against those godly, and our beloved brethren. Color of
Rhetoric, or manly persuasion will we use none, but charitably we desire you
to call that sentence of pity to mind: Feed the flock of God which is
committed to your charge, caring for them, not by constraint, but willingly,
not as though ye were Lords over Gods Heritage, but that ye may be examples to
the flock. And further also, we desire you to meditate that sentence of the
Apostle saying, Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Grecians,
nor to the Church of God. In what condition of time ye and we both travel in
the promoting of Christ's Kingdom, we suppose you not to be ignorant. And
therefore we are more bold to exhort you to walk more circumspectly, then that
for such varities, the godly should be troubled. For all things that may seem
lawful, edify not. If the Commandment of authority urge the conscience of
yours and our brethren more then they can bear; we unfainedly crave of you,
that ye remember that ye are called the light of the world and the earth:

All civil authority has not the light of God always shining before their
eyes in the Statutes and commandments, but their affections oft-time, savor
too much of the earth, and of worldly wisdom.

And therefore we think that ye should boldly oppone your selves to all power,
that will or dare extol it self, not only against God, but also against all
such as do burden the consciences of the faithful farther then God has
burdened them by his own word. But here in we confess our offense in that we
have entered farther in reasoning then we purposed and promised at the
beginning. And therefore we shortly return to our former humble supplication,
which is, that our brethren, who among you refuse the Romish rags, may find of
you the Prelates such favors, as our head and Master commands every one of his
members to show one to another, while we look to receive of your gentleness,
not only for that ye fear to offend Gods Majesty, in troubling of your
brethren for such vain trifles. But also, because ye will not refuse the humble
requests of us your brethren, and fellow Preachers of Christ Jesus, in whom,
albeit there appear no great worldly pomp, yet we suppose you will not so far
despise us, but that ye will esteem us to be of the number of those that fight
against that Roman Antichrist, and travel that the kingdom of Christ Jesus
universally may be maintained and advanced. The days are evil. Iniquity
abounds. Christian charity (alas) is waxen cold. And therefore we ought the
more diligently to watch. For the hour is uncertain, when the Lord Jesus shall
appear, before whom we your brethren, and ye may give an account of our
administration.

And thus in conclusion, we once again crave favor to our brethren, which
granted, ye in the Lord shall command us in things of double more importance.
The Lord Jesus rule your hearts in his true fear to the end, and give unto you
and unto us victory over that conjured enemy of all true Religion; to wit, over
that Roman Antichrist, whose wounded head Satan by all means labors to cure
again, but to destruction shall he, and his maintainers go by the power of the
Lord Jesus: To whose mighty power and protection we heartily commit you.

Subscribed by the hands of Superintendents, one part of Ministers, and scribed
in our general Assemblies and fourth Session thereof, At Edenbrough, the 38,
day of December. 1566.

Your loving brethren and follow Preachers in Christ Jesus. Jo. Craig. Da.
Lyndesay. Guil. Gislisomus. Io. Spottiswood. Io. Row. Rob. Pont. Io. VViram.
Iaco. Mailvil. Io. Erskin. Nic. Spital.


Thus have you heard in these two letters, the indgments of those excellent
Churches of the French and Scottish touching the things in controversy. Now if
to these I should add all other which are of the same judgment and of their
opinion: the number of Churches would be so many, that the adversaries would
evidently see and perceive what small cause they have to charge us thus with
singularity, as though we were post alone, and none to be of our opinion. And
it may here also be noted, that the most ancientest fathers of this our own
country, as Master Coverdale, Master Doctor Turner, Master Whitehead, and many
others, some dead, some yet living, from whose mouths and pens, the urgers of
these received first the light of the Gospel, could never be brought to yield
or consent unto such things as are now forced with so great extremity.

The answer and judgment of that famous and excellent learned man Master John
Calvin the late Pastor of Gene^a, touching the Book of England after that he
had perused the same faithfully translated out of Latin by Mr. Whittingham.
To the godly and learned men, Masler John Knox, and Master William
Whittingham, his faithful brethren at Frankford, etc.
THis thing truly grieveth me very much, and it is a great shame that
contention should arise among brethren banished and driven out of their country
for one faith, and for that cause which only ought to have holden you bound
together, as it were with an holy band in this your dispersion. For what might
you do better in this dolerous and miserable plague, then (being pulled
violently from your country) to procure your selves a Church, which should
receive and nourish you (being joined together in minds and language) in her
motherly lap? But now for some men to strive as touching the form of Prayer
and for cetimonies as though ye were at rest and prosperity, and to suffer that
to be an impediment that ye cannot there join into one body of the Church (as
I think) it is too much out of season.

Yet notwithstanding I allow their constancy which strive for a just cause,
being forced against their wills unto contention. I do worthily condemn
frowardness, which does hinder and stay the holy carefulness of reforming the
Church.

And as I behave my self gentle and tractable in mean things (as external
Ceremonies) so do I not always judge it profitable to give place to the foolish
stoutness, which will forsake nothing of their own wonted custom. In the
Liturgy of England, I see that there were many tolerable foolish things; by
these words I mean, Manyt lerable foolish things in the book by Calvin's judgment
that there was not the purity which was to be desired. These vices, though
they could not at the first day be amended, yet seeing there was manifest
impiety, they were for a season to be tolerated. Therefore, it was lawful to
begin of such rudiments or Absedaries, but so, that it behoved the learned,
grave and godly Ministers of Christ to enterprise farther, and so set forth
something more filed from rust, and purer. If godly Religion had flourished
till this day in England, there ought to have been a thing better corrected and
many things clean taken away. Now, when these principles be overthrown, a
Church must be set up in another place, where ye may freely make an order
again, which shall be apparent to be most commodious to the use and edification
of the Church. I cannot tell what they mean, which so greatly delight in the
leavings of Popish dregs. The book trisling and childish by Calvin's judgment.
They love the things whereunto they are accustomed. First of all, this is a
thing both trifling and childish. Furthermore, this new Order far differs
from a change.

Therefore, as I would not have you fierce over them whose infirmity will not
suffer to assend an higher step: So would I adve^tise other, that they please
not themselves too much in their foolishness. Also, that by their frowardness,
they do not let the course of the holy building, Last of all, lest that foolish
vainglory steal them away. For what cause have they to contend, except it be
for that they are ashamed to give place to better things? But I speak in vain
to them which perchance esteem me not so well, as they will vouchsafe to admit
the counsel that comes from such an author. If they fear the evil rumor in
England, as though they had fallen from that Religion, which was the cause of
their banishment, they are far deceived, for this true and sincere Religion
will rather compel them that there remain, faithfully to consider into what
deep gulf they have fallen. For their downfall shall more grievously wound them,
when they perceive your going forward beyond mid course, from the which they
are turned. Far-ye well dearly beloved brethren, and faithful Servants of
Christ, the Lord defend and govern you,

From Geneva 22. Ian. 1555. Yours JOHN CALVIN.

FINIS.

