Some Proposals by a well wisher to His Highness and the Parliament.
THat care be taken for the advancement of the Gospel, and that a way be found
out for the maintenance of such as are the faithful Dispencers thereof.

2. As an expedient thereunto, that it be considered how many little
Congregations there be, have maintenance, would serve three or four; many
large ones having scarcely any at all.

3. That, till certain Maintenance be settled, authority be given, to assesse
Maintenance upon the Inhabitants.

4. That Church Discipline be taken into consideration, and that all such
Ministers as are godly and Orthodox, care be taken for their reconciliation, in
that difference of Discipline; they not attempting to introduce that late
Lordly power, by Bishops and Prelates.

5. That the Statute, for the setting such Poor on work as are able, and
relieving the importent, may be perused and amended, if need be; and further
encouragement given for Justices of Peace, Constables, and other in feriour
Officers, to act vigorously in the same.

6. That the last Act for the Sabbath be perused, being defective, as is humbly
conceived, there being no power to levy penalties, as in former Acts.

As also, to that clause against Fulling-Mills, the penalty being but 10
shillings; and the mills sometimes consisting of 10 or 11 Stocks, being every
Stock will earn 5 shillings upon the Lords Day, it will therefore be necessary,
as to the reforming of that vice, that every Stock within the respective Mills,
pay 10 shillings from the Miller, and 10 shillings from the Owner of the Cloth,
in the said Stock; and so proceed in the penalty, as the parties go on in
offending.

7. That the Statute of James 1 st. and 9 th. 4 th. and 5 th. be perused and
amended, if need be, against tippling by Neighbors within their Townships; and
further encouragement given, for the putting the same in execution.

8. That no person, being a Justice of Peace, in any City, Town-corporate, or
elsewhere, and trading in Malt, by himself or his Agent, be authorized to
grant License to sell Ale or Beer.

9. That no Bailiff, Attorney, Coroner, Constable, etc. be licensed to sell Ale
or Beer, or keep a Tavern. And that also, not any person being a Tradesman, and
keeping many servants in his house.

10. That it be considered, whether Watch and Ward be not as necessary, if not
more, in Winter, as in Summer.

11. That the great inconvenience by Certioraries, be also considered; by
reason whereof, many gross offenses in the Country pass unpunished.

12. That payment of money, freely lent for the public good, be taken into
consideration, and speedy course taken therein.

And as an expedient thereunto, let it be considered, that seeing there are
great numbers of persons, who have aided and assisted the King's party; and
since the beginning of these Wars, have thereby procured unto themselves great
Estates, by buying of plundered goods, and otherwise, in the late troubles,
whether or no it were not reasonable, a collection of the names of such persons
were procured, and the said money assessed upon them, they being the only
persons that have gained by the late troubles, and never have been sequestered,
nor suffered by the times, being always upon occasion ready to side with both
parties, for advantage-sake. As also, any person or persons, discovering any
concealment, may not out of the same be relieved, for such his, or their
lent-mony.

13. That some provision be made, that upon any difference arising amongst
neighbors, unless in case of Titles of Land, or great sums of Money, before
any suit be commenced, the party complaining, have power to convent the
Defendant before the next Justice of Peace, or some others, authorized thereto,
who shall have power to hear and end the difference, if he can; and that any
Suit commenced, contrary to that rule, shall be void in Law.

14. That the Statutes for Clothing be perused, and provision made against the
deceirs, now too frequent, in that particular.

15. That the said complaints of Country People, as to the hard usage they meet
with, from such as collect the excise be considered, it being conceived, that
the charges of collecting of it, which the Country bears, is as much as comes
to the Commonwealth. And therefore it is proposed, that what any Leaser has
paid for three or four of the last years, may be charged upon the persons,
liable to pay the same; and some way found out to collect the same, without
such excessive charges, as other public money is.

16. That such as in the late Wars, have aided and assisted the late King, and
have forced persons, by fineing them to serve as Constables, etc. against their
minds, may not now be suffered to make choice of such like Officers; and in
case they will not desist, a way to proceed against them. And also that all
proceedings by suchin other their respective places, either by themselves, or
jointly with others, may be void in Law.

17. That unnecessary and excessive feastings, in Cities and Towns corporate,
be prevented; it having been very observable, how many persons of good Estates
have been weakened thereby; it also being a hinderance to other honest men, for
taking upon them places of trust.

18. Wants authority for the regulating of Pewes and Galleries, in several
great Assemblies, they being possessed by the younger sort, to the prejudice of
the aged, and such as hears the charge thereof; especially in Cities and great
Corporations.

19. That the discontinuance of the late Act of Parliament, for the repairing
of high ways by Assessments, be taken into further consideration, it having
been found by experience to be very effectually, in several places of this
Nation.

M. J.


