HIS MAJESTY'S Reasons for Withdrawing Himself from ROCHESTER, Wrote with His
own Hand and Ordered by Him to be PUBLISHED.

REASONS Why in this Conjuncture no Alteration should be made in the GOVERNMENT
of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND, BY A SINCERE PROTESTANT AND A LOVER OF HIS COUNTRY.

Printed in the Year, 1689.

HIS MAJESTY'S REASONS, FOR Withdrawing Himself from Rochester.
Wrote with his own hand, and ordered by him to be published.
THE World cannot wonder at my withdrawing my self, now this second time, I
might have expected some what better usage, after what I wrote to the prince of
Orange, by my Lord Feversham, and the Instructions I gave him; But instead of
an Answer, such as I might have hoped for, What was to expect after the usage I
received by the making the said Earl a prisoner against the practice and Law of
Nations?

The sending his own Guards at eleven at night, to take possession of the posts
at White hall, without advertising me in the least manner of it, The sending 'o
me at one a clock, after midnight, when I was in Bed, a kind of an Order by
three Lords, to begone out of my own palace, before twelve that same Morning.
After all this how should I hope to be safe, so long as I was in the power of
one, who had not only done this to me, and invaded my Kingdoms, without any
just cause given him for it? But that did by his first Declaration, lay the
greatest Aspersion upon me, that malice could invent, in that clause of it
which concerns my Son: I appeal to all that know me, nav even to himself, that
in their Consciences, neither he nor they can believe me in the least capable
of so unnatural a Villainy, nor of so little common sense, to be imp^s^d on in a
thing of such a Nature as that. What had I then to expect from one, who by all
Arts has taken such pains, to make me appear as black as hell to my own
people, as well as to all the World besides? What effect that has had at home,
all Mankind have seen by so general a Defection in my Army, as well as in the
Nation amongst all sort of people.

I was Born Free, and desire to continue so, And tho I have ventured my self
very frankly, on several Occasions for the good and honor of my Country, and
am as free to do it again, (and which I hope I shall yet do, as old as I am, to
redeem it from the slavery, it is like to fall under;) Yet I think it not
convenient to expose my self to be secured, as not to be at Liberty to effect
it; and for that Reason I withdrew, but so as to be within call, when soever
the Nations Eyes shall be opened, so as to see how they have been abused, and
imposed upon by the specious pretenses of Religion and property. I hope it will
please GOD. to touch their Hearts, out of his infinite mercy, and to make them
sensible of the ill condition they are in, and bring them to such a temper,
that a Legal Parliament may be called; and that amongst other things which may
be necessary to be done, they will agree to Liberty of Conscience for all
Protestant Dissenters; And that those of my own persuasion may be so far
considered, and have such a share in it, as they may live peaceably and
quietly, as Englishmen, and Christians ought to do, and not to be obliged to
transport themselves, which would be very grievous, especially to such as love
their own Country: And I appeal to all, who are considering Men, and have had
Experience, Whether any thing can make this Nation so great in flourishing, as
Liberty of Conscience? Some of our Neighbors dread it. I could add much more
to confirm all I have said, but now is not the proper time,

ROCHESTER, December 22d. 1688.
REASONS Why in this Conjuncture no Alteration should be made in the GOVERNMENT
of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND By a Sincere PROTESTANT and a Lover of His COUNTRY.
BEcause the present i. e. the Episcopal Government has not only the Advantages
of Apostolic Institution, and universal reception by all Churches, since the
first propagation of Christianity, (it being impossible in all the Authentic
Records of the Church, to find so much as one single Church, Governed by mere
Presbyters, till the 16th. Century;) but also by Experience it is found to be
the best Adapted for the preservation of Order, Peace, Unity, etc.

1. The Tyrrany of Presbytrie is unsupportable, as is evident from all the
Histories of the late times, many man are yet alive who knew this by Experience.

3. The most part of the Nobility, Gentry and Burgesses of this Nation have
taken the Test, and thereby sworn against Presbytrie, by consequence, such can
never consent to, or vote for the Introduction of Presbytry or the Abolition of
Episcopacy, nor choose such Commissioners, as will probably Vote so, without the
evident hazard of Perjury; especially considering,

4. That it Presbytry be Established, the Covenants must be renewed, as is
evident not only from the present proceedings of the Presbyteterian Preachers,
who refer manifestly to them in their Address lately designed for the Prince of
Orange, and have made the breach of them one of the principal Arguments for
their late Fast, but also from the Natural Exigencies of the Thing, it being
hardly imaginable upon what other Foundation the Restitution of Presbytry can
be claimed. Briefly, Presbytry cannot be settled but upon the Acts of the
General Assemblies Anno 1638. and downward, and the Acts of the Correspondent
Resciended Parliaments? or else it must begin on a new Foundation. It it begin
on a new Foundation, then the present separation of the Presbyterians from the
Church: as by all Law established must needs be condemned, if being made on no
tolerable pretenses, a thing which by all means they must avoid. If it stand,
upon the old Found, then all these Acts of Parliaments and General Assemblies
from the 38. to the 61. must revive; and by Consequence these Acts that oblidge
all Persons under the highest penalties, Civil and Ecclesiastical, to swear the
Covenants. But if the Covenants revive (besides the Material iniquities,
particularly of the Solemn League) it will unavoidably make the most
considerable part of the Nation either perjured or Miserable. All these must be
perjured who have taken the Declaration, Test, etc. and yet shall take the
Covenants, and all such must be miserable, who will not take them.

5. I he Restitution of Presbyters, will evidently have these further
deplorable Effects among many others. First, No man who has been any ways
active in the execution of the Laws, or in the Kings service, or for the
present Churches interest: but will be in eminent haz^^ds of sinning, and being
rendered incapable of all public Trusts, either Civil or Ecclesiastical, or
else he must do public penance for what he has done. This is already
Condescended on, and vented by the Presbyterian party. 2dly, All that have
taken the Test will be oblidged to renounce it, and submit to Ecclesiastical
Censures (perhaps to Civil too) for having taken it. 3dly, All that have
received Episcopal Ordinations or (being Laymen) have at any time Acte^ by
virtue of Episcopal Commissions, must expect the same measures; for all these
things are not only naturally consequent upon the Restitution of Presbytry, but
are actually resolved upon by that party. But above all these, whether Noblemen
or Gentlemen, who have at any time appeared in Arms, for Quashing the late
Rebellion; in the West, Pictland Hills, Bothwel Bridge, etc. are threatened with
the severest corrections, and reckoned the Arch-hereticks. None of these things
be, not only a great part of the Laity of the Nation, must be reduced to sad
straits, both in relation to Conscience and Interest: but also, all the present
conforming Clergy most be quite turned out it being unpresumable that they can
submit to these impositions. But if they shall be turned out (besides the
evident straits and necessities, so many Families must be Redacted to, wherein
yet the Gentrey of the Nation are Generally concerned) the Church will be left
almost entirely Destitute of Pastors, there being not so many tolerable
Qualified Men of the Presbyterian persuasion as can fill the 5th. or 6th. part
of the Churches of the Nation.

6. It Presbytry shall not be thus established in its Integrity, but all the
alteration shall be a Non-Episcopacy, and the present Incumbants shall be
permitted to continue in their Offices and Stations, our deplorable Schisms and
Divisions, will continue without Remedy, as is evident to any considering
Person, or else the Magistrate must entirely take upon him the Government and
Discipline of the Church, and we must instead of true Church Government, have
down right Erastianism.

7. The establishment of presbytry or Erastianism in this Kingdom, will
naturally tend to have a most pernicious influence upon the Protestant Interest
within this Island of Britain, if ever popery shall offer again to set up its
Head. The Church of Scotland, and the Church of England will stand on different
bottoms, and so will be obliged to defend themselves upon different principles,
and by different Arguments, which ('it is to be feared) will prove hard for
Scotland. We find by experience that the English Clergy have kept their ground
bravely against popery. In point of Argument, no Protestant Church has ever
justified her self so well upon so solid grounds, and that upon the account of
her Episcopal constitution, by which her Ordinations are clear, and the Mission
of her Officers unquarrellable by the papists. By defending Her self, She has
hitherto defended us likewise because we are built upon the same. Foundation.
But if we shall now begin upon another Foundation, we must divide from her, and
that will weaken her affection toward us, and her concern in us, and we must
stand by our selves: Yet God knows how unable we are to subsist without her
assistance. The papists love extraordinarly to Fish in troubled Watters, and to
see protestants divided, if therefore we cast out with England (as we must
needs do if we turn down Episcopacy) we shall give the Papists more advantage
then most people are aware of.

8. To endeavor the Restitution of Presbytery at this Juncture will undou^tly
disoblidge the Princess of Orange, who has from her Intancy been Educate in the
Communion of the Church of England, and still has professed her self of Episcopal
principles. It will disoblige the Prince of Orange, who (as we are
uncontravertibly informed) has no inclinations at all that the Government of
this Church should be changed. Our Scottish Nobility who are now at London are
generally (4 or 5. Lords only excepted) resolved to stand by the present
establishment of the Church. Very many of the Gentry who are there, who at
their first coming thither, were cold and careless seeing now further into the
Presbyterian designs then they did before, find it their concern to Espouse the
present Churches interest, I hose of the Presbyterian persuasion are not the
5th. or 6th. part of the people of the Nation, and generally people of mean
both knowledge and Quality. These things laid together may persuade any
Ingenious Man to befriend the present establishment.

9. And what though it be true that some of our present Bishops have done things,
and made condescentions, perhaps not entirely becoming their Character? any man
can easily distinguish between the Order and the Persons, Let the Persons who
have been guilty smart for it in Gods Name, but why should the Order be rumed
for their Miscarriages? Let all possible care be taken to prevent such
failings; for the Future; Let there be a Convocation of the Clergy in due
season, let us have Canons for regulating the exercise of the Government and
Discipline of the Church; Let the Explanatory Act be rescinded and the Church
be made a little more indeperdent on the Crown. So that Bishops may not be
turned out of their Chairs without a Legal Trial: Let convenient Restraints be
laid upon them, that they meddle not too much in Secular Affairs. Let these and
such other usual Regulations be made, but let the Order be preserved.

FINIS.

