JOYFUL NEVVES FROM THE KINGS MAJESTY. AND The PRINCE of WALES, TO All loyal
Subjects within the Realm of England, and Principality of Wales. With His
Majesty's Desires and Proposals to both Houses, concerning all His liege People
whatsoever. Signed, CHARLES R.

ALSO, Hammonds Letter to the Parliament concerning His Majesty's Royal Person.
And the Proceedings of the prince at Sea, his sailing toward the North, and
His Design touching the Earl of Warwick.

Likewise, the proceedings of Lieut. Genesis Cromwell, and Genesis Monro in the North,
and Monroes Declaraaion to his Army.

September 4. Printed for G. VV. 1648.

THE DESIRES OF The Kings most Excellent Majesty to both Houses of Parliament,
concerning all his looall and faithful subjects within these his distracted
Realms and Dominions.
My Lord, and Mr. Speaker,
I Have received your Letter of the 25 of this month with the Votes that you
sent me, which though they are not so full as I could have wished for the
perfecting of a Treaty, yet because I conceive by what you have done that I am
in some measure fit to begin one; such is my uneessant and earnest desire to
give a peace to these my now diftracted Dominions, as I accept the Treaty and
therefore desire that such five

Lords and ten Commons as my two Houses shall appoint, be speedily sent, fully
authorized and instructed to treat with me, not doubting by what is now
wanting, will at our meeting upon debate be fully supplied, not only to the
furtherance of this Treaty, but also to the consummation of a safe and
well-grounded peace.

So I rest your good friend, CHARLES R.
Postscript.
I desire in order to one of your votes, that ye would send me a free pass for
Mr. Parsons, one of the Grooms of my Presence Chamber to go into Scotland, and
that ye would immediately send him to me to receive dispatch thither accordingly.


For the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore, and
William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons.

The Right Honorable the House of Peers having received the said Letter,
communicated the same to the Commons, who after receipt thereof, ordered to
debate it, and no doubt but there will be a happy concurrence and compliance
between his Majesty and both Houses, to the great joy and comfort of all his
liege people, and the flourishing of his distracted Realms and Dominions.

Another Letter were read in both Houses from col. Hammond Governor of the
Isle of Wight; wherein he declares his desires to the Lords and Commons to be
freed of his employment, and that the service as formerly be by Commissioners.
The Lords read both these letters, but did not proceed thereupon.

Joyful News from the Prince.
Honored Sir,
BY a messenger from Deal we are advertized, that His Highness the Prince of
Wales having called a general Council aboard the Reformation, took into
consideration their present proceedings at Sea for the advancement of his
Fathers Cause, and conceiving it more necessary to draw off the Navy from the
Downs, gave command to Vice Admiral Batten to send Orders to every Captain
throughout the Navy, to weigh Anchor, which accordingly they did, and are now
sailed toward the North with the whole Fleet; but some conjecture that it is
only done in policy to invite the Earl of Warwick to Sea, who we hear will
suddenly be there, and in all probability may become master thereof, having a
gallant Fleet consisting of sixteen sail of lusty ships, the St. George being
Admiral, carrying fifty pieces of Ordinance, and well manned, as also the rest.

Our Country Royalists are now frustrated in their Design, who stuck not to
say, That if ever the Prince landed, they would rise as one man for him, and
cut the throats of the Parliaments soldiers; but finding their Design not to
take effect, and hearing of the Princes drawing off from the Downs, begins to
be more moderate, and recals their former speeches.


The Copy of a Letter from the City of York, declaring the proceedings of Major
General Monro, and Lieutenant General Cromwell.
Noble Sir,
YEsterday we received intelligence from Scarbrough, that Colonel Bointon
sallied out of the Castle with a considerable party of horse and foot, and
thought to have surprised our Cuards, but through the vigilance of the
Sentinels they were discovered, who fired, and alarmed the Guards, whereupon
they retreated into the Castle without any further action. But this morning
about three of the clock they gave us another visit, Capt. Dorbore who had
command of the Guard drew out his men, charged them, and after some dispute,
worsted the Enemy, put them to a disorderly retreat, killed seven, and took
four prisoners, with the loss of two men.

Sir, I have sent you here enclosed a copy of a Letter from Lieutenant General
Cromwels Army, which follows in these words.

Endeared fir, We have had a long and wearied march, our soldiery tired, and
our horses much galled, yet full of courage and gallantry, to fight the enemy,
and to try the spirits of the Irish Invaders, which will suddenly be effected,
being near an engagement with Monro.

Scarbrough 1 September. 1648.

Other Letters from the North say.

We expect a sudden engagement between the two Armies, born being resolved to
fight, the Scots Army is said to be about 6000. Monro commanding in chief,
being resolved to fight, and says, That he will show Cromwell School play.

Indeed he has four thousand resolute old soldiers, which he brought out of
Ireland with him, who has been a long time exercized and trained in the
Discipline of War.

But notwithstanding all which, our men fears them not, as appears by the
foregoing action, who disputed the ground at great odds and disadvantage, and
made good their retreat with little loss.

The Lieutenant Generals Army consists of about five thousand, all armed, and
well disciplined, the country rising for him wheresoever he comes, and
assisting him with all necessaries whatsoever.

But General Monro to gain the affections of the Country People, has made
Proclamation at the head of each Regiment, and set forth a Declaration to the
Inhabitants, intimating,

That any soldier whatsoever that shall use any violence or injury to any of
the Inhabitants, or plunder, or take away any goods whatsoever, to the value of
two pence under any pretense, shall immediately be tried by Marshal Law, and die
for it.

We hear that Monro has sent a message to the kingdom of Scotland, desiring,
That some additionall forces may be forthwith raised and sent unto him, and
that care be taken for provisions and other necessaries for maintenance of the
Army,

The two Castles of Scarbrough and Pontefract holds out still, and are very
resolute and obstinate, slighting the Lieutenant Generals Summons.

It is said that some of Lieutenant General Cromwels horse have lately beaten
up the Scots out-quarters in Westmerland, and have taken diverse prisoners,
putting many of the Irish to the sword, the two Bodies advance, and are near an
engagement, Monro being resolved to fight, so is the Lieutenant General, both
parties proceed forward, and a field is suddenly expected, policy is the chief
Engine which the two Generals make use of, who are exceeding vigilant, in
relation to an engagement, knowing it to be a business of great consequence, and
much looked upon by both kingdoms.

York 30. August, 1648.

FINIS.

