The Juries Right, Asserted and vindicated by the Ancient and good Law of
England.

VVherin is clearly discovered the necessity, benefit, and safety of Juries, in
opposition to those corruptions, and many evils that are incident, and do
attend Judges (as they are called) both in Civil and Common Courts.

Occasioned by the late unjust, cruel, and illegal Trial of Mr Tho. Web,
at the Sessions held for London and Middle-sex in the Old Bailey.

By Abraham Lawmind, ear-witnesse of the said Trial, a hearty Well-wisher of
the common good.

Deuteronomy. 17.6. At the mouth of two Witnesses, or three Witnesses, shall he that
is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one Witness he shall
not be put to death.

Chap. 9.15. One Witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or
for any sin wherein he sins; but at the mouth of two Witnesses, or at the
mouth of three Witnesses shall the matter be stablished.

LONDON, Printed for H. J. 1654.

The Juries Right, etc.
Gentlemen:
SEriously considering of the great weight of your employment and the great
trust reposed in you, by the Constitution of our good ancient Laws, placing
the Issues of life and death of the Prisoners (whose cases come within your
cognizance) in your honest and judicious consideration. The Law of this Land
constituting you Judges both of Law and fact; and indeed making you the chief
Judges in the Court, all others but inferior to you, as appears by the Lord
Cooks Commentaries on Littleton, viz. In this case the Recognitors of the
Assize may say and render to the Justices their verdict at large upon the whole
matter: and in another place he says, viz. for as well as the Jurors may have
Cognizance of the Lease, they also may as well have Cognizance of the
Condition: And further, Cook there says, Here its to be observed that a
special verdict, or at large may be given in any action, and upon any issue,
be the issue general or special: and in Section 368. Littleton has these
words, also in such case where the inquest may give their verdict at large, if
they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law, upon the matter they may
give their verdict generally. Cooks words upon it are to the same purpose, viz.
That the Jury if they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law (as
Littleton here says) may give a general verdict: and this we see made good in
all (...), where Juries do not only judge of the validity of the proof of
the fact but also of the Law, by assigning what ^^^^^ges they think is just, I
say these things induced (...) to offer unto your serious thoughts these
following lines, in part disburthening my self of those many sad thoughts,
which I contracted to my self at the last Sessions, held in the Old Bailey for
the City of London and Middlesex, at the Trial of one Mr. Tho. Web, a
Gentleman to whom I am altogether a stranger, only being present in the Court
when he was called to the Bar, and perceiving a high design carried on by the
Court against him, I was very intentive in hearing the trial, for the
information of my self. And having heard it, and strictly examining the
several passages thereof, and then inquiring of an Officer how long the
Gentleman had been in custody? I was informed, that he was committed by
Lieutenant Colonel Barksteed, and Mr Baldwine Gent. Porter of the Tower, for
coining, and had been in Newgate 9 weeks. At which I could not but much wonder,
that a Gentleman (and indeed any) should be committed to Prison for one fact,
and when Sessions comes to be indicted for another, it being a ready way to
destroy even the innocentest of men. For when one committed to a Goal, makes
preparation against his Trial for what he was committed; when he comes to be
arraigned he shall be arraigned for another thing, unthought of by the
Prisoner, and shall be forced to join issue thereon. What a most sad
condition is that Prisoner in? And what illegal and cruel dealings are these,
putting the Prisoner on the greatest hazard and danger of his life, being so
suddenly surprised by an Indictment against which he has made no provision?

This I perceived was the case of Mr. Web, who had he not undauntedly
withstood the malice carried on against him, and the Gentlemen of his Jury had
not been men of honest minds, Gentlemen discreet and knowing, the danger was
so great, by reason of the malice carried against him, that nothing but life
would satisfy, which fully satisfied me of the necessity of Juries, the only
equal and best way of deciding and terminating of Causes, whether civil or
criminal, they being the Guard of our Estates, Liberties and Lives. The Court
many times are interested by made friends; and indeed the chief thereof their
places are their trades: and where there is continuance in any Office, oaths
(though never so binding) wear out, and little regarded, (the great grievance
and crying sin of this Nation) as is witnessed by daily, woeful, and sad
experience.

But now a Jury consisting of 12 honest and indifferent men, whose places are
not their trades, who have not yearly allowances for the same, and who only
serve being elect^d, and not perpetuated in their places, I appeal to all
rational men, whether such a way be not most equal, most safe and secure?
and whether there be that probability of the Juries being corrupted, made
friends, etc. as of the Judges? (as they are called) No, I conceive it is the
standing water corrupts and gathers filth, and not the running stream, etc.

And now Gentlemen whose lots it shall fall out to be to serve in the Iuries
for London and Middlesex, your Office being of such necessity, and beyond which
the wisest of men cannot invent and find out a more equal, safe, and beter
way.

I shall proceed to give you a true and brief relation of the Gentleman's
Trial before mentioned, wherein you may see the hazards poor prisoners are
many times put upon, and how much the Court stops the legal Current of your
right, as you are Judges both of law and fact, and sworn equally between the
Commonweal and Prisoner at the Bar, and be rouzed up like so many English men
to claim your right, to lose no part of it; it is not only the Prisoner at the
Bar suffers, but many times endeavors are made to stifle the light of a good
conscience in you: therefore Gentlemen know what you are; stand fast in it; let
a good conscience always dwell in you; for Divine Providence has called you
forth to stand between life and death, to judge between the nocent and
innocent, that the evil may be punished, and the good justified.

Now Gentlemen, I desire you to understand, that the last Sessions held in the
Old Bailey began on a Wednesday, the 12. of December last, and ended Saturday
following, on which day I being there indeed only to see passages, and to
inform my judgment, Mr. Web aforesaid was called to the Bar, who appearing,
after holding up the hand, the Indictment for Adultery being read, and guilty
or not guilty being asked him, he desired liberty before he pleaded (as was
but right for to be granted him) to speak; but it was very angerly denied
him, and he urging it as his due, the Court caused him to be turned to the
other side of the Bar, and there Mr. Briscoe threatened to gauge him if he
spoke, when what I perceived the Gentleman had a desire to speak, was only to
have a Copy of his Indictment and a little time given him to provide an answer
to it, he expressing himself there in the Court, that he had no notice of any
such indictment, being committed for coining, and so had not provided any thing
for his defense, and the Act against Adultery allows witnesses to be heard and
sworn on the Prisoners behalf, therefore the Gentleman desired a little time,
but it was most illegally and cruelly denied him, and the Gentleman forced to a
Trial; so that had he not stoutly withstood their prejudice against him, and a
judicious Jury to consider the matter of fact etc. I desire you to consider
what eminent danger his life had been in, being suddenly surprised by an unknow
indictment, and not having any time to provide any Witnesses for his defense?
Oh, how many innocent persons have thus been cast away! and how many more may,
if you Gentlemen stand not in the gap in the claim and use of your own Right?

And after the Gentleman was put upon these disadvantages, and like a naked man
seized on by the prejudice and will of the Court, and forced to plead. After
that he had pleaded not guilty, and when it was expected that evidence should
be sworn and heard to the matter of fact mentioned in the Indictment, there
stood up a Council at Law, one Mr. Hilbey, in the behalf of the Protector,
against the Prisoner at the Bar, (another strange unheard of disadvantage,
especially for a naked and unprovided man, as the Gentleman was) who instead of
pleading either to the fact, or matter of Law, fell to railing and abusing Mr.
Web very grossly, and that with matters of opinion of 4 or 5 years
standing. Mr. Web desired the Court, that since a Council was entertained
against him, that he might hear the Witnesses sworn, and then if the Council
could inform the Jury, as to matter of fact from the evidence, he might freely
speak; but for the Council to wave the matter in question, and to run back to
opinions of four or five years standing, and they such also which are false,
he could not but look on it as very hard measure: and truly Gentlemen you may
consider of it, for the Prisoner was not only in hazard by that irregular
piece of malice, but the judgments of the Jury was e^deavored to be traduced,
and to entertain a prejudice against the Prisoner, and therefore the Counsel
labored to possess the Jury with dangerous opinions the Prisoner held, and
what a dangerous person he was, and therefore, said he, not fit to live; and so
would have taken off the Iuries consideration of the fact, and have fastened
their thoughts on his invectives against the prisoner, which (Gentlemen) if the
Jury had so done, or at any time should do (which God forbid any should)

What a sad condition may an innocent person be brought into, their lives
taken away, Ju^ies traduced and abused, (...) our whole Law made invalid and to
become a thing of its word?

Yet for all this, the P^^^^^r could not be heard, but the Couns^ll suffered
to p^oceed in his invectives, and to be spatter his good name and reputation,
till at last, whether it was shame, of because the Council had no more railing
matter against the Prisoner, he ceased, and then about sixteen or seventeene
witnesses were sworn; some from Dover, some out of Southwarke, and some in
London, but not one of them all swore to the matter of fact. viz. (carnal
knowledge;) nay not any of them swore that ever the Prisoner was seen in bed
with the Gentlewoman? only one M^s. Neale whose evidence was contradicted: for
when the Prisoner desired the Court to ask her where it was she could not
tell, only in general it was in London, but where about or at whose house she
could not tell. Besides she is known to be a very idle person, who has been a
companion with her husband in abundance of evils, and her husband was hanged the
Sessions before for an high way man; so that though there was many witnesses
and abundance of dirty matters, yet not one to the fact, nor from all could
handsomely be deduced and drawn, the least shadow or circumstance to prove the
fact.

Now when the witnesses were sworn and had given in their evidence with the
help of the Council, who would have drawn some of the witnesses by tricks and
quirks to evidence what they knew not, the Council instead of making use of
the evidence, to prove the matter of fact, waved that, and falls to his former
raylings with abundance of demureness, first premises solemnly that he had no
knowledge of the Prisoner, nor never see him till then at the Bar; yet in the
next place backs the evidence with telling the Jury that the Prisoner was not
fit to live, for he was a man of erroneous and dangerous principalls, and so
vented his foul mouth against the Prisoner, who all that while with abundance
of patience heard it, not being suffered to speak, till at last the Council
having shot out his venom, the Prisoner did himself in a very short, but
full, answer to the evidence, applying himself very discreetly to the
Gentlemen of the Jury, desiring them to consider the matter of fact for which
he stood there arraigned, and for which they were sworn to pass
indifferently between the Protector and him the Prisoner at the Bar, and the
evidence to the fact; withal acquainting them, that though the Gentleman
Lawyer was pleased to take a fee to abuse him, and so to make that his chief
work, neglecting all things of Law, matter of fact, and indeed common
civillity, yet he hoped better things of them. viz. that they would mind their
work, the fact, the evidence to it, and not be seduced by the Counsels evil
example; in confidence whereof he most cheerfully resigned himself to their
Uerdit, desiring the Lord to go along with them etc. After this the Council
offered to speak and to that end pulled out some papers out of his pocket, but
what hindered whether they were blankes or stuffed with such malice as he had
sufficiently before vented, I know not, but the paper he put up again, and
only said mum; and so after some debate the Jury brought their verdict, not
guilty, only one remarkable passage happened and that was the Jury; while
withdrawn to consider of their verdict sent three times to the Court for to
have the Act. but it was denied them, and answer returned, that they were only
to consider of the matter of fact, but if any thing of Law did arise they were
to come to the Court, and the Court would resolve them; a most strange kind of
practice that the Jury who are sworn, and who may as is cited in the
beginning, take the cognizance of the whole matter both as to fact, and Law,
should be denied the Law, that the Court shall hedge all in their own
breasts, certainly congruant with this practice would be illiterate men, men
that can neither write nor read; a Jury of such men will never trouble the
Court with business of Law, they will never send to the Court for their
Statute and Law books; and its much to be wondered what the reason was why the
Court should deny the Jury the Act; certainly it to be doubted their ends were
not good in the thing.

But so noble and gallant were the Gentlemen of the Jury, that they keep close
to their own, and would not yield one inch to the unjust deteiner of the
Court, a good example and president for all Gentlemen who shall be employed in
that honorable service of the Commonweal.

Now Gentlemen, you have had the relation of Mr. Webbs trial, I shall now
present you with the ends I proposed to my self, in the publication hereof, and
they were, viz.

First, the asserting of that good old principal of our English Laws; viz.
that the Jurie are Judges both of Law and fact, it being a principal as good
as its ancient; indeed its of that weight as that our weal and woe rests
wholly upon it. Judges, as they are called, may be biased and corrupted; long
continuance in their places may do it, favor and affections to great men may
do it, as when a business comes in competition, with the power ruling, under
which they are Judges; as in the Case of John Lilburne, in whose case its
manifest how the Law was abused, not suffered to be read, but now Iuries have
none of these cloggs, they are not men perpetuated, nor men interrested, but
men indifferent and sworn to go according to evidence, a most sure safe and
equal way of doing right to all men, and between man and man; so that
Gentlemen, your employment is not mean, you are not servants in the Court,
your employment is Honorable, and you are Masters of the Court, and therefore
Gentlemen this assertion comes in.

The second place, viz. That both Law and fact ought to be plain and clear
before you, therefore the evidences ought to direct their speech unto you, and
both evidences for the Common weal, and on behalf of the Prisoner, ought to
be free without interruption, and the Prisoner, himself to be free to speak
without the awe and threats of the Court; for Gentlemen the evidence is to you,
and for you to judge of, and if the evidence should be interrupted, your
judgment cannot but be very imperfect, and the Prisoner many times may have
something to say that may give great satisfaction; but if he be awed and not
suffered to speak, such satisfaction may not be received as may be requisite;
therefore Gentlemen, all things of this nature comes within your cognizance,
and you ought, its your power and duty to see a free and clear current for the
evidences and Prisoner, that one be not stretched forth on the tenters by
tricks the Court many times uses, and the poor Prisoner abridged and debarred
of his liberty; its your work, it chiefly concerns you, and therefore none
ought to intermeddle with it.

The next thing I have to offer to you, as my end in these, is a great cheat
that I then at the aforesaid trial perceived to be; put on the Prisoner; viz.
there being some crimes, as Treason and Adultery, that are to be prosecuted
within twelve Months, and that all prosecution out of that time is made null
and invallid, and that some men's malice may be answered, who covet as much
after blood, as the babe after its mothers breast, so that though they have
nothing within the time, yet will they lay their indictment within the time,
when their witnesses all swear to circumstances beyond their time a great
while, as was in the forementioned trial, wherein the indictment included a
fact done on the first of June last, and not one of the witnesses swore near
the time, but all swore beyond the twelve Months, a very great abuse, and of
dangerous consequences: for suppose a Prisoner be ignorant of the Law in such
cases, (as alas how many poor wretches do perish at the Bar in the Old
Bailey, for want of knowledge) what great danger is his life in? how will his
life become a sacrifice through his ignorance of the Law, to the malice of
bloody minded men? Oh! therefore Gentlemen consider you are sworn, the Law
has made you superior in the Court, the lives of many lies in your breast,
and honesty, and how it behooves you to weigh and examine every particular,
both of indictment and evidence, particulars of the indictment. First, the
fact. Secondly the time on which the fact was committed, both being equally
material and in the evidence. First whether they be to the fact plain and
clear. Secondly to the time true and certain, both which being as necessary
as the proof of the fact, which most evidently appears in the two cases of
treason and adultery.

First, in the case of treason, whether it be in words, plots against his
highness or the present government, or the coining or counterfeiting of money,
all being limited within 12 Months for prosecuting, as appears by the words of
his highness declaration published in Ian. 16^5 3. the words are these:
Provided always that no person or persons, shall be indicted or arraigned for
any of the offenses before mentioned in this ordinance, unless such offender
or offenders shall be indicted or prosecuted for the same within one year
after the off^nce committed, so that the time must be punctually sworn to as
well as the fact, or else its imperfect; for if it be without the time that is
above twelve Months its invalid, and no person ought or can be arraigned for
any act of Treason.

Again, to every fact of Treason, the Law requires two sufficient plain and
clear Witnesses, appears 1 Ed. 6. chap. 12. and 6. Ed. 6. chap. 11. to all
Treasons whether high or petty Treasons, there shall be two clear, legal, and
sufficient Witnesses. Sir Edward Cook in 3. part Institutes cha. of High
Treason, is of the same opinion. So that if there be not two Witnesses, and
they plain and clear (not circumstances and inferences) to a treasonable fact,
its not sufficient in Law for you to ground a Verdict on; and if two Witnesses
should swear to one and the same fact, yet if they differ in time one from
another, one swears to one time, and the other to another time, it is but one
Witness: the Law so deemes it, and (Gentlemen) you are Judges of Law as well
as of fact. This ought to be considered by you.

And then as touching Adultery, the Act of Parliament of June 24. 1650 says,
the words are these: Provided always that no person or persons shall incur any
of the penalties in this Act mentioned, unless the said person or persons be
therefore indicted within twelve months after the offense committed; And
evidence must be sworn for the prisoner, the words are these: Provided also,
that it shall be lawful for any person or persons who shall be indicted for
any of the offenses aforesaid, to produce at their respective Trials, any
Witness or Witnesses, for the clearing of themselves from the said offenses
whereof they shall be so indicted, and the Justices before whom such trial
shall be had, shall have power, and are hereby authorized to examine those
Witnesses upon oath. So that both the fact and the time must be clear and
certain, both in the Indictment and evidence; and the reason is this, that the
Prisoner may (if he has any) produce his Witnesses, which that he cannot do,
if the time be not certain, it being the company the Prisoner is in at such a
time that must either clear him, or lay him open to your Verdict: and therefore
(Gentlemen) indictment and evidence must both agree in fact and time; if not,
they are both invalids, and ought to be rejected, and no proceedings can or
ought to be upon the same: and further, the Prisoner ought to have notice of
both fact and time, before he be called to a trial, that so he may provide his
Witnesses, since the Act requires them to be heard and sworn, and not so
suddenly surprised by an Indictment, as Mr. Web I perceive was, who being
committed for coining, was unexpectedly arraigned for another thing, not having
any time to provide for his defense, quite contrary to the Act which allows
Witnesses to be heard and sworn, which cannot be without notice and time given.

And Gentlemen, the Law has put you into a place of great trust, and in case
the Court should have such prejudice against any Prisoner as thus to surprise
him, and to lay him open to the mercy of death: It Is your care to prevent it,
and do the Prisoner right therein; and indeed so much the more, for that your
Verdict is to be grounded on clear and plain proofs, which cannot be where the
Prisoner is called to a Trial for a fact which he dreams not of, especially in
the case of Adultery, where the negative is as good as the affirmative.

Gentlemen, life and death is in your hands, the weal and woe of many a poor
Family: your place is of great weight, the highest and greatest in the Court;
the Court moves as you move; if you move amiss, the Court must move so also.
The things that I have taken liberty to offer you are necessary; such Causes
may come before you: the Court may have that prejudice against the Prisoner, as
to throw them in many disadvantages, and may so much undervalue you (who indeed
are the life of the Court) as will not allow you the Law to read and examine,
as they did by Mr. Webbes Jury.

Therefore Gentlemen, as you are English men, and profess the Lord Christ, and
are now called to so great an employment (wherein you have a very large
opportunity of immitating our blessed Savior, and following his golden Rule:
Do to all men as your selves would be done unto.) Rouse up your Spirits; claim
your Right; let not might and greatness sway you, but in all things clear and
plain evidences, and a good conscience; so will you purchase praise both of
God and men, and be examples of great good to your Contrymen: For which the
Lord in his infinite mercy go along with you, according to the weight of your
employment.

FINIS.

