IVDAS JUSTIFIED BY HIS BROTHER SCOT.
DID Judas spare to a^ke? or did the Jews
Like wary Hucksters thriftily refuse
To give? Pish! Thirty pence! Why not at least
Two Hundred Thousand Pounds in hand, the rest
Secured by Public Faith? Surely that Crew,
Those bart'^ing Rabbis (give the Divill's due)
Were Babes in malice, very Novices
To Westminster-Preists, Scribes, Pharisees,
Invet'rate canck'red Caitiffs, would they not
Have else (like these) bid more? Iscariot
Was but a puny Scot in avarice,
Or he would have begged up a more Wealthy Price
For him that was beyond Price. Had the Bough
But spared that silly Traitors life till now,
To see his Brother Blew-cap spin a plot
Transcending his so highly, would he not
Have hanged himself twice ore? O prodigy!
Heavens stand amazed! Vast University
Of Sublunaries, tremble! What? the sin,
The execrable villainy, wherein
Judas for sixteen Centuries and more,
Sat Supreme Chaire-man (never evinced before)
Raked from his bowels now? made Christian?
Nay, rendered by the Caledonian,
A Demi peccadillo? Cursed Race
Of false Ubiquita^ies, that imbase
Gods Image, take the Balances and weigh
Your ponderous crime of poisonous alay,
And tell me, tell me, whether You, or He
For perpetration of Treachery,
Deserve the Palm. He by the Tempters craft
Was singled out, a lonely man, beraught
Of friendly Sociates that might advise,
And prompt the Horror of the Enterprise;
And So bewitched, in melancholy mood,
Rashly, in haste, before he understood
The depth of Satan, hood-winked drives the Pact;
Then by the Pa^tors driven, needs must he act:
But you a full Convention of Estates,
Packed by a Nation of Confederates,
A Kirk-assembly, which you term Divine,
(Monstrous Divinity!) with wide-ope Eine
And consciences (or none) illuminate,
Upon discussion and free debate,
Delib'rately (with cursed Votes) have sold
Your King, your Master. He was not so bold
To show the Light the Black faced deed he did,
But (as he could) he patched figge-leaves, and hid
It and his shame in mists of piceous Night:
But impious You, as if you meant to fright
Heaven out of Justice, called the Heavens to see,
And testify your brazen perfidie,
And dared the Sunbeams to record your sin,
That so Posterity might know wherein
You glory, to transcend. Your Master fled
To you (Impostors) to be sheltered
From storms of violence; Did his do so?
You vowed him safe Protection, and (to)
You bad the world defy you, call you base
Perfidious Villains, scumme of Humane Race,
If you betrayed so sacred Trust as this,
(Did he do so?) Yet while your fawning kiss
Did Hayle him thus (ye pedling Brats of Hell)
Ye bartered him for money. He straight fell
Into reluctant fits, and did confess
The horrid guilt of his grand wickedness:
But you still vaunt it our, as if you had done
An Act of merit; sad compunction,
Your caut'eriz'd souls abandon; shall the Tree
When It catch you, so much Ingenuity
Wring from you (stiffe-neck'd Rebels) as to cry
Peccavi once before you hang and die?
Judas before a Traitor Scot shall wear
A Saintly Rubric in Times Calendar.
FINIS.
Printed in the Year, 1647.


