THE RESOLVTION OF THE ARMY CONCERNING THE CITIZENS OF LONDON: Wherein is
discovered, Their present and great Designs in hand against the said City; and
their resolution to draw most of their Horse and Foot from all parts of the
Kingdom, to advance for London, with the time prefixed when they intend to
enter the said City.

ALSO, Their Demands and Proposals, concerning all those who have enriched
themselves by the vast sums of money, and Assesments, collected for the payment
of the Soldiery, and their resolution to have an account given thereof, and to
prosecute the same with the hazard of all their lives and fortunes.

Nou: 28

LIKEWISE, The Design of Lieut. General Cromwell, touching the King,
Parliament, City, and Kingdom.

PVblished for general satisfaction, by a Gentleman who came lately from St.
Albanes, hose Surname and Christened name begins with the ninth letter of the
Greek Alphabet.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

THE RESOLUTION OF THE ARMY, Concerning The Citizens of London; Wherein is
discovered, their present Plots and Designs against the said City, and the time
prefixed for their marching up with the whole Army.
Right Worshipful,
HAving some six days since undertaken a journey into the Country; and on my
return being to pass through St. Albanes (the now Headquarters of the Army)
toward London: I there occasionally fell into the company of an Officer under
Sir Thomas Fairfax, within his own quarters; and so consequently and generally
into discourse, in reference to the present times, and the present management
of affairs.

And because the subject and scope of the Armies writings has of late and more
(especially) reflected on the City of London (this Kingdoms Metropolis, and the
honored place of my Nativity, and present residence) in the service whereof
(the glory of God, the Kings honor and Kingdoms peace intended) I shall most
joyfully sacrifice (what is dearest unto me) my life. I did gladly apply my
self (both to satisfy me concerning former reports, and not to be ignorant of
future purposes) to enquiry into the Armies resolutions, and consulatory
results; and (though with tacit internal contradictions, in the audite of
their warlike Rhetoric) did seem to pace the steps of their infidelity, and
inveterate disloyalty, with the same earnestness and resolution, and tinct of
principle which because not portending the least of evils and mischiefs) in
the midst of our strong hopes, and this Kingdoms present and great expectation
of an happy Peace) in all relations (viz.) to King. Parliament, this City and
Kingdom: I could not ^besides my particular relation to this famous City;
which in all the branches thereof were a sufficient obligation) but (as beyond
that) out of my general respect to the public good; which I have hitherto
pursued with my utmost industry and hazards: so (God willing) shall I
constantly prefer beyond my own particular interests and relations; to
discover (in the best manner, and to my best memory and remembrance) the same
words and expressions as were then by him delivered as the general se^^e of
the Army; therefore I shall speak in the plural number. And indeed, that which
is the most visible inducement to me in committing this to public view (it
being a real truth heard with my own cares, and delivered in the presence of
others) is the improvidence and neglect of this City, for the prevention of any
such imminent danger; and withal the peoples incredulity of any such
mischievous plots and purposes to be performed; (notwithstanding to be averred
by many upon oath) and which report has long blazed abroad.

We have a true rule in Latin, Praemonitus, Praemunitus, forewarned and
fore-armed; I wish we had long since been put into a posture, that upon all
occasions it might appear, we were ready to receive an Enemy without
prejudice, or repel with advantage (which if it may be effected upon the true
delivery of purposed approaches, and approaching dangers) I shall (not to
trouble your Worship with a further preamble) present you what was delivered by
an Officer at his own quarters to my self, which I conceive of high
concernment in all respects, viz.

My self asking how affairs stood in relation, and were like to succeed? this
reply was presently made without intermission (viz.) that the Soldiery ( viz.
Sir Thomas his Army) had at present as great Designs in hand as ever were acted
in this Kingdom: and that (however opposed or obstructed) they were resolved
with the hazard of all their lives and interests, to prosecute and perpetrate.
What was particularized are these.

I. That in relation to the City of London, etc. They well understood of the
unequal balance of affairs there; and how partially businesses (especially
general) were managed and handled: and how great deceit there was in the
collection of moneys, and who they were that most obstructed the payment of the
Soldiers: As also, that furthered the present Treaty (not allowed of by them.)
To remedy all which, they do purpose (within a fortnight) to advance for
London, with their whole force from all parts, and with this Parenthesis (that
if Skipponprove but true, etc.) which I leave to better capacities then my own
for construction.

II. That relating to the Parliament, they were resolved for a limited time of
their dissolution; etc. well knowing what particular profits each man had
reaped to himself: And who they were that did concur in obstructing the affairs
of the Army (which stay they) have now wrought Englands freedom and liberty:
and with all, not forgetting the Vote for the return of Sir William Waller,
Colonel Massey, Sir John Maynard, etc. and themselves who stand impeached by
the Army.

III. In relation to the Treaty, they well understand of the conjunction of
many against them and their affairs, and how things are carried in relation
thereto, in opposition and disrespect to them.

IV. That it is Cromwels work (before his advance) to settle Counties, and such
Officers, as are and may prove true to their designs; and may manage
businesses accordingly as they shall proceed.

V. That relating to an Act of Indemnity, they abhor and detest such thoughts;
resolving severity of justice to pass on the greatest, as well as mean st.
person, etc. in which, not doubting but most Counties would herein join with
them; (if not) they would not the less prosecute: with many such like
expressions, which among tedious discourses, my weak memory could not retain.

Right Worshipful,

What is here inscribed, upon my life is true, my self bein in discourse; and
the truth is, I shall not rest in the bare presentment of these lines to your
self, and so happily in the communicating of them to the Honorable
Common Council, but must bear them to public view unalterable. I may happily
run some hazard in the true subscription of my name, yet cannot desist: I shall
glory to sacrifice for the public, and can truly say of my self, as Plutarch
in another case: Haud timeo mortem, ignem Maerisque fluctus, atque turbines
venti paratus transiere, etc.

Right Worshipful,

Your Worships Servant: J. J.

Adjuvari nihil dicitur qui nihil sponte conatur. Aug.
FINIS.

