A GALLANT SPEECH Spoken by His Highness JAMES DUKE OF YORK TO ENGLANDS
renowned General, His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, at the Kings Majesty's
Royal Court at Causam.

TOGETHER, With His Excellencies Answer to the said Speech, concerning the
Kings Majesty, and His Royal Posterity.

Also the chief Heads of the Armies new Declaration concerning the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom. With a Message from the General to the Citizens of
LONDON. July 23

Printed at Oxford for Edward Benington, for the public use of Great Britain,
Anno 1647.

THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM The Generals Headquarters at Redding, to the
Citizens of London.
Gentlemen,
THe particulars which I have to represent unto you at this present, are things
very remarkable and of great consequence, being of ripeness and maturity, both
for the view of your Metropolis, and the whole Kingdom also: Therefore, for
satisfactions of your selves, and the rest of your Fellow Commoners, I shall
here communicate unto you, a Copy of the Generals Declaration to the Lord
Mayor and Citizens of London; together with another Paper of great cons^quence,
agreed upon by his Excellency, and the Council of War, concerning the
Freeborn Subj^ands of this Nation; both which, I shall here insert verbatim,
viz.

A Copy of the Declaration sent from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fuirfax, to the
Lord Mayor and Citizens of London.
Whereas in the carrying on of the great businesses of the Kingdom toward a
general and happy settlement, it has been a sixed principle with us to make
it our first endeavor with the Parliament, that all things which threaten an
Engagement of the Kingdom in a second war, might be removed before we could
have a confident expectation of a good issue; upon a Treaty with their
Commissioners, which course of ours, although it might have some appearance of
delay: yet by men that are zealous of the Kingdoms good (we hope) no endeavor
will be judged unnecessary, that may secure the Kingdom from the danger of any
new imbroylments.

We are now come thus far, that the most material particulars which we have in
preparation to propose, for the general settlement of the affaries of the
Kingdom, have bin communicated to the Parliaments Commissioners; and we hope
they are satisfied that they contain in them things tending to a general
good, and to lay an hopeful Foundation for common Right, and Freedom, to the
people of this Land for future; and for a lasting peace amongst us. But before
we can securely intend and without interruption apply our selves, unto the
proceedings and dispatch of the Treaty, there upon we have delivered into the
hands of their Comissioners, the paper which consists of three particulars, in
the last whereof (which is the Militia of the City) you being most immediately
concerned, to the end you may see we would ask nothing which relates to you,
without giving you a just account thereof, and all possible satisfaction
therein; we have also given a Copy thereof to your Commissioners, to be here
with sent unto you. We should not desire this or and thing else of that nature
were we persuaded, that what we desire is seasonable, and for yours and the
Kingdoms good and quiet. And we should willingly have been silent (as to
this:) but considering the just jealousies which lie against some persons, now
authorized in the exercise of that powea amongst you, and those attempts which
have bin made by some, who would have engaged your city, to a war, had not
your Lordships and the court of Aldermen and Common Council by your wisdom
prevented it, by getting those votes which were passed by the Militia, made
null.

We cannot in a case of this importance but deal freely with you, in deuring
your concurrence with ours to the Parliament; that the Militia may be changed
into those hands, out of which it was taken, of whose care and fidelity to the
Public, there has been so long and large experience, as few ages have
paralleld. And if the interest we have so long fought for be still the same,
let it not seem slrange that we desire both of the parliament and City, that
those may be in places of such a trust, who have given the best proof of their
courage and constancy in prosecution of the same. Having thus far declared our
selves with all freedom and clearness to you, as we do not doubt of your good
acceptance of our intention therein, so we desire your forwardness in a work
so much tending to mutual confidence: and to prevent the designs of any who
would be glad to put obstructions in the way to a happy conclusion, and envy
nothing more then the continuance of a night understanding between you and us.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of
War. Signed, John Rushworth, Secre.
Redding July 18. 1647.
A Copy of another Paper from the Army, concerning the Freeborn People of
England.
HIs Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax has writ to the parliament in these words,
That all persons imprisoned in England, or Dominion of Wales (not for
Delinquencie in relation to the late war) may be brought to a speedy trial, and
if they appear wrong fully, or unduly imprishned, they may have reparation
according to their sufferings. And in particular, it is desired that this may
be done in behalf of Lieutenant Col Lilburn, M. Musgrave, M. Overton, and
others (in their condition) imprisoned about London.

SIR,
Upon the close of this Letter, a Gentleman residing near the Court, intimated
unto me, that when His Majesty's Children were at Causam, his Excellency Sir T.
Fairfax came also thither, and presended himself before the two Dukes, and the
Princess; to whom the Duke of York made this ensuing Speech.

Renowned General,

To which his Excellency replied, That it was the least of those duties,
w^erein he was obliged to serve his Majesty, and his Royal Posterity.

But by reason of our motion Northward, I dare not detract too much time, but
must of necessity draw to a period; only (in brief) I shall give you some of
the chief Heads concerning the Armies grand Declaration, now speedily to be
presented to both Houses of Parliament, VIZ.

1. That a Council of State consisting of 21. may have the ordering of the
Militia, and power to treat with foreign States. 2. That a period be set to
this Parliament. 3. That some penal Statutes be repealed. 4. An Act of Oblivion
past, and the future Parliaments bienunall. 5. Something concerning the King,
touching Parliaments. 6. Concerning liberty of Conscience.
Thus having given you a brief account, I remain

Yours to serve you, William Sanders.
Redding 22 of July 1647.

(...) 8 Their eighth unreasonable Demand is, To have a Toleration for all
manner of Persons or opinions without any distinction or limitation at all but
this, If they live peaceably, and are beneficial to the Commonwealth. That
you might see I wrong them not, I shall put down their very words: See a Letter
sent from Sir Thomas Fairfax and the chief Commanders in the Army, to the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London. Dated from Royston
June 10.
We wish that every good Citizen, and every man that walks peaceably, and is
beneficial to the Commonwealth, may have liberty and encouragement, it being
according to the just policy of all States, even to justice it self: So that
by this it seems they desire, that if Papists, Idolaters, Blasphemers, or any
other persons what ever, though they continue blaspheming God, and disturbing
the Church, yet must they have not only liberty, but encouragement, in case
they live peaceably in, and beneficially to the Commonwealth; if the Army had
told us thus, when they were first raised, they should never have had my
prayers with them. Is this the fruit of all the expense of treasure and blood,
that instead of order, we shall have confusion; instead of establishing the
true Religion, there should be a toleration of all Religions? what is this but
to make London worse then Amsterdam, and England worse then India it self?

9 Their ninth unreasonable Demand for Humble Represent. p. 23. l. 4.
Reparation and Vindication of the Army. Now with what conscience can they
expect this? Would they have us say, they are an obedient Army, when they have
published their disobedience to all the world? Would they have us say, they are
an Army of Saints, when we know there are abundance of gross and abominable
Heretics among them, who deny the Divinity of Christ, the Authority of the
Scriptures, the Immortality of the Soul? etc. Instead of requiring Vindication
and Reparation from us, we may rather desire humiliation and reformation from
them.

Touching the unreasonablenesse of these demands, I cannot but admire at three
things, viz. 1. At the falsehood of the Army, that should make these high
Demands, after they had promised in a Letter See the Letter from Sir Thomas
Fairfax and the chief Commanders to the Lord Mayor etc. Dated from Royston June
10. 1647.
to the L. Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council (dated from Royston June 10.)
they would not go beyond their former desires. Yea in their Declaration four
days after this they make this engagement; Though there are besides these many
particulars we could wish to be done, and some to be undone, but these
proposalls aforegoing present, being the principal things we bottom and
insist upon, we shall (as we have said before) acquiesse in the wisdom and
justice of the Parliament. Notwithstanding this promise, that they would
acquiesse, ask no more, not go beyond their former desires, yet have they
peremptorily infisted on most of these, and many more unreasonable Demands
since that time. 2. I cannot but admire at the forgetfulness that is in the
people of their solemn League and Covenant; that they will suffer an Army to
foment schism by Separation, to destroy Religion by Toleration, to make
factions and parties among the people by combinations; to infringe the power
and Privileges of Parliament by their peremptory refusal, and obstinate
disobedience to the Parliaments Commands. 3. I cannot but admire, that any
people should approve of the Demands and proceedings of the Army, when the Army
it self has some hesitancie or doubting about their proceedings, whether
justifiable or not.
The Counsel of War convened at Bury confessed, that among their Soldiers
there were See the opinion and advice of the Council of War at Bury, 20. May,
1647. p (...) lin^ 37.
disturbed and tumultuous actings. So also in the copy of the Grievances of
the Army presented at Saffron-Walden to Field-Marshall Skippon,
Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, Commissary Ireton, and Colonel Fleetwood, it is
by 240. Commission-Officers of the Army desired, that the abovenamed
Commissioners would, S^e the copy of Grievances, p. (...) line 18.
as far as justly they can, cover their weakness: yea Sir Thomas Fairfax
himself confesses that he is See Sir Thomas Fairfax his Letter to M. Speaker,
dated at Bury May 30. 1647.
forced to yield to something out of order to keep the Army from disorder, or
worse inconveniences. Yea by the whole Army in their Remonstrance it is confessed,
that they shall be See humble Remonst p. 14. 33.
enforced to take courses extraordinary. Now if themselves confess they have
disturbed and tumultuous actings, shall we think they are all peaceably-minded;
if they themselves say they have weakness in the transactions of this
business, may not we judge it wickedness? If their General confesses, that
he is forced to yield to some things out of order, and that in the Month of
May, when they did but begin their mutinies, to what disorders is he forced
since to yield to, now the Army has been so inured to disobedience?

I come now to urge some new Queres to the consciences of the Army.

1. Quere. WHether your disobedience to the Parliament does not directly answer
and run parallel to Absalons Rebellion against his father David? 1. Did
Absalon pretend an obstruction of justice? 2 Samuel 15.3. so do you. 2. Did
Absalon wish that he were Judge in the Land, then promised, that any man that
had a suit or a cause, if he did come to him, he would do him justice? 2 Samuel
15.4. and do not you do thus? 3. Did not Absalon at that very time he cried up
justice, justice, with his tongue, carry rebellion in his heart against his
father David, and does not the Army walk in his steps? 4. Did Absalon by fair
words, a flattering carriage and plausible pretenses, steal away the hearts of
the men of Israel? 2 Samuel 15.5 6. is not this the daily endeavor of this Army
thus to bewitch and seduce the people? 5. Did Absalon (when he had gathered
head) endanger and terrify Jerusalem that great City, where his father David
was? 2 Samuel 15.14. and was not the great City the Metropolis of the Kingdom
endangered by the approach of the Army near it?
As face answers face in a glass, so does the Armies disobedience answer
Absalons Rebellion.

2. Quere. Whether would you have the Parliament to be speedily dissolved, in
case you could new-mould it to an Independent Parliament?

3. Quere. Whether it be for the credit of your cause, that Judge Jenkins and
other desperate Malignants, should be the chief Vindicators of your
proceedings?

4. Quere. Whether would you be willing that eleven or more Independent-Members
should be suspended the House, in case a Charge or accusation should be
brought in against them? would you be content that those that own your party
should be so dealt withal, as you deal with the eleven Members? Suppose a
particular Charge of Treason and Rebellion should be brought in against
Cromwell: suppose further, it can be proved, that he was chosen a
Parliament Man by the Prelaticall party in Cambridge, because he reviled the
Puritans and would stand for Episcopacy; suppose further it can be proved, that
when he kept a Brew House in the Isle of Ely, he was generally termed the
Town-bull; suppose all this I say, would you be willing that this great
Ringleader of your Rebellion should come to a legal and public trial?

5. Quere. Whether your capitulating with the State, standing for Punctilioes,
pressing high demands of the Parliament, whether if all you desire were
granted, would this seeming good you desire, be a recompense for those real
miseries and dangers the poor Protestants in Ireland undergo, by your
delays, and refusal of that just and honorable service.

6. Quere. With what face can you cry out against injustice in others, when you
suffer that greatest act of injustice among you to go unpunished? particularly
that traitorous act done by Cornet Joyce to take away the King from Holmeby
without the consent of Parliament; which is such a high injury to the King, and
affront to the Parliament, that will make you stink in the nostrills of all
Nations, that shall hear of your carriages; so far are you from punishing
this Joyce, that since this traiterous action done by him, some of your most
eminent Commanders have tendered him preferment, as if that act did rather
deserve a reward then a censure?

7. Quere. Whether it be not just with God that the chief Commanders, who have
stirred up the Army to disobedience to the Parliament, should be punished by
God, that that very Army shall not for the future be obedient unto them? I end
this subject with this confidence, that if God will not honor the Parliament
and City, to endeavor to suppress these seditious, traiterous Commanders,
who have led the Army into disobedience in the simplicity of their hearts, that
God will honor his Name to bring us deliverance some other way; it may be, if
no body will appear to suppress them, they shall destroy one another. This is
the assured confidence of

Tom Tell-Troth.


