Joyful News FROM LICHFIELD, BEING The true Copy of a Letter sent from a
Captain in LICHFIELD to his wife in London, Dated April 17.

Wherein is contained the proceedings of Prince Rupert against the Parliaments
Forces in the said town: CONTAINING 1 The manner of Prince Ruperts assaulting
Lichfield. 2 His endeavoring to undermine the wall with pick-axes. 3 How he
attempted to scale the walls of the close, and what men he lost in that attempt.
4 How he was repulsed by the Parliaments Forces, and how they rung the bells in
defiance of him. 5 A Postscript annexed to this Letter, declaring Prince Ruperts
death upon great probabilities.


Published at the desire of those that upon occasion will justify the truth of
what is herein contained.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Watson. 1643.

True Intelligence FROM LICHFIELD Declaring the proceedings of Prince ROBERT,
against the Parliaments Forces, with the true estate of the Siege, etc.
IT is apparent that Prince Rupert has always been since the first beginning
of these Wars, and at this present does continue very active in promoting,
countenancing, and personally executing those destructeve, dishonorable, and
so much detested designs of pillaging and plundering the inhabitants of this
Kingdom, always expressing his valor where he finds, or expects the weakest
opposition, otherwise he had not so valliantly assaulted Cirencester, had not
his ods in number, and times advantage given him a daring resolution.

Had he assaulted Bromisham, had it been a town fortefied, or had it had in it
any considerable strength, but places weakest in themselves, and farthest from
the relief of others, are only made the subject of his valor.

Let it be examined what honorable exploit he has performed since the beginning
of these Wars, that he should be so much cried up by his malignant and
evil-affected admirers.

At the Battle at Edgehill, when he should have guarded the Standard, he was
a plundering the Wagons, it seems he fought for the spoil, not for honor
and the cause, but happily should he have engaged himself in so hot a s rvice,
he might have been forced to bear either the Bearer, or Standard company, in
death or restraint, therefore he made use of the old Proverb, which concludes
it good sleeping in a whole Skin, had he been killed or taken there, it is
probable Cirencester had escaped a plundering, Bromisham had not been fired,
nor Lichfield endured so long a Siege, upon such an advantage, being a place
remote from any place where any of the Parliaments Forces makes their
residence, and they in themselves being but a handful, in comparrison of his
power, being seconded by multitudes of his malignant and evil affected
Friends, and dependant Collegiats, upon which advantage, it is no wonder if he
valliantly venture to hazard his person at distance to give direction to those,
which are already practiced in robbing and spoiling his Majesty's loyal
Subjects, and Liege-People.

But I know the malignants of this City, are so chained to the errors of their
Forefathers, that they think their own opinions orthodox, neither will they
be drawn to believe ought that seems contrary to their desires, they will not
believe that Prince Rupert will remain at Liechfield, Redding being besiedged,
and ^^ford so much distracted, to take off these imagin^tions, and to make the
truth apparent, I will produce the evidence of two or three witnesses, which in
matters of Law does determine the greatest differences, much more then ought it
to convince reasonable men, in a matter of such a nature as this is, concerning
which I speak.

By Intelligence bearing date the 16. of April, it is manifested that Prince
Rupert came before Liechfield, and played against it five dayees and nights,
that this is true, enquire of the Intelligencer.

By another Letter from the Army, it is certified that he was expected at
Oxford, but they received certain intelligence that before Liechfield on the
16. of April likewise.

And by this Letter which I have here published, at the desire of some Persons
of very considerable quallity, and fidellity to the King and Parliament, which
was sent from a Captain to his wife in London, bearing date the 17. of this
instant April, all which, although from several places, and from several
Persons, differs not in the time nor method, all which may seem sufficient
evidence to the most unbelieving man, however affected or infected with a
spirit of malignant infidellity.

The Copy of a Letter sent from a Captain in Lichfield to his wife in London,
bearing date April 17.
ALL the news I can write is, how bravely our men behave themselves at
LICHFIELD, in the Close, against Prince RUPERT, he has fought against it ever
since the tenth of April, and can do no good against it: he has lost many
men, but we have lost none as yet; he lay shooting against it for five days,
and could not make a breach, whereupon he caused the Colliers to come in, and
they brought with them all their pick-axes to undermine it, but could not for
the rock and the water; so that failing, he sent for all the ladde^s within ten
miles, intending to scale the walls, which work he put in execution, but could
do no good that way: but in the scalling of the walls our men killed eight of his
men, and took one, and that which they took they with advice hanged him three
yards from the wall like a sign, and bid Prince RUPERT shoot him down, then
Prince RUPERT swore, GOD dam him he would not give one man quarter, yet did not
make a shot; but yet the next day Prince RUPERT sent to the Close to know if
they would yield it upon quarter, and to have their goods: they sent this
answer to prince RUPERT, that before they would yield it up, they would all
die, and withal asked the Trumpeter that came to offer them quarter, why
prince RUPERT did shoot no faster; and if he wanted powder, they would lend him
a barrel: then prince RUPERT swore GOD dam him many times together, he would
have the Close, or else he would stay till Michaelmas, after this he caused all
his Ordnance to be charged, and shot all together at the wall, but hurt not:
then our men did ring the bells in the Close in defiance of them. This is all
the news I have to write.

Since I writ this Letter I think prince RUPERT is slain, but I do not know the
certainty of it.

Thus with my love to you, etc.
Lichfield April 16. 1643. Although this Postscript carry not that certainty
and efficacy that happily is expected by some, and desired of most men,
especially those that wish well to the propagation of the Gospel, (to which we
have cause to believe him an Enemy) and the Peace of the King, Parliament, and
Kingdom, yet let it not be concluded as a matter infallible, for believe it
for a truth, the Captain that sent this Letter, is a man of that conscience and
honesty, that he would not have mentioned any such thing, had he not had some
special probabillity thereof.



FINIS.

