A just and clear REFUTATION of a false and scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled,
Babylons fall in Maryland, etc.

AND, A true Discovery of certain strange and inhumane proceedings of some
ungrateful people in Maryland, toward those who formerly preserved them in
time of their greatest distress.

To which is added a Law in Maryland concerning Religion, and a Declaration
concerning the same.

By John Langford Gentleman, Servant to the Lord BALTEMORE.

He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor comes
and searches him.

Prove. 18.17. Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be
showed before the whole Congregation.

Prove. 26, 26. London, Printed for the Author. 1655.

A just and clear refutation of a false and scandalous Pamphlet, etc.
HAving lately met with a Pamphlet, entitled, Babylons Fall in Maryland, etc.
which lays many false and scandalous aspersions upon the Lord Baltemore, his
Government, and Officers in Maryland, put forth by one Leonard Strong and
attested by William Durand, pretending to be Secretary of that Province, It was
thought fit in regard I have been acquainted with, and employed by my Lord
Baltemore in his affairs relating to that Province, both here and there, for
above twenty years last past, That I should publish this brief Refutation
thereof, to undeceive such as may be deluded by it.

Captain Stone (who is well known to be a zealous and well affected
Protestant) being Governor of Maryland under the Lord Baltemore, did receive
and protect in Maryland those people and their families mentioned by Mr. Strong
when they were distressed in Virginia, under Sir William Berkley, among whom it
is to be noted that Mr. Richard Bennet (afterward Governor of Virginia) was
one, and thereupon a Commission was granted by Charles Stuart the eldest Son of
the late King to Sir William Davenant, constituting him Governor of the said
Province, alleging therein the reasons to be, because the Lord Baltemore did
visibly adhere to the Rebels in England (as he terms them in that Commission)
and admitted all kind of Sectaries and Schismatics, and ill affected persons
into that Plantation.

These people seated themselves at a place by them called Providence, but by an
Act of a General Assembly there called Anne-Arundell in Mariland, and there
was nothing promised by my Lord or Capt. Stone to them, but what was performed,
they were first acquainted by Capt. Stone, before they came there, with that
Oath of Fidelity which was to be taken by those who would have any Land there
from his Lordship, and the Oath which was required of them to take before they
could have any Parent for Land there, was ratified by an Act of a General
Assembly of that Province, wherein those very men had their Burgesses, there
being an express Clause in it, That it should not be understood to infringe
or prejudice Liberty of Conscience in point of Religion, as will appear by the
Oath it self, nor had they any regrett to the Oath till they were as much
refreshed with their intertainment there, as the Snake in the Fable was with
the Country man's breast, for which some of them are equally thankful

But it is now, it seems, thought by some of those people too much below them
to take an Oath to the Lord Proprietary of that Province, though many
Protestants of much better quality, have taken it, and which is more then can
be hoped for from some of these men) kept it.

As to the Government there, they knew it very well before they came thither,
and if they had not liked it they might have forborne coming or staying there,
for they were never forced to either, the chief Officers under my Lord there
are Protestants, the Jurisdiction exercised there by them is no other then what
is warranted by his Lordships Patent of that Province, which gives him the
power and privileges of a Count Palatine there, depending on the Supreme
Authority of England, with power to make Laws with the Peoples consent, and of
Martial Law in cases of Mutiny, Rebellion, or Sedition, without which powers
and privileges his Lordship would not have undertaken that Plantation, and
have been at so great a charge, and run so many hazards as he has done for it.

There are none there sworn to uphold Antichrist, as Mr. Strong falsely
suggests, nor does the Oath of Fidelity bind any man to maintain any other
Jurisdiction or Dominion of my Lords, than what is granted by his Patent; for
by express words it relates to such only as are therein contained, whatsoever
Mr. Strong says to the contrary.

Though some of those people (it seems) think it unfit that my Lord should
have such a jurisdiction and dominion there, (unto which he has as good a
right as Mr. Strong or any of those people can claim to any thing they have)
yet they it seems by their arrogant and insolent proceedings think it fit for
them to exercise far more absolute Jurisdictions and Dominion there then my
Lord ever did, such as in truth are Arbitrary and Barbarous without any lawful
right or Authority at all, nor are they contented with freedom for themselves
of Conscience, Person and Estate, (all which are established to them by Law
there and enjoyed by them in as ample manner as ever any people did in any
place of the world) unless they may have the liberty to debarr others from the
like freedom, and that they may domineere and do what they please.

As to the pretended Commission mentioned by Mr. Strong from the supreme
Authority of England in 1652. for reducing of Maryland, there was no such
thing; but the ground of that pretense was this. In September 1651. when the
Council of State sent Commissioners from hence, that is to say Capt. Dennis,
Capt. Steg, and Capt. Curtes, to reduce Virginia to the obedience of the
Parliament, the said Council appointed a Committee of themselves for the
carrying on of the affairs of the Admirallty, to give instructions to the said
Commissioners for that business, and Colonel George Thomson being then in the
Chair of that Committee, Maryland was at first inserted in their instructions
to be reduced as well as Virginia, but the Committee being afterward
satisfied by all the Merchants that traded thither (who were engaged to assist
with their ships in the reducement of Virginia) that Maryland was not in
opposition to the Parliament; that Captain Stone the Lord Baltemores
Leivtenant there, was generally known to have been always zealously affected
to the Parliament, and that diverse of the Parliaments friends were by the Lord
Baltemores especial directions received into Maryland, and well treated there,
when they were feign to leave Virginia for their good affections to the
Parliament; then the said Committee thought it not fit at all to disturb that
Plantation, and therefore in the presence of many of the said Merchants, caused
Maryland to be struck out of the said instructions, and the Council of State
did thereupon give License to many Ships to trade at that time to Maryland, but
would not permit any to go to Virginia, till that Colony were reduced to
obedience; all which will be testified by diverse Merchants and others to be
true.

In this expedition to Virginia Captain Dennis and Captain Steg the two
chief Commissioners (who were present when Maryland was struck out of the said
Instructions) were cast away outward bound, in the Admiral of that Fleet which
was sent from hence upon that service, and with them the Original Commission
for that service was lost.

But Capt. Curtes having a Copy of the said Commission and Instructions with
him in another ship, arrived safe in Virginia, and there being also nominated
in the said Commission two other persons resident in Virginia, that is, Mr.
Richard Bennet before mentioned, and Capt. Cleyborne (known and declared
Enemies of the Lord Baltemores) they together with Capt. Curtes proceeded to
the reducement of Virginia, which was effected accordingly; and Captain Stone
being then the Lord Baltemores Lieutenant of Maryland, did actually assist them
therein. After all which, the said Mr. Bennet and Capt. Cleyborne went
notwithstanding to Maryland, and upon pretense of a certain Clause in their
Instructions, That they should reduce all the Plantations in the Bay of
Cheseapeacke, to the obedience of the Parliament, because some part of
Maryland, where the Lord Baltemores chief Colony there is seated, is within
that Bay, as well as all the Plantations of Virginia are, they required Capt.
Stone and the rest of the Lord Baltemores Officers there, first to take the
Engagement, which they all readily subscribed, and declared, that they did in
all humility submit themselves to the Government of the Common wealth of
England, in chief under God: then the said Commissioners required them to
issue out Writs and Process out of the Lord Baltemores Courts there, in the
name of the Keepers of the Liberty of England, and not in the name of the Lord
Proprietary as they were wont to do; wherein they desired to be excused,
because they did conceive the Parliament intended not to divest the Lord
Baltemore of his right there; and that they understood out of England that the
Council of State intended not that any alteration should be made in Maryland,
that the Kings name was never used heertofore in the said Writs, but that they
had always been in the name of the Lord Proprietary according to the
Privileges of his Patent, ever since the beginning of that Plantation. That
the Act in England for changing of the forms of Writs declared only, that in
such Writs and Process wherein the Kings name was formerly used, the Keepers
of the Liberty of England should for the future be put in stead thereof. That
the continuing of the Writs in the Lord Proprietaries name was essential to
his interest there, and therefore they could not without breach of trust concur
to any such alteration: where upon the said Commissioners demanded of Captain
Stone the Lord Baltemores Commission to him, which he showed them, and then
without any other cause at all they detained it and remooved him, and his
Lordships other Officers out of their employment there under him, and appointed
others to manage the Government of that Plantation independent of his Lordship.

By which it appears Mr. Bennet and Capt. Cleyborne took upon them an Authority
much contrary to the intention of the Council of State, and indeed contrary to
common sense and reason; for certainly if the Council had had any cause to
have altered their mind in that particular of Maryland, after they had struck
it out of the said Instructions, they would have caused it to have been put in
again by the same name, whereby their Intention might have been clearly
understood; much less could they have any Intention of reducing any place that
was not in opposition against them, but in due obedience; so as if Maryland had
been by any mistake put in by name to be reduced, upon a supposition in the
Council that it had been in opposition, yet they could not in reason intend
that in case their Commissioners had found when they came upon the place (as
they did) that it was not in opposition, that they should reduce it or
prejudice any man's right upon that account: so that whatsoever was done in
Maryland by the said Mr. Bennet, then Governor of Virginia, and the other
persons Mr. Strong mentions as Commissioners from England, for reducing of
Maryland, or their subordinate Officers, having no firmer foundation from
hence, was done without Authority, which makes all those proceedings mentioned
by Mr. Strong of his friends and their pretended assembly there, illegal,
mutinous, and usurped, and the Lord Baltemore and his Officers had just reason
to rectify the same by all lawful means, other then which they used none,
when they reassumed the Government; for by his Lordships Patent he and his
substitutes have power to make use of what force they can, to compel such as
shall unlawfully oppose his Government there, and by a Law made with the
consent of a general Assembly of that Province, wherein the said people above
mentioned had also their Burgesses, it was enacted that such as should by force
of Arms oppose the Government there under the Lord Proprietary, or attempt the
disinherison or dispossessing him (as those people did before Capt. Stone
attempted any force upon them) of his rights or Jurisdiction there, according
to his Patent, should be punished with Death and confiscation of their Estates,
as is usual and necessary in the like cases to be done in all such Governments
whatsoever; though no such severity is ever put in execution there, but when
all fair and gentle means, being first tried to reduce such people to obedience
will not prevail.

Moreover that pretended authority of the said Commissioners for reducing of
Maryland, was urged here in England by Colonel Matthews, Agent for the said
Mr Bennet, and the Colonie of Virginia, when his Petition was debated before
the Committee of Petitions of the late Parliament which began in July 1653. and
was by that Committee dismissed, and yet notwithstanding after the said
dismission and Dissolution of that Parliament, the said Mr. Bennet and Capt.
Cleyborne did again in July 1654. come into Maryland, and with the assistance
of some of the people above mentioned, by force of Arms turned out Capt.
Stone, and the Lord Baltemores other Officers, and put others in their rooms
by what Authority no man knows; for although they had had as they pretended an
Authority (which in truth they had not) from the Parliament which was dissolved
in April 1653. to do what they did in Maryland in 1652 according to Mr. Strongs
relation, yet after the Dissolution of that Parliament the Authority from it
ceased, so as all proceedings in prosecution thereof afterward was
unwarrantable, unless that Authority which they pretended had been given them
by an Act or Ordinance of Parliament for a certain time then not expired, or
confirmed by the succeeding supreme Authority here, which it was not.

And although Mr. Strong shelter most of the bloody actions done by those who
employ him hither, under pretense that the Government, the Counselors and
Officers in Maryland were Popish, and therefore there must needs be some
design to extirpate those of another Judgment, yet he does not (because
indeed he cannot) make appear any disturbance given by the Lord Baltemores
Government, to any person there for matter of Religion, but contrariwise it is
well known that no Nation affords better Laws to prevent any difference
arising upon that Account, nor more freedom of Conscience then that Government
does, as the most considerable Protestants in that Province have attested by an
Instrument under their hands, unto which the said Mr. Durand (attestor of the
aforesaid Pamphlet) has also subscribed his name, wherein they do also
acknowledge that the said freedom is provided for not only by the said Laws
there, with his Lordships assent unto them, but by several other strict
Injunctions and Declarations of his Lordships for that purpose.

There are as well affected Counselors and Officers to his Highness and this
Government employed and entrusted by the Lord Baltemore in Maryland as any that
oppose his Lordship there. And his Highness was by Capt. Stone caused to be
publicly and in a solemn manner proclaimed there as Sovereign Lord of that
place.

As for the late unhappy contests there which (as Mr. Strong says) were
desired by those people above mentioned to be composed in an amicable way, how
does that agree with their turning Captain Stone out of his Government in
July 1654. by force of Arms, and ferrying their men over the River toward
Capt. Stone in the last conflict, and the shooting of Ordnance from Capt.
Hemans ship at Capt. Stone, and the blocking up of Capt. Stones Boats by a
Barque with two pieces of Ordnance (as Mr. Strong confesses they did before
any hostile attempt made by Captain Stone upon them) which forced Capt. Stone
to engage with them in his own defense. As to Capt. Stones taking away the
Records and Arms from those of Patuxent, if he did so, it was but what every
discreet man ought to have done in the like case, they having been Actors in
displacing him as formerly; and lest in his absence they should attempt upon
the Colony behind him; but Mr. Strong I suppose is the more impudent in
alleging untruths, and endeavoring to smother under them the barbarous and
bloody actions of those people, because he knows that they have taken order to
hinder what they can, all persons and Letters which may come from thence
hither, and have imposed Oaths upon all those of concernment whom they had in
their custody, that they neither should endeavor to com over into England, nor
write any Letters or Petitions into England, to manifest to his Highness the
truth of their proceedings in Maryland, which will reflect upon Mr. Strong as
much as any one else; nevertheless providence, notwithstanding all their
diligence to the contrary, has brought some Letters and Persons lately over
from thence, which much contradict Mr. Strongs Relation of the last contests
there, viz. a Letter from Mr. Luke Barber to his Highness the Lord Protector,
which the said Mr. Barber wrote when he thought he should not have been able to
have got away from thence, the people above mentioned having detained him
as well as others, but afterward finding means to come hither himself in the
same ship wherein he intended to have sent that Letter, he thought fit in
stead thereof to declare by word of mouth to his Highness what was therein
contained, a Copy of which Letter subscribed by the said Mr. Barber is heerunto
annexed, and he will affirm the contents thereof upon Oath to be true. Another
is a Letter from Captain Stones Wife (he being a Prisoner, and not suffered to
write himself) to my Lord Baltemore, a Copy whereof is also heereunto anexed:
by both which it appears clearly that Mr. Strong has omitted to mention the
putting to death of fowr of Captain Stones party by the people above mentioned,
in cold blood, several days after the fight, and has very falsely related
Capt. Stones and the Lord Baltemores other Officers proceedings in that last
contest as well in relation to his Highness, as to those people above mentioned;
wherefore for the present I shall refer the Reader to the said Letters for
satisfaction therein, till further proof be made thereof in such a way as his
Highness shall please to direct; whereupon my Lord Baltemore doubts not but his
Highness will be pleased to do him and his Officers in Maryland right, and to
call those to a strict account who were actors in the horrid murders
aforesaid: for certainly that pretense of theirs of acting what they did (as
Mr. Strong says) in his Highness name, will not excuse them; no man I conceive
doubting but that whosoever shall presume to put any man to death in his
Highness name, without any lawful Authority from him, does put a great
dishonor upon his Highness, and not mitigate but aggravate the crime of
murder in so doing.

And lastly, though it be a good thing to sing praises and give thanks to God
as Mr. Strong does at the end of his Pamphlet, so it is a good thing to know God
is not mocked, but will render unto every man according to his actions, and
vindicate the innocent.

The Copy of a Letter intended for his Highness.
May it please your Highness:
HAving formerly had the honor to relate to your Highness not only in your
Army, but also as a domestic servant, I humbly thought it my duty to give your
Highness a true relation of the late disaster of this Country, which although
it be not a place any way considerable or worth your Highness trouble, yet
when I consider the great care and pains your Highness has formerly taken both
below your self, and almost incredible to those that have not been
eyewitnesses of them, for the true settling of Government, and avoiding the
needless shedding of blood, it gives encouragement to my pen, and assures me
that the score upon which I write, will obtain a pardon of your Highness for my
presumption, it being humbly and in the name of that great God (whom I know had
not your Highness feared would never have so palpably helped your Highness in
your greatest necessity, and fought your Battles) to beg a boon which will I
doubt not, absolutely end the needless shedding of blood in this part of the
World, in regard now both parties pretend to fight for your Highness: My Lord,
my humble Petition to your Highness is, that your Highness would be pleased
graciously to condescend so low as to settle the Country, so as we may here
understand the absolute pleasure and determinate will of your Highness therein
the disobeyers of which cannot after your Highness known pleasure but in a
moment perish, and the rest live secure and happy. My Lord I am an absolute
stranger here as yet having not been a month in the Country, in which time
this unfortunate action fell out, so much the sadder, in regard of the common
enemy the Indian who ever takes advantage by our intestine troubles being both
cruel and potent, and therefore I hope will be a motive to further the
charitable condescending of your Highness for settling the Country. My Lord
having had a very tedious passage being necessitated to stay above two months
in Bermudas and above one month in Virginia, so that I was above half a year
from the time that I came out of England to my arivall in Maryland, at which
arival I found the Country in a great disturbance, the Governor Captain Stone
being ready to march with his Army (which here is considerable if it consist
of 200 men) against a party of men at a place called Anne-Arundel who the year
before (pretending a power from your Highness as also that your Highness had
taken the Lord Baltemores Country from him) bred a great disturbance in the
Country, and withal took away the Governors Commission from him, which
Governor being since informed by a Gentleman by name Mr. Elkonhead (one that
came out of England 2 or 3 Months after me) that the Lord Baltemore kept his
Patent, and that your Highness had neither taken the Lord Baltemores Patent
from him nor his Land, he thought he might act by the contents of his former
Commission from the Lord Baltemore and accordingly went up to reduce those
people to the Lord Baltemores Government, but still under your Highness
command, as formerly under the Kings, having here in the Country before I came
first solemnly proclaimed your Highness, as also in all Proclamations and
public Edicts ending with God preserve the Lord Protector, and the Lord
Proprietary. Now going up to reduce these people, if possible by fair means, a
Declaration to which purpose the Governor desiring me to bear him company the
march, I got leave to carry to them, in the end of which the Governor did
protest, as in the presence of Almighty God, that he came not in a hostile way
to do them any hurt, but sought all means possible to reclaim them by fair
means; and to my knowledge at the sending out of Parties (as occasion served)
he gave strict command, that if they met any of the Anne-Arundell men they
should not fire the first Gun, nor upon pain of death plunder any: these were
his actings to my knowledge upon the march; but coming nearer to them, there
was a Ship a Merchant man called the Golden Lion, one Hemans Commander, and as
appears hired by them, having since received his reward of them, who seeing
the Governor land his men under the command of his ship, shot at them as they
landed over night, and the next morning continuing his course (as I am credibly
informed) killed one of the Governors men, and so began the war which after fell
out, for the Anne-Arundell men coming suddenly upon them on the one side, and
the Golden Lion being on the other side, they being in a neck of Land invirond
round with water except one little place by which the Anne-Arundel men came in
upon them, where after a skirmish the Governor upon quarter given him and all
his company in the field, yielded to be taken Prisoners, but two or three days
after the Victors condemnd ten to death, and executed four, and had executed
all had not the incessant Petitioning and begging of some good women saved
some, and the soldiers others; the Governor himself being condemned by them
and since begd by the Soldiers, some being saved just as they were leading out
to execution, and since fall a sequestring their Estates, and taking away what
they have as if they were mere Malignants, and had fought directly against
your Highness, in which I cannot but speak my conscience, knowing that at
their first setting out the general cry was that they went to reduce the
Country and bring it under the obedience of your Highness and the Lord
Proprietary, as also the Governor who protested to me before he went out,
that had he not been very credibly informed that your Highness had not taken
away the Lord Baltemores Patent, nor his Land, as the Anne-Arundel men
pretended, he would not stir in the business. My Lord, the reason why I take
upon me to give your Highness an account of this action is nothing but out of
my duty to your Highness to give a true and impartial account of the
proceedings here, in regard they still keep the Governor and most of the
Council Prisoners, as also all the chief Officers till all the shipping is
already gone out of the Country except one, and till that is gone I hear for
certain none of them shall be releast, by which means they are not only
debard from coming for England (as some desired to answer for what they had
done before your Highness, and were denied it) but are likewise hindered from
writing their grievances, as not being suffered to write to their own Wives,
but their Letters are broke open, so that I cannot but think my self bound in
conscience to declare the truth, as also to remain so long as I possess a
being in this world,

My Lord, Your Highness most obedient and ever Loyal Subject L. Barber.
Maryland this 13. of April, 1655.
For the Right Honorable the Lord BALTEMORE, these present.
Right Honorable:
I Am sorry at present for to let your Honor understand of our sad condition,
in your Province. So it is, that my Husband, with the rest of your Council,
went about a month agone with a party of men up to Anne-Arundell County, to
bring those factious people to obedience under your Government. My Husband sent
Dr. Barber with one Mr. Coursey with a Message to them, but they never returned
again before the fight began. Also he sent one Mr. Packer the day after, with
a Message, and he likewise never returned, as I heard: but so it is, that upon
Sunday the 25. of March, they did engage with the people of Anne-Arundell, and
lost the field, and not above five of our men escaped; which I did conceive
ran away before the fight was ended; the rest all taken, some killed and
wounded; my Husband has received a wound in his shoulder, but I hear it is
upon the mending. My Husband, I am confident, did not think that they would
have engaged, but it did prove too true to all our great damages; They, as I
hear, being better provided then my Husband did expect; for they hired the
Captain of the G^l^len Lion, a great ship of burden, the Captains name is Roger
Hemans, a young man, and his Brother, who have been great sticklers in the
business as I hear, Captain H^man was one of their Council of War, and by
his consent would have had all the Prisoners hanged; but after Quarter given,
they tried all your Counselors by a Council of War, and Sentence was passed
upon my Husband to be shot to death, but was after saved by the Enemies own
Soldiers, and so the rest of the Counselors were saved by the Petitions of
the Women, with some other friends which they found there; only Master William
Eltonhead was shot to death, whose death I much lament, being shot in cold
blood; and also Lieutenant William Lewis, with one Mr. Leggat, and a Germane,
which did live with Mr. Eltonhead, which by all Relations that ever I did hear
of, the like barbarous act was never done amongst Christians. They have
Sequestered my Husbands Estate, only they say they will allow a maintenance for
me and my Children, which I do believe will be but small. They keep my
Husband, with the rest of the Council, and all other Officers, still
Prisoners: I am very suddenly, God willing, bound up to see my Husband, they
will not so much as suffer him to write a Letter unto me, but they will have
the perusal of what he writes. Captain Tylman and his Mate Master Cook are
very honest men, and do stand up much for your Honor; they will inform you
of more passages then I can remember at the present; and I hope my Brother will
be down before Captain Tylman goes away, and will write to you more at large;
for he is bound up this day for to see his Brother, if they do not detain him
there as well as the rest; the occasion I conceive of their detainment there
is, because they should not go home, to inform your Honor of the truth of
the business before they make their own tale in England, which let them do
their worst, which I do not question but you will vindicate my Husbands honor
which has ventured Life and Estate to keep your due here, which by force he
has lost. And they give out words, that they have won the Country by the
sword, and by it they will keep the same, let my Lord Protector send in what
Writing he pleases. The Gunners Mate of Hemans, since his coming down from
Anne-Arundell to Patuxent, has boasted that he shot the first man that was
shot of our Party. All this I write is very true, which I thought good to
inform your Lordship, because they will not suffer my Husband for to write
himself: I hope your Honor will be pleased for to look upon my Son, and
for to wish him for to be of good comfort, and not for to take our afflictions
to heart. And nothing else at present, I rest

Your Honors most humble Servant, Varlinda Stone.
Postscript.
I hope your Honor will favor me so much, that if my Son wants twenty or
thirty pounds you will let him have it, and it shall be paid your Honor again.

Hemans the Master of the Golden Lion is a very Knave, and that will be made
plainly for to appear to your Lordship, for he has abused my Husband most
grossly.



A true Copy of the Oath of Fidelity to the Lord Proprietary of the Province of
MARYLAND.
I A. B. Do swear that I will be true and faithful (so long as I shall be a
member of this Province) to the Right Hon. CAECILIUS, Lord Baron of Baltemore,
Lord and Proprietary of this Province of Maryland, and the Islands thereunto
belonging, and to his Heirs Lords and Proprietaries of the same, and to his
Lieutenant or Chief Governor here for the time being: And will not at any
time by words or actions in public or in private, wittingly or willingly, to
the best of my understanding, any way derogate from, but will at all times, as
occasion shall require to the utmost of my power, defend and maintain all such
his said Lordships and his Heirs just and lawful Right, Title, Interest,
Privileges, Jurisdictions, Prerogative, Propriety and Dominion, over and in
the said Province and Islands thereunto belonging, and over the people who are
or shall be therein for the time being, as are granted to his said Lordship and
his Heirs by the late King of England in his said Lordships Patent of the said
Province under the Great Seal of England, not any wise understood to infringe
or prejudice Liberty of Conscience in point of Religion; And I do also swear
that I will with all expedition discover to his Lordship or to his Lieutenant
or other Chief Governor of the said Province for the time being and also use
my best endeavor to prevent any Plot, Conspiracy, or Combination, which I shall
know, or have just cause to suspect, is or shall be intended against the person
of his said Lordship, or which shall tend any way to the disinherison or
deprivation of his said Lordship or his Heirs their Right, Title,
Jurisdiction, and Dominion aforesaid, or any part thereof; And I do swear that
I will not either by myself or by any other person or persons, directly or
indirectly take, accept, receive, purchase or possess any Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments within the said Province of Maryland, or the Islands thereunto
belonging from any Indian or Indians to any other use or uses but to the use of
his said Lordship, and his Heirs Lords and Proprietaries of this Province, or
knowingly from any other person or persons not deriving a legal Title
thereunto, by, from, or under some grant from his said Lordship or his Heirs
Lords and Proprietaries of this Province legally passed or to be passed under
his or their great Seal of the said Province for the time being.

So help me God etc.
THis Oath was appointed by my Lord to be taken by every one who had any Land
granted to him in Maryland from his Lordship before any Patent thereof should
pass the Seal to him; and it was also appointed to be taken by a law made in
Maryland in An. 1649. with the consent of the Protestants as well as the Roman
Catholics there, by every inhabitant above the age of sixteen years, upon
pain of Banishment in case of refusal, and of fine in case of return and a
second refusal; but it was never yet imposed upon any, nor any ever yet
banished or fined for refusal of it, only they could have no land granted them
from his Lordship, unless they took it; nor was there any other Oath
appointed to be taken upon any penalty whatsoever. But there was another Oath
appointed for the Governor and Council only in Maryland to take, which have
these clauses among others in them (viz.) That they shall not accept or execute
any Place, Office, or Employment in Maryland, relating to the Government
thereof from any Person or Authority, but from the Lord Baltemore or his
Heirs: and another Clause (viz.) that they shall not directly or indirectly,
trouble, molest, or discountenance, any person whatsoever in the said Province,
professing to believe in JESUS CHRIST, and in particular no Roman Catholic,
for or in respect of his or her Religion, nor in his or her free exercise
thereof within the said Province. But this Oath was never imposed upon any
body, nor any penalty appointed for the refusal thereof; for it was free for
any man, if he did not like the Oath not to accept of the place of Governor,
or one of the Council there; and this last mentioned Oath of the Governor and
Council was appointed in the life time of the late King. The Lord Baltemore
conceiving it lawful and justifiable by his Patent to require such an Oath
from such as he should employ in Offices of so great trust in so remote a
place; for although by his Patent the sovereign Dominion of that Province be
reserved to the late King, his Heirs, and Successors, yet the immediate and
subordinate authority of the Government thereof is granted to his Lorship and
his Heirs, so as no man ought to act therein but by authority derived from
him. And he appointed this Oath to be taken by the aforesaid Officers, when he
made Capt. Stone Governor, and Mr. Tho. Hatton Secretary, and others of his
Council there who being of different Judgment in Religion from himself, his
Lordship thought it but reasonable and fit that as he did oblige them by Oath
not to disturb any there who professed to believe in Jesus Christ, so to
express the Roman Catholics in particular, who were of his own judgment in
matter of Religion.

A true Copy of a Law made in Maryland, Entitled, An Act concerning Religion.
FOrasmuch as in a well Governed and Christian Commonwealth, matters
concerning Religion and the Honor of God ought in the first place to be taken
into serious consideration and indevoured to be settled. Be it therefore
Ordained and Enacted by the Right Honorable CAECILIUS Lord Baron of Baltemore,
This Title is given his Lordship in his Patent of Maryland.
absolute Lord and Proprietary of this Province, with the Advice and Consent of
the Upper and Lower House of this General Assembly, that whatsoever Person or
Persons within this Province and the Islands thereunto belonging, shall from
henceforth Blaspheame GOD, that is curse him, or shall deny our Savior JESUS
CHRIST to be the Son of God, or shall deny the Holy Trinity, the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, or the Godhead of any of the said Three Persons of the Trinity,
or the Unity of the Godhead, or shall use or utter any reproachful speeches,
words, or language, concerning the Holy Trinity, or any of the said three
Persons thereof, shall be punished with death, and confiscation or forfeiture of
all his or her Land and Goods to the Lord Proprietary and his Heirs. And be
it also Enacted by the Authority and with the advice and assent aforesaid, That
whatsoever Person or Persons shall from henceforth use or utter any
reproachful words or speeches concerning the Blessed Virgin MARY, the Mother
of our Savior, or the holy Apostles or Evangelists, or any of them, shall in
such case for the first Offense forfeit to the said Lord Proprietary and his
heirs Lords and Proprietaries of this Province, the sum of 5 l. sterling, or
the value thereof, to be levied on the goods and chattells of every such
person so offending; but in case such offender or offenders shall not then have
goods and chattels sufficient for the satisfying of such forfeiture, or that
the same be not otherwise speedily satisfied, that then such offender or
offenders shall be publicly whipped, and be imprisoned during the pleasure of
the Lord Proprietary, or the Lieutenant or Chief Governor of this Province
for the time being; and that every such offender and offenders for every second
offense shall forfeit 10 l. sterling, or the value thereof to be levied as
aforesaid, or in case such offender or offenders shall not then have goods and
chattells within this Province sufficient for that purpose, then to be
publicly and severely whipped and imprisoned as before is expressed. And that
every person or persons before mentioned, offending heerin the third time,
shall for such third offense, forfeit all his lands and goods and be for ever
banished and expelled out of this Province. And be i^ also further Enacted by
the same authority, advice, and assent, that whatsoever person or persons shall
from henceforth upon any occasion of offense or otherwise in a reproachful
manner or way, declare, call or denominate, any person or persons whatsoever,
inhabiting, residing, trafficking, trading, or commercing, within this
Province, or within any the Ports, Harbors, Creeks or Havens to the same
belonging, an Heretic, Schismatic, Idolater, Puritan, Presbyterian,
Independent, Popish Priest, Jesuit, Jesuited Papist, Lutheran, Calvinist,
Anabaptist, Brownist, Antinomian, Barrowist, Roundhead, Separatist, or other
name or term in a reproachful manner relating to matter of Religion, shall for
every such offense forfet and lose the sum of 10 s. sterling or the value
thereof to be levied on the goods and Chattels of every such offender and
offenders, the one half thereof to be forfeted and paid unto the person and
persons of whom such reproachful words are or shall be spoken or uttered, and
the other half thereof to the Lord Proprietary and his Heirs, Lords and
Proprietaries of this Province; But if such person or persons who shall at any
time utter or speak any such reproachful words or language, shall not have
goods or chattells sufficient and overt within this Province to be taken to
satisfy the penalty aforesaid, or that the same be not otherwise speedily
satisfied, that then the person and persons so offending shall be publicly
whipped, and shall suffer imprisonment without Bail or Mainprise until he, she,
or they, respectively shall satisfy the party offended or grieved by such
reproachful language, by asking him or her respectively forgivenes publicly
for such his offense before the Magistrate or chief Officer or Officers of the
Town or Place where such offense shall be given. And be it further likewise
Enacted by the authority and consent aforesaid, that every person and persons
within this Province, that shall at any time hereafter profane the Sabbath or
Lords day called Sunday, by frequent swearing, drunkenness, or by any uncivil
or disorderly Recreation, or by working on that day, when absolute necessity
does not require, shall for every such first offense forfet 2 s. 6 d. sterling
or the value thereof; and for the second offense 5 s. sterling or the value
thereof; and for the third offense and for everytime he shall offend in like
manner afterward 10 s. sterling or the value thereof; and in case such offender
or offenders shall not have sufficient goods or chattells within this Province
to satisfy any of the aforesaid penalties respectively hereby imposed for
profaning the Sabbath or Lords day called Sunday as aforesaid, then in every
such Case the party so offending shall for the first and second offense in that
kind be imprisoned till he or she shall publicly in open Court before the
chief Commander, Judge, or Magistrate of that County, Town, or Precinct
wherein such offense shall be committed, acknowledge the scandal and offense
he has in that respect given, against God, and the good and civil Government
of this Province: And for the third offense and for every time after shall also
be publicly whipped. And whereas the enforcing of the Conscience in matter of
Religion has frequently fallen out to be of dangerous Consequence in those
Commonwealths where it has been practiced, and for the more quiet and
peaceable Government of this Province, and the better to preserve mutual love
and unity amongst the Inhabitants here, Be it therefore also by the Lord
Proprietary with the advice and assent of this Assembly, Ordained and Enacted,
except as in this present Act is before declared and set forth, that no person
or persons whatsoever within this Province or the Islands, Ports, Harbors,
Creeks, or Havens thereunto belonging, professing to believe in Jesus Christ
shall from henceforth be any ways troubled, molested, or discountenanced, for
or in respect of his or her Religion, nor in the free Exercise thereof within
this Province or the Islands thereunto belonging, nor any way compelled to the
belief or exercise of any other Religion against his or her consent, so as
they be not unfaithful to the Lord Proprietary, or molest or conspire against
the civil Government, established or to be established in this Province under
him and his Heirs. And that all and every person and persons that shall
presume contrary to this Act and the true intent and meaning thereof, directly
or ^ndirectly, either in person or estate, wilfully to wrong, disturb, or
trouble, or molest any person or persons whatsoever within this Province,
professing to believe in Jesus Christ, for or in respect of his or her
Religion, or the free Exercise thereof within this Province, otherwise then is
provided for in this Act, That such person or persons so offending shall be
compelled to pay treble damages to the party so wronged or molested, and for
every such offense shall also forfet 20 s. sterling in Money or the value
thereof, half thereof for the use of the Lord Proprietary and his Heirs Lords
and Proprietaries of this Province, and the other half thereof for the use of
the party so wronged or molested as aforesaid; or if the party so offending as
aforesaid, shall refuse or be unable to recompense the party so wronged or to
satisfy such fine or forfeiture, then such offender shall be severely punished
by public whipping and imprisonment during the pleasure of the Lord
Proprietary or his Lieutenant or chief Governor of this Province for the time
being, without Bail or Mainprise. And be it further also Enacted by the
authority and consent aforesaid, that the Sheriff or other Officer or Officers
from time to time to be appointed and authorized for that purpose of the
County, Town, or Precinct where every particular offense in this present Act
contained, shall happen at any time to be committed, and whereupon there is
heerby a forfeiture, fine, or penalty imposed, shall from time to time
distrain, and seize the goods and estate of every such person so offending as
aforesaid against this present Act or any part thereof, and sell the same or any
part thereof, for the full satisfaction of such forfeiture, fine, or penalty as
aforesaid, restoring to the Party so offending, the Remainder or overplus of
the said goods or estate, after such satisfaction so made as aforesaid.

This Act was passed by a General Assembly in Maryland in April 1649. and
assented unto by the Lord Baltemore in 1650. and the intent of it being to
prevent any disgusts between those of different judgments in Religion there,
it was thought necessary to insert that clause in it concerning the Virgin
Mary, of whom some, otherwise might perhaps speak reproachfully, to the
offense of others. And in the time of the long Parliament when the differences
between the Lord Baltemore, and Colonel Samuel Matthews, as Agent for the
Colony of Virginia were depending before a Committee of that Parliament for the
Navy, that Clause in the said Law concerning the Virgin Mary, was at that
Committee objected as an exception against his Lordship; whereupon a worthy
Member of the said Committee stood up and said, that he wondered that any such
exception should be taken against his Lordship; for (says he) does not the
Scripture say, Lu. 1.48.
that all Generations shall call her blessed? and the Committee insisted no
more on that exception.

THE Declaration and Certificate of William Stone Esquire, Lieutenant of the
Province of Maryland, by Commission from the Right Honorable the Lord
Baltemore, Lord Proprietary thereof, and of Captain John Price, Mr. Thomas
Hatton, and Captain Robert Vaughan of his said Lordships Counsel there, and of
diverse of the Burgesses now met in an Assembly there, and other Protestant
Inhabitants of the said Province, made the 17. day of April, Anno Dom. one
thousand six hundred and fifty.
WE the said Lieutenant, Council, Burgesses, and other Protestant Inhabitants
above mentioned, whose names are heerunto subscribed, do declare and certify
to all persons whom it may concern, That according to an Act of Assembly here,
and several other strict Injunctions and Declarations by his said Lordship for
that purpose made and provided, we do here enjoy all fitting and convenient
freedom and liberty in the exercise of our Religion under his said Lordships
Government and Interest, And that none of us are any ways troubled or
molested, for or by reason thereof within this his Lordships said Province.

Governor. William Stone
Council. Jo. Price Robert Vaughan Tho. Hatton
Burgesses. James Cox Note that James Cox and George Puddington were then
Burgesses for the people at Anne-Arundell.
Tho Steerman John Hatche George Puddington Robert Robines Walter Bain William
Brough Francis Poesy
Note that this is the same man who attests Mr. Strongs Pamphlet before
mentioned.
William Durand Anthony Rawlins Thomas Maydwell Mark Blomefield Thomas Bushel
William Hungerford William Stumpson Thomas Dinyard John Grinsdith William Edwin
Richard Brown Stanhop Roberts William Brown John Halfehead William Hardwich
Elias Beech George Sawyer William Edis John Gage Robert Ward William Marshall
Richard Smith Arthur Turner William Pell William Warren Edward Williams Raph
Bean John Slingsby James Morphew Francis Martin John Walker William Hawley
William Smoot John Sturman John Nichols Hugh Crage George Whitacre Daniel
Clocker John Perin Patrick Forest George Beckwith Thomas War Walter
Waterling.



