WITTY OBSERVATIONS Gathered from our late Sovereign King JAMES in his
ordinary Discourse.
London november.8. 1643
1. WOrds are not the difference of good men and bad, for every man speaks
well; therefore how noble thing is Virtue when no man dares profess any thing
but it.

2 I love not one will never be angry; for as he that is without sorrow, is
without gladness, so he that is without anger is without love.

3. There are degrees of men in respect of one another, but in respect of God
all are equal; all are to use like duty, like reverence toward him, all are
like beggars at Gods door.

4 We are departed no further from the Church of Rome, then they from their
first Jesus.

5 Give me the heart of a man, and out of that all other his deeds shall be
acceptable.

6 In clothes I would have a fashion should choose a man, and not a man a
fashion.

7 It is one of the miseries of a man, that when he is full of days and near
his end, that he should love life most.

8 It has like operation to make women learned as to make Foxes tame, which
teaches them only to steal more cunningly; the possibility is not equal,
for where it does one good, it does twenty harm.

9 Parents may forbid their children an unfit marriage, but they may not force
their consents to a fit.

10 No Country can be called rich wherein there is war; as in the Low
Countries there is much money, but the Soldiers have it in pay from the
Governor, the Bores have it for victuals of the Soldiers, the Governors have
it again in taxes, so there is no center nor honor.

11 No man gains by war, but he that has not wherewithal to live in peace.

12 God accepts the intent before the deed, for if I do justice because I would
be accounted a just King, and not for Gods glory, not because I stand
answerable to God if I do otherwise; or if I punish a man rightly, but withal
satisfy my own malice, both these are abominations. If I give alms only for
my reputation sake, this is a wicked deed because there is nullum medium,
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

13 No man shall do ill that thinks ere he undertakes what the end will be, not
what his passion will have it to be.

14 Time is the essence of many Laws, so that a King may do well at diverse
times both in making and abrogating the same Laws.

15 I desire not to live longer then I am accounted honest, reasonable, of
honest and reasonable men: no longer to be a King then I use my power to
maintain reason, and not to overthrow it.

16 I should think it a sign that God leaves me not if I should kill a man by
chance, I would most unwillingly do that ill that lies not in my power to mend.

17 I do not think the greatest Clerks, nearest heaven, much of their knowledge
is superfluous: for Bellarmine makes 400. Questions of Faith, and not ten of
which touches our salvation to understand.

18 Many have attempted to make glass malliable, and so gold artificial, but
both in vain; for God does ever cross the invention of man, lest he should
rejoice in his own works.

19 The persons of all men are like equal to us, and our hate or love should
only go according to their virtues or vices, these bonds of kindred should
only command us in all civil duties, but not our judgments; and particular
injuries should only make us hate that particular deed, but not the doer in
general.

20 Men of high understandings as they do many things above the common stream,
so they fall often into into greater errors then those of mean capacity, which
in all their actions will rather do nothing faulty then any thing
extraordinary, being of a temper better mixed then the former.

21 The Devil always avoids the mean, and waits upon the extremities; so he
has sought to divide betwixt Atheism and superstition.

22 All extremities come round to one end, the simple obedience of the Papists,
and the no obedience of the Puritan: the one breeds confusion, the other
ignorance and security.

23 The end of the Law is to punish sin when it is committed, but to keep it
from being committed it cannot as the Pope who thinks by allowing fornication,
to avoid adultery.

24 I will not reward any in matter of justice, for that is not mine, but Gods,
and the peoples.

25. The wisdom of a King is known in the election of his Officers, as in
places which requires a peculiar sufficiency, not to choose them whom he
affects most, but to use every man according to his proper fitness.

26 Virtue is easier then vice; for the essential difference betwixt vice and
virtue is truth and falsehood; and it is easier and less pains to tell truth
then lie. As for vices in the senses, custom is all in all: for to one that
has lived honestly its as much pains to commit sin, as for another to abstain.

27 It is likely that the people will imitate the King in good, but it is sure
they will follow him in ill.

28 I have been often deceived, yet will I never leave to trust, neither shall
the falsehood of some make me think there is none honest.

29 All that ever write of Christ said he was an honest man, they had so much
natural sight as to see his civil goodness; but they wanted the
supernatural to see and perceive his Godhead.

30 The same sentence with diverse relations may be both holy and divellish.

31 I wonder not so much that women paint themselves, as that when they are
painted men can love them.

32 Of all the number of men that have been slain in war, not the tenth part
have been fighting, but flying.

33 Parsons erres in their resolutions in making the difficulty of our
salvation, so lie in the hardness to find Gods mercy, when indeed it consists
in the right seeking of it, for the other is sure.

34 God has distributed his benefits so equal, that there is no country
which excels not all other in some thing, so that as it borrowes, so it
lends: so in men, there is none excels so in one thing, but he had need of
another wit in some other: from these two proceeds all traffic and society.

35 The art of Physicians is very imperfect, for I doubt not but for every
disease there is in nature several simples if they could find it out: So that
their compounds do rather show their ignorance, then their knowledge.

36 The Devil where he cannot have the whole, seeks ever to get one part of
the soul, either the will or the understanding which he may come easiest by; as
in Protestants the will, in Papists the understanding: a learned Papist, and an
ignorant of two Religions.

37 The Papists religion is like Homers Iliads of the siege of Troy, or Virgils
Aeneides of the beginning of Rome, both of them had a foundation of truth; so
had the Papist the Bible, but they have all added so much that the first truth
is almost lost.

38 God never fails of his word but where he threatens ill to man, as in the
punishing to Niniveh; but always performs where he promises good, that, or
better as he promised to Abraham, and his seed everlasting, earthly
blessedness, and instead of that gives them heavenly.

39 Not only the deliverance of the Jews till they came into the Land of
Promise, but even their daily preservation was miraculous: for there was never
any noted plague in Jerusalem, though it stood in an hot climate, which had it
been would endangered the whole Nation, it being to assemble thither every year
of necessity.

40 Men are often in arguing carried by the force of words further asunder than
their questions was at first, like to Ships going out of the same Haven, their
journeys end is many times whole countries distant.

41 Cowardice is the mother of cruelty, it was only fear that made Tyrants
put so many to death to secure themselves.

42 The fashion of the Romans of killing themselves, was falsely called
fortitude, for it was only to prevent the power of Fortune when indeed Virtue
lveth quiet out of her reach. Nor can any man be overcome but of himself, and
so most truly were they when they fled to death for a refuge against death.

43 Its easier to reclaim a man from heresy then to convert an Atheist to the
truth, for to believe is the first degree common to Religion, and an Atheist is
to be brought so far before he come to choosing.

44 All Gods miracles are above nature, but never against nature, for that were
to destroy his own work which he cannot do; but he may excel it: therefore the
miracles of the Papists Transubstantiation being against nature it self.

45 Types are the image of the mind which God allowed the Jews to keep them
from images of the Senate, and to show that his worship was to be in spirit and
truth.

46 The Church of Rome fell at first from her purity into i^firmities, then
into corruption, then into errors, then into heresies, and lastly into
abominations: God still punishing sin with sin.

47 Most heresies have proceeded from mingling Philosophy with Religion, from
that and policy have all the Papists errors risen, when Christ tells them that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven.

48 We cannot conceive extremity but by faith, we cannot understand what God
is, and of that ignorance comes all sin; for surely if we knew him we could not
offend him.

49 Men as often fall out about small things as great, because after the first
contradiction they maintain themselves not the thing.

50 Before Christ came it was enough for the Fathers to believe only, since
they must believe and understand both.

51 Those Princes which think to secure themselves by blood, shall find that
the more they kill, the more ever they have need to kill.

52 The Church is to be believed in the interpretation of Scripture but not
directly against it; for where it differs from that, it is no longer the Church.

53 There are three kinds of wisdoms that use to be in Kings, a sanctified
wisdom; a politic wisdom, which often strains it self to a less evil so to
avoid a greater; and a wisdom of falsehood: The first is both lawful and
necessary; the second is lawful but not necessary, the third is neither.

54 All governments is severed in their constitutions, in their practice tend
to a Monarchy, and wheresoever the better sort bear rule there is always some
one that resembles a King amongst them. Yea though in the State of Venice the
Duke is as it were a dead man, yet were it impossible that their Commonwealth
should long uphold it self without him.

55 The preservation of the Bible is miraculous, that it should remain pure
after it had passed the hands of Infidels which sought to destroy it, of
Heretics which sought to pervert it to their own advantage.

56 No indifferent gesture is so seldom done without-sin and laughter, for its
commonly raised upon things to be pitied, therefore man only can laugh, and he
only can sin.

57 God made one part of man of earth, the basest element to teach him
humility; his soul proceeded from the bosom of Himself, to teach him
goodness; so that if he looks downward nothing is viler, if he cast his eyes
to heaven he is of a matter more excellent then Angels, the former part was a
type of Adam, the second of Christ, which gives life to that which was dead in
it self.

58 Much money makes a Country poor, for it sets a dear price upon every
thing.

59 At what time the Gospel did flourish, all kind of learning did ever
abound; and upon the decay thereof there came always a vail of darkness upon
the face of the earth; the reason is a part of Religion, but error and
superstition is safer by the ignorance.

60 A lie of error is a fault of credulity, not of falsehood; but a
presumptuous lie is that which a man makes, as God made the world of nothing.

This is Licensed and entered according to Order.

FINIS.

