THE IVDGEMENT OF AN OLD GRAND-JVRY-MAN OF OXFORDSHIRE, CONCERNING THE
BREAKING UP OF THE LATE TREATY Begun at UXBRIDGE 30. Ian. 1644.

Delivered upon His perusal of the Late Printed FULL NARRATION of the Passages
concerning it.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, 1645.

THE JUDGMENT OF AN OLD GRAND-JURY-MAN of Oxfordshire, Concerning the
breaking up of the late TREATY.
ALthough the sadness of our Days, and the shortness of our Nights, may seem
to discountenance all old merry Stories, as being unseasonable: yet before they
be unlawful too, (for They at Westminster may chance to Vote down Tales, as
they have done Stage Plays) I shall venture to tell One unto the World:
conceiving I may fairly desire pardon for the unseasonablenesse thereof, when
it shall appear, that none have deserved more punishment, then They which have
made it, most of all, in Season. It is an old Story of the Horse and the Hind,
which I have heard my Grandfather tell many a Winter night, when I was a boy;
But I dare say, I should never have remembered it, if the reading of the Full
Relation of the Passages concerning the late Treaty at Vxbridge, which was
lately Printed at Oxford, and sent me down into the Country by a Friend, had
not renewed the decayed Impressions and Images thereof, and brought them all
fresh again into my mind. And the Tale, which he told, was this.

The Horse and the Hind, said he, were feeding in a goodly piece of Enclosed
ground, where there was grass enough; and at last down comes the Horse to a
Brook running thereby, with a desire to drink; The Hind tripping here and
there over the plain, at last chanced to take the water, in that very quarter
or division, where the Horse was drinking: and in the passage, disturbing the
clearness of the water, hindered the Horses draught, and made him life up his
head. Which the Horse took so ill, that forthwith he addresses himself unto
the Keeper of the Park, and in a most importunate manner, sues to him for
Justice, against the poor Hind. This Keeper having so much of the fence of a
Justice in him as to smell any sommodity that was coming near him, promises to
do him right: and he would teach the Hind to spoil more grass then he could
eat, and to trouble the water which the Horse should drink, I marry, that he
would only this one thing, he destred of the Horse, by way of Accommodation to
his Revinge, and that was: that the Horse would let him bridle him, and back
him straight, whilst the Hind was now in sight, and he doubted not but
instantly to overtake him, and lay him dead before him. The Horse accepts of
the Condition in all have: and after two or three heats, the poor Hind falls,
At which the Horse does seem not a little to rejoice, in confidence, that all
the whole Park, and the River too, will now be his without any molestation or
disturbance. But in the conclusion, it proved nothing so: for the Keeper
finding it more for his ease to ride, then he did to go on foot, and having
now the bridle in his own hands, would never be persuaded to let it slip
again, for all the Horses entreaties: but hurried him from this place to that,
coursing him over this ditch and that hedge, through this Brook and that Bogge,
till he rod him clean off his legs, so that he was not able to stand. And
thus he purchased indeed, the poor satisfaction of his impotent spleen, by
the death of the poor Hind, having gotten his life: But with the loss of
that, which was as dear as Life, his own lively hood and liberty.

To my Thinking, this Horse is a convenient Emblem or representation of the
Civil State of this Kingdom, or that part thereof, which we call the Laity
(and truly being a Layman my self, I was some what loath to use the familiar
home linesse of this Comparison, but that I have heard, that one Pope likened
the Common People in general, and another Pope likened the Common People of
this Nation in special, to a Beast of more unworthy burden.) And this Hind,
I have good Authority to make an Emblem of the Spiritual State of this
Kingdom, that which we call the Clergy; For I have been tol, that the Holy
Ghost in the Psalms, comprehending all those Agonies and pressures, which from
Christ the head, were to stream and issue down upon his Members, the Church,
has couched them all in this one Parson, of the Hind of the Morning; which
our Lecturer says, he thinks, is meant by those words, pro Cervomatutino, in
the Latin; but he is sure, it is the meaning of those hard words, Aijeleth
Shahar, in the original Hebrew, which words are the Title of the two and
twentieth Psalm.

It is yet within the memory of Man, since both this Horse and this Hind, the
Laity and the Clergy of this Land, ran in good Pasture, up to the very belly
in the Park; that is, mutually participated and enjoyed all the blessed
effects of Law and Government, which compassed and pal'd them in, on every
side. And long might they so have continued, if unluckily they had not met and
clasht at Watering, so as they did. These Waters are those Waters of life;
certain points of Religion; and these Waters the Horse had a conceit they ran
not clear, they were not fit to drink because the Hind had Crossed them; The
People snuff at pretended Innovations and Superstitions in their Religion,
brought in by the Priest; and then whatsoever the People will imagine the
Priest to have done, that shall he be sure to smart for doing. Now, because
this Hinds was so quick of foot, that the Horse had but little hopes to
overtake him; because the Clergy were so nimble with their Arguments and
Antiquities, and all points of Learning, that the Laity could not well
understand them; Their utmost resolution is, to compass that end by Might,
which could not be attained by Right; and to oppress them with Ruin, whom
they could not oppose with Reason. To this purpose up comes the Horse to the
very threshold of the lodge, with his petition in his head, just as the Common
People, came lately up to the door of the Parliament House, with Petitions in
their hats, To cry for Justice. And the Parliament were as ready to do them
Justice, as any Keeper could be; (though the Major of Coventries Justice, for
failing, that is, whither it were right or wrong) They would teach the Hind to
trouble the Waters, and to spoil more grass in one place, then he did eat in
two: They would take an order with the Clergy for mixing Superstition with
their Religion; They would take a course with their Non-Residencies and
Pluralities, and one man's enjoying of more maintenance, then would serve two or
three; But then this Horse must submit unto the bridle; The Laity must admit of
the Militia; they must put all the Power of the Kingdom, into the Parliaments
hands; and if they do not revenge the Horse against the Hind, if they do not
lay the Pride of the Clergy low enough, then never trust them. Never was
foolish Horse prouder of his golden Bit and Bosse, then was the Common People
at first, of this gay bridle. It was the simplest sight in the World, to see
them bring in their Boles, nay their Bodkins, their Tankards, nay, their very
Thimbles to Guild Hall (just as the Children of Israel did their Eare-rings) to
make themselves a Calfe.

For indeed, what else have they now made themselves? It is true, the poor
Hind is fallen; they have had their desires, in the ruin of the Clergy, and of
the Church; but, have they yet slipped the Bridle from their own necks? has not
the Parliament rid them to the purpose, now? have they not hurried them through
such boggs of Contributions, and such briars of Covenants, that have scratcht
and tore both their Fortunes and their very Souls? have they not courst them
over hedges, that fence in their propridties and liberties? and over Gates,
that opened them the free use and benefit of Laws? In stead of settling the
pretended Troubles in the Water of life, have they not cut a new River, and
carried the water clean another way? so that, one knows not where to drink
when he is a dry? so that one knows not where almost to have any Sacrament
administered as it was wont? have they not so long persecuted the poor Surplice
in most Churches, that they have scarce left any man a Shirt in the whole
Parish? It is to little purpose to persuade any man to that, which every man
does feel. And now the Horse would be glad to be case of his Rider, if he
could tell how; The People would feign return to their old wonted Laws and
Liberties, if they could tell which way; But, alas, it is too true which the
old Proverb says, set a Beggar on Horse back and he will ride; put the power
over the Lives and Liberties of the Common People, into Necessitous and
Indigent men's hands, men that mean only to raise their own Fortunes, though it
be upon the whole Kingdoms ruins, And they will leave them bare and poor
enough before ever they have done. Honest simple men, that were willing to
believe that, which they feign would have, were apt to receive some hopes of
slipping this Bridle, at the last Treaty for Peace. They did imagine, that the
Parliament intended a Peace, if the King were willing, as well as they
pretended it; But a man with half an eye might see, they never meant it; Alas!
they drive too good a trade at Westminster to break suddenly; Men will talk
much of some ground about London, how much one Acre thereof is worth; But I
dare say, two foot of ground at Westminster well occupied and well manured, (as
some Parliament men have done) has yielded some of the Farmers of all our
Fortunes, greater Commodity, and quicker Return, then all the Land in
England, which they have, besides. And will any wise man think, they will ever
forfeit their Lease for not-payment of a Pepper corn? does any man Imagine,
they will loose that Commodity, which they have got by War in three or four
years; for not offering to talk a little of Peace, for two or three days?
Truly they did nothing else, so far as I can see; and if those Papers, which
are printed, do contain all their Propositions, and all, the true passages,
thereupon; in all my life, did I never see the Proverb trulier verified, A
great Cry, and but a little Wool.

What a noise is there made with Religion? (for one of their Propositions is
concerning that) I profess, I began to look about, at that; I did verily
believe, either there was some Error in our Creed, or in the Doctrine of our
Sacraments, or in our Book of Homilies, or in our Book of nine and thirty
Articles, or in our Book of Common Prayer, or some where or other; the
profession whereof did much derogate from the purity of the Protestant
Profession; and I longed to see, what point of Religion that was: because,
having heard so much of the devotion and piety of the King, I could not
imagine, that the Parliament and He, could differ in that; especially, He
having professed to maintain the pure Protestant Religion, so often, as he
has done. Now, when all comes to all. The great business of Religion, what
do you think it is? An abolishing of the Church Government, by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. and the bringing in of a New Government whereof They themselves
are not yet agreed, what that kind of Government shall be; and, as appears by
their own Books (although a man would have thought, that nothing could have
set Mr Prinne and Mr Burton together by the ears, as of late about this point,
they both have been) it is like, they never will. And is this such a great
point of Religion, to destroy that Order of Men, that has conveighe Religion
unto us, ever since there was any, in this Island of ours? Is it for God's
Glory, to dishonor his Ministers? do the Bishops hinder the growth of
Reformation, without whom this Church of England, all the World knows, had
never been Reformed?

Well, any man may see plain, it is not the Lawne of the Bishops, but the Land
of the Bishops, which these men are offended with; and they have opened their
mind pretty well: for whereas, in the first passing of that Act against
Episcopacy, they were contented all the Bishops Lands should revert and come
unto the King, (the better to bayte him, that he might catch thereat, and so be
the more willing for to pass the Bill) In a later See the Appendix. no. IV.
Declaration of both Kingdoms, and so in the Treaty at Edinburgh, They assign
those very Lands unto the Scots, the payment of Public Damages; and in
conclusion, mean to reduce them, at last, into their own private Purses. If
these men had desired to alter the Government of the Church, and not desired to
alienate the Lands of the Church; truly, I should have been so charitable, as
to think they might have done it out of Conscience: as believing the Calling of
a Bishop, unlawful; but when I see, the Alteration of the one, is but made a
shooing-horne, to draw on the Alienation of the other, (for which there is no
necessity; for if the Office of a Bishop be Antichristian, sure, the Revenues
are not; the Presbyteriall Government, or any other Government in the World,
may enjoy them, as well as any private Layman) I cannot but conclude, that
they never meant any Public Reformation of the Church, but only the Raising
of their own private Fortunes; that, they never looked after any Godliness,
which is great gain; but after such gain, as might go for great Godliness;
and if they can get that, I dare say for them, Religion may either sink or
swim, They never care.

Well, but admit, they had got all the Church Land into their hands; how do
they hope to keep it? O, let them alone for that: in the next place therefore,
they offer a Proposition for the Militia: wherein, they desire but two things,
Page 59. no, 73. of the Full Narration.
first, the Sole Nomination of all Persons, that shall be entrusted with all
the Forces of this Kingdom, either by Sea or Land, without allowing the King,
so much as the Nomination of one, whom he may Confide in; or so much as the
Power of exception to any one, whom he has great reason to distrust; And
secondly, They desire this Power of Nomination, without any limitation of Time,
or (as one would say, in plain English) For ever. And, if they should not
secure all that they have, now, they were much too blame; for who shall take it
from them? Believe me, I am somewhat afraid they intend such a Reformation of
the State, as they have done, of the Church; and then our Farms and
Copy-holds, may prove as Antichristian, as the Churches Lands, if they are
worth any thing. For you know New Lords and New Laws, ever. They may do what
they will; they have all in their own hands; who shall gainsay them, and not
be a Malignant strait? But wherefore do they desire this, say they? Oh, for
the securing of these Kingdoms: and a preservation of the Peace, when it shall
be settled. I am sure, the Kingdoms were secured, and the Peace was preserved
whilst this power was wholly in the Kings hands; but since they have had but a
fingering of it, I know not how they have secured the Kingdoms, unless it be
in that sense which they use the word now and than; when they lay a man fast;
and secure his Person, that is, make him safe, and forth-comming, when they
have a mind to ruin him. So they have secured it, pretty well, for they have
brought it into such bondage and slavery, which our Fathers never knew; or
could ever have believed, a Parliament would have brought it.

But against whom would They secure it; against Foreign Enemies? So, the King
has done; and so, he still can do. Against the King, because they dare not
trust Him? Why, what reason is there in the World, if the King and the
Parliament be jealous and fearful one of another power, but the King should
be secured against his Fears of the Parliament, as well as the Parliament be
secured against their Fears of the King? To that end, was the King, it should
appear, content to divide and share His Power with the Parliament, (a thing,
which was never yet known since the Conquest, until now) and to give them
leave to choose half those persons that should have the power of this Militia,
and to name the other half himself. But this would not be accepted; They must
name all, or none; because, Page 92. no. 136. of the Full Narration.
they say, if the Persons should be severally named, some by the King, and some
by them: It is probable, they would act, according to their several Interests;
and the War thereby would be the more easily revived. Why, but if it be only
probable, They would do so; then it is probable too, that they would not do
so: for probabilities are incident to both sides; and if it be but probable,
that men named by both Parties, should act according to their several
Interests: it may be probable, that men named by both parties, may have no such
several Interests; but may conscientiously and honestly intend one and the
same End, the public Peace of the Kingdom, and the preservation of the just
Prerogatives of the King. How soever, if it be so probable, that men named on
both sides, will act according to their several Interests, and some do what
they can for the King who named them, and the others do what they can for the
Parliament, who named them; Certainly, it is more probable, that men only
named by the Parliament, will act according to that Interest of theirs, and so
do all for the Parliament, and nothing for the King; whereby, the War
indeed, is not like to be revived; but the whole State of Monarchy to be
ruined; the Prince being brought in subjection to His People; and having
neither power to suppress his Enemies, or to succor his Friends. And truly
for my part, if I must live in subjection, as the State, to which God has
called me; I had rather live in subjection to One, then to Four hundred; to
One, whom God has made my Superior, then to four hundred, whom I my self,
and some others no wiser then I, have made; and must unmake them too, I think,
before we shall be quiet; for if they Rule and Command, a little longer, so, as
they have done: I am afraid, they will forget quite to Obey; specially, being
never very well acquainted with the Rules thereof, or having ever been desirous
much, to learn them.

Their third Proposition is concerning Ireland; wherein they demand three
things more. 1. The declaring of the late Cessation made, to be quite void, and
utterly unlawful. 2. The prosecution of the War in Ireland, to be put into
their hands, to be managed by a Committee of both Kingdoms, some whereof are
to be English and some Scotch. And 3. The Nomination of the Lieutenant of
Ireland, and all the Officers and Justices of both Benches. Truly, all good men
I think, do detest and abhor that bloody Rebellion in Ireland; and although
they streine reasonable well, to set it out in its own Colors, when they call
them bloody Rebels, Page 121. no. 174. of the Full Narration.
Antichristian Rebels, (though I could have wished they had made no mention of
their Covenant, for fear the World hereafter be mistaken, it looks so like
their own) Men that have broke all the Laws of God and Man, their Faith,
their Allegiance, all bonds of Charity, etc. Yet, if they should have used more
severe expressions of them, and Imprecations upon them, I think no good
Subject, but would have said, Amen. But then, woe be to the Geese, when the
Fox preaches, as they use to say; God help all good and honest Subjects, when
the greatest Rebels in the World, profess against Rebellion, and cry out upon
it. For, as for those Rebels in Ireland, they did nothing but what their
Religion will avow: They make no Conscience of keeping Faith with Heretics,
and therefore, by their own rules, it is a less sin for them, to break
their Oaths, and their Allegiance; But for our Rebels of England, every thing
which they do, their own Protestant Religion does disclaim: Did ever the
Protestant Religion allow Subjects to take Arms against their own Native
King? and yet these men will take them. Did ever the Protestant Religion suffer
men to violate their Faiths, and break their Oaths, which they have swore both
to God, and Men? and yet these men will break them; nay, and think they do God
good service, in the violation thereof.

For God's sake, how comes it to pass, that the King did so please the
English; in making the late Pacification in Scotland, and does now so displease
them, in making the late Cessation in Ireland? Is it because the Irish were
Rebels; surely, so were They. Is it because the Scots only fought for their
Liberties and their Religion? surely, so did They. But, you will say; their
Religion is a false Religion; So will they say of yours: and so long as it is
true in their Opinion, and to their Conscience, it is altogether as lawful for
them, to fight for that Religion, which they believe to be True, though it be
false; as it is for our Rebels to fight for that Religion, which is, both
believed to be, and is also, True. But the plain truth is, whither or no, there
was that necessity for the Pacification, I will not meddle; but sure enough of
this Cessation, there was the greatest necessity that ever could be; for the
Lords and Justices of Ireland, wrote most lamentable Letters to the King, See
the Letters of the Lords Justices, page 194. no. 10. in the Appendix.
complaining that they wanted bread; That they had not provision for one Month;
and not a Hundred barrells of Powder in all their store, which would not last
them above a Month; and that the Parliament knowing of all these necessities,
never sent them in whole six Months, but fourteen tun of Cheese, and three
score and fifteen barrells of butter, which would not serve that part of the
Army which lay about Dublin, for above seven or eight days; and they humbly
beseech the King, to think of some expedient course, as soon as may be, to
preserve His whole Kingdom from imminent and apparent ruin. Now what could the
King do for them in such a case? Send victuals, or Moneys, or Ammunition, He
could not, for He neither had them; nor the use of His own Ships to conveigh
them, if He had. Send to the Parliament He might; and to as much purpose, as
before those of Ireland did; for they that could have the conscience to spend a
Hundred thousand pounds of the money which was collected for Ireland, which was
none of their own, Page 135. no. 177. of the Full Narration.
upon the maintaining of this their Rebellion here in England (as they dare not
deny themselves to have done) it is somewhat unlikely, they would part with any
thing that was their own, when nothing but charity, could compel them
thereunto.

Well, but they say, that by undeniable proofs it is most clear, Page 133. no.
177. in their Paper of the 22. of Feb.
that these necessities alleged for the grounds of the Cessation, were made
by the design of the Popish and Prelaticall party in England and Ireland. But,
me thinks, if the proofs be so undeniable, they should be demonstrable. I
could never meet with any thing that did look like a proof thereof in all those
papers. I confess this had been somewhat, if it had been true. But the Rebels
do not offer so good proof of that, which they allege, as that proof is,
which is offered for the contrary, which notwithstanding, they will not accept;
for, to prove the want of necessary provision for relief of that miserable
Kingdom, there are diverse Letters produced by the Kings Commissioners, from
the Lords Justices, and the Council of Ireland; the Truth whereof, they seem
not willing to believe, unless they may see the names of those men who did
subscribe them (and yet they will not promise indemnity to their persons if
they should see them; or, that it should be no prejudice unto them, if they
should fall into their hands; for upon those terms, they might have seen
them, when they would) But, to prove that these necessities were contrived by
the Popish and Prelaticall party both in England and in Ireland, they produce
not so much as any Letter, either under many men's hands, or, one; not bring the
least evidence thereof, other then their own Iealousies, unworthy surmises; and
the consideration of circumstances; Now I would have the World Judge, whether
there be not more apparent proof, from Letters under men's hands, that live
upon the place, and were lamentable witnesses, and sufferers in the necessities
of that Kingdom, that there was no relief at all sent them, from the
Parliament; Then there is from their simple affirmations, that those releifes
were disposed of by the Popish and Prelaticall party, for the succor and
assistance of the Rebels, in their greatest wants. And yet these Rebels of
England will have us believe any thing which they affirm upon their own words,
although they are Parties in the Cause, and will not believe us upon the
Letters and subscriptions of the Lords and Council of Ireland, who certainly
were the best Judges therein. Besides, in all probabilities, if the Popish and
Prelaticall party had had such a hand in doing the Rebels service, certainly
they would have found some better comfort then they did, in receiving of their
Wages; The Rebels could not choose but be favorable to their Persons and their
Estates, and give them liberty to enjoy them, in some measure. But it is too
apparent, that, although the cruelties of this Rebellion, have fallen upon all
the Kings good Subjects there in Ireland, yet they have fallen thicker upon no
condition of men, then upon the Prelates; some whereof have received sixteen or
seaventeen wounds from the Rebels, and bin left for dead; others have bin robbed
and plundered to their very shirts; and all, or the most Part of them, have bin
driven out of That Kingdom into This, for the very safeguard of their Lives,
where they remain in great distress and necessities, not having scarsly how
to get them Bread.

And yet these men must have this Cessation made void, and the farther
prosecution of the War, committed to their hands. Truly I dare say, if there
were a Peace, here, the King would so far accept of their Assistance, in the
rooting out of that Rebellion, as is fit, either for him to take, or them to
give: I dare say, they could propose no likely way of reducing those Rebels,
but the King would be willing strait to practice it. But, whilst they are in
actual Rebellion here against him; whilst they manage one War here against
him: For him to entrust them with the managing of another War, there, for
him; Were such a piece of weakness, as no man certainly can be persuaded to,
but he, that will be persuaded to give a man two to one, that is scarce able to
play with him on even hands.

And, as concerning their Nomination of the Lieutenant in Ireland, and the
Judges of both Benches, it seems to me the greatest piece of Arrogance that
was ever yet heard off. Have they not enough, that they are Kings themselves;
but they must make Kings, too? but, I could be contented, if men were arrogant
only, if they were not absurd also; For I demand; The Nomination of the
Lieutenant, either it was in the Kings Power, before they desired it to be
granted them, or it was not; If it was not in his power, then, they are absurd
to ask that, which they know, was not in the Kings Power to Give: If it were;
then they are absurd, Page 136. no. 178. of the Full Narration.
not to admit the Marquess of Ormond, for a Lieutenant, whom all the World
knows the King had Nominated; before ever They desired this power of
Nomination; as in express terms, they say, they do not, in their Paper of
the 22th February.

Now, if such a simple man, as I, can see these Demands of the Parliament to be
unreasonable, senseless, and ridiculous: Surely, those men that were
Commissioners for the King, and had more wit and understanding, then I, could
see further into them; No doubt, but they saw, that the concession and granting
of them must needs infer, a total Alteration and Change, both in our
Spiritual, and in our Civil Government; both in our Church, and in our State;
and God deliver me, and every honest man, from living to behold that day. We
have by woeful Experience found, what the want of Episcopal Government has
wrought in the Church, already: for no man knows almost, of what Religion his
Neighbor is today, or, of what he himself shall be, to morrow; by our sad
sufferings, we have learnt, what it is, to see days, when there is no King in
Israel; or as good as none; when His Subjects seek to divest and spoil Him of
His Rights and Power. Before, we could complain, if we thought the King broke
any Law; but now, we do not know our selves, what is Law, till we have broke
it. It is not as it was once in Saint Paul; I had not known sin, but by the
Law; but it is now, I had not known Law, but by the sin; for every thing
that a good man does in Conscience to God, or Obedience to his King, is
therefore made a crime, because he does it, though it never had any such name,
before.

I, but you will say, if the Cause of the Parliament be such a bad Cause, that
they are absolute and direct Rebels against the King; how come so many men to
be of that side? Truly, I confess, the Cause is a good Cause to live in (for
if a man take that side, he is likely to save his own stake, and he is like
enough to get a good share in many other men's;) But give me a Cause to live in,
and to dye in too; A Cause, which, if it yield me no profit whilst I live,
shall notwithstanding yield me pleasure when I dye; and the comfort of this
Consideration, that I have not stained my Conscience, for any base and beggarly
respects of this World, but have kept it clean, both toward the Lord, and
toward his Anointed; as no doubt, but every man is bound to do. And
certainly there is more in it, then, every simple Country-fellow like my self,
imagines; That, on the Parliament side, so many men of note and quality, when
They have their senses about them before they dye, do familiarly renounce this
wicked and ungodly course, and profess, they undertook it for mere gain, or
some baser end, (as from Colonel Sandys, who dyed at Worcester, in the
beginning of this War, to Major Abercromie who dyed by us, but a little while
ago, many poor Souls afflicted which the sense of their Rebellion have done)
When, on the Kings side, there was never yet heard one man of any condition
whatsoever, (though reduced to the greatest exigence, and want that man could
be) that ever repented him of taking up Arms, and spending his life in His
Majesty's Cause and Service.

I know it weighes much with many of my Neighbors, That the Rebels use Country
people kindly, where they come, and use to pay for what they have, when the
Kings Soldiers do not; And so, they are ready to Judge of the goodness of
the Cause, by the purses of their Customers; and truly, this wrought a pretty
good opinion of them, once even in me my self; but when I had considered a
little better, how these men come by that Money, (even by robbing and
plundering the King and His good Subjects, for otherwise they could never have
a penny) I began to think that as they were direct Thieves, so we that took
their Moneys, were but little better then Receivers; and the curse of those
poor People, who are despoyled of their Estates, to furnish them with moneys,
must doubtless light upon us.

Besides; alas, what is the poor Horse the better (when he has been ridden
into a sweat, from head to foot, and is searce able to stand) for a little
stroking and clapping on the shoulder? What are the poor people of the
Country, the better, for receiving some few pence, from them, when they must
pay it out again, by whole pounds unto Them? They do but steal a Goose, and
stick up a Feather, as we use to say; For at last, between fair means and
foul, they leave us nothing. But all this while, what is become of the Liberty
of the Subject, which made such a noise, at the beginning of these Wars? In
all the Twenty days Treaty, not a word of that, on their Side; And when the
Kings Commissioners desired to have the Kings Propositions Treated on, which
insisted much upon this point, They could never have an Answer. All this while,
what is become of the Laws of the Land, which every man thought at first,
these men did only fight for? In all the Twenty days Treaty, not one word, of
the breach of any one Law of the Land, with which they tax the King; but they
rather invite Him to break many, if He would be persuaded unto it; For there
was scarce any one thing, in all the Treaty which they desired of the King,
which was not directly against the known Laws of the Land, which they have all
this time, pretended to defend. Nay, when the King (to show how zealous He was
of the preservation of the Laws) desired in His Propositions, That nothing
might be avowed, but that every Act might be disclaimed on both Sides, which
was not according to the known Law; They would never Treat of that
Proposition, or give any Answer to it. All this while, what is become of
Fetching the King up unto His Parliament, which was given out, as the sole
reason for the raising of so many several Armies, as have been raised? In all
the Twenty days Treaty, not a syllable of that, on their part; Nay, when the
Kings Commissioners, had proposed it unto them, and desired to Treat with them,
concerning His Majesty's speedy Return to Westminster, whereby an End might be
put to these unhappy Distractions and Divisions; They utterly refused to Treat
with them, therein; and chose rather, to break up the Treaty, (when they might
have prolonged it, if they had pleased, for so they were earnestly desired to
do, by our Commissioners) then to allow That, for the Subject matter of it.

And therefore, resting well assured, by these proceedings of theirs, in the
late Treaty, that they of Westminster aim at nothing but their own Greatness;
and intend to rule perpetually, both over the King and Kingdom; purposing to
change that ancient Government of Kings in the State, as they have changed
that other of Bishops in the Church; I desire all my Countrymen, to lay it to
their hearts; whether they had not better venture their lives once, then be
sure to loose both their Livelyhoods and Liberties for ever: Whither they had
not better help to make an end of the War; then live, and linger out their
lives and Fortunes, in the vain expectation of a never intended Peace. Whither
they had not rather their Sovereign should reign, then that their Servants
should rule over them, which is one of the pitiful complaints of Zion, in her
prayer to God, in the fifth of the Lamentations.

For this they may trust to, that, by the blessing of God, (who never exposes
the person or the Cause of Kings to danger or miscarriage, but for the Peoples
sin) They may recover in a very short time, both their Liberties, Laws, and
Lively-hoods and yet save their Lives; And, if the Countries here abouts, would
but rise and take up Arms (as they should do, not only for the Kings sake,
but for their own, if they did well consider it) less then Three Months, with
Gods help, would put an end to the Miseries of more then Three years, that are
past; and prevent the Miseries of many years, which are yet to come, if some
such course, as this, be not timely taken; for out of doubt, so long as God
shall send either the King or any of His Children, Life; there will never be
wanting those true-hearted Englishmen, that will spend their blood, in
preserving of their just Interests and Rights: Which I do as firmly believe
they will recover, either first or last, as I do any one thing in this World,
which is not Scripture.

FINIS.

