Exceeding good NEVVES FROM IRELAND BEING A perfect Relation of the relieving
of the City of Dublin* by the Regiments belonging to Sir John Clotworthy, Col.
Hill, and Col. Conway, who fell upon the Rebels at Carric-Mac-Rosse in
Leimster, putting them all to flight.

ALSO, Their taking ^00* Horse. 800 Gowes* some sheep, and diverse prisoners;
besides a great number of the Rebels slain.

Certified by a Letter from Ulster, to one of the Britttsh Officers here in
England.

Published the 30. of May, 1647

London, Printed by B. A. May 30* 1647.

More Gallant NEWS FROM IRELAND
SIR,
Upon the order sent hither, from the Committee for the affairs of Ireland,
directing, that we should make the strongest diversions we could, to entertain
the Rebels, that they might not have leisure to prejudice the Garrisons under
the Lord of Ormond, and upon his Lordships desire, that we should allarm them,
by sending out parties into their quarters, tho our soldiers are naked, and
the Officers miserably poor, and destitute of all means, yet rather then any
inconveniency should arise to the public, it was resolved by some of the
Officers of the British Forces to send out 2 parties several ways, wherein
some of us only could be drawn to this service, and of the forces in the
Counties of Down and Antrim, there marched out in this party, under the command
of Colonel Conway, son of the Lord Clanboyes, Sir John Clotworthies, and Col.
Conwayes Regiments of Foot, with the horse of Col. Hills Regiments, and those
belonging to the 3 Regiments, and some other of the troops consisting in all
of about 800. Horse and Foot. who having no means for carrying of victual, or
victual for any continuance, the Foot took ten days meal on their backs,
and marched as far as the County of Mead in Leimster, the Counties of Monaghau
and Cavan on the Borders of Ulster, and fell on a party of the Rebels beyond
Carric-Mac Rosse, being five Foot Companies, and two troops of Horse, who were
so suddenly surprised, that they made very small resistance, but quit their
posts, and betook themselves to their heels, and in the pursuit diverse were
killed; but they being fresh, and acquainted with the bogs and passes in those
parts, and our men weak and weary, could not perform any great executions upon
them, but took and brought away 7 or 800 lean Cowes, and 200 small Garons, and
some sheep, of which our hungry soldiers soon made havoc of, whereof they
could not in reason be restrained, having no other means to give them the
least satisfaction in, but the remainder of our purchase, which being
distributed amongst the soldiers and officers that were abroad, was a very
seasonable relief to them; but those at home in their quarters will be
necessitated to fall on the Cowes of the Country, their stock of the last years
Harvest being quite spent and devoured, and the inhabitants themselves will
grow so desperate, that seeing all is like to be gone, they think it but reason
to take a share of their own. They have waited with much patience on the
effect of our Commissioners solicitation in hope to be eased of their extreme
oppression.

But what we have labouted to spare them in, our fellow Soldiers of the Scots
Army are taking from them: for it seems here being reports spread, of the
dismission of that Army, their Officers are exacting 3 Months assesment
together, which is so insupportable a burden, that they are weary of their
lives.

And indeed* it is a most compendious way to bring our miseries to an end, for
we must quit the Country for ought I see after all the miseries we have
endured, in preserving of it from the Rebels, who will be found troublesome to
England. Gods will be done, we cannot make brick without straw, though we would
undergo any burdens, so we may be rendered serviceable to this cause. We have
heard nothing yet of our other party of the Lagan Forces, who are marched out
under Col. Mervin, about the time ours went abroad from these quarters, and
have bin 14 days abroad busied in Conaught, as we have bin toward Dublin, and
after a short refreshment, our Officers are resolved upon another march, with a
stronger party, which we hope will prove a good means of security to the Lemster
Garrisons, though it be a great wasting to our poor soldiers, who want shoes
and all other necessary accommadation for such service, which gives them as
mvch discouragement, as the Rebels are lifted up, to see supplies of men and
money come over so slowly, being informed, that the Divisions in England, are
greater then they have been at any time since these troubles.

The Pirates (...) so busy in our Northern Coasts, and about the Isles of
Scotland, that our Fishermen and Barks are like to be in great danger to be
taken (as some have been already) unless some of the Parliament small ships be
appointed to lie on these Coasts, to prevent the daily intercourse betwixt the
Rebels of Ireland and th^se of Scotland. Thus having given you a short account
of our affairs, I rest

Your affectionate friend and servant, H. J.
Belfast, 10. May, 1647.
FINIS.

