AN EXPOSITION Of the EPISTLE of St JUDE, Together With many large and useful
DEDUCTIONS.

LATELY Delivered in XL LECTURES In Christ-Church LONDON, BY WILLIAM JENKYN,
Minister of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST.

The FIRST PART. but not printed as it was p^thed

1 TIMOTHY 4.1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later times some
shall depart from the faith.

TIT. 1.9. Holding fast the faithful word.

(...), Epiph. adv. Haer. l. 1. Tom. 2. haer. 25. p. mihi. 92 London, Printed
by Th. Maxey, for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the golden BALL in Paul's Churchyard.
1653.

To the Right Worshipful, and other my Beloved and Christian Friends.
Inhabitants in the Parish of CHRIST-CHURCH LONDON.
THE Souls of men may as certainly be destroyed by poisoning, as starving. If
Satan cannot hinder from some kind of tasting and receiving the grace of the
Gospel, he often perverts it poysonfully, by making men to turn it into
lasciviousness, and even by freedom from sin, to allow themselves in sinning
freely. The Seducers crept into the Church in Jude's time, under pretense of
Christian Liberty, introduced unchristian Libertinism: No cheaper stuff then
Grace would serve their turns, wherewith to cloth lasciviousness; and no
other Patron then the Lord Christ himself to protect their impieties: Whether
they were the Disciples of Simon Magus or Nicolaitans, or Gnostics, (as
Epiphanius thinks) I much enquire not; sure I am, they were of the Synagogue of
Satan; he was both their Father and Master, whom they resembled, and whose
works they did. In this Epistle the Apostle Jude, not only with Holy zeal
opposes them himself, but sounds a Trumpet, for the rousing up the Christians,
(upon whose Quarters these Seducers had fallen, to surprise their Treasure, the
Doctrine of Faith,) earnestly to contend for the preservation of so precious a
Depositum, once, and once for all delivered to their keeping. The Arguments
used by the Apostle are Cogent, his Directions Prudent, and probable it is,
that his Pains were in some degree Successful. I know no Spiritually skillful
Observer, but apprehends too great a Resemblance, between the faces of those,
and our times. Sins in our days are not only committed under the enjoyment,
but (in pretense) by the encouragement of grace; men who now dare not sin, are
by some derided as ignorant of their Christian liberty; and evident it is, that
many live, as if being delivered from the fear of their enemies, they were
delivered from the fear and service of their Deliverer; and as if the Blood of
the Passover were not intended by God to be sprinkled upon the door posts to
save them; but upon the threshould of the door; for them to trample upon.
Beloved friends, if God has appointed that you should resemble these
Christians, to whom Jude wrote, in the danger of your times, its your duty to
embrace the directions delivered to these Christians, for your defense from
those dangers. A gracious heart considers not how bitter, but how true; not how
smart, but how seasonable any truth is. My aim in the publishing these
Lectures, is to advance holiness, and (so far as I could do it, with following
the mind of the Apostle) to oppose those sins, which if people hate not most,
are like to hurt them most; and to advance those duties with which, if people
be not most in love, yet in which they are most defective, and thereby most
endangered. And now again, I beseech you (that I may testify my unfayned
affection, as well by my Epipistle as my Book) labor to keep close to God in a
loose age; spend not your time in complaining of the licentiousness of the
times, in the mean while setting up a toleration in your own Hearts and Lives.
That private Christian, who does not labor to oppose prophancnesse with a
river of tears, would never (if he could) bear it down with a stream of power.
Lay the foundation of Mortification deep. Reserve no lust from the stroke of
Jesus Christ. Take heed of pleasing your selves in a bare formal profession;
Labor to be rooted in Christ: He who is but a visible Christian, may in a
short time cease to be so much as visible: He who speaks of Christ but
notionally, may in time be won to speak against him: Love not the world. Beware
of scandals; take them not where they are; make them not where they are not
(the common sin of our times, to black Religion, and then to fear and hate it.)
Despise not the providence of God in the world; they are signs of Gods mind,
though not of his love: Delight in the public Ordinances, and highly esteem of
faithful Ministers; they and Religion are commonly blasted together. Shun
Seducers; sit down under a Minister, as well as under a Preacher; He who will
hear everyone, may at length be brought to hear none; and he who will hear him
preach who ought not, may soon be left to learn that which he ought not.
Preserve a tender conscience; Every step you take, fear a snare: Read your own
hearts in the wickedness of others. Be not slight in Closet-services; and often
think of God in your shops, for there you think you have least leisure, but
sure you have most need to do so. Let your speech be always with grace, and a
word or two of Christ in every company, if it may be; and yet not out of form,
but feeling.

These Lectures here presented might sooner have seen the light, had I not
lately met with such hindrances (sufficiently known) as I once expected should
have stopped them altogether. The main of this employment has lien upon me
since that time, which, considering my many other Employments (you know) has
not been long, though otherwise long enough to have performed this work much
more exactly. I here present you, though not with half of the Epistle, yet with
more then the one half of that which upon the whole I preached. I have not
knowingly left out any passages delivered in the Pulpit. The other part I
promise in the same Volume with this (so soon as God gives strength and more
leisure) if this find acceptance with the Church of God. And now (Brethren) I
commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you
up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified; Resting

Your Servant in the Work of Christ, WILL. JENKYN.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 11. for four read three; p. 29. l. 27. for going to him for. r.
we feel its; p. 44. l. 15. for them r. it. p. 119. l. 32. for feast r. food, p.
121. marg. r. differenter p. 123. l. 19 for lover r. love. p. 128. l. 5. r.
(says the soul) p. 152. marg. r. beneficentia, and under it Nieremb. p. 164.
l. 9. for may r. might. p. 202. marg. r. omnes. p. 212. l. 8. for explication
r. exhortation. p. 228. l. 12. r. entrusted. p. 234. l. 30. r. invincible. p.
266. l. 12. r. opinions. marg. r. (...). p. 288. l. 24. r. Schoolmen. p. 305.
marg. dele. Josh. 62.9. p. 339. marg. r. solatia. p. 388. marg. r. (...)
frangere. p. 409. l. 34. r. distempered. p. 449. l. 27. r. substances. p. 460.
for any one is r. men are. p. 363. l. 31. for and r. or. p. 464. l. 21. r. by.
p. 465. marg. r. Enchir. p. 472. l. 36. r. put. p. 494. l. 19. r. always
continuing. p. 504. marg. r. comparativus. l. 31. r. heaven. l. 35. for in
heaven. r. there. p. 512. marg. r. severitas. p. 574 Obser. 5. r. hellishly. p.
579. l. 23. r. Domoeritus. l. 26. r. in mind, blind. p. 585. marg. r. Josh.
ibid. r. perpetuo. p. 623. l. 1. for jurisdictionem r. in jurisdiction.

READER,
be pleased to take notice, that there is now published the second, third, and
fourth Part of that most learned and judicious Treatise of the SABBATH, by M.
DANIEL CAWDREY, and M. HERBERT PALMER.

Also a Treatise of GRACE and ASSURANCE, entitled, SPIRITUAL REFININGS, being
one hundred and twenty Sermons by M. ANTHONY BURGESS.

An EXPOSITION upon the Epistle of JUDE.
I Begin with the first part of the Epistle, the Title of, or Entrance into it,
contained in the two first Verses, which are these:

VER. 1. Jude the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that
are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Christ Jesus, and called;
VER. 2. Mercy unto you, and peace, and love be multiplied.
This Title contains three principal parts: 1. The Person who wrote the
Epistle. 2. The Persons to whom he wrote it. 3. The Prayer: wherein the person
writing salutes the persons to whom he wrote.


1 The person who wrote this Epistle is described these three ways.

1 From his name: Jude. 2 From his office: A servant of Jesus Christ. 3 From
his Alliance: the brother of James.
1 The description of the Penman of this Epistle from his name: Jude. In the
consideration whereof I shall proceed by way 1 of Exposition, 2 of Observation.


1 The name of the Author of the Epistle considered by way of Exposition:
wherein two things are to be opened: 1 The signification of the name Judas, or
Jude. 2 The subject of that name, or who the person was to whom it is here
applied.


1 For the signification of it. Its found fully expressed Genesis Genesis 29.35.
29.35. The occasion of the first imposing it, was Leah's apprehension of Gods
goodness to her, (...)
in giving her a fourth son, whom therefore she called Judah, signifying Praise,
Confession, or Celebration: She made his name a monument of her thankfulness
to God for him, as also of her sons duty, to live to the praise of so good a
God: a fruitful Wife to Jacob in children; and a fruitful Daughter to God in
thankfulness. In qua nominis impositione, non dubito quin eam direxerit
Spiritus sanctus, cum Judah fuerit is qui inter Jacobi filios, pater futuri
Messiae constitutus erat. Riv. in loc. Joh. 3.16.
The learned Rivet well observes, that in imposing this name, she was directed
by the spirit of God: this Judah being that son of Jacob, of whom Christ
(according to the flesh) was to come, for whom God is principally to be
praised, he being the choysest gift that ever God bestowed; he turning every
gift into a mercy: Only those who have him, and bear him, can praise God; to
others God gives nothing (comparatively,) and they return nothing. God shows
only how rich he is, in giving his Son; So God loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son.

2 The subject of this name is to be considered, to which it is here applied.
It Is applied in Scripture to a threefold subject.

1 To a Tribe. Frequent mention is made of the tribe of Judah, 1 King. 12.20.
Psalm. 76.8. etc. 2 To a Country or Region, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. Jer. 2.4. and 17.25.
3 and properly, To Persons: and so in Scripture we read of six several persons
that had this name. 1 Judah the Patriarch, Genesis 29.35. 2 Judah in whose house
Saul lodged at his first conversion. Act. 9.11. 3 Judas surnamed Barsabas. Act.
15.22. 4 Judas of Galile. A seditious person. Act. 5.37. 5 Judas Iscariot the
traitor. Mat. 10.4. Joh. 14.22. 6 Judas the Apostle, the Author of this
Epistle. Concerning whom the Scripture intimates (besides his Apostolical
office, and relation to James, of which anon)

1 His Parentage: his Father being Alphaeus spoken of Matthew. 10.4. and Mark
3.18. and his Mother held to be that Mary spoken of Matthew. 27.56. in regard
that this Alphaeus and Mary are said to be the parents of James, to which James
in Luke 6.16. Act. 1.13. and here in this Epistle this Judas is said to be
brother. In sacra dodccada fuerunt duo qui nomen Judae gessere; unus fuit
sectator, alter insectator. Aug. Tr. 76. in Joh. Unus nomini suo convenienter
se gessit (Judas enim Confesso rem significat,) alter per anti prasin nomen
istud a se gori ipsis operibus demonstravit. Gerh. Har. in loc. Joh. 14.22.


2 The Scripture expresses a manifest distinction between him and Judas
Iscariot, Joh. 14.22. calling him Judas, not Iscariot; taking especial care
that he might not be taken for him, their hearts and persons being as
different, as their names agreeable; for one was sectator, the other insectator
Domini; the one following Christ as a Disciple, the other as a Blood-hound; one
confessed him, the other betrayed him; the one carried himself according to his
name, the other was a mere living contradiction to his name. When the
Evangelist says, Judas, not Iscariot, he intended a difference 'twixt him and
this holy Jude.

3 The Scripture expresses an humble Question propounded by him to Christ:
Lord, How is it, that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not unto the
world? Concerning which Question, although I meet with different opinions, yet
I see not why (with Musculus) we may not conceive, that Jude propounded it out
of an humble and modest consideration of himself and the Apostles, in partaking
of the gracious manifestation of Christ to them, there being a passing by of
others more famous, and better accomplished then were the Disciples. A
Question, which (thus understood,) as it shows [1] the freeness of him that
gives; so [2] the humility of them that receive grace; who, in stead of
insulting over others that have less then themselves, admire the goodness of
him, that gives more to them than to others: nay [3] the tender-heartedness and
pity of the godly toward the souls of those wicked ones, who are commonly
cruel and unkind to their bodies.

4. The Scripture expresses concerning this Apostle, that he was (...), and
Act. 1.13. (...), Judas trinominis.
had sundry names: for he that in Luke 6.16. is called Judas the brother of
James, is in Matt. 10.3. called Lebbaeus, and Thaddaeus: concerning the reason
whereof, I meet with sundry opinions among Writers. Jansen. Harm. p. 220.
1 Some conceive, that he had this diversity of names from an usual custom
(they say) among the Jews, which was, that if any name had in it three or more
of the letters of Jehovah, (...)
it should not be used in ordinary speech, but that some other name like it
should be used in stead of it. (...)
Now Judah containing in it all the four letters in the name Jehovah, (having
besides the letter (...)) this Apostle had other names to be ordinarily called
by: but this reason seems (whatever is the superstition of the later Jews) not
to have taken place in our Jude, or in any other that we read of; the Patriarch
Judah, the son of Jacob, had no other name but Judah bestowed upon him by his
mother or friends, nor did the custom appear upon Judas Iscariot. 2. Others
conceive, that these names were conferred upon him, to difference him from
Judas (of the same name) the traitor, grown detestable for his execrable fact
and heinous treason; for which cause our Apostle may in the title of this
Epistle, style himself also the brother of James; the name of Judas being so
odious in the Church, that (as a learned man observes) a Lorin. in loc. p. 320.
Id verum doprehendi, abstinere fere Christianos ab imponendo et usurpando
nomine Judae. Exe^rabile hoc nomen Christianis ob execrabilem proditionem a
Juda factam.
Christians have in all ages in a manner abstained from imposing it (though a
good name in it self) and that very rarely is it to be found mentioned in any
History. And there seems to be an exact care in the Evangelist, that when this
holy Apostle [Joh. 14.22.] was named, he might not be taken for the traitor,
speaking thus, Judas, not Iscarior. Nor was it any change of his name that did
serve the turn; for it was no less wisely then piously heeded, that those
other names (Thaddaeus and Lebbaeus) should be suitable to the person upon whom
they were bestowed; Thaddaeus signifying in the Syriack the same thing (Praise
or Confession) with Judah in Hebrew; the imposers of this name intimating the
constancy of this holy man in confessing Christ, what name soever he had. Nor
is it to be thought, but that the other name (Lebbaeus) was applied fitly and
sutably to him, as being derived either from the Hebrew word from the Heb.
(...) Videantur Junius in loc. Brugens. in 10. Matt. Jansen. c. 39. Lapide in
loc. Justini. in loc. Lorin. in loc. (...)
Labi, which signifies a Lion (the cognizance of another Judah, Genesis 49. of
which tribe this Jude was) to show his holy resolution and b Leo dicitur a
(...) Leb, Cor, quasi cordatus seu animosus, quia a generositate and praesentia
animi imperterritus; cor enim seeds est and symbolum fortitudinis: unde
Aristomenes, qui to tam Graeciam stupefecerat audaciae miraculo, post mortem
dissectus, inventus est habere cor totum pilis hirsutum. Plin. lib. 11. c. 37.
courage for God, in opposing sin, and the enemies of the truth, even as with a
Lion-like heart: or, from the Hebrew word Leb, which signifies a heart;
thereby noting (say some) that he was a man of much wisdom and understanding in
his place and carriage; for he who was of greatest c Corculum dicebant antiqui
solertem and acutum. Fest. Qui valde cautus and prudens, vocabatur Corculum.
Plin. l. 7. cap. 31. Unde Scipio Nasica, ob prudentiam bis Consul, appellatus
est Corculum. Cic. Tusc. 1.
discretion and prudence, was of old wont to be called Corculum, from cor a
heart; and a wise, understanding man is usually termed homo cordatus, a man
with a heart: or noting (say others) that he was Cordis cultor, a man that
labored much about his heart, studying diligently the purity and sanctifying
thereof. This for the expository part of the first thing considerable in the
description of the penman of this Epistle, viz. his Name; the collection of
Observations follows.

Observations from the first thing in the description of the Author of this
Epistle, his Name, Jude.
1. Obs. 1.
I observe from the samenesse or commonness of the name Judas, to a holy
Apostle, and a perfidious traitor, together with that seditious Galilean, That
Names commend us not to God, nor conduce any thing to our true happiness: Many
that have holy and blessed names, come much short of them, Zedekiah. Jehoahaz.
as Adonijah, Judas, etc. Absalom signifies the fathers peace; but he that was
so called, proved his fathers trouble: On the other side, many have unpromising
and infamous names, who are excellent persons, and have lost nothing thereby.
Its not a holy name, but a holy nature that makes a holy man. No outward titles
or privileges profit the enjoyer: (...) aliquando mali, (...) aliquando boni.
Si co^munio nominum condicionibus praejudicat, quanti nequam servi, Regum
nominibus insultant. Tert. cont. Mart. c. 7.
Neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. A peasant may
have the name of a Prince; a traitor, the name of an holy Apostle: Its all one
with God to call thee holy, and to make thee so. Oh, beg of him inward
renovation, more then outward estimation: otherwise, a great name for holiness
will prove but a great plague hereafter. Hell is a wicked Judas his own place.
A good name with an unchanged nature, is but white feathers upon a black skin.
A great privilege unsanctified is a great punishment.

2 I observe, Obs. 2.
That wicked men make the best names and things odious by their unholy
carriage. Judas the traitor makes the name Judas, by many, the worst thought
of. 1 Samuel 2.17. Ezekiel. 36.20.
Elie's sons made the people to abhor the Lords offering. God tells the people,
that they had profaned his holy Name, while the heathen said, These are the
people of the Lord, etc. Vita Evangelica debet esse vita Angelica.
Scandalous Christians have brought an odium upon Christianity. Its the duty
therefore of those that are conversant about holy things, to be holy; to tremble
lest any should think the worse of Ordinances, of Ministry, of Sanctity for
them. The blood of seeming Saints will not wash away the scandal they have
brought upon true sanctity, nor make amends for the evil report which they have
brought upon the Canaan of godliness: and yet we should take heed of thinking
the worse of holiness, or of any way of God, for the wickedness of any person
whatsoever: Eli's sons sinned in making the people abhor the Lords offering; 1 Samuel 2.24.
and yet the Text says, the people sinned too in abhorring it. Obs. 3.


3 Our Baptismall names ought to be such as may prove remembrancers of duty.
Leah and Alphaeus, in imposing names on their Children, made use of such as
might put Parents and Children another day upon holiness. God called Abram
Abraham, to strengthen his faith: Hannah gave the name of Samuel to her son, 1 Samuel 1.20.
because a son of prayers. It Is good to impose such names as express our
baptismal promise. A good name is as a thread tied about the finger, to make us
mindful of the errand we came into the world to do for our Master.

4. Obs. 4.
Ministers [especially] ought so to carry themselves, as that they may not be
ashamed to their names; that their name prefixed may be a crown, a credit to
their Writings: that whenever their names are spoken of, the hearer may bless
them: that their names may be as a sweet perfume to their actions. Many
Christians names are so odious, that what they say or do is blemished because
it comes from them; it had been good, if it had been another's. He is a dead
man among the living, that has a hateful name. It Is a great mercy when our
names outlive us; it is a great punishment, when we outlive our names. They
that honor God shall have the spirit of glory rest upon them. He that is a
Jude, a Confessor of Christ, shall never want that honor.

5. Obs. 5.
We should not do that which we are ashamed or afraid to own, or put our names
to. I deny not, but in some cases it may be lawful to change our names, or
forbear to mention them, either by tongue or pen; but then we should not be put
upon such straits by the badnesse of our actions (as the most are) which we are
ashamed to own; but by the consideration of Gods glory, or the Churches good,
or our own necessary preservation in time of persecution, which may be the more
advanced by the concealing of our names: Thus Bucer, in times of trouble for
the Gospel, called himself Aretius Felinus. Calvin's Institutions were printed
under the name of Alcuinus: But these did not conceal themselves for sin, but
safety; nor yet so much for safety, as Gods glory.

I pass from the Name, and I proceed to the second thing in the description of
the Author of this Epistle, and that was his Office: A servant of Jesus Christ.
1. By way of Explication. 2. By way of Observation.


1 For Explication. Here two Points are to be opened.

1. In what respect Jude was the servant of Christ? 2. Why he here so styles
himself?
1. In what respect. Jude was the servant of Christ. He was so in four
respects. Deus est Caussa rebus, tam ^ssendi, quam siendi. Implicat
contradictionem, ut Deus communicet alicui creaturae, ne a se dependeat: hoc
enim facto communicaret ut non esset creatu^a. Dau. in Col. 1.17. Servus in
Latina linguadictus est a servando; quod hi qui jure belli possent occidi, a
Victoribus cum servabantur, servi fiebant, Aug. li. 19. de C.D. c. 15.


1. Of Creation and sustentation, as are all creatures: Psalm. 119.91. All are
thy servants, from the highest Angel, to the lowest worm. Col. 1.16, 17. All
things were created by him, and for him, and by him all things consist. The
whole world is but his Family, altogether at his finding: should he shut his
hand, the house would be famished: If he withdraw his manu-tenency, the world
would fall.

2. In respect of Redemption from the power of sin and Satan; from their
condemning and destroying power, Heb. 2.15. Romans 8.1. Luke 1.74. From their
corrupting and defiling power, Romans 6.18. Ephesians. 6.6. And that this was a
redemption deserving to make us servants to the Redeemer, appears, in that it
was not only by Conquest, and vindication from our enemies, when as the
Conqueror might have destroyed us as well as taken us, or destroyed them (in
which respect, according to all usage and equity, we ought to be for ever his
servants;) but a redemption also by purchase, the Lord JE SUS having paid no
less price then his own precious blood, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. 1 Cor. 6.20. in which
consideration the Apostle strongly argues, That we are not our own, but serve
for the glorifying of another.

3. Isa. 49.3. Heb. 3.5. Psalm. 89.21. Hag. 2.23.
This Apostle was the servant of Christ more peculiarly, by way of special
office and function: In which respect, as Christ himself, Moses, David, Cyrus,
Zerubbabel, etc. were called Gods servants; so are the Prophets in the Old,
Jer. 35.15. Amos 3.7. Romans 1. Phil. 1. Tit. 1. 2 Timothy 2.24.
the Apostles and Ministers in the New Testament called servants. Although it is
granted, the Apostles were servants in a different way from other Ministers,
both in regard of the manner of their calling, which was by immediate mission
and appointment from God, as also of the extent of their power, which was not
tied up or confined to one place, Mat. 28.19. Mark. 16.15. Matt. 5.13.
but granted to them for the planting and governing of Churches in any part of
the world. In which respect, some think, they are called the salt of the earth.

In regard of this function, and Office of Apostleship, Jude principally calls
himself a servant of Christ; though not barely and solely in respect of Gods
calling him to it; but in respect also of his own diligence, and faithfulness
in endeavoring to discharge his Office to which he was called: as Peter
exhorts, 1 Pet. 4.10. and as Paul speaks of himself, 1 Cor. 9.16. For Christ
keeps no servants only to wear a Livery: As he is not a titular Lord, so
neither are his servants titular servants. All their expressions of service
reach not the emphasis either of their desires or duty.

2 The second thing to be opened, Apostle here styles himself the servant of
Christ.

1. Some think, to show his humility and modesty, in that he who might have
used the title either of Apostle, or Brother of the Lord, rather contents
himself with this note of duty and service common to every Christian.

Others, better, for the confirming and comforting of himself in his work; in
that his Lord whom he served, and who had set him on work, would stand by him,
both in protecting his person, and prospering his work.

Others, and those upon cleerest grounds, conceive that the Apostle here
imbraceth this title of servant in respect of others, that his doctrine might
with more respect and readiness be received by those to whom he wrote; seeing
that he was called to his work, and that by such a Master, whose service added
not more dignity to him, then ^t required duty from them.

This for Explication: the Observations follow.

1. Obs. 1.
They who undertake any public employment for Christ, must receive a calling
from him, to be his servants, if with comfort to themselves, or benefit to
others, they will go about his work. Romans 10.15. Heb. 5.4, 5.
Its a great shame, if all that are prophets are not the Lords people: but its
a gross error to think that all the Lords people are ministerially prophets.
Their being the Lords people makes them fit to hear, but not fit to preach: fit
sheep, not fit shepherds. Suppose that (which constant experience contradicts)
they have the fitness of gifts; have they therefore a sufficient Call to
preach by way of Office and Ministry? Is this enough to be a Kings servant, or
a Noble man's Steward, for a person to have abilities to discharge those places?
is there not required Commission or Call also? and are not Ministers called
servants and Stewards? At this time, I doubt it would hardly be accounted true
doctrine, that every one who has military gifts, courage and policy, may be a
Commander of a Regiment, or Captain of a Troop, and that he might gather his
Followers without Commission. Is it enough for a man to be a Princes
Ambassador, because he has sufficient gifts, for wit, and good expression,
etc.? must not the King also give him the authority to be an Ambassador? Is
every one that has good legs, or can run, a Messenger? must he not be sent
likewise? Besides, whosoever has a commission to preach, has a commission to
baptize; as is plain from Matthew. 28.19. preaching and baptizing reaching alike
the Ministry of all ages: But has every gifted-man such a Commission?
Further, does not our Savior ( Mat. 10.41.) clearly distinguish between a
righteous man and a Prophet? if they had been all one, why would he have done
so? And if gifts make a Minister; is it not as true, that gifts make a
Manistrate? and then every one that had understanding and other good governing
parts, were a Lord Mayor: nay, then why might not women preach, (as lately they
have done) many of whom have better gifts then some men? And how could that
agree with the Apostolical prohibition for women to speak in the Church? 1
Cor. 14.34.


Besides, all who are called to preach, are bound to increase their gifts, by
giving attendance to reading, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15.
to doctrine, and by giving themselves wholly to these things: which cannot be
done, unless earthly occupations be laid aside: But gifted men are not bound
to this; therefore they have not this Call which they pretend. To conclude,
Every one that has this Ministerial Call, has that Pastoral care lying upon
him, mentioned Hebr. 13.17. To watch over souls, as those that must give an
account with joy, and not with grief: But this can in no wise be said of every
one that is a gifted man: and therefore gifted persons (as such) must forsake
their pretended claim to a ministerial call. Nor can it be evinced, that
because the Apostle says, (1 Cor. 14.31.) All may prophecy, therefore every
gifted person may preach: For, besides that the gift of prophecy was
extraordinarily bestowed in that age of the Church, not procured by study and
industry, but immediately conferred by the Spirit upon some, as were also
Miracles, the gift of healing, and diversities of tongues (all which are now
ceased,) its most plain, that the word all in that place is not to be taken in
its full latitude, as if all the men, or every believer in the Church of
Corinth might stand up and prophecy (for that is expressly contrary to 1 Cor.
12.29. 1 Cor. 12.28.
where by an Interrogation the Apostle does vehemently deny that all are
prophets:) but its to be taken restrictively, to those that were in office, and
set by God in the Church for that purpose, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 12.28.
God has set some in his Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, etc.
Other cavils are weaker then to deserve a mentioning; as to argue from that
place 1 Cor. 14.34. that because women are forbid to speak in the Church,
therefore any man may speak. What greater strength is in this argument, then to
reason thus? Because no woman may be a Justice of Peace, therefore every man
may. Because no woman may speak publicly, therefore some men must (namely, such
as are in office) had been a much better consequence. Nor is there more
strength in that allegation of Moses his wish, Number. 11.27.
that all the Lords people were prophets, to prove that all might prophecy:
for in his desiring that all might be prophets, he includes a required
condition, that they might be called by God to that employment.

2. Obs. 2.
Alliance in faith, spiritual relation to Christ is much dearer and nearer
then alliance in flesh. Jude might have called himself a near kinsman to
Christ, or Christ's Brother, as indeed he was, and was so accounted, Mat. 13.55.
Mark 6.3. as much as James, who Gal. 1.19. is called the Lords brother: but
that which includes a spiritual relation is to him much sweeter; to be a
servant of Christ is more desirable then to be a Brother of Christ. To bear
Christ in the heart, much better then to bear him in the womb.
What had it profited to have been his kinsman, unless his servant? many that
were his kinsmen according to the flesh, wanted the honor of this spiritual
affinity; but such of them who had this honor bestowed upon them, had all
their other glory swallowed up in this (as Christ expressed himself) he is my
brother, Mat. 12.47, 50 John 12.26.
and mother, and sister. Blessed be God, that this greatest privilege is not
denied to us even now: though we cannot see him, yet love him we may: 1 Pet.
1.8.
though we have not his bodily presence, yet we are not denied the spiritual:
though he be not ours in house, in arms, in affinity; yet in heart, in faith,
in love, in service he is.

3 Obs. 3.
I observe, A peculiar excellency and worth in the title of Servant, which our
Apostle with others before him was so frequently delighted withal; It might
furnish them and us with a five-fold Consideration full of sweetest delight.
Sumus Domini, non tantum in genitivo singulari, sed and in nominativo plurali.
Luth.
1. That he much honors us. To serve Christ is to reign: Its more honor to
serve Christ, then to serve Emperors, nay, then to have Emperors serve us:
for indeed, all things do so. 2. That he will assist us in our works: If he
gives employment, he will give endowments too; if an errand, a tongue; if work,
an hand; Phil. 4.13.
if a burden, a back: I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me
(says Paul.) And herein he goes beyond all other Masters; who can toil and
task their servants sufficiently, but cannot strengthen them. 3. That he will
preserve us; He will keep us in all our ways: and surely then, he will so in
all his own work. Safety evermore accompanies duty. His mercy is over all his
works; but peculiarly over all his workers. Men are never in danger, but when
they leave working. Jonah was well enough till he attempted to run away from
his Master. When our enemies do us greatest hurt, they remove us above hurt. A
servant of Christ may be sick, persecuted, scorned, imprisoned, but never
unsafe: He may lose his head, but not one hair of his head perish. 4. That he
will provide for us. He can live without servants; but these cannot live
without a Master. Verily his Family-servants shall be fed. The servants of
Christ shall want no good thing: If they be without some things, there is
nothing they can want; they shall have better, and enough of better. Can he
that has a mine of gold, want pibbles? can it be that a servant of Christ
should want provision, when as God can make his very work meat and drink to
him? nay, when God can make his wants meat and drink? how can he want, or be
truly without any thing, whose friend has and is all? And no good thing shall
they want, nothing that may fit them for, and further them in duty. It Is true,
they may be without clogs, snares, hindrances; but these things are not good
that hinder from the chief Good: should God give them, he would feed his
servants with husks, nay, with poison. 5. That he will reward them: The Lord
gives grace and glory: Mat. 5.12.
Great is their reward in heaven; nay, great is their reward on earth. There Is
a reward in the very work: but God will bestow a further recompense hereafter.
We should not serve him for, but he will not be served without wages, even such
as will weigh down all our work all our woes.

Oh the folly of them that either prefer the cruel and dishonorable service of
sin, before the sweet and glorious service of Christ; or, that being servants
to Christ, improve it not for their comfort in all their distresses!

4. Obs. 4.
I infer, We owe to God the duty and demeanor of servants. 1. To serve him
solely, Matt. 6.24. not serving sin, Gal. 1.10. Tit. 3.3. Romans 6.12, 13.
Satan at all, not man in opposition to Christ; not serving our selves, the
times. Who keep servants to serve others, enemies? Christ and Sin are contrary
Masters; contrary in work, and therefore its an impossibility to serve both;
contrary in wages, and therefore its an infinite folly to serve Sin.

2. Christ must be served obediently, submissively, [1] in bearing when he
corrects: A beaten servant must not strike again, nor word it with his
Master; we must accept of the punishment of our iniquities: it is chaff that
slyes in the face of him that fanneth. [2] We must be submissive servants in
being content with our allowance, in forbearing to enjoy what we would, as well
as bearing what we would not: the proper work of a servant is to wait; stay thy
Masters pleasure for any comfort. All his Servants shall have what they want,
and therefore should be content with what they have. The standing wages are
certain and set, the vails are uncertain. [3] Submissive in not doing what we
please, not going beyond our rule, our order. Ministers are his servants, and
therefore must not make Laws in his house, either for themselves or others, but
keep laws; not of themselves lay down what they publish, but publish what he
has laid down. Ministers are not owners of the house, but Stewards in the
house. Laws are committed to us, and must not be excogitated by us. No servant
must do what is right in his own eyes. Deuteronomy. 12.8.
[4] Submissive in doing whatever the Master pleases; not picking out this
work, Ps. 119.6, 128.
and rejecting that; nothing must come amiss to a servant: We must not examine
what the service is that is commanded, but who the Master is that commands: 1 Timothy 5.21.
We must not prefer one thing before another; a service that most crosses
our inclinations, opposes our ease and interest. A servant must come at every
call, and say, Lord, I hear every command. Acts 10.33.
[5] We must serve Christ obediently in doing what is commanded, because it is
commanded: this is to serve for conscience sake. If the eye be not to the
command, the servant acts not with obedience, though the thing be done which is
commanded: nay, its possible, a work, for the matter, agreeable to the command,
may yet be an act of disobedience, in respect of the intent of the performer.
Oh how sweet is it to eye a precept in every performance! to pray, hear,
preach, give, because Christ bids me! Many do these works for the wages, this
is not to be obedient; they sell their services, not submit in service.

3. Christ must be served heartily: Ephesians. 6.6. Col. 3.23. Romans 1.9.
We must not be (...), eye-servants, we must do the will of God from the heart.
Paul speaks of serving God in the spirit, There are many complement all
servants of Christ in the world, who place their service in saying, Thy
servant, thy servant, Lord; lip-servants, but not life, heart-servants: such as
the Apostle ( Gal. 6.12.) speaks of, that do (...), make a show only, but the
heart of a service is wanting; the heart makes the service sacrificium
medullatum, it is the marrow of a performance. Bodily service is but like the
fire in the bush, that appeared to burn, but did not; or like the Glowworm in
the night, that shines, but heateth not: these do but act service, but are no
servants, servants only in profession: To these who would not profess Christ
seriously, Christ will hereafter profess seriously, Mat. 7.23.
I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

4. Christ must be served cheerfully: He, Psalm. 40.8. Joh. 4.34. 2 Cor. 9.7.
as he was his Fathers servant, delighted to do his will; It was his meat and
his drink. God loves a cheerful servant in every piece of sorvice: This makes
the service pleasing to Master and servant too; acceptable to the former, easy
to the later: Nothing is hard to a willing mind; willingness is the oil to the
wheel. A servant cheerful at his work is as free as his Master: Si non possint
a Dominis liberi sieri, suam servitutem ipsi quodammodo li beram faciunt, Aug.
de C.D. l. 19. c. 15. Romans 12.11.
If his Master make him not free, he makes himself free. The preaching of the
Gospel must be performed willingly, 1 Cor. 9.17. Love to souls should make us
cheerful in that service; not mourning at our own pains, but at peoples
unprofitableness; not that we do so much, but that they get no more.

5 Christ must be served diligently: These two, fervent in spirit, and serving
the Lord, are most properly joined together: Hence it is most necessary, that
whatever we do, Eccl. 9.10. Genesis 24.33.
should be done with all the might. Abraham's servant was diligent when he went
to procure a wife for Isaac; he would not eat bread, till he had done his
errand; when 'twas done, he stayed not upon complements. They whose service is
in soul-marriage, Qui ludit in Cathedra, lugebit in Gehenna.
should spend no time needlessly. Its pity that Satan's Emissaries should be more
diligent then Christ's servants,; Impostors, then Pastors. How diligent a
servant was Paul, that passed over so many Countries with so much speed? I
labored more then they all, was spoken as comendably, as truly; not plus
profui, I was more successful; but plus laboravi, I took more pains: Diligence
may be a companion and comfort, where success is a stranger.

6. Christ must be served perpetually: There must be no end of working, till of
living. The dead are they who rest from their labors: Life and labor are of
equal continuance. We can never begin too soon, nor continue too long in the
service of Christ: none ever repented of either, many of the contrary to both:
Faithfulness to the death has the only promise of the Crown of life: Better
never to have begun, then to apostatize. Its an unanswerable Dilemma; If the
service of Christ were bad, why did you enter into it? if good, why did you
depart from it?

Lastly, Obs. ult.
Observe, That they who expect to persuade others to serve Christ, must be
servants themselves. Jude, a servant of Christ, hopefully exhorts others
continue in his service, and to contend for his faith. The best way to move
others, is to be moved our selves: words that come from the heart, are most
likely to reach to the heart. It Is not sufficient for Ministers to discourse of
his service, but to embrace it. A blurred finger is unfit to wipe away a blot.
Its woeful when the function and the conversation oppose each other. If the
service of Christ be bad, why exhort we others to submit to it? if good, why
accept we not of it our selves? A titular service shall never receive a real
reward. Depart from me ye that work iniquity, shall be the doom of some that
cast out devils, and prophecy in the name of Christ.

Thus much for the second particular in the description of the Author of this
Epistle, viz. His Office, A servant of Jesus Christ. Now follows

The third and last Particular considerable in his description, taken from his
Kindred and Alliance: in these words,

The Brother of James.

Of which, by way 1. Of Explication. 2. Of Observation.


1. For Explication. Two things are to be opened: 1. Who this JAMES was. 2. Why
this Apostle here calls himself his Brother.


1. Who this JAMES was.

The Scripture speaks of two of that name: The one, James the son of Zebedee,
the brother of John the Evangelist, mentioned under these relations, Matthew.
10.3. Mar. 3.17. Matthew. 4.21. Called by Christ; leaving father and ship; slain
by Herod, Act. 12.2. named by Christ, with his brother, Boanerges, Mar. 3.17.
the sons of thunder. The other, this James here mentioned: Concerning whom much
is said, 1. in Scripture; 2. in Ecclesiastical History: but in both he is
spoken of very honorably.

1. In Scripture. First, His kindred and alliance are often mentioned: His
father is said to be Alpheus, Matthew. 10.3. Mar. 3.18. Luke 6.15. Act. 1.13. His
mother was Mary, spoken of Mat. 27.56. Mar. 16.1. Luke 24.10. Mar. 15.40. His
brethren are said to be Simon, Joses, and Judas, Mat. 13.55. Mar. 6.3. two
whereof were Apostles, viz. Simon and Judas, Mat. 10.3, 4. Luke 6.15, 16. Act.
1.13. and the other, viz. Joses, or Joseph, was competitor with Matthias (as is
generally supposed) for the Apostleship in the room of Judas Iscariot, Act.
1.23. Particularly, this James is said to be the brother of the Lord, Gal.
1.19. though together with him, his brethren, Joses, Judas, and Simon are also
called Christ's brethren, Hierom. cont. Helv. Virgo ille mansit cum Maria qui
pater Domini meruit appellari. Tantopere Christus dilexit floridi pudoris
integritatem, ut non modo de virgineo utero nasceretur, sed etiam a nutritio
virgineo tractaretur. Pet. Dam. Ep. 11. Aug. Tr. 10. in Joh. Bed. Aqu. Apud
Hebraeos nomina quae convenient in radicalibus, per additionem literarum
servilium, notionem non mutant; ut Judas and Thodas idem significant, etc.
Boulduc. in Jud. ver. 1.
Mat. 13.55. Mark 6.3. Not as if Mary the mother of Christ had afterward born
children unto Joseph, as the erroneous Helvidius (whom Hierom confuteth at
large) labored to maintain: Nor as if James and the rest were called the
brethren of Christ as being the sons of Joseph, (Christ's reputed father) by
another wife; for the Scripture tells us frequently, they were the sons of
Alpheus; and its the received opinion, that Joseph was never the husband of any
but the blessed Virgin, (though happily some have the more earnestly asserted it
from their high esteem of Virginity.) But some suppose this James and his
brethren are called the brother and brethren of Christ, in respect they were
the cozens germane of Christ by the mothers side, or Christ's mothers sisters
children: and this their mother Hierom thinks is that Mary, called the sister
to the Virgin, and the wife of Cleophas, John 19.25. her first husband Alpheus
either being dead, or else one and the same husband being (as others) adorned
with two names, Alpheus, and Cleophas; which might well be, in regard among the
Hebrews, those names that agree in the same radical letters, lose not their
notion and signification by the addition of other letters to them (a rule
applicable to these two names, Alpheus and Cleophas.) And Harm. Hist. Pas. Chapter
16. p. 186.
Gerhard also thinks, that this Mary the sister of the Virgin, and the wife of
Cleophas, was the mother of James, etc. because, as in John 19.25. Mary the
wife of Cleophas and sister of the Virgin, is joined with Mary Magdalen
standing by the Cross; so, in the other Evangelists, Mary the mother of James
(upon the very same occasion) is joined with Mary Magdalen, Matthew. 27.56. and
Mark 15.40. Some conceive this Mary the wife of Cleopas was mother of James,
but was not own sister to the Virgin Mary, because (say they) it is not the
custom for the same parents to put the same names on several children; but
that she is called sister to the Virgin Mary because her husband Cleopas or
Alpheus was the brother of Joseph, the husband of the Virgin Mary, brothers
wives being frequently called sisters. The most probable opinion is, that
Joseph and Alpheus were of near relation, happily natural brethren, and therefore
Joseph (being the reputed father of Christ) his brother Alpheus his children
(among whom this James was one) are called the brethren of Christ; it being
usual in Scripture to call those brethren that are near of kin; as we see
Abraham and Lot (Genesis 13.8.) are called brethren, although Lot was his nephew,
Genesis 14.12. So Jacob calls his uncle Laban, brother, Genesis 29.12, 15. vid. Genesis
31.32, 37, 46.

Thus the Scripture speaks of James in respect of his kindred or alliance.

2. The Scripture speaks worthily of him in regard of his Office; not only in
that he was an Apostle, Perkins in Gal. 2.9. with others.
but also of great honor and respect among the Apostles, and in the Church, he
being Act. 15. a principal member (some say President) in the Council of
Jerusalem, where he gave his advice in a great Controversy, and it was highly
esteemed and followed: and in regard of his high esteem in the Church, and
usefulness, he is (with Cephas and John, Gal. 2.9.) called a Pillar: for
although all the Apostles were equal in degree of office, yet there were some
of them endowed with more eminent gifts, and had greater esteem then the rest:
and therefore we read of Paul's comparing himself with the chiefest of the
Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.5. and 12.11. of which James was one. And whereas Mark
15.40. he is called James the less, it is conceived, it was not to distinguish
him from the other James the son of Zebedee, as if the Scripture hereby would
denote our James less in respect of age, calling to Apostleship, or of
stature, much less of esteem: but he may be called the less in comparison of
his father, Ista majoritas and minoritas est inter patrem and filium; inter
Jacobum Alphaeum, and Jacobum Alphaei filium. Vid. Boulduc. in ver. 1. Jud.
Videantur Epiphan. Hieron. Egesippus etc.
who (as a learned man thinks) was called James also, as well as Alpheus; which
opinion of his he probably confirms in his Exposition upon this place.

2. Ecclesiastical History speaks of him also as a most worthy person, both
for the admirable and rare holiness of his life, and his constancy in
professing of Christ at his death.

1. For his life: Hierom, in allusion to his name, James, or Jacob, calls him
the supplanter of sin and vice of those times wherein he lived, preached, and
wrote. And, as many write most highly in commendation of him, so particularly
Eusebius in his second Book, Chap. 1. and 22. For his holiness he was called
the Just, (...), etc. Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 22.
one that was much in fasting and prayer for the pardon of that sinful people
the Jews: with his frequent and long praying his knees were hard. The Jews were
generally much convinced of his holiness; insomuch, as the enemies of Christ
hoped, if they could procure him to deny Christ, that most of those that
professed, would abandon the Faith of Christ.

2. For his Death: The Scribes and Pharisees earnestly besought him to disclaim
Christ openly; and to that end they set him upon the Temple, that in the sight
and audience of the people he might declare that Jesus was not Christ: but he
to admiration professed his own faith in Christ, telling the multitudes, that
Christ was in heaven at the right hand of God, and that in the clouds he should
come again to judge the world: with which profession his enemies being enraged,
cast him down from the Temple, and afterward murdered him, he before his death
praying, that God would pardon their sin unto them: the same Author (as also
Josephus lib. 20. Antiq. cap. 8.) testifying, that those who were of the wiser
sort thought that this detestable fact was that which shortly after drew down
the judgment of God, to the utter destruction of that bloody City Jerusalem,
that had (among others) butchered so holy a man. Thus far Eusebius.

This though I relate not as Canonical, yet neither do I look upon it as
fabulous, it being by many famous and godly Writers testified. And this for the
first particular to be explained, Who this James was.

The second Branch of Explication was, Why Jude styles himself the brother of
this James.

Of which I find two reasons given, both probable.

1. That he might difference himself from others of that name, especially Judas
Iscariot; of which also the Scripture seems to take especial care: Hence Joh.
14.22. he is spoken of with an addition of a not Iscariot, this traitors name
being grown detestable: in which respect, it is generally conceived, Mar. 3.18.
Matt. 10.3.
that he had the names of Thaddaeus and Lebbaeus put upon him (as was before
noted:) and thus he wisely preserves himself and Epistle from undue prejudice,
and by the clearness of his person, prevents dislike of his performance.

2. He expressed this near relation between himself and James, Act. 12.17. Gal.
2.9.
in regard this Apostle James being better known then himself, of high
estimation and reputation in the Church, Jacobi celebr is ob virtutem apud
omnes fama effectura erat, ut hujus Apostoli doctrina apud auditores majorem
haberet authoritatem, libentius que admitteretur; praesertim si is qui genere
and sanguine cognatus esset, non alienus a cognati moribus, sed sub uno Domino
Christo degens, idem servitut is jugum cum fratre, etc.
commonly known by the title of the Lords brother, respected by Peter, famous
for his sanctity of life, accounted a Pillar in the Church, President of the
Council of Jerusalem; Jude might hereby win attention and credit to himself and
his Epistle from those to whom he wrote: And this is the reason that Occumenius
gives to this effect: The fame of James for his virtue, would put the greater
authority upon Judes doctrine; especially when it should be seen, that Jude was
as near him in his practices and conversation, as in blood and kindred.
Besides, by the naming of James with so much respect, it could not be imagined
but that he consented with him in that wholesome doctrine for which James was
famous in the Church; and yet though our Apostle provides for the acceptance
of his doctrine, neither he nor his brother James ambitiously advance their own
reputation; both of them (though the Lords brethren) yet contenting themselves
with that humble (though indeed truly honorable) title of the servant of Jesus
Christ.

2. I come to the Observations flowing from his using this title of the brother
of James.

1. How needful is it for a Minister to be of an unteinted reputation? Obs. 1.
Jude provides for it, both by making it known how far he was from Iscariot,
and how near unto James. 1 Timothy 3.7.
A Bishop must be of good report (says Paul.) Its necessary for his own
salvation that he should be good; and for the salvation of others, that he
should be accounted so. How great was Paul's care, that the Gospel should not
be blamed? 2 Cor. 6.3. Sometime the people are occasioned to love the Word by
the worth of the Minister; though we should love the Minister for the Word. A
cracked Bell is not good to call men together; nor is a Minister of cracked
reputation fit to persuade others to holiness. To have all speak well of us,
is not more impossible then suspicious. Antisthenes the Athenian, when he heard
some unworthy men did highly commend him, said, I fear I have done some evil
that I know not of. And another would frequently say, Would we know a man, we
should observe the life of him that praises him: Rarely will one praise him
that takes contrary courses to himself. But this should be the care of the
best, to keep himself from being spoken of reproachfully and truly at the same
time by the worst. Nor is it less the sin of people to blemish the name of him
that deserves well, then it is the sin of any one to deserve ill. The Apostle
is tender of receiving an accusation against an Elder: certainly, he who is so
much against receiving, would be much more against thieving.

2. Its lawful to use humane helps for the advantage of Truth. Obs. 2.
This help, the title of the brother of James, was warrantably prefixed. Paul,
where the fruit of his ministry was hazarded by omitting titles, mentions them
at large; 1 Cor. 9.1. Gal. 1.
as to the Corinthians and Galatians: and where concealment of his titles might
do as well, or better, he omits them, as in both the Epistles to the
Thessalonians: the like is requisite for us: In these things Ministers should
consider what tends most to the benefit of souls. I have known Ministers of
great learning and worth, who have been despicable among Idiots, because Birth,
or University degrees, or Alliance have not commended them; perhaps they had
not a James to their brother. 1 Cor. 15.33. Tit. 1.12. Act. 17.28.
The Heathens testimonies are not refused by the Apostle to advantage Truth: If
the naming of a Father in a Sermon tends more to ostentation then edification,
it may better be forborne, otherwise be lawfully used. Scripturis non
credidissem. etc Aug.
Humane Authority was an Introduction to Austens faith; afterward (as the
Samaritans) he believed upon firmer grounds. Certainly, we never so well
improve our humane advantages, as when Christ is advanced by them. How sweet,
to observe Ministers to set Christ upon their Names, Titles, Parts, Readings!

3 The beauty of Consent and Agreement between the Ministers of Christ, either
in Doctrine or Affection: Obs. 3.
Both these the prefixing of James his name argued between him and Jude.
Readily and rashly to dissent from other the faithful and approved Ministers
of Christ is not like our Apostles carriage. Indeed, we must not admire men too
much, though of greatest learning and piety; not so affect unity, as to forsake
verity; or so follow men, as to forget God: The best men in the world are but
rules regulated, not regulating; We must only so far set our Watch according to
theirs, as they set theirs according to the Sun. Satan endures no mediocrity:
All Ministers he represents as Dwarfs or Giants, none of a middle stature;
either they must be worshipped, or stoned. Avoid we both extremes: neither
proudly dissenting from, nor imprudently assenting to them either in practice
or opinion. Their gifts must neither be adored nor obscured; their falls and
slips neither aggravated nor imitated: We must avoid both sequaciousnesse to
follow them in any thing and singularity to dislike them in every thing: The
middle way of a holy, Scripture-consent, joining in what we may, and meekly
forbearing in what we may not, is a gracious temper. Ministers must not so
study to have multitudes of followers, as to scorn to have any companions; to
vilify others for the advancement of themselves; to build up their own
reputations upon the ruins of another. Consent, as much as may be, is no more
then should be. If Ministers should endeavor a holy peace with all men, much
more with one another; there is not more be^ty then strength in their union. How
pleasant is it to read Peter mentioning his agreement with his beloved brother
Paul; 2 Pet. 3.15.
that Paul that had withstood him to the face? Gal. 2.11.
There Is no repugnancy in Scripture; why should there be betwixt them that
handle it? If the Paen-men of the Scripture be at peace in writing, Ministers
must not be at war in preaching: they must not seek more their pr^ise for wit,
then the profit of souls. When children fall out in interpreting their father's
Will, the Orphans patrimony becoms the Lawyers booty. Heretics are the gainers
by the divisions of them that should explain the Word of Christ. The dissension
of Ministers is the issue of Pride: If there must be strife, let it be in this,
who shall be foremost in giving honor; if emulation, in this, who should win
most souls to Christ, not admirers to themselves. Its good to use our own
parts, and not to contemn others. The Apostles in the infancy of their calling
were not without the itch of pride; Christ labored to allay it both by precept
and example.

4. Grace and Holiness are not only an ornament to the person himself that is
endowed with them, Obs. 4.
but even to those that have relation to him: The holiness of the child is an
ornament to the father, that of the father to the child, the grace of the
husband to the wife; the holiness of one brother beautifies another. It Is
true, Every vessel must stand on his own bottom, and every one must live by
his own faith: Its a folly to boast of the holiness of our Parents, and
neglect it our selves: if thy father be holy for himself and thee too, he shall
go to heaven for himself and thee too. The grace of thy friends does not beget
grace in thee, but beutifie it. The Saints have oil of grace little enough for
their own lamps; and where holiness is abhorred by the child, that of the
parent is but an addition to the child's shame and punishment, in being so
unlike him spiritually, whom he does so resemble naturally. 'Twas but a poor
privilege for the Jews to have Abraham for their natural, and the Devil for
their spiritual father: but when a child, a brother, a wife, love and labor
for that grace which those of near relation have attained, its their honor and
ornament, in that they who are near them are nearer to God. Indeed, its often
seen, that they who have most spiritual loveliness have least love from us:
The godly want not beuty, but carnal friends want eyes. A blind man is unmeet
to judge of colors: how possible is it to entertein Angels, and not to know
it? The love of grace in another, requires more then nature in ones self. Blood
is thicker (we say) then water; and truly the blood of Christ beutifying any of
our friends and children, should make us prefer them before those, between whom
and us there is only a watery relation of nature. But how great a blemish often
does the gracelesnesse, the unholinesse of a parent, a husband, a brother,
bring upon them that are of near relation to them? Its a frequent question that
was propounded by Saul to Abner, 1 Samuel 17.56.
Whose son is this stripling? How disgraceful is such an answer as this; The
son of a Drunkard, a Murderer, an Oppressor, a Traitor, a Whoremaster? Love to
our friends, our posterity, etc. as well as to our selves, should make us love
grace.

Thus much for the third and last particular in the description of the Author
of this Epistle; the brother of James: and so for the first part of the Title
of the Epistle, The description of the Penman of it. The 2d part of the title
or preface of the Epistle, viz. The parties to whom the Apostle writes.


The second part of the Title follows; which is the Description of those
persons to whom he wrote; which persons are described from a threefold
privilege: 1. They are sanctified by God the Father, 2. Preserved in Jesus
Christ, 3. Called.


Of these in their order.

The first branch of this description, sanctified by God the Father: Wherein I
consider two Particulars: 1. The sort or kind of the privilege bestowed upon
them, viz. Sanctification; To them that are sanctified. 2. The Author thereof,
or by whom it was bestowed, By God the Father.

1. Of the kind of Privilege, Sanctification. Of which I shall speak 1. By way
of Explication of it. 1. By way of collecting Observations from it.


1. Of the Privilege, Sanctification, by way of exposition.

(...), To them that are sanctified.] Beza speaks of two Copies that read it
(...) and from thence the Vulgar Translation renders it Dilectis, This other
reading, mentioned also by To. Steph. and Gagnaeus.
To them that are beloved of God the Father: which manner of speech (as Beza
well notes) is unusual in Scripture, which speaks of us being for and in
Christ beloved of the Father: And Estius (though a Papist) acknowledges, that
the former reading, Estius in loc.
sanctified, is not only more pure, but more suitable to the scope and drift of
the Apostle, who by calling them sanctified, would deterr them from, and make
them take heed of those unholy and impure Seducers against whom he was now
about to write.

The word here used by the Apostle, admits of, and signifies in Scripture
several kinds of Sanctification; as

1. Sanctification by way of destination or separation: To this purpose the
Greeks use the word (...), Exodus 29.44. 1 King. 9.3. 2 Chro. 7.16. Esa. 13.3.
i.e. when things are separated to an holy use: so the Lord sanctified the
Sabbath day, by separating it from other days, and appointing it for the
duties of his own Service: Thus also the Tabernacle, the Temple, the Firstborn
were sanctified. Exodus 13.2. God commands Moses to sanctify all the
Firstborn; which he explains ver. 12. Thou shall set apart unto the Lord all
that opens the matrix.

2. There is a sanctification by way of celebration, acknowledging,
manifestation, declaration of the goodness of a thing: thus the creature
sanctifies the name of the Creator; Isa 29.23. They shall sanctify my name,
and sanctify the holy One of Jacob.

3. Sanctification by way of fruition, comfortable use, and blessed enjoyment
of the gifts of God: so 1 Cor. 7.14. the unbeleeving husband is sanctified by
the wife. and 1 Timothy 4.5. Every creature of God is sanctified.

4. Sanctification by way of application, to apply a thing to such a holy use
as God appointed: so we sanctify the Sabbath, Exodus 20.8. i.e. employ it to
the holy use for which God ordained it.

5. By exhibition, introduction, or bestowing actual holiness; by putting
holiness really and properly into one: This the Creator only can do to his
creature: this God does by his Spirit, which is called the holy Ghost, and the
Spirit of sanctification. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
And thus man particularly is sanctified or made holy three ways:

1. Of not holy negatively: Ex non sancto negative.
and so Christ as he was man was sanctified; for there was a time when as
Christ had not this holiness in his humane nature; when his humane nature was
not.

2. Of not holy privatively: Ex non sancto privative.
and so man that had lost totally his holiness, is made holy by regeneration
or effectual vocation.

3. Of less holy: and so Gods children are sanctified, Ex minus sancto.
by being enabled to the exercise of an actual mortifying of sin, and living
in holiness, with proceeding in both.

The sanctification here spoken of presupposes the second, afterward in the
word [ Called] more particularly to be handled; and intends the third,
namely, the actual exercise of the abolition of our natural corruption, and
the renovation of Gods image in us, begun in grace here, and perfected in glory
hereafter.

So that this Sanctification stands 1. In an actual putting off of corrupt
qualities; Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. Col. 2, 9, 10. Romans 6.2. Gal. 2.20. Gal. 5.24.
Romans 6.8.5. Gal. 6.14. Col. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.1.
2 a putting on the new and sanctified. 1 A Burial; 2 a Resurrection. 1 A
mortification of the old; 2 a vivification of the new man. 1 One thing is
destroyed and pulled down; 2 Another set up. 1 A taking away of what is
redundant; 2 an addition of what is wanting. 1 The killing power of the Cross;
2 the quickening power of the Resurrection of Christ.

1. Mortification of the old man is the first part of sanctification, whereby
the strength, power, and tyranny of sin is weakened, and more and more
abolished; like John Baptist, it decreaseth; like old folks in a house, who are
going out of the world, and crowded out, as it were, by the younger, the heirs:
The living of the old man is only as a clog and eyesore to the new.

This work of Mortification stands principally in these three acts, or degrees
of acting: 1. An act of discerning. 2. Detesting. 3. Destroying sin, the souls
enemy. Knowing causes hatred; and hatred puts us upon seeking the destruction
of an enemy.

1. An act of discerning: Sin may hurt us when we know it not; but we not hate
it unless we know it: Sin had deformity always, but we had not always eyes to
see it. It was Leah that lay by Jacob all night, but he discerned her not till
the morning. Sin is now discovered as it is, not as it is colored over by
Satan. Sin is uncomly only to a renewed understanding: Nature never sets up a
light to discover its own deformities. Of others its often said, They know not
what they do: In understanding they are children, nay, brutes; they see with
Satan's spectacles: But a renewed mind discerns between things that differ,
looks upon the old bosom- favorite as a traitor: there are new apprehensions
of the old man. The Apostle not without an emphasis speaks of those things
whereof we are now ashamed; now, not formerly: nay, heretofore sin was gloryed
in: but now the soul sees its not only unsafe, and its own death, but
unsuitable, and the death of Christ: It was striking at me (says a gracious
heart,) but Christ stepped between me and the blow: Herein standing sins great
deformity, as that of drunkenness in a man's wounds.

2. Detestation: The eye increases loathing. It cannot meet this ugly guest in
any corner of the house, but the heart rises against it; this hatred of evil
(Psalm. 97.10.) is more then of hell: its a killing look that the soul does cast
upon every corruption. He that hates his brother is a manslayer; he that
hates his lust is a sin-slayer: not he that hates the sins or practices of
his brother, but the person of his brother; so, not he that hates the effects
and fruits of sin, but the nature of sin; not he that hates sin for hell, but
as hell. Every evil, by how much the nearer it is, by so much the more its
hated: An evil, as it is so to our estate, names, children, wife, life, soul,
as impendent, adjacent, incumbent, inherent, admits of several degrees of
hatred: Sin is an inward, a soul-foe. Love turned into hatred becoms most
bitter; brethrens divisions are hardest to reconcile; the souls old love is
turned into new hatred; the very ground sin treads upon is hated: There Is a
kind of hatred of ones self for sin; every act that sin has a hand in is
hated, our very duties for sins intermixing with them; and we are angry with
our selves that we can hate it no more.

3. This hatred puts forth it self in laboring the destruction of sin. Love
cannot be hid, neither can this hatred: The soul seeks the death of sin by
these ways and helps.

1. By lamentation to the Lord, when going to him for strength with the
Apostle, Oh wretched man that I am! was there ever a soul so sin-pestred! Ah,
woe is me, Lord, that I am compelled to be chained to this block! Never did a
slave in Egypt or Turkey so sigh under bondage, as a mortifying soul does under
corruption. The sorrows of others are outward, shallow, in the eye, the look;
but these are in the bottom of the soul, deep sorrows. Its true, a man may give
a louder cry at the drawing of a tooth, then ever he did pining under the
deepest consumption; but yet the consumption, that is the harbinger of death,
does afflict him much more: and, though outward worldly grief, as for the death
of a child, etc. may be more intense and expressive; yet grief for sin is more
deep, close, sticking, oppressive to the soul then all other sorrows: the soul
of a saint, like a sword, may be melted, when the outward man, the scabbard, is
whole.

2. The soul of a sin-subduer fights against sin with the Cross of Christ, and
makes the death of Christ the death of sin; Ephesians. 5.25.
1. By depending on his death as the meritorious cause of sins subduing, of
sanctification and cleansing. Christ's purifying us being upon the condition of
his suffering, 1 Cor. 6.20.
and so it urges God thus, Lord, has not Christ laid down the price of the
purchase? why then is Satan in possession? Is Satan bought out? Lord, let him
be cast out. 2. By taking a pattern from the death of Christ for the killing of
sin, we being planted into the similitude of his death, Romans 8.5. sin it self
hanging upon the cross (as it were) when Christ died. Oh, (says a gracious
heart) that my corruptions may drink Vinegar, that they may be pierced, and
naild, and never come down alive, but though they die lingeringly, yet
certainly. Oh, that I might see their hands, feet, side, and every limb of the
body of death bored, the head bowing, and the whole laid in the grave: the
darkness, error, and vanity of the understanding; the sinful quietness and
unquietness of my conscience, the rebellion of my will, the disorder of my
affections. 3. And especially, the soul makes use of the death of Christ as a
motive or inducement to put it upon sin-killing: Ah, my sin is the knife (says
the soul) that is redded over in my Redeemer's blood: Ah, it pointed every
thorn on his head, and nail in his hands and feet. Lord, Art thou a friend to
Christ, and shall sin that killed him, live? Thus a sin-mortifying heart brings
sin near to a dead Christ, whom faith sees to fall a bleeding afresh upon the
approach of sin; and therefore it lays the death of Christ to the charge of
sin. The cross of Christ is sins terror, the souls armor: The blood of Christ
is old sures-be, (as holy Bradford was wont to say) to kill sin. As he died for
sin, so must we to it; as his flesh was dead, so must ours be, Our old man is
crucified with him, Romans 6.6. Its not a Pope's hallowing a Cross that can do
it, Mr. D. Rogers Pr. Cat.
but the power of Christ by a promise, which blesses this Cross to
mortification.

3. The soul labors to kill sin by fruitful enjoyment of Ordinances. It never
goes to pray, but it desires sin may have some wound, and points by prayer
(like the sick child) to the place where its most pained. How does it bemoan it
self with Ephraim, and pour-forth the blood of sin at the eyes? It thus also
improves Baptism; it looks upon it as a seal to Gods promise, that sin shall
die: We being buried with Christ in baptism, that the Egyptians shall be
drowned in the sea. It never hears a Sermon, but (as Joab dealt with Vrijah)
it labors to set its strongest corruption in the forefront of the battle,
that when Christ shoots his arrows, and draws his sword in the preaching of the
Word, sin may be hit. An unsanctified person is angry with such preaching, and
cannot endure the wind of a sermon should blow upon a lust.

4. By a right improving all administrations of providence: If God send any
affliction, the sanctified soul concludes, that some corruption must go to the
lions: If there arise any storms, presently it enquires for Jonah, and labors
to cast him overboard: If God snatcheth away comforts (as Joseph fled from his
Mistress,) presently a sin-mortifying heart says, Lord, thou art righteous, my
unclean heart was prone to be in love with them more then with Christ my true
Husband: If God at any time hedge up her way with thorns, she reflects upon her
own gadding after her impure Lovers: If her two eyes (Profits, Pleasures) be put
out and removed, a sin-mortifier will desire to pull down the house upon the
Philistims; and bears every chastisement cheerfully, even death it self, that
sin may but die too.

5. By consideration of the sweetness of spiritual life. Life is sweet; and
therefore what cost are men at, to be rid of diseases, to drive an Enemy out of
the Country! The soul thinks how happy it should be, could it walk with God,
and be upright, and enjoy Christ, be rid of a Tyrant, and be governed by the
laws of a Liege, the Lord Jesus. How heavy is Satan's yoke to him who sees the
beutie, and tastes the liberty of holy obedience? A sick man confined to bed,
how happy does he think them that can walk abroad about their employments? Oh,
(says a gracious heart) how sweetly does such a Christian pray! how strictly
does he live! how close is he in duty! how fruitful in conversing! But I
(alas!) how feeble, how dead, how unable! I am held under by a tyrant; oh that
I could be his death!

6. By recollecting its former folly in loving of sin: thinking thus; Formerly
I loved that which now I see would have murdered me: What a deal of pains,
care, cost, time laid I out to satisfy my lusts! oh that I could recall these
follies as I recollect them: but since I cannot make them never to have been,
I Will labor to hinder them for time to come. Oh that my hatred might be greater
then ever my love was to them. A soul that has been mad upon sin, afterward is
as vehement against it. This is the Apostles argument, As ye have yielded your
members servants to uncleanness, Romans 6.19. 1 Pet. 4.3.
so now to righteousness: and The time past of our lives may suffice us to
have wrought the will of the Gentiles.

7. By withdrawing those things that have been as fuel and fodder to
corruption: Fire is put out as well by taking away wood, as casting on of
water. A sin-mortifying heart forbears the using of that which it has
heretofore abused; it knows that often Satan lies in ambush behind lawful
enjoyments. He that has taken Physic in wine, afterward is ready to loath
that very sort of wine in which his loathed medicine was given him; he that
has been sin-sick, dreads those tentations in which Satan was wont to wrap sin
up: he considers, that he that always goes as far as he may, sometime goes
farther then he should: he feeds not without fear, Jude ver. 12.
but trembles in every enjoyment, lest it may be an inlet to sin, and his own
corruption get advantage by it; he fears a snare under his very trencher, and
poison (for his soul) in every cup of wine; especially, if he has been
formerly bitten thereby. Whereas a carnal heart engulfs it self in occasions of
sin (if in themselves lawful,) sees no enemy, and therefore sets no watch: he
makes provision for the flesh, Romans 13.
he cuts not off the food which relieveth his enemy: whereas a Sin-mortifier
(as an enemy that besieges a City) hinders all the supplies and support of
lusts, that so he may make himself more yeeldable to holiness.

8. By re-inforcing the fight after a foyl; by gaining ground after a stumble,
by doubling his guard after unwariness, strengthening the battle after a
blow; praying more earnestly, contending more strenuously, laying on more
strongly after sin has been too hard: thus Paul was the more earnest with God
against sin; he besought the Lord thrice after the messenger of Satan had
buffetted him. 2 Cor. 12.8.


9. By a holy vexation with the constant company, and troublesome presence of
sin. Thus was holy Paul put upon opposing of sin: he complains, sin was always
present with him, (Romans 7.21.) even when he would do good. And sin is called (
Heb. 12.1.) encompassing, easily besetting, (...), It dwells in us: Its a
leprosy not ceasing till the wall be pulled down, the house of our mortality
dissolved; its as near as the skin upon the back, bowels in the body; it goes
along with a saint in every duty, Sabbath, Ordinances, like Pharaoh's frogs
into the Kings chambers, pestering a Saint at every turn: the apprehension
hereof puts the soul upon endeavoring sins ruin. The nearer an enemy is, the
more hateful he is; the closer the conflict is, the quicker are the strokes,
the fiercer the fight.

To conclude, A holy insulting and rejoicing in God follows, if at any time he
has given the soul victory, and any fore-skins and heads of these
uncircumcised; it blessing God (as Panl, Romans 7.21.) I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord; going about duty more cheerfully, and yet humbly: A man may
read the good news of a victory in a Saints countenance. Does he not say to
Christ when some lust has been smitten (as Cushi to David) I would that all
the enemies of my Lord were as that one young man? Lord, When will there be a
perfect riddance of these vermin? Oh, how sweet will heaven be, when I shall
trample upon every Goliath, and see every Egyptian dead upon the shore! when I
shall have neither tear in my eye, nor lust in my soul!

This for the first thing in the nature of Sanctification, viz. Mortification.

2. The second follows, which is Vivification, whereby we live a new and
spiritual life: The Scriptures proving it are abundant; I live (says Paul,
Gal. 2.20.) yet not I, but Christ lives in me. If ye be risen with Christ,
seek those things that are above, Col. 3.1. The life of Jesus is made manifest
in our mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4.11. As the death of Christ is the death of
corruption; so the same power of God by which he raised Christ from the dead,
Ephesians. 1.20.
does frame us to the life of Christ's holiness: Christ by the power of his
Deity, whereby he raised himself, having derived spiritual life to all his
members (as life is derived from the head to the other members) enableth them
to manifest it accordingly. As Christ was raised up from death by the glory of
the Father, even so we walk in newness of life, Romans 6.4. and ver. 11. Reckon
ye your selves alive unto God through Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 2.10. We are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them. Joh. 15.5. He that abides in me and I in
him, the same brings forth much fruit.

These brief considerations may show in what respects a sanctified person lives
a new life, a life of holiness.

1. A sanctified person lives a holy life, in moving and acting from a
principle of holy life. All vital actions are from an inward principle: A body
without a soul lives not, moves not naturally; nor without an internal
principle of spiritual life received from Christ does any one live
spiritually. The body of every living creature has a heart, which is the forge
of spirits and the fountain of heat: Joh. 3.9. Jer. 32.40. Jer. 31.33.
True holiness proceeds from an implanted seed, the fear of God in the heart,
the Law put into the inward man. Sanctity, unless Christ be in us, is but a
fable: Gal. 2.20. Romans 6.11. Joh. 15.5. Gal. 4.19. Col. 1.27.
Christ lives in me, says the Apostle: and so he speaks of living to God by
Christ. Christ must abide in us; he is formed and dwells in us. The actions
of a sanctified person are from a vital principle, the spirit within; the
holiness of another is but from without, begins at his fingers ends; he is
drawn by outward inducements; his motions are not the motions of a living
creature, but like those of a clock, Duceris ut nervis alienis mobile lignum.
Hor. Ser. l. 2.
or some image, that move not from within, but from weights and plummets
without; when his weights are down, his work is done. A person spiritually
enlightened, has not only Spiritum adstantem, but assistentem: should he have
all the encouragements of honor or profit from without, he could never do any
thing cheerfully, but would ever be complaining, unless he enjoyed inward
quicknings and enlivenings of heart in duty by the Spirit of Christ; the
supplies of the Spirit.

2. A sanctified person lives a holy life, from, so according to a principle of
holy life. Now his actings are according to his principle of holiness,

1. In regard of their kind: they are of the same sort or nature with the
principle of holiness: Water in the stream is of the same nature with that in
the fountan. He that is sanctified lives like himself, his regenerated self. A
spiritual life produces spiritual living, the seed of God puts forth it self
in the fruits of godliness; if he be a fig tree, he bears no thistles; the
working of a Saint follows his being: The Understanding acts in a sound,
efficatious, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.23.
operative, influentiall knowing both of God and our selves. The Conscience
acts in a holy tenderness and remorsefulnesse for sin, Psalm. 16.7. 2 Chr.
34.27. and in a pious peaceablenesse and quietness, giving witness of a
persons reconciliation to (Romans 5.1.) and walking with God sincerely. 2 Cor.
1.12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of a good conscience. The Memory
retaining heavenly things as a treasury, Psalm. 119.11.
repository, or spiritual storehouse of the Word, an Ark for the two Tables.
The Will acts by a pliable yielding to God in all things, both to do what God
enjoins, and to undergo what God inflicts; in both its flexible: Romans 7.18.
Psalm. 39.9.
It desires to please God in all things, though it find not always to perform.
The Affections act in a holy regularity and order (being streams not dried up,
but diverted:) 1 Timothy 1.5. Psalm. 18.2.
Love is out of a pure heart, a spark flying upwards, set upon God principally,
and that for himself; set upon man for God, either because we see God in him,
or desire we may. Psalm. 139.25.
Hatred is now of those things that God hates, and that hate God. Joy is now
spiritual in the Lord, in communion with him, in serving of him, though in
tribulation. Sorrow is now for ours and others sin, and the sufferings of the
Church, not for such poor things as worldly trifles; the pearls of tears not
being cast upon the dunghill. Our Desires are now set upon the presence and
pleasing of God, pardon of sin, a soft heart, fruitfulness under the means,
the prosperity of Sion, the appearance of Christ. Our Zeal is not now hot for
our selves, and cold for God; like fire well ordered, burns for the service,
not the consuming of the house. Hope is now lively and well grounded, not false
and carnal. This spiritual acting, outwardly reaches the body, making it a
weapon of righteousness; fire within, will break out: The whole body is the
souls instrument, in all its members being obedient to effect good actions,
according to the dictate of renewed Reason, and the command of sanctified Will:
the Eye is (as it were) a watchman, the Tongue a spokes-man, the Ear a
disciple, the Arm a champion, the Leg a lackquey, all at the dispofall of God.
If the wares of holiness be in the Shop, those of the same kind will be on the
Stall: the life of a Saint is a visible Sermon of sanctification; he who has
his heart ordered aright has his conversation ordered aright; Psalm. 50.
the hand of the clock goes according to the wheels: Out of the good treasury
of the heart he brings forth good things: The body will be the interpreter of a
gracious heart: the law is written in the heart, and commented upon in the
life: a clean stomach sends forth a sweet breath. The matter of our actions
shall be warranted by the word, Psalm. 119.35. Mic. 6.8. Luke 17.10. Act. 4.19.
Psalm. 32.2. Psalm. 112.1.
the manner humble, cheerful, resolute, sincere. In a word, glory ends are
propounded, and our workings (if God require) shall cross our own interest,
ease, profit: Tohave a good heart and a wicked life, is a walking
contradiction. A sanctified person is not as Ephraim, a cake not turned, only
baked on one side.

2. The actings of a sanctified person are conformable to his principle of
Sanctification as that principle is extensive to, and puts upon all the ways
of holiness, and as it is a seed of all the fruits of Sanctification: A
sanctified person embraces every holy duty, he fructifieth in every good work,
Col. 1.10. has respect to every precept; Ps. 119.6, 128
esteems every precept concerning all things to be right: There Is a
concatenation of all graces; they are linked together in a divine league; he
has not any grace, that wholly wants any: The instructions of the Law are
copulative; Jam. 2.10.
he that would seem to make conscience of keeping all the Commandments of God
save one, Non est justa causatio cur praeferuntur aliqua, ubi facienda sunt
omnia. Salv. de Pro. l. 3.
observes none at all out of any obedience to God, who has alike commanded
all. A sanctified person preferrs not one Command before another, 1 Timothy 5.21.
his foot can endure to walk (being sound) in a stony as well as a sandy path:
he will do, not many things, but all, even to the parting with Herodias, and
the putting down the Calves as well as Baal; he is not double-diligent in some
matters, and negligent in others: he is neither maimed, to want any limb, nor a
monster, one part excessively outstripping another.

3. The actings of a sanctified person are conformable to the principle of
spiritual life as it is the same, a permanent, abiding principle; not sometimes
in us, and at other times quite gone from us, but at all times remaining in us.
A sanctified person is holy in a continued course, he walks with God; Psalm.
119.112.
he applies himself to keep the Commandments continually. He is not holy upon
extraordinary occasions; his duties are not like a misers feast, all at one
time, nothing at another; he is not holy by fits and pangs, upon a rainy day
reading only, good in thundering and lightning, or in a storm at sea, moved
passionatly with an affectionate sermon, trembling for the present, Acts 24.25.
and presently after following bribery. At the first coming on to profession
seething hot, after a while lukewarm, at length key-cold; slashing with Peter
at the first, and shortly after flying, and denying. His infirmities and falls
are but for a fit, but his holiness is constant; his goodness is not like the
morning cloud, and early dew; Hos. 6 4.
not like the redness of blushing, but the ruddiness of complexion: his
religion is not operative in company, silent in secret: he is not like water,
that conforms it self to the shape of every thing into which its poured; or
like a picture that looks every way; his religion leaves him not at the
Church-doors, he retains his purity wherever he lives: He has a principle
like a fountain in him, that supplies him in the time of drought; not like a
plash of water, licked up with an hours heat of the Sun: The music allures him
not, the fournce affrights him not from God.

3. from, and according to a renewed principle of life, so are they for it: and
that both in respect of preservation of life in himself, and also the
propagation of it to others.

1. A sanctified person acts for his sanctified principle of spiritual life,
in respect of preserving it in himself; which he expresses, 1. In shunning
whatever may prejudice and impair it, much more then a man does avoid that
which would shorten a natural life, as sword, poison, diseases, etc. that
which parts between God and the soul being more hurtful, then that which
parts 'twixt soul and body. What shifts have some made to scramble from
death, throwing estates into the sea, leaving them and sweetest relations,
running through rivers, fire, etc.? And have not holy men suffered more to keep
from sin, which tends to spiritual death? have they not left goods, lands,
children? have they not run through fire, water, nay, into them, even embracing
death rather then death, temporal rather then spiritual? A man would give all
the world rather then lose one natural life; but a Christian would give a
thousand lives rather then lose the life spiritual. Lord (says he) I desire
but to live, to keep Christ who is my life. Psalm. 63.3. Col. 3.4. 2. In a
prizing his food that upholds life: He loves what nourishes him, delights in
the Law of God, 1 Pet. 2.2. Psalm. 19.10.
hungreth after the sincere milk of the word, accounts it sweeter then the
honey and the honeycomb, has a most ardent affection to uncorrupted Truths,
accounts a famine of the Word the sorest, esteems the bread of life the staff
of life. When he was dead, he had no hunger, the Word was as food in a dead
man's mouth, found no savor or entertainment: now, though God give him never so
much of other supplies, yet it is a famine with him, if he have not bread; like
an infant-King, that preferrs the breast before his Crown: though he be rich in
grace, yet he is poor in spirit; he desires grace, having the grace to desire:
He never says, I have enough; truth of grace ever puts him upon growth. 3. A
sanctified person labors to preserve his inward principle of life, In using
the means that may recover him, Jer. 17.11. Psalm. 41.4.
when his life is endangered by sickness, desiring earnestly, that God would
heal him; embracing the sharpest administrations, the bitterest reproofs,
taking down the most loathed pill, bearing the heaviest affliction, being
willing to be cut, sawed, seared, so as to be saved. His great request is, that
he may be whole, walk holily, that the pain and impotency of his disease, the
filthiness and hurtfulnesse thereof were both removed.

2. A sanctified person acts for his principle of spiritual life, In laboring
to communicate it to others, as well as to preserve it in himself. The life of
a spiritually quickened soul is generative of it self: All living creatures have
a seminary for propagating of their kind; the spirit of life is fruitful,
endeavoring to derive it self from one to another. You never heard of a soul
that loved to make a monopoly of Christ; Grace may be imparted, not impaired.
Samson, when he had found honey, gave his father and mother some with him: John
4.
The woman of Samaria calls others to Christ, being called: How diffusive of
Christ was blessed Paul! (like the wall which reflects upon the passenger, the
Sun shining upon it:) How suitable was that wish of his to a sanctified soul; I
would to God that thou, and all that hear me this day, were almost, and
altogether such as I am, except these my bonds, Act. 26.29.? Every Christian
labors to raise up seed to his elder brother: The great design of the soul is
to set up Christ more in it self and others, to leaven others with grace; and
this gaining of souls is a Christians greatest covetousness.

This for the explication of the sort or kind of their first privilege,
Sanctification. The Observations follow in the second place.

1. Obs. 1.
Grace whereby we are changed, much excels grace whereby we are only curbed.
The Sanctification wherewith the faithful were said to be adorned, was such as
cured sin, as well as covered it: not a sanctification that did abscondere, but
abscindere; not only repress, but abolish corruption. Psalm. 145.
The former, restraining grace, is a fruit only of general mercy over all Gods
works, common to good and bad, binding the hand, leaving the heart free;
withholding only from some one, or few sins; tying us now, and loosing us by
and by; intended for the good of humane society, doing no saving good to the
receiver: In a word, only inhibiting the exercise of corruption for a time,
without any real diminution of it; as the Lions that spared Daniel were Lions
still, and had their ravenous disposition still, as appeared by their devouring
others, although God stopped their mouths for that time. But this sanctifying
grace with which the faithful are here adorned, as it springs from Gods
special love in Christ, so it is proper to the Elect, works upon every part
in some measure, body, soul, spirit, abhorrs every sin, holds out to the end,
is intended for the salvation of the receiver; it does not only inhibit the
exercise of corruption, but mortifieth, subdueth, diminishes it, and works a
real change; of a Lion making a Lamb, altering the natural disposition of the
soul, and making a new man in every part and faculty.

2. From the nature of this Sanctification, I note, Obs. 2.
It changes not the substance and faculties of soul and body, but only the
corruption and disorder, and sinfulness thereof: it rectifies, but destroys
not; like the fire wherein the three children were, it consumes the bonds, not
the garments; it does not slay Isaac, but only the ram; it breaks not the
string, but tuneth it. The fall of man took not away his essence, but only his
holiness; so the raising of man destroys not his being, but his unholy
ill-being; Grace beautifieth, not debaseth nature; it repairs, not ruins it: It
makes one a man indeed; it tempereth and moderateth affections, not abolisheth
them; it does not extinguish the fire, only allay it that it may not burn the
house: It does not overthrow, but order thy love, hatred, sorrow, joy, both for
measure and object: Thou may be merry now thou art sanctified, but not
mad-merry; thy rejoicing will now be in the Lord, elevated, not annihilated.
They are mistaken, that think Sanctification unmans a man, that he must now
always be sad, and sour, solitary; that (as they said of Mary) a Christian
looking toward heaven is always gone out to weep; no, there is nothing destroyed
by sanctification, but that which would destroy us; we may eat still, but not
be gluttons; drink, but not be drunken; use recreation, but not be voluptuous;
trade, but not deceive: In a word, be men, but holy men.

3. The people of God even in this life are Saints: Obs. 3.
perfectly indeed hereafter, but inchoatively here; A child has the nature,
though not the stature of a man. A Christian has here as truly grace, though
not so fully as in heaven; Grace is glory in the bud; this life is the
infantage of glory; Aetas infantalis gloriae.
Ye are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6. They who look upon sanctity as an accmplishment
only for heaven, are never like to get thither: Its common to hear a reproved
sinner give this answer, I am no Saint; Were this an accusation, and not an
excuse for his unholinesse, it might be admitted: but he is no Saint, nor
desires to be one; holiness and holy ones are his scorn: These in this
condition shall never see God; heaven must be in us, before we be in heaven.
Rev. 21.8. Rev. 22.15.
Depart from me will be the doom of them that work iniquity; Dogs shall be
without. Ye who here cannot be merry without scoffing at purity, hereafter
shall mourn for your want of purity: ye who account purity and sanctification
inconsistent with nobleness, breeding, generosity, will see, that these were
nothing without purity. That which is the beauty of heaven, the glory of
angels, is it an ignominy upon earth, the shame of worms? You are not too good
for holiness, but holiness for you. I confess, its a great sin and shame, and
should be a sorrow, that there are so many counterfeit, unsanctified saints,
who have made sanctity so hateful: but yet for thee by these to be scandalized
at sanctity, is thine, as well as their woe. Let the Popes Calendar only saint
the dead, the Scripture requires sanctity in the living.

4. Obs. 4.
Holiness cannot lie hid: Holy life is holily active; if a living man hold his
breath long, its death to him: Saul was no sooner converted, but he prays, he
breathes; A regenerated person speaks to God as soon as he is born. If God be
dishonored, he speaks for God; he cannot learn the wisdom of our times, to
dissemble his Religion, to be still when God is struck at; he must show whose
image and superscription he bears: wicked men proclaim their sin as Sodom, and
he proclaims his grace; and yet not that he may be seen, but that he may be
serviceable. The Spirit of God is fire, wind, a river, it will bear away any
opposition, rather then be kept in: the world thinks a saint is mad of
suffering, when he appears for God; they are mistaken, he is not desirous of
it, but fearless of it when God requires; he is neither profuse when he should
spare, nor penurious when he should spend himself for God.

5. I note The great change that is wrought upon a person when God comes with
sanctifying grace: Obs. 5.
There Is no difference in the world greater, then between a man and his former
self; the world, and men of it, need not take it ill, that a Saint differs so
much from them, he differs as much from himself: a sanctified person is utterly
opposite to all he was and did before, the stream is turned; he sees now, he
was blind before; he loves that which formerly he loathed, he loathes that
which formerly he loved; he unlives his former life, he picks it out (as it
were) stitch by stitch: The wicked (1 Pet. 4.4.) are said to think the course
of sanctified persons strange; (...), the word is, they are like men in a
strange Country, that see strange sights, which before they were altogether
unacquainted with: Oh the power of grace! a Lion is now a Lamb, a Goat is now a
Sheep, a Raven is now a Dove; and which is more, a Sinner is now a Saint: he
that before rushed into sin, now trembles at it; he that before persecuted
holiness, now preaches it. They in the Gospel hardly knew the man that had
sight restored to him, but said, he was like the blind man: John 9.
Did the alone recovery of sight make such a difference in him from what he was
formerly? what a difference is wrought then by grace, which makes not only a
new eye, but a new tongue, ear, hand, heart, life?

6. Obs. 6.
The holiness of a sanctified person is not purely negative; It stands not
altogether in laboring not to sin: Its not enough for the tree that escapes
the ax, not to bring forth bad, unless it also bring forth good fruit: nor is
it sufficient for the sanctified soul to put off filthy, unless it put on
beautiful garments. The old man must be put off, and the new put on: we are
not content with half happiness, why should we be with half holiness? The
holiness of the most is not to be as bad as the worst; few labor to be as good
as the best. Men love to be complete in every thing but that which deserves
exactness. We must not cut off the garment of holiness at the midst: Our
eternal happiness shall not only stand in being out of hell, but in being in
the fruition of heaven: we must not mete to God one measure, and expect from
him another.

7. Obs. 7.
Sanctification admits no coalition, agreement between the new and the old man:
This later is abolished, as the former is introduced. Col. 3.10.
The new man is not put upon the old, Ephesians. 4.24.
(as sometime new garments are put upon old) but in the room of them. In
sanctification there is no sewing of a new piece to an old garment, which always
does but make the rent the wider. Its one thing for sin to be, another thing to
be allowed; one thing for sin to be in us, another thing for us to be in sin.
Sin is a Saints burden, a thorn in his eye, not a crown on his head; its his
daily task to weaken and impair it: if he cannot fully conquer, yet he
faithfully contends. Sin and holiness are like a pair of balances, when the one
goes up, the other must needs go down: Christ knows no copartners in
Government, he will not drink of a fountain where Satan puts his feet; Nescit
de turbato font amicus bibere. Bern.
his Church is a Garden enclosed, open only to heaven, shut on every side. The
faithful have a broken, not a divided heart.

8. Obs. 8.
As a sanctified person allows no mixtures with grace, so he puts no limits to
grace: he desires that the grace he has should be perfect as well as pure, and
as he loves that no part of him should be defiled, so, that none should be
destitute; he is sanctified throughout; he perfects holiness in the fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7.1. A Saints complaints of his wants and deficiences rather prove
him covetous, then poor; his strong appetite rather speaks him healthful, then
empty; his desires of clothing, rather growing, then naked: he desires that
the Dominions of Christ may be as large, as ever were those of Sin, even
extending to the whole man. He is not like an upstart Gallant, who, unable to
furnish himself with new attire for every part, is new and adorned in some
parts, and uncomely in all the rest: he labors for furniture for every room,
to see whole Christ formed, to have graces for every faculty. There Is no grace
he sees in another, but he wishes he had it too; he never thinks he has lived
enough, or done enough for God; he never thinks his work done while he is on
this side heaven. Who ever was the man that so thoroughly mortified sin, as to
leave no life in it? who ever had such a degree of spiritual life, as not to
want a further increase? Thy sword must never be thrown away while so many
enemies remain. The means of preserving a holy life must never cease, till
grace be consummate in glory. He that has holiness enough, never had any.
Sanctified persons are always adding to grace, and taking away from sin.
Sanctification is a progressive work. The least Saint has grace enough to be
thankful, the greatest not enough to be idle. To negelect the helps of
sanctification never was a Scripture sign of sanctity: to live above
Ordinances, is to live below a Saint. Abstinence from spiritual food is so far
from proving a strong Christian, that it proves but a sick Christian at the
best. He who gives over, never truly began; he who goes not forward, goes
backward. Till the flame be out, we must never cease crying for water; till sin
be quite extinguished, we must ply the blood of Christ. How short do the best
come of their duty, of what God does, and they should desire?

9. Outside, Obs. 9.
superstitious Mortification is but a shadow of the true. Penance, Fasts,
Starvings of the body, Abstinence from Marriage, are not blessed to kill sin;
they have no blood in them; Sin and Satan fear no such holy water: Its the
death of Christ that must be the death of sin: the mortifying or macerating of
the carcass, is but the carcass of the duty; there is more labor required to
let the blood out of our corruptions, then out of our bodies. A child of God
takes more pains with his heart in a day, then a Papist with his skin in a
year; the one indeed whips himself, but the other denies himself; the one
scratcheth his skin, the other pulls out his right eye; the one afflicts the
flesh, the other the soul; the one something without himself, the other his very
self.

10. Obs. 10.
I note, The Lord esteems of his people by the better part; their bent and
strain, not their defects. They are here called sanctified: but alas, how
imperfect is their Sanctification! Yet their Father looks upon them as they
would be, not as they are or do: Not I (says the Apostle, Romans 7.) but sin
that dwells in me. Corn full of weeds we call corn: Christ loves what he
sees of himself, in the midst of much more he sees of us; he casts not away
the honey because of the honeycomb; he spyeth a grain of grace in a heap of
corruption; he considers what we aim to be now, and what we are to be
hereafter, more then what we are now. The owner of an Ort-yard, that knows the
goodness of every tree in it, although a tree which is of a good kind has
fruit upon it which for the present is green, and as hard as a stick, yet he
will say, This is an excellent apple, etc. considering what it will be when
ripe, and what its kind is to be.

11. Obs. 11.
How causelessly does the world complain of those that are truly sanctified! The
contentions of a Saint are most with himself; the destructions he makes are
bloodlesse; if after any blood he thirsts, it is that of a lust; the tyrants
he brings to punishment are those in the soul: Were all his enemies in the
world overthrown, and those in the heart spared, those Mordecaies still in the
gate, what would all avail him? Men have little reason to blame sanctity for
distracting of the times; there is more reason to blame the want of it. If a
good man carries himself turbulently, it is because he is no better, not
because he is good: He is, or should be at peace with every thing but sin; If
he shuns any company, it is not for hatred of the person, but the plague-sone:
if he reproves, Duplici sub specie divinus Spiritus se mundo ostendit,
Columbina and ignea, quia omnes quos im plet, and Columbae simplicitate
mansuctos, and igne Zeli ardentes exhibet. Greg. z. p. past. cap. 11. Moses
causam populi apud Deum precibus, causam Dei apud populum gladiis allegavit.
Greg. Charitas pie solet saevire, patienter novit irasci, humiliter indignari.
Bern. Ep. 2. ad Fulc. Molcstus est Medicus furenti phrenetico, and pater
indisciplinato filio; ille ligando, iste caedendo, sed ambo diligendo. Aug. Ep.
1. ad Bon.
he wounds not destructively, but medicinally: His greatest heats are pious,
God is in his flame; his very anger is patient, his indignation humble; he
participates of the Dove, as well as of the fiery tongues, as the Spirit that
fills him had both shapes. Does he reprove sharply and openly; he prays for
thee secretly. A Saint, when he acts like himself, is always doing good,
diffusive of holiness, a benefactor to the age wherein he lives, a
conduit-pipe of blessings to a whole Kingdom. If his endeavoring to make thee
holy, make thee hate him, he will be hated still.

This for the Explication of, and Observations from the kind of their first
Privilege, Sanctification.

The handling of the Author thereof [ God the Father] follows.

And of this also 1. By way of Explication. 2. By way of collecting
Observations.


1. I shall briefly explain two particulars. 1. How they are said to be
sanctified by God. 2. How by God the Father.


1. How by God. 1. Not transferendo Essentiam, 1. Ephesians. 2.10. Acts 5.31. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Heb. 12.10. (...).
by transferring his Essence unto them; but operando gratiam, by way of
operation and working holiness in them; not by bestowing his Deity upon them,
but by setting up the divine nature in them, (2 Pet. 1.4.) as fire warms by its
virtue and operation.

2. God was the Author of their Sanctification, not excludendo media, as if he
made not use of the Ministry of the Gospel for the accomplishing thereof. The
Word cannot sanctify without him; and ordinarily he will not sanctify without
it: he sanctifies by the Word, Joh. 17.17. enlivening and actuating it, making
it his power to salvation, bestowing upon it an enlightening power, to discover
our misery and deformity by reason of unholinesse, as also to discover the
beauty of holiness, and the happiness laid up for holy ones: bestowing also
upon it an inclining power, to bow us to the embracing and obeing of his holy
will, the pattern of all holiness.

2. From God we have our sanctification, not by traduction from our parents.
Grace is not of an equal extent to Nature; Grace is not native, but donative;
not by generation, but by regeneration; its from the Father of spirits, not
fathers of our flesh: Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? The new
birth is not of blood, nor the will of the flesh, nor of man, Joh. 1.13. The
purest seed-corn brings forth the stalk, the husk, and chaff; and the holiest
men have a posterity with a nature covered over with corruption.

4. God sanctifies so, as the first infusion of the habit of Grace is without
the active concurrence of any abilities of our corrupted nature to the
acquiring of grace in the heart, the plantation of grace in us being purely
supernatural. Gods manner of working is altogether divine, beyond the power,
and without the help of any thing in man (only he being a rational creature,
is a subject capable of grace, and thereby in the work of sanctification has a
passive concurrence:) for of our selves we are not sufficient to think a good
thought, but our sufficiency is of God: He works in us both to will and to
do: We are dead in trespasses and sins, etc. New begotten, new created, etc.
Grace is an habitual quality, merely infused by divine virtue, not issuing out
of any inward force of humane abilities, howsoever strained up to the highest
pitch of their natural perfection: All civility, sweetness of nature,
ingenuity of education, learning, good company, restraint by laws, with all
moral Virtues, with their joint force, cannot quicken our souls to the least
true motion of a spiritual life.

5. God sanctifies so, as that in the practice of sanctification man does
actually concur with God: for, being sanctified, and inwardly enabled in his
faculties by spiritual life put into them, he moves himself in his actions of
grace, although even in these actions he cannot work alone, he being only a
fellow-worker with the Spirit of God (not in equality, but) in subordination to
him. Nevertheless, though these actions be performed by the special
assistance of the Spirit, yet in regard man is the next agent, they are
properly said to be man's actions.

2. God the Father sanctifies. And yet, Ephesians. 5.26. 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is said
to sanctify, and to be Sanctification; and most frequently the holy Ghost is
said to sanctify; Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 5.9. Gal. 5.17.
Grace being called the fruits of the spirit, the whole work of Sanctification
styled by the name of spirit* and the Scripture expressly speaks us sanctified
by the Spirit; and the holy Ghost is called the Spirit of Sanctification. Yet
when the Scripture says we are sanctified by God the Father, it does not
contradict it self.

For the explication whereof I shall briefly set down this Distinction, and
these Conclusions.

All the Attributes of God are either 1. Essential; Did.
which are the very divine Essence, and pertaining to the very nature of God,
as to be a Spirit, omniscient, eternal, true, good, powerful, merciful, etc.

Or, 2. Relative: And that, either 1. Inwardly, to the Persons within
themselves; as for the Father to beget, the Son to be begotten, the holy Ghost
to proceed from Father and Son. Or, 2. Outwardly: And that either 1. to the
creatures, as to create, sustain, etc. or, 2. to the Church, as to redeem and
sanctify, etc.

The Attributes that appertain to the Nature or Essence of God, are common to
the three Persons, as to be a Spirit, Concl. 1.
omniscient, eternal, etc.

The Attributes or properties that inwardly belong to the Persons among
themselves, Concl. 2.
are peculiar and proper to each of them, both in regard of order of being and
working: The Father has his being from Himself alone, the Son has his being
from the Father alone, the holy Ghosi has his being from them both, The Father
alone begets, the Son is alone begotten; the holy Ghost does proceed from
the Father and the Son.

All works external, Concl. 3.
and in reference to the creatures, as to create, to govern, to redeem, to
sanctify, etc. are, in respect of the things wrought, equally common to the
three Persons of the Trinity; who, as they are all one in Nature and Will, so
must they be in operation, all of them working one and the same thing together.
John 5.17, 19. Most true is that of Christ, Whatsoever things the Father does,
these also does the Son; the like may be said of the holy Ghost: so that we are
sanctified by Father, Son, and holy Ghost; there being the same power and will
of all three: and in works external, and in respect of the creature, when
only one Person or two are named, the whole Trinity is to be understood.

Though the works of three Persons toward the creature, Concl. 4.
world, or Church, in regard of the thing wrought, are common to all the three;
yet in respect of the manner of working, there is distinction of Persons that
work; for the Father works through the Son, by the holy Ghost: The Father works
from none, the Son from the Father, the holy Ghost from both, Joh. 5.19. and
8.28. and 16.13. (there being the same order of working in the Trinity, that
there is of existing:) the Father works by the Son and the holy Ghost, sending
them, and not sent by them; the Son works by the holy Ghost, sending him from
the Father into the hearts of believers, and is not sent by him, but by the
Eather: the holy Ghost works, and is sent from the Father and the Son, not from
himself. The works therefore of the Trinity are considerable, either absolutely,
or in regard of the works wrought, and so they are the works of the whole
Trinity in common: Or relatively, when we consider in what order the Persons
work, which Person works immediately, which by another. And so the Persons are
distinguished in their works.

This considered, Jude in ascribing Sanctification to God the Father, is easily
reconciled to those that ascribe it to God the holy Ghost, and the Son; these
last named persons being by Jude included in the working of sanctification, and
only the order of working of the blessed Trinity noted. The Father sanctifying
through the Son, by the holy Ghost; the Father sanctifying by sending the Son
to merit, and giving his Spirit to work; the Son, by meriting; the holy Ghost
by working our sanctification, and immediately sanctifying us; in which respect
he has the title of holy, and Sanctification most commonly expressed as his work.

This for the Explication of the second particular in the first privilege of
the faithful to whom Jude wrote, viz. The Author of their sanctification, God
the Father.

Secondly, the Observations follow.

1. Even our holiness administers matter of humility: Obs. 1.
Our very graces should humble us as well as our sins; as these later because
they are ours, so the former because they are none of ours. Sanctity is
adventitious to Nature: Heretofore holiness was natural, and sin was
accidental; now sin is natural, and holiness accidental: when God made any
of us his garden, he took us out of Satan's waste; ws are not born Saints: the
best, before sanctification, are bad, and by nature not differing from the
worst; the members that God accepts to be weapons of righteousness, were
before blunted in Satan's service; when God sanctifies us, he melts idols,
and makes of them vessels for his own use. Before any becomes as an Israelites
wife, he is as a captive, unpared, unwash'd, unshaven. Sanctification is a
great blessing; but was this web woven out of thine own bowels? the best thou
did bring to thine own sanctification, was a passive receptivenesse of it,
which the very worst of heathens partake of in common with thee, having a
humane nature, a rational soul; and was there not with that, a corrupt
principle of opposition to God, and all the workings of God? was not God long
striving with a cross-grained heart? how many denyals had God before he did win
thee to himself? How far was the iron gate of thy heart from opening of its own
accord? and if he had not wrought like a God, omnipotently, and with the same
power wherewith Christ was raised, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.
had thy resistance been ever subdued? and when the being of grace was
bestowed, from whence had thy grace at any time its acting? Did thou ever
write one letter without Gods guiding thy hand? did thou ever shed one
penitential tear till God unstop'd thy spouts, smote thy rock, and melted thy
heart? did thou hunger after Christ, till God who gave the food gave the
stomach also? Was ever tentation resisted, grace quickened, corruption
mortified, holy resolution strengthened, power (either to do or will) received
from any but from God? Does not every grace, the whole frame of sanctification
depend upon God, as the stream on the fountain, the beam on the Sun? when he
withdraws his influence, how dead is thy heart in every holy performance? only
when he speaks the word effectually, bidding thee go, thou go; and do this
or that, thou do it.

2. Obs. 2.
The reason why all graces of a sanctified person are for God: they are from
him. Gods bounty is their fountain, and Gods glory must be their center: He
planted the Vineyard, and therefore he must drink the wine: We are his
wormanship, and therefore we must be his workmen. All our pleasant fruits must
be laid up and out for our well-beloved. All things (but particularly our
graces) are from him, and for him: we can never give him more or other then his
own, when we give all we can. The streams will rise as high as the fountain
head; and so should our graces ascend as high in duty as he who gave them?
Where should God have service, if a sanctified person denies it?

3. Obs. 3.
From this Author of Sanctification, I note ts excellency and worth. Its a rare
work certainly, that has such a workman; a beauteous structure that has such
a builder: What is a man to be desired for, but his sanctification? if we see a
beauty on that body which has a soul; how much more on that soul that has the
reflection of God himself upon it? Every Saint is a wooden casket filled with
pearls. The Kings daughter is all glorius within. Love Jesus Christ in his
worky-day clothes, admire him in his Saints; though they be black, yet they are
comely: Did the people of God but contemplate one another graces, could there
be that reproaching, scorn and contempt cast upon one another that there is?
Certainly, their ignorance of their true excellency makes them enemies: they
strike one another in the dark.

4. Obs. 4.
Great must be the love that God bears to Sanctification: Its a work of his own
framing, a gift of his own bestowing. God saw that the work of the first
creation was very good; much more that of the second. Wonder no more that the
faithful are called his garden, his Jewels, his Treasure, his Temple, his
Portion: God has two heavens, and the sanctified soul is the lesser. How does
he accept of Saints even in their imperfections, delight in their performances,
pity them in their troubles, take care of them in dangers? He that has given
his Son for them, promised heaven to them, and sent his Spirit into them, what
can he deny them? Jesus Christ never admired any thing but grace when he was
upon the earth: the buildings of the Temple he contemned, in comparison of the
faith of a poor trembling woman. Certainly, the people of God should not
slight those graces in themselves, that God does so value; as they do, when
they acknowledge not the holiness that God has bestowed upon them: Shall they
make orts of those delicates that Jesus Christ accounts an excellent banquet?

5. The love of God is expressive, Obs. 5.
really and effectually in us, and upon us, even in sanctifying us. Creatures,
when they love, will not put off one another with bare words, of bidding be
clothed, sed, etc. much less does God: If there be love in his heart, there
will be bounty in his hand. Thou say that God is merciful, and loves thee;
why, what did he ever do for thee, work in thee? has he changed thy nature,
mortified thy lusts, beautified thy heart with holiness? Where God loves, be
affords love tokens; and such are only his soul-enriching graces. No man knows
love or hatred by what he sees before him, but by what he finds in him: If our
heart moves toward God, certainly his goes out toward us; the shadow upon the
Dyall moves according to the motion of the Sun in the Heaven.

6. Obs. 6.
We are to repair in our wants of Sanctification to God for supply: He is the
God of grace; The Lord will give grace and glory. He has the key of the womb,
the grave, the heavens, but chiefly of the heart. He that sits in heaven can
only teach and touch the heart. How feeble a thing and unable is man (whether
thy self, or the Minister) to do this? He has the winds in his own keeping,
and till he send them out of his treasury, how necessarily must thy soul lie
wind-bound? Whither should thou go but to him? and how can thou go but by
him? The means of grace are to be used in obedience to him, Parum prodest
Lectio, quam non illuminat Oration.
not in dependancy upon them: A golden key cannot open without him, and a
wooden can open with him. Man may (with the Prophets servant) lay the staff
upon the forehead, but God must give life. How many fat and rich Ordinances
have been devoured, the soul after all remaining as lean as before, for want of
seeking God aright for a blessing?

7. Obs. 7.
I observe, How careful we should be to maintain that which God has set up in
us, and how fearful lest it should be pulled down by Satan. Christ destroys the
works of the Devil, and Satan labors to oppose the work of Christ. Every plant
indeed that God has not planted, is to be plucked up: but the plants that Gods
own hand has planted are to be nourished. What God has joined together none
should separate; Grace and the Soul are of Gods joining together. Who laments
not the destruction of man's workmanship, the overthrow and demolishing of
beutifull buildings, the rooting up of corn-field and pleasant gardens by
Swine? But what are these to the destructions made by sin in the hearts and
lives of people? Who can give way to sin, but it must be with a sinful
patience? Keep thy heart with all diligence: Pro. 4.23.
the best endowment is to be most carefully preserved. Who loves not to keep
his body healthful? and yet who regards the keeping of his soul holy? The
whole Trinity of Persons adorn the heart with holiness; every of them is to
have a corner in it, nay, the whole. Let not Satan have wells which he never
dug, inhabit houses which he never built. If the Philistims tread not on the
threshold on which Dagon fell, let not Satan lodge in the heart that God
fanctifieth.

This for the first Branch considerable in the description of the parties to
whom the Apostle wrote: Sanctified by God the Father.

The second follows; Preserved in Christ Jesus. The second branch of the
description of the faithful to whom Jude wrote.


Wherein I consider two particulars: 1. A privilege or enjoyment received,
viz. Preservation: [Preserved, etc. 2. The means or way of enjoying it: and
that was, In Christ Jesus. Of both these briefly.

1. The Privilege bestowed is Preservation, To them that are preserved, etc.
In the handling whereof I shall briefly give, 1. The Explication of it. 2. The
Observations from it.


1. For the Explication. The word used by the Apostle is (...) properly
signifies, solicitously to be kept, as a thing lest it be lost, or taken away
by others. 1 John 5.18. its spoken of a regenerate persons keeping himself from
being touched by the wicked one: (...), keeps himself as with watch and ward;
gardeth himself so accurately, as he that watches a prisoner for fear of his
escape. So Act. 4.3. its said, the Apostles were put (by the Priests) (...), in
hold. So Act. 5.18. they put them (...), in prison. And of these preserved ones
its said, They are kept by the power of God, (...); kept as a Town is kept with
a garrison from the enemies: praesidio circumvallati, Conservati, ne decepti a
seductoribus, pereant. Estius in loc.
incircled with a military strength: so are these Saints preserved by Christ,
lest being deceived by Seducers, they should perish.

This preservation of the Godly is threefold. 1. Temporal, and of the Body.
2. Spiritual, chiefly of the Soul. 3. Eternal, of both in heaven.

1. The first, though it be not here intended (as indeed, being frequently
denied to the faithful) yet its often in Scripture besto^wed upon them, and
that several ways: sometimes when their enemies want means to effect their
desires upon them, 2 Samuel 8.2. 1 Samuel 24.27. Judge. 7.22. 2 Samuel 17.16.
though they have poison; yet no power, no arms or instruments of force; or
when the enemies of the Church have outward strengths and forces, but are
diverted another way, by reason of enemies coming against them from an other
place; or when the enemies spend their hatred and forces upon one another; or
when their forces are by the providence of God timely discovered, so that the
people of God taking refuge in some place of security, strength, or distance,
the enemy cannot at all come at them; or when there is such a curb of restraint
put upon the spirits of enemies, as, though they find them, and have them in
their hand, yet they shall not be able to put forth their inward poison against
them; Dan. 3.26.
thus even the natural force of fire, seas, beasts shall be bridled up, when
God will, from hurting his people; 2 King. 7.6.
or when the enemes of the Church are discomfited, either by their own
preposterous fear or oversight, Judge. 5.20.
or the instrumentalnesse of the senseless creatures against them, or the
puissance of the Churches forces, not only spiritual, 2 Samuel 17.23.
but even visible and worldly; or when the faithful being taken, are delivered
out of their hand by making escape; Genesis 33.
or when God makes an enemy of his Church to be his own destroyer, to twist and
use his own halter; or when God enclines the hearts and dispositions of the
haters of his people to pity, tender and favor them, though they be far from
love to their grace: or when God works a really sanctifying change upon their
hearts, Act. 16.31.
making them to wash the stripes, and lick the wounds whole which they have
made; or when God takes his people out of this life from the evil to come,
housing his flock against a storm, taking down his ornaments when he purposes
to destroy the house; and this he ordinarily does by a natural death, though he
can translate his people, and take body and soul immediately into heaven, as in
the case of Elijah.

2. But principally, the care of God is in this life expressed toward his
people in spiritual preservation: This spiritual preservation of believers in
this life, is, 1. From punishment: The curse of the Law, the wrath of God. Gal.
3.13.
Not from the Law of God as giving precepts, but as being a Covenant (Romans
6.14. 1 Timothy 1.9.) exacting perfect obedience, and condemning for a not perfect
performance: From the terror of the law, forcing for fear of punishment, as
bondslaves by the whip, Romans 8.15. the people of God being made a voluntary
people, Psalm. 110.3.
and worshipping God without servile fear. The faithful also are preserved
from the guilt and condemning power of sin, Ephesians. 1.7. 2 Cor. 5.19. God not
imputing their trespasses: Preserved from the curse of all external
punishments, as they are the effects of vengeance. Sin may be, and may not be
in the godly; it is in them by habitation, not by dominion: so punishments are
on them, and are not on them; on them as sensible pains, on them as
castigations to better them; on them as consequents of sin, and Gods expression
of his dislike of sin; not on them as curses not on them to satisfy wrath: The
wrath of God lies not upon them, when the hand of God lies upon them: Every
affliction is medicina, not laniena; sent to kill sin, not the man: the edge,
the soul, the sting, the malignity of every trouble is removed, so that it has
little more then the notion of a misery. Gods people are not delivered from
evils as oppressive to nature, but as satisfactory to Justice: whatsoever they
suffer, though it be death it self, they may say, Christ has labored, John 4.
and we enter into his labors; he has born the heaviest end, death lost its
sting in his side. There Is honey in the carcass of this lion; this Serpent is
but a gentle rod being in his hand.

2. This spiritual preservation of believers is from Sin, and in the state of
holiness; their grace being preserved, and the image of God never totally
obliterated in them: God preserving the jewel, often, when not the casket; a man's
self, his soul, though not his carcass; and from that which is the greatest
enemy and evil, sin, so often in Scripture called the evil, John 17.15. Mat.
5.37.
and that which makes the very Devil himself both to be, and to be called the
evil One, he both having most, and dispersing most of that evil; the world to
be called an evil world; Luke 6.45. 1 John 5.18. Gal. 1.4.
and men, evil men. And so this privilege of preservation from sin, and in
the state of holiness, aptly follows Sanctification; the elect being not only
made holy, but kept holy. Hence we read of him that is able to keep us from
falling; Jude 24.
of Christ praying that his disciples should be (though not taken out of the
world, yet) kept from the evil, Joh. 17.15. the world kept out of them, though
not they out of the world: of the faithful, their being kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Of the evil one's not touching
him that is born of God, 1 John 5.18. and of his not sinning; of Gods
delivering of Paul from every evil work; 2 Timothy 4.18.
of preserving blameless to the coming of Christ; of finishing the good work
begun unto the day of Christ, Ephesians. 1.6. All which places intend this spiritual
preservation mentioned by Jude, which is that gift of God whereby the elect,
being united to Christ by his Spirit and faith, continue in him, and can never
totally and finally fall from holiness.

Sundry ways does God preserve from sin, and in holiness: 1. Sometime by
keeping his people from the very outward tentation to sin, if he sees it would
be too hard for them; often dealing with his servants, as the people did with
David, 2 Samuel 21.17.
who would not let him go down to battle, lest the light of Israel should have
been put out: as Gideon dealt with his soldiers, suffering not the fearful to
go to fight: Judge. 7.3.
as we use to keep in a candle in a windy night, putting it into a lanthorn. 2.
Sometime by making them conquerors even for the present, over the tentation; he
strengthens them so with his Spirit, as that they break the strongest cords
(with Samson,) bearing away the very gates of the City, and overthrowing whole
troops of tentations: Genesis 39.
Thus was Joseph preserved (as Chrysostom expresses it) in a fiery fournace,
even when it was heated seven times hotter then ordinary; the power of God
being put forth therein, more then in preserving the three children: Thus were
the blessed martyrs preserved from sin; we read in that holy Martyrologie, Heb.
11, 35. they were tortured, not accepting deliverance. How many have overcome
fire with fire; the fiery flame with love to Christ hotter then fire? their
holy resolution rising the higher, the more opposition they had, as a flood
that meets with an obstacle; or as a ball, the harder it is thrown against the
ground, the higher it mounts in the rebound. 3. Always God so preserves his
Saints from sinning, Luke 22.32.
that they sin not finally, they sin not away all their holiness; their faith
fails not; there is something in them that sins not, the seed of God, a grain of
mustard seed, a principle of holiness, which, Gratia nec totaliter
intermittitur, nec finaliter amittitur.
as it opposes, so it will overcome their distempers; as a fountain works out
its muddinesse when dirt is thrown into it; as life in a man, his diseases. A
Saint is not delivered fully from the being of sin, but from the total
prevalency of it, from final Apostasy; so that his soul still continues in the
state of grace, and has the life of holiness, for the essence, though not
always in the same degrees: he may aliquo modo recedere, non penitus excidere:
Grace may be abated, not altogether abolished: he may peccare, Actus omittitur,
habitus non amittitur: actio pervertitur, fides non subvertitur; concutitur,
non excutitur; defluit fructus, latet succus: jus ad Regnum amittunt
demeritorie, non effective. Pr.l. Effectus justificationis suspenditur, at
status justificationis non dissolvitur, Suffr. Br. p. 187. Secundum quasdam
virtutes, spiritus recessurus venit, and venturus recedit. Gr. Mor. l. 2. c. 42.
not perire; sin, but not to death; intermit the actings of of grace, not lose
the habit. Faith may be shaken in, not out of the soul; the fruit may fall off,
but the sap not totally dry up. It Is true, Grace in it self considered, as a
creature, might totally fail; our permanency is not respectu rei, but Dei; not
from our being holy, but from our being kept holy. We are kept by the power of
God, and if so, it will be to salvation. Notwithstanding the power of sin in
us, and the power of Satan without us; the frowns and the smiles of the world,
the music and the fournace, the Wind and the Sun, the tide of nature, and the
wind of example, holiness, though in the least degree, shall never be lost to
be of no degree. Satan does soli perseverantiae insidiari, he only aims to take
away grace; he would never care to take away gold, or names, or comforts, etc.
if it were not to make us sin. He that offers to give these things to make us
sin, would not snatch them from us but for that end. God was not delighted that
Job should be tormented, but that his grace should be tried; nor Satan so much
that Job should be tormented, as that his grace should be destroyed: But though
he winnow never so violently, Luke 22.23.
he shall winnow never out all our grace. All the power of hell shall never
prevail against the God of heaven.

The immutable eternal decree of God is the foundation of perseverance. Isa.
46.10.
Now the counsel of God shall stand, The elect cannot be deceived, Matt. 24.24.
The impossibility of seduction is grounded upon the stability of election: the
foundation of God abides sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. it can never be moved out of its
place. The purpose of God according to election must stand, Romans 9.11. Of all
that God has given Christ (by election) he will lose nothing, John 6.39.

And that Preservation flows from the decree of Election, Quod datur ex
efficaci intention infallibiliter servandi illam personam cui donatur, illud
ex decreto dilectionis dimanare manifestum est. Suffr. Br. p. 197.
is most manifest, in regard its given with a previous intention of infallible
bringing him to salvation, to whom it is given; for what is election, but to
ordain infallibly to obtain salvation?

And this immutable purpose the all-powerfull and faithful God backs with
infallible promises: The mountains shall depart, but the covenant of his peace
shall not, Isa. 54.10. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me, Jer. 32.40. My sheep shall never perish, neither shall any
man pluck them out of my hand, Joh. 10.29. I will betroth thee unto me for
ever, Hos. 2.19. Christ shall confirm you to the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. Nay, this
stablenesse of his Council he shows by an oath also; which was, Luc. 1.75. That
we being delivered, etc. might worship him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life.

This purpose, and these promises, God even in this life backs with such
performances, as prove Perseverance infallibly to follow; he bestows upon his
people an inward continuing principle of holiness, the seed of God remaining
in Gods people, which makes them that they cannot sin, 1 John 3.9. A well of
water springing up unto everlasting life, Joh. 4.14. An anointing abiding in
them, 1 John 2.27. The Spirit abiding for ever, Joh. 14.26. The fear of God in
their hearts, not suffering to depart from God, Jer. 32.40. Gifts without
repentance, Romans 11.29.

Upon these performances of God, 1 John 5.13. Heb. 3.6. 2 Pet. 1.10.
believers have been assured, and are commanded to labor for the assurance of
their salvation: A privilege not to be attained, if assurance of perseverance
were impossible; for without perseverance there is no salvation.

3. The third and fullest preservation is Eternal, which shall be perfectly
from every enemy that may hurt in a way of sin and misery, truly called foelix
securitas, and secura foelicitas; happy safety, and safe happiness; when the
people of God shall neither offend, nor be offended: when there shall be
neither a sin in the soul, nor a sinner in their society; when Satan shall no
more solicit,; when the faithful shall not only be exempted from foyls, but
even from fighting; when in stead of swords, they shall only have palms in
their hands. Oh blessed condition! to have rest on every side, fullness of
grace, perfection of peace, to be freed from all fears, to be lodged in the
bosom, and locked up in the embraces of God to eternity, to be in our haven,
our center, our fathers house; O my soul! it is a heaven to hope it, what then
is it to have it?

And this for the explication of the nature of this Preservation, the second
kind of privilege bestowed upon the faithful.

The Observations follow.

1. Obs. 1.
Sanctified persons have many enemies. It Is true, none are safe but such, and
yet none so much solicited as such. What need this (...), this careful
preservation, this garrison of Gods power, if there were none feared to give and
take the possession of thy soul from God? Is there not a false party within?
The best-govern'd City has some traitors, and so has the best-govern'd heart:
nay, is not the better party in the soul far the lesser? and how often does the
disaffected conspire to let in the enemy without? which they had long ago
done, and destroyed the good party too, Perfectiones sibi relictae, sunt
pondera ad ruinam. Gers.
(for Grace left to it self, falls) had it not been for Gods power. The great
design of Satan is to surprise Sanctity: the thief gotten into the house,
presently enquires where the jewels and money are laid up: the Devil had rather
catch one fish, then a hundred frogs; he is sure already (he thinks) of his
own: Besides, they do not much credit his cause; but could he bring over to
himself one sanctified person, he would boast in such an addition to his
Kingdom. Its the tree that bears fruit which is plucked and cudgel'd; under
other trees which have only leaves, men sit and walk indeed, but they pluck
them not: And of all trees which bear fruit, those which bear the best, are
pulled and beaten most. Its the richly laden ship that is most endangered by
the Pirates; the soul enriched with holiness for which Satan lies most in
wait. There are as many miracles wrought, as a Saint is preserved minutes. Let
us neither be secure, nor discouraged: Not secure; we live in the midst of
enemies: He that will be always safe, must never be secure; we cannot trust God
too much, nor our own hearts too little; the former is our keeper, the later is
our traitor: there is no Christian his own keeper; we can neither stand not rise
alone, all we can do alone is to fall. Not discouraged; thy many robbers show
thou have something worth the taking from thee: thy enemies, though they
endanger thy holiness, yet grant it; in opposing thee, they speak thee none of
theirs; nay, they engage Jesus Christ to oppose them, who will lose none of
his; Cadit mundus, sed non cadit Christianus, quia non cadit Christus. Aug Obs.
2.
to pity thee, who will not suffer thee to be tempted above thy power. Let the
world fall, yet a Christian falls not, as long as Christ stands.

2. Then God keeps most graciously, when he keeps us from sin: then he keeps us
as his own people. He keeps from sickness or poverty by way of a general
providence, but from sin by way of peculiar preservation: whatever other
preservation he bestows without this, it is but a reservation to eternal ruin.
Christ, that loves all his members most tenderly, never desired of his Father,
to keep them free from outward troubles: he prays, not that he should take
his disciples out of the world; Joh. 17.15.
but keep them from the evil: Not that they should be exempted from sufferings,
but preserved from sin, the evil: that they might never side with the times
against God, that they might never apostatize, or forsake the truth: Every one
seeks safety, but who desires this true safety, this soul-safety? Worldly
policy would that a man sleep in a whole skin; but true wisdom puts a man upon
preserving a whole conscience: A whole skin countervails not for a wounded
conscience. And yet this is the study of the times, every one labors to save
one, to fall upon his feet, to keep from being plundered, etc. but who study to
be kept from offending God? If thou could as easily keep thy self from Gods
wrath, as from man's, by all thy projects, thy policy would be a good pattern;
gain in the chist, and loss in the conscience is but a bad exchange: he that
will save his life when he should lose it, shall lose it when he would save it.
Fear not troubles, because he sleeps not that preserves thee; but fear sin,
because he sleeps not that observes thee: Account it a greater mercy in all the
sinful agitations of these times, that God has kept thee from being an actor,
then a misery that God has made thee a sufferer.

3. Obs. 3. Psalm. 37. Psalm. 91.
The people of God are never unsafe. If the Lord be the Watchman, what though
it be an estate, a life, nay, a soul that is the City, we should not fear the
loss of it: The meanest of the people of God stir not out without their
lifeguard; Agnoscit se just dedisse stultae securitatis poenam; est etiam
filiis Dei pia securitas. Calv. inloc. Psalm. 30.6. 1 Pet. 4.19. 1 Pet. 2.23.
if they wanted, there is not a creature in heaven or earth but would take their
part; they are the hidden, the secret, the preserved ones. Security is not so
great a sin as distrust, our Friend being much more able to help, then our Foes
to hurt. What one said sinfully, every child of God may say holily, I shall
never be moved. We must commit our selves to God in well-doing. Christ, though
he committed himself not to man, (knowing what was in man) yet himself living
and dying he committed to his Father; we do quite contrary. Find out the
danger in which God cannot, or the time when God did not, or the Saint (for to
him I speak) that God has not kept, and then distrust him. Say not, If worse
times (yet) come, what shall I do to be kept? Will not he that provided a City
of refuge for those that killed men, find out a City of refuge for thee, when
men labor to kill thee for God? Has God so many chambers, so many mansions in
his house, John 14.2.
so many hiding places upon the earth, (his, with the fullness of it) in the
earth, in heaven, and shall his children be shut out? Thy work is not to be
solicitous how to be kept, but how to be fit to be kept; labor to be always in
well-doing, then who will harm thee? Keep faith and a good conscience; keep
never a sin allowedly in thy soul; do thy part, and let God alone with his. but
this is our busy sinfulness, we will needs be doing of Gods work, and neglect
our own.

4. Obs. 4.
A strong engagement lies upon Gods people, to endeavor the preservation of
Gods honor. It Is true in this case, Protection draws allegiance: If he be a
wall of fire to us, our souls and bodies; let not us be a rotten hedge when we
should defend his Name, Servants, Ordinances: if he be a tower, let not us be a
tottering wall. Let us labor to say, Lord, he that touches thine honor,
touches the apple of mine eye. If we look that God should keep us in our, we
must maintain his cause in its danger.

5. Obs. 5.
The gainsayers of perseverance are deceived. Their doctrine most clearly (as
has been proved) opposes Scripture, and most incurably wounds a Christians
comfort. What joy can we have, that our names are written in the book of life,
if again they may be blotted out? The life of our mortal life is the hope of
an immortal; but how unsteddy a foundation of hope is the stedfastness of our
wills? nay, thus, faiths foundation is overturned; it is this, He that believes
shall be saved: but this opinion says, Some that believe shall not be saved;
for it maintains, that some who truly believe do not persevere; and those which
do not persevere shall not be saved: it makes the decree of God to depend upon
man's most uncertain will. Arminians say that believers shall persevere, if they
be not wanting to themselves, if they always will persevere. But what is this,
but to say, Believers shall persevere, if they persevere? for, always to will
to persevere, and to persevere, are all one. Its a prodigious error, to hold
that God works nothing in us for perseverance, the effectual use whereof
depends not upon man's free will. God gives (says an Arminian) to persevere, if
we will: but God gives (say We) Nobis qui vere Christo insiti sumus, talis data
est gratia, ut non solum possimus si velimus, sed etiam ut velimus in Christo
perseverare, Aug. de Cor. and gra. c. 11. and 12. Non solum ut sine isto dono
perseverantes esse non possint, verum etiam ut per hoc donum non nisi
perseverantes sint.
to will to persevere. And how can we pray to God for perseverance, the
condition whereof depends upon man's will, and not upon Gods working. Christ
promises ( Joh. 14.16.) to pray the Father to give his disciples his Spirit,
which shall abide with them for ever: now the cause of the abiding of the
Spirit for ever with them, is not their will to have the Spirit abide in them:
but the abiding of the Spirit was the cause of their willingness. I conclude,
According to this Arminian error of falling from grace, its possibe that there
may not be one elect person; for if one finally fall away, why may not another?
and by the same reason, why not all? and then where is the Church, and to what
end is the death of Christ?

Lastly, He that will approve himself a true, Obs. 6. (...). Arist. Roh. l. 2.
c. 21.
must show himself a steadfast Christian: All the sanctified are preserved:
Instability is an argument of insincerity: He was never a true friend, that
ever cease to be a friend. What has levity to do with eternity? an
inconstant Christian with an eternal reward? Not he that comes first (in this
race of Christianity) is crowned; but he that holds out to the last. All that
which is done of any thing, is held as nothing, as long as any thing remains
to be done. If any one draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb.
10.38. A thatched roof suits not a precious foundation; nor a wicked
conclusion, beautiful beginnings of Christianity. Within a while all
possibilities of falling will be removed: one style or two more, and thou art
(happily) at thy fathers house; Difficilius saepius inchoare, quam semel
perseverare.
the longer thou continuest, the sweeter will be the ways of God, Its harder
often to begin, then once to persevere. Take heed of falling from thy
steadfastness: God preserves us, but we our selves must not be negligent. Get a
sound expecience of the truth thou professest; tasting the sweetness, as well
as hearing of its sweetness. Follow not Religion (as some hounds do the game)
only for company. Love the truth for single, not sinister respects: Let Christ
be sweet for himself. Tremble at the very beginnings of sin; look upon no sin
as light; keep a tender conscience; as our apparel, so our consciences, when
spotted, become neglected. Apostasy has modest beginnings: the thickest ice
that bears a cart, begins with a tender film, not able to bear a pibble: the
least enemy must not be neglected. Presume not on thy own strength: He that
carries grace in a proud heart, carries dust in the wind; a proud man is
arbor decorticata, a tree whose bark is off; humility keeps in the sap of
grace. Shun the occasions of sin; its easier to pass by the snare, then to get
out. Lastly, Pray to be preserved: from God is it that we stand: we are reeds
tied to a pillar. The wicked go out of the way; and they call not upon God,
Psalm. 14.3, 4.

This for the handling of the first particular in the second Privilege; viz.
the kind of it, Preservation.

The second follows; viz. The ground of this their preservation: In Christ
Jesus. Briefly.

1. To explain it. 2. To collect Observations.


1. For Explication: The faithful may be said to be preserved in Christ two
ways.

1. Merito passionis, by the merit of his suffering: And thus he saves from the
wrath and curse of God: There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.1. He saves from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. The
chastisements of our peace were upon his head, and by his stripes we are
healed, Isa. 53. He was as the brazen Serpent in healing the beholders. All
miseries (as curses) have left their stings in his side. He was the true
Passover, for whom all the Judgments of God pass over us: his Cross is the
tree cast into the waters of Marah, to take away their bitterness: his
ignominy, our glory; his poverty, Paupertas Christi patrimonium meum. Ambr.
our patrimony.

2. We are preserved in Christ, Efficacia operationis, by his effectual
working in us, and bestowing upon us such supplies of grace, as that we never
fully and finally depart from God: and this is effected two ways. 1. On
Christ's part, He sending his Spirit to work in us. 2. On our parts, Faith is
enabled by his Spirit to receive continued supplies of strength from him.

1. His Spirit of grace, called the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. Gal. 4.6.
v. 9. is bestowed upon us, he interceding with his Father for that end: I will
pray the Father (says he) and he shall give you another Comforter, Joh. 14.16.
If I depart, Spiritus Vicarius Christi.
I will send him unto you: And this presence of the Spirit working and
continuing grace, is the fruit of those prayers for proservation of his people.
I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not (says Christ to Peter) Luke
22.32. and, I pray that thou would keep them from the evil, Joh. 17.15. And
the Apostle ( Romans 8.34.) from the Intercession of Christ, inferrs the
certainty of perseverance: -- Who also makes intercession for us: Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? etc. Now this Spirit sent by Christ into
the hearts of his people, preserves them, both by working, and strengthening
their union with Christ: In the former, Romans 8.9. Romans 6.
conveying a life, and bestowing a permanent principle of holiness upon them;
1 John 3.9.
putting into them a seed that shall never dye, infusing an habit of holiness
never to be lost. In the later, Phil. 1.19. Ephesians. 3.16. Phil. 4.13.
affording daily supplies, and strengthening them with might to resist all
tentations, to bear all burdens, to go through all conflicts, to thrive by all
Ordinances, to rest upon all the promises, to act their graces with vigor, to
mourn for sin committed, Romans 8. 2 Cor. 12.8.
call and cry for grace which is wanting; the Spirit directing in doubts,
quickening in deadness, comforting in sorrows, interceding in prayer, etc.

2. John 15.4, 6. Ephesians. 3.17.
On our part we are preserved in Christ by his operation, when faith is enabled
by the Spirit to adhere and cleave unto him, to unite and fasten us unto him,
making Christ to dwell in our hearts, incorporating us into him as the branches
are in the tree, or as the root is fastened in the soil, the member in the
body, or the house upon the foundation; this grace joining and making us adhere
to Christ so strongly, that having fastened upon him, there is no plucking of
the soul from him.

And thus, as Christ lays hold upon us, and takes us by the hand with his
Spirit; so we lay hold upon him, and take him by the hand with our Faith,
whereby the union is complete and reciprocal, Our beloved ours, and we his.
And from this uniting and closing work of faith, by the Spirit, flows the
preservation of a Christian, as the weak branches of a Vine are upheld by
fastening about the prop, and the house by abiding on the foundation, or a weak,
slender reed by being tied to a pillar. But yet faith rests not here, but
improves this union, and by virtue of it Habemus sapientiam, justitiam,
sanctitatem Christi, non quatenus speculamur Christu^ quatenus long a nobis
existentem, sed quatenus incorporamur Christo, quatenus habemus Christum in
nobis manentem. De font hujus spiritualis plenitudinis accipere non possumus,
nisi in illo simus; et boc discriminis est inter fontem naturalem and
spiritualem. Dau. in Col. p. 248. John 1.16.
draws continual supplies of grace and strength from Christ, as the root from
the soil, or the branches from the root, or the pipe from the fountain. Hence
it is that we live by faith, Gal. 2.20. because our faith is the instrument
that draws virtue from Christ to relieve and sustain us in all our wants, Faith
and Christ being well met; Christ is very full, and loves to be giving; Faith
very empty, a covetous grace, and loves to be receiving of his fullness. It
suffices not faith to be in the fountain, unless it drink of the fountain; to
be in Christ, unless it receive from Christ; to unite us as members to the
head, unless it supplies us as members from the head; from the head all the
body by joints and bands has nourishment ministered: Col. 2.19.
the Spirit on the part of Christ, and faith on ours are those (...), those
joints and instruments of connection betwixt Christ and us, whereby a Christian
is not only knit to Christ his head, and a kind of spiritual continuity
between Christ and him is caused; but has nourishment ministered, (...), is
furnished or supplied with all suitable furniture plentifully, necessary to
preservation of grace, all things that pertain to life and godliness; 2 Pet.
1.3. Romans 8.10. 2 Cor. 8.9.
justifying grace to preserve us from the guilt of sin, supplies of sanctifying
grace to preserve us from the filth of sin in us, and the force of tentation
without us, 1 John 5.11.
in both respects faith drawing preservation from Christ, in whom life is, nay,
Col. 3.4.
who is our life. And faith makes use of the Ordinances, but as conduit-pipes
or watercourse to conveigh from Christ those supplies of grace it wants,
esteeming of Prayer, Word, Sacraments, without Christ, but as a vial without a
cordial, a plaster without salve, a pipe without water.

This for the explication of the second particular in the second Branch, In
whom they were preserved, In Jesus Christ.

The Observations follow.

1. Every one out of Christ lies open to all danger: Obs. 1.
his temporal preservation is at best but by common providence; but its cursed
as well as common: 2 Timothy 4.18.
he is reserved to the day of wrath, not preserved to that everlasting kingdom
of which Paul speaks. Kept he is, but as a prisoner, whose provisions do but
strengthen him to go to execution: he has no guard from wrath, because no
shelter from sin. Sinner, thy security is not from want of danger, but
discerning; and did thou know it, thou would no more rest one hour without
laboring for Christ, then a man would securely go to bed when his house is on
fire about his ears. Is It not a curse for thy soul to be Satan's for egress and
regress? For God to let thee lie as a Common without an hedge, to wander as a
lamb in a large place, without a shepherd, without a fold, a prey to every
beast of prey? Thou will not let God be a hedge to keep thee from straying, and
he will not be a hedge to preserve thee from devouring. How dreadful is it to
be at the cruel courtesy of every Devil, every tentation? Thou labourest to
keep thy treasure safe; nay, thou have a hole to hide thy swine in: but thy
poor soul has not where to hide its head. What is it to have the protection of
a State for thy goods and body, to have the benefit of the Law; and to be
without the protection of God in Christ, and to want the benefit of every
promise in the Bible? Was it dangerous to be shut out of the Ark, when the
waters swelled; to be shut out of a City of refuge, when the avenger of blood
pursued; to want blood upon the door-posts, when the Angel was destroying? and
it is not dangerous to be without a Jesus to deliver thee from the wrath to
come? You that will not be preserved from Satan as a seducer in your life,
shall not be preserved from him as a destroyer at your death: Christ will then
be a shelter worth the having; get into him while you live: The drowned world
called to Noah too late for admission, when the waters were come to the top of
the mountains. The heavens are black, the times gloomy, the storms swift and
sweeping, oh let not thy approaches to thy shelter be delayed; Run to thy
tower, not the paper-tower of thine own merits: Lock up thy self in the wounds
of Christ; there is nothing else can profit in the day of wrath: The storm will
go through every other refuge.

2. Obs. 2.
Hypocrites will not be steadfast. One out of Christ cannot be preserved, be
persevering: They who are not built on the Rock, Munimur quatenus unimur.
cannot stand in the fury of floods. Union to Christ is the cause of
permanency. The hope of the hypocrite is as the spiders web; nor is his
holiness more permanent. It Is not a union by profession, but by real
implantation, that makes thee persevere. A stake thrust into the ground, may
easily be plucked up; it is the rooted tree that will stand: A painted
profession will never hold out; fire and water never be endured by it: if the
heart be not set aright, the spirit will not be steadfast with God. Psalm. 78.8.
There are many end in apostasy; the reason is, they never begun in sincerity.
How few real Saints are there in suffering times? An unsound body discovers it
self in a cold season; a rotten apple in a windy day. Never think to stand
long, if thou stand loose from Christ: Loose things that lie close upon the
land, will be parted in the water; so will Christ and an Hypocrite in
sufferings: He that has no strength from Christ, will prove too weak to bear
burdens. He that believes not, will never be established. A poor, humble,
dependent soul will stand when he fears he shall fall; a proud Hypocrite will
fall when he thinks he stands.

3. Obs. 3.
In all dangers its our wisdom to have recourse to Christ, and improve our
interest in him. Its not enough to have, unless we use Christ, and fly to this
tower in which we have a propriety, that we may obtain preservation. Its the
grand design of Satan to encourage a presuming sinner to make use of Christ,
and to discourage an humble believer from approaching toward him: to suffer the
multitudes boldly to throng about Christ, but to dismay a poor trembling woman
to touch the hem of his garment: he emboldening thieves to possess what is
another, but disheartning owners from using what is theirs: he laboring,
because he cannot destroy a believers grace, to disturb a believers peace. But
if fear of wrath assault the conscience, there is preservation from that in
Christ: There Is room enough in his wounds to hold, and readiness enough in his
heart to receive all that fly unto him. Christ is a shadow against the heats of
justice, a City of refuge against the pursuits of wrath, an Ark against the
flood of vengeance, a passover in neernesse of destructions: He is able to the
full to save those that come unto him: And if any come unto him, he will in no
wise cast him out. In the solicitations of sin, improve the death of Christ;
beg of him lend thee the quenching power or his blood, when lust is kindling.
In the feebleness of thy graces, the deadness of thy heart, the faintness of
thy faith, the gasping of thy gifts, Psalm. 51.
the decays of fervor, beseech him not to take away his Spirit, but to
strengthen thee in the inward man with supplies of spiritual life, and
influences of his grace. In sufferings from the world, go to him for strength
that has overcome the world, Joh. 16. uit.
to make thee find thy enemies conquered, and thy self more then a conqueror;
that his comforts may be real, and the sufferings from the world but appearing.

4. How fearful should we be of that which weakens our union to Christ. Obs. 4.
There Is nothing but sin that endangers the souls preservation, because nothing
but that endangers Christ's departure, and so puts it out of Christ's protection.
Sin obstructs supplies of strength from Christ, and so stops the spouts of
mercy: Sin cuts off the locks, and makes believers a prey to Philistims. Christ
and preservation, sin and unsafenesse are undivided couples: The faithful
enjoying Christ, are quiet and confident in the midst of all their troubles;
but letting in sin, they are fearful and unsafe in the midst of all their
pleasures. A child at play complains not of the dust in which it rouls and
tumbles, but if the least dust get into the eye, it presently begins to cry:
The people of God, while troubles are upon them, are safe; but when they are
within them, when sin sends away Christ, then begins their woe: Sin can never
quite bereave a Saint of his jewel, his grace; but it may steal away the key of
the cabinet, his assurance: he may not know where to find his grace when he
stands most it need of it. Grieve not that holy Spirit which unites Christ to
the soul, and supplies the soul with Christ: Grieve not that Spirit in thy
joys, which only can rejoice thee in thy griefs: The Spirit of Christ is a
tender thing. When J^seph manifested himself to his brethren, the Egyptians we^
made to go forth; and when the Spirit discovers the love o^ Christ to us, there
must not be a lust allowed in us.

5. Obs. 5.
I note The great happiness by the second, abov^ what was enjoyed from the
first Adam. We were holy in the first, but are preserved only in the second
Adam; in the former holiness was perfect only, in the later it is permanent;
in Adam we had a power to stand if we would, in Christ we have grace that makes
us will: Adam had life, but lost it, and derives death; Christ has life, keeps
it, and communicates it. Oh the goodness of God, that he should take occasion
by man's hurting himself, to do him good; and after his falling, not only to
raise him up, but to keep him up, to keep him (as the Apostle afterward) from
falling! A mercy, which as it requires thankfulness, Felicior Job in
sterquilinio, quam Adamus in Paradiso. Subjiciuntur miscriis, non rejiciuntur
cum miseris.
so it opposes high-mindednesse. Job on the dunghill, was more safe then Adam
in that place which was the beauty of the earth. Though the faithful may be
cast into miseries, yet they perish not with the miserable. But though we
stand longer then Adam stood, yet by our selves we stand not at all: we live in
a continued dependence upon Christ, if he withdraw his manu-tenency, Romans
11.18, 20.
the higher we are in grace, the lower shall we be in sin: We bear not the
root, but the root bears us, let us not be high-minded, but fear. Who-ever is
preserved in Christ, must not arrogate his preservation to himself: Christ must
have the glory both of our setting out, and holding out.

This for the second Privilege from which the faithful to whom Jude writes,
are described, viz. Their Preservation in Christ.

The third and last follows, viz. Their Vocation: Last in the order of the
Apostles writing, though indeed first in the order of Gods working; the Apostle
hereby expressing the ground of their Sanctification, and their perseverance
therein, viz. Their true and effectual vocation from sin to God at the first:
Called.

Of this Vocation, 1. By way of Explication. 2. By way of Observation.


The word here used signifies sundry sorts of Callings.

1. Not to speak of calling personal, 1 Cor. 7.24. Romans 1.2. Gal. 1.1.
or to a Function and Office, whether oeconomicall, Military, Magistraticall,
or Ecclesiastical, Acts 1.26.
immediate, or mediate, as not being here intended.

2. Nor of that general calling of all persons in the world by the works of
creation, Romans 2.15. and 1.19. Psalm. 19.1. Acts 17.27.
and the light of nature; by which God speaks to heathens.

3. But of that spiritual calling afforded only unto some, Acts 14.17.
which is, to seek happiness and blessedness in Christ.

This is twofold: 1. Only external and ineffectuall. 2. Internal also, and
effectual.


1. Only external, Ps. 147.19, 20. Acts 17.30.
and by the ministry of the Gospel, bestowed sometimes upon Cities, Kingdoms,
Commonwealths: A calling according to means, common to the elect and
reprobates: Mat. 20.16.
Many are called, but few are chosen: Its often inefficacious, as to the saving
good of the hearer. Mat. 23.37. Heb. 4.3. Audiunt multi, obaudiunt pauci.
Christ would have gathered Jerusalem's children, and they would not. The word
preached profited not, because not mixed with faith; God by this external
calling showing what is man's duty, and what was once his ability to perform;
the impairing of which later is no exemption from the former; Joh. 15.22, 24.
and hereby rendering men inexcusable, they knowing what they should do, and not
doing what they know. And also by this merely outward calling men are contained
in external order, abstain from sundry great and heinous sins, are profitable
instruments in a Commonwealth, observe civil Justice, etc. which God often
rewards with temporal blessings.

2. The other sort of this spiritual Vocation is internal and effectual; this
bringing us into the invisible Church, as the other into the visible; this
uniting us to Christ the head, the other tying us to the members; this bringing
to illumination of faith, the other to illumination of knowledge only; this
making us members, the other professors of Christ; this curing and changing,
the other only curbing us; this being a calling according to purpose, and
flowing from election, the other a calling according to means only: The general
way leading to the knowledge of God by the creatures and natural light, or the
mere external revelation of the will of God in the Scriptures sufficing not,
Totus Psalmus in tres parts distribui potest; Prima agit de prima Schola, quae
est universalis, seu omnium hominum communis. Secunda, de Schola particulari,
propria Ecclesiae, penes quam Deus Oracula sua deposuit. Tertia de Schola
specialis gratiae, interna, efficaci, quae ad Unctionem Spiritus refertur, quae
docet vero and salutari modo. Riv. arg. Ps. 19.
without the effectual operation of the Spirit upon the heart; in respect
whereof, (as the learned Rivet well observes) the Psalmist throughout the 19
Psalm sets down a threefold School by which God teaches us, and calls us. 1.
That which is common to all men, by the contemplation of the creatures. 2. That
which is proper to the Church, standing in Gods committing his oracles unto it.
3. That which is internal, and of special grace, efficacious, and to be
referred to the unction of the Spirit, which teaches and calls after a
saving manner. And this is the calling here intended, being that powerful work
of God, calling persons to be what they are not, of sinners to become Saints,
of enemies to become sons; whereby grace is not only offered, but conferred; a
work of Gods Spirit, whereby the elect are not only morally invited, but
efficaciously incited to come to Christ.

For the explanation of which, I shall briefly touch upon six Considerations,
which sweetly agree in three pairs or couples, with the ordinary calls or
invitations which are between man and man.

1. The term from which we are called, with 2. The term to which we are called.
3. The Caller, or who it is that calls; with 4. The persons called. 5. The
Voice wherewith he calls; with 6. The answer to the voice of the Caller.
1. The term from which we are called, is a sinful and damnable state of
nature; expressed in Scripture under terms of greatest terror: We are called
out of darkness, Col. 1.13. Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 4.18. Ephesians. 5.8.
1 Pet. 2.9. turned from darkness: translated from the power of darkness. Man
before his calling is dark in his understanding, as a blind man is said to be
dark, he knows no truth savingly, 1 Cor. 2.14. 3 John 19. Ephesians. 4.11.
sees no commanding beauty in any of the ways of God, accounts them
foolishness; being blind, he loves darkness, and his works are the works of
darkness: he falls every step, sins in every action; every comfort he uses is
a stumbling block, he is afraid of the stirring of every leaf, stirs not a foot
in holiness (as the Egyptians, who in darkness sat still) never enjoying the
light of Gods countenance, always full of grief and trouble (of which darkness
is the emblem,) and ready to fall into utter darkness. Col. 1.13.
An uncalled person is under the power of darkness, Ephesians. 2.2.
born in the kingdom, and under the dominion of Satan, walking according to the
Prince of the power of the air; led captive by him at his will. In a word, we
are called from a state, not of darkness only, and blindness, but slavery,
rebellion, poverty, pain, ignominy, banishment, nakedness, filthiness,
deformity, sickness, the company of lions and leopards, death, perdition, and
every thing that is miserable; all the woes of the world, were they a thousand
times greater, being but a faint representation of the misery of wicked men;
they being miserable within, without, here, hereafter, in life, in death, after
death; liable to the loss of the glorious and soul-ravishing presence of God to
all eternity, and to be tortured with a fire, to which ours is but painted.

2. The term to which we are called is a state of all blessedness; the good of
grace here, and the good of glory hereafter. Isa. 42.7. Acts 26.18. 2 Cor. 4.6.
John 8.12. Luke 16.8.
1 Pet. 2.9. Called into his mavelous light, the light of saving knowledge of
the will of God; such a light as is influentiall, like the light of the Sun, not
that of a Torch; a commanding light to believe and love what we know; this
being a knowledge of things as they are, a seeing divine beauty in every word
and will of God; acounting the things of God foolishness no more: A light that
discovers the deeds of darkness, and makes them loathsome; that makes the
called, walk as children of the light, and of the day; which discovers heaven
in every grace, and hell in every lust. Psalm. 97.11.
This calling is also to the light of joy, sown for the righteous, and only
bestowed upon them; this oil of joy being only put into a vial clean, and
without cracks; joy beyond the joy of harvest; Psalm. 4.7.
joy, more then that of corn and wine, spoil, treasures, nay life; this light
coming from the Sun, the face of God, without which, all the candles in the
world could never make a day for a gracious heart: In a word, a light that
leads to eternal light, the inheritance with the Saints in light. Col. 1.12.
2 Timothy 1.9. Heb. 3.1. Ephesians. 1.18. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Phil. 3.
In which respect the faithful are not only said to be called with an holy,
but partakers of an heavenly calling; and its the Apostles prayer that they may
know the hope of their calling, they being called to a Kingdom, to the
obtaining the glory of Christ; deservedly therefore termed a high-calling. But
why attempt I to give you an Inventory of the benefits by vocation, when
eternity shall be little enough to contemplate them? 2 Thessalonians. 2.14.
Who can think what it is to be called to sanctification, to have of every
grace, the least dram or drop of any one whereof is infinitely more worth then
an ocean, a world of wealth and treasures; to be called to the privileges, as
well as the graces of a Christian, justification of our persons, freedom from
the wrath of God, and all those millions of mountains of sins that before lay
upon us; to be called out of a dungeon of woe (as Joseph out of prison) to be
favorites of the King of glory; to be called to the adoption of sons, liberty
of children, comfortable enjoyment of all bessings, admission with boldness to
the throne of grace, exemption from the least drop of curse in the greatest
deluge of crosses: in a word, to be called to the full fruition of God in
heaven; from not only corruption by and with sin, world, devil, but even from
their very company; not only from curses, but even crosses too; to have the
perfection of all happiness in our God, Psalm. 16. ult.
in whom all delights are concentred, and in comparison whereof, the worlds
ocean of pleasure is not a drop; and to see and have all this to eternity,
without either intermission or amission? This and ten thousand times more is
not a shadow of that substantial happiness laid up in the consideration of
this terminus ad quem, this term to which a Christian is called.

This for the terms of Vocation; the first pair of parallels between man's
calling man, and Gods calling man.

The next pair is 1. The Caller. 2. The Caller.


1. The Caller is God. 2 Timothy 1.9. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 These. 5.24. 2
Pet. 1.3. 1 Pet. 5.10. Romans 8.28. 2 Timothy 1.9.
He has called us with an holy calling. He that calls us is holy. Faithful
is he that has called. He has called out of darkness. The God of all grace
has called us. Our calling depends 1. upon his purpose, it being therefore
said to be according to purpose, he purposing the means with the end. 2. Our
calling depends upon his power; He must draw, otherwise we never follow: He
only calls things that are not, as if they were: He only can call so loud,
Joh. 5.28. Ephesians. 2.1.
that the deaf, the dead should hear: He only who creates, can call; and the
work of creation is in effectual vocation: 2 Cor. 4.6.
he who created the light, can only make us see; he who made, only remaking.
3. The happy estate of our calling is only from his bounty; Gal. 4.6. 1 Cor.
1.9. 1 Pet. 5.10.
exemption from death, devil, world, condemnation; the bestowing of grace,
fellowship with Christ, and the kingdom of glory. Eternal life is the gift of
God.

2. The Called are considerable in this doctrine of vocation: and they fall
under a double consideration. 1. In respect of themselves; and so they are
sinners with others. Paul tells us, 2 Timothy 1.9. Praedestinavit nos Deus antoquam
essemus, vocavit cum aversi essemus, justificavit cum peccatores essemus,
glorificavit cum mortales essemus. Nemo dicat ideo, me vocavit, quia colui
Deum: Quomodo coluisses, si vocatus non suisses? Aug. ser. 16. de verb. Ap.
that we are called, not according to works: we are not called because of our
good works; but because we are called, therefore are our works good. When
Abraham was called, he worshipped other Gods, Josh. 24.2. Paul was called when
he breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Church, Act. 9.1. Gal.
1.13. Rich Zacheus, when an extortioner, nothing better by nature then the rich
glutton in hell. God calls those to his kingdom, that are (with Saul) seeking
of asses, and running after worldly trifles: Such were some of you (says Paul)
fornicators, idolaters, etc. but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, etc. 1
Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Elijah and Elisha walked together before the fiery chariot
separated them, then one was taken up into heaven, and the other left upon the
earth: so, till effectual vocation makes the difference, there is no
differrence 'twixt persons, but they all run to the same excess of riot. 2.
Persons effectually called considered in respect of God, are they, and only
they who are elected; this eternal decree and purpose of God being the
foundation of election: Whom he has predestined, them also has he called,
Romans 8.30. And, As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed, Acts 13.48.
and, God has called us with an holy calling, not according to works; but
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the foundation of the world, 2 Timothy 1.9. This purpose of God made the
difference 'twixt Esau and Jacob, Moses and Balaam, David and Saul, Jude and
Judas.

3. The third couple or pair of parallels 'twixt man's calling man, and Gods
calling man, is the Voice of the Caller, and the Answer of the Called.

1. The Voice the Lord makes use of is the Ministry of his word: it being the
ordinary means appointed by God (as the Spirit accompanyeth it) for this
purpose: in the preaching whereof, the Law of God first convinces of the
sinful distance we are in from God, Romans 7.
manifests our misery by reason of sin, and so tames a wild sinner, that now
he will stand still while God speaks to him, although of late he was like the
wild Ass, Jer. 2.24.
snuffing up the wind: the terrible convictions and consternations of the Law
are not to commend us to God, but God to us; not deserving grace, but preparing
for it; though that preparation be also from God: nor are they alike in every
one; God comes to some as on mount Sina, in thunder and lightning; to others,
more stilly and sweetly; yet to all in a way of conviction of sin, and loss in
themselves, Joh. 16.8.
remaining in this condition of distance from God. To old sinners, who have
long lived in sin, God makes conversion more painful (as they say the pains of
childbearing are to women who are more then ordinary in years,) and they who
have been famous for pleasure in sin, are commonly made famous by their greater
apprehensions of wrath for sins: men of deep insight and perspicuity, see sin
more in its colors, then those of duller capacity: Those whom God intends most
to comfort afterward, he often deals most sharply with at first; as the ball
which rises highest, is thrown against the ground hardest; or, as Landlords
that take a great fine of those from whom they are to receive but little rent.
How-ever the terrifyings of the Law are not intended to kill, John 15.3. 2
These. 2.14. Romans 1.16. John 1.13. and 3.6. 1 Pet. 1.23. 2 Pet. 1.4.
but to prepare for curing him whom God is calling; the wounds made by the Law
but making way for the oil of the Gospel, the blood of Jesus Christ. This
Gospel, inviting the poor soul to Jesus Christ, is (as it is actuated and used
by the Spirit) the power of God, an efficacious organ, a spiritual channel for
the conveying grace into the soul; it is the seed cast into the womb of the
soul, and blessed by the forming power of the Spirit, for the begetting of
grace in it, imprinting the image of Chrst, and bestowing the divine Nature
upon it, we being his workmanship by this (through him) efficacious instrument
the Gospel.

2. The Answering to the call stands in the effectualness and prevalency
thereof, in making the called obedient to the Caller's voice, when the heart is
so prevailed with, that its made what it is invited to be, Romans 4.17.
enabled to do what it is exhorted to; when the law is written in the heart,
which is cast into divine Doctrine, Romans 6.17. 2 Cor. 3.18.
as into a mould, and comes forth bearing the stamp and figure of it: when,
beholding the glory of the Lord in the glass of the Gospel, we are changed
into the same image from glory to glory: when the heart ecchoeth to that voice,
Psalm. 27.8.
Seek my face, thus, Thy face, Lord, will I seek: when the Gospel comes not
only in word, 1 These. 1.4, 5. Psalm. 40.7. Acts 16.14. Ezck. 11.19. Jer. 31.33.
and 32.39. Deuteronomy. 30.6. John 5.28.
but in power, and the holy Ghost, and much assurance: when the ear is bored,
the heart opened, the heart of stone (the uncircumcised heart) taken away, and
the heart of flesh (the circumcised heart) is bestowed. In a word, God speaks
to the dead heart, which is made to hear his voice, and live; being now
inclined to embrace that will of God, to which it was refractory, against which
it rebelled formerly; being now made soft, pliable, receptive, yielding, bowed
and obedient.

This for the explication of the third Privilege belonging to the faithful,
viz. Calling.

The Observations follow.*

1. They are mistaken, who teach, Obs. 1. Joh. Arnold. cont. Til. page 397.
That the reason of Gods calling of some rather than others by his Gospel, is
in regard of the greater worthiness of some to partake of it, than of others.
We are all in a state of greatest distance from the Caller, and opposition to
his Call. What worth above others was in the Corinthians, when the Gospel came
first to them? The Apostle tells them, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Such were some of
you; namely, fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, effeminate, abusers of
themselves with mankind, thieves, covetous, drunkards, etc. Commonly, it is the
darkest time of ignorance and profaneness in places immediately before the
dawning of the Gospel, God washing us when we are in our blood, most polluted,
persuading to reconciliation in greatest enmity, calling in most open distance:
2 Timothy 1.9. Romans 9.18. Mat. 11.26. Romans 5.6, 10. Ex duobus, aetate jam
grandibus impiis, Cur iste ita vocetur, ut vocantem sequatur: Ille autem non
ita vocetur, ut vocantem sequatur, nolito judicare, si non vis errare.
Inscrutabilia sunt judicia Dei; Cujus vult miseretur. Aug. de bon. pers. cap. 8.
our calling is not according to works, but according to purpose: so resolved
by Christ, even so, Father, because it seemed good to thee. Else why God
calls one rather then another, do not judge, if thou would not err. Before
calling, we were not only without strength, and full of impotency, but enemies,
and full of antipathy: we are not holy, or willing to be so, and therefore
called; but called, and therefore holy. Men find a thing lovely, and love it;
God loves a thing, and thereby makes it lovely.

2. With as gross an error are they deluded, Obs. 2.
who make this calling of God to stand in moral persuasions: in the persuading
power of threatenings, exhortations, Remonst. Col. Hag. p. 260.
promises of the word, whereby men (say they) are moved or drawn in a most
suitable way to their own nature. That God uses the persuasion of precepts and
promises etc. in his Word, Suavis motus in Verbo, and fortis tractus in Deo.
it is granted; but that in effectual vocation he uses no more, we deny.
Illumination of the understanding barely by the word, is but natural and
common, natural reason being thereby only perfected, not spirituallized; and
with its clearest light apprehending spiritual objects but naturally; and all
the motions of the Will toward any objects which are so apprehended, are but
common and carnal motions; upon a natural man's understanding of threatenings or
promises, when his Will puts forth its motions in fear, love, hope, joy, hatred
toward good or evil, all these motions are proportionable to the light of the
Understanding which bred them; and therefore, as they were caused by
apprehensions of good or evil to ones self, so they amount to no more then
natural propensions to self-preservation. But spiritual illumination, whereby
we see a ravishing beauty and excellency in holiness, and apprehend Christ the
chiefest of ten thousand, valuing every way of God above all the pleasures of
sin, Interna and ineffabili potestate operantur in cordibus hominum, non solum
verae revelationes, sed bonae voluntates. Aug. cont. P. l. 1. c. 24.
is joined with a spiritual motion of the Will toward every way of God in holy
a resolution, vehemence, constancy. How can a bare representation of Gods will,
an objective representation by way of proposal of threatenings, promises, etc.
create or work any real effect upon the heart? why then are not those that know
most, most obedient? why are not those that have the best gifts in knowing how
to represent truths, most successful in their Ministry? why are not Satan's
seducements to evil always more effectual then the Words persuasion to
holiness, he both representing sinful objects, Deuteronomy. 29.3, 4. Joh. 12.37. Neh.
9.29. Joh. 6.36, 37. Isa. 53.1.
and our natural corruption in understanding and will being on his side? How
can the bare proposal of an object make a dead, a deaf man regard? How
frequently have moral entreaties been rejected, when used by the best of men?
What is all the outward shining of light to a blind man? How is bare moral
persuasion that strength which raised up Christ from the dead? Ephesians. 1.19.
Or, what is it in comparison of that new creation, resurrection, renovation,
new birth, afforded in effectual vocation? Moral swasion only moves
objectively, and in the strength of the proposal of a good: Now as a man is, so
will any thing that is propounded seem to him; so long therefore as a man is
natural, and not born again, supernatural blessings propounded to him, cannot
so affect the Will, that he should embrace and receive them: Istam aliquando
gratiam fateatur, qua futurae gloriae magnitudo non solum promittitur, verum
etiam creditur; nec solum revelatur sapientia, sed et amatur; nec suadetur
solum quod bonum est, sed and persuadetur. Aug.
but the Will must be wrought upon by a powerful operation, overcome and
changed, before an offered good can be effectually embraced. All the verbal
entreaties in the world to a man spiritually dead, are but as the rubbing of,
and putting hot waters into the mouth of one that is naturally dead. We are
taught therefore to whom to feek for saving benefit in our enjoyment of the
word: The word is only Gods by way of ordination, and His only by way of
benediction; though he has not taken away his word from us, yet if he take
away himself from his word, 'twil not profit. Whither should we go but to him;
and how, but by him? Draw us, Lord, and we shall follow thee.

3. As much over-seen as the former, Obs. 3. Corvin. contr. Bogerm. p. 263
are they who labor to maintain, that Notwithstanding all the power put forth
in our effectual vocation, there is a liberty in the Will to oppose the work of
conversion, Joh. Goodwin Yo. Eld. p. 66.
even to the frustration and defeature of it: Or, that Putting all the
operations of grace that need to be put into the balance, a man's freewill must
turn the scales, and determine the case, whether a man shall be converted or
no, accept of grace, or refuse it. But, according to this heterodox Position,
it will follow, That not God by his grace, but man by his free will is the
principal cause of his conversion. For, if God by putting forth all his
strength in man's conversion, does no more then afford to the Will a middle
kind of state of indifferency, he concurrs to the act of conversion, or to
the change of the will from that indiffereny, not principally, or
predominantly, but only by way of concomitancy, contingently and conditionally;
namely, if the Will please by its natural power to move from its indifferency:
so that the Will receives from God the less, which is, to be put into a middle
state of indifferency to convert, or not convert; and that which is the
greater, and which determins the act, the Will performs of it self. And in
conversion more must be attributed to man's Will, Si nobis libera quaedam
voluntas ex Deo est quae adhuc potest esse bona vel mala, bona vero voluntas ex
nobis sit; melius est id quod a nobis, quam quod ab illo. Aug. de pecc. mer.
and rem. l. 2. c. 18.
then Gods work: for, None is therefore holy because he may be so if he will,
but because he is truly willing to be so: only the former this opinion
attributes unto God, and the later to free will. And how can the patrons of this
error ever truly pray to God for the grace of his Spirit? what should they
pray for? sufficient grace to convert if they will? no: that is universal, and
received by the worst. Or shall they pray for the good use of that grace?
Neither: for the good use of grace they hold to come from the Will, which must
by no means be determined by God, but be indifferent, whether to convert, or
not: And if God only gives a power to will to convert, but it is alone from
the Will to will to convert, it follows, that Gods grace affords no more help to
John who is converted, then to Judas who is not; and so it will inevitably
follow, That John made himself to differ from Judas by some act of his own,
which he received not from grace, contrary to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7.
Who made thee to differ? For John and Judas are not really made to differ by
grace, neither of them receiving any other grace but to convert if they will,
and they are not made to differ by what they equally receive; Bunez. in 2.
2dae, q. 19, art. 1. cited by that most learned Professor of Divinity, Dr.
Ward, in his Book, called, Gratia discriminans. Cum Deus vult id fieri quod non
nisi volentibus hominibus oportet fieri, inclinat eorumcorda, ut hoc velint.
Aug. de praed. l. 1. c. 20.
therefore they differ in that John would make use of grace afforded, and Judas
would not: whence it follows, that John might thus glory before God; Lord, I
give thee thanks that thou did afford me the help of thy grace, which was a
power for me to will to convert; but the same help thou did afford to Judas,
only I added that which supernaturally thou did not give me, namely, to will
to convert, and to will to use thy help: and when I received no more from thee
then Judas did, yet I have effected that which Judas did not, I being
converted, and he not: and therefore I am no more indebted to thee, then that
Judas who is not converted. But how would such a speech as this grate upon
Christian ears! And therefore it must be yielded, that John received from God
not only a power to be willing to convert, but also the will it self: and this
very thing [ to wil] is ascribed to God by the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.12, 13. It is
God that works in you to will. Non est devotionis, dedisse prope totum; sed
fraudis, retinuisse vol minimum. Prosp. cont. Col. c. ult.
It is not devotion to attribute to God almost all in our conversion; but
deceit to keep back even the least. Now God has promised to give us even the
will it self to believe. Ezekiel. 36. I will cause you to walk in my commands. And
if God work in us this only, to be able to will to convert, but man himself the
will to convert, the greatness of that mystery of predestination mentioned by
the Apostle, comes to nothing; and that profound question, why God calls many
to salvation, to whom he gives not effectual grace whereby they may will to be
converted. This Question (I say) may easily be answered; for, according to the
Arminians, who say, God gives a power only to convert, and the person called
has it from himself actually to convert; it may be answered, Those who being
called, God foresaw to be willing to convert, he elected to life; and those
whom he foresaw not willing to convert, these he passed by: Romans 9.20.33.
And hereby that speech of the Apostle will be altogether superfluous, Who art
thou, O man, that reasonest against God? and that admiration of the Apostle, O
the depth, etc. Nor need an Arminian fear so much, by grantsng this
irresistible, indeclinable, invincible work upon the heart of one that is
converted, that the Will would be ravished, and forced to consent contrary to
its bent, whether it would or no: for when God by his efficacious grace works
in the Will to will, this efficacious grace puts into the Will a non-resistency,
and takes away actual resistency: so that it is as impossible that these two
should co-exist and meet together in the Will, to be wrought upon with
efficacious grace, and to resist, as for the Will in the same moment to resist,
and not to resist; to will to resist, and to will not to resist. So that it is
a contradiction, to say, When efficacious grace determines invincibly and
indeclinably man's Will, it compels the Will, in working upon it whether it will
or no; for that which grace works in it, is this, to will; the Will being never
against the working, Subventum est infirmitati voluntatis humanae, ut divina
gratia indeclinabiliter and insuparabiliter ageretur. Infirmis servavit ut ipso
donante invictissime quod bonum est vellent, De cor. and Gra. c. 12. Prima
gratia data primo Adamo, est, qua fit, ut habeat homo justitiam si velit; sed
gratia potentior est in secundo Adamo, qua fit, ut velit, tantoque ardore
diligat, ut carnis voluntatem contraria concupiscentem, voluntate Spiritus
vincat. Id. Ib. Inspirata gratiae suavitate per Spiritum sanctum, faciente plus
delect are quod praecipit, quam delectat quod impedit. Ea quae pertinent ad
justitiam sic delectant animum, ut quicquid aliud dolor impedit, delectatio
superat, Aug.
when under the working of efficacious grace; the sweetness of grace inspired
by the holy Ghost, making the soul more to be delighted with what is commanded,
than with what would hinder it: which (as Augustine calls it) is a delight
victorious and conquering.

And the truth is, this efficacious determination of the Will by grace, is a
most happy adjutory to the Wills liberty, taking away nothing but only the
pravity and rebellion of it; the holy Ghost tempering its working to the
disposition of the Will, Liberum arbitrium non corrumpitur quoad agendi
radicem, sed terminum. Paul. Ferrius c. 19. p. 6.
that it may act with such liberty as becomes its own nature, and by grace
never be destroyed, but perfected: The Spirit of God not taking away the
natural liberty of the Will which is by creation, but only the pravity
thereof, which comes into it by man's corruption: Grace not slaying, but
sanctifying, and not abolishing, but elevating it to move to a supernatural
good.

4. How are we bound to bless God for his Gospel, Obs. 4.
which is his voice to call us from sin and misery? Admire his goodness, that
when he only calls the most with his works, he should also call us with his
word. What could God do more for a Nation? What are Kingdoms without the
Gospel, but dens of thieves, dungeons of darkness, but as the world without a
Sun? Psalm. 147.
The heathen have not the knowledge of his Law. He made his Gospel dawn, when
we were in our darkest and deepest Idolatry: he called Britain from the
worshipping of [ Apollo and Diana] dumb Idols, to serve the living God. What
was there in us worth the calling to us, when we lay sweltring in such
abominations? When men call either to God or man, it is to get good; but Gods
call was to give good: he called us not because we were good, but to make us
so. Let us not receive the grace of God in vain: In a land of light, tremble to
live in the works of darkness. We having the light of the Gospel, should do
our work better then those who only have the dim light of Nature; O England, be
not weary of it. Take heed of shutting your eyes against the light, or putting
out the light because it shines in your eyes: Be not weary of God. Forget not
your ornaments and attire. Run not away when God calls. Think it not a disgrace
to attend the hearing of that which it is your greatest honor to obey. Let not
your stomach decay because your food is so plentiful. Rejoice in the light not
for a season only. John 5.35.
Let not the Proverb take place here, Every thing is pretty while it is young:
The longer you enjoy, the more rejoice in the word. Let new food find new
stomachs; or rather, the same food continually new brought. Take heed lest
wantonness under, procure a want of the word. While your are on this side
Canaan, love to feed on Manna. What a shame is it, that God should call louder
to us then ever he did to any, and yet that we should hear worse then ever any
did?

5. The dignity and duty of the Ministers of the Gospel: Obs. 5.
1. The dignity; in that God calls by them, they are his mouth, as the Gospel
is his voice. God beseeches by them to be reconciled: they are his
Ambassadors, his Stewards, his fellow-workers, they are fathers, saviors;
their work is for the good of souls; not for the estate with Lawyers, nor for
the body with Physicians: it is the heavenly inheritance which they teach you to
procure, the blood of Christ which they direct to receive. You are led by them
to Christ. Augustine speaks to God thus concerning Ambrose, Ad eum per te
ducebar nescius, ut ad te per eum sciens ducerer.
who was an instrument of his conversion; I was led by thee to him unawares,
that by him I might through knowledge be led to thee. 2. Their duty; Ministers
should labor to uphold the dignity of their calling: the way to do so, is,
more to desire to be profitable, then pompous. Ministers are to call, and cry:
if they be silent, who should speak? If peoples lusts hate a faithful
Minister, yet their consciences (even then) honor him, as is clear in Herod.
Ministers must call aloud, they must tell people of their sin, thunder out the
judgments of God against sleepy sinners: they who must not be dumb dogs, must
neither bite the children in the house, nor spare the thieves. If any sin in a
Minister be unpardonable, it is silence. They must call often, giving line upon
line, not being weary of calling, waiting with patience when a sinner may
repent: Importunity at length may prevail. They are animarum proci, Wooers of
souls to Christ; one denial must not discourage them: All the day long they
must stretch out their hands; they must never be speechless till they die. They
must call in the language of God; 1 Pet. 4.11. 2 Cor. 2.17.
they must speak as the words of God, with demonstration of the Spirit. There
must not be a sinful curiosity in handling the word: better the Grammarian
should reprehend, then the people not understand. Ministers must not so call,
as to cause astonishment, but understanding in people: pithy plainness is the
beauty of preaching. What good does a golden key that opens not? The kingdom of
God is not in word, but power. And as preaching must not be curious, so neither
over-slight, consisting of raw, sudden, indigested meditations: The word must
not be torn, but divided; not tossed, but handled; the Text not named only, but
followed: there must be a diligent kind of negligence in handling the word.
They must not forbid and unbid in their lives, whom they call in their
doctrine. They who are Callers, must live like called ones themselves, not
neglecting that to which they persuade others: The health of a Ministers honor
can never be maintained in the air of a corrupt life. If we would have none to
despise us, we must be examples.

6. Obs. ult.
The called of God should live sutably to their calling. They must walk worthy
of it. If men be called to an office, they must wait upon it accordingly. Romans
12.7.
A base deportment becoms not those in high place: Joseph called to stand
before Pharaoh, throws away his prison-garments: 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Saul called to a kingdom, had another heart. The virtues of him that calls
must be shown: 1. Humility and self-debasing, considering so great a God
regarded so poor a worm. Remember, as it was a dung-hil from whence God took
thee; so thy unwillingness was great to leave it; and how long God was making
thee willing to do good to thy self; how thou had nothing to set up with;
that thy portion was nothing but pride and poverty. 2. Pity to those that are
uncalled: the elect of God must put on bowels; they that have obtained mercy,
must pray that others may do so. Look upon others sins with more trouble than
thine own sorrows: Pity those that cannot pity themselves: weep over their
dying souls; thy soul has been in the state of theirs. Call after others, if
God has called thee, Luke 22.32.
and pray that God would make them hear. Embrace the company of the worst, to
make them good, not as a companion, but a Physician. 3. Contempt of the world:
Acknowledge thy dignity; be above those trifles, which thou (a child) did
magnify. A Christian is called to a kingdom; 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Col. 1.13. Phil.
3.14. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
he has an high calling; all that the world can give him he should lay at his
feet: His heart must be where his treasure is, and his treasure only where
Christ is. Only he can look upon the world as small, who has looked upon
Christ as great. How unsuitable is it to see a King raking in the dunghill, or
making hay with his Scepter? 4. A preferring that voice before all other, which
called thee: Cant. 2.8. John 10. Ephesians. 4.14. Gal. 6.
It is the voice of my beloved: My sheep hear my voice. Let not the voice of a
stranger withdraw thee; Be not tossed up and down with every wind of
doctrine; be not a follower of men: Walk by rule, not example. Whenever the
world, or thy own heart call thee, rather fear them, than follow them. Follow
others, as they Christ. Love that voice of Christ that calls thee from thy
sweetest sin: Value one promise of his above the sweetest music. Let every
Scripture threat be more dreadful than a thunderclap. 5. Delight in calling
upon him that called thee: Prayer is the called souls echo back again to God:
As soon as Paul was called, Acts 9.11.
he prayed. God saw nothing in thee, and yet he called after thee: how much is
there in God, for which thou should call after him? Desire him to draw thee
nearer to himself, to call thee to him closer, to keep thee, as he has called
thee to him. 6. Be thankful for thy vocation, 1 These. 2.12. 2 These. 2.14.
that God should call thee when there was nothing but woe and unwillingness,
and should pass by others better accomplished. Let his free grace have all the
glory. Who shall speak of God, if thou be silent? Let heart, and tongue, and
life advance him.

Hitherto of the two first parts of the Title: viz. 1. The Person who wrote
this Epistle: And 2. The Persons to whom he wrote it.

The Third follows. The Prayer; wherein the person writing salutes the persons
to whom he wrote, contained in the second Verse, in these words:

VER. 2. Mercy unto you, and peace and love be multiplied.
IN which Prayer we consider,

1. The blessings which the Apostle requesteth may be bestowed; which are
three: [1. Mercy. 2. Peace. 3. Love.]

2. The measure in which the Apostle desires they may be bestowed: [ Be
multiplied.]

3. The persons upon whom he prays that these blessings may be in this
measure bestowed: [ Unto you.]

1. In this Prayer, To consider of the Blessings which the Apostle requesteth
for: And first of the first of them, Mercy. Concerning which I shall speak by
way

Of 1. Exposition. Of 2. Observation.
1. For the expository part. Mercy is referred either to Man, or to God.
Misericordia est dolor et aegricudo animi, ex miseria alterius injuria
laborantis conceptus, Cic. in Tus. 4. Misericordia est alienae miseriae in
nostro cord compassio, qua utique si possemus, subvenire compellimur. Aug. de
C.D. l. 9. c. 5. Ex eo appellata est misericordia quod miserum cor faciat
condolescent is alieno malo. (...). Arist. Nemo parricidae supplicio
misericordia commovetur. Cic. Tusc. 4. Mat. 5.7. Luke 6.36. Luc. 10.37. 1 Pet.
3.8. Col. 3.12.



1. To Man: and so mercy is (according to some) a grief of heart arising from
the apprehension of another misery: according to Scripture, Such a holy
compassion of heart for the misery of another, as inclines us to relieve him in
his misery. It is a compassion or sympathy, because it makes the merciful
heart a partaker of the misery of him who is distressed; and therefore (say
some) called misericordia, because it translates the misery of another into the
heart of the merciful. And for this cause it is called the bowels of
compassion, Col. 3.12. 1 John 3.17. Phil. 1.8. and 2.1. So likewise by the LXX.
Pro. 12.10. And to have compassion is usually set out in Scripture by a Verb
that signifies, to have the bowels moved, Mark 6.34. Matt. 14.14. and 15.32.
Mar. 1.41. Luke 7.13. etc. because mercy expresses it self in the bowels
especially; he that is affected vehemently with another sufferings, having his
very intrals and bowels moved and rouled in him, ( Hos. 11.8.) and is affected,
as if the bowels of him that is in misery were in his body: Nor is this
Scripture compassion a foolish pity, whereby a man does unlawfully tender him
that is in deserved misery, as Ahab pitied Benhadad, and Saul Agag against Gods
command; but such a compassion as God approves, a fruit of the Spirit,
commanded and commended in the Word. In this grace of mercy is also
comprehended a forwardness to succor the miserable; the bowels of the
merciful not being shut up, 1 John 3.17. This grace the Scripture honors with
many precepts and promises. A merciful man is Gods Almner, his conduit-pipe to
convey his blessings, his resemblance, like unto his heavenly Father, who is
the Father of mercy.

And that is the second consideration of mercy, as it is referred to God; and so
indeed it is in this place by Jude.

In which consideration of mercy as referred to God, there are three things to
be explained.

1. How mercy can be attributed to God. 2. What sorts of mercy are attributed
to God. 3. What be the properties of the sorts of mercy attributed to God.
1. How mercy can be attributed to God: Not as it is an affection of grief for
the misery of another: But 1. As it signifies a promptitude and forwardness of
the will to succor the miserable: Not as it is miseria cordis, or as to be
merciful is taken passively, for one to be a fellow-sufferer; Zanc. de Not.
Dei l. 4. c. 4. q. 1. Misericordem hominem appellare solemus^, non passive, qui
miserum habet cor (talis enim potius est miser, quam misericors); sed active,
hoc est, illum qui miscro homini ex cord cupit succurrere. Si licuit
Augustino, dicere quod sit cordis miseria, ex alterius miseria concepta: our
non liceat nobis dicere, misericordiam dici, quia nobis sit cordi alterius
miseria? Misericordia duo importat; unum tanquam essentiale, aliud tanquam
accidentale: Primum est promptitudo voluntatis ad subveniendum miseris; alterum
est passio tristitiae, quae oritur in appetitu ex cognitione miseriae alterius,
quantum ad primum sum est in Deo, non quantum ad secundum. Rich. d. 46. a. 2.
qu. 1. lib. 4. Zech. 2.8. Acts 9.4. Exodus 34. Psalm. 100.5. Psalm. 145.9.
but as it is miseria cordi, (as learned Zanchy distinguishes) and as to be
merciful is taken actively, for one so to be mindful of the miseries of
others, that he desires, and is willing from the heart to help them. Suffering
with the distressed in their miseries, is not essential to mercy, but only
accidental, in regard of our nature, which is so subject to passions, that
without a fellow-feeling we cannot look upon the miseries of those whom we
love; and this is not in God: but a propension and inclination of will to
relieve the miserable (which is the essential part of mercy) is most properly
and abundantly in God; although sympathy or fellow-feeling be often attributed
to God improperly, and by way of resemblance to humane affections, for the
relieving of our capacities, and strengthening our faith: And in respect of
this propensenesse and willingness in God to help the distressed, are we to
understand those Scriptures where God calls himself merciful, and of great
mercy; that is, of a most forward nature to help us in our distresses.

2. Mercy is attributed to God, as it signifies Gods actual helping and
relieving us in our distresses; as he bestows those blessings upon us
spiritual or bodily, which proceed from his alone mercy: and of this are those
places of Scriptures to be understood, where God is said to have, or show
mercy, as Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will. 1 Timothy 1.13. I found mercy,
because I did it ignorantly. In which places mercy is put for calling to
Christ, So Psalm. 136. Romans 11.31. 2 Timothy 1.18.
and all graces which follow it. These works or effects of mercy being various
and innumerable, it comes to pass, that (though mercy be single and one in God)
the Scripture speaks of it in the plural number: as Genesis 32.10. 2 Cor. 1.3.
Romans 12.1.

2. sorts or kinds of Gods mercy: It is either 1. A general mercy, extended to
all creatures in common, as there is no creature in any misery which in some
respect he does not succor; he giving food to the hungry, warmth by wool, and
sundry sorts of skins to the naked; medicine by many kinds of herbs; the Sun,
the Clouds, the Winds, the Rain to refresh the earth severally: Psalm. 147.9.
Luke 6.37. Psalm. 145.15.
and thus he is merciful to the elect and reprobate, just and unjust, nay men
and beasts.

Or 2. A special mercy bestowed upon the elect alone, different from the former
both in regard of Gods will to help, as also in regard of the effects of that
will. John 6.39.
It Is the will of God that the Elect should be delivered from their sins, his
wrath, Satan's power, the sting of death, and that they should obtain eternal
life in Christ: Isa. 62.4. Mal. 1.10.
the will and pleasure of God is to do them good, they are his hephsibah; but he
has no pleasure in, or special love to others. The effects likewise of his
will to help are different toward the elect, from those he expresses upon the
reprobate; Romans 9.15, 18. 1 Timothy 1.13. Romans 11.31. Psalm. 103.13. Psalm. 32.10.
Psalm. 86.5.
he calling effectually, justifying, redeeming, glorifying the elect. The Lord
pitieth them that fear him. He that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass
him about. The Lord is plenteous in mercy to them that call upon him. Of others
he says, I will deal in fury, mine eye shall not spare, Ezekiel. 8.18.
neither will I have pity: The elect are vessels of mercy, the other of wrath:
To the former he is merciful in bestowing upon them an eternal, to the later,
in affording a temporal life. These two differing as much, as the mercy with
which a man regards his beast, does from that wherewith he tenders his son; the
beast is fed to be slain, or to be fit for labor; the son to be preserved, and
out of a paternal care for his good: To the wicked God affords a drop, to the
godly a draught of mercy; to the wicked, the crumbs under the table, to the
godly, Christ with all his benefits, that bread of life which endures to
eternal life.

This special mercy of God here prayed for by the Apostle, is distinguished
according to those several miseries of his people in which he succors them.
Take a taste of the kinds of it.

God is merciful 1. With a preventing mercy, when he makes us holy, of unholy
ones; he loved us first: He waited to show mercy, Isa. 30.18. he doing good to
us when we knew him not: Ezekiel. 16.22.
Pitying us when we were in our blood; regarding us, when we neither regarded
him nor our selves; keeping us from falling into the sins to which of our
selves we were prone. So that, as in respect of good, we are what we are from
Gods mere mercy; so, in respect of evil, we are not what we are not from the
same mercy.

2. He is merciful to his with a forgiving mercy: fully freeing them from
wrath; their sins are as if they never had been, blotted out as a cloud, Isa.
44.22. thrown into the bottom of the sea, Mic. 7.19. though sought for, yet not
to be found, Deus vindictae gladium miserationis oleo exacuit.
Jer. 50.20. In a sea of affliction there is not a drop of wrath: The faithful
are looked upon as sons, not as malefactors; their sufferings are not to
satisfy God, but to sanctify them, Heb. 12.6, 7.

3. He is merciful with accepting mercy, taking in good part the desires of
the soul, whenas it finds not to perform; accepting a sigh in stead of a
service; a cup of cold water, a mite, a broken reed, smoking flax, a groan in
stead of a duty, the stammerings of his child above the eloquence of a beggar,
a broken heart as the box of spike-nard.

4. Hos. 14.4.
He is merciful with re-accepting mercy; looking upon a returning Prodigal as
a son; pitying as a father, not punishing as a Judge; Isa. 55.7.
multiplying to pardon, receiving back-sliders again.

5. He is merciful with providing mercy; supplying all our wants; suffering no
good thing to be wanting to us; Psalm. 23.2 Pet. 1.3. Psalm. 84.11.
always giving what we need, if not what we would; either asswaging, or
answering our desires; bestowing temporal blessings in subordination, not
opposition to eternal blessedness: giving us, if not riches with godliness,
contentment with our poverty.

6. He is merciful with directing mercy in our doubts, guiding us by his
counsels; Psalm. 73.24. Gal. 6.16.
showing us the way wherein we are to walk; being eyes to us in our blindness,
light in our darkness, a teacher in our ignorance, a pillar and a cloud in
every wilderness, giving his Word for a rule, his Spirit for a guide.

7. Merciful he is with sustaining mercy, upholding us in all our distresses,
making every affliction fordable, and carrying us through, visiting us in
prison, feeding us through our grate, knowing our souls in adversity, Psalm.
94.18.
leading us gently, proportioning our burdens to our back; casting a tree into
every Marah, shining through every shower, sending supplies in every siege, 2
Cor. 12. Luke 22.32.
making his grace sufficient for us in all our buffetings, keeping us from
being swallowed up of sin, and our grace from being totally obliterated.

8. Merciful with quickening, enlivening mercy to any holy duty; so that we can
do all things; Phil. 4.13.
making us a willing people, oyling the wheels of our souls, putting into us
delight in his law, Psalm. 119.
so that we account it sweeter then our appointed food, and run the ways of
his commandments: he giving, as work and wages, so hands.

9. Merciful with a restoring, recovering mercy; and that, not only from sin
and miseries; but even by them: 1. From them, bringing out of every distress,
bodily and friritual; causing every cloud to blow over, making the longest
night to end in a morning; raising us after the fowlest fall, and out of the
deepest grave, Psalm. 103.9. Joel 2.13. Lam. 3.22. Hab. 3.2.
making faith to work out of the greatest Eclipse; he chides not for ever, but
repents him of the evil; through his mercy he suffers us not to be consumed: In
wrath he remembers mercy. 2. By sin and miseries, making our afflictions, nay
our very sins to work for our good, and all the smutchings with both to make us
brighter, more humble, watchful; and our fiery trials to burn in sunder only
our bonds.

10. Romans 8.28.
Merciful with crowning mercy, when he brings us into heaven; 2 Timothy 1.18.
there he perfectly freeing us not only from the contagion by, but even the
company of every sin: nay, the fear of ever being annoyed again thereby;
delivering us from impure hearts, and imperfect graces, from foyles, from
fighting, from all our causes of complaint: he then giving for every combat we
have had, a crown, for every tear, a pearl, for every light affliction, a mass
of glory, for a drop of gall a sea of joy, for appearing troubles, real
blessedness: 2 Timothy 1.18.
This is the mercy of that day, crowning mercy.

3. properties of Gods mercy; 1. Its full: 2. Its free.

1. Its a full and unmeasurable mercy: the unmeasurablenesse whereof is set
forth 1. More generally, when God is said to be plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 86.5.
1 Pet. 1.3. Ephesians. 2.4. Psalm. 108.4. Psalm. 51.1. Neh. 9.19. Psalm. 103.11. 2
Cor. 1.3. Psalm. 145.9. Psalm. 33.5. Matt. 5.15.
abundant, rich in mercy, his mercy great, above the heavens, his mercies
unsearchable, high as the heaven is from the earth; multitudes of tender
mercies. 2. More particularly, the unmeasurableness of his mercy is set forth,
1. In that there is no creature in heaven or earth but tastes of it: His
mercies are over all his works; the very dumb creatures speak him merciful:
The whole earth is full of his goodness: he preserves man and beast; nay, his
enemies.

2. In that resemblances to set forth his mercy, are taken from the most
tenderhearted creatures: Hos. 11.4.
he draws with the cords of a man: He pitieth as a father; nay, more then the
most tenderhearted mother does her sucking-childe; he gathers people as a
hen does her chickens: He has bowels of mercy, Isa. 49.15. Jer. 31.20. Luke
1.78.
and such as sound; and therefore his mercy pleases him; he delights to show
mercy, he forgets not his mercy.

3. He is the fountain of the mercy and mercifulness in all the creatures in
the world toward one another: the mercies of all parents to their children, of
every mother to her little ones, of every Christian, of every tenderhearted
person, of every beast and foul to their young ones, are but drops that come
from the sea of Gods mercy; he is the Father of mercies. 2 Cor. 1.3.


4. He can deliver from every misery: Bread takes away hunger, drink thirst,
clothes nakedness, knowledge ignorance; but no creature can take away every
misery: Phil. 4.19. 2 Cor. 1.3 Psalm. 23.1. Psalm. 34.10
whereas God is the God of all comfort, he supplies all our wants, comforts in
every trouble, he has a plaster for every sore, is a Physician for every
disease, inward and outward: and so merciful is he, that in the very not
removing of miseries, he is merciful: Were it not for trouble, how should
corruption be killed, holiness increased, 1 Cor. 11.32 Heb. 12.10
heaven be sweet, eternal crowns and triumphs be enjoyed?

4. He is merciful to his enemies: full of patience and forbearance, expecting
their return many years together; giving them rain, and fruitful seasons, Acts
14.17 Mat. 5.15
filling their hearts with gladness, notwithstanding they sin and fight against
him with all his goodness; yea, so merciful is he, that in their greatest
enmity to him, Romans 5.10
he has often done them the greatest good, changing their hearts, and making
them his friends.

6. He bestows mercy with greatest frequency and reiteration: he has many,
manifold mercies, Psalm. 51.1 Psalm. 40.5
mercies for thousands, more than can be expressed: innumerable are the sins of
one man; how innumerable the sins of the whole world? how numberless then are
those mercies of forbearance expressed every time sin is committed, there being
so many millions of sinners, every one committing so many millions of sins?
innumerable are the morsels of food, drops of drink, the motions, deliverances,
provisions received by one man; what then are those received by a whole world?
and every such expression is a mercy.

7. The mercy of God is eternal, 1 King. 8.2^
and therefore immeasurable: he keeps mercy for ever: he will not take away
his mercy from his servants: Psalm. 89.2 Psalm. 23. ult. Psalm. 103.17 Psalm. 136
it shall follow them all the days of their life: his mercy shall be built up
for ever: It endures for ever: it is from everlasting to everlasting: He may
hide his face for a moment (though that is but according to our thinking) but
with everlasting mercies will he receive us. Isa. 54.7, 10
The hills may be removed, and the mountains may depart, but Gods covenant of
peace shall not be removed. God never repented himself of bestowing his best
mercies.

8. Gods Mercy is so immeasurable, that to help us out of our miseries, he that
was God sustained them himself: It had been mercy, to have helped us by
speaking comfortably to us; more, to have helped us by the bounty of his hand;
but, to help us out of misery by bearing our miseries, by coming to man, by
becoming of man, by suffering so much pain, hunger, ignominy, griefs, wounds,
nay death for man! Oh, immeasurable mercy! Oh, my soul, acknowledge thine
insufficiency either to conceive, or requite it.

2. The Mercy of God is not only full, but free, without desert on our parts:
We deserve no healing from his mercy, unless by being sore and sick; no riches
from mercy, unless by our poverty; no deliverance from mercy, unless by being
captives; no pardon from mercy, unless by being guilty; no preservation from
mercy, unless by being in danger; no mercy, unless by being miserable. God is
not tied to one man more than another; he has mercy on whom he will: he has
mercy on the beggar, as well as the King; on the Barbarian, as well as the
Grecian; the bond, Ephesians. 1.5, 6 Romans 11.5 2 Timothy 1.9 Phil. 1.29. Romans 3.24 Phil.
2.13 Romans 6.23 (...). 43.25
as well as the free; the Jew, as well as the Gentile; Election is the election
of grace; Vocatiou is according to grace; Faith is said to be given;
Justification is freely by Gods grace; every good motion is of Gods working;
Life eternal is Gods gift; the putting away of every sin is for his own sake.
God is merciful, because he will be so; his arguments of mercy are drawn from
his own pleasure: What can our works deserve, that are not ours, but his
working; that are all due to him, if a thousand times more and better; that are
all maimed and imperfect, Luke 17.10 1 Cor. 4.7 Romans 11.35 Romans 8.18
that are all vicious and polluted, that are all unequal to the recompense?

This for the explication of the first benefit which the Apostle requesteth for
these Christians, [ Mercy.]

2. The Observations follow.

1. Obs. 1.
How unbeseeming a sin is pride in any that live upon Mercy! Mercy our highest
happiness calls loudest for a lowly heart. He that lives upon the alms of
Mercy, must put on humility, the cloth of an Alms-man. Renounce thy self and
thine own worthiness both in thy receiving and expecting blessings.

1. In receiving them: If thou have spiritual blessings, Mercy found thee a
bundle of miseries, a sinner by birth, Ephesians. 2.1
a sinner in life, deserving to be a sufferer for both; without grace, nay,
against it; by thy birth, a poor outcast, Ezekiel. 16.22
in thy blood, as naked of grace, as of clothes. The Apostle therefore speaks
of putting on the graces of the Spirit: Col. 3.12 Job 1.21 1 Chro. 22.16 Genesis
24.35 Genesis 33.5, 11
the spots upon these clothes are only thine; the garment it self was another
before it was thine. Thou art beholding to mercy for any endowment of mind or
body; wisdom, estate, riches, honors, etc. Its hard to be high in place, and
low in our own esteem. Sacrifice not to thine own yarn, or net; let Mercy have
the praise of all thou art and have. Pride is the moth of mercy; nay, Magnus
dives est, and major divitiis suis, qui non ideo magnum sc putat quia dives
est: Aug.
the wind that dryes up the streams both of Gods bounty, and thy gratitude:
That which by mercy was thine, by thy pride may become another. He is truly
great in his riches, that thinks not himself great by riches. The greater our
receipts, the less room for pride, the greater cause of thankfulness.

2. In expecting of blessings, only have an eye to mercy: Idco Deus meus, quia
bonorum meorum non in diget: Omne bonum nostrum aut ipse est, (...) ab ipso:
Aug. de Doc. Chapter l. 5. c. 31.
In desires of pardon for sin, acceptance of services, obtaining of heaven,
renounce thine own worthiness, either in what thou art, or do. How purely
unprofitable to God is thy greatest goodness? it is nothing unto him, he is
neither the better for thy goodness, nor the worse for thy wickedness. Is it
any benefit to the fountain, that thou drinkest of it; or to the light, that
thou see? How full of mixtures of sin are thy holiest services? in the sense
whereof holy Augustine prayed, Regard, O Lord, in me not my work, but thine
own: If thou regardest mine, thou damnest me; if thine own, thou crownest me:
whatever good I have is from thee, and it is rather thine then mine. How full
of pride is thy humility, thy faith of distrustfulnesse, Phil. 3.13
thy zeal of lukewarmnesse, of self-seeking thy performances, what darkness is
in thy light, how unrighteous thy righteousness! If God should contend with
us, Job 9.2, 3 Qui de perfectione se ^rigit, habere se been vivendi ne^ initium
indicat: Gr. Mo. l. 9. c. 1. In sola Christi morte te totum contege; huic morti
te involve; and si Deus te voluerit judicare, dic, Do mine, mortem Domini mei
objicio inter me et te. Ans. de art. Mor. Meritum meum miseratio Domini: Bern.
Sermon. 61. in Cant. Prece post justitiam indiget, ut quae succumbere discussa
poterat, ex sola Judicis pietate convalescat: Gr. Mor. l. 9. cap. 14. Etsi ad
opus virtutis excrevero, ad vitam non ex meritis, sed ex venia convalesco: Id.
Ib. Sordet in districtione Judicis, quod in aestimatione fulget operantis: Gr.
Mor. l. 5. c. 7. James 2.13. 2 Timothy 1.16. 2 Timothy 4.8.
we cannot answer for one of a thousand. He that boasts of the perfection,
wants the very beginning of holiness. That which appears beautiful in thine
eyes, is foul in Gods. The wisest counsel is, to cover over thy self, and
wind up thy soul in Christ's death, to set that between God and thy soul; to
acknowledge his mercy thy only merit. Death is a stipend, Life is a donative,
a free gift, not a due debt. God crowns with mercy; but a swollen head is not
fit to have that crown put upon it. Who can say, he has cleansed his heart? We
want a thousand times more grace than we have: though sin be cast down in
regard of its regency, yet it is not cast out in regard of its inherency: Thy
rectitude compared to thy rule, is crookedness. It Is not thy purity, but thy
pardon that must save thee. If there shall be judgment without mercy, to those
that showed no mercy; then must it be with mercy even to those also which show
mercy. Its mercy that must stand Onesiphorus in stead at that day. The Crown of
righteousness Paul speaks of, is a crown of mercy too: the bestowing it is of
justice; but the promising it was of mercy.

2. Obs. 2.
The duty of contentation in our greatest wants, or smallest receipts. If one
not engaged to us, deny us a courtesy, we have no cause of coffeehouse:
when God gives, it is free mercy; when he withholds, he uses his liberty: Thy
supplies are without desert, and thy wants must be without discontent. Wonder
not at the blessings thou do not, wonder more at those thou do enjoy: Thy
condition is begging, and thy part is not choice. Cum aspexeris quot te
antecedant, cogita quot sequantur: Sen. Ep. 15.
Repine not if thou can not reach thy richest neighbor, who have nothing to
say against God, should the poorest overtake thee. Murmur not for what is lost,
but be thankful for what is left. We must not control God in the disposing of
his alms, as if he did not distribute with equality: We should bring our hearts
to his hand; where he stays his bounty, there must we stint our desires.

3. I note The impiety and folly of those that abuse mercy, that spurn against
Gods bowels: Obs. 3.
Sins against mercy are double-dy'd: This is the provocation, Heb. 3.8
to see Gods works of love and care forty years, and yet to sin; this is to sin
against the remedy: other sinners may, these who thus sin must die: These sin
at a higher rate than others: These in sin cast not off God only, but even the
very man; Isa. 1.3
nay, are shamed by the beasts. If to requite good for evil is our duty in
reference to man, surely, to requite evil for good, and that to God, must
needs be impiety. This sin renders inexcusable: God appeals to the very
consciences of mercy-despisers, Isa. 5.3, 4
and offers themselves to judge of the righteousness of his proceedings in
punishment; nay, the recollecting of abused mercy will be the most scalding
ingredient in that fiery lake, when the flaming sufferer remembers, he that is
now mocking at my calamity, once wept over my unkind soul; he who is now harder
than flint and marble against me, was once a tenderhearted God toward me; he
who now thunders in wrath, formerly soundin bowels: the way of mercy was once
open and plain, but now the bridge of mercy is drawn, my possibilities are
ended: I am now in a gulf of woe, that heretofore was unprofitably a gulf of
mercy. How many Kingdoms, nay Worlds, would I now give for but one drop of that
love, the sweet and swelling streams whereof I heretofore did but paddle in? O
Christian, sin not against Mercy; if that be thine enemy, what shall Justice
be? when Love it self shall be inexorable, who shall plead for thee? Let mercy
make thee blush, that justice may not make thee bleed. Trifle not away the day
of grace. The wine of mercy is to refresh the sorrowful with hope, not to
intoxicate the sinner into presumption. If mercy cannot thaw thee, 'twill burn
thee. O let the long-suffering of God be salvation.

4. 2 Pet. 3. Obs. 4.
Great is the heinousness of sin, that can provoke a God of much mercy, to
express much severity. That drop of gall must needs be bitter, that can
imbitter a sea of honey. How offensive is sin, that can provoke a God, to whose
ocean of pity the sea is but a drop? Ephraim (says the Prophet) provoked God
to anger most bitterly, Hos. 12.14
or, with bitternesses. God afflicts not willingly: he gives honey naturally,
but stings not til provoked. Every sufferer coyns his own calamities: There is
no arrow of judgment which falls down upon us, but was first (in sinning) shot
upwards by us; no shower of miseries that rains down, but was caused by the
ascent of the vapors of sin; no print of calamity upon the earth, but sin was
the stamp that made it. What a folly is it, in our sufferings to be impatient
against God, and to be patient toward sin: to be angry with the medicine, and
in love with the disease? Let us justify God in all our sufferings, and
condemn our selves. God commands, that if a man were found dead, the City that
by measure was found to be nearest to the place where he was found, Deuteronomy. 21.2
should offer up a sacrifice: In all our deaths and woes, would we measure
impartially, we should find sin nearest, let us sacrifice it.

5. Obs. 5.
It should be our care to obtain the best and choycest of mercies. God has
mercies of all sorts; wicked men are easily put off with the meanest: their
enquiry is, Who will show them any good? But, O Christian, let nothing please
thee but the light of Gods countenance: so receive from God, as that thou thy
self may be received to God. Desire not gifts, but mercies from God; not
pibbles, but pearls. Labor for that which God always gives in love. There may
be angry smiles in Gods face, and wrathful gifts in his hand; the best worldly
gift may be given in anger. Luther having a rich present sent him, professed
with a holy boldness to God, That such things should not serve his turn. A
favorite of the King of heaven rather desires his favor than his preferment.
We use to say, when we are buying for the body, that the best is best cheap:
and is the worst good enough for the soul? The body is a bold beggar, and thou
give it much; the soul is a modest beggar, asks but little, and thou give
it less. O desire from God, that thy portion may not he in this life, Psalm.
17.14
that what thou have in the world, may be a pledge of better hereafter: that
these things may not bewitch thee from, but admonish thee what is in Christ.
The ground of Paul's thanksgiving was, Ephesians. 1.3
that God had blessed the Ephesians with spiritual blessings in Christ.

6. Obs. 6.
How little should any that have this God of mercy for theirs, be dismayed with
any misery? Blessed are those tears which so merciful a hand wipes off; happy
twigs, that are guided by so indulgent a father: Psalm. 25.10
All his severest ways are mercy and truth to those in covenant; if he smiles,
it is in mercy; if he smites, it is in mercy: he wounds not to kill thee, but sin
in thee: the wounds of mercy are betthan the embraces of anger: if sickness,
poverty, dishonor be in mercy, why do thou shrink at them? Wrath in
prosperity is dreadful, but Mercy makes adversity comfortable. Its the anger
of God which is the misery of every misery. Peter, at the first, was not
willing that Christ should wash his feet; but when he saw Christ's merciful
intent therein, feet, and hands, and head are all offered to be washed: A child
of God, when he sees the steps of a father, should be willing to bear the
stripes of a child: God will not consume us, but only try us: He afflicts not
for his pleasure, but for our profit, Heb. 12.10. Psalm. 89.
God visits with rods, yet not with wrath; He takes not away his
loving-kindnesse. Mercy makes the sufferings of Gods people but notions. It
would do one good to be in troubles, and enjoy God in them; to be sick, and lie
in his bosom. God gives a thousand mercies to his people in every trouble, and
for every trouble: He burdens us, but it is according to our strength; the
strokes of his flail are proportioned to the hardness of the grain; Is^. 28.27
and merciful shall be the end of all our miseries: There Is no wilderness but
shall end in Canaan; no water but shall be turned into wine; no lions carcass
but shall be a hive of honey, and produce a swarm of mercies. The time we spend
in laboring that miseries may not come, would be spent more profitably in
laboring to have them mixed with mercy, nay, turned into mercies when they
come. What a life-recalling cordial is the apprehension of this mercy of God to
a fainting soul under the pressure of sin! Mercy having provided a
satisfaction, and accepted it; nay, (which is more) it beseeching the sinner to
believe and apply it! That fountain of mercy which is in God, having now found
a conveyance for it self to the soul, even Jesus Christ, through whom such
overflowing streams are derived unto us, as are able to drown the mountains of
our sins, even as easily as the ocean can swallow up a pibble. O fainting soul,
trust in this mercy. Psalm. 33.18 and 147.11
If the Lord takes pleasure in those that hope in his mercy, should not we take
pleasure to hope in it? Mercy is the only thing in the world more large than
sin; Its easy to presume, Exodus 34.7 Psalm. 77.7
but hard to lay hold upon mercy. Oh beg, that since there is an infinite
fullness in the gift, and a freeness in the giver, there be a forwardness in
the receiver.

7. Obs. 7.
Its our duty and dignity to imitate God in showing mercy: Obs. 7. 1 Pet. 3.8
Matthew. 5.45 Luke 6.36 Col. 3.12 Romans 12.15 Plus est aliquando compati, quam
dare: nam qui exteriora largitur, rem extra se positam tribuit; qui
compassionem, aliquid sui-ipsius dat: Gr. Mor. 20.
A grace frequently commanded and encouraged in the Scripture. Mercy we want,
and mercy we must impart: As long as our fellow members are pained, we must
never be at ease. When we suffer not from the enemies of Christ by persecution,
we must suffer from the friends of Christ by compassion. When two strings of an
instrument are tuned one to the other, if the one be struck upon and stirred,
the other will move and tremble also. The people of God should be so
harmonious, that if one suffer and be struck, the other should be moved and
sympathize. Jer. 9.1. Luke 19.41. 2 Cor. 11.29.
Holy men have every been tenderhearted, Grace not drying up, but diverting
the streams of our affections. Christ was mercy covered over with flesh and
blood; his words, his works, life, death, miracles, were all expressions of
mercy, in teaching, feeding, healing, saving men; If there were any severity in
his miracles, it was not toward man, but the swine and the barren-fig-tree.
Insensiblenesse of others miseries is neither suitable to our condition as men,
nor as Christians: according to the former, we are the same with others;
according to the later, grace has made the difference. Mercy must begin at the
heart, Sic men's per compassionem doleat, ut larga manus affectum doloris
ostendat. Greg. Luke 14.14. Gal. 6 9.
but must proceed further, even to the hand; they whose hands are shut, have
their bowels shut also: We are not Treasurers, but Stewards of Gods gifts. Thou
have so much only as thou give. The way to get that which we cannot part
with, is by mercy to part with that which we cannot keep. Our good reaches not
to Christ's person, it must to his members. Jonathan is gone, but he has left
many poor lame Mephibosheths behind him. We must love Christ in his worky-day
clothes. We cannot carry these loads of riches to heaven; Its best to take bills
of exchange from the poor saints, whereby we may receive there, what we could
not carry thither. Especially should our mercy extend it self to the souls of
others; as soul-miseries, so soulmercies are the greatest. They who are
spiritually miserable cannot pity themselves: though their words speak not to
us, yet their woes do. We weep over a body from which the soul is departed;
and can we look with tearless eyes upon a soul from which God is departed? If
another be not afflicted for sin, grieve for him; if he be, grieve with him. If
thou have obtained mercy, thou do not well (as said the Lepers) to hold thy
peace: Mercy must never cease till its objects do; in heaven both shall.

Thus much for the first blessing which the Apostle prays may be bestowed upon
these Christians to whom he wrote, viz. Mercy.

The second follows, viz. Peace; of which, by way Of 1. Exposition. Of 2.
Observation.


Peace is a word very comprehensive, and is ordinarily used to denote all kind
of happiness, welfare and prosperity. And 1. I shall distribute it into
several kinds. 2. Show the excellency of that here intended.

1. There Is Pax temporis, or external, among men. 2. Pax pectoris, or internal,
in the heart. 3. Pax aeternitatis, or eternal, in heaven. Or more distinctly
thus: 1. There Is a Peace between man and man. 2. Between man and other
creatures. 3. Between man and (or rather, in man with) himself. 4. Between God
and man.

1. Peace between man and man: and that is public or private:

1. Public; and that either Political of the Commonwealth, when the politic
State is in tranquillity, and free from foreign and civil Wars (2 King. 20.19.
Jer. 29.7. There shall be peace in my days. In the peace thereof ye shall have
peace. This is either lawful, and so a singular mercy; or unlawful, as when
one People is at peace with another against the express will of God; as the
Israelites with the Canaanites and Amalekites: or join in any sinful attempt,
as did the Moabites and Ammonites against the Israelites:) Or Ecclesiastical,
and of the Church, when its public tranquillity and quiet state is not troubled
within, by Schisms and Heresies; or without, by persecuting and bloody Tyrants.
Psalm. 122.6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Acts 9.31. The Churches had rest.
and Acts 4.32. 1 Cor. 14.33.

2. Private; and that, either between the good and the good: or between the bad
and the bad: or between the good and the bad. 1. Between the good and the good;
1 Pet. 3.8. Love as brethren; and, Let brotherly love continue. and Col. 1.4.
The love ye have to all Saints. 2. Hebr. 13.1
Between the bad and the bad: 2 King. 9.22. Is it peace, Jehu? And that either
lawfully, for their own preservation; or wickedly, against the people of God;
or to strengthen one another in some sinful attempt, and to that end, joining
hand in hand. 3. Between the good and the bad; which is either lawful, as
Abraham's with Abimelech; and commanded, Romans 12.18. Render to no man evil for
evil; but, if it be possible, have peace with all men. So Psalm. 120.7. I am for
peace. And sometime caused by a work from God upon the hearts of wicked men, as
in the case of Daniel, Chap. 1.9. and in Esan's love to Jacob: according to
that of Solomon, Pro. 16.7. The Lord will make his enemies at peace with him,
etc. Or unlawful, when against the mind of God the godly make leagues with
them, or agree in any way of sin.

2. There is a peace between man (the faithful I mean) and other creatures; the
good Angels are at peace with, 2. Heb. 1.10 Ephesians. 1.14
and ministering spirits to them: as Job 5.23. Thou shall be in league with the
stones of the field, and the beasts of the earth shall be in peace with thee.
and Hos. 2.18. Hujus foederis vigore, mala hujus vitae sic laedunt pios, ut non
noccant, non perdant, sed prosint. Ubi notandum est, vocabulum foederis accipi
(...), and per similitudinem effectus. Riv. in Hos. 2.18
I will make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the
fouls of the heaven, and with the creeping things of the earth: The meaning is,
There shall be such a work of God upon the beasts and fouls, etc. for the good
of the Church, as if God had bound them to do them good by way of covenant,
(There is mention Jer 33.20. of Gods covenant of the day, and of the night:
that is, the establishment of Gods decree upon the day and the night, whereby
they come to be in such and such a way from the creation to the end of the
world:) so that although the beasts, the fouls, the stones, etc. may annoy
them, nay kil^ them; the true safety of the Church shall not be hindered by
them; yea, All things shall work together for their good: neither nakedness,
nor sword, nor death, nor any of these things shall separate them from the love
of God in Christ: and if God sees it for their good, all the creatures in the
world shall be so far from hurting the godly, that they shall all agree to
advance their temporal good and welfare.

3. There is a peace in man with himself; and that is either false, or sound:
False peace is, when sinners thinking themselves free from the fear of dangers,
falsely promise safety to themselves: 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. When they shall say, Peace
and safety, etc. Sound peace in man with himself is twofold: 1. Of Assurance,
when sanctified conscience cease to accuse and condemn us, speaking
comfortably in us, and for us before God: 1 John 3.21
This sweet quietness and tranquillity of conscience being the immediate fruit
of our atonement with God; that peace of God which passes all understanding,
Phil. 4.7. and in which the Apostle places the Kingdom of God, Romans 14.17. the
peace that Hezekiah was not destitute of, when he said, Remember now, O Lord,
Isa. 38.3
I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, etc. This peace
sweetens every condition, is as music within, when the rain and storms fall
upon the house; a friend (as Ruth to Naomi) that will go along with us in every
distress: though we change our place, our garments, our conditions, our
companies, yet our enemies cannot take this from us; its a continual feast,
Pro. 15.15. This peace preserves our hearts and minds in all afflictions, Phil.
4.7 Psalm. 4.8
and puts into us a holy security and neglectivenesse of all dangers. 2. Of
subordination, when the will, affections, and inclinations of a man submit
themselves to the mind savingly enlightened by, and subjugated to God; which,
although it be not perfect, by reason of that repugnant law in our members; yet
is it true and progressive, the imperfection of it occasionally being an
incentive to godliness, making us more fervent in prayer, humble,
brokenhearted, and receptive of that peace we long for.

4. There is a peace with God; and that is twofold: 1. In this life: 2. In the
next.

1. In this life; and so it is twofold: 1. A peace of Reconciliation; and 2.
of Contentation. 1. Of Reconciliation, whereby God in Christ is at one with man:
The chastisements of our peace were upon Christ; Isa. 53.5. 1 John 29.
the wrath deserved by us for our sins Christ sustained, and satisfied divine
justice fully; so that now God (not requiring satisfaction twice for the same
offenses) is at peace with us. Isa. 9.6 Ephesians. 2.14 Romans 10.15 2 Cor. 5.20 Romans
5.1
This, the foundation of all the former, and following kinds of good peace, is
purchased by Christ the Prince of peace, and our peace; and proclaimed in the
preaching of the Gospel, the glad tidings of peace, by the Ministers of it, the
Ambassadors of peace; and accepted by faith, whereby we therefore enjoy and
have peace with God. 2. Of Contentation, or holy submission, by which a man is
peaceable, Phil. 4.11
and not murmuring or impatient against God, but quietly accepting whatsoever
is his will; the way indeed to live a truly quiet life, and (as one says well)
ever to have our will; the waves of unquietness being ever raised by the wind
of pride and unsubmissiveness.

2. Peace with God in the next life, or peace eternal, is the perfect rest
which the Saints shall enjoy in heaven; called ( Romans 8.6.) life, and peace,
and the rest that remains for the people of God; their resting from their
labors, both inward and outward; not only from hurt, but from danger by, nay,
from the presence of any thing that ever did molest them.

The Apostle in this salutation by peace, intends principally, peace with our
selves; that peace of God which passes all understanding, so often commended;
which includes peace with men, commanded, and peace with the other creatures,
promised to accompany it; and peace with God, presupposed as its cause and
original. Romans 1.7. 1 Co. 1.3 Col. 1 2 Pet. 1


2. This sanctified tranquillity and quietness of conscience, (a singular
blessing, often requested by the Apostles for the faithful to whom they wrote)
is of rare excellency:

1. For its author and original; it is from God, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23 2 Cor. 13.11 Col.
3.15 Phil. 4.7
he being called the God of peace, and it the peace of God. He is the author
of external peace in Church and Commonwealth; the peace of Jerusalem must be
begged of him; He makes wars to cease, and all stirs to be hushed; He makes
peace between us and the creatures, making a covenant for us with them: He is
the author of eternal peace; for, eternal life is the gift of God. But after
a special manner is he the God of internal peace, the peace of conscience, at
which S. Jude. aims: for 1. He sent his Son, [1] To merit it for us, when we
lay in the horror of an accusing conscience; who is therefore called in
himself, the Prince of peace; Isa. 9.6 Ephesians. 2.14. John 14.27.
and in respect of us, our peace: and the peace we speak of is said to be his
peace, he making peace by slaying hatred on the cross, by his perfect obedience
abolishing whatsoever God might hate in us. [2] He sent his Son to preach and
publish this peace, and to invite men to it, and that, first, In his own
person, Isa. 61.1. Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, to preach glad
tidings, etc. Secondly, In his Ministers, Ephesians. 2.17. Christ came and preached
peace to you who were afar off; he thus preaching it to the worlds end. As he
sent his Son to merit and preach this peace: so. 2. He sent his Spirit to apply
and seal this peace in the hearts of the elect; it being called a fruit of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22. this Spirit enabling us to cry for this peace, Gal. 4.6. and
working faith in our hearts, whereby we have peace with God, Romans 5.1. and
boldness and access to the throne of grace, Ephesians. 3.12. creating the fruit of
the lips to be peace, Isa. 57.19. Nothing that the world either is or has;
nay, neither men nor Angels can give Peace, they may wish and publish it, God
only gives it; some say there is a disease which only the King can heal: I am
sure a broken heart, a wounded conscience, can be healed only by the Prince of
Peace.

2. The excellency of this Peace appears in the subject of it; and that both
in respect of [1] the Parties that have it, and [2] the part of every of those
parties in which it resides.

1. The parties that enjoy it are only the faithful; It is only promised to
them, the true children of the Church; Isa. 54.13. Psalm. 29.11 and 37.11 Psalm.
85.8 Isa. 26.12 Psalm 37.37 Isa. 57.2 Jer. 33.6 Luke 10.6 Romans 5.1 Psalm.
119.165 Isa. 57.22 and 59.8 Romans 1.7 1 Cor. 1.3, Gal. 1.3 Phil. 1.2 Col. 1.2,
etc. Gal. 6.16 2 Thessalonians. 1.2
Great shall be the peace of thy children: The Lord will bless his people with
peace: The meek shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace: He will
speak peace to his people: Lord, thou will ordain peace for us: The end of that
(the upright) man is peace: He shall enter into peace: God will reveal unto
such abundance of peace.

2. Its only reported of the faithful, that they have peace; They are the sons
of peace; the justified only have peace with God: There is no peace to the
wicked; The way of peace they know not. Great peace have they which love the
law.

3. Peace is only wished and requested for the faithful: for others, either
only as they were with an eye of charity looked upon as faithful; or as in
those requests the terms upon which they should obtain this peace are also
included; namely, the disturbing of their own unsound, the accepting of him
that deserves the true peace, and the walking in the ways of holiness. But
peace from God is never desired for men to continue in a state of war against
God.

4. Romans 5.9, 10 Romans 5.1 Ephesians. 1.6 Hebr. 2.15 1 Cor. 15.31 Job 15.20, 21 Jude
19. Gal. 5.22 Ephesians. 2.12 Romans 12.12
The faithful only have taken the right course to obtain peace: They alone
are freed from Gods wrath, more dreadful then the roaring of a Lion, or the
wrath of all the Kings of the world, it destroying body and soul in hell: they
only have pardon of sin; the other, like guilty malefactors, are in an hourly
expectation of the worst of deaths, through the fear whereof they dye before
they dye. The faithful only have Christ, who is our peace, and the Prince of
Peace; the Spirit of God, of which peace is a fruit and effect; they alone
rejoice in hope, and live in expectation of a crown incorruptible, an
everlasting kingdom; others live a hopeless, heartlesse life.

2. The part of these parties in which this peace resides, is the heart and
conscience, Col. 3.15. The peace of God rules in the heart, Joh. 16.22. Your
heart shall rejoice, and Psalm. 4.7. Thou have put gladness into my heart; and
Phil. 4.7. The peace of God shall preserve your heart,; in which respect, 1.
It Is a sustaining, strengthening, reviving peace; so long as the heart is kept
safe, a man falls not, faints not; when the heart is relieved with a Cordial, a
fainting man revives; Now the peace of God keeps up the heart, it brings aid
and relief to it in all dangers, when sin and Satan, temptation and persecution
lay siege to it; It brings strong consolation, (...). Phil. 4.7. Act. 16.25.
Act. 21.13. 2 Cor. 1.3, 4 Romans 5.3.5. Heb. 10.34.
Heb. 6.18. Its a Banner over us in war, a Cordial, an Antidote against all
Poison; It makes Paul and Silas sing in Prison, Paul to be ready to dye for the
name of the Lord Jesus, the faithful to be comforted in all tribulation, and
consolation to abound as sufferings abound; it making the faithful in a cold
winter of persecution to be warmest within, making a Martyr to go as merrily to
a Stake, as another to a Feast. 2. The seat of this peace, the heart, notes as
our sustentation by it, so the soundness, truth and reality of it: it is not in
cortice, but in cord; in the heart, not in the habit; in the conscience, not
in the looks; It Is in the breast, not in the brow; not suffering a man to be
like some Prisons, beautiful without, but full of horror, blackness, chains
and dungeons within; It Is a Peace not residing in the hall of the senses, but
in the closet of the heart: A Saints peace is a silent calmnesse, an unseen
quietness; meat, of which those without know not, like the windows of Salomons
temple, narrow without, Pro. 14.10.
broad within; the worst, the unbeautifull, the black-side of his cloud is
seen, when the bright is hidden. 3. The seat of this Peace the heart, implies
it is seriousnes, weightinesse, Tu illum judicas gaudere qui ridet? animus debet
esse alacer. Res severa est verum gaudiam, caeterae hilaritates leves sunt;
frontem remittunt, pectus non implent. Sen. Ep. 23. Ego neminem posse scire
arbitror, quid sit, nisi acceperit, Bern in Cant. Melius impressum quam
expressum innotescit. In his non capt, intelligentia nisi quantum attingit
experientia, Id. ibid.
greatness, that the ground of it is not slight, and toyish, but some great
matter, not lightly pleasing the fancy, and superficially bedewing the senses,
but like a ground-showr, soaking even to the heart-root. The peace of a Saint
is not like the mirth of a Child, caused more by a gay, or a toy, then by a
conveyance of a thousand pounds by the year; or like our laughter which is more
at a jest, than at the finding of a bag of gold of ten thousand pounds; No, his
peace is not idle, frothy and ludicrous meriment, but deep and affecting the
heart with apprehensivenesse of an interest in the great things of eternity; a
peace that passes understanding: Light, either griefs or contentments, are
easily expressed, not so those which are deep and weighty; these are joys
unspeakeable and glorious, superabundant, 1 Pet. 1.8. 2 Cor. 7.4. 4. The seat
notes the safety of this peace: the heart is too deep for a man to reach; a
Saints peace is laid up in a Cabinet that man cannot open; Joh. 16.22.
men may break into his house, but not into his heart; Your joy (says Christ)
no man takes from you: The power of adversaries is but skin-deep: There is a
threefold impotency of man in reference to a Christians peace; 1 Man cannot
give this peace: 2 He cannot hinder it from entering. 3. He cannot remove it, or
hinder it from abiding; It continues like a Fountain in the hottest Summer,
and is warmest in the coldest Winter of affliction; like a Candle which is not
overwhelmed, or quenched in the dismal darkness of the night, but is made
thereby to give the cleerer light: David in greatest straits comforted himself
in God; 1 Jam. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 7.4. Romans 5.3. 1 These. 5.16. 2 Cor. 14.5. Phil.
4.4. Heb. 12.11.
the faithful glory in tribulation; they are commanded to rejoice evermore; as
the sufferings of Christ abound in them, so their consolations abound by
Christ. The faithful have often drawn matter of joy from their sufferings, they
yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness. A sick man may rejoice at the
coming of the Chyrurgeon, though he knows he will put him to pain; Phil. 1.19
2 Cor. 4.17
I know (says the Apostle) that this shall turn to my salvation: The light
affliction that lasts but for a moment, procures an exceeding, excessive,
eternal weight of glory: If we suffer for Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12 Romans 8.
we shall also reign with him: None can separate us from Christ, and therefore
not from peace: the Spirit of peace by us may for a time be sinned away, but he
cannot by enemies be persecuted away: The Sun may as easily be blown out with
bellows, as true peace be driven away by sufferings. 5. The seat of this
peace, the heart imports, the spiritualnesse and sublimity of it; it is not,
sensual, earthly and drossy; the heart is no more relieved with worldly
comforts, then are the belly, bags and barnes, filled with grace and holiness.
What is it to the soul that, thou have goods laid up for many years? The
rarest delicacies of the earth, are not such food as the soul loves,
spiritual blessings of Communion with God, Illud verum and solum est gaudium,
quod non de terra, sed de Caelo est; quod non de creatura, sed de Creatore
accipitur, Bern. Ep. 114.
enjoying of Christ, a view of our names as written in heaven, alone pacify
the heart; This peace is upheld by the promises of God, not of men; by
Scripture, not Politic props; The Father of Spirits is only the Physician of
Spirits: Thus the Jewel of Peace is rare, obtained but by a few, the faithful;
and regarded, laid up in the Casket of the heart; There Is the subject of it.

3. The excellency of this peace appears in it'^ effects, 1 It most disturbes
sin, when it quiets the soul most. A pacified conscience is pure: The soul at
the same time time tastes and fears the goodness of God: the Sun of mercy
thawes the heart into tears for sin; Hos. 3.5
Peace with God increases fear of transgression, as it diminishes fear of
damnation, making us who formerly feared because we sinned, now to fear lest we
should sin. If mercy be apprehended, sin will be hated: spiritual joy causes
godly grief. As God is wont to speak peace to the soul that truly mourns for
sin; so the soul desires most to mourn for sin, when God speaks peace unto it.
The pardoned traitor (if he have any ingenuity) most grieves for offending a
gracious Prince. Godly peace does at the same time bannish slavish horror, and
cause filial fear. Besides, the more quietness we apprehend in enjoying God,
the more are we displeased with that trouble-heart sin.

2. Another effect of this peace is activenesse and stirring in holy
performances: When the faithful are most quiet, they should be least idle;
When David had rest from his enemies, he then was careful how to build God an
house: when the soul sees it is redeemed from the hands of his enemies, Luke
1.74, 75
its most engaged to serve the Redeemer in holiness and righteousness. This
peace is as oil to the wheels, to make a Christian run the ways of Gods
commandments. The warmth of the Spring draws out the sap of trees into a
sprouting greenness; and the peace of God refreshes the soul into a
flourishing obedience. Jonathan having tasted honey, his eyes were enlightened;
and the soul which has tasted the sweetness of inward peace, is holily
enlarged. Some who profess they enjoy an ocean of peace, express not a drop
of obedience: Suppose their profession true, they defraud God; but it being
false, they delude themselves. The joy of Gods people is a joy in harvest; as
it is large, so it is laborious: they are joyful in the house of prayer. Isa.
56.7


3. This inward peace from God, inclines the heart to peaceablenesse toward
man: A quiet conscience never produced an unquiet conversation; 1 Pet. 3.8, 9
the nearer lines come to the center, the nearer they are one to another; the
peaceable approaches of God to us, will not consist with a proud distance
between us and others. Pax ista reddit offendentes ad sat is faciendum humiles,
and offensos ad remittendum faciles: Dau. in Col. 3.15.
This peace of God makes those who have offered wrong to others, willing to
make satisfaction, and those who have suffered wrong from others ready to
afford remission: The equity of the former stands thus; If the great God speaks
peace to man when offended by him; should not poor man speak peace to man when
offending of him? The equity of the later thus; If God be pacified toward man
upon his free grace, should not man be pacified toward man, Mat. 18.24
it being a commanded duty? and, if God by his peace have sealed to man an
acquittance from a debt of ten thousand talents; should not man by his peace
acquit man from the debt of an hundred pence? In a word, this peace from God
makes us peaceable toward all: it keeps us from envying the rich, from
oppressing the poor; it renders us obedient to superiors, gentle to equals,
humble to inferiors; it preserves from Sedition in the Commonwealth, from
Schism in the Church; it cools, it calms, it rules, in heart and life.

4. Peace from God makes us commiserate those who are under his wrath: a
pacified soul loves to impart its comforts, and is most ready to give a Receipt
of what eased it; it labors to comfort those that are in trouble, by the
comfort wherewith it is comforted. 2 Cor. 1.4
The favorites of the King of heaven envy not his bestowing favor also upon
others: They pity both those who please themselves with an unsound peace; and
also those who are pained with the true wounds of conscience.

5. This peace from God makes us contented and quiet in every affliction: since
the Lord has spoken peace in the first, we shall take it well, whatsoever he
speaks in the next place: whatever God does peaceably, the soul bears it
patiently. The great question of a godly heart, when any trouble comes, is
that of the Elders of Bethlehem to Samuel, Come thou peaceably? and it
answering peaceably, is entertained with welcome. Lord, thou have pardoned my
sin, (says a pacified soul) and now do what thou please with me. Men
destitute of this peace, are like the leaves of a tree, or a sea (calm for the
present) moved and tossed with every wind of trouble: their peace is nothing
else but unpunished wickedness.

And this for the Explication of the second blessing which the Apostle
requesteth for these Christians, viz. Peace.

The Observations to be drawn from it, follow.

1. Obs. 1.
They who are strangers to God in Christ, are strangers to true peace: True
peace comes from enjoying the true God. A quiet conscience, and an angry God
are inconsistent; A truth deducible as from the preceding exposition of Peace,
so even from the Apostles very order in requesting peace: First he prays for
Mercy, then for Peace. 2 King. 6.27
If the Lord do not help us, how shall we be helped to this blessing, out of
the barn-floor, or the wine press? The garments that we wear must receive heat
from the body, before they can return any warmth again unto it; and there must
be matter of peace within, ere any peace can accrue from any thing without; If
God be against us, who can be for us? if he disquiets us, what can quiet us? if
He remain unpacified, the conscience will do so, notwithstanding all other
by-endeavours. A wicked man's peace is not peace, but at the best only a truce
with God: The forbearance of God to strike is like a man's, who thereby fetches
his blow with the greater force and advantage; or like the intervals of a
quartane, the distemper whereof remaining, the fits are indeed for two days
intermitted, but return with the greater violence. A wicked man's conscience is
not pacified, but benumbed; and the wrath of God not a dead, but a sleeping
Lion: Pro. 14.13
A sinners peace is unsound and seeming, in the face, not in the heart; a
superficial sprinkling, not a ground-showr; he having in laughter his heart
sad, may truly in it say with Sarah, I laughed not; he being in his rejoicing,
Vides convivium, laetitiam: Interroga conscientiam. Amb. Off. l. 1. cap. 12.
Evasisse putas quos diri conscia facti, Men's habet attonitos et surdo verbere
coedit, Occultum quatiente intus tortore f^agellum. Job 20.5, 7. Eccl. 7.6
as well as in his mourning, an hypocrite. Ask not the countenance, but the
conscience of a sinner, whether he rejoices? The guilt of his sin is an unseen
sore, an hidden scourge: His peace relieves him not, its no preservative to his
heart in persecution or distress; it leaves him (like Absoloms mule) when he
hangs in any woe, and stands most in need thereof: His peace stands only in
the avoiding of troubles, not in the sweet enjoying of God in his troubles; its
as uncertain as a dream, or as the crackling of thorns under a pot: his days
of mourning will shortly come: Deluded he is with a groundless conceit of vain
hopes; he is like a child in a Siege, not appehensive of his danger, but busy
at sport, while the parents are at the breach, and the City ready to be sacked:
He is secure, but not safe.

2. Its a mistake, Obs. 2. Gal. 5.22 Romans 14.17 Isaacum, i. e. gaudium
jugulandum tibi formidas? securus esto; non Isaac, sed Aries mactabitur; non
peribit tibi laetitia, sed contumacia, cujus utique cornua vepribus haerent,
and sine punctionibus anxietatis esse non potest. Bern.
to think there is no peace to be found in the good ways of God. True peace is
a fruit of Gods Spirit, and a branch of Christ's Kingdom: Godliness does not
quell, but qualify mirth, not consume, but correct it; it deprives neither of
the use of, nor comfort in any lawful delights, being procured by Christ, and
bestowed by God as fruits of love. As for sinful and inordinate delights, which
have no more pleasure in them, than is found in the scratching of some unsound
part when it itcheth; a Saint being now healed of his disease, it is no pain
for him to part with them: If holy men want peace, it is because they, or
others, or both are not more holy; nor are they sad because they are now holy,
but because they were no sooner so: Their greedy desire of more holiness,
often hinders them from taking notice of what already they have: they judge not
aright of their present state; they have a pardon signed and sealed, but happily
they cannot read it, in regard some sin has blurred it, Vid. Mr. Gatakers Just
man's joy.
or Satan casts some mist before their eyes. If the holiest will sport with,
they must expect to smart for sin; Satan who was their tempter, will soon prove
their torturer: And, in mercy does God correct a wandering child home, when in
wrath he suffers a vagabond to take his course; and, The tears of the godly
for sinning, are full of peace, they are a shower mixed with a sunshine; and
more delight is there in godly grief, than in sinful pleasures, in mourning
with Christ, than in sporting with Satan. Or it may be, sorrowing Saints are
but newly entered into the ways of God: Milstones, though they be hewed fit
either to other, yet they grind not well, till they have wrought some time
together: Apparel, though made fit, is not so easy at the first putting on, as
when it has been worn a while. Matt. 11.29 Grave dum tollis, suave dum
tuleris. Greg. in Ezekiel. l. 2. c. 7. Quam male inassueti veniunt ad aratra
juvenci!
Christ's yoke seems heavy at the first putting it upon us, but it becomes
easy and delightful when we have born it a while. Nor is the peace of a Saint
to be estimated by its not appearing; his peace is inward, and often makes but
little show in the face: The wealthy Merchant cries not his rich wares (worth
many thousands) about the street, when the poorer sort, who carry toys,
proclaim them in every corner of the City: The godly have their souls fraught
with inward joys, though their looks outwardly show them not, while the
hypocrite boldly voyceth up his supposed happiness; As the glory, so the joy
of a Saint is most within. In a word, This life is the time of obscurity to a
Saints happiness; its in some sort a winter with him, while it is a summer
with the wicked; now the lofty oak in winter seems dead, while the dunghill
grass is fresh and green; Job 16. ult.
but when summer comes, the oak is flourishing, and the grass is withered, or
made hay of. The happiness of the people of God is hidden in their root, in
this winter of affliction and desertion: They are now the sons of God, 1 John
3.2 Col. 3.3, 4 Gramen hieme virescit, astate ares^it: Arbor (arescente
gramine) virescit. Aug. in Psalm. 36.
but it does not yet appear what they shall be: Their life is hid with Christ;
but when Christ who is their life shall appear, then shall they appear also
with him in glory. But then at the approach of this Sun shall that foenea
faelicitas (as Augustine calls it) that grasse-like happiness of wicked men
consume and wither.

3. How careful should the people of God be to preserve their peace! Shall a
blessing so excellent in it is original, Obs. 3.
nature, use, and so earnestly desired by this, and all the other Apostles for
the faithful, be by them neglected? Oh forfeit not, disturb not this happy
peace.

1. Preserve in thee a fear of God; As sin gets in, peace goes out: Nor is it
the being, but the allowing of it in us that makes the soul unquiet: No sin
shall destroy peace in us, but that which finds peace from us. The tares of
desention between God and us are only sown by the enemy sin: This was the
instrument which broke the bones, and wounded the conscience of David and
Peter; This is the mint of a Saints misery, the source of his sorrows: every
sin has a bitter farewell; sin is nothing else but sorrow in the seed: when
ever thou art tempted, before thou consentest, take up and weigh thy sin in thy
meditations, as a Porter does his burden before he agrees to carry it, and
ask thy soul whether thou art able to go through with thy burden. 2. Delight
in the Ordinances: These are the feast of peace: They shall be joyful in my
house of prayer: Isa. 56.7
Prayer is fitly called the leech of cares: Its a breathing out the heates of
inward grief, and a breathing in the cooling delights of Gods spirit. The
Gospel has glad tidings in the very name of it. A promise spread with the
blood of Christ is the only plaster for a wounded conscience. The directions
of the word are the ways of peace: Great peace have they that love the Law,
Gal. 6.16
and walk according to that rule. 3. Be sincere and upright in thy services;
the end of the upright man is peace; Psalm. 37.37.
sincerity and walking before God with an upright heart, darted a beam of peace
into Hezekiahs shower of tears: Isa. 38.3
God puts not the oil of peace into a cracked Vial: Heart-peace is a Companion
only of Heart-purity. 4. Love not the world; for it is enmity with God: The
Sunshine of earthly enjoyments, puts out the fire of spiritual peace: the
thorns of worldly cares make the peace of many a Saint to go but with a
scratch't face. They who have suffered with joy the spoiling, have suffered
sorrow for the loving of their goods; when men sweat in outward employments,
their peace is coldest inwardly.

4. Holiness makes no man unpeaceable and turbulent. The more God quiets us,
the less shall we sinfully discontent men: The world condemns the Godly as
authors of dissension; but the true reason why they are accounted unpeaceable
by the world is, because they will not lose their Peace with God: to find
trouble in the world is their portion, but to cause trouble in the world is not
their property: They are wont indeed to disquiet men's lusts; but are wicked men
and sin so near, that the one cannot be distinguished from the other? The will
of a Saint is for peace, but it is necessity that makes him contend. Peace rules
in his heart, Col. 3.15.
it does (...), it sits as the Judge or Umpire was wont to do in the public
games of wrestling or running, Apostolus innuit hoc esse hujus virtutis
officiu^, ut agat brabeutem sive agonothetam inter caeteros affectus; nam (...)
id significat. Cum igitur insurgunt in cordibus nostris turbidi affectus irae,
odii, vindictae, haec pax Dei debet suum officium facere; id est, instar
agonothetae, lites dirimere, tumultuantes affectus compescere, and omnia ad
pacem deducere. Davenant in Col.
who did rule and order the runners or wrastlers, deciding their controversies,
and giving rewards to the best-deserving: so this peace of God, when the
troublesome affections of anger, hatred, and revenge arise in our hearts,
appeaseth strifes, ends controversies, and renders us peaceable. As for wicked
men, who seem sometimes to be very peaceable among themselves in sin, they must
know, that agreement against God is not Peace but Conspiracy, and such a rotten
peace makes way for a real war, both with others and within themselves.

5. Its most suitable to a Ministers Function to further and pray for the peace
of others. As they are Christians, Obs. 5.
they are called to peace, Col. 3.15. and as Ministers, they are called to be
Ambassadors of peace. The bodily peace of others, should be prayed for by them,
Jam. 5.14. Brotherly peace should they promote among their people: An
unpeaceable people among themselves, will be an unprofitable people under him,
Jam. 3.16. Ministers should endeavor the civil peace, put people in mind to be
subject to Principallities and Powers, Tit. 3.1
and to take heed of Treason and Rebellion: To revile them for this, is to be
angry with the fifth Commandment. But especially should Ministers labor to
bring people into peace with God, and to pray them to be reconciled to God; 2
Cor. 5.27
and by Ministerial directions to help them to attain peace of Conscience
within themselves. Confident I am, That while men's lusts speak Ministers
contentious, their Consciences speak them peaceable. (...) dicitur vel ab
(...), i.e. seipsum toto animo in rem dilecta^; vel ab (...), quod est, valde
in re amata acquiescere. Ita (...) significat vehementem affectu^, ardentemque
amorem, quo quis alicui sese intime adjungit et in eo totus quiescit; unde et
pater Caelestis de filio suo, hic est (inquit) filius meus (...). et mox, quasi
etymologiam subdens, in quo mihi complaceo: Zanc. de na. dei. l. 4. c. 3.
Amicitia est quasi habitus. Amor autem et dilectio significant actum vel
passionem: Charitas autem utroque modo accipi potest, defferenter tamen
significatur actus per ista tria: nam amor est aliquid communius inter ea;
omnis enim amor dilectio est vel charitas, sed non e converso. Addit dilectio
super amorem, electionem praecedentem; unde dilectio est in sola voluntate
rationalis creaturae, charitas autem ultra amorem addit perfecttionem amoris in
quantum illud quod amatur, carum, i. e. magni pretii aestimatur: Tho. 1.2. qu.
16. Art. 3.


The third and last Blessing desired by this Apostle for these Christians is
Love: Of which likewise

By way of 1 Exposition. 2 Observation.


For the Expository part, I shall 1. Specify the several kinds of Love,
principally that at which the Apostle seems most to aim. 2. Set down the
excellent Properties of this kind of Love which make it so desirable.

Not to stay upon the consideration of the word (...), Love, Amor aliarum rerum
est, charitas inter solos homines, dilectio ad Deum spectat: diligimus Deum;
charos habemus parents, liberos, etc. amamus omnes. Aret. in Probl.
or of its agreement with those other Expressions ordinarily used to set forth
(after a sort) the same thing; as charity, friendship, etc. This Love in the
general, being that inclination or tendency of any thing to the good beloved;
or, that principle whereby one joins himself to, and rests in an object, is
of sundry sorts.

Not to speak of those which are either far from, or contrary to the Scope of
the Apostle; as of natural love, which is that quality in any thing following
its form, by which it tends to, and rests in what is agreeable to it; Nor of
animal love, whereby the sensitive appetite in men or beasts tends to its good,
and rests in it: Nor of love merely rational, or intelective, whereby the
will freely embraces any object presented to it by the understanding: Nor of
Angelical love; Nor of that love which God has toward himself, as the chief
good.

There are Three sorts of Love, any of which may be desired from God as a
blessing:

Namely, a love of 1 God to man. 2 Man to God. 3 Man to man, himself, or others.


I yet conceiving, (since the Apostle had desired that these Christians might
receive mercy from God, and that every particular Believer might have peace in
himself) that he seems now in the last place to pray, That they might again
both return love to God, and render it also to one another.

1 love of God to man, (though without passion, sympathy, or any imperfection
or weakness; these being attributed to him only to relieve the weakness either
of our Faith or apprehensions.) And this love is

1 Considered as a love of desire; as love desires to be carried to the union
of the thing beloved. This desire of union with man, God shows many ways; as,
1 By being near unto, nay present with him, by his universal care and
providence; he being not far from every one of us; for in him we live, etc.
Act. 17.27, 28. 2 By assuming the nature of man into a personal conjunction
with himself in the Mediator, Christ. 3 By conversing with man by signs of his
presence, extraordinary visions, dreams, oracles, inspiration; and ordinarily
by his holy Ordinances, wherewith his people (as it were) abide with him in his
house. 4 By sending his holy Spirit to dwell in man, and bestowing upon man the
divine nature. 5 By taking man into an eternal habitation in heaven, Psalm. 16.
ult.
where he shall be ever in his glorious presence.

2 There is a love of God to man, considered as a love of benevolence, or of
good will, or of willingness to do good to the thing beloved; what else was his
eternal purpose to have mercy upon his people, and of saving them, Romans 9.13
but (as its expressed concerning Jacob) this loving them? And to whom can a will
of doing good so properly agree, as to him whose will is goodness it self?

3 There is a lover of God to man, considered as a love of beneficence, bounty,
or actual doing good to the thing beloved. Thus he bestows the effects of his
love, both for this life, and that which is to come. And the beneficence of
God, is called Love, 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God. And Joh. 3.16. So
God loved the world that he sent, etc. By this love of beneficence bestows he
the good things of nature, grace, glory: God does good to every creature,
hating though the iniquity of any one, yet the nature of none; Genesis 1.31.
for the being of every creature is good, and God has adorned it with many
excellent qualities. According to these loves of benevolence, and beneficence,
God loves not his creatures equally, but some more then others; in as much as
he wills to bestow, and also actually bestows greater blessings upon some
than upon others: he makes and preserves all creatures, but his love is more
especially afforded to mankind; he styles himself from his love to man, Tit.
3.4. and not from his love to Angels, or any other creature. He is called
(...), a lover of man, but never (...), or (...), a friend of Angels or
creatures without man. His love is yet more peculiarly extended to man in
creating him after his own image, Psalm. 8.5 Heb. 2.16 Romans 5.8
and in giving him lordship over the creatures, in giving his Son to take upon
him man's nature, and exalt it above heavens and Angels, to dye for sinning,
dying man; offering him to man in the dispensation of the Gospel with wooing
and beseechings; Mat. 28.18
and yet of men he loves some more especially and peculiarly than others;
Omnia diligit Deus quae fecit, etinter ea, magis creaturas rationales; et de
illis, eas amplius quae sunt membra Unigeniti, et multo magis ipsum Unigenitum.
Aug. T. 9. in Joh.
namely those whom he loves with an electing, calling, redeeming, justifying,
glorifying love. God loves all creatures, and among them the rational, and
among them the members of his Son, and much more the Son himself.

4. There is a love of God to man, considered as a love of complacency, and
delight in the thing beloved; he is pleased through his Son with his Servants;
and he is much delighted with his own image wheresoever he finds it. He is
pleased with the persons and performances of his people, He has made us
accepted in the Son of his loves; the Lord takes pleasure in them that fear
him. Psalm. 147.11 Zeph. 3.17
They reflecting his excellencies, and showing forth his virtues, he rejoying
over them with joy: he resting in his love, accounting a Believer amiable: his
soul, a lesser heaven; his prayers, melody; his sighs, incense; his
stammerings, eloquence; his desires, performances.

2 Man to God: which is, when the Soul is moved, Amor concupiscentiae non
requiescit in quacunque extrinseca aut superficiali adeptione amati, sed
quaerit amatum perfect habere quasi ad intima illius perveniens. Aq. 1.2 ae.
q. 28. ar. 2.
drawn, and called out to desire the participation of his presence; yielding
up, and conforming it self to his will; as also quietly resting in the enjoying
of him. This love is considerable in its several kinds.

1 Its a love of desire to enjoy him for ours as the source of all our
happiness: The Soul loves God, under the apprehension of the greatest good, and
therefore puts forth it self in strongest desires toward him. This love is as
strong as death, and can take no denial. It is the wing and weight of the Soul,
that carries all the desires into an intimate unity with the thing beloved,
stirs up a zeal to remove all obstacles, works an egress of the Spirits,
and as it were an haste of the Soul to entertain and meet it: According to
those expressions of the Saints in Scripture, The desire of our soul is to thy
name: Es. 26.8 Ps. 119.10.81 119.20 Psalm. 42.2 Psalm. 84.2
With my whole heart have I sought thee: My soul faints for thy salvation. My
soul breaks for the longing it has to thy judgments at all times. My soul
thirsts for God, I am sick of love, etc. Oh the vehement panting, breathing,
and going forth of the soul of one toward God who is in love with him; he
contemns the most serious worldly employments when he is taken up with this,
and who so discourses with him of earthly concernments, speaks as with one not
at home; all the world not satisfying without the kisses of the lips of our
beloved, our desires being a thousand times more for one smile of his face than
for all the wealth under the Sun. No difficulty so great, no danger so
imminent, nay no death so certain, which this love carries not through for the
obtaining of the thing beloved; this love being a falling mountain that breaks
down all that stands betwixt it and the place of its rest. In a word, no means
shall be left unused that by God are appointed for the obtaining of our
beloved; enquiries of, or from others, how to find him; letters of love, sighs,
tears, sobs, groans unutterable, are sent to win him; desires to hear again
from him in his promise of grace are expressed. The soul is never gotten near
enough till it be in the arms, the bosom of God in heaven. It says not (as
Peter of his Tabernacles) Lord, Let there be one for me, and another for thee;
but let us both be together in one. Its ever night with one who loves Christ
till the Sun of his presence be arising. He is like a certain kind of Stone,
of which some report, That if it be thrown into the water whole, it swims; if
broken, it sinks: he never droops in any trouble, unless he apprehends a
breaking between him and Christ. He is like the marigold that opens with the
shining, and shuts with the setting of the Sun. His heart is locked up in sorrow
when God hides his face, and he cannot find another key fit to open it again
among all the keys in the house. What Is all the world to him without the
presence of God but as a sive plucked out of the water? His comforts are only
full, when God is in them. What are companions to him in whom he sees nothing
of God, but objects either irksome, or pitied? What are Ordinances unless with
Christ, but as candles that have no light put to them? Nay, what would the
joys of heaven it self be, if it were not for the presence of God, but as a
funeral feast or banquet where is much provision, but no cheer.

2 There Is a love of Complacency and delight, Amor Complacentiae.
when the soul having ark'd it self in Gods embracements; now with infinite
sweetness and security reposeth it self in them, saying then as David, Psalm.
4.7, 8. Thou have put gladness into my heart more than when their Corn and Wine
increased. I will lay me down in peace and sleep: and with Peter, Lord, its
good being here: and with the Spouse, I charge you stir not up, nor awake my
beloved. And when Christ meets it sweetly in Prayer, Sacraments, or a Sermon,
breathing thus, Oh that (Lord) this meeting might never end; deer Jesus, why
come thou so seldom, and stayest no longer! All the night long do thou lodge
between my breasts. Psalm. 84.10
A day in thy house, is better than a thousand elsewhere. Cant. 2.4
My soul is filled as with marrow: Thou have brought me into a
banqueting house; thou have made me drink abundantly: Thy left hand is under
me, thy right hand embraces me. How contented could the soul be in such an
in-come of Christ, were not his pleasure otherwise, that it had no avocation to
take it off; no earthly employment; no family, feeding of body or relations to
call it away from those secret enjoyments of such a beloved? Oh thinks the
soul, what a blessed place will heaven be, where I shall never be severed one
moment from the embracements of Christ to eternity!

3 There Is Amor amicitiae: A love to be set upon God, for the goodness and
excellency which is in himself. To love God for the creatures is not to enjoy,
but to use God. To love him for another end than himself, Medium, qua tale, et
per se, nullam boni appetibilis rationem possidet, tota quippe ratio amandi
medium, est convenientia cum fine. Aquin. Mat. 13.21
is to turn the ultimate end into a mean. Love to God, grounded upon humane
inducements, is but spurious. When the inducement (suppose profit, preferment)
is removed, that love will discover its falsness. And by that very reason for
which men contend for the outward appearance and profession of love to God,
viz. because they love their pleasures and profits, which without such a
profession they cannot peaceably enjoy: By that very reason (I say) they will
be beaten off even from that their outside appearing profession, when thereby
those profits and pleasures which they love so much shall come to be hazarded.
Its a dead love to God that cannot stand unless it be shored up. True love will
stand alone without politic props. To shroud our own private ends under the
name of love to God, is not amicitia, but mercatura; not to love, but to make
merchandise of him. The love that cannot be warm any longer than it is rubd with
the warm clothes of preferment is but the carcass of love. Then has this love
a soul, when God himself is the object of it, when it is not of what he has,
but of what he is; when he is beloved though we beg with him, or though all his
Rings and Ornaments are plucked off; nay, when he plucks off ours: In a word,
all his ways, ordinances, people, will have our love drawn out to them, for
that of God which is imparted to them. The word will be received in its purity
and power, most loved, when least adulterated: when it discovers most of God to
us, and most of sin in us; when the dearest corruption is struck at, the
closest duty urged, the secret corners of the soul searched, when the spiritual
sword is laid on with severest blows: The persons also in whom most shines the
beauty of Gods likeness, we shall most be taken with; and those shall have our
love shine upon them, who can reflect nothing back again but holiness.

4. There Is Amor benevolentiae; A love set upon God, endeavoring to bring to
him (so far as creatures can to an infinite Creator, Psalm. 16
(to whom their good extends not) all service and honor: This love returns
to God not only a heart, but a tongue, a hand of praises and obedience. All its
pleasant fruits are laid up for its beloved; all it is and has is accounted
too little. (Lord, says the soul) that I could love thee more, and serve thee
better! how impure is my heart! how poor and imperfect are my performances!
what I have is neither enough, nor good enough for thee: but had I something
better than my self, (and Oh that I my self were a thousand times better for
thy sake!) it should be bestowed upon thee. A soul in love with God is
boundless in duty: The smalness of his obedience, is the greatness of his
trouble, when another man observes his zeal and vehemence, his tears, and sobs,
and wrestling in prayer, and sees him so strict and exact in living, he thinks
it a great matter, and is ready (as the Disciples, who looked upon the
beautiful buildings of the Temple) to admire him; but then the party himself
that loves Christ thinks all this as nothing, in comparison of what Christ
deserves: he looks upon his services as Christ foretold of the Temple, as if
there were not one stone left upon another. This love causes an universal,
Joh. 14.24
cheerful, constant obedience to the Commandments of Christ: In it all our
services are steeped, and with it, made easy to us; and coming from Faith,
acceptable to God. Nor will love think it much to suffer much for Christ; 1
Cor. 13.7
nay, it accounts it little to endure all things for him who has born our
burdees, and shed better blood for us than any we have to shed for him: Faith
works by love. Love is the instrument in the hand of Faith. A hand alone can
lay hold and receive; and so the proper work of faith is to lay hold upon
Christ: but a hand without an instrument cannot cut any thing, no more can
faith practice any moral duties without love. Faith in justification is alone,
but in the life of man it works by love.

3 third to be considered, viz. Love to man; whereby our neighbor is loved as
our selves.

This comprehends a love 1 Of our selves. 2 Of others.


1 Of our selves; Levit. 19.18. Mat. 22.39. Quid anima invides carni? Nemo tam
proximus tibi, quem post Dominum diligas. Princeps amor humanus est sui ipsius.
Qui sibi malignus, cui bonus?
Its made the rule of loving others: None is so near us, after God, as our
selves. Frequent are the commands of Scripture for the regarding of our selves.
Act. 20.28. Take heed to your selves. 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed to thy self. Phil.
2.12. Work out your own salvation. 1 Cor. 11.28. Let every one examine himself.
And verse. 31. If we would judge our selves, etc. Examine your selves whether
you be in the faith: Prove your selves. Every one is bound to wish to himself
that good, which to wish is truest love; namely, The everlasting enjoyment of
God. None can love God, but at the same time he loves himself; for he that
loves God, desires to enjoy him; but whosoever desires to enjoy such a good,
must needs love himself: and this enjoyment of God a man more desires for
himself, than for another: and if it could be communicated to no more than one,
a man should desire it rather for himself, than any one: for there are more
causes concur why a man should thus love himself than any other; Precepto non
est opus ut se quisque et corpus suum diligat; quoni am id quod sumus et id
quod infra nos est, in concussa naturae lege diligimus, quae in bestias etiam
promulgata est, restabat ut et de illo quod supra nos est, et de illo quod
juxta nos est, praecepta sumeremus. Aug. de Doct. Chr. l. 1. c. 25, 26.
for another man may miss of true blessedness without either my fault or
misery, but I my self cannot: And though there be not this express and direct
precept in terms, Thou shall love thy self; yet where we are commanded to love
God, we are at the same time enjoined to love our selves; for to love God is to
desire to enjoy him for ours, who is the chief good; and this is the chiefest
love. And some note that the written Law of God was given for help and relief
of the Law of Nature, which was much defaced and darkened in every one by sin;
but the Law of Nature was not impaired, as it moved and put men upon the loving
and caring for themselves; and therefore an express command of loving our
selves was not needful. And whereas the love of our selves is noted in the
Scripture as a great sin, 2 Timothy 3.2. There Is a Threefold love of our selves;

1 Naturalis, whereby every Creature by natures instinct desires its own
preservation, and this is not disco^mended.

2 Spiritualis; or Amor Charitatis: A true Charitative love, whereby a man
desires to obtain divine and spiritual good; and this damps not, but inflames
the love of God: None can desire a divine good too much. This is commended, and
commanded.

3 Inordinatus: Love which only respects good things that please the sense:
Such a love which so makes us love our selves, as to contemn God, and to
neglect spiritual good things: this inordinate love of our selves is taxed by
the Apostle: We should not so love our bodies as to neglect God; but we must so
love God as to neglect, nay, to hate our bodies: and this hatred of our bodies,
is true love to our selves, because its most profitable for us. A man may be
willing to have a limb cut, nay cut off, and yet this man may love himself: nay
because he loves himself, and desires the preservation of the rest, he
therefore yields to lose one limb. To love our selves, is, not Curare cutem,
but Animam, to regard our souls, not our skins; and to regard the soul, is to
love God, and loath sin. Prove. 8.36. He that sins, hates his own soul. He
that loves a garment, hates the Moth that eats it. Neither can he love his
neighbor well, who does not so love himself; as he cannot write a right line,
who writes by a wrong rule. It were better that some man should say to one,
Proximus est, vel cui a nobis praebendum est, vel a quo nobis praebendum est
officium misericordiae. Aug. l. 11. c. 30. de Doct. Chr. Proximus non sanguinis
propinquitate, sed rationis socictate pensitandus est. Aug. E. 52 Romans 15.16
I love you as well as my swine, than as well as my soul.

2 Love to man comprehends a love to all others, who are meant by the word
neighbor; Thou shall love thy neighbor. Now he is our neighbor, and to be
beloved with a love both of benevolence and beneficence; not only who is our
friend, as the Pharisees thought, Mat. 5.43. but every one who stands in need
of our help, Luke 10.37. He is a neighbor who may want our relief, and whose
relief we may want. A neighbor is to be esteemed not by the neerness of blood,
but by the society of reason.

1 Even those who are most remote in respect of place, are to be beloved, and
are comprehended within this neighborhood. They of Macedonia and Achaia made
a Contribution for the poor Saints at Jerusalem. 3 John 5 Quod praestamus
nostris per affectum, praestamus aliis per humanitatem. Lactant. Mat. 5.44 1
Pet. 2.23 Luke 6.27 Ps. 35.13, 14 Romans 12.14 Amicos diiige re omnium est,
inimicos solorum Christianorum. Tert. ad Scap.
Gaius is commended for his love to strangers. A good man, having ability, is
as diffusive as a common treasury, or a fountain. A great fire will warm those
that sit far from it, and love that is fervent, will extend to them that are
most remote.

2 Our Enemies. Its the command and example of Christ to love our enemies:
Bless them that curse you: Do good to them that hate you. Every one can love
his friend, but it is only a Christian that can love his enemy. Love, like fire
in cold weather, must be made the hotter by the sharpness of cold unkindnesse.
Our Savior and Stephen prayed for their enemies. David's imprecations are
rather Prophesies, than Curses. His and Paul's were both against men as they
were known to be enemies to God, and incurable sinners. In our enemy we may
find something to be beloved; a participation of that nature which may possibly
partake of holiness and eternal blessedness. Theodosius being moved to
execute one that had reviled him; Answered, That if his enemy were dead, he had
rather restore him to life, if it were in his power, than being alive, to put
him to death". Its not manhood, but childishness, to be quieted with striking
the thing that hurt us. Though enemies be not worthy to be loved by us, yet
malice is unworthy to be lodged in us. It Is true, the precept of loving enemies
is contrary to unsanctified nature. It was once said by a good man, Either this
Precept is a fable, or we are no Christians: Fatigatur improbitas patientia.
But God alone knows how to punish our enemies without passion and inequality:
Its our duty to weary Persecutors with patience: A Christian must not, like the
flint, seem to be cool, but be fiery when struck. He that takes up fire to
throw (though against his enemy) hurts himself most. To be kind to the kind,
argues civility: To be unkind to the unkind, argues corruption: To be unkind to
the kind, argues divelishnesse: To be kind to the unkind, argues
Christianity. He has nothing supernatural in charity, that comes not to this,
To be ready to requite evil with good: Publicans doing good for good; and
Heathens absteyning from returning evil for evil. When the godly in Scripture
have rejoiced in the destruction of their enemies, it was not out of delight in
the punishment of their enemies, whom they loved not; but in the Justice of
God, whom they loved: Non de malo inimici, fed de bono Judice: not that their
enemies suffered such evil, but that they had so good and upright a Judge. We
must not so much as use the Magistrate to revenge us on our adversary; for this
were to make Gods ordinances an instrument of our malice. Violent things have
the more force upon those that resist them: A sword may be spoiled with the
force of lightning, Romans 12.19 Eccles. 7.9
the scabberd not being hurt at all. To give place to wrath, is council both
wise and holy. Anger rests in the bosom of fools. Love to an enemy is a
token of a truly noble mind: 1 Samuel 24.20 Prove. 16.32 Romans 12.21
When David spared Saul, having power to kill him; Saul told him, He knew that
he should be King. It Is a sign of a weak stomach not to be able to concoct
light meats, and of a weak mind not to digest injuries. Wicked men account
revenge to be valor. These are not like Adam in his innocence that gave Names
to things according to their natures. Its an unhappy victory to overcome a man,
(...) ^^oelix victoria, ubi superans virum, succumbis vitio. Bern.
and to be overcome by a lust. The wisdom of the World and the Word are
contrary. Is it not a thrice noble conquest to overcome our own and our enemies
passions, and Satan's tentations; three enemies at one blow, and all this
without shedding blood? Nay, not only not to hurt an enemy, but to help him, to
feed him, give him drink in his hunger and thirst; nay, to feed him cheerfully,
tenderly; such being the feeding commanded by Paul, who bids us (...), (...)
proprie significat cibum concisum et intinctum frustulatim veluti in os inderc,
ut puerulis et aegrotis solemus. Non significat simpliciter pascere, sed
indulgenter pascere, ut in conviviis fieri solet, quum quis alteri ministrat de
iis quae ipsi apponuntur. Significat et abundanter pascere; frustulatim
distribuere. Pisc. Tollet. Eras. Bez. Steph. (...) ex (...) propina illi: Quod
verbum in conviviis locum habet. Salaz. in Prove. 25.1.
feed our enemies, as birds feed their young, or as sick folks and young children
are fed, with much tending and tenderness; their meat being minced and cut; or
as a man feeds his friend, carving him the best. And the Hebrew word, rendered,
Give him drink, signifies most properly, propina, Drink to him as a token of
true love.

3 The wicked are not excluded the line of love and neighborhood. It Is true, In
societate fruitionis divinae fundatur charitas. Sanctior est copula cordium
quam corporum.
holy men are chiefly the objects of our love. With these we have communion
both of nature and grace also. Gal. 6.10. Let us do good unto all, especially
to the household of Faith. The love of Complacency must be set upon the good:
The love of Benevolence must not be denied to the bad: As those objects are
best seen which are most in the light, because light is that by which every
object is seen; so those men are most to be beloved which are nearest to God,
because he makes every object to be beloved. Yet wicked men also are to be
beloved, because being men they may be good; as are good men, because being
Saints, Non hoc ago ut sim homine convitiando superior, sed errorum convincendo
salubrior. Aug. con. lit. Pet. l. 3 c. 1 Apud summum patrem, qui non fuerit in
charitate fratrum, non hab^bitur in numero filiorum. Leo. Ser. 11. de quadr. 1
Pet. 1.22 2.17 3.8 Joh. 13.34 2 Pet. 1.7 Col. 3.14 Romans 12.10 1 Thessalonians. 4.9 Heb.
13.1 Non erit tibi concordia cum Christo, si sit discordia cum Christiano.
they are good. If a man be degenerate into a beast and wandering from God,
bring him to his Master again. As the nature of man must not make his vices
loved, so neither must the vices of man make his nature hated. St Augustine
thinks that Stephens prayer was a great means of Paul's conversion. The
denouncing of curses against wicked men by Ministers must not be poysonful but
medicinal.

4. The faithful call for the chiefest room in our love, and are eminently to
be looked upon as neighbors. With our heavenly father he is not in the
Communion of Sons, who is not in the charity of Brethren. The bond of grace is
the strongest; Creation has made us friends; but Redemption has made us
brethren. The frequent inculcating of the command of love of the brethren, the
brotherhood, the household of Faith, of brotherly love, and of being kindly
affectionated with brotherly love, etc. insinuates the necessity, and common
disestimation of this duty. In pursuance of this duty, contentions, strifes,
and controversies among brethren are forbidden. 1 Cor. 6.6. Its a fault for
brother to go to Law with brother. Let there be no strife between us (said
Abraham to Lot) for we are Brethren. Genesis 13.8. Why do ye wrong one another
(said Moses) since ye are brethren? Act. 7.26. The sowing of discord among
brethren, is one of the abominations which Gods soul hates. Prove. 6.19. In
this respect likewise the Scripture opposes inward hatred and rancor among
brethren. Genesis 37.4. How dear did this sin cost Joseph's brethren? He that
hates his brother is in darkness: 1 John 2.11. He is a murderer: 1 John
3.15. As also anger, Mat. 5.22
which is a short hatred, as hatred is a long anger. This causeles anger puts
us in danger of the judgment. Choler is not allowed by Christianity. Most
opposite also to brotherly love is the contempt and despising of any brother.
Despise you the Church of God? 1 Cor. 11. said Paul. The poorest brother
concurs to make up the perfection of Christ. When Darius his mother had saluted
Hephestion instead of Alexander the great, who was Alexanders Favorite, she
blushed and was troubled; but Alexander said to her, It is well enough done,
for he is also Alexander. The meanest Saint is to be beloved, for what of
Christ is in him; he is an old Casket full of pearls. But above all, how
destructive to brotherly love is oppression, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6
defrauding, and grinding our brethren? Let no man (says Paul) defraud his
brother in any matter. Even the Jew, who might take usury of an Heathen, might
not take it of his Brother. If Lillyes rend and tear Lillyes, what may Thorns
do? Nor must a Christian content himself in not hurting a Christian: his care
must be to benefit him, to do him good. And that for his Soul; All thy
Spiritual gifts of knowledge, utterance, etc. must profit thy brother. 1 Cor.
12. 1 Cor. 14.26. Comfort him in his troubles of mind, direct him in his
doubts, reprehend him gently for his faults. Not to rebuke him, is to hate him.
Levit. 19.17. To be angry with the sin of our brother, is not to be angry with
our brother. To love the soul, is the soul of love: so to love thy brother, as
to labor to have him live in heaven with thee. For his name; not casting
aspersions on him, but wiping them off: not receiving, much less raising
accusations against him, but laying hold upon the theif that pillaged his name,
as knowing that the receiver in this case, is as bad as he. For his body;
visiting and sympathising with him in his sickness; helping him (to utmost
ability) to find the jewel of health. For outward necessaries; pitying him in
his low estate^, casting the dung of thy wealth on the barren soil of his
poverty: making his back, thy wardrobe; his belly, Psalm. 16.3
thy barn; his hand, thy treasury. For body and soul; praying for him, calling
upon God, as Our Father, not thine alone. In the Primitive time (says one)
there was so much love, Tert. Apol. c. 39.
that it was ad stuporem Gentilium, to the wonder of Gentiles: but now, so
little, that it may be to the shame of Christians. That which was the Motto of
a Heathen, (Dic aliquid ut duo simus; Say something that we may he two) must
not belong to Christians. Its best that dissension should never be born among
brethren; and next, that it should die presently after its birth. When any leak
springs in the Ship of Christian society, we should stop it with speed. The
nearer the union is, the more dangerous is the breach. Bodies that are but
glewed together, may (if severed) be set together as beautifully as ever: but
members rent and torn, cannot be healed without a scar. What a shame is it, 1 John 3.14 1 John 5.1 1 John 4.7, 8, etc.
that the bond of grace and religion should not more firmly unite us, than
sinful leagues do wicked men? A true Christian (like the true mother, to whom
Solomon gave the Child) may be known by affection. As the spleen grows, the
body decays; and as hatred increases, holiness abateth.

In sum: This love to the faithful must put forth it self both in distributing
to them the good they want, and in delighting in them, and rejoicing with them
for the good they have. Both these, how profitable, how honorable, how amiable
are they! Most honorable it is for the meanest Christian to be a Priest to the
high God, Heb. 13.16
to offer a daily sacrifice with which God is well pleased; to resemble God, in
doing, rather then in receiving good; to be the hand of God to disperse his
bounty, to have God for his debtor, to lend to the Lord of heaven and earth.
What likewise is more profitable than that our distribution to Saints (like an
ambassador) by lying Lieger abroad, should secure all at home? that this most
gainful employment should return us pearls for pibbles, jewels for trifles,
crowns for crumbs; after a short seed-time, a thousand fold, measure heaped,
shaken, thrust together, and running over? What (lastly) so amiable, as for
members of the same body, children of the same father, and who lay in the same
womb, suck at the same breasts, sit at the same table, and expect for ever to
lodge in the same bosom, to be at union with, and helpful to one another? And on
this side heaven, Psalm. 16.3. Vid. doctiss. Rivetum in loc.
where should our complacency center it self, but upon the truly excellent,
noble, illustrious ones, who are every one Kings, and more magnificent than
ever were worldly Monarchs, for their alliance, having the Lord of heaven and
earth for their Father, the King of Kings for their elder Brother, Psalm. 45.9.
a Queen (the Church, the Spouse of Christ) for their Mother: having for their
treasures those exceeding precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.
more to be desired than gold, yea, Psalm. 19.10
than fine gold; in comparison of which a mountain of gold is but a heap of
dung. For their guard, having the attendance of Angels, Psalm. 34.7 John 6.27
Cant. 1.2 Cant. 4.7
nay, the wisdom, care, and strength of God: For their food, having bread that
endures to eternal life, drink better than wine, and a continual feast: For
their apparel, having the robes of Christ's righteousness here, which makes
them as beautiful as Angels, all fair, and without spot; and attire to be put
on hereafter, which will shine more gloriously then an hundred Suns made into
one: For their habitation, a palace of glory, a building of God, an house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

Having thus first explained this love here desired by the Apostle in its
several sorts, I come in the next place to touch briefly upon those rare and
excellent properties of this grace of love, both as it is set upon 1 God. 2 Man.


1. This grace of love set upon God, is true, cordial, and sincere; (...).
not in word or outward profession, but in truth, and in the inward man; not
complemental, but real; the inward purpose of the heart having an emphasis Of
love, that hypocrisy and expressions cannot reach. And the truth is our loving
of God, Ephesians. 6.24.
is not so properly said to be sincere, as to be our very sincerity. Then, and
then alone a duty is done in sincerity, when it is done in love; and herein
stands hypocrisy, when though there is much doing, yet there is no loving. The
love of an hypocrite to Christ, like the shining of the Gloworm is without any
inward heat; and stands only in a glistering profession: or like some spices
which are cold in the stomach, though hot in the mouth; or like the fire in
Moses his bush, it burns not while it blazeth: it proceeds from humane
inducements of education, Countenance, or Commands of Superiors, Interest, an
apprehension of the love of Christ barely to mankind, or from this, that Christ
is out of sight, and troubles not his lusts: or from some accidental,
circumstantiall Ornaments which attend the Ministry, and Truth, as wit,
learning, expression, elocution, or credit of visible conformity to them; not
from an inward apprehension of the proportionablenesse, sutablenesse, and
fitness of Christ to all his desires, and capacities, Luke 7.47. 1 John
4.16.19.
as being the fairest of ten thousand, or from any real interest, and
propriety in Christ, which are the grounds of love, when true and sincere.

2. This love to God is superlattive; it surpasses all other loves; the soul
in which it abides, seeing infinitely more loveliness in one God, then in all
the combined, assembled excellencies of all worldly Objects, loves him
infinitely more than them all. It often not only steps over them, but kicks
them away, not only laying them down as sacrifices, but hating them as snares,
when they would draw from Christ. When Christ and the World meet (as it were)
upon so narrow a bridge, that both cannot pass by, Christ shall go on, and the
World shall go back. Christ in a Christian shall have no Corrivals; as Christ
bestows himself wholly upon a Christian, (wholly upon every one, as every
line has the whole indivisible point) so a Christian gives himself wholly to
Christ; he shares not his heart betwixt him and the world; all within him he
sets on work to love Christ, keeping nothing back from him, for whom all is too
little. The greatest worth that it sees in any thing but Christ, is this, that
it may be left for Christ; ever rejoicing that it has any thing to which it
may prefer him. To a soul in which is this love, Christ is as oil put into a
vial with water, in which (though both be never so much shaken together) the
oil will ever be uppermost; or as one rising Sun, which drowneth the light of a
numberless number of Stars. It loves the world as always about to leave and
loath it; not as that for which it does live, but as that without which it
cannot live. The world has not the top and strength of it is affection; It
loves nothing much, but him whom it cannot love too much. It lodges not the
world in it is best room, and admits not such a stranger into the closet of the
heart, but only into the hall of the senses.

3. It Is a jealous or zealous love; suspicious lest any thing should, and
burning in a holy heat of indignation against any thing that does disturb the
Souls beloved. Love is a solicitous grace, and makes the soul account it self
never sufficiently trimmed for Christ's imbracements, never to think, that any
thing done, is well enough done. All the soul is and can, is esteemed too
little for him, who is its optimus maximus, its best and greatest; the more
brightly shining the beams of love to Christ are, the more motes and
imperfections does the soul ever see in its services. Its fear only is, lest
by sin, and unsuitable carriage it stirs up, Gal. 4.11.16. Act. 15.2. and
17.16. and 18.25. and 19.8. Jude 3.
and awakes the beloved. It cannot put up a disgrace, expressed by the greatest
against Christ. It zealously contends for his Word, Ways, Worship,
Worshippers, Kingdom. All it is anger is against those intercurrent
impediments, that would stop it in the advancing of Christ; it labors to bear
down those hindrances of Gods glory with a flood of tears, if it cannot with a
stream of power. The meekest soul in love with God, knows how to be holily
impatient, and like Moses, though when with God to pray for men, yet when with
men to contend for God. Every sin by how much the nearer to it, by so much is
it more detested by it. Of all sins therefore its own have the deepest share of
hatred: for what it cannot remove, Romans 7. Heb. 12.
it mourns heartily, crying out of the body of death, the sin that does so
easily beset it, as of the constant company of a noisome carcass,
endeavoring that every sin may be more bitter to remember, then 'twas ever
sweet to commit; looking upon the want of sorrow after sin, as a greater
argument of want of love then was the sin it self.

4. It Is a chaste, a loyal love, not set upon what God has so much, as upon
what God is; not upon his, but him, not upon his rings, but his person; not his
clothes, but his comeliness; upon a Christ, though not adventitiously
adorned; his gifts are loved for him, not he for them; he is sweet without any
thing, though nothing is so without him. Love desires no wages, it is wages
enough to it self, it pays it self in seeing, and serving the Beloved. A
Nurse does much for the child, and so does the Mother; but the former for the
love of wages, the later for the wages of love. Love carries meat in the mouth;
the very doing of Gods will is meat and drink to one who loves him: A heart in
love with Christ is willing with Mephibosheth that others should take all, so
it may behold the King. Worldly Comforts shall not fallere, but monere; Nil
dulcescit sine Jesu.
only they shall be used to admonish how much worth is in Christ, not to
bewitch the soul from Christ; Si ista terrena diligitis, ut subjecta diligite,
ut munera amici, ut beneficia domini, ut arrham Sponsi. Aug. Med.
as spectacles by which the soul may read him the better, or as steps by which
it may be raised up to him the nearer: and no further shall they be delighted
in, then as they are pledges of, or furtherances unto the enjoyment of him.
Should God give all to one who loves him, and not give himself, he would say
with Absalom, What does all avail me, so long as I see not the Kings face.
Communion with God is the Heaven of him who loves God. It Is heaven upon earth
for God to be with him, and the Heaven of Heaven for him to be with God.

5. It Is an active: John 14.24. Psalm. 119.68.140. Esaias 45, 19. (...), from
(...), say some. 2 Cor. 5.14. (...).
stirring, expressive love, the fire of love cannot be held in, 'twill break
out at lips, hands, feet, by speaking, working, walking. Love says (as Elijah
to Obadiah) as the Lord lives, I will show my self: the strength of love will
have a vent. The Love of Christ constrains; and (as the word used by the
Apostle signifies) hemmeth in, shuts up, pinfolds the heart, that it cannot
wind out from service, and cannot choose but do for Christ. Love is a mighty
stream, bearing all before it. It cares not for shame, or loss: It carries
away these (as did Samson the other) gates upon it is shoulders. It Is strong as
death. A man in love with God, is as a man who is carried away in a crowd, who
cannot keep himself back, but is hurried without his own labor with the
throng. Love with ease dispatcheth great employments: The Commands of God are
not grievous to it. Love is the wing, that weight, and holy proclivity of the
soul, which if it finds not, makes a way; Nay it is so speedy and present an
affection, that it endures no delays. It accounts not the least time little in
which God is withdrawn. It follows hard after God, and puts not off it is
pursuits of duty or comfort till to morrow, or a more convenient time.

6. It Is an expensive, Psalm. 16.
bountiful, costly love; It will not offer that which cost it nothing; even
the meanest gift (as alas, how much below Christ is all we are, or do!) comes
from a Kingly heart. Love contends after excellency and perfection in attending
upon that object which it loves under the apprehension of the greatest good.
How willingly did those Converts lay down all their goods at the Apostles feet!
and those afterward burn their books of curious Arts, 1 Chr. 22.29. 2 Samuel
24.24.
though of great value! How great was David's expense for the Temple, and his
desire, that his purchase which he bought of Araunah should be (being for his
God) costly! Luke 7.
How bountiful was that (formerly sinful) woman in her expression of love to
Christ! How freely were her tears, hairs, kisses, ointment employed! The
greatness of the debt forgiven her, made her love much, and the greatness of
her love made her spend much. What save love made Zach^^ part with half of his
goods to the poor, Luke 19.8. John 1. Act^ ^^.^^. G^n. 43.34.
and a fourfold restitution to the wronged by false accusation? Love will make
Peter willing to feed the sheep of Christ, and Paul not to account his life
dear to him to finish his Ministry. Joseph loved Benjamin most, and gave him a
mess five times so much as any of the rest. He that loves God most, will lay
out most for God. 1 These. 1.3. Heb. 6.10.
More then once we read in the Scripture of the labor of love. Love rests in
its labor, and then rests most, when it labors most. Nothing labors
more, or thinks it labors less then love. I have heard of one that was asked
for what sort of men he labored most; he answered, for his friends. He was
again asked, for whom then he labored least; he answered, for his friends:
both answers were true; for love made him think he did least for those, for
whom indeed he did most.

7. It Is a submissive, stooping, patient love, bearing from, and forbearing for
the Beloved any thing. It puts us upon things below us, for the pleasing of him
whom we love; it makes us to undertake that which another may esteem weakness,
and indecencie. David's love to Gods presence, transported him to leaping and
dancing, thereby (though Mical esteemed it baseness) to honor God. Parents
out of love to their children, play, and lisp, and stammer; Christ himself
emptied and humbled himself for our sakes, Love flies not (like chafe) in the
face of him that fans; Romans 8.38, 39
The soul that loves, is reconciled to God, Cant. 8.7.
though it sees not that God is reconciled to it. It has a child-like
ingenuity to love, and stay with a father that scourges it, not a servile
unsubmissivenesse, to threaten, presently after stripes, departure. It does
iratum colere numen, follow a frowning father. It lives contented with Gods
allowance: It will patiently be without what he thinks either fit to remove, or
not fit to bestow; and all this not upon force, but upon choice. It loses its
own will in Gods, and had rather will as does God, than understand as does an
Angel. It takes with joy the spoiling of its goods. It ever thinks it has
enough left, so long as God takes not away himself. Omnia quae horribilia
audis, servire, mori expiata and sancta sunt amori, Nier. de art. vol.
It bears the indignation of the Lord, and accepts the punishment of its
iniquity, and is willing to receive evil as well as good, because from the
hand of a God whom it loves. For his sake it is willing to be killed all the day
long: nor can the waters of death extinguish the taper of love.

8. It Is a conforming love. The Will of God is the Compass by which it steers.
It fashions not it self according to the world. It walks not by example, but
by rule. The heart will be set like a Watch which goes exactly, not by others,
but by the Sun. It walks not by president, but precept. It regards not what is
either its own, or other men's, but what is Gods will. Its will and Gods are
like two strings of an Instrument, the one whereof being tuned to the other, if
the one be struck and sound, the other also stirs and trembles; when Gods will
is declared, the will of him that loves God moves accordingly. It is much more
solicitous to understand duty, then to avoid danger. It desires to have a heart
according to Gods heart, to be effigiated and molded according to Scripture
Impressions; to love what God loves, and hate what he hates; to think and will
the same with God.

9. It Is a sociable love, It moves to the full enjoyment of God, as its Center.
Converse with God is its Element. The soul where this love is, debarred from
prayer, hearing, is as the fish on dry land. It restrains not prayer from the
Almighty: It walks with God: It sings in the absence of Christ, no more than
did they in a strange land. It loves to have its bundle of Myrh all the night
between its breast. It delights in every thing in which Christ may be seen:
Word, Sacraments, Conditions, Soscietie, Ministers; and the more these have of
Christ's presence, the more it loves them: the closest, purest powerfullest, and
most sin-discovering, sin-disturbing preaching, it loves best. The holiest, and
most exactly walking Saints, it loves best. The Sacrament or Prayer wherein
Christ smiles most sweetly, it loves best. The condition (though outwardly
bitterest) wherein it sees the face of Christ most clearly, it loves best. 2 Timothy 4.8. 2 Pet. 3.12.
Chiefly is the sociableness of love discovered in longing after the second
coming of Christ: in counting it best of all to be with him: in loving his
appearance: in hasting to the coming of the day of God. The unwillingness to
have that day come, proceeds from a Christians unrenewed part: so much soreness
as is in the eye, so much lothness is there in a man to see the light, and
proportionable to our love to sin, is the disaffection to Christ's appearance;
and the fear which is in a gracious heart of Christ's second coming, rather
proceeds from a sense of its own unfitness to appear before Christ, than an
unwillingness to have Christ appear to it: and more from a desire to be made
meet for him, than to remain without him.

10. Lastly, Its an uncessant Love. A flame never to be quenched. The Waters of
affliction cannot drown it, but only (as they increase) elevate it. The very
snuffers of death shall make it burn the more brightly. It unconquered
out-lives, as opposition, so its fellow-graces: 1 Cor. 13.
the faithful are rooted and grounded in love. They love God for himself who
fails not, Ep. 3.17. 1 Cor. 13.8.
and therefore Love it self fails not. Hypocrites are uneven in their love:
feigned things are unequal: appearing friends cannot dissemble so exactly, but
that at one time or other their hatred will appear. In some companies, or
conditions they will show what they are: In the time of persecution they fall
away: Mat. 13.21.
like rotten Apples, they fall off in a windy day. True love to Christ, Amor
uescit ferias.
knows no holy days: it ever has a rest of Contentment, never has a rest of
Cessation.

2. I proceed to the Properties of love to man.

First, Romans 12.9. 1 Pet. 1.22. 1 John 3.18.
It Is a love unfeigned, without dissimulation. (...), Love without hypocrisy.
Love indeed and in truth, not in word and tongue: a love from the heart. It Is
not like the love of Joab and Judas, that outwardly kissed, and inwardly (at
that time) designed killing.

It contents not it self in giving (like Nephthali, Genesis 49.21. Goodly words.
The Apostle speaks of Soundness in Charity. Tit. 2.2.
Unsound Charity is Courtship, not Christianity. Of all things, dissimulation
does worst in love, as being most corrupting of, and contrary to the nature of
it; and appearing love is nothing but Christianity acted, and Religion painted:
some sins scratch the face of love, but hypocrisy stabs it at the heart.

Secondly, It Is an expressive, open-handed Love: though it arises at the
heart, yet it reaches to the hand. Love is a fruitful grace; it bears not
only the leaves and blossoms of words and promises, 1 John 3.18.
but the fruit also of beneficial performances. If Love be in truth, it will
also be in deed: words, be they never so adorned, cloth not the naked; be they
never so delicate, they feed not the hungry; be they never so zealous, they
warm not the cold; be they never so free, they set not the bound at liberty:
our Faith must work by love: Love must be seen, felt, and understood: verbal
Love is But painted fire: Love is so beautiful a Grace, that it is willing to be
seen. The Apostle says, Romans 13.10.
Love works no ill: it is a diminutive expression; there is more intended, even
the doing of all the good the Law requires, and therefore he adds, Love is the
fulfiling of the Law.

Thirdly, It Is a forward, cheerful Love. It is not drawn or driven, but runs:
it stays not till the poor seeks it, but it seeks for him. Onesiphorus sought
out Paul diligently. Prove. 23.6. 2 Timothy 1.17. Romans 12.13.
It relieves not with an evil eye. It makes men given to hospitality: the water
of bounty flows from it, as from a Fountain, and goes not out, as from a
narrow mouthed bottle, with grumbling. It is not like the sponge that sucks up
the water greedily, but gives it not out unless it be squeezed. Hoc ipso
amplius gaudent pauperes, cum paupertati little consultum fuerit and pudori.
Leo. Sermon. 4. Duplex Eleemosyna, and quia damus, and quia hilariter damus.
Ingenuous poverty rejoices in this forwardness of love, as much as in the
gift it self; for thereby not only it is want, but bashfulness is relieved. Its
a double beneficence when we give, and give cheerfully. The mind of the
receiver, is more refreshed with the cheerfulness of the Giver, than is his
body with the greatness of the Gift.

Fourthly, It Is an extensive universal Love. 1. Universal, in respect of
duties: it shuns no performance that may benefit Body, Name, Mind, Soul of
another: Love is a Pandora, abounding in every good work and gift: Romans 13.10.
it is therefore called, the fulfilling of the Law. Love is the Decalogue
contracted, and the Decalogue is Love unfolded. Love is a Mother; the ten
Commandments, her ten children, and she forgets none, neglects none. Gal. 6.10.
2. It Is Universal, in respect of persons: It remembers the Apostles rule, to
do good to All: even wicked men it loves, though not as wicked, yet as men; the
men, not their manners. Col. 1.4. Non peccatorem, sed justum in paupere nutrit,
qui in illo non culpam, sed naturam diligit. Gr. 3. past. 1 Pet. 2.17. Jam. 2.1.
The Love of the Collosians was extended to all the Saints: wherever there is
grace, love will follow; for grace is beautiful wherever it is. The Ointment of
Love falls even upon the skirts of the garment, as well as the head. Love is
set upon the Brotherhood; the whole Fraternity of Believers; not here and
there upon one. Holy Love regards grace in its working-day clothes: upon a
Dunghill, in a Prison: Grace in the Idiot, as well as in the Scholar; in the
Servant, as well as the Master. As all our delight must be in the Saints, Ps.
16.3.
so our delight must be in all the Saints.

5. It Is a religious, and a holy love. It Is from, in, and for holiness. From
it: he that loves his brother, first, 1 Timothy 1.5.
loves God; 1 Timothy 1.5.
first he gives his heart to God, as a son, before he reaches out his hand to
man as his brother. His love is said to be out of a pure heart. First, he gives
himself, then his. Secondly, In holiness, and holy ways; It joins not hands
with any in a way of sin. For this is not unity, but faction: it has no
fellowship with fruitful works, Ephesians. 5.11.
but reproves them: it makes a man most angry with the sin of him whom he loves
most. He fears not only to be fratricida, but fideicida: he does not so love a
man as to be an Enemy to religion. Thirdly, for holiness; this love is set
upon holy ones, because they are so; not because they are great, but good; Gods
Image in them is the Lodestone of our love. 1 John 5.2.


6. It Is a just and righteous love; It bestows gifts, not spoils; it hurts
not some to help others; it buys not a burying place for strangers with the
blood of Christ; it is not bountiful upon any others cost. The people of God
must be blameless and harmless, Phil. 2.15.
not having in the one hand bread for one, and in the other a stone for
another. We must not build Gods house with Satan's tools; the poorest Saint
wants not our unrighteousness to help him.

7. It Is a prudent discerning love, It loves all, yet with a difference; it is
most set upon those that are the fittest objects either for want or worth: it
beats not the poor from the door, while it makes strangers drunk in the Cellar;
It is not like the Oak, which drops its acorns to swine. Gal. 6.10.
It loves Gods friends best; the wicked with a love of pity, the godly with a
love of complacency. True Christians shall have a Benjamins portion of love;
Mark 10.21.
it does good especially to the household of faith. Brotherly-love is set upon
brethren. Christ loved the young man a Pharisee, by showing loving respect
toward him, but he loved Lazarus a godly man with a dear intimate love; John
11.3. and 5.11.
the best men shall have the best love. There Is a prudence also in the measure
of expressing love, so to love to day, as we may love to morrow. We sow not by
the bushel, but the handful.

8. It Is a mutual, reciprocal love. Hence it is, Joh. 13.34. Gal. 5.13. Col.
3.13. Gal. 6.2. Jam. 5.16. 1 These. 5.11.
that there is so frequent mention of Loving one another: giving and receiving
benefits, is by some compared to the Game at Tennis, wherein the Ball is tossed
from one to the other, and if it falls, it is his forfeit who mist his stroke.
His disposition is very bad, who if he will not provoke, will not repay love:
where Affection, there Gain is reciprocal. The Pole sustains the Hop, and the
Hop adorns the Pole: the Wall bears up the Roof, and the Roof preserves the
Wall from wet: the wise directs the strong, and the strong protecteth the
wise: the zealous inflameth the moderate, and the moderate tempers the zealous:
the rich supplyeth the poor, and the poor works for the rich: Love must have
an echo to resound and return.

9. It Is a fervent, burning love. (...), q. (...).
Purity and fervencie of love are joined together, 1 Pet. 1.22. and 1 Pet.
4.8. Have fervent charity among your selves. It must be a love to the utmost,
not remiss and faint; not a love of courtesy, and civil correspondencie, but
of intireness, and holy vehemency: such a love as was between Jonathan and
David, surpassing the love of women. The fervencie of it must be so great, as
that it may burn and consume all intervening occasions of hatred and dislike,
by bearing with infirmities, covering of sins, construing men's meanings in the
better part, condescending to those of lower parts and places: 1 King. 18.
like the fire that fell from Heaven upon Elijahs Sacrifice, which licked up a
trench full of water. A love that overcomes the greatest difficulties for the
good of others, and triumphs over all opposition.

10. It Is a constant and unwearied love. 1 Phil. 9. Joh. 13.1. 15.12.
A love that must abound more and more. A love that must be like that of
Christ's, who loved his to the end. Love is a debt always to be owed, and always
to be paid: it is a debt which the more we pay, the more we have. And which
herein differs from all civil debts, that it cannot be pardoned. When we have
well chosen our Love, we should Love our choice, and be true Scripture-friends,
to love at all times; not fawning upon our friends, when high; and frowning
upon them, when low: not looking upon them as Dyals, only when the Sun of
success shines upon them: we should love them most, when they want us, not when
we want them most.

This for the explication of the third, and last blessing, which the Apostle
requesteth for these Christians. [ Love.]

2. The Observations follow.

1. Love to God flows not from Nature. Observe. 1. 1 John 4.7.
God is not only the Object, but the Author of it. From him, for these
Christians, the Apostle desires it. The Affection of Love is natural; the Grace
of Love is divine. As Love is the motion of the will toward good, it is in us by
Nature; but as it is the motion of the will toward such an object, or as
terminated upon God, it is by Grace.

Love is one of the Graces to be put on, Col. 3.14. Romans 1.30.
and we are no more born with it in us, than with our clothes on us. Wicked men
are haters of God, and that (as the word signifies) with the greatest
abhorrency: (...), abhorreo, unde Styx.
they so hate him, as to desire he were not, that so they might live without
the limits of his Law, and the reach of his Justice. God is only by them
looked upon with fear, Ps. 139.21. 2 Chro. 19.2. 1 John 3.13. Joh. 15.18.20.
Romans 8.7.
as a Judge: and whom men fear, as hurtful, they hate, and wish they were
taken out of the way. Men's hearts, and Gods holiness, are very opposite: The
carnal mind is enmity against God. The very reason of it, the best thing that
is in Corrupt Nature, even Lady-Reason her self, is not an enemy only, but
enmity, and irreconcilable. There is in it an Enmity against every truth,
preferring before it humane mixtures, and Traditions: and undervaluing Gods
mercy, and the way of obtaining it in his Son; misjudging all his ways as
grievous, and unprofitable; accounting all his Servants base, and contemptible.
An enmity there is in Affection against his Word, wishing every truth, which
crosses its lust, razed out of the Scripture: quenching the motions of the
Spirit; refusing to hear his voice; rejecting the council of God: against his
people, his Messengers; hating them most, that speak most of God, either with
the language of lip or life. Enmity in conversation, holding the truth in
unrighteousness; by wilful disobedience, forsaking the ways of God, to walk in
those of Nature; casting off his Yoke, and refusing to be reformed. And all
this hatred is against God, though man by it hurts not God, but himself, man
being Gods enemy, not by hurting his will, but resisting it. Non nocendo sed
resistendo.
The consideration whereof should humble us for our folly, and danger in hating
so good and great a God. It should also teach from whom to beg renewed
inclinations. Lord, Whither should we go but to thee? and how, but by thee?

2. Love is the best thing which we can bestow upon God. Observe. 2.
It Is our All, And the All which the Apostle desires these Christians may
return to God, who had bestowed upon them mercy and peace. Love from God, is
the top of our happiness; and love to God, the sum of our duty. It Is that
only grace whereby we most nearly answer God in his own kind: he commands,
corrects, comforts, directs, pitties, sustains, etc. in these we cannot
resemble him; but he loves us, and in this respect, we may, and must answer,
returning love for love. Love is the best thing, that the best man did ever
give his God. Love is a gift, in bestowing whereof, hypocrites cannot join with
the faithful: there is nothing else but they may give as abundantly as the most
upright in heart: they may give their tongue, hand, estate, children, nay life,
but Love with these, or these in love they cannot give. And the truth is, not
giving this, they give to God, in his esteem, just nothing. The best thing that
an Hypocrite can bestow, is his Life, and yet Paul tells us, That though he gave
his body to be burned, 1 Cor. 13.3. Nucleus donorum animus.
and had not love, he should be nothing: nothing in Esse gratiae, in point of
truth, worth, and grace. Love is the beauty of our performances; their
Loveliness is Love to God in doing them: Love is the Marrow of every duty. Love
is the salt which seasons every Sacrifice: (...).
the exquisitest service without it, is but as a dead carcass embalmed. God
delights in nothing which we give him, unless we give our selves first. He more
regards with what heart we give, than what we give. God accepts no duty when we
do it because we dare not do otherwise, but when we do it because we love to do
it, it is acceptable to God. He who wants Love, though he do the thing
commanded, yet he breaks the Law Commanding. He who Loves, keeps the Command
Evangelically, while he breaks it Legally.

3. Observe. 3.
Love set upon other things beside God, is wrong placed. The world must often
be left and loathed, at the most but used, never loved. So to love it, as
thereby to lessen thy love to God; so to love it, as to be excessive either in
grief for wanting it, or joy for having it, and to be over earnest in using it,
and injudicious in preferring it before thy God, is to love it unduely, and
sinfully: if at any time the creature be beloved innocently, it is beloved in
and for God; as a pledge of heaven, as a spur to duty.

Among all the Creatures there cannot be found a helper fit for man. Between
the soul and them there can be no match with Gods consent. He that is wedded in
love to the Creature, is married to one that is poor, base, vexing, false.

1. Poor, the whole world is but a Curt, and unsatisfying good: the sieve in
the water has something in it, pulled thence, it is empty: the Creature apart
from God, is empty of all loveliness: it is a breast filled with nothing but
wind. Should the whole world be cast into our Treasury, it would hardly be a
Mite. Hagar out of Abraham's house found nothing but scarcity; and all plenty
which is not God, is but penury. Earthly blessings, like to numbers, cannot be
so great, but still we may reckon, and our desires reach some one beyond them.
Men in their contentions for the world prove it a scanty thing, and that it
cannot satisfy all. A lover of the world can endure no rivals, as knowing how
scanty an object he contends for. So large a good is God, that he who loves
him, delights in company.

2. Base and ignoble. Whatsoever is below a God, is below our soul; its as
unfit to rule our hearts, as the bramble to rule the trees. What we love,
subdues us it to it self, and we are always below it: to love these earthly,
drossie comforts, is to make thy soul a vassal to thy vassal, a servant of
servants, Love leaves the impression of the thing beloved upon the soul; if
thou love the earth, thou have the impression of vileness upon a noble
soul; the impression gives denomination: a piece of gold is called a Jacobus,
an Angel, a Serpent, a Lion, according to the stamp it bears: If therefore
earthly objects have by love set their impression upon thy soul, what is that
golden, excellent, heaven-born creature, but a lump, a clod of earth; The earth
should be under our feet, not upon our heart.

3. Vexing and unquiet Love set upon the world, has more of anguish than love;
it ever wrangles with us for not giving it enough. Peace is the only product of
the enjoyment of God. If Christ be not in the ship, the storms will never
cease; nor can any thing but his presence bring a calmnesse upon the sonle.
Rest is peculiar only to Gods Beloved. Love never stings, but when you disturb,
anger it, and hinder it from resting in a God; in him it is hive, it is always,
and only quiet, and innocent.

4. False and inconstant. They are but lying, and flying vanities. A soul that
loves the world is matched to that which will soon break and run away; none are
so foolishly prodigal as the covetous, who assures all to that which can
assure nothing (no not his own) again to him. The World is like to Absaloms
mule, that runs away when its lovers most want relief; its not able to love
again those, that love it most. The love of that which is inconstant and weak,
is the strength of our misery. The best of earthly blessings have their moth,
and their thief; Mat. 6.20. Prove. 25.31. Observe. 4. Plus bonitas, quam
benificientia. Expiat infinita venustas, omnem injuriam.
they make themselves wings, they flee away as an Eagle toward Heaven.

4. God is an Object very meet for our love to be set upon. Much he deserves
it, even for whathe is. His own lovely excellencies are so great, that even for
these our hearts should be set upon him, although his hatred were set upon us.
Goodness is more than beneficience. God is a bundle, an heap of all worth and
perfections; all the scattered excellencies of the whole Creation, Center, and
meet in him: a flower he is, in which meet the beauties of all flowers. Suppose
a creature composed of all the choycest endowments of all the men that were
since the Creation of the World, famous in any kind. One in whom were a meek
Moses, a strong Samson; all the valiant Worthies of David, a faithful
Jonathan, a beautiful Absalom, a rich and wise Solomon: all the holy men of
God, eminent for any grace; Nay, all the Angels of Heaven, with their
understandings, strength, agility, splendour, spiritualnesse, holiness: and
suppose this creature had never known us, helped us, benefited us, yet how
would our hearts be drawn out toward it in desires and complacencies; but this
alas, though ten thousand times more exquisitely accomplished, would not amount
to a shadow of divine perfection. God had in himself assembled from Eternity,
all the excellencies which were in time; and had not he made them, they had
never been. If every leaf, and spire of grass, nay all the stars, sands,
atoms in the World, were so many Souls, and Seraphims, whose love should
double in them every moment to all eternity, yet could not their love be enough
for the loveliness of our God. There is nothing in God but what is amiable:
Cant. 5.16.
he is altogether lovely; nothing to cause loathing, fulsomness, or aversation,
though we enjoy him to all Eternity. And it should much draw out love from us,
to think what God does for us. Man does but little, and it is counted much; God
does much, and it is counted little; and whence is this distempered estimate?
Must mercy therefore be under-valued, because it comes from God? Does water
lose it is nature, because it is in the fountain, or heat because it is in the
fire, and not in some other subject? Can we be thankful to a thief that
spoiled us not of what we have, and not to a God that furnished us with what we
have? Can we love a man that spared and not a God that bestowed our life? Can
we love him that supplied us when we had nothing, and not him who made us when
we were nothing? Is any want so great, as to be nothing; or is any gift
comparable to our very being? Children love their parents from whom they have
their body, though they gave it not, but God by them. And what they did give,
was not for love of their children, but pleasure, and possibly they caused
their childrens beings unwillingly; 'Twas not from any love in parents that
these children were begotten rather than others, because it was not in their
choice, but when 'twas in Gods choice, seeing innumerable men, whom he could
have made, he made these rather than others. What is it that shores and
sustaines our beings, but the prop of divine manutenency? Did God make the
house, and then leave it to stand alone? Has not the same power that set it
up, held it up, ever since? has he taken off that hand of sustentation one
moment since he built thee? Parents and friends have loved thee, but was not
all their affection a drop of Gods fountain? would not (else) their bowels have
been flint and marble? and had not God bid them love thee, might they not have
been upon choice, what some tender mothers are upon constraint, butchers
instead of parents? The light of the Moon, and Stars in the night is from the
Sun, though the Sun be not seen: so every benefit afforded by man is from God,
though God be not observed. And what save love it self was it, that re-made
thee when thou were worse then nothing? Surely the giving of Christ was the
hyperbole of love, the highest note that ever love reached. A work that looks
as if it were intended to draw out love from us. Fire in its sphere burns not,
but in some solid matter, so God, though love it self, inflamed us not with
love, but by coming to, and becoming of man. What immeasurable love was that
whereby he was debased to our vileness, that we might be advanced to his
Majesty, and whereby he suffered even beyond measure, and was never prodigal
of any blood but his own! A mercy, for contrivement, so peculiar to Gods love,
that Angels could no more have invented it, than Infants; and for
manifestation, so appropriated to his love, that had not he discovered and
tendered it, it had been blasphemy and sacrilege (says one) once to have
desired it.

How great a condescension of love is it for him to become a Suter to thee for
thy love, to seek and beseech thee to be reconciled to him! what is thy portion
but poverty? Romans 5.6, 8
what gets he, if he gain thy love? what loses he, if he miss it? what saw he
in thy person, but deformity? what in thy affection, but impotency and
antipathy? How long did Love contend before it conquered thee! How witty were
thou to shift off happiness! How unlike to man's carriage toward man was Gods
carriage toward thee! Who ever heard before, that abused patience should be
turned, instead of fury, into affection. If the patience of him that unjustly
offends, draws love from him, that is justly offended, how much more should the
patience of him that is justly offended, draw love from them that unjustly
offend!

5. Obser. 5.
A Christians greatest service and work for God is most just and equal. Why?
It is to love. And what more righteous? We are his Creatures, if he had
commanded a harder task, as to Sacrifice our children, or burn our bodies to
ashes, we ought to have done it. But 1. He asks no more than this at our
hands, to Love him: And now Israel, what does the Lord require of thee, Deuteronomy.
10.12.
but to Love him? Love is a ready, prompt, willing affection, which does all
with ease, and is its own weight. 2. Love is that which every one has: it is
implanted in every soul. If God had required a child, the Barren might have had
a plea. If God had required our Lands, and money, the poor. If Labor, and
Travail, the sick might have had his plea of exemption: but every one has a
Love, that has a Soul. 3. This love which he requires, he bestowed, and he
calls for no more than his own: he does but gather the grapes of his own
Vineyard; the Waters of his own Fountain; the fruit of his own Ort-yard: he
requires no more than he first gives. 4. If it be bestowed on him, he returns
it much better than he received it. He purifies and appeaseth it; removes its
pain and impurity: he slayes nothing in it but the Ram: he makes it like to the
Rain, which though the earth sends up in thick and foggy vapors, falls down in
pure and silver showers: or like to the waters which though they come from the
sea brackish and brinish, yet return thither again in sweet and Crystal
streams. God takes away the inordinateness, unholiness, and sensualness of our
love: he quiets and appeaseth it, not emptying it of its honey, but only
pulling out its sting. Love being never unquiet, when in its center, or
stinging when in the hive, or vexing the soul when set upon God. 5. In loving
him, we do no more than we have tied our selves to do. We have chosen him for
ours: Deuteronomy. 26.17.
for our Husband, Father, Master,: he may challenge our love, we must not go
back: we are baptized in his name: when we love not God, we rob him of our
selves: we are Adultresses being married, not to love. 6. In loving, we can but
repay him (though with no proportion) not prevent him: he loved us first. 1 John 4.19.
Loved our souls in pitying, and pardoning, and renewing them: loved the body,
in constant provision, protection, direction. Loved us in giving himself; loved
us in giving his gifts. 7. We must, if we love not him, love some thing else.
And where can we find any other upon whom to bestow it? Exodus 15.11.
who among the Gods is like to him? and what among the Creatures is fit for us,
that can satisfy our exigences, that will relieve us in distress, that will
stay with us continually, that will love us again? 8. In loving him, we love
one another: and love is the glue of the world, the Cement of society; it
thinks nothing too difficult for a friend: it makes us harmless, and helpful.
If twenty men love one another, every one as himself, every one is twenty,
every one has twenty hearts, forty hands, eyes, feet. Love unlocks every ones
Cabinet; making the one take out cousnel, another riches, another strength, all
something, for the good of one another.

6. Observe. 6.
Wheresoever love to God is, there will love to man appear. The grace of love
(as has been opened) comprehends love to both; from the Fountain of piety,
must flow the Stream of charity. He who has not love enough for a man, Ephesians.
1.15.
where will he find it for a God? Love is the pulse of faith, and the breath of
Christianity. Faith works by love: Gal. 5.6.
though love be not a hand to receive Christ, yet is it a tool in the hand to
work for Christ, and that in working for Christians. The flames of zeal never
consumed the moisture of Charity: he who loves God for his own sake, will love
his brother for Gods. Add to your Godliness (says the Apostle) Brotherly
kindness. 2 Pet. 1.7. 1 John 3.17.
He who shuts up his bowels to a wanting brother, how dwells the love of
God in him? The nearer the lines come to the Center, the nearer are they to one
another. Our love to the godly, increases with our love to God. The Sunshine
upon the dyal moves, though not so swiftly, yet according to that proportion
which the Sun in the firmament moves: and our love to the people of God,
though it be not so great as unto God, yet is it according to the measure of
our love to God.

7. Observe. 7.
It Is a great discovery of Gods goodness, in that with our loving of him, he
joins our loving of one another. He might have so challenged our love to
himself, as thereby we might neither have had time, will, strength, or
allowance to love one another. But, behold his love, he will be served of us,
in our serving of man. He accounts this pure religion, Jam. 1. ult. Gal. 5.13.
to visit the fatherless and widow. The serving of one another by love, he
requires as a token of our serving him by faith. So gracious is he, that he
esteems what we do to our own flesh and blood, as done to himself; Pro. 19.17.
Pro. 21.13. Psalm. 112.9. Mat. 25.40.
and accounts himself a debtor to us for what we do for our selves; he
remembers it long, rewards it largely, and does both exactly: he has appointed
charity as the most safe and gainful invention in the world: Ars
quaestuosissima. Heb. 13.16. Luke 12.33.
It Is a payment to the poor Christian in this place, who sends his bill of
exchange (his prayer) to God, and he accepts the bill, and pays it for our use
in heaven; we keep nothing as a mercy, but what we are willing (and one way
thus) to lose. Death robs us by the way, if we think to carry our wealth to
heaven with us; but if we send it by bills, we shall receive it safely. He who
has laden himself with apples in the ortyard, and is sure to be searched when
he comes out of the gate, throws his apples over the wall to a friend, who
keeps them for him. In this world we lade our selves with gifts, death will
undoubtedly search us when we go hence; but if while we are here, we throw by
charity, our enjoyments into heaven; we have there a friend that keeps them
safe. He that denies to give this Interest of his gifts by charity, forfets the
Principal, and he that takes in his worldly commodities without paying God
this custom, shall lose the whole.

8. Prayer is a singular help to bring us to love God: Obser. ult.
it was here the Apostolical Engine in the Text. When we cry for his holy
spirit, the spirit of love, he cannot deny us; he healed the lame when they
cried. When thou cryest and say from the heart, I would fain love thee, but
I cannot, will he not give thee legs to run after him? Prayer brings us into
familiarity with God, and by converse (you know) love grows between men. God
delights to show himself in his own way, and as he did to Moses, to send us
down from the Mount of Prayer, with souls shining with love. Prayer exercises
our love, it blows up the sparks of love into a flame. Love is an especial
gift of the spirit. We are taught of God to love one another. Gal. 5.22. 1
These. 4.9.
It Is he that must warm our hearts with this divine grace, and he being sought
unto, and his power implored and acknowledged, will not deny it.

Thus much of the first particular, in this third and last part of the title,
the Prayer, viz. the Blessings prayed for, mercy, peace, love. The second
follows, the measure in which the Apostle desires these blessings may be
bestowed, in this expression, [ be multiplied.]

For the Explication whereof, two things would be opened.

1. Explicat. 1.
Wherein stands the multiplication of these Blessings, or what it is that the
Apostle desires, when he prays for the multiplication of these gifts and
graces.

2. Why the Apostle makes this request, and prays not only for the
bestowing, Multiplicari, dilatari, incrementum capere, adimpleri. Tum de
multiplicatione in quantitate discreta, tum de augmento in quantitate continua
accipitar. Mat. 24.12. Acts 6.17. and 7.17. and 9.31. 2 Cor. 9.10. 1 Pet. 1.2.
2 Pet. 1.2. Jude 2. Gerh. in 1 Pet. 1.2.
but the multiplying of these Blessings.

1. What this multiplying is? The word in the original signifies, as to be
multiplied, so to be increased, filled, enlarged; and it is in Scripture
indifferently usedto signify the multiplication of things in their number, and
their augmentation in measure, and greatness. Whence it is that some render
this ((...)) multiplicetur, be multiplied: others, adimpleatur, be filled, or
fulfilled, or filled up, or increased. It properly signifies to increase in
number, and not in measure, and when it is applied to people, and the Church
(as it is often in the Acts of the Apostles) it is only used for an increase in
number; but when it is spoken of sin, or graces, as Mat. 24.12. Pet. 1.2. 2 Pet.
1.2. and in this place of Jude, it may signify an increase in measure only.
And so the Apostle prays that the gifts and graces, which these Christians
had already obtained, Ephesians. 4.16. 1 Pet. 2.2 2 ^et. 3.18 John 2.5. Psalm. 84.7. 1
These. 4.1, 11 2 Cor. 13.9.
might receive a further degree of augmentation, that believers might grow,
abound, and increase in them more and more. And thus, though the mercy of God
(which was the first of the three blessings here desired by the Apostle) as it
is in it self, and as in God, cannot be increased, (it being infinite:) yet in
respect of the effects and graces flowing from it upon believers, it may be
increased.

More particularly, when the Apostle prays that these Christians may have
this increase and augmentation of grace: he comprehends in that his request,
these several blessings.

1. That they may be sensible, and observing of their wants and deficencies of
Grace. That they may often cast up their accounts; and see, as what they have
gained, so wherein they are defective: that they may resent, as their gains
with thankfulness, so their wants with humility. They who see not, can neither
desire, nor receive what they want. A Christian must be like a covetous man,
totus in rationibus, much employed in searching and examining what he has not,
as well as what he has; what he has lost, as well as what he has gained;
what he has laid out, as well as what he has laid up; Whether he stand, how
he has fallen, how far he has gone: and though he must account no loss
irreparable, yet none contemptible; and though no gain so small as to be
unthankful for it, yet none so great as to be contented with, or proud of it.

2. That they may make use of the helps, the food, and fuel which God has
appointed for the increase of their Grace. Luke 17.5. Pet. 2.2
As Reading, Prayer, Hearing, Sacraments, Meditation; and he that neglects
these, is not a strong, but a sick Christian. Nundinae aeternitatis.
These are the Marts and Fairs wherein we trade for Grace: a thriving Christian
must keep constant traffic with heaven; sending thither, hearing thence; in
the former, telling; in the later, taking in what he wants. We must make growth
the end of our feeding; and thriving of our trading: we must not trade, to
trade; pray, to pray; hear, to hear; but to grow better thereby.

3. That they may proportionably answer the worth, and length of those
opportunities God afforded them for the increasing of Grace. That they might
not devour fat enjoyments, having mean while lean, and barren, or indifferent
hearts. He is not an abounding, thriving Christian, who has but an ordinary
growth under rich opportunities: we must abound in returning, as well as in
receiving: we must not be like the kidney in the beast, lean in the midst of
fatness: Heb. 5.12.
not heaths and wildernesses, under the showers of salvation: nay, not content
our selves in being but as good as others, who happily enjoy less. They who enjoy
much from God, and yet are no better than those who enjoy less, are therefore
worse, because they are not better.

4. That they may forbear, and avoid whatsoever hinders and keeps down the
thriving and growing in Grace. That they may take heed of secret ways of
spending: that they may not privily delight in any known way of sin, or beloved
lust, which makes the most glittering Christian abroad, to be but a bankrupt at
home. Christians must cut off the Suckers that draw away their nourishment:
Love of the world, pride, uncleanness, etc cannot thrive with grace in the same
heart: as the one goes up, the other goes down: as the spleen swells, the body
decays.

5. 2 Pet. 1.5.
That they may have an impartial increase in every grace, in one as well as
another. That to one grace they might add another; Psalm. 119.101.
loving of every duty, and loathing of every evil. All graces have a
Concatenation, and an inseparability, Col. 1.10.
a holy band, a divine league: and as every Christian has, so he grows in
every part of the new Creature. 1 Timothy 5.21.
He fructifieth in every good work: he labors to keep an equability in his
courses; not strict in some things, and slack in others. He prefers not one
before another; he has a pulse of grace, that beats evenly and equally: he is
neither a maimed person who wants any limb, nor a Monster, who has one limb
so big, that others want; but has a comely symmetry. of part with part. No one
of his graces stands at a stay, while the other grows; he does not go richly
apparelled in some one piece of his apparel, and beggarly in the rest; All his
nourishment is not conveyed to some one part, to the starving of the rest.

6. That they may multiply in grace to an exercise, acting and laying out of
grace. That grace might be augmented into action; that the fountain full
inwardly, might overflow outwardly; that as it was, so it might appear grace,
that they might be free as well as full, and fructify in every good work; that
the hand as well as the heart might be filled with the fruits of
righteousness; as grace will be increased in the pouring out, so must it be
poured out, when it increases. The running water, and the active Christian,
are both the sweetest; the more a musical instrument is used, the sweeter is
its melody. Graces like garments will be, the more we use them, the more free
from the moth; the more we can, the more we should do; and the more we do, the
more we can, we love to do.

7. That they may obtain a measure of grace, suitable to their several and
particular exigences and occasions. That they may not only have grace more than
others, but enough for themselves; i. e. in some suitable measure to their own
several conditions, and employments. Some men have stronger temptations to
resist, corruptions to subdue, greater burdens to bear, employments to go
through, and these want more abundant graces than others. Some man may better
keep house with an hundred pounds a year, then another who has a great family,
and familiarity, can do with a thousand; A man who has great revenues, may yet
be poorer than he who has less, if he have greater expenses.

8. That they may constantly abide and continue in the grace they had received.
The further obtaining of what grace we want, necessarily implies a retaining,
and an holding fast of what we have. By the same reason that we desire to get
more, we shall keep that which we have already gotten Decay is ever
inconsistent with growth. A Christian must not go aside, much less go
backward, not lie still with the stone, nor creep with the snail, much less go
back with the Crab; not be a golden Christian in youth, a silver one in
manhood, and a leaden one in old age. Our falls into sin must be but for a
fit, not so, our forwardness in Christianity; our goodness not like the
morning dew; Hos. 6.8. Psalm. 78.57.
we must not turn back, deal unfaithfully, and turn aside as a deceitful bow.
Its hypocrisy to pretend that we are gone, or going further in religion than
others, who are eminent, and yet be behind what our selves once were, and that
when we were beginners. If grace be not preserved, it cannot be augmented; fire
cannot be made to blaze out, if it be not kept from going out. If the life of
grace be gone, the growth will follow. If we continue not rooted in Christ,
Col. 2.7.
we cannot be built up in him.

9. That they may be boundless and unlimited in the progress of grace; that
they may be ever making additions to what they have: 2 Pet. 1.5.
Christianity knows no enough; the degrees of a Christians gracemust be like
numbers, the highest whereof being numbered, a higher than that, may yet be
named. 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
Even those worthy Thessalonians, had something lacking^ in their faith. We
must never cease growing, till we be grown into heaven; we must forget what is
behind, Phil. 3.13.
and press forward toward the mark. If perfection be our pattern, proficiency
is our duty. It Is true, Ubi incipis nolle fieri melior, ibi desinis esse bonus.
Bern. Ep. 91. Nolle preficere, deficere est, Ep. 254.
he that has least grace, has enough to be thankful; but he that has the
most, has not enough to be idle. We are never gotten far enough, till we are
gotten home; he that is rich enough, is nothing worth. He was never good that
desires not to be better; he is stark naught, that desires not to be as good
as the best.

10. Lastly, the Apostle desires the multiplication of grace even to the
sense, feeling, and apprehension of those that were partakers thereof: that
those who had grace might know they had it. The people of God do not ever know
their own holiness and happiness: these are true, though not strong in grace.
The perceiving of our grace is an additionall happiness to our receiving it. In
the light of God we must see light. It Is a double, and a very desirable
blessing to have the company and comfort of grace at the same time.

This of the first branch of Explication, What the Apostle desired for these
Christians when he prayed for this multiplication. The second follows, which
was to consider, Why he desired it. 2d Branch of Explicat.


This he did, 1. In respect of God. 2. In respect of Others. 3. In respect of
Themselves. 4. In respect of Himself.


1. In respect of God. The more grace is multiplied, the more God is 1.
Honored: Mat. 5.16. Joh. 15.8. 2 Cor. 4.15. Phil. 1.11.
Herein is my Father honored, if ye bring forth much fruit. If the servants of
God do much work, God will be accounted a good, a bountiful Master; 1. In
respect of the great reward men will think there is in his service, and some
extraordinary benifit by it, that his servants are so painful in it. And 2. In
respect of the great ability that he bestows upon his to be and do good. God
will be admired in them that believe. If poor servants are so rich and
glorious, Aestimari a Cultoribus potest ille qui Colitur. Salv.
what then (will men say) is the Master? if his servants be so holy, what then
is he who keeps them? if there be so much in a drop, what is there then in the
ocean? if he imparts so much to others, what then has he in himself? The
plenty of the crop is the praise of the husbandman. Luke 15.7. Chrysostomus
cxistimat glorificationem hic poni pro exultatione. Gerh. in Joh. 15.8.


2. As God is honored by the abounding of his servants in holiness, so is he
likewise pleased. Fruitfulness upon earth is joy in heaven. The Husbandman is
not only praised, but pleased by the fruitfulness of his grounds, the
barrenness whereof is both his shame and his sorrow. The thriving of the child
is the joy of the father. If we rejoice so much in holiness, that see it, and
love it so little, Isai. 5.6.
what then must God do, who is holiness it self? How angry was God with his
barren vineyard? If God be best pleased with holiness, he must needs be best
pleased with them who are most holy.

2. The Apostle desired this multiplication of grace in respect of Others; that
they may not only speak good of God, but get good to themselves. The whole
Country fares the better for a rich Christian; he keeps open house, the
more he has, the more he gives; he labors to make all such as himself, Acts
26.29.
his bonds only excepted. There Is nothing more covetous, or prodigal, than
grace: A Saint ever loves to be receiving from God, and imparting to others.
From Jerusalem round about to Illyricum, Paul preached the Gospel. Romans 15.19.
2 Cor. 6.10.
He who was so abundantly rich himself, made it his work to make others so.
What an encouragement is it to young beginners in grace, to see that they who
once were as poor, and had as little to begin with as themselves, have attained
to such a plentiful spiritual estate? What a joy is it to the strong
Christian, whose love of complacency is ^set upon the excellent Ones, and whose
Crown of Rejoicing it is to see the Honor of God propagated?

3. The Apostle desired this Multiplication of grace, in respect of Themselves,
and that

1. In respect of their duty; they could never be too abundant in goodness for
him, from whom they were, and had, and did what ever was good. How could God
dwell too much in the house of his own building? How could the Vineyard and
Garden of his own planting be too fruitful? the Well of his own digging be too
full? In their creation they received souls, bodies, faculties, senses, with
parts and members from him; in him also they lived, and moved, and had their
being; and could they do him too much service? In their redemption the delivery
not only from condemnation, but from vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18.
and from the service and corruption of sin was aimed at by God; and not only a
preservation of them to Heaven, but in holiness. In their profession, they
were Christians, and followers of Christ; And how could they walk too exactly,
that had such a guide? They had in the word, precepts, promises, threatenings,
examples; and how could they be too precise, that had such a rule?

2. For their dignity. Holiness is a Christians greatest honor, and therefore
the greatest degree of holiness, the highest degree of honor. Grace is called
glory, 2 Cor. 3.18.
and the more grace, the more glory. It Is that which has the most of
Scripture-commendation. What an honorable mention does Paul make of the
Romans, for having their faith spoken of throughout the world. Romans 1.8.
Our Savior, Mat. 8.10. and, 15.28.
that contemned the glorious buildings of the Temple, when his Disciples showed
him them, admired a strong faith more than once.

3. For their further peace and comfort in this life. There Is no abundance, but
that of grace, which can content the possessour; the more holiness, the more
enjoyment of him, in whose presence is fullness of joy. Whence is a Saints
trouble, but from the deficiency of his graces? what is it that pincheth him,
but the scantinesse of these spiritual garments? the larger they are, the
greater is his ease. He that has true grace, may go to Heaven certainly; but
he who has strong grace, only goes comfortably. A weak faith, a small degree
of love, patience, humility, will not carry a man joyfully through great
troubles.

4. For their future crown, and further felicity in the next life. If any shall
follow the lamb in whiter and larger robes of glory than other; they are those
whom he has adorned most with the robes of grace here. If any shine brighter
than others in heaven, they shall be those who have been brightest in grace
upon the earth. Though glory be not bestowed for any merit in grace, yet I see
no inconvenience to hold, that it is bestowed according to the proportion of
grace. If the more grace a Saint has, the more he be fitted for glory, Col.
1.12
then the more grace he has, the more (it is likely) he shall be filled with
glory. The more the soul is widened with grace, the more capacious will it be
of glory; the heaviest crowns are fittest for the strongest heads.

4. Lastly, The Apostle desired this multiplication of grace upon these
Christians, in respect of Himself. The holiness of the people, is the crown of
the Minister, and the greater their holiness, the weightier, and more glorious
is his crown. The Apostle John had no greater joy than to see his spiritual
children walk in the truth; The thriving of the child, is the comfort and
credit of the Nurse; the fruitfulness of the field, the praise and pleasure of
the Husbandman; the beauty of the building, is the commendation of the
Artificer; the health, fruitfulness, and good plight of the flock, is the joy
of the Shepherd. Ministers are Husbandmen, Nurses, Artificers, Shepherds in
Scripture phrase: Nothing more troubles a godly Minister than to see his
multiplied pains answered with a scanty proficiency; and his double labor,
with scarce a single return of holiness. A gainsaying people is the grief of
a Minister, that all the day long stretches out his hands; although it may be
a sweet mitigation of that grief, to consider that God will not reward his
Ministers according to their success, but their sincerity, and industry.

This for the Explication of this second Particular, in the Apostles prayer,
the measure in which he desires these gifts and graces may be bestowed, [be
multiplied.]

The Observations follow.

1. Observe. 1.
Great is thefolly of those, whose whole contention is for worldly increase,
and multiplication of earthly blessings. In worldly things, their desires have
an everlasting Et catera: they will lay house to house, field to field, like
the widow, who when she had filled all her vessels with oil, yet calls for
another vessel. Ahab to his Kingdom* must add Naboths vineyard; the rich man
Luke 12. had his barns full, yet he must enlarge them; Many live, as if God had
sent them a voyage into the world to gather cockles and pibbles, whereas he
employed them to trade for pearls. Where is the man that envies not him who
has more wealth, and yet who is it that with an holy emulation, looks upon him
that has more grace than himself? Where does the best sort of earth deserve
to lie, but at the Apostles feet? What has the man who goes Christlesse? What
has he labored for all his days, but that, not only without which, he might
have gone to heaven, but that with which, he cannot get thither? What folly to
lose a Crown for a crumb, a Kingdom, a Soul, a God for a trifle? How vain is
it to multiply that which in its greatest increase is but nothing! The truth
is, earthly comforts are not capeable of multiplication. Did men look upon the
world with Scripture spectacles, and not with Satan's multiplying glass it
would appear in its greatness, but a small thing. The world has two breasts;
they who suck at the best of them, draw nothing but wind and vanity; they who
suck at the other, draw woe and vexation.

2. Observe. 2.
Gre at is the impiety of those that hinder people from increasing in grace.
Who are the pul-backs, damps, and quench-coles of the companies where they
converse. The holiest men pray that grace may be multiplied: what then are they
who labor to have it extinguished? Elymas the sorcerer had one of the
bitterest and severest expressions of detestation from the Apostle, that we
read was ever bestowed upon any by a good man; the Apostle calls him One full
of subtilty, and all mischief, Acts 13.10.
a child of the devil, an enemy of all righteousness; and why? but because he
sought to turn away the Deputy from the faith. They who take away the key of
knowledge, stop the mouths of Ministers, cause a dearth of spiritual food,
and cannot endure the preaching of sound doctrine, and the spreading of
holiness, would happily account such expressions as these of Paul to be bitter;
but I hardly see how they deserve milder.

3. Obser. 3.
It Is the height of impiety to hate people, because God has multiplied grace
in them. How hateful is it to hate where, and because God loves? yet some
there are, who like Gardiners, snip those most, who are tallest sprouts in
holiness. It Is observed by some, that there is most admiration, and highest
respect bestowed by the professors of all false religions in the world, upon
those that are most precise, and exact in the observing of those religions.
What an amazement is it, that professors of the true religion alone should
most bitterly hate those that make the furthest progress in it? It Is a
commendable thing among men, for one to be excellent and exquisite in his trade
and occupation which he professes; and must it alone be a disgraceful thing,
that men should excel in the best of mysteries and callings? yet what more
common than to see the most thriving Christian to become the obloquie, nay,
prey of the times? And those who are most illuminated to have that Aeolus of
hell, Heb. 10.32.
sending out his winds of opposition most against them? And who has not
observed the zealous and sincere Christian persecuted, when the time-serving
and lukewarm formalist is not only spared, but preferred? and what trees are
so cudgel'd and battered as those who are most fruitful? If hatred be hellish
because it is set against godliness; then certainly that hatred is most
hellish, which is set against most godliness.

4. Obser. 4.
They who are ashamed of being exact and forward in religion, are ashamed of
their greatest glory. Men commonly love to excel in every thing more than in
that which is true excellency; they think that a little godliness is enough,
and that abundance of wealth is but a little. In getting riches they love to
lead; in going toward heaven, they will hardly follow. So much religion as will
preserve their estates and reputation, so much as will not cross their
interest, or hinder their preferment, they will embrace; but they love not to
follow religion too close, for fear of being dashed. They herein resemble some
Students of the Law, that study that Science, not to be exact in it, but only
so far as they may be able another day to keep their estates. Men commonly
love that much, which when they do so, it is hard not to love too much; but they
are but remiss in that, in which it is impossible to be excessive: they making
it their study, to take heed of that, of which there is no danger. viz. Too much
preciseness in the ways of holiness. Christianity in our times is like our
buildings, much more slight than of old. Till I hear of one man from the
Creation of the World to this day, that ever repented him when he came to die
of being too holy while he lived, I shall desire to be no man of the times.

5. God is most free of his best gifts; Obser. 5.
he gives his people leave and command to multiply spirituals, when often he
impaireth their temporals; he bestows a Crown, where he sometime denies a
crumb; those whom he makes poor in the world, he at the same time makes rich in
faith. He deals with his people when they are too heavy laden with the luggage
of worldly enjoyments, as men do that are weighing their commodities in a pair
of scales; they never leave taking, and taking away from that scale which is
too heavy, till the other be as weighty or weightier than it. And God does
justly and mercifully impoverish the body, to enrich the soul. There Is nothing
good which hinders us from enjoying the chiefest good: which is not vehiculum,
but vinculum; not a furtherance, but a fetter. How gracious is God to choose our
comforts for us! we should ever take the worst part, should he leave us to our
own skill; he loves to relieve us for our profit, not for our lust; we
naturally love the contrary.

The Christian whose grace multiplies, Obser. 6.
is neither careless of the helps, or fearlesse of the hindrances of grace:
he dares not omit any duty, slight any ordinances, which God has appointed to
make him spiritually prosperous. He is rowing up a river that runs with a
strong current, and he knows if he rest his Oars, he shall fall down the
stream; 1 These. 5.17
he delights to pray continually; he who has grace in plenty, will have prayer
in fervency. Prayer woos grace to come, and wins it to tarry. Grace ever sets
us upon praying for grace; the alms of grace will be begged for, James 4.6.
and God gives it to the prayer of the humble. Growing men have good stomachs.
It Is as possible at the same time to grow in the love of grace, and decay in
love to ordinances, as to increase the fire by withdrawing the fuel. The
sprouting Christian sits under the dew of heaven; they who forsake the
assembling of themselves together, Heb. 10.23.25.
will never hold fast the profession of the faith without wavering. As grace is
not given nolenti, to him that continues unwilling to receive it; so neither is
it increased negligenti, to him that does not labor to improve it. Apostles,
Pastors and Teachers were given by Christ for our growth up to the measure of
stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.
The forsaking of these is ever with a decreasing of grace. As a Christian
abates in his appetite, he will decay in strength; and with his strength, his
stomach will return. They who have no spiritual hunger, are far from
spiritual health; and never had God a working, who was not a feeding servant.
He is but the picture of a Christian, who grows not, who feeds not. Nor can
growth in Christianity consist with the love of poison, any more than with the
forbearance of food. They who thrive, hate the ways of inordinate spending.
Sin is a waster of our graces, and our comforts; The Spirit of God is a tender
and delicate thing, nor will it stay with those that admit of company so
contrary to it as is sin. Every beloved lust is as a worm at the root of a
flower. He who has so excellent a jewel as grace, must keep it under the lock
of the fear of sin: while sin comes in at one door, grace goes out at the
other; the Ark could not stay with the Philistines, nor grace with the love of
the smallest sin; the least sin is terrible to the greatest Saint, he makes not
light of it, but well knows that a long thread of iniquity may be let in with
a small needle.

7. Observe. 7.
Decays in grace are most repugnant to a Christians welfare; decreasing in
spiritual blessings directly thwarteth the Apostles petition. It Is
uncomfortable to see the days grow shorter, to see a man grow behind-hand in
the world, to see a withered and a blasted field; a man in a lingering
consumption. Naomies condition moved pity, when she went out full, and returned
empty: but what pity does a decaying soul require from us! To consume
heavenward, to be plundered of grace, to lose our first love, to be declining
from God, is a misery indeed, a soul-misery, the misery of every misery. It Is
better for thee that God take away all than himself from thee. Psalm. 51.11.
David was more fearful of losing Gods Spirit, than his Kingdom; It Is the
sorrowfullest alteration in the world, after the enjoyment of it, to be
forsaken by it.

8. Observe. 8.
A Saint allows not himself in any deficiency of grace. He desires to be
perfect in every good work; Heb. 13.12. Ephesians. 4.15. Romans 15.14. 2 Timothy 3.17.
to grow up in Christ in all things: to be full of goodness, and knowledge; to
be thoroughly furnished to all good works, and to have grace in all the powers
of the soul, as his blood is in every vein of the body; 2 Cor. 7.1.
to perfect holiness in the fear of God. His imperfection is a trouble to him
as well as his pollution. He sees no grace in another, but he covets it; no
Ornament, but he admires it; no spot, but he abhors it. He ever wants as much
of contentment, as he does of grace; he never says, I have as much as another
has; but I have less than I my self should have: he labors to furnish his
house all over; he prizeth every command, delights in every duty, sees a
beauty in every way of God, and the weakness of his grace, is the strength of
his trouble. They who needed nothing, Rev. 3.17.
were indeed defective in every thing.

9. Observe. 9.
A fruitless Coversation is inconsistent with grace multiplied. A fruitless
tree is little better than a log; there is small difference 'twixt a dead stock,
and a barren tree. True Christianity suffers not Christians to content
themselves with bare hearing the word; or (as one calls it) with mere auricular
profession. Where ever grace grows, others may see it. Men cannot discern the
growing of it, or how it grew, but they can discern that it is grown, when it is
grown. The profiting of a Saint with Timothy's, 1 Timothy 4.15.
appears to all. Growing grace like corn will appear above ground. The thriving
of a child will be known by its looks; its color and complexion will speak it.
The thriving of Daniel, and the rest, was known by the looking upon their
countenances. He who thrives in holiness, will have his visage altered, his
outward carriage and complexion amended; he is like a grown man, who for some
time has been absent; he is so grown, that he can hardly be known. The voice
of a grown Christian is much altered from that which it was, when he was a
child; 1 Pet. 4.4.
he speaks now not vainly, but profitably. Hence it is, that wicked men wonder
at him, as at a strange sight.

10. Observe. 10.
Lastly, The increase of grace, as well as the beginnings of it, is from God.
The Apostle here prays even for multiplication of grace. It Is grace that must
make us multiply in grace: the plantation, and the accretion are from the same
hand. When God at first made all living Creatures, Qui operatur, ut accedamus,
idem operatur ne discedamus. Aug. de bon. pers. c. 7. Phil. 1.6. Heb. 12.2.
he bestowed on them their Crescite, a Blessing, as well as a Being. He who
makes us good, must make us better. He who makes us come to him, must also keep
us from going from him. He who begins the good work in us, must also perform
it. God is both the Author and Finisher of our faith. If our graces be only
put into us by God, and not kept in, they will soon go out. God it is that must
not only set us up, but keep us up. Grace is like a top, or a bell; if God do
not continue the impressions of his strength upon us, and keep us up, as well
as raise us up, we shall soon go down. The strongest child in Gods family,
cannot go alone. He it is who enables us to take the first, and every step we
take toward heaven; we live in a constant dependency upon him; he is not only
the term of our journey, but our way, our guide, our keeper in it. If God
should give us a stock of grace, and then leave us to our selves to trade, we
should never thrive. Adam himself became a bank-rupt, and so should we; but
blessed be God, our happiness is held by a better tenure, even by Christ, the
supplies of whose Spirit alone continue and multiply our graces.

This for the second particular in the third part, (the Paryer) of the title:
viz. the measure in which he desired those Blessings. The third and last
follows, viz. the persons upon whom he prays that these blessings may be in
this measure bestowed; in these words [ Unto you.]

The Apostles desire of these Blessings, Explicat.
and the multiplication of them, agrees to the persons for whom they are
desired, in two respects.

1. In respect of their for-mentioned Privileges, Sanctification, Preservation
in Christ, Calling.

2. In respect of their after-mentioned Dangers, by Seducers, who were crept in
among them.

1. In respect of their forementioned Privileges, of Sanctification, etc. and
so the Apostle desires this multiplication of grace for them. 1. Though they be
sanctified, they were not so fully sanctified, and had not been so long
preserved and called, but that they still wanted a further multiplication of
grace; they still stood more in need of the effects of mercy, more inward
peace, and love; they had not yet attained their full measure. Phil. 3.13.


2. To all that are sanctified, preserved, etc. Though they were many, he
wishes that every one might have a child's portion; that blessings might be
multiplied to the whole multitude of Saints; that there might not be one barren
among them; that as God had aful hand, and was rich in mercy, so that his
bounty might be dispersed to them all.

3. To them only who are sanctified. They only who had grace, were capable of
having grace multiplied; To these only who had, the Apostle wishes that more
might be given. There Is no growth, where there is not a truth of grace; nor can
these distinguishing blessings of mercy, love, peace, be desired at all for
wicked men, upon the supposition of their resolution to continue and proceed to
be such.

4. To them, because they were sanctified, preserved, called. How suitable was
it for them who had formerly received these Privileges, to multiply and
increase in holiness; for them to thrive who had a stock of sanctity; for them
who were preserved by Christ, to be kept from hurt by sin; for them who were
called, to be holy in all manner of holy conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.
as he who called them was holy?

2. This desire of the multiplication of these Blessings agrees to the persons
to whom it is desired, in respect of their after-mentioned danger by seducers,
who were crept in among them. It Is observable that both Jude and Peter salute
the Christians to whom they wrote, with this prayer, for multiplication of
these spiritual blessings; that since these Christians had more enemies, they
might have more armor than others; and that their graces might be multiplied
with their dangers.

1. Observe. 1.
The sanctification of none is in this life so complete, but it admits of
multiplication. Mercy, peace, love, even to you (says the Apostle) be
multiplied. There Is no plenary perfection on this side heaven; The highest
Saint in this life is not come to the fullness of his measure. Ephesians. 4.13.
Phil. 3.13.
Blessed Paul thought not himself to have apprehended: The perfectest
Christian is perfectly imperfect when he begins, imperfectly perfect when he
ends; when we have done all, we are unprofitable servants. The fullest vessel
may have more wine poured into it, without any fear of bursting; none must bid
God stay his hand. They who think they have need of nothing, have truly
received nothing. Till the Sabbath comes, we must daily be gathering Manna:
Nihil praesumitur actum, dum superest aliquid ad agendum.
he that rests in the time of labor, shall labor, though in vain, in the
time of rest. A Christian is not like a top, that moves by going round, and not
by going forward; not like the Sun in Hezekiah's time, that stood still; but
like the Sun in its natural course, that goes forward to the perfect day. We
must go from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7.
till we appear before the Lord in Sion. Where there is no growing, there is
some decaying. While we neglect to gain, we spend upon the stock. Sin is
continually making breaches in our graces, and we must be daily making them up;
our garment has daily rents, and therefore it wants constant mending; the dust
daily falls in our houses, and therefore they want frequent cleansing; our
hearts are like to childrens faces, after every washing, they soon grow foul
again. Sanctification is nothing but a return to our first estate, to which we
cannot attain till death. When the sting of sin is gone, the stain cleaves
close, and we had need wash seven times daily to get it out.

2. God has enough grace for every one of his children. Observe. 2.
Grace is afforded and multiplied indifferently to one as well as another;
though all have not grace equally, yet all truly, and according to their
particular exigences. As every good and perfect gift is from God, so (in a due
proportion) upon every Saint. None so has all grace, as that every one has
not some. Christ is a head that sends influence into every member. Ephesians.
4.16. 1 John 12.
Of his fullness we have all received. He is an overflowing fountain of grace,
which though it may be imparted, yet is not impaired. The receiving of grace by
one, does no more hinder the receiving thereof by another, than one man's seeing
of the Sun, hinders another from seeing it also. God is a rich Father, he
gives, though not alike, yet sufficient portions to all his children. Our
elder brother had a double portion; he was anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7.
but the ointment poured upon the head, fell down upon every member. He who had
holiness for Abraham, Moses, David, Peter, will not suffer the least child in
his house to be totally destitute. They all drank of that rock which flows
toward us. If we had but their thirst, here is as much water still as ever there
was. The people of God should neither envy one another for their fullness, nor
upbraid one another with their emptiness; but admire the wisdom, and bless
the bounty of him, who gives to all, though differently. The whole Company of
Saints is like to a well tuned instrument, Varii toni in musica.
the strings whereof, though not all of one note, but some higher, some lower,
yet all together make a sweet harmony, nor can the loudest be without the
smallest. In what grace one is defective, in that let another labor to supply.
In what one abounds, let another labor to imitate, and excel; but let all
adore, and delight in him, whose are the scattered excellencies bestowed upon
all the Saints in the world.

3. Observe. 3.
Where God has begun grace, he is not weary of bestowing more. Mercy be
multiplied to you sanctified ones. To him that has shall be given. Mark 4.25.
God loves not to set up a foundation without a wall, nor walls without a roof.
He perfects what concerns his people; and the work of the Lord is perfect.
Deuteronomy. 32.4. Isai. 10.12.
And he does his whole work upon Mount Sion. How good is God, not only to do
good, because he will do good, but because he has done so! to make one grace a
kind of obligation upon himself to bestow another! God herein resembling some
magnificent King, who when he has set his love upon a favorite, afterward is
in love with his own choice of, and bounty on him, and loves him for these very
favors which he has given him. John 15.2. John 1.50.
Every branch that bears fruit he purges it, that it may bring forth more
fruit. Greater things (says Christ to Nathaneel) thou shall see. He who
kills one lust, shall kill another; he who is conscionable in one duty, shall
be enabled to another. He who has the grace of desire, shall have grace
bestowed on his desire; and he who has grace to do a little, shall have grace
to do more. God is never weary of giving. He has oil enough for every
vessel, and still asks when he has filled all our vessels, as that woman in
the story, Bring me yet a vessel. The meditation whereof, 2 King. 4.6.
as it should comfort us against our spiritual deficiencies, in regard we know
where to have more grace; so should it incite us to proceed in holiness, and
never to think we have enough, or to answer as he did, There is not a vessel.
In the best things there is no excess.

4. Obser. 4.
Only sanctified ones have the blessing of spiritual multiplication. As
first, God gave the word of Creation, before he gave the word of Benediction;
so does he still spiritually. Whosoever has not, Mat. 13.12.
from him shall be taken away even what he has. If there be not essentia, there
cannot be incrementum, If no truth, no growth of grace. Omnis germinatio
supponit plantationem.
A stake that is merely thrust into the ground, having neither root nor life,
grows in nothing, but in rottenness; and this speaks the misery of one not
in Christ, and enlivened by the spirit of regeneration; nothing does him good;
he devoureth fat ordinances, but has a lean soul; he is by the showers of
every Sermon and Sacrament, made meeter for the axe, and fitter fuel for hell.

5. Obser. 5.
Our beginning in holiness is an Engagement upon us to go on. Sanctified,
preserved, called ones, must multiply grace. The beginning in the spirit, must
be a caution to us, that we end not in the flesh. If Saints be barren, the
Trees of Gods Ort-yard, where can increase be expected? A fruitless tree in
the field may happily be born with, not such an one in the garden. They who are
planted in the House of God, Psalm. 92.13, 14.
should flourish in the Courts of our God, still bring forth fruit in old age,
be fat and flourishing. It is an unanswerable Dilemma, If the ways of God were
bad, why did you begin in them? if good, why did you not proceed? They who are
holy, must be holy still. Rev. 22.11.
It Is a great disgrace for religion to be disgraced by her children, to be
forsaken by her followers. The dispraise of any by a friend, is easily believed
by every one, especially by an enemy to the dispraised: when sanctified ones
grow loose and remiss, sanctity is stabbed: by the reproaches of others, it is
but scratched. It Is excellent counsel of the Apostle, that we lose not the
things which we have wrought. 2 Ep. John 8. Luke 22.3.
As the vigilance of Satan is to take from sanctified ones, so their care must
be to keep what they have gotten, and to get what they want.

6. Observe. 6.
God affords graces suitable to all the exigences of his people; multiplied
grace to those who are in multiplied difficulties, and tentations. My grace
(says God to Paul) is sufficient for thee. 2 Cor. 12.9.
When ever God gives a burden, he provides a shoulder. He never requires brick
from his people, without giving them straw. He will either multiply grace, or
diminish the tentation. He bids his people up and eat, if he sends them a long
journey. Those Saints of his, whom he has employed in winter seasons, he has
ever clothed with winter garments; commonly the best men have lived in the
worst times; and Gods stars have shined brightest in the darkest ages. The
faithful have been more then conquerours, in conflicts both with persecuters
and seducers. Romans 8.37.
And truly, grace multiplied is much better than tentation, either assuaged,
or removed.

VER. 3. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that ye
should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints.
WE have finished the first part of this Epistle, viz. the Title. The second
follows, the Body and Substance of the whole Epistle, wherein the Apostles
scope is to incite these Christians to embrace a seasonable Exhortation, to the
24th verse of the Epistle.

In it there are four principal parts, (two of them contained in this third
verse.)

1. The Reasons of the Apostles sending this Exhortation to these Christians,
or what it was that put him upon this profitable performance, of exhorting them
in these words, Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the
common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you.

2. The Exhortation it self, in these words, And exhort you, that ye should
earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints.

3. Sundry weighty and unanswerable Arguments to move the Christians to follow
and embrace this excellent Exhortation, from the third, to the 17th. verse.

4. Several apt and holy Directions, to guide and teach these Christians how
to follow and observe the Exhortation, which he had backed with the former
arguments, to the 24th. verse.

I begin with the former: The Reasons which put the Apostle upon sending this
following Exhortation: And the Reasons (contained in these words, Beloved, when
I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful
for me to write unto you,) are these three.

1. The first is drawn from the dear love which the Apostle did bear to them:
they to whom he wrote were beloved.

2. The second is drawn from the care and diligence of the Apostle for the
doing of them good, and the furthering of their salvation; When I gave all
diligence to write unto you of the common salvation: wherein consider,

1. With what mind and disposition, he endeavored their good, or how he was
affected in endeavoring it; he gave all diligence.

2. In what work he was employed for their spiritual good, or by what means he
endeavored it; by writing.

3. The Weightinesse and great Concernment of that Subject about which he
wrote, the common salvation.

3. The third reason is taken from their need of having such an Exhortation
sent to them; It was needful for me to write unto you.

1. The first reason is taken from the love which the Apostle did bear to them;
They were beloved.

For the Explication whereof, Explicat.
two things are briefly to be opened.

1. What the word Beloved imports, and what is contained in it.

2. Why the Apostle here bestows this title upon them, calling them beloved.

For the first, the word (...), beloved, notes two things. 1. An amiablenesse,
and fitness for, and worthiness of love in the thing beloved, which can and
does commend it self to our love; It imports more than (...), diligendi,
they who are to be loved; for that word comprehends every one, even the wicked,
and our enemies; but (...), beloved, properly respects those who have something
of excellency to draw out our love toward them; Vid. passim.
and therefore it is in Scripture only attributed to the faithful. 2. The word
(...), beloved, notes a very intense, dear, tender, vehement love, Romans 16.5.
and 8.9.12. Col. 1.7. and 4.7. and 4.14. Philem. 1.3. 3 John 1. Jam. 1.16.
Phil. 16.19.2.5. Ephesians. 6.21. Col. 4.9. 1 Cor. 15.58. 1 Cor. 4.14. Ephesians. 5.1.
1 Cor. 4.17. 2 Timothy 1.2.
to the thing beloved; and therefore it is in Scripture not only the title of
some most dear friends, but of brethren, of children, and sons; nay Christ, who
was the Son of. God by nature, who was his only Son, that his Son, in whom he
was well pleased, is also called (...), his beloved Son. The word (...) is by
Greek Authors attributed to an only child: the Septuagint do with this word
interpret that phrase, Only Son, Genesis 22.2. Take thy Son, thine only Son: They
translate, take thy Son, thy beloved One. And Zech. 12.10. They shall mourn for
him as one that mourns for his only Son: they translate, as one that mourns
for his beloved One: and others attribute this word to an only eye, as when a
man has but one eye, they call it a beloved eye.

2. For the second, why the Apostle bestows upon them this title of beloved.
He did it for two reasons.

1. To show what was his duty, not only as a man, in which respect love is a
debt due to all; Romans 13.8.
or as a Christian, it being the duty of Christians peculiarly to love
Christians, the household of faith, brethren, John 13.34.
the members of one body, etc. but especially as an Apostle and Minister. What
more suitable than for a Father, a Nurse, 1 Cor. 4.14, 15. 1 These. 2.7, 8. John
21.
to love their children, a Shepherd his flock? The Apostles were spiritual
Fathers, Nurses, Shepherds.

2. To gain their loves by this affectionate Compellation, Beloved: that they
by observing his love to them, might both love him, and thereby more readily
embrace the following Exhortation. He is very uningenuous, who if he will not
provoke love from an enemy, will not repay love to a friend. Mat. 5.46.
Even Publicans love those who love them. The stone wall reflects heat, when
the scorching Sun shines upon it. Love must be reciprocal; if we are to love
those who are friends to our bodies, estates, names, etc. Si diligis, fac
quicquid vis.
are not they to be beloved much more who are our soul-friends? Nor was it more
the duty of these Christians, than their benefit, to love this holy Apostle.
How much would their love to him, forward their love to his Ministry? Though
the message should not be embraced for the messenger, yet it is not so easily
embraced, unless the messenger be beloved. 1 Cor. 4.14. Gal. 4.19. 1 Pet.
4.12. Phil. 1.8. and 4.1. and 2.12. Romans 12.19. 1 Cor. 10.14. 2 Cor. 12.19.
Heb. 6.9. Jam. 1.16.19. 1 John 3.2.21.
That Minister who is beloved, has a great advantage above another; he stands
upon the higher ground for doing good; and this is the main reason that the
Apostles so frequently call those to whom they write, beloved. They did not
desire to insinuate themselves into the hearts of the Christians for their
goods, But for their good; not to set up themselves, but Christ; they did not
woo for themselves, but for the Bridegroom, they being his friends; they did
not seek to advance themselves, but their Message, their Master.

1. Observe. 1.
Piety is no enemy to courtesy. Christianity forbids not sweet compellations.
Religion does not remove, but rectify courteous behavior. 1. By a flat
prohibition of the act of dissimulation, and of sinful serving men's humors.
2. By a moderation of excessivenesse in our expressions, which seem courteous.
3. By preserving affection pure, from being made the instrument of
profaneness and wantonness; that the pure seeds of religion may spring up in
the terms of affability.

2. Observe. 2.
The work and labor of a Minister should proceed from love to his people. The
Apostle loved them, and therefore he wrote to them. Love should be the fountain
of ministerial performances. First, Christ enquired of Peter's love, John 21.
and then he urged Peter to labor. A Minister that speaks with the tongue of
men and Angels, and has not charity, is as sounding brass, and a tinkling
cymball; though he have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and
all knowledge, and has all faith; though he bestow all his goods to feed the
poor, nay, though he give his body to be burnt, 1 Cor. 13.
and have not charity, he is nothing. God will not reward Ministers according
to what they have done, but according to what they have done in loving to do.
Love is the marrow, the soul of every service. All performances without love,
are but ciphers without a figure, in Gods account they stand for nothing; they
are sacrifices without fire.

3. People should study to be fit for the love of their Pastor. Observe. 3.
To encourage him to love them; to be diligibiles, such as these Christians
were, whom the Apostle called beloved. A painful Minister should not only be
put upon loving his people by conscience of this duty, but by encouragement to
this duty. Ministers are often wrongfully complained of for want of love; All
kind of love must not be afforded to all kind of people; a love of intimacy and
complacency, must only be set upon the godly among his people. If a faithful
Minister be not such to his offensive unprofitable hearer as he would, it is
because this man is not such to God, and his own soul, as he should. How
unworthy a part in any is it to make a faithful Minister spend that time in
weeping, complaining, reproving, which he had much rather spend in sweet
complacency, familiarity, and commendation!

4. The love of a Minister must not be slack and remiss, Observe. 4.
but vehement and ardent. Ministers are to imitate him in love, whose love was
the most earnest, who was the chief Shepherd, and had the chiefest care of his
flock; who purchased it with his own blood, Act. 20.28. who was nothing but
love covered over with our flesh. As he was the President of Ministers love, so
gave he earnest and frequent precepts to Ministers to testify this love, John
21.15. Love alone can facilitate the difficulties of a Ministers calling. Many
things must be born, as the hatred, frowardness, dullness, weakness of
people; There must ubera be given, though verbera be returned; Ministri
proferant ubera, non verbera. Bern.
the breast must give its milk, though it be struck at. Sometimes lawful
liberties must be forborne: A Minister must be like indulgent Mothers, or
Nurses, who forbear to eat such meats as they love, for fear of hurting the
child which they are breeding, or giving suck to. Paul was such an one, who
rather then he would offend a weak brother, would eat no flesh while he lived.
A Minister must be lowly in doctrine and life, patient, laborious; and nothing
but love can make him be so. Every thing will be difficult to him that loves
not. The object of a Ministers love is the soul, the heaven-born soul, the
precious eternal soul. What would it profit a Minister to gain the whole
world, and lose his peoples souls? The beast, the name, the body of a man must
be beloved; much more his soul. The winning of souls is the wisdom of a
Minister. Genesis 14.21.
A Minister should say of his ease, profit and pleasure, as the King of Sodom
to Abraham, Give me the souls, and take the goods to thy self.

5. Observe. 5.
The Loving of a Ministers person, has a great influence upon the loving of
his doctrine. The Apostle knew this, when he desired that these Christians
should know that he loved them. It Is the folly of people not to love the word,
who ever be the speaker. The message has not its commendation from the
messenger; but the messenger from the message. Yet rare is it to find that
Christian, who thinks well of that counsel, which is given him by a Counselor
who is not beloved; and therefore it is Satan's policy to asperse the Minister,
thereby to cause a dislike of his Ministry. And great is their sin, who by
their un-amiable carriage, often make their Ministry abhorred, who either by
profaneness, or unfit austerity, confute with their life, what they persuade
with their lip. Some offend by profaneness, preaching perhaps so holily in
the pulpit, as some may almost think it pity they should ever come out of it;
yet when they are out of it, showing so much levity, sloth, worldliness,
looseness, as any would almost think it pity they should ever go into it.
Others offend by unmeet morosity, not considering that a Minister must neither
be all bait without hook, nor all hook without bait; as he must not by his
flattery sooth, so neither by austerity affright his people. A Minister must
not be a flashing Comet, but an influentiall Star; not a Storm, or a Tempest,
but a sweetly dropping, bedewing Cloud.

6. The aim of a Minister in being beloved of his people, Observe. 6.
should be the benefiting of their souls. The Apostle desires to be beloved by
these Christians, that he might have the greater opportunity to further their
salvation. He robs Christ, who improves not the interest he has in the hearts
of his people for the honor of Christ. It Is not service, but sacrilege, to
desire the terminating of peoples loves in our selves. It Is better (could it be
without sin) that all should hate us, than that they should love us for our
selves; for if all should hate us, we should have but what is our own; if they
should love us for our selves, we should usurp what is Christ's. A Ministers
design in being beloved by his people, should be but to raise up seed to his
elder brother: all his services must be but scaffolds to erect a building of
glory to Christ. Ministers should labor to be good for their own benefit, and
to be accounted good for the benefit of others. They should not do good to get
a good name, but they should labor for a good name, that they may be the more
able to do good.

7. The love of a Minister to his people, Obser. 7.
should procure love again from his people. The Apostle in professing of love
to these Christians, expected that they should love him again. Love must be the
echo of love. It Is often seen that they who love their people most, are
beloved of them least. In a spiritual sense it is likewise true, that love
descends more than it ascends. And ordinarily, beggary, or at least poverty, is
all the requital which is returned for the Jewel of Plain-dealing. People
love not an eradicative, but a palliative cure of their spiritual distempers:
Spiritual flatterers are commonly more respected than spiritual fathers.
People and their lusts are so near together, that a godly Minister cannot be an
enemy to the later, but he is esteemed such to the former. It Is spiritual
frenzy to rage against the Physician of thy soul. A Minister should requite
such unkindness with the revenge of pity and prayer; and a holy resolution
still to love, though he be the less beloved; endeavoring to do people good,
though against their will. As Job's record, so such a Ministers recompense is
on high.

This for the first reason of the Apostles sending the following Exhortation to
these Christians, they were beloved. The second follows, The careful diligence
of the Apostle to further their spiritual welfare; When I gave all diligence to
write unto you of the common salvation. And in that,

1. First, of the first particular, With what mind, and disposition, he
endeavored their good, or how he was affected in endeavoring to do them good.
I gave all diligence. (...).

In the Explication whereof, Explicat.
1. I shall give the force and meaning of the words. Diligence, and all
diligence. 2. Gather from thence what kind of diligence, and how qualified this
of the Apostle here was. The Apostle expresses the forwardness of his mind
and disposition, in furthering their good, by two words, by his giving, 1.
Diligence. 2. All diligence.

Diligence: (...), Studium, Solicitudo, Diligentia, Festinatio.
in the Greek (...), the Vulgar here translates it, solicitudinem, solicitude,
or carfulness. Beza, studium, study, or earnest intention of mind; Our new
Translation renders it diligence, as it does also the same word, Romans 12.8. 2
Cor. 8.7. Heb. 6.11. 2 Pet. 1.5. Sometimes again it renders it carfulness, as
2 Cor. 7.11. and forwardness, as 2 Cor. 8.8. and earnest care, as 2 Cor. 8.16.
and haste, as Mark 6.25. Luke 1.39. The Greek word comprehends all these
significations; for it signifies an earnest, and serious bending, application,
and intention of the mind about the things which we are doing; and this is
study. It imports also such a serious bending of the mind, as is with a fear
of the future event; and this is care, carfulness, or solicitude. It also
signifies a speedy, and cheerful putting of a thing in execution; and this is
diligence, and festination, forwardness, have.

The other word, all, (...), which the Apostle uses to express his forward
disposition to do them good, increases and enlarges the former. He gave not
some part of, but all, or his whole diligence. For the Apostle does here, as
the Scripture often else where, put all for whole, (...), for (...), as Romans
10.18. 2 Timothy 3.16. his whole diligence was bent this way, and other things, in
comparison of this, he neglected. In this channel did run (as it were) the
whole stream of his diligence.

2. From this force and meaning of the words it may plainly be collected what
kind of diligence this of the Apostle here was.

1. It was a solicitous careful diligence. He resented the danger of these
Christians, and feared their spiritual loss and hurt by Satan, and his
instruments. The care of these faithful ones was upon him, as upon holy Paul,
was the care of the Churches. Gal. 4.19. 2 Cor. 8.16. 2 Cor. 11.28.
Paul was afraid of the Galatians, of whom he traveled in birth till Christ
was formed in them. Love is ever solicitous, does its best, and fears the
worst. Titus had an earnest care for the good of the Corinthians; and among
them none was offended, but Paul burned.

2. It was a studious, and an intentive diligence. It set his head and heart a
working to do them good. There was an earnest and vehement application of both
to this employment. Faithful Ministers are laborious; they are peculiarly
called laborers, and they labor in the word and doctrine. Paul labored more
abundantly than they all. Timothy was to show himself a workman. All their
titles, as Fishers, Soldiers, Watchmen, Laborers, etc. bestowed upon
Ministers, commend Jude's diligence.

3. It was a cheerful willing diligence. Studium est animi vehemens ad aliquam
rem magna cum voluptate applicatio. Bez.
This he fully discovers both by the word diligence, and giving diligence. He
was not forced to this employment. Paul, 1 Cor. 9.17. tells us, his reward came
in a way of willing doing. Jude had the constraint of love upon him; his
service was not like honey pressed, but of it self dropping. His feeding the
Church was his meat and drink. This good work was not done with an ill will.

4. It was a speedy ready diligence; it was with a holy haste. The Seducers
were already entered among these Christians; There was now no room for delays.
The beginnings of this mischief were to be crushed. While Ministers are
lingering, and doubting, Satan is devouring. They are soldiers, and Victory
loves to fly upon the wing of Expedition.

5. It was his whole, utmost, entire diligence. Such a diligence as Paul
professes he used, when he said, As much as in me is, Romans 1.15.
I am ready to preach the Gospel. This work he made his business, and to it
he gave himself; in comparison of this his diligence for other things was but
negligence. For three years he warned every one, night and day with tears, Act.
20.31. Nay, he was glad to spend and be spent, 2 Cor. 12.15. He was fervent in
spirit, but in serving the Lord.

1. Observe. 1.
Greatest diligence is always to be used about the best things, about matters of
greatest concernment. The custom of the world is to use substantial endeavors
about circumstantiall, and circumstantiall endeavors about substantial
employments. A holy remissness befits our care about the things of this life. A
Christian should keep his sweat and industry for the things of heaven; when he
uses the world, it should be as if he used it not. He should not pray, or
hear, as if he heard, or prayed not. It Is madness to make as great a fire for
the rosting of an egg, as for the rosting of an ox; to follow the world with
as much fervency, as we do holiness; and about trifles to be employed with
vast endeavors. It Is impossible to be too diligent for heaven, and difficult
not to be over diligent for the earth.

2. Observe. 2.
All that Ministers, even the best of them, can do, is but to be diligent, to
take pains, and endeavor. Paul can but plant, Nostrum est dare operam, Dei
dare operationem.
Apollos waters, God it is that gives the increase. It is our part to be
diligent, it is God that blesses that diligence. Aliud est docere, aliud
flectere. One thing to preach, another to persuade. The organ-pipes make no
music without breath. He that teaches the heart, sits in heaven. God must
have the praise in the successefulnesse of the Ministry; Non scoundum
profectum, sed laborem; non secundum quod valuimus, sed quod voluimus
his glory must not cleave to our fingers, nor must Ministers be discouraged in
the want of success, God never required that at their hands. He accepts of
their willing mind, nor does God reward them according to peoples proficiency,
but their own industry.

3. Observe. 3.
Diligence in duty is the commendation of Ministers. The light of knowledge
without the heat of love, speaks him not excellent. A golden key that opens
not, is not so praised as a wooden one that opens the door. The shining,
pransing, and trappings of a Steed, commend him not, but his serviceablenesse.
Ministers are not made for sight, but for service. Sine cura cum pervenerit ad
curam. Bern.
Nothing more unsuitable than for him to live without care, who has gotten a
Cure. Pray the Lord (says Christ) to send forth laborers into his harvest.
Ministers must labor for the pulpit, Qui ludit incathedra, lugebit in gehenna.
and in the pulpit; there must be the labor of study before we speak, the
labor of zeal and love in speaking, the labor of suffering must be born after
preaching; always the labor of praying before and after. Their plainest
performances must be painful. Diligens negligentia.
There must be a diligence even in their seeming negligence. Cursed is he that
does the work of the Lord deceitfully. Jer. 48.10. John 4.34.
No danger is so great as spiritual, nor must any care be so great as
Ministerial. A godly Minister must be careful for those that do not, and
careful with those that do care for themselves. He should not only eat his
bread in the sweat of his brows, but his sweat, John 4.34.
his labor, should be his meat and drink. Love to Christ and souls should
constrain him. His life is short, and his reward is eternal. Short seasons
require quick services. The nearness of Peter's departure made him diligent. 2
Pet. 1.13, 14.
Seldom does the Kingdom of Heaven suffer violence under a remiss Ministry. A
sleepy Preacher cannot expect a waking Auditory. It Is uncomely to see a
Minister weary himself in the world, in the family, in the field, in Courts of
Justice. Omnibus avocamentis valedicat.
He must take his leave of other employments. He must not leave the word of
God, to serve tables. He is a Warrior, and must not entangle himself in the
affairs of this life. They who sweat in worldly employments are commonly but
cold in the pulpit.

4. Observe. 4.
People who partake of the Ministers diligence, must take heed of negligence, a
double negligence. 1. They must not neglect themselves: Nor 2. their Minister.
1. Not themselves, their own souls: they must carefully gather up that
spiritual Manna that raineth upon them in this wilderness: they must not play
with that meat which the painful Minister has been long a dressing. If he
take pains to do them good, what should they to do themselves good? 2 Pet. 1.5.
Jam. 1.19. Isai. 60.8.
They must give all diligence to make their Calling and Election sure; In this
their day knowing the things of their peace, walking while they have the light:
They must be swift to hear, fly as doves to the windows, delight in the word.
Alphonsus King of Naples read the Bible over forty times in his life time. The
Bereans received the word with all readiness of mind. Acts 17.11.
First, They must seek the Kingdom of God; not labor for that bread which
perishes, but for that which endures to everlasting life. It Is not meat on
the table, but in the stomach that nourishes. A Ministers care without their
own, will be but their curse. 2. They must not neglect their Minister: Double
diligence deserves double honor. If the Minister consume his strength, they
must labor to restore it. It Is a shame that people should lay out more upon
brooms to sweep their kennels, than upon a Ministry to cleanse their souls. If
Ministers bring them venison, their souls must bless them. It was a saying of
an holy man now with God, (but his speech died not with him) London loves a
cheap Gospel. Dr. Stoughton.
If Ministers spend their oil, people must supply it. They must administer of
their temporals. Alas, they give but pibbles for pearls. Since the Ministry was
so slighted, godliness never thrived.

This for the first Particular, considerable in the second Reason; Why the
Apostle sent the following Exhortation? viz. With what mind and disposition the
Apostle endeavored the good of these Christians, He gave all diligence.

The second follows, In what work he was employed for, or by what means he
endeavored their good; viz. by writing: he gave all diligence; and it was to
write.

And why would the Apostle choose to further their salvation by the means of
writing? Explicat.
what was the advantage of a performance of that nature? His writing was sundry
ways eminently advantageous.

1. It was helpful and advantageous to the absent; he could not speak, and
therefore he writes to them. Being absent (says the Apostle) I write to them
which heretofore have sinned. 1 Cor. 13.2.
Writing is an invention to deceive absence. The use of Epistles, is, that even
the separated by distance of place, may be near to one another (...) affection;
that there may be among the absent, a resemblance of presence. The pen is an
artificial tongue, the relief of the dumb, and the distant; by it the former
speaks plain, and the later alond. The rongue is as the pen of a ready writer;
and the pen is as the tongue of a ready speaker.

2. The Apostles writing had the advantage to be diffusive of good to many. He
was covetous of benefiting as many as he could, and his writing scattered
holiness. Writing as it reaches further, so more than the tongue. It Is like a
little leaven that leaveneth a great lump; even whole Countries, nay,
after-Ages. Paul's Epistles are ours, though not in their inscriptions, yet in
their benefit. Augustine was converted by reading part of that to the Romans.
The pen has the greatest Auditories. Romans 13.13, 14.


3. The Apostles writing had the advantage of authority and esteem. Often the
contemptiblenesse of bodily presence, by reason happily of defects in utterance,
aspect, life, rank, etc. dampeth the spirit, and diminishes the esteem of the
worthiest speaker. Learned Doctor Fulk. Master G.H.
Many are famous for their writing, who have been less esteemed for their
speaking. Paul's adversaries objected the weakness of his bodily presence, 2
Cor. 10.10.
when they confessed his letters were weighty and powerful. Writing abstracts
the work from sundry prejudices against the workman. Many there are who build
the tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous; who
publish, allege, adorn the books (those monuments of the memories) of holy
Fathers, and others, whose persons, had they lived in their times, they would
have as much persecuted and opposed, as they now do those who are guided by the
same spirit, and walk in those holy ways, in which those Saints of old did.
Many, but meanly esteemed of in foreign Countries, by reason of their common
and contemptible society, are most eminently and deservedly esteemed among us
for their writings.

4. The Apostles writing had the advantage of permanency and continuance; it
was a standing, lasting monument of his love, and their duty. Words pass away,
and are forgotten, when writing remains. Every new tide blots out a writing on
the sand, and every new Sermon makes the former forgotten; but writing deceives
even death it self. It Is a kind of image of eternity. Some by idleness have
been dead while they lived; others by their labors have lived when they have
been dead. 2 Pet. 1.15.
Peter endeavored that the Christians might be put in remembrance even after
his decease. Psalm. 102.18.
This shall be written (says the Psalmist) for the generation to come.

1. Observe. 1.
The desire of Ministers should be to benefit as many as may be. To help in the
way to heaven, not their present, but even their absent friends; nor the age
only in which they live, but even succeeding generations; they should (like a
great fire) heat those who are a great way off. The world should smell of the
sanctity, and holy labors of a godly Minister, even when he is removed out of
it. He should, like Zisca, who commanded that a drum should be made of his
skin, to terrify his enemies, even after his death be serviceable. Though the
Prophets live not ever, yet their labors should. Zech. 1.5.
Some of the ancient Worthies, like Samson, have thus done more good by their
deaths, than by their lives.

2. Obser. 2.
Gods giving us the constant and standing rule of a written word, shows our
great readiness to leave and swerve from him. As we could not have found out,
so neither could we have kept in the right way, without a written word. We have
ingenium erraticum, we love to wander, and should, without this light shining
in a dark place. In the Infancy of the Church, and while it was contained in
narrow bounds, God manifested his will without the written word, by dreams,
visions, and audible voice: But error and profaneness increasing in
after-generations, men could not be without Gods will committed to writing;
without it we can neither find, nor keep our way to heaven. The Pope, unwritten
traditions, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, Reason and Revelations, are all erring
guides.

3. Observe. 3
Great is the goodness of God, who would have his will committed to writing,
giving us a sure, 2 Pet. 1.19.
a more sure word of prophecy; that upon which, we may more safely build, than
upon the voice which came from heaven, when Christ was transfigured. How full
of love is Christ to send Epistles to his Spouse the Church in his absence from
her! Great is his care who has safely transmitted an uncorrupted canon to
every age of his Church, and set up a light, which the rage and subtilty of
Satan can no more blow out, then can a man the Sun with a pair of bellows. God
provides not only light in heaven, but light to heaven. He teaches us in the
School of Scripture. He has not dealt so with every nation; the Heathen have
but the school of creatures: Psalm. 147.20.
the Jews, though our careful Library-keepers yet understood not this written
word.

4. Observe. 4.
The great impiety of those, who neglect and undervalue the written word: I
have written (says God) the great things of my Law, Hos. 8.12.
but they were accounted a strange thing. The written word is undervalued by
some practically: their lives are visible (as much as in them is) confutations
of it; they live crooked lives, though they have a strait rule; They commit the
sins of darkness in a Land of light, and they do their work worse under this
glorious light, than those who lived in darkness. Others disgrace the written
word doctrinally. Papists say, Alb. Pighius. Costerus in Euchirid. Eccius.
Bailius p. 1. Bellar. de verb. Dei. l. 4. c. 4. John Goodwin. Yo. Eld. p. 32.
Vid. Blind guide guided, p. 47.
it is not necessary for the Church, calling it by way of contempt,
Atramentariam Theologiam, a dead letter, a divinity made of ink and paper;
preferring before it the scripture which is made in the Popes breast. To these
may be added the Sectaries of our times, who peremptorily write, That no
writing whatsoever, whether Translations, or Originals, is the foundation of
Christian Religion. And to prove it, they borrow the popish arguments, whereof
this is the prime; Religion was founded before the Scriptures, therefore the
Scripture cannot be the foundation of Religion. They never remembering what is
truly answered by our Divines, Chamier, Rivet, Patribus olim Deus se
familiariter ostendit, atque iis per se voluntatem suam patefecit, and tum
Scripturas non fuisse necessarias fatcor: at postea mutavit hanc docendae
Ecclesiae rationem, and scribi suam voluntatem voluit, and tum necessaria esse
Scriptura coepit. Whitak. de perfec. Scrip. cap. 7.
Whitaker, etc. the later whereof tells them, that though of old time, when God
familiarly made known himself to the fathers, and by himself manifested to
them his will, the Scriptures were not necessary; yet after God did change the
course of teaching his Church, and would have his word written; the Scriptures
were a necessary foundation.

Obser. 5. The misery of those times and places, where writing is made an
engine to advance the devils kingdom. It Is pity so useful an invention should
be employed for any but for God; and that it should be used as a weapon against
him. Heretical and profane writings kill souls at a distance, leaven a whole
Kingdom with sin, and propagate impiety to posterity. Satan has prevailed more
with his pen than his sword against the Church. Far be it from a Christian
Commonwealth to suffer weekly Advocates to write for Satan; to take away the
pen from Jude, and to put it into the hand of the Seducers against whom he
desires to write. We put not a sword into the hand of our own, may we never put
a pen into the hand of Gods exemies.

This for the second Particular, in the second reason of the Apostles sending
this following Exhortation, namely, by what kind of means he endeavored the
good of these Christians: viz. by writing.

The third follows, the excellency and weightinesse of that subject about which
he was to write, the common salvation. Wherein he expresses, 1. The nature
thereof; it was salvation. 2. It Is property; it was common.


1. The kind and nature of that subject about which he wrote; Salvation. The
word (...), Explicat.
here rendered salvation, properly signifies a deliverance from danger and
distress, as also a preservation of a thing in a condition of safety; such a
preservation or safety, Chemnit. Har. in Luc. 1. Cameron. in Myroth. Evang.
without which a thing would be lost and destroyed; and by which, it is
perpetually preserved, and kept safe from all danger and evil whatsoever. But,

Salvation is taken in Scripture sundry ways. 1 Samuel 14.45. 19.5. Isai. 59.11.
Jer. 3.23.


1. First, For deliverance from temporal miseries and calamities. Exodus 14.13.
Stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord. And 1 Samuel 11.13. To day the
Lord wrought salvation in Israel.

2. For the power, and providentiall care of God, whereby he lets not his people
want what is fit for them. Psalm. 78.22. When they desired food, they trusted
not in his salvation.

3. For the garments of joy, and feasting, which they were wont to wear upon
occasion of public victories and deliverances, Psalm. 132.16. Isai. 61.19.
I will choath her priests with salvation. And Psalm. 149.4. He will beautify
the meek with salvation.

4. For the Author of salvation, whether temporal, or spiritual, Isai. 12.2.
Psalm. 27.1. The Lord is my light and my salvation. And Luke 2.30. Mine eyes
have seen thy salvation.

5. For the Entrance into the estate of blessedness; John 4.22. Heb. 2.3. 2
Cor. 6.2.
and so the means of salvation, the Gospel, as Act. 28.28. Salvation of God is
sent to the Gentiles, and they will hear it: and the embracing of those means
by faith, together with holiness of life, are called salvation, Luke 19.9.
This day is salvation come to thy house. So Ephesians. 2.8. Romans 11.11.

6. For our blessedness and glorification in heaven; whereof there are two
degrees. The first, At the time of our death, Acts 16.17. Romans 10.10.
when the soul being loosed from the body, is carried into the third heavens.
The second, At the day of resurrection, when body and soul shall be received up
into heaven by Christ, Romans 13.11. Now is our salvation nearer then when we
believed. And Heb. 1.14. Heirs of salvation, etc.

7. For our blessedness, as comprehending both our entrance into it here, and
the perfection of it hereafter. Heb. 2.3. Acts 4.12. Acts 13.26.
If we neglect so great salvation, Ephesians. 1.13. The Gospel of your salvation,
2 Pet. 3.15. Account that the long-suffering of the Lord is salvation. In this
last sense I take it in this place, The Apostle gave all diligence to write
unto them, so of the means, way, and entrance of salvation in grace, that they
might happily at length enjoy and partake of it in glory; and so of the
fullness thereof in glory, that they may not neglect the entrance into it in
grace. And deservedly is the happy estate of the faithful both in semine, and
in fructu, in the first fruit, and full crop, in grace, and glory, called
salvation. For,

First, It is an estate of deliverance from the greatest enemies. Heb. 10.31. 1
These. 1.10.
All the most cruel, oppressive enemies in the world are nothing to the fury
of the great God, the wrath to come, the defiling and destroying power of sin,
the curse of the Law, slavery to Satan.

2. It is a deliverance of the soul, the precious eternal soul. Mat. 10.28.
What triumphs have been kept for deliverance of bodies from slavery! What
trophies, pillars have been erected to those, who have saved our Estates and
Liberties, and Country! These were but the shadows of Saviors.

3. It Is a deliverance from every Adversary, to be sure, from adversity by
every Adversary. A complete deliverance. Nothing hurts the delivered by Christ;
Luke 1.71.
they are delivered from all that hate them. No sin, no devil, nor cross, nor
death, shall hurt them. They are all conquered enemies.

4. It Is a deliverance from every enemy fully. Luke 1.69. Heb. 7.25. Romans 8.
Christ is a horn of salvation, and able to the full to save all them that come
to him, from the guilt and condemnation of sin. They are fully justified in
this life; There is no condemnation to them who are in Christ; their iniquities
are blotted out as a cloud; they are forgotten and forgiven; thrown into the
bottom of the sea, and subdued. Mic. 7.19.
Though they be sought for, yet can they not be found. Ephesians. 5.27.
And from the defilement and presence of sin they are fully saved in the next
life: no spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, shall there be in glory; no
mixtures of sin with grace. Nothing that defiles shall enter into the new
Jerusalem. Here the people of God are perficientes, perfecting; there perfecti,
perfect. They shall let their mantle of corruption fall when they go up to
heaven.

5. It Is a perpetual deliverance, everlasting salvation, not for a few years,
as were the deliverances of Israel by their Saviors. It is a happy security,
and a secure happiness. The saved by Christ shall never fall, never fall
totally into sin, or for sin. 1 Pet. 1.5.
They are kept by the power of God through faith, unto salvation.

6. It Is a positive deliverance: a preservation not from evil only, but to
good also; a preservation in grace, and unto glory. 1 Timothy 4.18. 1 Pet. 1.4.
Paul calls it a preservation to an heavenly Kingdom; to an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, where the perfection of all
delights in the fruition of a soul-satisfying good, shall make us forget all
our troubles. Heaven is an eternal triumph over all our former adversaries,
and adversities.

1. Observe. 1.
The faithful have many enemies. What need else of this salvation? Satan's
design is their destruction, either for sin, or by sin, or both. He lies most
in wait for the soul enriched with holiness, and like the thief in the house,
takes most care to find the Jewels. Let not the faithful be secure, or
discouraged: not secure, though Christ saves, yet our hearts betray us; And
Satan is a waking enemy: not discouraged, for Christ is a waking friend, a
powerful Savior.

2. Observe. 2.
They who are out of the way of salvation, out of Christ, and without
holiness, are without safety. Secure they often are, but never safe. Sometimes
they are kept from bodily dangers, and preserved by the general providence,
and the universal care of God extended to all his works; but alas, this
amounts not to Judes salvation; it is rather reservation, then preservation.
All the care of God toward the wicked, is but as the provision that a Jaylour
bestows upon his prisoner, to keep him alive against the day of execution; so
that a sinners preservation, is not only common, but cursed. A sinners security
is not from want of danger, but discerning. If the Command of God be not a
hedge to keep thee from being a straying sheep, his care shall be no hedge to
keep thee from being a devoured sheep. Was it dangerous for them of old to be
shut out of the Ark, and the City of Refuge, and to be without blood upon their
door posts? and is it not dangerous to be without a Jesus to deliver us from
the wrath to come? 1 These. 1.10.
They who will not be preserved from Satan as a seducer in their life, shall
never be preserved from him as a destroyer at their death. Of this more before.

3. Observe. 3.
The salvation of the faithful is begun in this life. Here they are Saints,
and here they are saved. Heaven is but the flower of salvation blown out; here
in this life, salvation is in the bud. Saints are here saved from the power of
their corruptions; they are here in the Suburbs of Heaven: they here sit
together in heavenly places in Christ. Ephesians. 2.6.
They here have salvation, not only in their desires, and expectations, but in
its Cause. 2 Pet. 1.11.
They have an entrance into the everlasting Kingdomof Christ. They are by faith
united to that Head which is already in heaven. They are freed, though not from
the company of, and contention with, yet from conquest by all their enemies;
and there is always the certainty of this salvation, in respect of it self, the
object, though not in respect of us, the subject.

4. The People of God are safe, and saved, Observe. 4.
even while they are in dangers. Their enemies are but nominall. The keeper of
Israel never slumbers, nor sleeps. Psalm. 90. per tot.
Though they be tempted, sick, persecuted, banished, yet never unsafe; and when
ever God brings them into these conditions, it is because they are the safest
for them. Their graces are always safe, their souls, their comforts safe,
because Christ their Head, their hope, their all is safe. The poorest Saint
has his Lifeguard. He who provided a City of Refuge for those who killed men,
will much more find out a City of Refuge for thee when men shall labor to
kill thee. Of this more before. Observe. 5.


5. Our dangers and enemies in this life should exceedingly commend heaven to
us. The Tempest commends the Haven; the Pursuit of the Enemy, the City of
Refuge; the Storms, the Shelter. We are never fully safe, till we arrive at
eternal salvation. It Is strange that Saints should long no more to get into
the bosom of Christ in glory; that they should be so unwilling to leave the
lions dens, and the mountains of leopards. Cant. 4.8.
Mundus turbatur, and amatur. We love to handle the world, though God makes it
a bundle of thorns: what should we do if it were an heap of roses?

6. Observe. 6.
God has appointed the holy Writings for our salvation. Jude writes to further
the salvation of these Christians. 2 Timothy 3.15.
The Scriptures are able to make us wise to salvation. Gal. 6.16.
Eternal peace is only upon those who walk according to this rule. The
Scripture tells us not only what we shall find heaven to be when we are there,
but how we should find the way thither. They are the pillar and cloud in our
wilderness. The light which shines in a dark place for our guidance. Let us
labor to have salvation furthered by them. How shall we escape, if we neglect
so great salvation? How sad is it to carry these Letters of Heaven about us,
only as Vrijah carried David's, for his own destruction.

7. The furthering of the salvation of others, Observe. 7.
should be the end of our writing. To write the same things to you (says Paul)
is sufe. Phil. 3.1, 2. 1 Pet. 5.12. 1 John 2.1. Videtur quicquid literis
mandatur, id commendari omnium eruditorum lectione debere. Cicero 2 Tusc.
quaest.
I have written (says Peter) exhorting and testifying, that this is the true
grace of God wherein ye stand. My little children (says John) these things I
write unto you; that ye fin not. We must not write to show our learning, much
less to obscure the truth. Nothing should be written, but what the reading of
the best should commend. The best thing that many do by writing, is to make
paper dear, but which is worse, they make their reader worse; it were well that
either they would not write at all, or else write a Book of Retractations. But
among us, Sectaries after conviction write with more rage, instead of
retractation. If these will not amend, readers are to take heed of buying their
books, lest they embrace their errors; and rather to dig in the Mine of the
Scriptures for gold, than to wallow in the mire of the Books of Sectaries and
Seducers.

This for the first, the nature of that subject, about which the Apostle was to
write, Salvation.

The second follows, the property of it, Common: common salvation. Wherein by
way of Explication, we may show two things.

1. In what respect Salvation is called common. Explicat.


2. Why the Apostle here in this place does call it so.

Common cannot be here taken according to the usage of the word sometimes in the
Scripture, as it is opposed to holy, and as importing as much as profane, or
that which every one may use, or belongs to every one, as 1 Samuel 21.4. that
bread which was not consecrated to God, or hallowed, and of which any might
eat, is called common. So Act. 10.14.28. and 11.8. Meats forbidden by the
Leviticall Law are called common and unclean, because the profane Gentiles did
commonly use those meats, which the Jews, being an holy people, might not eat.
Heb. 10.29.
And so those Apostates are said to account the blood of the Covenant a common,
or unholy thing: they esteeming the blood of Christ no more, then if it had
been the blood of some ordinary person, or of some wicked or guilty one. Nor is
common here to be taken unlimitedly, for that which is common universally to
every one, as if none were excluded from this salvation. Mat. 7.14. Aug. de
haeres. cap. 43.
Origin is charged as if he held that those who lived and died the most
flagitious of sinners; nay, that the devil himself, and his angels, after a
thousand years torments, should be saved.

But Common is here taken in a limited sense; this salvation being common only
to the faithful, who all have an interest in the same; it belongs to one of
them, John 17.12. Rev. 7.9. Acts 1.8. Romans 1.16. Acts 10.35.
as well as to another; the meanest are not excluded it. Christ loses none of
his. It Is a salvation for Jews and Gentiles, rich and poor, honorable and
ignoble, bond and free, learned and illiterate.

And thus it is common salvation sundry ways.

1. In regard of the meritorious purchaser of this salvation. There is one
common Savior, Ephesians. 4.5. Ephesians. 5.23.
the Savior of the body. Every member thereof has influence from this head.
There is one Lord, 1 Cor. 10.4. 1 Cor. 3.11. John 1.16.
there is this one Mediator between God and man. They of old all drank of the
same spiritual rock, Christ Jesus. Of his fullness we have all received. He is
the sun that gives luster and light to every star, the Well that filled every
pitcher; the only foundation laid by all.

1. It Is common salvation, in regard of the rule and way, by which we are
guided thither. There is but one faith, called also Catholic. God calls all
his people with one voice. Omnis una voce invitat, Call. in 4. Ephesians.
There Is but one way to heaven, the good old way; there is one rule prescribed
to all; sometimes it has been more plainly, sometimes more obscurely discovered,
but yet the way has ever been the same. Our light now may be new for the
degree, not for the kind of it.

3. It Is common salvation, in regard faith both in the purchaser, and doctrine
of salvation, is common to all true Christians. They all have the same spirit
of faith. And faith ( Tit. 1.4.) is called common. 2 Cor. 4.13.
They all build upon the same personal and doctrinall foundation; and though
like the boughs of a tree they cross one another in some things, yet they all
grow upon the same root, and agree in that. Christ and Scripture is precious to
all.

4. It Is common salvation, in regard of the earnest of it. The holiness of the
spirit is common to all the faithful. Ephesians. 1.14. 2 Cor. 1.22.
They all have the earnest of the purchased inheritance; some have more, some
less given them in earnest, yet it is in all of the same kind, Heb. 12.14. 2 Timothy 4.8.
and all have some. Without holiness none shall see God.

5. The waiting, the longing for this salvation is common to all believers.
Tit. 2.13.
They all love the appearance of Christ. They all are made to look upwards.
Heaven has ever been their Center.

6. The profession of an interest in, and the hope of this salvation, is also
common to all believers. They have all professed themselves strangers here below,
Heb. 11.13.14.
and they have ever shown that they seek a Country above. They have all had
Heaven in their tongues, in their lives; they have not been ashamed to confess
Christ before men; and have rather chosen to lose their lives, than the end of
their living; to part with what they had in hand, rather than what they had in
hope; with their possession, rather then their reversion.

7. It Is common salvation, in respect of the term: the place of blessedness,
to which all the faithful shall at length arrive. In heaven there shall be a
general assembly, not one missing: whosoever believes, John 3.16.
shall have everlasting life. God knows and loves all his children, as if he
had but one. I will (says Christ, John 17.24. ver. 12.
speaking of all believers) that they whom thou have given me, be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory. Of all that thou have given me (says
Christ) I have lost none. Christ's own glory would be incomplete in heaven, if
any one believer should be wanting. The poor partakes of the same heaven with
the rich. Lazarus and Abraham met together in heaven. 1 Pet. 3.7.
The wife is an heir of the grace of life with the husband. The servant shall
reign in heaven as well as the Master. One heaven shall hold Jew and Gentile,
Ephesians. 4.13.
bond and free. It Is the place where we shall all meet. Explicat. 2.


2. Why does the Apostle here call this salvation common, writing to these
Christians?

1. Some conceive that by showing it was common to him, as well as to others,
the surmise of his unfitness to write of so weighty a subject, might be cut
off. Jude would (according to this opinion) show that he writes, to them of no
other salvation, but what he himself in part understood, loved, expected with
themselves; and therefore he being an experienced Doctor, they ought the more
readily to follow him.

2. Others, as I apprehend more fitly, conceive, that the Apostle calls this
salvation common, to prevent the self-exemption of any particular Christian
from embracing the following Exhortation, and Directions, which belong to the
salvation of all: q. d. I write of the things which all have followed, that
ever heretofore obtained salvation; and all must follow, who would not incur
their own ruin; therefore let every one embrace them.

1. God is most free of his best blessings. Obser. 1.
He affords salvation in common to all his people. He gives honor and riches
but to few of them; he gives Christ and heaven to them all. God sometimes denies
a crumb, even to him on whom he bestows a Kingdom. There are many things that a
child of God cannot promise to himself, but heaven he may reckon upon. There Is
no famine, where there is bread, though there be no plums and apples. And if
God give salvation, though he denies these worldly toys, there is no fear of
famine. God gives those things but scantily, which often hinder from heaven. He
keeps nothing from his people, but what they may well be without: When the
poorest Saint looks upon the greatest Emperor in the world, he may say, though
I have not the same worldly glory and wealth, yet I shall have the same heaven
with him; only with this difference, I go not thither with so much luggage on
my back. It Is reported of the Duke of Hereford, when he was banished out of the
Kingdom by Richard the second, that he should say, Well, yet I shall have the
same sun to shine upon me, that he has who banisheth me.

2. Christ and heaven are full and satisfactory; Observe. 2.
they are enough for all. Salvation is imparted, but not impaired; the
happiness of one is no diminution to the comfort of another. Christus and
coelum non patiuntur hyperbolem.
Christ and heaven cannot be praised hyperbolically; they are common fountains,
and yet never drawn dry. The world is conscious of its curtnesse, when men are
wary of having corrivals in any enjoyment. Worldly comforts are like a narrow
table-cloth upon a broad table; those on both sides pull to themselves, and on
neither side have they enough. Christ and heaven always call and invite, and
rejoice in comers. The world altogether denies most, satisfies none at all.

3. None should be willing to be saved alone. Observe. 3.
Heaven was made for a common good. It Is angelical to rejoice when men are
brought to heaven, and (as I may say) hyper-angelicall to bring them thither.
Christians, (Ministers especially) should be common goods; like the Conduit
that serves for the use of a whole City, Blessings to a whole Nation,
compelling every one to the marriage Feast. Our gifts should be called common,
not only because God commonly bestows them, but because we commonly use them.
If heaven be large, our hearts should not be straight. How common a good was
blessed Paul, who wished that all who heard him, Acts 26.29.
were such as he was. This is an holy, honest covetousness.

4. They who teach others the way to salvation, Observe. 4.
should be in a state of salvation themselves. He who has sailed into foreign
Coasts, discourses more thoroughly and satisfactorily, than he who has only
map-knowledge. Then is the word like to grow, when the piety of the Preacher,
waters the seed of the Sermon. He who loves not salvation himself, can hardly
make others in love with it. Ministers must not only teach facienda, Animum non
faciunt, qui animum non habent
but faciendo. They must teach by doing, what they teach to be done. He who
teaches another should teach himself. He who comfort another, should
labor to do it with that comfort wherewith God has comforted him. 2 Cor. 1.4.


5. The commonnesse of salvation to all believers, Observe. 5.
should be a great inducement to every one to labor particularly for
salvation, and that they may not miss of it themselves. It Is our trouble here
upon earth, when we see others obtain riches and preferments, and we our selves
go without them. We urge our friends with this argument, that they did such a
kindness for such an one, and such an one, and therefore we hope they will not
exclude us. Have thou (said Esau to his father) but one blessing? bless me,
even me also. Oh, go to God, and say, Lord, thou have salvation for such and
such a friend, have it also for me, even for me also, Oh my Father. It may be
thou have a godly father, or mother, a brother, or sister, be not content that
they should go to heaven without thee.

6. There Is but one way to heaven. Observe. 6.
There are many Nations, more men, only one faith. The Jews shall not be saved
by the Law of Moses, Gentiles by the Law of Nature, and Christians by the
Gospel. It Is true, The just shall live by his own faith; but then it is as true,
That the object of his faith, is the object of every ones faith that is saved,
although the special application thereof be his alone. The Apostle Peter
calls faith, the like precious faith. 2 Pet. 1.1.


7. The partakers of this common salvation, Observe. 7.
who here agree in one way to heaven, and who expect to be hereafter in one
heaven, should be of one heart. It Is the Apostles collection, Ephesians. 4.3, 4.
What an amazing misery is it, that they who agree in common faith, should
disagree like common foes? That Christians should live as if faith had banished
love? This common faith should allay and temper our spirits in all our
differences* This should moderate our minds, though there be in-equality in
earthly relations. What a powerful motive was that of Josep^'s brethren to him
to forgive their sin, Genesis 50.17.
they being both his brethren, and the servants of the God of his fathers*
Though our own breaths cannot blow out the taper of contention, Oh yet let the
blood of Christ extinguish it.

This for the second reason, why the A postle sends the following Exhortation,
drawn from his care and diligence to promote their happiness.

3. The third follows, taken from their present need of having such an
Exhortation; in these words, It was needful for me to write.

(...), Explicat.
necesse, or necessitatem habui, I had necessity, word for word; or I held it
needful. Here we translate it more agreeably to the English expression, It was
needful for me; elsewhere, as Luke 14.18. I must needs; and (spoken of a third
person) Luke 23.1. Of necessity he must; and 1 Cor. 7.37. having necessity.

The word (...), here translated needful, signifies in Scripture a threefold
necessity. 1. A necessity of distress, and tribulation, as Luke 21.23. 1 Cor.
7.26. 2 Cor. 12.10. 2 Cor. 6.4. 1 These. 3.7. 2. A necessity of coaction, or
constraint; such a force as opposes ones liberty, and which makes one do a
thing against his will, as, Philem. 14. it is opposed to willingly; (...).
That thy benefit should not be, as it were, of necessity, but willingly. And 2
Pet. 5.2. Feed the flock of God, etc. not by constraint, but willingly, 1 Cor.
9.7. not grudgingly, or of necessity. 3. A necessity upon supposition of some
cause, ground, or reason, whereby it becomes necessary or needful, that such,
or such a thing should be, or be done. And thus Christ says, It must needs be
that offenses come; namely, Mat. 18.7.
because of the power and malice of the devil, the weakness and perverseness
of men. Acts 13.46.
Likewise Paul and Barnabas told the Jews, It was necessary that the word of
God should first have been spoken to you; namely, because of the Covenant which
God had made with them above others. In this respect, he says, Phil. 1.24. To
abide in the flesh is more needful for you; namely, upon supposition of the
benefit you may receive from me, and the want you will have of me. And 1 Cor.
9.16. Necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel. And
this was the necessity which Jude intends, namely, that whereby it became
needful and necessary for some weighty causes to write to these Christians.
And so it was needful in three respects.

1. In respect of his great care toward them. His diligence for their good,
and desire of writing being so great, as that it would not suffer him to be
silent: and so Erasmus interprets this necessity.

2. It was needful for him to write, in respect of his own duty, principally
as he had the office of an Apostle, which he received to further their
spiritual welfare: so Others.

3. But thirdly, (as Calvin, Beza, and the most interpret this necessity,) It
was necessary for him to write in respect of their danger; their faith being in
such hazard by false teachers and seducers; of himself he was forward and
diligent to do them good, but he was further put upon this service of writing,
by the very exigence and necessity of their present condition, they being so
much hazarded by false Teachers and Seducers. And their danger by Seducers made
it needful for him to write in sundry regards:

1. In regard of the destructivenesse of those doctrines and practices which
the Seducers brought in among them. They turned the grace of God into
lasciviousness: they denied the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: they
despised dominions: they walked after their own ungodly lusts. These were not
slight, but pernicious evils. Peter in 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. calls them damnable
heresies, pernicious ways: not scratching the face, but stabbing the very
heart of Religion. The eternal salvation of their precious souls was hazarded.

2. Their danger by Seducers made it needful for him to write, in regard of
their subtilty and cunningness in propagating their impieties. The Devil made
not use of the Ass, but the Serpent to tempt them: The seducers had craftily
crept in among them: Ephesians. 4.14. 2 Pet. 2.3.
they did by sleight and cunning craftiness lie in wait to deceive; they had
feigned words to make merchandise of souls; pretenses of Gospel-liberty, etc.

3. In regard of the great readiness even of the best, to give way to Seducers.
Our natures are like tinder, ready to take with every spark. There is in the
best a corrupt principle, that inclines to error in judgment, and impiety in
practice; which, were they not kept by the power of God to salvation, would
soon prevail. One who is diseased may more easily infect twenty that are sound,
than those twenty can cure that one infected person. Rusty armor soon makes
bright armor rusty, by lying near it; when as the bright armor imparts to the
other none of its brightness.

1. The written word is needful as the rule of faith and manners. Observe. 1.
Jude upon the entrance of the Seducers with their errors, tells the Christians
it was needful to write this Epistle to regulate and direct them. They who deny
that the written Word is necessarily required to be the rule of faith, must
necessarily give way to the overthrowing of faith. There Is no Truth in the
Scripture can be proved or believed with a divine faith, unless the ratio
credendi, or ground of such believing be the revelation of God in writing. John
20 31. John 1.5.13.
These things are written (says John) that you may believe that Jesus is the
Christ. And These things have I written (says he) unto you, that ye might
believe in the name of the Son of God. 2 Pet. 1.9.
We have a more sure word of prophecy (says Peter) to which ye do well to
take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place. Without this light,
the way of truth cannot be found. The Bercans searched the Scriptures, Acts
17.11. Luke 24.25, 27. Act. 13.33. Romans 14.11.
whether those things they heard were so. The doctrines of faith have been ever
by Christ and his Apostles proved, and errors which oppose them have been ever
by them confuted by the written word. They who build not their faith upon the
written word, must needs go to Enthusiasms, the Pope, or Reason for a
Foundation.

2. The helping forward the good of souls, 2 Observe. 1 Cor. 9.16.
is the most needful employment. Paul (as Jude here) tells us, that necessity
was laid upon him to do this work: A saving Ministry is that which we cannot be
without. We can better spare the Sun in the Firmament (as it was once said of
Chrysostom) than the preaching of a faithful Minister. The Word in its
ministry is compared in Scripture to the most needful things; bread, salt,
water, physic, armor, etc. Bread and salt are always set upon the table,
whatsoever the other dishes are: Let our condition be what it will, the Word is
always needful. The life of the the soul is the dearest, and the famine of the
Word is the sorest. Places, though never so rich and glorious, are but magna
latrocinia without the Word; dens of thieves, not dwellings for men. The
removal of the Gospel is a soul-judgment, and the soul of judgments. It Is
foolish to account the falling of the salt upon the table ominous; but it is our
duty to lament the falling of them whom Christ calls the salt of the earth.
Mat. 5.13.
They who are weary of the word, are weary of heaven, weary of God. Ministers,
for performing so necessary a work as is that of saving souls, should hazard
themselves. What father would not burn his fingers to pull his child out of the
fire? It is not necessary a Minister should be safe, but that he should be
serviceable, and that a soul should be saved.

3. Observe. 3.
The opposing of Seducers is a needful part of our Ministry. 'Twas this that
made Jude account it needful to write to these Christians. It Is the Ministers
work to defend, as well as to feed people; to drive away the wolf from, as
well as to provide pasture for the flock. The mouths of deceivers are to be
stopped, and gainsayers must be convinced. Tit. 1.9, 11.
They subvert (says the Apostle) whole houses. Cursed be that patience which
can see it, and lay nothing. I know not how it comes to pass, but among many,
the opposing of seducers, is either accounted bitter, or needless; and it is
still the policy of Satan not to suffer a sword in Israel. But if there be
damnable heresies, I see not but there may be a damnable silence in those who
should oppose them. 2 Pet. 2.1.
Every one must give account for his idle words, and a Minister for his idle
silence.

4. Observe. 4.
Ministers should preach such doctrine, as is most needful for the places and
people, with whom they have (...) do. The Physician administers not one kind of
physic to all distempers. Some Patients require one, some another. Some places
abound most with profaneness, others more with errors. Some places are
infamous for drunkenness, others for pride, others for covetousness, others
for weariness of the Gospel. The Minister must suit his preaching to their
exigences. It Is not enough in war for a soldier to discharge his Musket though
it be well charged with powder and bullet, unless also he aim well to hit the
enemy. He who delivers good doctrine, and reproofs, but not suitable to the
people whom he teaches, discharges up into the air. God commands the Prophet
to show the people their sins; Isai. 58.1.
not to show one people the sins of another, but their own. Some observe that
Christ in his doctrine ever set himself most against the raging impiety of the
times wherein he lived. We find his vehemence expressed more against the secret
subtle hypocrisies of the Pharisees, than against other sins, which in some
times and places would have deserved most severe reprehension. And the truth
is, the preaching of seasonable and needful truths is that which creates so
much hatred to the faithful Ministers. People can be content to hear us preach
of the sins of our forefathers, but not of the sins of the present times.
People will not take honey out of the Lion, unless he be dead, nor taste
sweetness in that preaching which is lively, and roars upon them in their way
of sin. A good heart considers not how bitter, but how true; not how smart, but
how seasonable a doctrine is. It desires that the word may be directed to it in
particular. It sets its corruptions in the forefront of the battle, when Gods
arrows are flying, and patiently suffers the word of Exhortation.

This for the third and last reason, which did put the holy Apostle upon
sending the following Exhortation to these Christians, namely, the needfulnesse
of sending such an Exhortation to them, It was needful for me to write; And so
I pass from the first part considerable about the Apostles Exhortation. viz.
the reasons why he did send an Exhortation.

The second follows, viz. the Exhortation it self, in these words, And exhort
you, that ye should earnestly contend for the faith once delivered to the
Saints.

In the words the Apostle sets down, 1. The way or manner of his writing, which
was hortatory, or by way of Exhortation. 2. The matter, or subject of the
Exhortation, or to what it was that he did exhort them, viz. earnestly to
contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints.

The first shows us what the Apostle did. The second what these Christians
ought to do.

First, Of the way, or manner of the Apostles writing, which was by way of
Exhortation. And exhort you.

In the Explication, Explication.
I shall 1. Show the force and meaning of the word exhort. 2. Show from thence
what manner of Explication this of the Apostle here was.

1. For the former: the word in the Original (...), here translated exhorting,
properly signifies to call to one, or vehemently to call out to another upon
some urgent occasion: But it is in Scripture translated several ways,
according to the nature and circumstances of the place where, and the thing
about which it is used.

Sometime it is rendered to pray, Precor, rogo, obsecro, peto. 2 Cor. 5.20. Heb.
11.19, 22. Philem. 9.10.
entreat, beseech; so it is used 1 Cor. 4.13. Being defamed, we entreat. And
Matthew. 8.5. Then came unto him a Centurion beseeching him. And ver. 31. The
devils besought him. So ver. 34. and Chap. 14.36. and 18.29, 32.

Sometime it signifies to exhort, Hortor, exhortor, adhortor.
as Luke 3.18. John exexhorting, preached. So Act. 11.23. and 14.22. Exhorted
them with purpose of heart, etc. and, exhorting them to continue in the faith.
So Heb. 3.13. exhort one another daily. Also Chap. 10.25. etc. and so in this
place of Jude.

Sometimes it signifies to comfort, Consolor.
and encourage; as, 1 These. 4.18. comfort one another. Act. 20.12. And were not
a little comforted. Romans 1.12. That I may be comforted together with you. Mat.
5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. And (...) is a
Consolatory speech. Zech. 1.13.

2. The word having these significations, shows what manner of exhortation it
was which the Apostle here uses. As,

1. It was a mild, sweet, and gentle exhortation: it had not the imperiousness
of a lofty command; but the gentleness of a Christian entreaty: And thus the
Apostle Paul tells Philemon, verse. 8, 9. Though he might be much bold in Christ
to enjoin him, yet for loves sake he did rather beseech him. This is also
suitable to that gentleness which Paul prescribes to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
The servant of the Lord must be gentle, apt to teach, patient, in meekness
instructing, etc. And 2 Timothy 4.2. Exhort with with all long-suffering. And the
Apostle tells us not only his practice, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. that he was gentle among
them, as a nurse cherishes her children: that he warned the Ephesians night
and day with tears, Acts 20.31. that he charged every one as a father does his
children, 1 These. 5.11. But expresses also his pattern, 2 Cor. 10.1. I Paul
beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, who was the copy of
meekness. Both he and his servants gave the lamb, not the lion for their
cognizance, pitying the defects and weaknesses, resenting the dangers, and
tenderly handling the sores of every soul.

2. It was an ardent, earnest, and vehement exhortation. Though it were sweet,
yet it was not slight; though with all his meekness, yet also with all his
might: and this was the right temper of an Apostolical spirit, neither to be
incompassionate when zealous, nor remiss when gentle; ever to be driving the
flocks, though not to over-drive them. Paul's advice to Timothy in 2 Timothy 4.2.
was, to be instant in season, out of season, to exhort, etc. Paul was an
excellent Orator, and all his Oratory was employed to persuade men to be
saved. Never did malefactor so plead to obtain his own life, as did blessed
Paul plead with men to accept life: He was a wooer of souls to Christ, and he
would take no denial. Though the more he loved, the less he was beloved,
though the more he sued to them, the more he suffered from them, yet he suffers
all things for the elects sake. He labors abundantly; He becomes all things to
all men, 1 Cor. 9.22.
that he might by all means save some. What importunate beseechings are his
Epistles filled with! he seems to besiege souls with beseechings. I beseech
you by the mercies of God, Romans 12.1. I Paul my felf beseech you by the
meekness and tenderness of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.1. I the prisoner of the Lord,
beseech you, Ephesians. 4.1. (never did a poor prisoner so earnestly beg at the
grate for bread.) We beseech you by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1. etc.

3. It was an encouraging, animating, strengthening, establishing Exhortation;
such a one as is used to fainthearted soldiers in battle: He raises up the
spirits of these Christians to withstand Seducers. Such a Lion-like Leader
would even make an army of Hearts courageous, and put life into dead men.
Davenant. in Col. 2.2.
Its a great comfort to men going to fight, to see themselves regarded even by
those who cannot help them, to hear men with loud voices calling to them,
wishing them good success, and encouraging with hopes of victory; a greater,
when men will engage with them. Such was Jude in his present exhortation: such
was the Apostle Paul, who was set for the defense of the Gospel; whose bonds
made the brethren confident: who so often bids the faithful to quit themselves
like men, 2 Cor. 16.13. Phil. 4.1. 1 These. 3.8. Ephesians. 6.10.
to be of good comfort, to watch, to stand fast in the faith, to be strong, to
be strong in the Lord, to stand fast in the Lord. Such was Barnabas, who
exhorted the brethren, that with full purpose of heart they should cleave to
the Lord.

1. Obser. 1.
Gentleness and meekness is necessary for every exhorter. We live not among
those who are perfect; and their defects should make us meek, as well as their
duty make us earnest. Meek persuasions most take with ingenuous spirits. Men
will rather be led than drawn; the cords wherewith we draw others should be the
cords of a man. Ministers should rather delight in the optative, than in the
imperative mood. Indeed, the temper of the exhorted is much to be observed:
Some are more sturdie, others more tender; and there is a difference to be put
between an iron vessel and a Venice glass in the cleansing of them: But all
gentle means are first to be used; we should choose to be gentle, and rather to
drive away, than shoot the bird.

2. Observe. 2.
No persuasions or entreaties should be so vehement, as those which are for the
good of souls. It Is hard not to be too importunate when we desire any thing for
our own good: impossible to be so when we request others for their own souls.
Knowing the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11.
(says the Apostle) we exhort men. It Is an holy impudency, to be impudent in
calling upon people to regard their souls. It Is a sinful modesty to prefer
courtesy herein before Christianity. The Conscience of the most gainsaying
sinner will commend an importunately exhorting Christian, although his Lust be
angry with him. That which can never be learned enough, can never be taught
enough. That which men can never avoid enough, they can never be warned of
enough. It Is very good manners in Christianity to stay, and to knock again,
though we have knocked more than three times at a sinners conscience.

3. Observe. 3.
The best Christians often stand in need of quickening by holy incitements. The
strongest arms, like Moses's, want holding up: the ablest Christian may now and
then have a spiritual qualm: He who is now (as it were) in the third heaven, 2
Cor. 12.
may anon be buffeted with the messenger of Satan. Grace in the best is but a
creature, and defectible; only the power of God preserves it from a total
failing. Corruption within is strong, tentations without are frequent, and all
these make exhortation necessary. A Christian more wants company as he is a
Christian, than as he is a man, though much as both. The hottest water will
grow cold, if the fire under it be withdrawn.

4. Observe. 4. Isa. 23.16. Hos. 6.1. Mal. 3.16. 1 Samuel 23.16.
Holy exhortation is an excellent help to Christian resolution. It Is as the
sharpening of iron with iron; It Is a whetstone for the relief of dullness.
Jonathan in the wood strengthened David's hand in God. They who fear the Lord
must often speak one to another. The want of communion is the bane of Christian
resolution. When an Army is scattered, it is easy to destroy it. The Apostle
Heb. 10.23, 24. joins these two together, the holding fast the profession of
our faith without wavering, the provoking one another to love and good works,
as also the exhorting one another.

5. Observe. 5. Heb. 13.22.
Christians must suffer the word of Exhortation. They must be entreated. If
importunity overcame an unrighteous Judge to do good to another; how much more
should it prevail with us for our own good! Let not Ministers complain with
Esaias; I have spread out my hands all the day to a rebellious people. Isai. 65.2.
Heavenly Wisdom is easy to be entreated. Men want no entreaty at all to do
good to their bodies. Whence is it that when we want no precept (and therefore
have none) to love our selves; all Precepts and Exhortations are too little to
persuade us to the true self-love?

This for the way or manner of the Apostles writing, it was by Exhortation.

The second follows, The Apostles expressing to what he exhorted these
Christians, viz. earnestly to contend for the faith once delivered to the
Saints.

In which words, I consider two things.

1. What it is which the Apostle here commends to them carefully to maintain
and defend: The faith once delivered to the Saints.

2. The means whereby, or, the manner how he exhorts these Christians to
maintain and preserve that thing: which was by earnest contention, Earnestly
contend.

1. What thing it is which the Apostle here commends to these Christians to
maintain and preserve; viz. The faith once delivered to the Saints. This thing
the Apostle here first specifieth, calling it the faith; secondly, amplifieth,
three ways, 1. It was faith given, or delivered. 2. To the Saints delivered.
3. Once delivered.

1. He specifieth the thing which these Christians were to maintain and defend,
Explicat.
faith, (...).

The word faith in the Greek (...), is derived from (...), doceo, and
persuadeo, to teach, concerning the truth of a thing which we persuade men to
believe; and it is in Scripture taken either properly, or improperly.

1. Properly: and that either 1. In its general notion, for that assent which
is given to the speech of another. Or 2. In its different sorts and kinds: and
so it is either humane, or divine: humane, the assent which we give to the
speech of a man: or divine, the assent which we give to divine Revelation.

This divine faith is commonly known to comprehend these four sorts.

1. Historical faith, called also by some dogmaticall, (...).
which is nudus assensus, that bare assent which is given to divine truth
revealed in the Scripture, without any inward affection either to the revealer,
or to the thing revealed. Thus the devils believe, James 2.19. and ver. 17.
This is called dead faith.

2. Temporary faith, (...).
(not so properly called a different kind of faith from the former, as a
further degree of the same) which is an assent given to divine truths, with
some taste of, and delight (though not applicative and prevalent) in the
knowledge of those truths for a time; Mat. 13.21.
he endures for a while. Luke 8.13. for a while they believe. Miraculosa.


3. Miraculous faith, is that special assent which is given to some special
promise of working miracles; and this is either active, when we believe that
miracles shall be wrought by us, as 1 Cor. 13.2. Mat. 7.22. or passive, when we
believe they shall be wrought for and upon us, Acts 14.9.

4. Justificans.
Justifying faith, which is assent with trust, and affiance to the promise of
remission of sin, and salvation by Christ's righteousness, Romans 3.26. Gal.
2.16. Luke 22.32. Acts 15.9. Romans 4.5. etc.

2. Faith is considered improperly, and so it is taken in Scripture four ways
especially.

1. For (...), De hac fide nunc loquimur quam adhibemus cum alicui credimus,
non ca quam damus cum alicui pollicemur; nam and ipsa dicitur fides; sed aliter
dicimus, non mibi habuit fidem; aliter, non mihi servavit fidem. Illud est, non
credidit quod dixi; hoc, non fecit quod dixit; secundum hanc fidem qua
credimus, fideles sumus Deo; secundum illam vero qua fit quod promititur, etiam
Deus est fidelis nobis. Aug. lib. 6. de sp. and lit. cap. 31.
fidelity, and faithfulness. And so faith is attributed to God, Romans 3.3.
Shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect. And to man, Mat.
23.23. Yea have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and
faith. This is (as Cicero says) Dictorum conventorumque constantia, the truth
and constancy of our words and agreements. So we say, he breaks his faith.
Punica fides.


2. For the profession of the faith, Act. 13.8. Acts 14.22. Romans 1.8. Your
faith is spoken of throughout the world.

3. For the things believed, or the fulfilling of what God has promised, Gal.
3.23. Before faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the faith
which should afterward be revealed, and ver. 25 But after that faith is come.
Here faith is taken for Christ, the Object of faith.

4. For the doctrine of faith, or the truth to be believed to salvation; and
more peculiarly, for the doctrine of faith in Christ, Acts 6.7. A great company
of the priests were obedient to the faith. Romans 3.31. Do we make void the law
through faith? Nomine fidei censetur, and illud quod creditur, and illud quo
creditur, Lomb.
Romans 12.6. Acts 24.24. He heard him concerning the faith in Christ, Gal. 1.23.
He now preaches the faith, which before he persecuted. So 1 Timothy 4.16. Gal.
3.2. So here in this place of Jude, Faith once delivered, is to be understood
of the faith of heavenly doctrine, the word of faith, which the Apostle says,
God had delivered to them; and they were to maintain against the opposite
errors of seducers. This holy doctrine being called faith,

1. Because it is the instrument used by God to work faith. The Spirit by the
word persuading us to assent to the whole doctrine of the Gospel, and to rest
upon Christ in the promise for life. In which respect, faith is said to come by
hearing, Romans 10.15. And the Gospel, the power of God, Romans 1.16.
etc. to every one that believes. The faith to be believed begets a faith
believing.

2. Because it is a most sure, infallible, faithful word; and deserves to be
the object of our faith and belief: The Author of it was the holy and true,
Rev. 3.7.14. Tit. 1.2. 2 Pet. 1.2.
the faithful and true Witness, God who cannot lie. The Instruments were
infallibly guided by the immediate derection and assistance of the holy Ghost.
The Matter of it an everlasting truth; the Law being a constant rule of
righteousness; the Gospel containing promises which shall have their stability
when heaven and earth shall pass away; and of such certainty that if an angel
from heaven should teach another doctrine, he must be accursed; It abounds also
with prophesies and predictions most exactly accomplished, though after
hundreds, yea thousands of years. The form of it which is its conformity with
God himself, shows that if God be faithful, Heb. 4.12. Psalm. 19.7, 9.
needs must his word be so; its powerful, it searches the heart, its pure,
and perfect true and faithful, and all this in conformity with the power,
omniscience, purity, perfection, truth of God himself. The end of it is to
supply us with assured comfort. Romans 15.4. Observe. 1.


1. The word of life is most worthy of assent and approbation. No word so much
challenges belief as Gods: it is so true and worthy of belief, that it is called
faith it self. When in Scripture the object is called by the name of the habit
or affection, it notes, that the object is very proper for that habit or
affection to be exercised about. Heaven is in Scripture called joy, to show,
it is much to be rejoiced in: and the Doctrine of salvation is called faith, to
show that its most worthy of our faith. Infidelity is a most inexcusable and
incongruous sin in us, Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.18. Isa. 53.1.
when the faithful and true God speaks unto us. It Is impossible for God to
lie; and yet [ Who has believed our report?] may be a complaint as ordinary as
it is old. How just is God to give those over to believe a lie, who will not
believe the truh! How miserable is their folly, who believe a lie, and distrust
faith it self!

2. Observe. 2.
Deplorable is their estate who want the doctrine of salvation. They have no
footing for faith; they have, they hear nothing that they can believe.
Uncertainty of happiness is ever the portion of a people who are destitute of
the Word. He who wants this light, knows not whither he goes. The Fancy of the
Enthusiast, the Reason of the Socinian, the Traditions of the Papist, the
Oracles of the Heathens are all Foundations of sand; death shakes and overturns
them all.

3. Observe. 3.
The true reason of the firmness and steadfastness of the Saints in their
profession: they lean upon a sure word, Spiritus sanctus non est Scepticus, ne^
opiniones in cordibus, sed assertiones producit, ipsa vit a and omni
experientia certiores.
a more sure word than any revelation; a word called even faith it self.
Greater is the certainty of Faith, then that of Sense and Reason. It Is not
Opinion and Skepticism, but Faith. The holy Ghost is no Sceptick; it works in
us not opinions, but assertions, more sure than life it self, and all
experience. The more weight and dependency we set upon the word (so firm a
foundation is it) the stronger is the building. None will distrust God, but
they who never tried him.

4. Our great end in attending upon the word, should be the furthering of our
faith. The jewel of the Word should not hang in our ears, but be locked up in a
believing heart. It Is not meat on the table, but in the stomach, that
nourishes; and not the Word preached, but believed, that saves us.

The Apostle having specified the thing which they were to maintain, Faith: he
amplifieth it, and that three ways.

1. Explicat. 2.
He says it was delivered. The word in the Greek (...), here translated
delivered, signifies to be given, or delivered from one to another several
ways (in Scripture) according to the circumstances of the place where, and the
matter about which it is used.

Sometime it imports a delivering craftily, deceitfully, or traitorously, in
which respect the word (...) is often rendered to betray as Matthew. 2.4.10. and
Chap. 26 15, 16, 21, 23, 24, 25. and Chap. 16.45, 46, 48.

In some places it signifies a delivering in a way of punishment, and
suffering, As Mat. 4.12. Jesus heard that John was delivered up. So Mat. 5.25.
and 10.17.19.21. and 17.22. and Acts 7.42. etc.

In other places it signifies a delivering in a way of committing something to
ones trust, to be carefully regarded and preserved, as Mat. 11.27. and 25.14,
20. and John 19.20. and 1 Pet. 2.23. And thus it frequently signifies a
delivering by way of information, or relation of doctrines and duties from one
to another, to be kept and observed; And that both from God, first by the
speech, and afterward by the writing of holy men for the use of his Church, as
1 Cor. 11.2. 2 These. 2.15. and 3.6. 2 Pet. 2.21. and also from men who often
deliver doctrines to others, not written in the word, Mat. 15.2. Mark 7.9.13.
but invented by men.

In this sense the delivering here mentioned is to be taken; namely, for such
an information, or relation of Gods will, as they to whom it is delivered, are
bound to preserve and keep as their treasure: In which respect, the delivering
of this faith, or doctrine of salvation, comprehends, first, Gods bestowing it:
secondly, Man's holding, and keeping it.

1. Gods bestowing it; and in that is considerable,

1. In what ways and after what manner God delivered it.

2. What need there was of this delivery of the faith by God.

1. In what ways God delivered the faith; the Scripture tells us, he has
delivered it either extraordinarily, Number. 12.6.8. Heb. 1.1.
as immediately by himself, by Angels, by a voice, by a sensible apparition to
men; sometime when they were awake, at other times when they were sleeping, by
dreams; sometime only by inward inspiration. Or ordinarily, and so he delivers
the doctrine of faith 1. To his Ministers, whom he has appointed to be
Stewards thereof to the end of the world; partly, by qualifying them with gifts,
and Ministerial Abilities; and partly, by appointing, and setting them apart
for the Ministry, by those whom he has authorized thereunto. 2. To his people,
by the Ministry of his forementioned servants, who have instructed the
faithful, sometime by preaching with a lively voice, and afterward, by
committing the doctrine of faith to writing. And Ministers shall to the end of
the world be continued to deliver this doctrine of faith to the Church, for
their edification in holiness. And among those people to whom Ministers
deliver this faith externally; some there are to whom it is delivered also
effectually, by the internal revelation of the Spirit, which so delivers this
doctrine of faith to all the Elect, that they themselves are delivered into it;
Romans 6.17.
their understandings being savingly enlightened to see that excellency in it,
which by the bare Ministry of it cannot be perceived; and their wills persuaded
to embrace it, as that rule of life according to which they will constantly
walk.

2. What need there was of the delivery of this faith.

1. In regard of the Insufficiency of all other doctrines or prescriptions in
the world to lead to life. Only this doctrine delivered is the rule of faith
and manners. Peace internal and eternal is only afforded to them who walk
according to this rule. Gal. 6.11.
God brings to glory only by guiding by these counsels. All other lights are
false, are fools fires, which lead to precipices and perdition. This is the
light which shines in a dark place; 2 Pet. 1.20.
to which who ever gives not heed, can never find the way to heaven. Learned
Ethnicks never wrote of eternal happiness in their Ethics. 1 Cor. 1.21.
The world by wisdom knew not God.

2. In regard of the total insufficiency of man to find out this doctrine of
himself. The things delivered in this doctrine, are mysteries, supernatural,
and depending on the mere will and dispensation of God. The incarnation of the
Son of God, Col. 1.26.
expiation of sin by his death, justification by faith, could never have entered
into the mind of man, unless God had revealed them. They depend not upon any
connection of natural causes. Though there be a kind of natural Theology, yet
there is no natural Christianity. Also the und erstanding of man is so obscured
by the darkness of sin, that in spirituals it is purely blind. The natural
man perceives not the things which are of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.

2. This delivering of faith comprehends the keeping and holding it by those to
whom it was delivered. This is done therefore, 1. by Ministers. 2. by every
Christian.

1. This duty is incumbent on Ministers, who must keep the truth, hold fast the
faithful word, and be tenacious, Tit. 1.9.
(...), holding it (as the word signifies) against a contrary hold, with both
their hands, with all their strength, Jer. 10.27. Amos 7.14.
holding it in their understanding, in their affections, in their preaching and
delivery, in their life and practice, not parting with it for fear or favor,
either to Sectaries, or Politicians, rather parting with their lives, than
their sword.

2. The faith is kept by every Christian, by persevering in the knowledge, love
and practice of it. Every Saint must keep it in his head, in his heart, in his
hand; this he must do, though for keeping the truth, he lose his life. It Is not
the having, but the holding the truth, Rev. 2.13.
which is a Christians crown. He who lets it go, never had it truly and
effectually in the love of it, nor shall ever enjoy it in the recompense of it.
Of this more afterward.

1. God was the Author of the doctrine of life; Observe. 1.
though by men, yet from him has it always been delivered; it is his word and
revelation. The word of the Lord, and thus says the Lord, is the Scripture
stamp and superscription. When the Patriarchs and Prophets preached it, it was
from him; when holy men of old time wrote it, it was from him; though he has
spoken in diverse manners, yet 'twas he that spoke. When the doctrine of life
was committed to writing, he commanded it. He moved and inspired holy men to
write, 2 Pet. 1.21. 2 Timothy 3.16. Exodus 17.14. chap. 34.27. Isai. 8.1. chap.
30.8. Jer. 36.2.
They were his Organs and Instruments of conveying his mind to the world. The
Spirit of the Lord (says David, 2 Samuel 23.2.) spoke by me, and his word was in
my tongue. And Acts 28.25. The Holy Ghost spoke by Isaiah. Quicquid Chri. stus
de suis dictis ac factis, nos scire voluit, ipsis scribendum tanquam suis
manibus imperavit. Aug. l. 1. de cons. Evang. c. 35.
And 1 Pet. 1.11. The Spirit of Christ in the Prophets foretold his
sufferings. These and the other holy men, were the Scribes, the Pens, the
Hands, the Notaries of the Spirit. They wrote not as men, but as men of God;
when any book is called the Book of Moses, the Psalms of David, the Epistle of
Paul; it is in respect of Ministry, not of the principal cause.

2. Great is the necessity of Scripture. The doctrine of life could never
without a scripturall delivery have been found out; without it indeed, this
doctrine was between two and three thousand years preserved by the delivery of
a lively voice; but afterward when their lives who were to deliver the word,
grew short, men numerous, memory frail, the bounds of the Church enlarged,
corruptions frequent; and therefore tradition an unfaithful keeper of the
purity of doctrine, (as appears by Tharah's, Jos. 24.3. Genesis 35.2. Apostoli
quod primum praeconiaverunt, postea per Dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis
tradi derunt fundamentum and columnam fidei uostrae futurae. Iren. lib. 3. adv.
haeres. c. 1.
and Abram's worshipping of other gods, the idolatry in Jacob's family, etc.)
God appointed that the doctrine of life should be committed to writing; and
upon supposition of the will and pleasure of God, whose wisdom has now
thought fit to give us no other rule and foundation of faith, the written word
is now necessary, as the means of delivering faith to us. Had not the faith
therefore been delivered in Scriptures, whence should it have been found, how
retained? The written word is the cabbinet, wherein lies the jewel of faith;
the star which shows where the Babe lodges, the light which discovers the
beauty of salvation; A Book of Apocalypse, or Revelation of Christ.

3. Strong is the engagement upon us to be thankful for Gods discovering to us
the doctrine of faith. It was above the compass of Reason and Nature, ever to
have found it out by their own inquiry: Romans 16.25 Ephesians. 1.9. Ephesians. 3.9.
neither men nor Angels could have known it without divine revelation. It was a
mystery, a great, an hidden mystery, which was kept secret since the world
began. How much to be adored is Gods goodness to us, to whom the Faith is
delivered, though from others it was hidden! This Faith, without the knowledge
whereof there is no salvation, Deuteronomy. 7.6.7. Mat. 11.25, 26
and which could never have been known but by revealed light, was not given to
us rather then to others who lived and died in the utter ignorance thereof, for
any preceding difference and disposition thereunto in us, but only out of the
mere love and free grace of God.

4. Observe. 4.
The great impiety of those who obtrude a faith upon people invented by men,
not delivered by God: who erect a building of faith upon the foundation of
Philosophical principles. Schoolmen and Papists fasten many things for articles
of Faith upon the people, Ex philosophorum ingeniis, omnes haereses animantur.
Tert. adv. Marc. l. 1.
which they never received from divine delivery, but from the discourse of
blind Reason: What else are their errors concerning Worship, Free Will,
inherent Righteousness, the merit of Works, etc. but streams which flowed from
the Ethics of Philosophers, not the Epistles of Paul? Humane Reason is
deceitful, when it goes beyond its bounds: A Philosopher, as such, is but a
natural man, and perceives not the things of God. Blind men cannot judge of
colors, beasts order not humane affairs,; nor must humane Reason determine of
heavenly doctrine. The principles of Reason are a sandy foundation for the
Conclusions of divine Doctrine; Hagar must be ejected, if she submit not to
Sarah. Reason must be subdued to Faith.

5. Great is the dignity of a Ministers Office. Observe. 5. 2 Cor. 4.7.
The end of it is the delivering of the Faith to people. Ministers, though
earthen vessels, yet carry a treasure; though torn caskets, yet they contain
jewels. A faithful Minister is Gods Steward, to dispense his blessings. He is
a Star for light and influence; a Cloud to distill down showers of plenty upon
Gods weary heritage; a Nurse, a Father, a Savior, a common Good. Joseph's
Office in delivering out of Corn to the people in the Famine, made him
honored; how worthy an employment is it then to deliver to souls the bread of
life?

6. Observe. 6.
It Is a great sin to part with the faith delivered to us. It Is an heinous sin
either in Ministers or People: In the former, when they shall either give it
away, or suffer it to be taken from them: Phil. 1.17.
For the defense of the Gospel they are set; they must be men made up of fire
in the midst of a field of stubble or errors; though holily patient when their
own interest, yet holily impatient when the interest of Christ is endangered.
They must not be dumb dogs, when thieves attempt to rob the House of God, the
Church. Though they must not bite the children within, yet neither spare the
thief without. Nor is any Christian exempted in his station from the duty of
keeping Faith: Pro. 23.23.
they must not sell the truth, not patiently suffer Sectaries and Persecuters
to bereave them of it: not for the love of their swine suffer Christ to go,
much less send Christ out of their Coasts: not part with the faith by keeping
their money. In a word, they must keep the faith by perseverance in the love
and profession of it, by taking heed of error and profaneness; lest being led
away with the error of the wicked, they fall from their steadfastness. 2 Pet.
3.17.


2. Jude says in the amplification of this faith, that it was delivered to the
Saints, (...). It may here be enquired, 1. Who are holy and Saints. 2. Who the
Saints are to whom this faith was delivered.

Men are called holy in two respects. 1. In respect of the holiness of
destination separation, Explication.
or being set apart from common uses and employments to the holy service of
God; 2 Chro. 7.16. Isai. 13.3. 1 Kings. 9.3.
thus the Greeks apply the word (...), to separate, and thus not only men, but
the Temple, vessels, Sabbath, Tabernacle are called holy. The first born Exodus
13.2. God commands Moses to sanctify: which he explains Ver. 12. Thou shall
set apart to the Lord, etc. Thus the Prophets and Apostles are often in
Scriptures called holy; and Jeremy was sanctified from the womb, Jer. 1.5.
in regard of this holiness of separation and dedication: and all visible
professors and their children are called holy, 1 Cor. 7.14.
as likewise may the whole body of a visible Church.

2. In respect of their having holiness really and properly put into them:
which is done by the holy Spirit, (whence it is read of the sanctification of
spirit) it abolishing their native polution and unholiness, 2 These. 2.13. 1
Pet. 1.2. 1 Cor. 1.2. Exodus 19.6.
and bestowing upon them graces and holy qualities by the renovation of Gods
image in them. And the holy Spirit makes them holy in two respects. 1. Of not
holy privatively; and so man that had lost totally his holiness is made holy by
regeneration or effectual vocation. 2. Of less holy; and so Gods children are
sanctified, by being enabled to the exercise of an actual mortifying of sin,
and living in holiness, with proceeding in both.

2. Who the Saints are to whom the faith was delivered.

1. Some by Saints here understand those holy Prophets, Apostles, and other
Ministers, who are holy by peculiar Office and Employment, to whom God
delivered the doctrine of Faith, either of old, in an extraordinary, or since,
in an ordinary way, that they might be his Ministers in delivering it unto
others; and these in Scripture are called holy, Luke 1.70. He spoke by the
mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began. And Acts
3.11. the same words are again used. So 2 Pet. 1.21. Holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost. So 2 Pet. 3.2. The words spoken before by
the holy Prophets. Rev. 18.20. Ye holy Apostles and Prophets. And Rev. 22.6.
The Lord God of the holy Prophets. And these in a peculiar manner had the
doctrine of faith delivered to them. Act. 1.8. Ye (Apostles) shall be
witnesses to me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and Samaria, and unto the
uttermost part of the earth. Mat. 28.19.
These had commission to teach all nations. By these, Heb. 2.3. the great
salvation was confirmed. Paul tells the Corinthians 1 Cor. 11.23. he had
received from the Lord that which he delivered to them. And 1 Cor. 15.3. I
delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received. And 1 Cor. 9.17. A
dispensation of the Gospel is committed to me. 2 Cor. 5.19. God has committed
unto us the word of reconciliation. Gal. 2.7. The Gospel of uncircumcision was
committed to me. 1 Timothy 1.11. The glorious Gospel of the blessed God was
committed to my trust. 1. Tim 6.20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to
thy trust. He principally means the Gospel with which God had instrusted him.
So Tit. 1.3. etc.

2. But (not excluding the former) by the Saints to whom the Faith was
delivered, I understand All the people of God to whom it was delivered by the
forementioned servants of God: And as some of these were Saints in regard only
of visible profession and dedication, and others were made Saints in respect of
true and saving sanctity: so the faith was delivered unto these differently; to
the former, by way of outward administration and visible dispensation; to the
later, who were made true Saints, by way of saving and effectual operation.
They who were, and continued to be only visible and external Saints, had the
faith delivered unto them, as the common sort of Israelites had, to whom God
wrote the great things of his Law, and yet they were accounted a strange thing,
Hos. 6.12.
and to whom were committed the oracles of God, Romans 3.1. and yet they believed
not: Isai. 53.1.
contenting themselves in the retaining the letter of the Law, declaring Gods
Statutes, and taking his covenant into their mouth; in the mean time never
regarding to have the law written in their hearts, Psalm. 50.16.17 etc.
but hating instruction, and casting the word of God behind them. They who had
the faith delivered unto them by way of efficacious and saving operation, did
not only hear, but believe the report of Gods messengers, and the arm of God
was revealed to them: Isai. 53.1.
To whom it was given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, although to
others it were not given; Mat. 13.11.
and for whose sake alone the faith is delivered to others, who got no good at
all thereby, but only an estimation for members of the visible Church.

1. The Word is to be laid out and delivered to, Observe. 1.
not to be laid up and kept from others. The Saints are to be the better for
it. The Ministry is in Scripture compared to light, what more diffusive? to
seed, it must be scattered: to bread, it must be broken and distributed to
every one according to their exigencies: to salt, it must not be laid up in the
Salt-box, but laid out in seasoning the flesh, that it may be kept from
putrefaction. He who hides truth, buries gold. Ministers must rather be worn
with using, than rusting. Paul did spend, and was spent. The sweat of a
Minister (as it is reported of Alexander's) casts a sweet savor: His talents
are not for the napkin, but occupation. How sinful are they that stand idle in
a time of labor! how impious they who compel them to stand so!

2. They who retain and keep the Faith, are Saints. Observe. 2.
Visibly those are Saints, and that is a Church, which keep it by profession
and ministerially; A Church that is which is the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Romans 3.2.
to whom the Oracles of God are committed, as Paul speaks of the Jews. None
are so to complain of the defects of our Church, for what it wants, as to deny
it a Church, considering what it has. It holds forth the truth of all
Doctrines which serve both for the beginning and increase of faith. It Is one of
Christ's golden Candlesticks wherein he has set up the light of his Word; and
though Sectaries do not, yet Christ walks in the midst of them. I must be bold
to fear, that because our adversaries cannot rationally deny, that while we
hold forth the Truth, we are a true Church, they labor by their errors to
extinguish the Truth, that so we may be none.

3. How much is the world beholding to Saints! 3. Observe.
They have kept the Faith, the Word of life for the ungrateful world, ever
since 'twas first delivered. Were it not for them, we had lost our Truth, nay,
lost our God. These are they who have in all ages with their breath, nay with
their bloods, preserved the Gospel, kept the word of Christ's patience. Rev.
3.8.10.
And rather then they would not keep the Faith, they have lost their lives:
They profit the world against its will, they are benefactors to their several
ages; like indulgent Parents, they have laid up the riches of faith for those
who have desired their deaths. It Is our duty, though not to adore them, yet to
honor their memory. Satan knows no mean between deifying and nullifying them.
Imitation of them is as unquestionably our duty, as adoration of them would be
our sin.

4. 4 Observe.
Unholiness is very unsuitable to them to whom the Faith is delivered. It Is
delivered to Saints in profession, and they should labor to be so in power.
They should adorn the Doctrine of God. Tit. 2.10.
How sad a sight is it to behold the unsanctified lives of those to whom this
faith has been long delivered! How many live as if faith had banished all
fidelity and honesty, or as if God had delivered the faith, not to furnish
their souls with holiness, but only their shelves with Bibles! Books in the
head, not in the Study, make a good Scholar: and the word of faith, not in the
house, or head, but in the heart and life, make a Christian. Oh thou who art
called a Saint, either be not so much as called so, or be more than called so;
otherwise thy external privilege will be but an eternal punishment. If God
have delivered his Faith to thee, deliver up thy self to him.

5. 5 Observe.
The Fewness of faiths entertainers is no derogation from faiths excellency.
They are a poor handful of Saints by whom the faith is preserved, and to whom
it is delivered in the world. The preatest number of men and nations have not
the faith delivered unto them ministerially, and of them the far greater part
never had it delivered efficaciously. Its better to love the faith with a few,
than to leave it with a multitude. Numbers cannot prove a good cause, nor
oppose a Great God.

6. Observe. 6.
The true reason of Satan's peculiar rage against Saints, they have that faith
delivered to them, which is the bane and battery of his kingdom: that word
which is an Antidote against his poison; that doctrine which discovers his
deeds of darkness. Satan's policy is to dis-arm a place of the word, when he
would subdue it; he peaceably suffers those to live who have not the weapons of
holy doctrine; he throws his cudgels against fruitful trees; he lays wait as a
thief for those who travel with this treasure. They who are empty of this
treasure, may sing and be merry when they meet with him; he never stops them.
Others who have the faith, he sets upon, and annoyeth. I have given them thy
word (says Christ) and the world has hated the^. John 1.7.


3. Jude says, in this amplification, Explicat.
the faith was once delivered, once, (...).

Three things may be touched in the Explication.

1. The meaning of the word once.

2. The agreement thereof with the delivery of faith, or how faith may be said
to be once delivered.

3. Why the Apostle adds this expression, Once, to the delivery of faith,
amplifying it this way.

For the first, The word Once is taken two ways in Scripture, and ordinary
usage.

1. As it is opposed to inconstancy, deficiency, Nulla reparabilis art laesa
pudicitia est, deperit illa semel. Ovid.
cessation, or uncertainty of continuance; and so once is as much as firmly,
constantly, irrevocably, always. Thus God says, Psalm. 89.36. Once have I
sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David; that is, my oath is
irrevocable, nor is there any danger of inconstancy. What I have sworn, shall
surely be accomplished.

2. Once is taken as it is opposed to reiteration, repetition, or frequency,
either of the being, or doing of any thing; and so once is as much as once and
no more; Once for all; Once, and not again; Once, and only once. When a thing
is done so fully and perfectly, that it need not, or should not, or cannot be
done again. Thus Heb. 9.28. Christ was offered once to bear the sins of many.
And Heb. 10.10. we read of the offering of Christ, once for all. And Abishai 1 Samuel 26.8. desired to smite Saul once, promising that he would not smite him
the second time.

2. For the second, Both these significations agree most aptly and sutably to
the delivery of the doctrine of faith. For

1. The faith is once delivered, as once is opposed to deficiency, or
cessation, that is firmly and irrevocably delivered. It shall ever be, it shall
never be quite taken away from the Church, 1 Pet. 1.25.
it endures for ever. As the habit of faith shall never cease in the soul, so
the doctrine of faith shall never cease in the world. It Is a candle, that all
the winds of hell can never blow out; a flame, that all the waters of trouble
can never extinguish. Thus it is called Rev. 14.6. the eternal Gospel, never to
be destroyed; it shall ever be in the Scripture, Ministry, hearts, and
profession of a number of men. My word* (says God) shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, from henceforth and for ever, Isai. 59.21. Christ promises to be with
his Ministers to the end of the world, Mat. 28.19. The servants of Christ shall
trade in the spiritual Merchandise of faith till he come, Luke 19.13. The
people of God in the use of the Lords Supper shall set forth the Lords death
till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. And the work of the Ministry, with the edifying of
the body thereby, shall continue till we all meet, etc. Ephesians. 4.13. That the
doctrine of faith shall ever continue in one place, is not asserted; but that
it shall ever, in some place, is certain. It Is not for the dignity of Christ,
the King of his Church, ever to suffer his Scepter to be wrested out of his
hands. It Is not consistent with the safety, integrity, health, life, etc. of
the Church, in this her condition of constant exigency, to be deprived of the
doctrine, which is given her for armor, a rule, medicine, food. It Is as easy
for enemies to pluck the Sun out of the Firmament, as this faith out of the
Church. The whole power and policy of hell has been employed for that purpose
sixteen hundred years. Could it have been done, it had been done long before
now.

2. The faith is once delivered, as once is opposed to frequency, or
reiteration; it is once, and no more, Once for all, Once, and not again to be
delivered, in respect it shall never be delivered again, with any change or
alteration, which it is to receive. It Is a work done so well, Semel traditam
doctrinam dicit quae nunquam sit posthac immutanda. Beza in loc.
that it need not be done again, because it cannot be done better. And thus the
doctrine of salvation may be said to be once, or unalterably delivered, both in
respect of the matter of it, and the present manner of administering it.

1. In respect of the matter; it never was, nor ever shall be changed. The same
Savior of man, and Mediator between God and man has unalterably been
afforded. Christ Jesus the same yesterday, and to day, Heb. 13.8. Rev. 13.8.
Acts 4.12.
and for ever. He was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. There
never was any other but his Name by which salvation at any time was bestowed.
All, even those before and after Christ, have drank of the same spiritual
rock. 1 Cor. 10.4. 1 John 29. Ephesians. 5.23. Gal. 1.7. 1 Cor. 3.11.
Christ is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world; not he the
sin of some ages, and another of other ages of the world. He is the Savior of
the whole body. No other Gospel can be preached, but the glad tidings of life
by Christ. Other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. As Christ, so the doctrine of life by Christ, is the same yesterday to
Adam, the Patriarchs, and Prophets, To day to the Apostles, and for ever to all
following Saints. It Is a testament wherein all the legacies of grace and glory
are bequeathed; and therefore (as the Apostle argues) it is unalterable. Gal.
3.15.
The rule of life, the holy Law of God, is a standing and unalterable rule.
Whatsoever is a sin against the morrall Law now, was a sin always; duties
required now by it, were duties always. Peace is the portion now, and it was
ever the portion of them that walked according to it. The ransom from death,
and standing rule of life, were ever one and the same.

2. The doctrine of salvation is once, i. e. unalterably delivered now, in
respect of the present manner of administration; namely, by Ministers,
preaching, and Sacraments, etc. No other form or manner of exhibiting the
benefits by Christ can be introduced. In respect of this manner of
administration and exhibition of the benefits of the Gospel, without legal
types, shadows, and sacrifices, it is called the New Testament: And it is called
new, because it is to be always new, Novum, quia semper novum.
and never grow old, as the former did. Should there ever be another manner of
administration admitted, it must be called The new Testament; and so either
this must be called Old, and then there must be two Old Testaments, the former
and this; (...) this must still be called new, and so there should be granted
two New Testaments. Besides, this last way of administration of the benefits of
the Gospel being instituted by Christ himself, it should much derogate from the
dignity of Christ, if another way should afterward be thought more excellent
and perfect. Heb. 1.2.
God in these last times has spoken (says the Apostle) by his Son, and
therefore delivered his will more excellently and worthily than ever before.
After Christ comes none. The condition also of the times of the Gospel is such,
that they are called The last days, Heb. 1.2. and after the last comes no
time: So that Faith shall never, in respect of the matter delivered, or manner
of delivering, receive a new edition, for enlarging, correcting, or amending
the former.

3. Why does the Apostle add this expression once to the delivery of faith?
It Is used as a most invinsible argument to prevail with these Christians to
preserve the faith and themselves from the wicked and destructive errors and
practices of seducers; and so it is a strong argument sever all ways.

1. It Is an argument from the possible, nay sure succesfulness of the work of
contending, they being to contend for a faith that was once delivered, that was
always to remain, that should never be totally removed: against which the
power of hell should never prevail. What soldier would not wilingly fight for
the party that does prevail, and is ever sure to do so? When it is not a
desperate battle, but there is a certainty of success?

2. It Is an argument ab honesto, from the seemliness of it, and that two ways.
1. It Is a faith once delivered, and but once; once delivered, and unchangeably
the same which their holy Predecessors, Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles
embraced and defended, and therefore to be preserved and maintained. Who will
not carefully preserve the inheritance which belonged to his ancestors? God
forbid (says Naboth) that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto
thee. 1 Kings 21.3.
If the ancient land-markes be not to be removed, much less the faith-markes. A
ring, Pro. 22.28.
a jewel which belonged to our father or predecessors of old, how precious is
it! 2. It Is a faith once, and so always and perpetually to be delivered; and
therefore by preserving it to be left as a legacy to posterity, to be laid up
as a precious depositum or treasure for children and successors. We should
endeavor that the generation which is yet to come may also serve the same God,
and enjoy the same Christ and Gospel. How desirable is it to put (as it were) a
fallacy upon death, by doing good, and living when we are dead; to derive
Religion to Posterity; to be like Civet, of which the box savours when it is
emptied of it!

3. It Is an argument a periculoso; it is a faith once delivered, i.e. without
reiteration and alteration; and therefore the errors of Seducers are not this
Faith, q. d. If you let it go for that pretended faith of these Seducers, you
part with a pearl for a pibble, a rich Conveyance, not of an earthly, but an
heavenly Inheritance (like children) for a gay: The living child by the
Seducers is taken away, and the dead one laid in its room. The faith is
unchangeable, and therefore the faith which Sectaries would fasten upon you is
not faith but fiction. Either this faith once delivered, or none must be your
faith. Hence it is that Paul tells the Galatians, Gal. 1.7.
That the other Gospel which Seducers had obtruded upon them, was not another,
i.e. was none at all. Now, how impossible is it in this wilderness to travel
to Canaan without a guide, a cloud, a pillar! How dangerous to walk in a dark
place without a light, and to follow a false, a fools fire, which leads unto
bogs, and precipices!

1. Observe. 1.
The sin and folly of those is evident who conceive they can live without and
above this doctrine of faith. If it be once, and perpetually to be delivered,
it is perpetually to be embraced, and we stand in perpetual want of it. This
Manna must rain till we come to Canaan. We must be fed with the spoon of the
Ordinance while we are in this age of childhood, (as the Apostle calls it 1 Cor.
13.) Certainly, the way of Ordinance-forsakers is their folly; not their
strength, but their weakness, their sickness; if ever they recover their
health, they will fall to their food. A standing dispensation of faith is both
promised, and commanded, Ephesians. 4.13.
till we all meet in the unity of the faith; and how that commanded
dispensation of faith is consistent with a commendable despising thereof, I
understand not.

2. Observe. 2.
The doctrine of faith is perfect. What ever truth or doctrine is needful to
life and salvation, is fully and perfectly delivered in it. It needs not
another delivery, because it cannot be made more perfect. The Law of the Lord
is perfect, Psalm. 19.7.
converting the soul. By the Law is meant all heavenly doctrine. Romans 10.18.
And St. Paul accommodates that Psalm to the preaching of the Apostles. The
word is a perfect platform of righteousness. The Gospel of salvation is Ghrists
testament it contains therefore his whole will, and must not be dis-anulled or
changed. The doctrine of faith is a Canon, a rule; and if a rule be not
perfect, it is no rule. It Is able to make us wise to salvation, Gal. 6.16. 2 Timothy 3.15, 17.
thoroughly furnished to every good work. It Is propounded as a motive by Christ,
that the Jews should search the Scriptures, because in them they thought to
have life eternal. John 5.39. John 20.31. Iren. lib. 3. c. 2. Cum ex
Scripturis arguuntur haeretici in accusationcm convertuntur Scripturarum, quia
non possit ex his inveniri veritas ab his qui nesciunt traditionem; non enim
per literas traditam illam sed per vivam vocem, etc. Quod tibi creditum, non a
te inventum, quod accepisti non excogitasti, cum dicas nove non nova, profectus
sit fidei, non permutatio. Vinc. Lyr.
These things are written (says John) that we might believe, that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life in his name. The
Scripture accepts of no supplement from traditions. Papists with all the
Heretics of old, are necessitated to fly to traditions, as the refuge of
their heresies. Though they can never with any show of certainty prove that
their traditions were received from Christ, or his Apostles; many whereof are
known to be lately devised fables; and all of them, when received as a rule of
faith, are impious, and oppose the perfection of the Scripture. In vain do they
worship God, teaching for doctrine men's traditions.

Obser. 3. Ministers have no liberty to deliver any new doctrine to their
hearers. They must neither add, nor diminish. Their doctrine is committed to
them, not invented by them. They must preach what they have received, not
excogitated. If they preach after a new manner, yet they must not preach new
things. They must proceed in the faith, not change it. Timothy is commanded by
Paul to keep that which is committed to his trust, 1 Timothy 6.20. Ministers are
Stewards, not Masters of the mysteries of the Gospel. They must proclaim, not
contrive laws for the conscience. Were they Angels from heaven, people must
not hear them delivering another Gospel.

4. Observe. 4.
Infinite is the power of God to preserve the faith perpetually and
unalterably. The doctrine of faith is a torch burning in the midst of the sea;
It Is a Moses's bush, burning, not consumed. All oppositions are by God turned
into victories on its side. The smutchings which Heretics cast upon it, are
but to make it shine the brighter. Naked truth will vanquish armed error.

5. This delivering of the faith once, Observe. 5.
regulates the notion of new lights. If we understand by new light, a new and
further degree of knowledge to understand what is unchangeably delivered in the
Scripture, new light is a most desirable gift; but if by it we understand
(pretended) truths which are new to Scripture, varnished over with the name of
new light, they are to be shunned for false lights, which lead to perdition.
After Christ has spoken in the word, we must not be curious; it is bastard
doctrine, which springs up after the Scripture. This one thing believe, that
nothing but Scripture Doctrine is to be believed.

6. Observe. 6.
Gods unchangeable, perpetual delivery of the faith, is a singular
encouragement to expect his blessing in the delivery of it. It may encourage
Ministers and people. He who has promised a Gospel to the end of the world,
has also promised to be with the deliverers of it to that time. He who will
continue a Gospel to us, if sought, will also continue his grace to it. He who
bestows the doctrine of faith, will not deny the grace of faith, if we duly
ask it. When the Lord bestows the seed of his word, be encouraged to expect
the showers of his blessing. If he sticks up his candles, comfortably hope that
he will put light by his Spirit to them.

7. Observe. 7.
It Is a great comfort to the Saints, that in all their changes and losses,
their best blessings shall never be altered, or utterly removed. In an impure
world, there shall ever be kept up a pure word. This light shall never be put
out till the Sun of righteousness arises at the last day. God will keep his
stars in his right hand. They who will go about to remove the stars in his
right hand, shall feel the strength of his right hand. Of the Ministry it may
be said, as Isaac said of Jacob, God has blessed them, and they shall be
blessed. The Saints shall have a golden Gospel, though they live in an iron age.

8. Observe. ult.
It must be our care to be steadfast in the faith, and to shun heretical
superadditions, and superstructures. We must beware lest being led away by the
error of the wicked, we fall from our steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17. To this end
1. We must be grounded in the knowledge of the truth. Ignorant and doubting
people will easily be seduced. Silly women, 2 Timothy 3.6.
ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge of the truth, will easily be
led away. Children in knowledge will soon be tossed with every wind of
doctrine. Ephesians. 4.14.
They will like water be of the same figure with the vessel into which it is
put: They will be of their last doctors opinion. 2. We must get a love to the
truth. Many receive the truth for fear of loss, disgrace, etc. or hope of
gain, preferment, etc. or because others do so; and as hounds, who follow the
game, not because they have the sent of it, but because their fellows pursue
it. These who embrace the truth they know not why, will leave it they know not
how: and by the same motives for which they now embrace the truth, they may be
induced to forsake truth and embrace error. God often sends to those strong
delusions that they should believe a lie, who received not the love of the
truth. 2 These. 1.11. 3. Nourish no known sin. The Jewel of faith can never be
kept in a cracked cabbinet, a crazy conscience. He who puts away a good
conscience, concerning faith will soon make shipwreck, 1. Tim. 1.19. Those
silly women laden with sins, may easily be led captives, 2 Timothy 3.6. Solomon by
following strange women, soon embraced strange and idolatrous practices Demas
having loved the present world, soon forsook Paul, 2 Timothy 4.10. Seducers
through covetousness will make merchandise of souls, 2 Pet. 2.3. Tit. 1.11.
Pride will also hinder from finding and keeping wisdom, Prove. 14.6. God
gives grace to the humble, and resists the proud. The garment of humility is
the souls guard against every spiritual mischief. It Is prudent counsel to be
clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. An humble soul will neither hatch nor easily
be hurt by heresies. 4. Labor to grow in grace. Beware (says the Apostle)
lest being led away with the error of the wicked, ye fall from your own
stedfastness; the remedy is immediately subjoined, but grow in grace. They who
stand at a stay will soon go backwards.

This for the first part of the duty to which the Apostle exhorted these
Christians; viz. What the thing was which he commended to them to maintain, The
faith once delivered to the Saints. The second follows; namely, the means
whereby he exhorts them to defend the faith; by an earnest contending for it,
That you should earnestly contend.

Two things offer themselves in the Explanation.

1. 1. Explicat.
To show what the force and importance of that word is, which is translated
earnestly contend.

2. More fully, what the Apostle here intends by earnest contending for the
faith, and wherein this earnest contention does consist, as it is employed for
the faith.

1. The compound-word in the original (...), unto which our English words
Earnestly contend do answer, Decerto. Bez. Supercerto, Vulg. John 18.36. Luke
13.24. 1 Cor. 9.25. Col. 1.29 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Timothy 4.7. (...) proprie dicitur de
aestuatione animi in eo qui in certamen descensurus est. Accipitur pro lucta in
morte. Gerh. Harm.
is only used in this place throughout the whole new Testament. All the
several translations thereof by interpreters, speak this contention to which
Jude exhorts these Christians to be eminent and extraordinary. The word (...)
out of composition (though then it imports not so notable a contention as
here in composition it does) is rightly translated to strive, to fight, and
that as for the mastery, to labor fervently, and signifies that vehement
fighting and striving which was wont to be among wrastlers in their solemn
games, with sweat, pains, and trouble: but it being so compounded as in this
place, it imports a more renowned and famous contention than ordinary. It is
not agreed by all wherein the force of the composition (...) consists; Some
conceive that thereby the Apostle intends they should add one kind of
contention to another, (as possibly) an open professed to an inward and secret
contention. Others, that the Apostle would have them after one battle to double
and reinforce the fight again with new supplies. Others (best of all) that Jnde
exhorts these Christians to put to all their strength, acriter, summo,
continuo, maximo studio.
and utmost force in their contention, as those who fought for their lives, nay
that which was dearer then life it self, even the life of their souls: and so
great is this contention, that no one English word is able to express the
Greek; to contend with all their strength, extraordinarily, beyond measure,
most earnestly, do scarcely render the meaning of the word. More particularly,
this extraordinary and most eminent contention, imports five things. 1. A
serious and weighty cause and ground of contention. Men account not trifles
worth any, much less vehement strife. The thing about which they contend
earnestly, is either weighty, or so esteemed. 2. It imports a considerable
enemy to strive with; not one who is contemptible, but who requires a great
power to contend with him. 3. Some strength and force whereby to deal with him.
A child is not only unable to conquer, but even to contend with a Giant. 4. A
putting forth of strength against the enemy. Though a man be never so strong,
yet if he stands still, and puts not out his strength, he contends not. 5. And
lastly, the contending after such a manner as is conducible to a victory, and
prevailing over the enemy with whom we contend; even the using of our utmost,
best, and choycest endeavors; not a slight, but a serious and victorious
contention.

2. From hence we may gather, what this earnest contention does comprehend,
which is here to be employed about this faith.

1. It imports, that the forementioned faith, is a serious and weighty ground,
and a most considerable cause upon, and for which to contend. What does the
Scripture more hold forth to be our duty, than to buy the truth, Prove. 23.23.
Phil. 1.27. Rev. 3.10. Mat. 11.19.
and not to sell it. To strive together for the faith of the Gospel; to be
fellow-helpers to the truth; to keep the word of Gods patience; to be valiant
for the truth; to justify wisdom, etc. Most precious is this faith to be
contended for! first, even God himself was the fountain and founder of it, the
Sun from which this ray of faith was darted; the Mine whence this faith, more
to be desired than the finest gold, was taken. Psalm. 19.10.
All the Princes of the world with all their combined bounties, could never
have bestowed this faith upon the world. How precious is it secondly, in regard
of the price of it, the death of Christ, without which, not one promise of the
word of life would ever have been made, or made good to our souls. How precious
lastly, in regard of the benefit of it; it does all for us that God does. For
God affords by it, direction in our doubts, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. John 17.17. Romans
1.16.
consolation in our troubles, confirmation in our fears, sanctification in our
filthiness, guidance to glory. In sum, it is the power of God to salvation.
It Is not then a slight and trivial, but a most weighty and considerable cause,
for which these Christians were so earnestly to contend, it being for the
maintaining of the faith.

2. It implies and presupposes a considerable and strong adversary to contend
with, in contending for the faith. The enemies with whom these Christians were
to strive, were Sectaries, and soul-destroying Seducers; and Satan is the
ringleader, instructor, and assistant both of these, and all other forces
raised against faith. We wrestle not against flesh and blood (says the
Apostle) but against principalities and powers. Ephesians. 6.12. Genesis 3.1. Luke
22.31. 1 These. 2.18.
We wrestle not with flesh and blood, as it is in it self, weak and frail, but
as set on work, assisted and guided by Satan. Flesh and blood are but Satan's
instruments, he sets them on work; he tempted Eve, not the Serpent; he
winnowed Peter, when the man and maid made Peter to deny Christ. Satan hindered
Paul from coming to the Thessalonians, though by the persecuting Jews. Rev.
2.10.
Satan cast some of the Smyrnians into prison, when men did it. The false
Prophets, with whom these Christians here were to contend for the faith, are
called the Ministers of Satan; 1 Cor. 11.15. Ephesians. 2.2. Ephesians. 4.27. Acts 5.3.
he is the spirit that works in the children of disobedience. Satan has a
hand in the soliciting of us to sin, either by our own lusts, or by the
inticements of others. In all combats, either against our own corruptions, or
others, persecuters, or seducers, if we can drive away the devil, flesh and
blood will not much annoy us. If the Captain be conquered, the common soldier
will yield. It Is Satan who seduceth in Seducers. Paul was afraid, 2 Cor. 11.3.
lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve, the mind of the Corinthians should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. He is the enemy that sows
tares among the wheat, Mat. 13. And had not these Christians in contending for
the faith a considerable enemy? How could the Seducers want subtilty to creep
in among these Christians by their persons, and into them by their opinions,
into whom Satan the Serpent had crept before; nay, who now had the advantage of
being the old Serpent? How easily could he flatter each humor, Rev. 12.9.
propound suitable lusts to every palate; clothe and color every heresy and
lust with plausible titles, Christian Liberty, new Lights, rare Notions; oil
and butter over wicked practices, and do much with sweet words, cunning and
doubtful expressions? What powerful adversaries were these seducers, Ephesians.
2.2.
who had the Prince of power, the strong man armed, the god of this world to
help them* How could they want malice, and cruelty, who were assisted by the
enemy of souls, the destroyer, the roaring lion, the red dragon? How could they
want diligence and activity, who had the devil to drive them; him to
instigate, whose motion in sin is his rest; who walks about, seeking whom he
may devour?

3. This earnest contention imports a considerable strength, whereby to contend
for the faith against so potent an Adversary. Every ones strength is in it self
but weakness; the strongest are not of themselves able to stand before the
weakest tentation. Our strength is then from our Head, our Captain Jesus
Christ, who bestows upon us such supplies of grace, as that we are never
fully and finally foiled, but in and with him overcome all, as the persecuting,
so the enticing world. More particularly, he affords this strength to us two
ways. 1. On his part, he sends his Spirit to bestow upon us. 2. On our
parts, he enables our faith to receive from him the supplies of his strength.

1. On his part, he bestows his Spirit to strengthen us. This his Spirit does
two ways, 1. By working. 2. By strengthening our union with Christ. 1. In the
former, the Spirit conveyeth a principle of spiritual life and holiness, 1
John 3.9.
puts into us a seed that shall never die; and infuseth an habit of
holiness never to be lost, or overcome. Phil. 1.19. Ephesians. 3.16. Ephesians. 6.10.
2. In the latter, it affords those continued supplies of grace, whereby we
are more and more strengthened with might to resist all tentations, go through
all conflicts; to find preservation and direction in every danger and doubt; to
walk in daily detestation of every sinful way; to call and cry for grace which
is wanting; and in a word, Phil. 4.13.
enabled to do all things through him who strengthens us.

2. On our parts, he enables our faith by his Spirit to receive from him the
supplies of his strength. This he does by giving a power to faith. 1. To unite
us unto, and to incorporate us into him, as the branches are in the tree, the
member in the body, or the house upon the foundation. We laying hold upon him
for ours by our faith, as he lays hold upon us for his by his Spirit; whereby
the union is complete and reciprocal. 2. To improve this union for our
assistance, by drawing daily influences of grace and strength from Christ, who
is a fountain of fullness, John 1.16. John 15.1.5. Gal. 2.20.
as the root does from the soil, or the branches from the root, or the pipe
from the fountain. Hence it is, that we live by faith, it being the instrument
that fetches virtue from Christ to sustain us in all our wants, and
weaknesses; it being not only in, but drinking of the fountain; it not only
uniting us as members to the head; but supplying us as members from the head,
with all virtue necessary to the preservation of grace, both from the filth of
sin within us, and the force of tentations without us; and hence it is that
faith makes use of all ordinances but as the conduit pipes, or watercourse,
to convey from Christ that grace and strength it wants; it esteeming ordinances
without Christ, but as a vial without a cordial, or a pipe without water.
Faith also having united us to Christ, helps us to expect through him that
abundant reward which will infinitely more than countervail for all the combats
and contentions for him against his enemies. Moses saw him that was invisible,
Heb. 11.26.27.
he had an eye to the recompense of reward. We faint not, etc. (says the
Apostle) while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen. 2 Cor. 4.16.18
And herein consists principally the strength of Christians in this earnest
fight and contention.

4. This earnest contention by which the faith is maintained, implies a
putting out and forth of this strength against the enemy with whom we contend
for the faith. He who has strength contends not, if he stands still and acts
not.

Sundry ways is strength to be put forth in contending for this faith.

1. Magistrates must put forth their strength, 1. By commanding their subjects
to submit to the faith. Their edicts and injunctions should be like those of
Asa and Hezekiah, who commanded Judah to seek the Lord. 2 Chro. 14.4 2 Chro.
29.5.30 2 Chro. 34.33.
They must engage men to be true and faithful to God, by precept and example:
their commands must not so savor of state policy, as to be regardless of
Scripture purity. It Is not reason of State, but ruin of States, to be remiss in
enjoining piety. The laws of man should be a guard to the Law of God. They who
reign by God, should reign for him. Neh. 13.19.
How unreasonable is it that people should be lawless only in Religion! Shall
it not be indifferent whether men will pay a tax? And shall it be indifferent
whether they will ever hear a Sermon? It was a commendable decree of
Artaxerxes, though aheathen, and that for which the faithful servant of God
blessed God, That whosoever would not do the law of God, judgment should be
executed upon him, to death, to banishment, Ezra. 7.26.27.
to confiscation of goods, or imprisonment: and of Darius, Dan. 6.26. who
decreed that in every dominion of his Kingdom men tremble and fear before the
God of Daniel.

2. By repressing the perveters of the faith. Restraining heretics and
Seducers, removing the impediments of Religion whether persons or things.
Nebuchadnezzar, a heathen, made a decree that none should speak any thing amiss
against God. 1 Kin. 15.12.13. 2 Kin. 18.5. 2 Kin. 23.8. 2 Chro. 17.6. 2 Chro.
31.1.
Asa took away the Sodomits, Idols, and removed Maachah an idolatresse from
being queen. Hezekiah removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut
down the groves. So Josiah defiled the high places, and brake them down. Thus
likewise Jehoshaphat took away the high places and groves out of Judah. Thus
also Manasseh took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house of the
Lord, and all the idols that he had built, etc. To these may be added zealous
Nehemiah, in repressing Sabboth-breakers. Neh. 13.21. And the Apostle says,
Rulers are a terror to wicked works, Romans 13.3.

3. By providing and maintaining a faithful Ministry to dispense the doctrine
of faith. Thus did Jehoshaphat, and Hezekiah. 2 Chro. 17.8.9. 2 Chro. 31.4.
That Magistrate cannot contend for the faith which contends against the
Ministers thereof. Satan knows no mean between the pampering and famishing of
the Ministry: double labor must not be requited with scarce a single
maintenance. Ministers should not labor for, and yet not without a comfortable
recompense. They ought not to be left to the courtesy of those, who though
they account enough for themselves but a little, yet they account a little for
the Ministry too much. It Is not enough for faithful Ministers to be kept from
being battered and stormed by cruel persecuters, unless also from being starved
by the common protestants.

2. Ministers must contend for the faith, principally two ways.

1. 1 Timothy 6.3. Tit. 2.1.
By preaching the word of faith, they must preserve the pattern of wholesome
words, and speak the things which become sound doctrine. They must take heed of
their own mixtures, and not adulterate the doctrine of faith to please men. The
beauty of heavenly truths wants not the paint either of humane or heretical
additions. The babes of Christ must be fed with sincere milk; and the sorenes
of men's eyes must not hinder the lights of the Church from shining.

2. By confuting gainsaiers and heretics. The Apostle commands Titus, by sound
doctrine to convince gainsayers. Tit. 1.9.11.
Ministers must not only have a voice to call their sheep, but to drive away
wolves; one to establish truth, 2 Cor. 13.8.
another to oppose error: one of his hands must work, and the other hold a
weapon. Christ confuted the corrupt glosses of the Pharisees, and Paul
confounded the Jews, by proving that this is the very Christ, Act. 9.22. and
Apollos mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the
Scriptures that Jesus was Christ, Act. 18.28. A ministers breast should be a
storehouse of spiritual armor. He must be furnished both with skill in
Scripture, in which he should be mighty, and in writings of men, even of
heretics themselves, to beat them with their own weapons. He that will be but
a looker on while his fellow-brethren contend, shall never be more than a
looker on while they are crowned.

3. Every Christian should contend for the faith. Every child of wisdom should
justify their parent. Saints must strive together for the faith of the Gospel.
And this they must do sundry ways.

1. By praying for the success of the faith against error. They must pray,
that God would send forth laborers into his harvest; That utterance may be
given to Ministers, Mat. 9.38. Ephesians. 6.19.
that they may speak boldly as they ought to speak. That God would open unto
them a door of utterance. That the word of the Lord may run and be glorified.
Col. 4.3. 2 These. 3.1.
That Christian who can prevail with God, shall conquer heretics. Prayer has
got as many victories as disputation.

2. By holy example: confuting wickedness and heresy by the language of their
lives. Christians must be blameless, Phil. 2.15.
harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse nation, among whom they should shine as lights in the world. The
error of the wicked must not cleave to them. They must not walk by example,
but by rule. They must live what their faithful Minister preaches, strive and
swim against a stream of impiety, being and doing best, when the times are
worst.

3. by encouraging those against whom Satan bends his greatest force and fury
in this Conflict about faith. They must know those who labor among them, 1
These. 5.12.
esteeming them very highly in love for their works sake. When the service of
Ministers grows hottest, the love of people must not grow coldest. What
proportion does money bear to faith; what is gold but dung to religion? How
just is it that they who will not part with their money for the truth, should
part with money and truth too! and that they who will not pay the Scripture
Sessment, to honor God with their substance, to buy truth, etc. should have
all swept from them by oppressors! No soldiers deserve so much to have the oil
of love dropped into their wounds, as those who received them in contending for
the faith: No scarrs are so honorable as those gotten in this conflict. Never
did kissing better become an Emperor, than when Constantine kissed the hollow
of holy Paphnutius's eye; whose war having been so holy, made his scar
honorable.

4. By mutual exhortation. Christians must incite one another to the
spiritual conflict, Heb. 10.24. Mat. 3.16.
speak often one to another for the strengthing of their resolution, and the
whetting of their zeal; for the blowing up their love to God. In the primitive
persecutions Christians wanted the bridle, but they now want the spur.

5. By confession of the faith when called and examined about it. It Is not
enough to have faith in the heart, without confession in the tongue. If the
fire of faith be in the heart, the flames of confession must be in the tongue.
Romans 10.10.
He who believes must speak. It Is our faith which justifies our persons, but
our confession must justify our faith. A dumb faith is not a divine faith, 1
Pet. 3.15, 16. Mat. 10.32.
but the faith of devils. Hypocrites will confess Christ in times of
encouragement, but not of contradiction. A Christian has no cause to be
ashamed of his name, of his Livery, his Master. He who will confess Christ,
Maledicta sit humilitas quae huc se demiserit. Luth.
when most deny him, shall be confessed by Christ, when he shall deny most.
This is the only holy kind of boldness; and cursed is that modesty, which
makes us ashamed of our Master.

6. By suffering for the faith. A Christian is never so like a soldier, or
himself, as when he confesses the faith he has, and suffers for the faith
he confesses. He that saves his life, and forsakes the faith, never lived
comfortably; but thousands that have lost their lives, and kept the faith, have
died joyfully. Would Saints but betray the faith, all Satan's contests with them
would be at an end, but then Gods would begin; Rev. 2.13.
and though God be the sweetest friend, yet is he the sorest enemy. How kindly
does God take it when we hold fast his name, Nemo miles ad militiam cum
deliciis venit; de umbra ad solemn, and sole ad coelum, de tunica ad loricam, de
silentio ad clamorem, de quiet ad tumultum, bonum agonem subituri estis, in
quo agonothetes Deus vivus est, xystarches Spiritus sanctus, Corona
aeternitatis bravium. Tert. lib. ad Martyrs.
and not deny his faith in the days wherein Antipas is slain! How honorable
is it to follow our Captain through mud and blood! How unsuitable is
delicateness to sanctity and soldiery! Every Christian must change his warm
coat into a Coat of mail; he must not expect rest, but tumultuous clamours; not
to sleep in the shadow, but sweat in the scorching Sun; and to have all the
Militia of hell to fight against him. But here is his comfort, he fights a good
fight, wherein God is the Judge, the holy Ghost the principal ruler, and the
eternal Crown of glory is the reward of his fighting.

5. Lastly, This earnest contention imports the putting forth our strength, or
contending after such a manner as is conducible to a victory and prevalency
over the enemy with whom we contend; not any putting forth of strength will
serve the turn, but the doing it to the purpose, eminently, with all our
ability of power and skill. 1 Cor. 16.13. (...).


1. We must contend resolutely and valiantly. Danger must be despised,
Fortitudo in ferendo and feriendo. Hoc gero titulum; Cedo nulli. Luth. Per
charitatem flexibiliores arundine, per sidem simus duriores adamante. Luth. 2 Timothy 3.10. Acts 11.23.
difficulties adventured on, terrors contemned, fears suppressed, cowardice
vanquished, Christian generosity, and a holy manhood must be put on. There must
be a manhood in bearing strokes, in assayling strikers; the former is as the
back, the latter the edge of Christian valor. Blessed Paul, who fought a good
fight, tells Timothy, that he knew his purpose, faith, long-suffering: and
Barnabas exhorted the Christians, that with full purpose of heart they should
cleave to the Lord.

2. We must contend vigorously, fervently, vehemently, with all our might. A
lazy, slender, slight contention, will not serve the turn. Luke-warmnesse
neither pleases our Captain, nor prevails over our adversary. Zeal is the
beauty of Christian undertakings; slightness and lukewarmnesse are unsuitable
to the Captain that leads, who sweat in his conflict, the enemy that assailes
us, the cause for which we contend, the crown that rewards us. Holy fervor is
never so seemly as in contending for a holy faith. It Is storyed of Scanderberg,
that in fighting against the Turks, he was so earnest that the blood would
often start out of his lips. Indifferency better becomes our worldly
contentions between man and man, than spiritual contentions between men and
devils.

3. We must contend for the faith unanimously, and with one consent. How easily
will error prevail, when Faith's Champions are divided among themselves! How
shall they adventure their lives one for another in war, Phil. 1.27.
who will not do so much as love one another in peace! Excellent is the
counsel of the Apostle, Stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving
together for the faith of the Gospel.

4. We must contend for the faith against error universally, impartially, for
every doctrine of faith, and against every opposite error. We must contend for
discountenanced, disowned, persecuted faith, and take it into our doors, when
the most would have it laid in the streets; and give it entertainment, when
it is death to harbor it. Nor ought we to to spare preferred, Quo major est
Princeps, eo minus ferantur ejus vitia. Nomina potestatum metuenda, sed vitia
contemnenda, Luth.
favored error. The snake of error must be struck at, though in the field of
a King.

5. We must contend for the faith constantly. We must never give over our
conflict as long as one enemy is left. We must continue in the things we have
learned, and hold fast the name of Christ. It Is not contention, but constancy
therein which crowns. We must be faithful to the death, if we expect a crown
of life. 2 Timothy 3.14. Rev. 2.13.
It Is easier once to persevere than often to begin. No Christian is too old to
go out to fight in this spiritual warfare. As soon as we cease to fight, we
begin to fly. Christianity knows no cessation of Combating. We must take heed
of losing the things which we have wrought and fought for. 2 John 8.
It Is as great a virtue to hold what we have, as to get what is worth the
holding. If the faith be bad, why did we begin; if good, why did we give over
our contention for it?

6. We must contend prudently and with judgment. Christian prudence is not
inconsistent with Christian fervency. Sundry ways must a Christian show his
prudence in this contention. 1. He must oppose those enemies most that most
oppose the faith. The greatest errors with greatest zeal, and place most
forces where there is most dan ger; not being (as some) fervent against
disciplinary, and superficial against doctrinall errors. The former do but
scratch the face; the latter stab the heart of truth. 2. He must contend for
the faith soberly, not passionately. God wants not the beesom of passion to
sweep down the cobwebs of error. Soft words and strong arguments are good
companions. We may at the same time spare the person, and yet be merciless to
his error. 3. We must contend for the faith orderly, not extravagantly. The
Minister must not contend like the Magistrate by politic government, nor the
people like the Minister by public preaching. Every soldier in this war must
keep his rank. Never did more contend against the faith, than in the times
wherein all are suffered to contend how they will for the faith. 4. We must
contend for the faith preparedly, not weakly: Faith deserves not obloquy, but
victory. A weak judgment often hurts the faith as much as strong passion. An
able mind is more needful in spiritual, than an able body is for worldly
wars. What pity is it that a good cause should have a feeble champion!

1. Observe. 1.
The goodness of any cause and course exempts it not from opposition. What
more precious then Faith, and what more opposed? Odium genius Evangelii, Luth.
John 17.14. Superbus sio, quod video nomen pessimum mihi crescere; gaudeo
rebellis dici. Luth. Gratias ago Deo, quod dignus sum quem mundus oderit. Hier.
Hatred is ever the companion of Truth. As that which Satan opposes must needs
be good; so that which is good, must needs be by him opposed. A good man once
said, He much suspected his own faithfulness in delivering that Sermon, for
which he got not some hatred from wicked men. Hatred (as one says) is the
Genius of the Gospel. I have given them (says Christ) thy word, and the world
has hated them. Wicked men's rage should rather make us thankful, than
discouraged. I am proud, (says Luther) because I hear I have an ill name among
bad men. I bless God (said Jerome) that I am worthy of the worlds hatred.

2. Observe. 2.
The best things require most contention for them. Not trifles, Nostra
impatientia non est pro reculis, honoribus etc. sed pro contemptu verbi, and
pertinacia impietatis, ubi anathema est esse patientem. Luth.
fancies or fables, but doctrines of faith deserve our earnest contention. How
poorly are most men's contentions employed! How happy were we, could we but as
earnestly contend for Christ, his cause, faith, and our own salvation, as
wicked men do for riches, honors, interest, nay for hell, by striving to
out-sin one another! How unsuitable is it, that a greater fire should be made
for the roasting of an egg, than for an ox; that men should be more contentious
for bubbles, than blessedness!

3. Observe. 3.
Satan will fight, though he cannot prevail. Though he conquer not, he will yet
contend. Though he be unable to overcome, yet he will oppose the faith. Such is
the hight of his malice, that rage he will, be it insuccesfully. If he cannot
disappoint the saints of their end, he yet pleases himself in disturbing them
in their way. Satan's rage should not dismay us. His furious onsets do not prove
his endeavors succesfull, rather his great wrath speaks his time short. And if
he fight, who knows he shall be foiled, how earnestly should they contend, who
know they shall both conquer and be crowned!

4. Satan labors most to spoil us of the best things, Observe. 4.
those whereby God is most glorified, and we most benefited. If he may have our
faith, heavenly things from us, he cares not to leave earthly blessings behind
him. Ephesians. 6.12. Chrysostom. Musculus, Perkins. vid. Heb. 8.5.
Hence it is, that the Apostle says, We wrestle against spiritual wickedness
((...), in heavenlies; i. e. as I humbly conceive) for heavenly things: whereby
is noted the cause of Satan's contention, which is, to bereave us of blessings
of an heavenly nature. In the tempting of Eve, he aimed at the bereaving of our
first parents of their happiness, and Gods image. It was Peter's faith he
sought to winnow: He blinds men's eyes, that the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ should not shine unto them. 2 Cor. 4.4.
In the troubles of Job, Satan aimed at a greater matter than the bereaving Job
of his temporal estate; namely, Job. 1.11.
the denying of God, and the blaspheming him to his face. The excellency of the
thing for which we contend, should strengthen and quicken our resolutions in
contending. It should be a greater motive to our valor when Christ our Captain
tells us, we fight to preserve the faith, than if he had told us, we fight for
our lands, children, wives, lives: For what are these to grace, to glory, to
our souls, to our God, all which we lose in losing the faith! What Satan in
malice does most assault, we in wisdom must most defend.

5. Of our selves we are too weak for spiritual conflicts. Observe. 5.
All our strength is from another. He who is barely by profession, not really
united to Christ, will soon give in, and turn his back in a day of battle; he
will be a soldier for show, Mat. 7.27.
not for service. He who is not built on the rock, cannot oppose the floods.
Painted profession will not endure the washing. Things which are not strongly
joined, but loosly put together, will part when thrown into the water; so will
Christ and the hypocrite in sufferings.

6. Observe. 6.
Moderation is not always commendable. Moderation in bearing the chastisements
of God, Praedicare verbum Dei, est derivare in se furorem totius inferni.
Satius est conturbari and collidi coelum and terram, quam Christum non
praedicari. Maledict a sit charitas quae servatur cum jactura fidei.
in enjoying worldly comforts, in enduring private injuries, are all most
Christian and commendable. But moderation which hinders a real, and an earnest
contending for faith, is no better than loathsome lukewarmnesse. I fear there is
much time-serving, neutrality, sinful halting, and indifferency gilded over
with the name of moderation; accursed is that moderation, whereby men will lose
the faith to keep their estates, and crack their consciences to save their
skins. The policy of these I never did admire, and their happiness (I trust) I
shall never envy. How soon learned is the wisdom of shunning troubles, of
selfpreservation, and tame silence, when religion is endangered! How easy is
it to swim with the stream, to hold with the strongest; and how easily, but
alas, how falsely, is this called moderation!

7. Observe. 7.
The War of Christianity, is laborious and dangerous. It will soon try our
valor; and not only the truth, but the strength of our graces. Religion is
like cold weather, good for those who are sound, bad for rotten hypocrites.
They who go on to this sea for recreation, will soon come back in a storm. The
more dangerous our conflict is, the greater is that strength by which we are
supported, and the firmer should be our dependence upon it. If Satan cease from
fighting with us, it is a sign he has conquered us. It Is our wisdom when we
have passed over light skirmishes, to prepare for greater. They who had endured
a great fight of affliction, Hob. 10.32.36.
had still need of patience. Though we must never despair of conquest, yet also
never presume of quietness, nor expect to be delicate members under a thorny
head.

8. A Christian should be best, when the times are worst, Observe. 8.
and get good by others sins. When others contend most against, we should most
contend for the faith. Of the opposition of the truth by others, we should make
a spiritual advantage. As God suffers nothing whereby he gets not glory, so a
Christian should observe nothing, whereby he gets not some good. As the faint
and lukewarm assistance of friends, so the fierce and furious opposition of
enemies should make his contention for the truth the more holily vehement. It
was not only the expression of a gracious heart, but of such an one in a very
gracious temper, Psalm. 119.127
That because the wicked had made void Gods Law, therefore did he love his
Commandments above gold.

9. Observe. 9.
It Is the duty and wisdom of Christians to observe directions for their
spiritual conflict. Who contends with a potent Adversary, without considering
how to encounter him! To this end, 1. Let us get a love to the Cause and
Captain, for which and whom we fight; not fighting for fear of his wrath, or
love of his wages, but affection to his interest. A soldier of fortune will
turn to that side where he shall be best paid, but one to whom love is wages,
will keep to one side. The Christian who seems now to fight for, but yet loves
not the truth, will soon either leave it, or fight against it. 2. Let us not
entangle our affections in worldly enjoyments. Bid earthly comforts farewell,
when you go your spiritual expedition. It Is pity to lose a victory for
regarding the bag and baggage; yet the love of the world has made many a
Christian lose both his courage, and his crown. 3. Let us not go forth in our
own strength against our enemies. A proud Christian will soon turn a coward. A
limb, though swollen and big to sight, is but weak and lame for service. If God
breath not a spirit of valor into us, we shall faint. Spiritual soldiers
must fight upon their knees. It Is from God we fight, of our selves we can do
nothing but fly. 4. Let faith consider Encouragements. Our Cause is righteous
and honorable, our Captain wise, valourous, bountiful, our supplies great and
near; our friends in all places, if fighting, prevailing, and if not fighting,
praying for us; our victory certain and sudden, our reward massy and eternal.

VER. 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old
ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
HEre our Apostle enters upon the third main part considerable in the
Exhortation, viz. the propounding sundry Arguments or reasons to enforce the
embracing of the forementioned Exhortation of Contending for the faith against
Seducers.

The Arguments or reasons used by him are reducible to these two Heads.

1. The first is the dangerousness of the company of these Seducers to the
Christians to whom he wrote. This is set down in this 4th verse.

2. The second is the downfall and overthrow of these Seducers; amplified and
proved from the 4th verse to the 17th verse.

1. The dangerousness of the company of these Seducers to the Christians,
expressed in this 4th verse.

In this the Apostle describes 1. The entrance of these Seducers into the
company of the Christians. 2. The impiety of these Seducers who had thus gotten
entrance.
1. He describes their entrance into the society of the faithful, and that
four ways. 1. From their nature; they were men. 2. From their indefinite
number; certain men. 3. From their subtilty and slyness in getting in; they
crept in unawares. 4. By clearing and vindicating their entrance from the
exceptions or objections, which the Christians might have raised against Gods
suffering them to enter among them; he says, They were before ordained to this
condemnation: he thereby teaching, that God was neither regardless and
unmindfull of the Church, nor indulgent to the false teachers, or their false
teachings.
2. In setting down the impiety of these Seducers, 1. He expresses it more
generally, saying, They were ungodly. 2. More particularly he shows wherein
that ungodliness appeared: 1. In their abusing the grace of God, Turning the
grace, etc. 2. In their opposing the God of grace, Denying the only Lord, etc.



1 The Apostle describes the entrance of the seducers among the Christians.
Explicat.
And

1. He describes it from the nature of the parties entering. They are men, (...).

The Apostle seems for two reasons to note the nature of these seducers,
calling them men. Riv. in loc. Me. lius sentiunt qui per hominis funes
intelligunt omnem humanam and amabilem tractationem, qualis solet esse hominum
erga homines. Homines hominum causa generati sunt, ut ipsi inter se alii aliis
prodesse possint. Cic. l. 5. Offic.


1. To aggravate the sin of the seducers. One man should be helpful, not
hurtful to another. Man is a word used to denote goodness. I drew them with
the cords of a man, says God, Hos. 11.4. to express his gentleness toward the
people. And in our ordinary expression, humanity is used for kind and helpful
carriage. Cruelty to the body is more beseeming beasts, but cruelty to the soul
is fitter to be used by Devils than by men. The nearer any one is to us, the
more heinous is the hurt which he offers us, or we him. Natura nos cognatos
edidit, Senec. Nature has made us near of kin. To be cruel and hurtful to
others, is to put off the man, as well as the Christian.

2. To amplify the danger of these Christians. Men like our selves, may most
probably prevail over us by their seducements. Non lupi silvestres, sed urbani,
specie humana lupinam vitiositatem tegunt.
Were they Devils or beasts they might affright, but being men they allure. As
it is the wisdom of God to send us holy men to instruct us, and win us to
himself; so its the subtilty of Satan to send wicked men to seduce and draw us
from God. None hurt so unexpectedly and unavoydably as those who are near and
suitable to our nature. Seducers are Satan's dequoyes to fetch men in to him by
multiiudes.

1. Observe. 1.
Sin has made even man a hurtful creature. Not only man hurtful to beasts,
and beasts to man; but man to man. Even man, who should be in stead of God, a
keeper, a defender, is by sin made a wolf, a destroyer of man. Man, till
sinful, was never harmfull. Before he sinned he (naked) neither feared nor
offered wrong. His sinless state will ever be known by the name of a state of
innocence, or hurtlesness: (...), sine cornibus, non feriens cornibus. Phil.
2.15.
and when the lost image of God is again restored, he is made a Lamb, a Dove, a
harmless, (or as the word in the Original signifies) a hornless creature. But
how much more than brutishly cruel has sin made man become! witness not only
the vast multitude of men destroyed in all ages by men, and the incredibly
exquisite tortures, as wrackings, sawings, burnings, etc. against man, invented
by man, as if sin had set up an hellish inquisition in man's nature; but even
the murders committed by Seducers and Heretics upon the souls of men; it being
now as much against corrupt nature to go toward hell alone, as to walk in the
ways of heaven at all. Oh that we could contemplate the odiousness of sin in
this glass of it is harmfulness!

2. Observe. 2.
We should not content our selves in being mere men. He who is, and continues
no more but a man, had better never to have been so much as a man. A man
altogether without grace (though otherwise never so exquisitely accomplished)
is but a tame devil, and often most hurtful. How restless should we be till
the divine nature be bestowed upon us! 2 Per. 14.
The natural man, or the man who has no more than a rational soul, natural
abilities and perfections, as he cannot receive, so he can and will oppose the
things of the Spirit of God. Satan can as easily enter, as assault a man merely
natural. And many who have had religious education, and made hopeful
beginnings, yet having never been by a saving change of heart, more then men,
have soon shown themselves as bad almost as devils. Nature elevated to the
highest pitch by its most exquisite improvements, is still but nature; it may
thereby be colored over; but grace can only change it.

3. Observe. 3.
We should beware of those who are but mere natural men, and have nothing
more, or more excellent then humane nature. It Is the Command of Christ to
beware of men. Mat. 10.17.
Beware of them, 1. lest they betray your liberties, lives, or external
welfare. Naturae bonitas nisi pietate confirmetur, facile illabescit. Cartw.
Harm.
Christ committed not himself to man, because he knew what was in man; and let
not us commit our selves to them, because we know not what is in them. Nature
is a slippery thing, and unless backed by grace, will prove but unsteady. How
often have I seen, found, I had almost said, that the love of acquaintance merely
natural, ends (upon change of times) either in persecution, or at the best, in
cruel compassion, in persuading to self-preservation by wracking conscience,
and offending God! 2. Especially, let us beware lest they betray our souls, by
seducing them from God, and truth. Follow no man further than he follows God.
Look upon every man as a rule ruled, not as a rule ruling. Captivate thy
understanding to none, but God. Take equal heed of receiving the word of God
as the word of man, and of receiving the word of man as the word of God. The
error of the Master is the tentation of the scholar. Love no man so much as to
follow that of his which is not lovely; in that sense call no man Master. We
must never believe error when he speaks it, nor truth because he speaks it.

4. Satan is wont to make use of such instruments as Observe. 4.
may most probably do his work. He loves to put upon himself the most taking
and insinuating shape, when he comes to tempt us. He employed the most subtle
creature to convey his tentations to our first parents. Ordinarily he makes use
of men, and most commonly of the fittest, either for parts, or seeming piety,
to work upon men. He also has his Apostles and Ministers to pervert the world,
2 Cor. 11.13.15
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and the Ministers of
righteousness. But how unworthy is it for men to suffer Satan to use their
parts and wits against their Maker! Quaenam foeditas carmen occinere quo
Satanas oblectetur!
And never should we more suspect Satan's poison, then when he offers us to
drink in a golden cup. Never more fear his seducements, then when he uses men,
and men whose plausibilities are most taking.

2. The Apostle describes the entrance of these Seducers, by the indefinite and
uncertain expressing of their number, that had entered among them. He neither
names who they were, nor determines thereby how many they were, but only says,
they were (...), certain men.

It Is here demanded, Why the Apostle mentions not their names; or who they were?

1. Explicat.
It was possible (though not likely) their names might be altogether unknown to
him.

2. It is by sundry conceived, that the Apostle did know them by name. Thus
Oecumenius, Aretius, and others; the former whereof tells us himself some of
their names, Homines nullius nominis.
as Nicholas, Valentinus, Simon, and Marcion. But it is conceived that the
Apostle did forbear to name them, though he knew them.

1. To show how much he disdained them; as if he apprehended them to be such
vile persons as were not fit and worthy to be named among Christians, or by him
distinctly, but confusedly to be bound up in this bundle, (...), certain men.
And this some (who conjecture that the discourse of Christ concerning the rich
glutton, is an history) conceive to be the reason why our Savior gives us the
poor man's name Lazarus, not so much as vouchsafing to name the rich epicure,
calling him only a certain rich man, (...), Luke 16.19.
as if it were unfit his name should be left to posterity. And this conjecture
concerning these Seducers in the text seems to be strengthened, not only by the
consideration of their detestable practices and opinions, which deserved that
their founders should be buried in forgetfulness; but also by the Apostles
expressing their base and contemptible manner of entrance in the very next
word, by creeping in unawares, as if he had set himself to slight them.

2. It Is thought the Apostle forbears to express the names, and thereby to
determine the numbers of these Seducers, to make these Christians more wary and
vigilant in their carriage and conversing, they living among Seducers, and yet
not knowing who they were. That there were sundry, many of them, he intimates;
who, or how many, he conceals, that so they might be the more circumspect in
taking heed of all who might any way seduce them. And thus the Apostle exhorts
the Christians 1 John 4.1. to try the spirits, because there are many false
prophets gone out into the world. If a man be to converse among persons
infected by the plague, when he is uncertain which of them, or how many have
that disease, he will be the more wary of every one. Our not knowing of all
those who are erroneous, should make us try what we hear even from those who
are soundest.

1. How much are heretics and Seducers deceived, Observe. 1.
who expect to grow famous, and honored by being patrons of ungodly and
erroneous opinions! Heresy never was a foundation of honor to the contriver,
though the hopes of gaining of honor be a furtherance to become heresiarchs.
While the pure lights of the Church have burnt sweetly, and shined bright even
to after ages, there is nothing remaining of old Heretics, notwithstanding all
their new and pretended light, but stink, and smoke, and snuff. Howsoever they
may be for a time respected in the world, yet as even at first the Scripture
proclaims their infamy, and discovers their impostures to some, so shall
posterity by the advantages of time, and Scripture-study, reckon their
sometimes adored names among the notes of greatest disgrace. So that even
those, who through the love of error, embrace their opinions, shall through
the love of honor be ashamed of their names. Seducers love to call their books
and companies by their own name, but their names are not up in Gods Book.

2. False teachers are wont to be many and numerous in the Church of God.
Observe. 2.
In Saint John's time many (though as here, 1 John 4.1. 2 John 2 7. Tit. 1.10.
he names not how many) false Prophets were gone out into the world. And he
says also, Many deceivers are entered into the world. And Paul tells Titus, that
there were many deceivers. The Prophets of Jezebel were four hundred. Satan's
Emissaries are sent out by troops, what they want of weight, they make up in
number. The goodness of any cause cannot be judged by the number of its
patrons. There may be an hundred false prophets to one; and if there were an
hundred true ones to one false, that false one may possibly have an hundred
friends, for one that truly loves the hundred who are true. Should religion be
carried only by vote, heresy would often prevail. Argumentum pessimum turba. The
most are usually the worst. Numbers are but a slight argument to a heart that
resolves to follow Scripture. It Is better to go to heaven with, and after a
few, than to hell with, and after the throng. Multitudes neither warrant in the
way, nor comfort in the end.

3. Observe. 3. Mat. 7.15. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.
Christian vigilance is most needful in days of herefie. Beware of false
prophets, says Christ. Beware, (says Peter) left ye be led away with the
error of the wicked. The cunning craftiness of false prophets in deceiving,
our readiness to be deceived, and our hurt in being so, call aloud for the
duty of circumspection. Seducers are crafty, error is catching; and it being
embraced, hurt to the soul is certain. How sad is it to see so many wary men in
trading for the world, and so many childish and simple in negotiating for
heaven! Most men invert the Apostles advice; for in malice they are men, in
knowledge children. Should all be reckoned children (as indeed they may) who
know not their right hand from their left in religion, where should we find an
man. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way. Prove. 14.8.
old Scripture preservatives should much be used in times of heretical
infection; in ways wherein there are many turnings, it is safe often to enquire.
The Word is the way, the Spirit is the guide; humility, prayer, vigilance,
excellent helps to walk in the one, and to follow the other.

Thirdly, The Apostle describes the entrance of these Seducers into the company
of these Christians, from the subtilty and slynesse of their entrance, and that
thus, They crept in unawares, (...). Explicat.


Two things offer themselves in the Explication.

The first, The sense and force of the word.

Secondly, The agreement of it to these Seducers in their entrance among these
Christians. Exodus 15.10. (...). Deuteronomy. 23.11. (...). Isai. 60.20. (...). (...),
urinator, Herodot. Luke 4.40. (...). Mat. 8.11. (...).


1. First, the meaning of the word: The word comprehends two things. 1. It
implies a fact brought about and accomplished, which is an obtaining of a
through entrance, and getting into some place or company, noted in the
preposition, (...), in, or into. 2. It mainly intends the manner of
accomplishing it, or the course taken and used to effect, and bring that
entrance about, which is by slynesse, and subtilty, close and cunning carriage,
and entrance unawares; the single and simple verb (...), or (...), signifies,
subeo, mergo, ingredior, to dive, sink, to go in, to go under; and it is used
concerning the setting of the Sun, as Mark 1.32. and Luke 4.40. etc. because it
seems then to sink, or dive into the sea. And the Apostle speaks of some, 2 Timothy 3.6. who crept into houses, (...), Vulg. qui penetrant, i. e. qui penitus
intrant. Scire volunt secreta domus, atque inde timeri. Subrepserunt, Bez.
subintroierunt, Vulg. Furtive se insinuare. Latenter and furtive ingredi.
Obiter subrepere. Oblique se ingerere, and tanquam aliud agentes ingredi.
(adding only the preposition (...), in, to this verb (...),) which Beza
translates qui irrepunt, others, qui immergunt, who subtly, silently slip in,
and dive (as it were) to the bottom, to search and understand the affairs of
houses, (as Jesuits use to do in States and Kingdoms.) But the principal
Emphasis lies in the preposition (...), which added to the former verb,
signifies a more secret and subtle, close and deceitful manner of Seducers
entrance, than the simple word will bear; and it imports their entrance in a
by-way, at a backdoor, theevishly, by little and little, clancularly,
unawares, creepingly, a winding in by stealth, obliquely; beside the way of any
real worth, and fit qualifications of integrity and piety to further the
spiritual welfare of the Church; and beside the intentions of the faithful,
who not knowing what manner of men these Seducers were, but conceiving them, by
reason of their painted and specious appearances of godliness, to be worthy of
admission, gave them entrance before they were aware. And this is the force of
the preposition, 2 Pet. 2.1. (...), they shall privily bring in heresies; that
is, subtly, deceitfully, and so as the Church should not be aware of them,
they bringing in their errors under the notion and appearance of truth. The
same force has the word (...), Gal. 2.4. in two words in that one verse, where
the Apostle speaks of false brethren, (...), unawares brought in, who (...),
came in privily, Irreptitios subintroductos, obiter ingressos subintroductitios.
etc. They crept into the company of the faithful by fraud, and such cunning
artifices, specious and plausible pretenses, that the faithful never went
about to keep them out; for though in both these places of Jude, and Galatians,
their coming in, might not be unawares, so, as that the faithful knew not at
all of their coming in; yet it was unawares, so as that they knew not what
manner of persons, how unworthy and heretical, etc. they were, when they did
come in among them.

2. The second thing to be explained, is the agreement of the word thus opened,
to the Seducers in their entrance among these Christians.

1. It agrees to them, in regard they had already gotten in, they were fully
entered by their artifices, they had obtained footing in the Church. And the
Apostle urges these Christians by this motive, of the nearness of these
seducers to them, and their presence among them, that they should be the more
strenuous in contending against them. God had suffered them to obtain entrance,
that those Christians, who were approved might be made manifest. The sincerity
of the faithful was discovered by the apostasy of hypocrites. When a City is
altogether in peace, all the Inhabitants are accounted faithful and loyal;
but when seditions and commotions arise, they who are faithful to the Prince,
are then discovered from the rest. And when heresies and persecutions for the
truth arise, the sincerity of the faithful is manifested by the defection of
those, who in times of peace seemed (happily) as good as the best. Thou shall not
(says God to his people) hearken to the words of that prophet, or dreamer of
dreams, for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord
your God, etc. And by the entrance of these seducers, the faithful were more
excited to search after, and to defend the truth. Both the sincerity of
believers, and the truths to be believed, were made more evident. Nothing is so
certain, as that which out of doubtfulnesse is made certain. The Sun of truth
breaks most clearly out of a cloud of errors. Pet. Molin. in Epist. dedic. ad
Enodation. Languesceret fides no irritata, and ex judiciorum conflictu, quasi
ex collisione silicum, emicant veritatis scintillae, quae tandem victrix
perrumpit obstantia. Debemus Pelagio and coelestio, Aureolos tractatus
Augustini, de praedestinatione, de natura and gratia, and perseverantia. Pravum
haereticorum acumen viri sancti acuebat industriam. Aug. de ver. rel. c. 8.
Haeretici plurimum prosunt, non verum docendo quod nesciunt, sed ad verum
quaerendum carnales, and ad verum aperiendum spirituales catholicos excitando.
The clashing of the faithful and erroneous (like the striking of flint and
steel) sends forth the brightly shining sparks of truth. Yea further, God by
the entrance of these heretics, made both them, and their hypocritical
followers manifest to the world, that so they might at once both patefacere,
and pudefacere, (as Pareus speaks on 1 Cor. 11.19.) discover and disgrace
themselves before all men, who hereby might know and shun them. By the entrance
also of these seducers, the faithful saw that this world was not a place of
local separation from all wicked ones, and were incited to long for that
place, where good and bad shall be perfectly parted.

2. The word here used of creeping in unawares, agrees to these seducers, in
regard of the manner of their entrance, which was close, subtle, hypocritical
and unawares; without any fitness in themselves to enter, or any intention in
the faithful to admit them; they only using many sly and sinful artifices, to
bring both their persons and pinions into reputation among the faithful, by
reason of which, both were suffered unawares to enter; although indeed both
deserved to be kept out before, and thrown out after their entrance.

This practice (in the general) of insinuating, creeping, and winding unawares
into the society and estimations of the faithful, has been used both by
these, and all other seducers; and therefore 2 Cor. 11.13. Paul calls these
false Apostles deceitful workers; Satan using them for his instruments to
beguile, as sometime he did the Serpent, which beguiled Eve. Likewise, Romans
16.18. Paul says, that they deceive the hearts of the simple. And Acts 20.30.
that they draw many disciples after them. (...).
By these Gal. 3.1. the Galatians were bewitched. These would have beguiled the
Colossians, Col. 2.18. They have their slight and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. They creep into houses, and lead
captive silly women, 2 Timothy 3.6. They are seducers, and deceiving, ver. 13.
False teachers, privily bringing in damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. And they
make merchandise of people, (...).
ver. 3. And they allure, (ver. 18.) those who were clean, etc.

But more particularly, the by-ways in which they go, the subtle artifices and
insinuations by whith they creep into the company, and good opinions of the
Church, and deceitfully enter unawares, are such as these,

1. They conceal their opinions, Vid. Aug. contr. Pelag. l. 1. Pelagius dixit,
liberum sic confitemur arbitrium, ut dicamus nos semper indigere Dei auxilio;
ita homi nis laudamus naturam, ut Dei semper gratiam addamus auxilium. Anathema
qui docet gratiam Dei per singulos actus nostros, non esse necessariam.
Diligenter est interrogandus Pelagius quam dicat gratiam qua fateatur homines
adjuvari, etc. Mihi paene persuaserat hanc illam gratiam, de qua quaestio est
confiteri, Aug. de gra. Christ. c. 37. In fraudem nomen Christi circumferunt.
Hos. 7.8.
especially at their first entrance. Either they totally forbear the delivering
of errors, or else they deliver them so darkly, cloudily and ambiguously, as
that they may find subterfuges, and places for retreating, whenever they are
charged with them. They love to know, but are wary in being known; like Moles,
they labor to spoil the ground, by keeping under ground. It Is often harder to
find them, than to overcome them. Their words and phrases have diverse senses;
the same sentence shall speak both truth and falsehood, so that their disciples
shall understand them one way, and the ingenuous hearer shall hope that they
meant another; by reason of which deceit, they resemble some
light-fingerd-dealers, who can steal even from those who look upon them.
Augustine was sometime almost well persuaded concerning Pelagius; so seemingly
orthodoxe were his expressions about grace.

2. They utter some real and wholesome truths. Their custom is to mix
something true with much that is false, that thereby they may put off one with
another. The false Apostles taught Christ, joining some other thing with him in
the cause of salvation; and so the Papists at this day. Their doctrines like
that cake which Hosea says was not turned, are neither raw nor baked, i. e.
neither altogether true, nor altogether false; or like a picture which seems
beautiful on the one side, and deformed on the other; or like the commodities
of some deceitful chapmen, the top, the uppermost of the bag is good and
vendible, but the wares which are under are corrupt and unsound; or as that
image, the head is of gold, but the feet of iron and clay. Error would never
be honored before the people, unless it were seen in the company of truth. As
a man who is often taken in a lie, is not believed when he speaks the truth; so
he who is often observed to speak truth, is not mistrusted, though he sometimes
utters what is false.

3. They preach doctrines pleasing to corrupt nature; 2 Pet. 2.18.
such as are most delightful to flesh and blood. They know that naturally
people cannot endure sound doctrine, Isai. 30.10. 2 Timothy 4.3. 2 Cor. 2.17. (...)
desire not to have right things prophesied to them, but smooth things, and
deceits; and therefore they corrupt, and deal deceitfully with the word, like
deceitful Vintners, who for gain, mix water with their wine; mere truth they
know would be bitter truth, veritas mera veritas amara.
and therefore they are more desirous to be sweet and unsound, than harsh and
wholesome; suting their doctrines (as some fable of the taste of the Manna in
the wilderness) to the pleasure of every palate. Hence it was that the false
Apostles preached up circumcision, and other abrogated observations, because
they knew such doctrines only would be savoury to Jewish pallates. And hence it
was that these seducers preached doctrines of liberty, and licentiousness, 2
Pet. 2.19. Jude 4.
and such as turned the grace of God into lasciviousness, making the narrow
way to heaven seem broader then God ever intended it; holding before peoples
eyes the spectacles of carnal liberty, whereby, in their passage over the
narrow bridge of Christianity, they adventuring upon a supposed breadth, tumble
down into the waters of perdition.

4. They deliver such doctrines as savor of novelty. The subjects of which
they treat, must be represented as rare, and unusual: to accomplish which,
either they put upon them a new dress, a new shape, and fashion of words and
expressions: or they deliver either that which is false, and against Scripture,
(they choosing rather to be erroneous, than not to be rare, and often venting
for new truths, old errors new dressed;) or that which is nice, and very
uncertainly grounded upon Scripture, they preferring a doubtful before a
common way; well knowing that usual truths will not suit with itching ears.
If the doctrines which they deliver be old, and ordinary truths, they often (as
men use to do by old stuffes) water them over with new expressions, strange and
new-minted phrases, not savouring of Scripture-simplicity, or agreeable to the
pattern of wholesome words.

5. They labor to work the godly and orthodox Ministers out of the affections
of their hearers. They erect a building of honor for themselves upon the ruins
of the reputation of such who deserve to stand when they are ruined. Well they
know, 2 Cor. 10.10.
as long as the messenger is loved, the message is not like to be loathed. They
had much rather stand in the peoples light, than that a godly Minister should
stand in theirs. Omnis apostata est osor sui Ordinis.
The greatest enemies to true have ever been false teachers. Thus it was of
old; Michaiah and Jeremiah had the one a Zedekiah, the other a Pashur, to smite
them. And as the practice of smiting ( with the tongue at least) still
continues, Amos 7.10.
so does the pretense of that practice. Hence it is that faithful Ministers
must be represented as the disturbers and troublers of Church and State; though
the true reason why turbulent practices against the peace of both, are by false
prophets condemned (a good work) is that they may get all the practice to
themselves, while the peaceable servants of Christ are only suspected. Non
accuso verba tanquam vasa pretiosa, fed vinum quod in illis propinatur ab
ebriosis doctoribus. Aug.
I mislike not the vessels, good words, but il wine offered in them by drunken
teachers. Nor did any so subtly undermine blessed Paul, as the false
Apostles; his great labor in some Epistles, being the vindication of his
Apostolical reputation. If the eminency of a godly Minister for piety and parts
be so evident, as that they dare not bring any downright accusation against
him, then these creeping seducers will ordinarily either doubt of, or deny his
calling; or else will mention his commendations with a But of their own
framing, or else so slightly and lukewarmly commend him (as thus perhaps, a
good honest man, a well meaning man, a pretty man,) as that it shall almost
amount to a discommendation.

6. They affix the highest commendations imaginable to their own opinions and
persons. 1. Their opinions they represent as the ways of God, the glorious
beamings out of light, the only paths of peace and sweetness, the liberty of
the Gospel, and other such like good words and fair speeches, Romans 16.18.
they use to deceive the hearts of the simple. Like Mountebanks, who despairing
that any will buy their oils and medicines, for any good they find by them,
are wont themselves to commend their virtue to the ignorant throng. 2. Their
own persons they represent as the most eminently qualified, for grace and
learning, of any the (mere) sons of men. They trumpet out their own godliness
and humility, meekness; Mat. 7.15.
though Christ tells us, they are wolves in sheeps clothing. And experience
proves them, with Montanus, Arius, Novatus, Pelagius, Arminius, to be but
Satan's Ministers, transformed as the Ministers of righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.14.
They pretend themselves to be the only Ministers, though herein they do but
imitate their Predecessors, who said they were Apostles, but were not: Rev.
2.2. 1 Cor. 11.13.
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. Their rare and raised
parts, their unparalleled abilities, and deep in-sight into Gospel truths they
proclaim to all the world, using great swelling words of vanity, in imitation
of him who gave out that himself was some great one, that so he might be said
to be the great power of God; Acts 8.9, 10.
and all because they know the fond multitude is ever more ready to judge of
faith by the person, than of the person by his faith.

1. The presence of wicked mon in the Church, Observe. 1.
is no sufficient ground of being offended at the Church. Mixtures of good and
bad men have ever been in the best societies; nor is it to be expected, till
the harvest, that tares and wheat can be parted perfectly: neither the godly,
Mat. 13.30.
nor Gods ordinances are therefore to be forsaken, because the wicked are
mixed. Needless society with the wicked, much more society with them in their
wickedness is to be avoided; but not such as from which we have no warrant
from God to separate, or wherein we join not in sin, but in that which is in it
self holy, saving, and commanded. As God does not, so neither must man punish
the innocent (whether himself or another) for the nocent. I fly from the
chafe, lest I should be also such, (says Aug.) Fugio paleam ne hoc fim; non
fugio aream, ne nihil sim.
I forsake not the floor lest I should be nothing. And though God does not
account evil to be good, yet he accounts it good that there should be evil.
And that good we shall find, could we (as we ought) be more watchful, zealous,
humble, fervent in prayer, longing for heaven by the necessitated company of
wicked men.

2. Observe. 2.
Satan uses sundry sorts of attempts to hurt the Church. Sometimes he creeps
and croucheth, at other times he roars and rages. He has several shapes, and
often changes his habit, though he never lays aside his hatred. Non deponit
odium, sed mutat ingenium.
One while he openly acknowledged that Christ was the Son of God; afterward he
stirred up his instruments to destroy Christ, because he made himself the Son
of God. Luke 4.41. John 19.7.
Satan (like an highway robber) frequently changes his apparel, that so the
unwary passenger may not discern him; he seldom appears in the same habit
twice together. In some ages of the Church he is a red dragon, in other, an old
Serpent; sometimes he uses his sword, at other times his pen. He commonly
proceeds from one extreme to another, from endeavoring to overthrow the Church
by persecution under heathens, to the hurting it more by promotions, and
seducings under Papacy. In one age, he advances superstition, in another,
profaneness; in one nothing shall be lawful, in another, every thing. None
shall preach at one time, every one at another. We cannot therefore judge, that
a way is none of Satan's, because it differs from that which was sometimes his,
but because it agrees with that which is always Gods.

3. Satan is most hurtful to the Church, Observe. 3.
when he opposes it by subtilty and creeping; when he comes not as an open
enemy, but an appearing friend. He is never so much a devil, Serpit putrida
tabes hypocrisis per omne corpus ecclesiae, omnes sunt amici and omnes inimici,
omnes necessarii and omnes adversarii, omnes domestici and nulli pacifici. Ecce
in pace amaritudo mea; amara prius in nece martyrum, amarior post in conflictu
haereticorum. Bern. ser. 33. in Cant.
as when he appears in white, and transforms himself into an Angel of light. He
does more hurt by creeping into, than breaking into the Church. False apostles
and seducers in the Church have been more hurtful to it by fraud, than bloody
and paganish persecuters by force. Satan has gained more victories by using
the one as sunshine to dazzle the eyes, than by raising the other as wind to
blow in the faces of the faithful. For his subtilty rather colors vice,
than openly contendeth against virtue. Under the resemblance of those graces,
for which Saints are most eminent, he draws to those neighbour-vices, which
seem to have most affinity with their Christian perfections. He colors over
superstition with religion, carnal policy with Christian prudence, cruelty
with justice, toleration with mercy, indiscreet fervor with zeal, pertinacy
with constancy. And never does sin so much prevail against us, as when it lies
in ambush behind appearances of piety. Nor is Satan's subtilty less hurtful in
using the ablest and most refined wits to devise and defend impious novelties
against the orthodox faith, as Arius, Sabellius, Pelagius, etc. of old; and of
late Servetus, Socinus, Arminius, etc. Satan fits every actor with a part
agreeable to him, and carves his Mercury on the most promising pieces. Those
whom God has furnished with the best weapons of parts and arts, have commonly
given his cause the deepest wounds. It Is our duty with prudence to countermine
subtilty, to steer our course by the card of Scripture, to mislike no good way
of God, because Satan makes it seemingly deformed; to love no way of sin,
though he makes it seemingly amiable; to build our faith upon no eminency of
man, and ever to be more forward to examine, than to admire what he says, or
is.

4. Observe. 4. Mat. 7.15.
The^ best Christians may sometimes be mistaken in Seducers. The advice of
Christ to beware of false prophets, shows how possible it is to be over-seen.
The shape into which they transform themselves, namely, the Apostles of Christ,
and the Ministers of righteousness, shows the difficulty of discerning them.
The very Apostles were deceived in him whom some conceive to be the Heresiarch,
Acts 8.13.
and one from whom these Seducers sucked their poison. 1 These. 5.21.
God will alone have the prerogative of trying the heart; the doctrines we
must, their hearts God only can search. And the difficulty of understanding who
are Seducers, should cause in the faithful diligence in trying what their best
of teachers deliver. The seduced most call for our pity, who with good meanings
though alas with bad success follow their blind leader; whose misery that we
may avoid, we must examine all we hear by the word, taking nothing upon trust,
not loving doctrines for men, but men for their doctrine, and it for its
Consonacy to Scripture, which should (like a sword of Paradise) keep errors
from entering into our hearts. Be not like little children, to gape at, and be
ready to swallow whatsoever the Nurse puts to the mouth. If Seducers appeal to
Scripture, 1 John 4.1.
to Scripture let them go; and if they cannot endure the light of that Sun,
reject them as spurious, and their meeting places as infected houses, and
schools of impiety. Psalm. 26.4.
Sit not among vain persons. Let not Satan take thee among his own, lest he
make thee one of his own.

5. Sin loves not to be seen in its own colors. Observe. 5.
These Seducers having in them no real goodness and worth, or fit
qualifications of piety and integrity, but intentions by their entrance to
seduce others, appeared not to be what indeed they were, but cunningly they
seemed to be what they were not, that so the faithful might admit them (as
they did) unawares, not knowing who they were. Sin is a deed of darkness, not
only because the sinners portion will be utter darkness but because his
practices he loves to conceal in the dark. Sins deformity makes not a sinner
desire that it should not be, but only that it should not be seen. Aaron
covered over his sin with the wickedness of the people. Exodus 32.22. 1 Samuel
15.21.
Saul colored over his sin of sparing Agag, and the cattle, with pretended
resolutions to sacrifice to the Lord. Carnal will ever has carnal wit
attending upon it. Love to sin refines the invention for concealing it. No sin
has beauty enough in its own complexion to win the affection of the fondest
spectator, unless its wrinkles be filled up with the paint of religious
pretenses. Sinners have a false conceit of God, they think he cannot see
through their coverts, like little children, because they shut their own eyes.
they think they are in the dark to all others. How much is holiness honored
by its enemies, who even when they hate the having of it, love to appear to
have it! How unable is an hypocrite to shun the dint of this Dilemma, If
holiness be bad, why does he so much as appear; if good, why does he no more
than appear holy? In a word, how slight and childish will all hypocritical
varnishings prove at the last day! Paint will not endure the fire of wrath, nor
can hidden wickedness be concealed in the day of divine disquisition.

6. Observe. 6.
Seducers with other sinners are modest in the beginning of sin. When these
Seducers first entered, the faithful thought them not such as afterward they
found them. They were like a deceitful gamester, or diceplayer, who playing
with one who is ignorant and wealthy, seems in the beginning of the game to be
altogether unskilful, till (at length) by degrees, he puts forth his craft,
and cheats him of all he has. And never has Satan been so dangerous an enemy
either to Churches, or persons, as when he has been hurtful insensibly,
gradually, and creepingly. He can hardly tempt men at one leap to get up to the
top of impiety, but by several steps. As 1. By an evil motion. 2. By some
kind of approbation. 3. By determination to embrace it. 4. By a vicious action.
5. By an evil habit. 6. By defense, and justification of sin. Till 7. there be
a glorying, and boasting in it. Satan dies not a man a purple, or a scarlet
sinner at the first; but after diverse tinctures, that so at the last he may
take the deepest dye. He windeth not up his treble to the highest pitch
hastily, but strains it up by little and little to the desired height; at the
first he makes men adventure upon actions questionable, whether sinful or not;
then he presses them forward to sins undoubted, yet small; and then he easily
draws men from making little account of small sins, to make small account of
great sins. How dangerously, because gradually, did Satan bring idolatry into
the Church! First, images and pictures of Saints were used in private for
memory, history, or ornamennt only; afterward in Gregory's days, they were
brought into the Church, but with an express prohibition of worshipping them;
in the next age, the worshipping of them was enjoined, yet not for themselves,
but in respect only of what they did represent; but since the Council of
Trent, it is the Tenent of the Roman Church, that images are to be worshipped
for themselves; Ut in se con^iderantur, non tantum ut vicem gerunt exemplaris.
Bell. De imag. Sanc. l. 2. c. 21. Plat. in Bonif. 3.
and further the heathen go not in their idolalatry. The great Seducer of the
Nations, the Pope, was he not creeping and modest in his beginnings to get into
his present height of tyranny! First, he contends for a bare primacy of order;
after he pretends to a little more, the receiving the last appeal from the
other Patriarchs. In Boniface the thirds time, he puts in for the title of
universal Bishop; and in his next Successors time, to give spiritual laws
to the whole Church; and after him in Pope Hildebrands time to give temporal
laws to Kings and Princes. Satan is like a deceitful tradesman, who first by
fair-dealing gains Customers, that so afterward by foul-dealing he may gull
them. Teachers must not speedily be admitted. It Is good to know before we take
or trust them. And people should take heed that they forsake not their old
approved Ministers, who have been thoroughly made manifest to them in all
things, (2 Cor. 11.6.) to embrace such strange Doctors, whose design is in
time to bring in strange doctrines. The mothers milk is most wholesome for the
child. The Ministry that begat thee spiritually is fittest to nourish thee.
They who often change their Masters, are seldom good scholars. Please not thy
self in the parts or abilities of thy Minister, but labor to find the
experimental working of his Ministry upon thine heart, that thou may be able
to answer Seducers, when they suggest that thy Minister is Anti-christan, thus;
He has not been Antichristian to me; for sure I am, he was the instrument of
forming Christ in my heart.

This of the third particular, in the description of the entrance of these
Seducers, viz. their subtilty and slynesse in getting into the society of the
faithful.

4. The fourth and last thing by which he describes their entrance, is by
clearing and vindicating it from the objections which the Christians might
possibly raise against God, (as if he were regardlesse of the welfare of his
Church, and indulgent toward the wickedness of the Seducers in suffering them
to enter,) and against godliness, when they observed that they who pretended
to be the most eminent in the Church for religion, did turn Apostates. And this
he does in these words, Who were before of old ordained to this condemnation.
q. d. Although they have entered so cunningly, as that the Church was not aware
of them, yet was not their entrance unawares to God, but he did foresee it,
and therefore will see that they do his Church no harm; and though now God
seems to spare them, yet are they in a state of condemnation; and though they
formerly seemed such eminent professors of religion, yet God foresaw they
would prove as they are; nay, for their sins ordained them to this condition
into which they are now fallen.

In which vindication of Gods care of his Church, and justice against the
Seducers: their punishment is two ways considerable.

1. In its severity, it was this condemnation.

2. In its certainty, they were before of old ordained to it.

1. The punishment of the Seducers considered in the severity of it, this
condemnation. Explicat.


But 1. What was this Condemnation of which the Apostle here speaks?

2. Why called Condemnation?

The word here importing Condemnation, (...). judicium, damnatio, condemnatio,
is taken sundry ways in Scripture.

1. And most properly; for the Sentence pronounced by the judge, or rather a
judiciary sentencing, or condemning; and so it is taken Romans 2.2. where the
Apostle says, We are sure the judgment ((...)) of God is according to truth;
and Mat. 7.2. With what judgment ((...)) ye judge, ye shall be judged.

2. For Administration of Government toward those that are under it, whether by
judgment or mercy; and it is spoken of Gods providence ruling and ordering the
affairs of the world, as Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are his ((...)
judgments! also of Christ's Government of that Kingdom which his Father gave
him, in the salvation of humble, and condemnation of proud sinners, John 9.39.
(...), For judgment am I come into this world, etc. that is, for the
discharging the office of a King, or a Judge, in adjudging to every one his due
recompense. In which respect judgment is taken for the whole judiciary
proceeding of Christ in the great day of judgment toward the good and bad, in
regard of his discovering, and sentencing of, and executing sentence upon all
at that day, Acts 24.25. He reasoned, (...), of judgment to come. Heb. 6.2.


3. For a Cause or Controversy discussed, judged, and determined by judges. So
1 Cor. 6.7. (...), Ye go to law one with another, ye have causes and
controversies among your selves.

4. Mark 12.40. Luke 20.47.23.40. Romans 2.3. Cor. 11.34. Judicium vocat vel
damnationem, vel reprobrum sensum, quo feruntur, ut pietatis doctrinam
pervertant; neque enim id quisquam facere potest nisi suo exitio. Calv. in loc.
Potest hoc judicium intelligi justa derelictio, qua propter peccata
praecedentia permissi fuerunt pati naufragium fidei, and variis errorum
fluctibus abripi, ita ut etiam fierent errorum magistri, tandem judicium illud
gravissimum aeternae damnationis subituri. Estius in loc.
For the wrath, vengeance, damnation, and punishment executed upon men for
wickedness, as Romans 3.8. (...), whose damnation is just. And 1 Cor. 11.29. He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks (...), damnation to
himself. So Mat. 23.14. Ye shall receive the greater (...), damnation. And
Romans 13.2. They that resist, shall receive to themselves (...), damnation. And
1 Timothy 3.6. Lest he fall, (...), into the condemnation of the devil. So 2 Pet.
2.3. Whose (...), judgment now of a long time lingreth not. And thus I take it
in this place. The Apostle Jude here by (...), This condemnation, intends that
punishment by God inflicted upon Seducers in this life for their abusing the
grace of God, whereby they did not only themselves turn back-sliders and
apostates, but become opposers of the truth, and perverters of others; hereby
making way for their own eternal condemnation. A punishment made up of many
poysonfull ingredients, and that has in it a complication of many spiritual
woes, which (as the Scripture testifies) belonged to these Seducers, and to
others who were in the same condemnation with them, as,

1. A voidnesse of spiritual judgment and understanding, an inability to
judge between good and bad, things that differ; an insufficiency to approve of
any thing which is excellent, whereby they put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter; spoke evil of the ways of grace which they understood not, and of the
Gospel in which they saw no beauty, it being hid to these lost ones, who
contemned and slighted it; were delivered up to a reprobate sense, Phil. 1.10.
2 Pet. 2.12. 2 Cor. 4.3. Romans 1.28. Romans 11.7. Romans 9.18.
and because they loved not what they knew, were not able to know what to love.

2. Another woe in this condemnation is, a spirit of benummednesse,
insensiblenesse, cauterizednesse, under all the most awakening administrations
of Gods word, or rod; a judgment which the Scripture puts for all the misery
and condemnation of the reprobate, and that which differenceth them from the
elect, Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. And Romans 11.7. having spoken of the elect, he says, the rest were
hardened. Of Seducers does Paul speak, 1 Timothy 4.2.
where he tells us of some who had consciences seared with an hot iron, whom
nothing awakeneth, but eternal burnings, (though too late) to a serious
sensiblenesse of their estate. These seducers, fed themselves without fear,
Jude 12.

3. A third woe in this condemnation is inccorrigiblenesse, and unreformednesse
under the means of salvation. All the dews of salvation fall upon them as
showers upon the barren wilderness; and they are by God compared to drossie
silver, Jer. 6.28.
which all the art and pains of the Silver-smith cannot refine; and therefore
called reprobate silver. These seducers in Gods Ort-yard were trees without
fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots, Jude 12.

4. A fourth woe in this condemnation is Gods giving them up to strong
delusion; a delighting in error and false doctrine, with a believing it; and
thus seducers are said not only to deceive, but to be deceived; 2 Timothy 3.13. 2
These. 2.10, 11.
and those who received not the love of the truth, had strong delusion sent
them from God, and upon them the deceivablenesse of unrighteousness takes
hold; and thus God suffered a lying spirit to deceive Ahab, and his prophets.

5. A fifth woe in this condemnation is a stumbling at, and a quarrelling with
the word of life, 1 Pet. 2.8. and Christ the rock of salvation. Thus Paul
speaks of some who were contentious, and obeyed not the truth; Romans 2.8.
and of seducers who resist the truth, 2 Timothy 3.8. Like these in Jude, who
contended so muth against the faith, that all which Christians could do, was
little enough to contend for it, against those who made the Gospel a plea for
licenciousnesse.

6. A sixth woe in this condemnation is progressiveness in sin; 2 Timothy 3.13.
and as the Apostle speaks of seducers, a waxing worse and worse, a walking so
far into the sea of sin, as at length to be over head and ears; a descending
to the bottom of the hill, a daily treasuring up wrath; a proficiency in Satan's
school, a growing artificially wicked, and even doctors of impiety.

7. Which lastly, will prove the great and heavy woe, not to be contented to be
wicked, and to go to hell alone, but to be leaders to sin, 2 Timothy 3.13.
and to leaven others with impiety; and thus Paul says, that seducers were
deceiving, as well as deceived. 2 Pet. 2.2.
And Peter, that many shall follow their pernicious ways. And certainly,
impiety propagated shall be condemnation heightened.

2. Why is this punishment of seducers called Condemnation? (...), for (...),
the cause for the effect.
I grant Condemnation is properly the sentence, or censure condemning one to
some punishment; and though in this place it be taken for the very punishment
it self, yet fitly does the Spirit of God set out this punishment of wicked
men, by a word that notes a sentencing them thereunto; And that 1. Because a
sentence of condemnation is even already denounced against them. 2. Because it
is such a punishment, as by judiciary sentence is wont to be inflicted upon
guilty offenders.

1. It is really and truly denounced, etc. For besides Gods fore-appointing the
wicked to this condemnation, as it is the punishment of sin, and the execution
of his justice, wicked men are in this life sentenced to punishment. 1. By the
word of God, which tells them, that God will render to every man according to
his deeds; to them who do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, Romans 2.8.
etc. And that he who believes not, is condemned already, John 3.18. 2. By
their own conscience, which accuses, and condemns, as Gods Deputy, and here
tells them what they deserve both here and hereafter. If our hearts condemn us,
etc. 1 John 3.20. etc. 3. By the judgments of God manifested against those who
have lived in the same sins, the wrath of God being revealed against all
unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. 4. By the contrary courses of the godly: The
practices of Saints really proclaiming, that because the ways of the wicked
are sinful and destructive, therefore they avoid them; Mat. 12.41, 42.
and thus Noah sentenced the old world, by being a practical Preacher of
righteousness. 2 Pet. 2.5
And all these sentencings of wicked men, do but make way for that last and
great sentence to be pronounced at the day of judgment, Mat. 7.23. Mat. 25.41.
to the punishment both of eternal loss and pain.

2. It is such a punishment as by judiciary sentence is wont to be executed
upon guilty offenders; and so it is in two respects, 1. Because it is
Righteous. 2. Severe.

1. Righteous. These Seducers were not spiritually punished without precedent
provocations; Romans 1.28.
as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge; God gave them over to
a reprobate mind; 2 These. 2.10.
and God sends them justly strong delusions, that they should believe, and
teach a lie, because they received not the love of the truth: and because they
would not be Scholars of truth, they justly become Masters of error.

2. The punishment of wicked men is such as is wont to be inflicted upon
offenders by a sentence, because of its weight and severity. It is not (...),
or (...), not a paternall chastisement, or a rebuke barely to convince of a
fault; but it is (...), the Judges sentence, condemning to a punishment, the
guilty Malefactor. It is not medicinal but penal; not the cutting of a
Chirurgian, but of a Destroyer; the happiness of correction stands in teaching
us, but this punishment is the giving of sinners up to unteachablenesse; and
what is it indeed but a hell on this side hell, for God to withdraw his grace,
and to suffer men to be as wicked as they will, to be daily damning themselves
without control, to be carried down to the gulf of perdition, both by the
wind of Satan's tentation, and (which is worse) the tide of sinful inclination.
For God to say, Be, and do as bad as you will, be filthy still, Rev. 22.11.
sleep on now, and take your rest, I Will never jog nor disturb you in your sins.
How sore a judgment is it to be past feeling, so as that nothing cooler than
hell fire, and lighter then the loins of an infinite God can make us sensible,
though too late!

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observe. 1.
The condemnation of the wicked is begun in this life. As heaven, so hell is in
the seed, before it is in the fruit. The wicked on this side hell are tunning
and treasuring up that wrath, Romans 2.5.
which hereafter shall be broached and revealed. The wicked have even here hell
in its causes. The old bruises which their souls by sin have received in this
life, will be painful when the change of weather comes, when God alters their
condition by death. When thy lust asks, How can thou want the pleasure? let
thy faith answer by asking another question, How can I bear the pain of such a
sin? Observe. 2. Tristitia nostra quasi habet, quia in somnis tranfit. Qui
somnium indicat, addit quasi, quasi sedebam, quasi loquebar, quasi equitaba^;
quia cum evigelaverit, non invenit quod videbat. Quasi thesaurum inveneram
dicit mendicus, si quasi non esset, mendicus non esset, etc. In adversis um
braest, vel similitudo, non ipsares. Ansel. 2 Cor. 6.9.
Put sin into its best dress, and its but gilded condemnation. 2 Spiritual
judgments are ever the sorest. In Gods withdrawing his grace, and delivering
up to a reprobate sense, there is something of Condemnation. The soul of a
judgment is its seizing upon the soul. The greatest misery which can befall
the body, is but for the soul to leave it: and what proportion bears this to
the misery of Gods leaving the soul! The death in death is the miscarriage of
the soul. If a man be not heart-sick, though otherwise distempered, he is not
feared; and if not soulsick, and the union between God and him weakened, there
is no danger. Bodily miseries are but appearing and opinionative, and there is
a vanity in outward troubles as well as enjoyments. The Apostle makes the
greatest suffering of the body to be but as such, rather a dream then a reality
of suffering. The poorest Saint never had a drop of condemnation in a sea of
calamity. His affliction is not laniena, but medicina; not Butchery, but
Surgery; nay the end of Gods chastning is, that he may not be judged. 1 Cor.
11.32.
How different is the condemning of a Malefactor, from the reprehension of a
Son, the Fathers rod, from the Executioners axe! Heb. 12.7. Ne timeas
flagellari, sed exhaeredari.
If we endure chastning, the Lord deals with us as with sons. Strive not so
much to get the rod taken off thy back, as to get it into a Fathers hand. How
madly merry is every obstinate sinner in all his worldly enjoyments! How
unsuitable is thy music when thou art sacrificing that which should be dearer
to thee then thy dearest child, and celebrating the Funerals of thy precious
soul! Si doles condoleo, si non doles doleo magis.
Who would not commiserate his mirth, who goes dancing to his own execution,
whose only strife is to double his misery by shunning the thoughts of that
which he cannot shun. Be not taken with what thou have in gift, but what thou
have in love. In receiving of every mercy imitate Isaaks jealousy, and say,
Art thou that very mercy, that mercy indeed, which comes in the blood of
Christ? Art thou sent from a Father, or a Judge? Satius est, ut vim
qualemcunque mihi inferas, Domine, quam parcens mihi, me in meo torpore securum
derelinquere. Observe. 3.
What do I receiving, if I shall never be received? It Is infinitely better that
God should correct thee so, as to awaken thee, then by prospering to let thee
sleep in sin, till it be too late to arise. It was better for the Prodigal to
be famished home, then furnished out. 3. These condemned ones should warn us
that we incur not the like condemnation with them. Saints should be examples of
imitation, and sinners of caution. A good heart will get good even by bad men,
and take honey out of the carcass of a Lion. These Seducers were mentioned and
stigmatized by Jude with this black mark, not only to show that God was
righteous in punishing, but that we might not be unrighteous and wretched in
imitating them. And that we may not, 1. Neglect not, undervalue not the truths
of the Gospel. Romans 1.26.
Shut not thy eyes, lest God suffer Satan to blind them. How severely did God
punish the Heathens for opposing the light of nature; and will not Christ, when
clearly discovered, and unkindly neglected, 2 These. 2.9.10
much more heighten thy condemnation? If Christ be not a rock of foundation,
he will be a stone of stumbling. Fruits which grow against a wall, are soon
ripened by the Suns heat, and so are sins which are committed under the
Sunshine of the Gospel. The contempt of the Gospel is the condemnation of the
world, John 3.12. 2 Pet. 2.1.
it brings swift destruction. 2. Preserve a tender conscience. Tremble at the
first solicitations of sin, which make way for eternal, by taking away
spiritual feeling. This deluge of impiety in which these Seducers were
drowned, began with a drop. Many knots tied one upon another, will hardly be
loosed; every spot falling upon the clothes, makes a man the more regardlesse
of them; and every sin defiling the conscience, makes a man the more careless
of it. He who dares not wade to the ancles, is in no danger of being swallowed
up in the depths. Modest beginnings make way for immodest proceedings in sin.
The thickest ice that will bear a cart, begins with a thin trembling cover that
will not bear a pibble. As these Seducers crept in by degrees into the Church,
so did Satan by degrees creep into them; 2 Timothy 2.16.
They increased to more ungodliness; They went down to this condemnation by
steps, and after they had begun, they knew not where or whether they should
stop. 3. Take heed of turning the grace of God into wantonness, of abusing his
goodness either to soul or body, to impiety. Take not occasion to be sinful,
because God is merciful; to be long-sinning, because God is long-suffering; to
sin because grace abounds; to make work for the blood of Christ, to turn
Christian liberty into unchristian libertinisme. This must needs incense even
mercy it self to leave, and plead against thee; and what then will justice do?
They who never enjoyed this grace of God, go to hell; they who have it, and use
it not, run on foot to hell; but they who abuse and turn it into wantonness,
gallop, or go to hell on hors-back.
This for the first way in which the punishment of these Seducers was
considerable, viz. Its severity, This condemnation.

The second follows, namely, its certainty, they were before of old ordained
to it.

EXPLICATION.
In this two things require Explication. 1. What this ordination is of which
the Apostle here speaks. 2. In what respect it is said to be before of old.

For the first, Metaphora sumpta ab it is qui in codicillis scribunt, memoriae
causa, qua statuunt agere. Haec Metaphora inde sumpta est, quod aeternum Dei
consilium quo ordinati sunt fideles ad salutem, Liber vocatu^. Calv. De quibus
olim praenuntiatum est in Scripturis quod deventuri sunt in judicium. Est. in
loc.
The word [(...)] here translated Ordained, properly signifying, forewritten,
enrolled, bill'd, book'd, or registered. It seems (say some) to be a Metaphor
taken from Records in Courts, wherein things are set down for an after
remembrance of them: Or (according to others) from books of remembrance,
wherein for the greater surenesse of doing any thing, men write down what they
purpose to do, and desire not to forget. Calvin draws the allusion from Scrip
ture, in which the eternal counsel of God, wherein the faithful are elected
to salvation, is called a Book. Sure we are, it is a Metaphorical speech; and
by none of our Protestant Divines (as I remember) is that interpretation
embraced, which is given by some Papists, who (happily) to wave the Doctrine of
reprobation, expound this forewriting here mentioned, to be the predictions by
writing which went before in the Scriptures concerning these Seducers. Nor can
this writing here mentioned, so be attributed to God, as if either he could
properly be said to have a memory, or to remember any thing, or had any defect
or weakness of memory, or had any material books, wherein he wrote any thing
at all: but this writing or booking is spoken concerning him (...), by way of
resembling him to man, who, what he purposes exactly to remember, or certainly
to do, he books and writes down before hand. And the Scripture speaks of four
Meta phoricall books, or writings which God has 1. The Book of his providence,
or Gods knowledge and decree of all the particular persons, things, and events
that ever were or shall be in the world; and in this book were written all the
members of David, Romans 5.1. Summa judicii aequitas ex humano foro significatur.
Pareus in Apoc. ^0.
Psalm. 132.16. And all the tears of David, Psalm. 56.8. 2. The Book of the last
and universal judgment, which is the perfect knowledge that God has of the
actions of all men good and bad, according to which at the last day he will
give judgment: thus Dan. 7.13. its said, The thrones shere set up, etc. and
the books were opened. And Revel. 20.12. I saw the dead, small and great, stand
before God, and the books were opened. It Is a term taken from public
judgments here among men, wherein are produced all the writings of
informations, depositions of witnesses, etc. to show that Gods Omniscience
shall discover and rehearse all actions, and his justice proceed accordingly.
3. The Book of life, Rev. 20.12. and 22 19. called also the Lambs book of life,
Revel. 13.8. and 21.27. which is Gods eternal decree to bestow grace and glory
upon some: Phil. 4.3.
and in this are set down the names of the elect; of these it is said often,
Their names are written in the book of life; Luke 10.20.
and at the last day this book is said to be opened, because it shall then be
manifested to all who are elected. 4. This writing here mentioned by Jude,
namely, that black bill, or the Catalogue of those whom God has appointed unto
wrath, 1 These 5.9.
ordinarily considered as the Positive or Affirmative part of Reprobation,
wherein God decreed justly to damn some for sin. For, Reprobation is
considerable in a double act. First, Negative; which is that of preterition, or
passing by of some; and Gods will not to elect them. Secondly, Positive; which
is Gods ordaining them to punishment for sin. And in both these acts there is a
double degree.

In the first, the Negative act, Gods denying his grace, in this life. And 2.
his denying them glory and salvation in the next life.

In the Positive or affirmative act. 1. Gods ordaining the wicked to
blindness, and obduration here. And 2. eternal condemnation hereafter. And
upon holy Scripture are both these acts, and both the degrees of each of them
evidently grounded. 1. Concerning the Negative act speaks the Spirit of God,
John 10.36. Ye are not of my sheep. And Matthew. 7.23. I never knew you: Mat.
13.11. To them it is not given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom. And Mat.
11.25. Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, etc. for so it
seemed good in thy sight: And Rev. 13.8. and 20.15. There are some mentioned
whose names are not written in the Book of Life. 2. Concerning the Positive, or
Affirmative act, speaks the Spirit of God in 1 Pet. 2.8. where the Apostle
mentioning those that stumbled at the word, and were disobedient; says, they
were appointed thereunto. And Romans 9.18. Whom he will be hardneth. And ver. 21.
he speaks of Vessels made to dishonor. And ver. 22. 1 These 5.9.
Of Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. And John 17.12. Judas is said to be
a son of perdition. And here Jude says, that these Seducers were written down,
and appointed to this condemnation, which was their abode among the faithful,
with an obstinate opposing of the truth and faith of Christ, making way to
their own eternal condemnation. A doctrine (I confess) not more distasteful
to the bad, then hard to be understood by the best. It is no where (as Pareus
notes, treating upon it, Romans 9.) perfectly apprehended, but in that eternal
School. I profess my greater desire to study then discuss it. I did not seek
it, nor dare I altogether shun it; ever remembering, that though we must not
rifle the cabinet of the secret decree, yet neither bushel the candle of
Scripture-discovery; the former being unwarrantable curiosity, the later
sinful ingratitude. Briefly therefore,

2 For the second, in what respect this ordination is said to be before of old.
The word (...), of old, is sometime applied to a thing done a little time
before: Pilate asks of Joseph, who came unto him to ask the body of Jesus,
whether he had been (...), any while dead. The word (as Doctor Twiss observes)
does not signify any definite time: It is applicable even to eternity. And
though (as he notes) the signification of the word be not extended to eternity
by any force in it self; yet from the matter whereof the Apostle treats, viz.
the ordination or decree of God (which is eternal) it ought to be so extended.
The denial of the eternity of Gods decree was one of the prodigious doctrines
of Vorstius. As the ancient of days was before there was a day, so this (of
old) was before there was an age. Which as it refers to the forementioned
ordination, comprehends, in the judgment of many Learned and Godly Divines, as
well,

1. The independency and absoluteness, of this ordination.

As 2. The immutability and unchangeableness of this ordination.

1. For the first: This ordination (according to some) was absolute, from all
causes in the creature; of old, before these Seducers were, before their sins
were, in respect not only of their actual existence, but even of their
prevision also and foresight of their futurition or coming to pass hereafter.
And in delivering their judgment herein, 1. q. 23. Art. 5.
they consider Reprobation, with Aquinas and other Shoolmen, either in respect
of the act of God reprobating, Gods willing and decreeing; or in respect of the
effect thereof, the things willed or decreed, as God wills that one thing
should be for another.

1. As to Reprobation in respect of the act or decree of Gods reprobating, or
Gods willing or decreeing; they say, the sins of the creature cannot be
assigned as the cause of reprobation; Non est assignare causam divinae
voluntatis ex part actus volendi. Aquin ubi supr.
and herein they agree with Aquinas and the sounder Schoolmen. They conceive
that the decree of reprobation was not without the foresight of sin; Yet that
the sight of sin was neither in order of nature or time, before Reprobation,
nor after it; but purely, evenly, and equally accompanying it. That Gods decree
to permit sin (from whence comes prevision of sin) and to condemn for sin, were
not the one subordinate to the other, or of a diverse order; as if the one were
the end, and the other the mean; but coordinate, and of one and the same order
and means, both accommodated to one and the same end: God neither condemning
that sin may be permitted, nor permitting sin, that he might condemn; but
permitting sin, and condemning for sin, that the glory of his justice might be
manifested; the glorious manifestation of his justice being not advanced only
by permission of, or only by condemning for sin, but by both jointly, or
together; according to which apprehension, sin foreseen could not be the
cause of Reprobation. They conceive, that God not depending upon any condition
in the creature, no other way fore-knew the futurition of sin, than by his own
decree to permit it. And they further urge, if consideration of sin, were
before Gods decree of Reprobation, then the decree of permission of sin should
have been before the decree of Reprobation; and so God should intend the
permission of sin, before he intended the damnation of man for it; and then it
would follow, (in regard that what is first in intention, is last in execution)
that damnaton for sin should be in execution, before the permission of sin, for
which men are damned; And this is the Argument often urged by D. Twiss; to which
he sometimes adds, that whatsoever is first in intention, has the nature of an
end, in respect of that which follows it; but the permission of sin cannot be
considered as an end in respect of the damnation of men, it being impossible
that men should be damned to this end, that sin should be permitted. And they
of this opinion assert, that if because God decreed, that condemnation shall
only be for sin, it follows that sin is a cause of that decree; it will also
unavoidably follow, because God has decreed, that salvation shall only be in
a way of good works, that good works are a cause of that decree; they
conceiving that though good works do not go before salvation with the same
efficacity, wherein sin goes before damnation ( good works being only
dispositive causes of the one, and sins meritorious causes of the other) yet
that they go before it, Non eadem dispositionis e^icacitate, sed tamen eodem
necessitatis ordine.
with the same order of necessity. And they add, that the Apostle removes both
from the election of Jacob, and the reprobation of Esau, the consideration of
all works either good or evil, as well in respect of their prevision, as
actual existence; to the end that he might show that the purpose of God,
according to election, was not according to works, but of him that calls: and
so by the same reason, that the decree of the reprobation of Esau, was not of
evil works, but of him that calls and leaves whom he will.

2. As to Reprobation in regard of the effect (or rather consequent thereof)
the things decreed and willed, or as God wills that one thing should be for
another, It is not doubted, albeit Gods eternal volitions or decrees, depend
not upon any temporal object or causes, as the prime motives thereunto, but
that God by his eternal decree ordained, that this or that event in the
temporal execution, shall not follow but upon this, or that going before; as,
that in those of years, the actual bestowing of eternal life, shall depend
upon believing; repenting and persevering, and that the actual punishing with
eternal death shall depend upon final unbelief and impenitency. This is not
to make the eternal decrees of Election and Reprobation dependent upon the
foreseen contingent Acts of man's freewill, but to make temporal events, Acts,
or Things, one to depend conditionally upon another, for their being or not
being in time.

And yet 1. The cause of Reprobation, in respect of denying of grace, external,
whether in regard of the outward means; or internal, either common or saving,
is the will and pleasure of God. As it is the mere will and pleasure of God
whereby in time men are reprobated from grace, was from eternity; for as God
does, or does not in time so it he purposes to do or not to do from all
eternity. Now, that in time the denial of grace is from the will and pleasure
of God, is most evident from Scripture, which teaches that God calls to grace,
and gives the very means of salvation to whomsoever he will. Act. 16.7. Mat.
11.24, 25 Deuteronomy. 29.4. Nulla sunt tam detestanda facinora quae possunt gratiae
arceredonum. Prosp.
The Spirit suffered not Paul to preach at Bithynia: To you it is given (says
Christ) to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, and to them it is not
given. And because it seemed good in his Fathers sight, he hid these things
from the wise and prudent. Tire and Sidon would have made better use of the
means of grace than the Jews, yet God bestowed those means not upon the former,
but up on the later.

But 2. The cause, of Reprobation, in regard of Gods denial of glory, is not
merely from Gods will and pleasure, but from the pravity and sin of men. God in
time denies glory in regard of men's impiety; and therefore he purposed to deny
it for that. Depart from me will Christ say only to the workers of iniquity,
Mat. 7.23. There shall enter into the new Jerusalem, nothing that defiles, The
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

And 3. The cause of Reprobation, in regard of blindness, and obduration in
sin in this life, and eternal damnation in the life to come, is from man's
impiety. God decreed that Condemnation should not be, but for sin; nor hardening
but for preceding rebellion, nor that the wages of death should be paid without
the work of sin. No man is ordained to a just punishment but for some sin; but
the withdrawing of grace, the blindness and obduration of sinners, are the
punishments of preceding sin, as appears. Romans 1.27 God gave them up; etc, that
they might receive the recompense ((...)) of their error which was meet. To
crown or to damn, is an act of judiciary power, and proceeds according to the
tenor of the revealed Gospel. The eternal dedecree of the damnation of the
very Devils, was never determined to be executed otherwise than for their own
misdeeds.

2. This expression [ of old] notes the immutability, and unchangeableness of
this Ordination; the (...), De ration^ aeternitatis est immutabilitas. Aug.
Cons. l. 12. c. 15.
the immutability of his counsel; that which is eternal, is unalterable. This
Ordination is like such a booking, and writing down of a thing as shall
unfailingly be performed. Nor can this book or writing of God (as a man's book
may) be lost or burnt, but it continues irreversibly and inviolably to be
performed; he who wrote it wants not skill, nor will, nor power to bring to
pass whatever he has written in it. What God has written, he has written;
and though sometimes he changes his denunciations, yet never his decrees; I am
the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6. The strength of Israel is not as man, that he
should repent, 1 Samuel 15.29. His counsel shall stand, Prove. 19.22. The Lord
has purposed it, who shall disannul it? Isai. 14.27. The number of those
appointed to wrath, 1 These. 5.9. is determined as well materialiter, who, as
formaliter, how many they are. Gods appointments are peremptory, not depending
upon the variable will of man, as if God had determined certainly concerning
none, but only as he sees they will believe or not believe; for how suits it
with the wisdom of God, so to work, as to determine nothing of the end of his
work! To make man, and not to appoint what shall become of him! How with the
love he bears to his own glory, to have creatures more beholding to themselves,
than their Maker! To hear them using this language, That we may escape hell, if
we will, we thank God; but that we do, we thank our selves, who by the use of
our free will, made that possibility beneficial to our selves!

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obser. 1.
Groundless are the exceptions which corrupt minds raise against the
delivering this Doctrine of Reprobation; and weak are the calumnies with which
they load it. Exceptions prevented.
1. For the first, God cannot be charged with cruelty in any man's Reprobation.
It is no cruelty in God to deny him grace to whom it is not at all due, but an
act of just liberty, and free power, Romans 9.21. nor can it be cruelty, but
vindicative justice for God to appoint men to punishment for sin, Romans 9.22.
This will be more clear, if we consider, Ea gratia quae per communis
providentiae administrationem sive sub lege naturae, sive sub gratia Evangelica
hominibus vario dimenso dispensatur, per hunc praeteritionis actum non
adimitur, sed potius praesupponitur. Synops. pur. theol. p. 290. Deus nunquam
indurat, nisi habito respectu ad praecedentia peccata. Riv. disp.
that by Reprobation all grace is not denied, but only that grace which is
peculiar to the Elect. That which is afforded by the administration of common
providence, either under the Law of Nature, or the dispensation of the Gospel,
being not taken away; God leaves the reprobate to their own free will under his
common providence, and in it affords to them those benefits which in the state
of innocence were sufficient to salvation, and which in this state of
corruption, especially under the Gospel, make men altogether without excuse
before God. And God never decreed to leave and harden any in sin, but such
who by their own free will leave God, harden themselves against his ways, and
abuse his abundant mercy extended toward them. God never appointed that any
should stumble at the word, but for their contempt of it. From falling into
which impiety, that the Elect are prevented, is to be attributed to the free
will or mercy of God, extended indeed to them, but due to none. 2. Nor
secondly, by decreeing the reprobation of sinners, can any conclude that God is
the cause of the sins for which the reprobate are damned. Deo reprobante non
irrogatur a liquid quo homo fit deterior, sed tantum non erogatur quo fiat
melior. Aug. Inter antecedens and consequens non intercedit Causalitas.
Although by reprobation God puts forth no act, whereby man is made holy, yet
neither is any thing done by it, whereby a man is made wicked. It Is true, sin
is a consequent of Gods decree, or that which follows upon it, as its
antecedent: but no effect flowing from the decree as its cause. It follows
not, because God gives not, that therefore he takes away repentance from
sinners; and that he throws down, because he raises not up. The Sun cannot be
said to be the cause of darkness, although darkness necessarily follows the
withdrawing of it: nor is reprobation the cause of sin, Liberalitas Dei qua
conservamur ne cadamus Labilitas nostra qua cadimus nisi conserv^mur.
although sin infallibly follow reprobation. Its Gods bounty whereby we are
preserved from falling, our own unstablenesse whereby we fall unless we be
preserved. Predestination is an effectual cause in the producing of all
salutiferous actions, but reprobation is no effectual cause in the producing
of wicked actions; and neither the one, nor the other implies any compulsion
or forcing unto actions, whether good or evil. True it is, that God decreed
not only privatively and permissively, but also with an energeticall working
will to be conversant about sinful actions; As, 1. That he would give to the
sinner at the very time when sinful actions are committed, the power and use
of understanding, and free will, without which he could not sin: And, 2. That
he would concur ad materialem actionem peccati, to the matter of the action it
self, which otherwise could not come into act, or being. 3. That he would deny
all such means as would have prevented the sinners sinning. 4. That he would
lay before sinners those occasions, and (possibly stir up in them those
cogitations) which he knew they would abuse to the committing of sin. 5. That
he would so limit and order their sins, that they should break forth in no
other measure, at no other time, upon no other persons than hmiself has
fore-appointed. 6. That all their sins should turn to his own glory, and the
good of his Elect: but any energeticall operative will of God which so has a
working in sinful actions, as that it is the cause quod talis actio fit cum
tali defectu, or that it should work the contrariety and repugnancy of the
sinners will to the Law of God, or that there should be any influence sent into
the wills of men, from the decree, to cause this, we utterly deny and disclaim.
The liberty of the will is not at all extinguished by the decree of God; but
freely and upon deliberate choice, wicked men do as they do, having not only
potentiam in se liberam, but liberum usum potentiae, and the dominion of
free-agents over their actions, which ever are the productions of their own
frail and defiled free will. The decree of Reprobation never shows it self by
any such influx or impression as instills any malicious quality into man's will,
or forces it unto any malicious action. 3. Neither can this Doctrine of
Reprobation justly be charged to be a means of driving men to Despair, rather
granting the truth of this Arminian conceit, that all were reprobated, who were
not foreseen believing and persevering, with much more dreadful advantage may
Satan fasten temptations on poor wretches to despaip; the tempted person
knowing there is not one of many, who either believes or perseveres; that he for
his part has hitherto resisted the motions of the Spirit, and started aside
from all inclinations to good: and finding also by his own experience, and now
by Satan's arguing (who at last in part turns orthodox) that by his own power he
can no more believe, then carry a Mountain. But the opinion which makes Gods
decree absolute, arms a man against temptation to despair, and gives him cause
to bless God (as it has made thousands to do) that their salvation depends
not upon foreseeing what good courses out of their own free will, Incerta est
mibide meipso voluntas Dei. Quid ergo tuane tibi voluntas de teipso certa est,
nec times? Aug. de praed. Sanc. c. 11.
they would take and continue in, that the bending of men's hearts to believe
and persevere, are the supernatural fruits of Gods eternal decree, and not
the natural fruits of man's depraved and frail free will; And though he be
uncertain of the eternal will of God, yet is he more uncertain (as Augustine
says) of the strength and stability of his own. Nor do I at all understand,
but that by the same reason whereby Arminians argue, that the absolute decree
tends to drive men to despair; they must also grant, that the decree does the
like, as founded upon the prevision of man's impenitency; for the Divine
eternal prescience of future actions and events, as much infers their
absolute certainty and necessity, as the decree of absolute Reprobation: And
therefore (as it is commonly observed) the Schoolmen are as much troubled (and
In ignorantia sola quietem invenio. p. 1. q. 22. a 4.
Cajetan, though a learned man, confesses himself to be at a loss) in
resolving whether the prescience of God, as whether Predestination imposes a
necessity on future events. 4. Nor is this Doctrine of Reprobation injurious to
a godly life. It hinders not the use of the holy endeavors which God requires
of those who expect happiness, and would shun wretchedness. Man's industry must
not cease, about things or ends determined by Gods absolute unrevealed decree.
Though our endeavors do not make the end otherwise quoad eventum, then God
did fore-determine it, yet it was so determined by God, as that it should never
be acquired without the use of our endeavors. God does not by the absolute
decree of Election absolutely determine to save us, whether we believe or not
believe, repent, or not repent. And therefore Faith and Repentance are not to
be rejected; nor does he by the absolute decree of Reprobation determine to
damn any whether they believe, Bishop Davenant. Genesis 4.7. Romans 2.10 Cum
praedestinatio ad finem includit media, non potest hunc sperare, qui ista
negligit. Pride. lec. 1.
or not believe, repent, or not repent. Such absolute decrees (says a learned
man) are the absolute mistakings of the Arminians. We may truly say to every
man in the world, elected, or not elected, as God to Cain, If thou do well,
sh^lt thou not be accepted? And to every one that works good, shall be glory,
etc. Never did God make any decree to damn any man, though he should believe
and live righteously; yea, God has published a quite contrary decree,
Whosoever believes shall have everlalasting life, John 3.16. And there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
Romans 8.1. From a godly life we may conclude, we are no reprobates, and may make
our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. So that this doctrine is so far
from quenching, that it quickens holy endeavors, seeing none but the unholy
are ordained to condemnation; and that we are as well ordained to the works of
grace, as the reward of glory. Will thou not fear reprobation, (as Paul spoke
of fearing the civil Magistrate) dothat which is good, fear to do evil; but if
thou will upon hearing the doctrine of Gods absolute decree, conclude, that
holiness is vain and fruitless; by the same reason resolve, because the
length of thy life is certainly decreed by God, therefore thou will never
either eat or drink to lengthen out thy life. If but one man in the world were
elected, thou should use the means appointed to life. If but one man in the
world were reprobated, thou should shun the ways which lead to death.
2. In regard of God there is no chance, Observe. 2.
nor any event by fortune. All which ever was, is, or shall be, was written
before him as in a book. In regard of men, Vid. Aug. retr. l. 1. c. 1. et Alex.
Alens. p. 1. q. 24. Deus cognoscit praeterita et futura praesentialiter,
temporalia aeternaliter, mutabilia immutabiliter, futura contingentia
infallibiliter.
nature may seem to have many mischances, being not (as it were) brought to bed
with her ordinary effects. But we who know the true God, should acknowledge
instead of chance, only his divine providence. That blind goddess Fortune,
holds her Deity only by the tenure of men's ignorance. Infinitely too weak is
the axel-tree of Fortune, for the least motion of the world to be turned upon
it. Punishments directed by Gods providence, are not to be entertained as the
pastimes of fortune. That which is casual to us, is ordained by God. 3. 3
Observe. Occurrere periculo voluit Judas, ne quos rei novitas turbaret. Calv. in
loc.
The faithful should not be surprised with wonder at the disturbance of the
Church by Seducers. The opposition of the truth by such as would be, and have
been accounted its greatest maintainers, is often to Christians the most
unexpected evil. It may make an honest heart not only to fear its own apostasy
from the truth, but even to question whether ever heretofore it did embrace the
truth or no. This fore-ordaining of many glistering professors to this
condemnation, should be a preservative from such a distemper. Alas! God did not
only see through them, when they were in their fairest appearances, but
foresaw when they would prove, before they either were men, or were appearing
Christians. Church-disturbers are no men of yesterday. He that foresaw, would
have prevented their entrance into the Church, had he not intended not only the
preservation of his elect from them, Mat. 24.24.
but the benefiting of the elect by them. 4. Observe. 4.
There Is no judging of any ones reprobation. We are commanded to read over Gods
oracles, but we are not so much as admitted to look into his rolls. Who is
before of old ordained, written down, shall never be known till the books be
opened. There Is a peradventure of Gods giving repentance even to opposers. 2 Timothy 2.25. De nullius hominis salute de. sperandum, quem Dei patientia sinit
vivere; de sui ipsius minime omnium. Tanquam caput omnis noxiae tentationis
repellatur ab animo Christiani, haec mortifera conclusio, Sum ex reprobis. Aug.
Observe. 5. Justus quis est nisi qui amanti se Deo, vicem rependit amoris? quod
non fit, nisi revelante spiritu per fidem homini aeternum Dei propositum super
salute sua futura. Bern. Ep. 107.
Censure thou may their actions, but not determine their end. Many a Saint
recollecting how far himself was suffered to go before he returned, may truly
say, I Will never despair of any; for surely Lord, there never will be a baser
heart then mine, for thee to deal with. Sinners must have thy pity, not thy
despair. That the end of their ways will be death, it is thy duty to declare:
That the end of those, who for the present walk in those ways, will be death,
it is thy sin, thy danger to determine. Least of all despair of thine own
salvation. This conclusion [ I am one of the reprobates] ought to be repelled
as a tentation not more groundless than dangerous. 5. Whosoever is exempted
from this appointment to condemnation, is engaged to be eminent and singular in
his love to God. No motive to love is so effectual as to be prevented by love:
Gods love to the elect was early, eternal. They were chosen by God, before
they could choose God. How due a debt is love to him when we were, who loved us
without due debt before we were! We ought to love him more than others, who is
incomparably more lovely, and who loved us more than others, when we were no
more lovely than others. Should not we single him out for our God, who
infinitely excels all, and who singled us out for his people when we were no
better than any? What was it beside election, that made Saints by grace, of
sinners by nature, and (as I may say) white paper of the foulest dunghill rags?
what but this went between the holiest Saint, and the most flagitious sinner?
both were cut off from the same piece, and formed out of the same clay. 6.
Observe. 6. Luke 12.32. Romans 8.33.35 etc. An timendum est ne tunc de se homo
desperet, quando spes ejus ponenda demonstratur in Deo, non autem desperaret si
eam in scipso superbissimus and infelicissimus poneret. Aug. de bon. pers. l.
2. c. 22.
The faithful may be strongly armed against tentations to despair. The decrees
of God depend not upon the pleasure of man's, but Gods will. The Angels and
Adam, who fell from integrity, plainly show what would become of man, who (now)
has the treachery of sin within him, and the battery of tentation without him,
if divine predestination were removed. Forbear then, wretched Pelagian, to make
the supposed dependence of predestination upon man's will, a ground of courage;
and the certain dependence of man's will upon predestination, a ground of
despair. Proud potsheard! expect not happiness without more humility. Lord,
how soon should I embezzel my happiness, and prove a beggarly prodigal,
should thou give me my portion into mine own hands! 7. Observe. 7.
incite the best to humility. He who fares best has no cause of insultation
over him who speeds worst. The least mercy deserves thankfulness, the greatest
allows not pride. The reading of what the worst are, and shall be, should
instruct us what the best had been, and should be without free grace, which
alone makes the difference. Col. 3.12.
Humble tenderness is the badge of election; as the elect of God, put on
bowels. Grace found the richest Saint but a beggarly sinner; Mat. 5.3. 1 Cor.
1.27.
and grace makes the richest in possession to be poorest in spirit. God has
chosen the weak to confound the mighty; not the mighty to domineer over the
weak. Every receipt is an alms, and the best furnished Christian does but
proclaim that he has been oftenest at the door of mercy. The taller thou art
in grace, the more need thou have to stoop, would thou enter into the
meditation of thy present estate without danger. 8. Observe. 8.
Forbearance of punishment is no argument to the finally impenitent of their
total immunity from punishment. They are bill'd and book'd by God, and at
length God will call in his debts; and, the longer he stays, with the more
interest. The judgments of God are sure, if they be late. With God, delay
wears nothing out of memory, nor is any thing gained by protraction. All things
to the Ancient of days are present. How fruitless is a sinners league with
hell! The Lord laugheth at him, for he sees that his day is coming. Mundi
laetitia impunita nequitia.
Grudge not to see impenitency and prosperity go together. What Is all a sinners
mirth but a little unpunished wickedness! The thunderclap of wrath will soon
make his wine of mirth sour. He who now goes on so pertinaciously in sin, must
either undo, or be undone. His cheer may seem excessive, but there is a
reckoning coming, which though it be the last, yet is it as sure as any part of
the entertainment. 9. Observe. 9.
Ministers ought not to propound to the people, a reprobation absolute from the
means. Reprobation is not so to be preached, as though men were to be damned
whatsoever they do; Nempe hoc verissimum est: ita sane sed improbissimum,
importunissimum, incongruentissimum, non falso eloquio, sed non salubri ter
valetudini humanae infirmitatis apposito. Aug. de bo. per. l. 2. c. 22.
but so, as that it may be manifested that destruction is the fruit of impiety.
It Is possible a Minister may preach what is true concerning Gods absolute
decree to save and reprobate men, and yet not in that due manner in which he
ought to speak. For example; should a minister preach thus to his people,
Whatsoever you do, ye shall be such as God decreed ye should be, etc. This is
indeed a true doctrine, but it seeming to separate the end from the means, it
is so true, that withal, as Augustine says, it is most inconvenient and
pernicious, because it is not wholsomely applied to humane infirmity. Now it is
the part of an unskilful, Dolosi vel imperiti Medici est, etiam utile
medicameutum sic alligare, ut aut non profit, aut obsit. Aug. de bo. pers. l.
2. cap. 21.
or deceitful Physician, so to apply a good plaster, that either it shall do
no good, or do hurt. Therefore Paul speaking of the reprobates, whose end is
destruction, adds, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame, etc.
and here Jude having said that these seducers were ordained to condemnation,
subjoyneth, ungodly men, who turn the grace of God into lasciviousness. To the
handling whereof I now proceed.
This for the first part of the first argument to move the Christians Earnestly
to contend, etc. The Argument is the dangerousness of the company of these
seducers. The first part whereof was a description of their entrance.

The Second follows, the description of their impiety they having got
entrance. Two ways the Apostle describes it.

1. More generally he calls them ungodly men.

2. More particularly he shows wherein their ungodliness appeared; they turn
the grace of God into lasciviousness, and deny, etc.

1. Explicat. (...). 1. (...), used indifferently of true and false worship,
Act. 18.13. Act. 13.50. Act. 16.14. 2. (...) signifies to worship God aright,
and duly. 3. (...) notes one who is of no religion, who worships not at all.
The Apostle expresses the ungodliness of seducers more generally, calling
them ungodly: Ungodly men.

For Explication; I shall first express more briefly and generally what the
Apostle here intends by the term ungodly.

2. More fully and particularly explain wherein that ungodliness of which he
speaks did consist, or what it is to be ungodly.

The word (...), ungodly, is compounded of a word which signifies to worship,
or be devout, and of a particle which notes a negation or denial of that thing
with which it is joined. So that the word made up of both, properly signifies
one who is indevout, or worships not, who yields no adoration, honor or
reverence to God, but casts off his service, or (as we say) is a profane
man, and one of no Religion. For godliness is properly the same with Religion,
and Religion is a spiritual bond; not only a divine impression whereby we are
possessed with most high and peerless thoughts of God, and rapt with admiration
of that excellency which shines in him; but it is also a binder, Dictam esse
religionem, quod quasi in fascem Domini vincti, and religati sumus. Hier. ad
Am. c. 9.
a golden belt or girdle, that ties and confederats, and clasps our souls to
God. The faithful by Religion are Gods bundle made upon earth to be carried to
heaven; men tied together, by being tied to God. Godliness is this gentle
manacle, and bond of love tying us by gratitude to Gods mercy, by faith to his
word, by fidelity to his Covenant, by hope to his promises, etc. and godliness
lays a most sweet and easy yoke upon all the parts of man, voluntarily
resigning themselves to draw all together in the service of God; and so it ties
the head from wicked imaginations, the heart from evil cogitations, the eyes
from vanity, the tongue from profaneness, the hand from violence, the feet
from running into sin. And though both religion and godliness in their largest
extent, comprehend the whole duty of man, to God and man, 1 Timothy 6.6.
even holiness and righteousness, yet properly and primarily they note piety,
and the observation of duties belonging immediately to God himself. And so
though ungodliness be often taken in the largest sense, as importing all kind
of wickedness committed against God and man, as Romans 4.5. 1 Timothy 1.9. etc. yet
always properly, and (as I conceive) in this place principally it is to be
understood of wickedness, immediately done against God himself, in denying him
that reverence and honor due, Romans 1.26. Genesis 20.
and abusing that worship and service given to him and the Apostle Ungodly
by this word at once discovers both the hypocrisy of these Seducers, whose
great endeavor was to be accounted in the highest form of Religion, and also
the root of all that following wickedness wherewith he charge them.

2. More particularly, to consider what it is to be ungodly, or wherein
ungodliness consists. I shall open it in three particulars.

1. The denial to God the honor which is due to him.

2. The attributing of the honor which is due to him to something else beside
him.

3. The giving to God his honor after a wrong manner.

1. To be ungodly, is to deny that honor to God which is due to him: and that
sundry ways, as 1. To deny God his honor by not knowing him, Fingunt Deum
talem qui non videt, non punit, etc. Psalm. 14.1.
and acknowledging his providence, presence, justice, mercy, power. The fool
has said in his heart, There is no God: he knows no such God as the true God
is, no omniscient, just, merciful, powerful etc. God. He who denies any
attribute of God, denies God himself; 1 Samuel 2.12.
thus the sons of Eli knew not the Lord: and thus he, spoken of Psalm. 50.21.
who thought that God was altogether such an one as himself: thus likewise the
ungodly, who say, Job 22.14. How does God know; can he judge through the dark
cloud? Thick clouds are a covering to him that he sees not, etc. This piece of
Atheism is the foundation of all the rest. He who knows not his Landlord,
cannot pay his rent. 2. Not to honor God by believing him: Ungodly men totally
distrust Gods promises, though he seals them with an oath. It Is impossible that
God should utter a lie to them, Heb. 6.18.
and that ungodly men (while such) should do any other than give the lie to
God. They make God a liar, 1 John 5.10. Heb. 3.12.
the greatest dishonor imaginable! an evil heart departs from, depends not
upon the living God. 3. Not to honor God by loving him. Ungodly men are haters
of God; Romans 1.30.
and it is not for want of poison, but power, that they express not the
greatest hatred against him, even the taking away his very being. Psalm. 81.11.
Hence it is that some have called an ungodly man a deicide, though they meant
him not such in regard of execution, but of affection. It Is true, God himself
is out of the reach of an ungodly man; but what of him they can come by, as his
pictures, Isa. 30.11.
his image in his children, Job 21.14.
ordinances, they endeavor to destroy and abolish: like thieves, who wish the
Judge were dead or hurt, the ungodly desire that God might cease to be God,
that he had lost the hand of his justice, the arm of his power, Timor Domini,
janitor anim^.
the eye of his knowledge, etc. 4. Not to honor God by fearing to sin against
him. Ungodly men sometimes presume, sometimes they despair, but never do they
reverentially fear him, so as to keep themselves from sin; they fear not an
Oath, they fear hell, they fear not God, they say not, How can we do this
great evil, Genesis 39 9. Job 21.14. Hos. 4.16. Psalm. 50.17. Jer. 44.16. Tit.
1.10. Luke 19.14.
and sin against God? they fear sin for hell, not as hell. 5. Not to honor God
by obeying his word. Ungodly men cast off the yoke, they are sons of Belial.
They slide back as a backsliding heyfer. They will none of his ways. They
desire not the knowledge of them. They hate instruction, and cast the word of
God behind them. In their works they deny God. They will never have Christ for
their ruler, nor his word for their rule. 6. Not to honor God by bearing his
stroke. Ungodly men are not as children under the rod, but as wild bulls in a
net, they had rather be able to tear, then willing to kiss the rod. Like
chafe, they fly in the face of, and not like the solid grain, fall down
before him that fans them. They accept not of the punishment of their iniquity,
2 King. 6.33.
not wait for deliverance from their punishment: they either faint under, or
rage against, or take no notice of the hand of God when it is lifted up against
them. 7. Not to honor God by regarding of his worship? The ungodly call not
upon the Lord. Psalm. 14.4.
Only the godly man is made like a man to look upward. The other in their
wants go to Baalzebub the god of Ekron, or the witch of Endor, to earthly and
sinful shifts, rather howling through the sense of their wants, then praying
in the belief of receiving the blessings they desire. In their obtaining of
comforts, Hab. 1.16.
they sacrifice to their net, and burn incense to their drags, and are as
sensual in their enjoyments, as unsubmissive in their wants. They can neither
pray when they are afflicted, nor sing Psalms when they are merry; instead of
praying they despair, instead of singing Psalms they revell; when they are in
want, they are as distrustful as if God could never help them; when they
abound, they are as secure as if God could never hurt them. In a word, they
account not the holy duties of prayer, Isai. 56.7. Isai. 58.13.
hearing, sacraments, etc. to be their privileges, but their drudgery. They
are not joyful in the house of prayer; the Sabbath is not a delight; the word
of the Lord is a burden; and when they are in holy performances, they are like
a fish upon the dry land.

2. Ungodliness consists in giving of the honor which is due to God, to
something else beside God. And this ungodly men do two ways.

1. Inwardly, in the soul, will, and affections, Jer. 17.5.
and the whole inner man; as 1. when they place their trust and confidence upon
something besides God, and so place it in the room of God, making flesh their
arm and support. Thus one ungodly man depends upon his wealth, Job 31.24.
making it his hope and confidence; another upon his strength, resting upon
man, Psalm. 20.7. Prove. 3.5.
putting his trust in horses and chariots; another upon his wit and policy,
which in a moment God is able to turn into foolishness. They will not take the
word of a man, who has once or twice deceived them; but they will rely upon
the broken creature, which always fails fond expectation, Jon. 2.8. Josh.
62.9. Psalm. 62.8.
and is no other then a lying vanity; hereby not only disappointing themselves,
but dishonouring him, who alone requires and deserves our trust and affiance.

2. When they set that love and delight upon other things which is due to God,
who is to be loved with all the heart, and soul; and thus sundry there are who
love their pleasures more than God, whose belly is their God; 2 Timothy 3.4. Phil.
3.19. Ephesians. 5.5.
others there are whose gain is godliness, and who are fitly therefore by the
Apostle called idolaters. That which a man most loves is his God. Psalm. 62.10.
Ungodly men set their hearts upon that which was made to set their feet upon;
with unbounded eagerness they follow the world. Moderation holds not the reins
of their earthly industry, in which they are not carried with the gentle gales
of indifferency, but the furious winds of violence. They will be rich, 1 Timothy
6.9.
though they lose their souls, their God, and are drowned in perdition.

3. When they bestow that fear upon the creature, which is only due to God;
Isai. 8.13.
when man, not God, is their fear and their dread. If outward troubles or
troublers approach, Isai. 7.2.
they shake like the trees of the wood; if man threaten a prison, they tremble
more than when God threateneth hell; Isai. 51.12, 13.
fearing him more that can kill the body, than him who can throw both body and
soul into hell; whence it is that they are ensnared by the unlawful commands
of Superiors, willingly walking after the commandment; Hos. 5.11. Prove. 25.26.
and falling down before the wicked, become like a troubled fountain, and a
corrupt spring; serving instead of the Lord, the times.

2. Outwardly, ungodly men give the honor to the creature, which is due to
God; and that they do by outward religious worship, Romans 1.25. Psalm. 95.6.
when they worship and serve the creature more than the Creator, who is God
blessed for evermore; before whom religiously we must only kneel, and bow down.
Mat. 4.10.
How unlike are ungodly men to him who was God and man! Christ refused to bow
to the devil, not only because he was a devil, but a creature; denying to him
not only inward devotion, but outward reverence. And how unlike to the three
godly men, who tell the King, Dan. 3.18. Isai. 40.18.25. Isai. 44.19.
commanding them to bow to his image, that they will not serve his gods! What
do they but make a lie, when they make an image of an uncircumscriptible
infinite God? and show themselves as blockish as the block they worship, which
is no better than that which even now they burnt; Poor is their pretense, who
to exempt themselves from this ungodliness, plead, though they present their
bodies at religious worship, yet they preserve their souls for God; for why
could not Christ, for a whole world, with all his wisdom find out such a piece
of policy? and make not body and soul one man, that must have but one God, one
worship? Are not our bodies the Lords as well as our souls? or can she be
accounted a chaste spouse, which gives the use of her body to a stranger, upon
pretense of keeping her heart to her husband?

3. Ungodliness consists in the giving of honor to God after a false and an
undue manner. As 1. When it is given unwarrantably, and not according to his
revealed will. When tradition and humane invention put the Scripture out of
place. This is to worship God in vain. (...). Mat. 15.9.
Nothing is more counterfeited, and disfigured than religion. Men through
natural unsubmissivenesse to the purity and simplicity of Scripture-commands,
through love of their own conceits, novelty, carnality, are prone to make many
golden calves. People, like the Lacedaemonians, who were wont to dress their
gods after the fashion of the City, love to dress their devotions after their
own humors, being zealous, but not according to knowledge; and like bats,
converting the humor of their eyes to make their wings large. These give not
God that reasonable service, for the performance whereof, Romans 12.1.
they must produce a word, a Scripture-reason. Man's work is to keep Laws, not
either to be, or make a Law for himself or others. 2. Honor is given to God
after an undue manner, when it is not given him obediently; when, though what is
done be commanded, yet it is not done because it is commanded, Oculus ad coelum,
manus ad clavum.
or in obediencee to a precept. The hand must not only be at work, but the eye
must also be upon the word. It Is very possible for a work commanded, to be an
act of disobedience, in respect of the intent of the performer. 3. When it is
not given him inwardly, heartily; when men are eyeservants, and do not the will
of God from the heart, Col. 3.23. Romans 1.9.
nor serve him in the spirit. Ungodly men rather act a service, than yield a
service; they rather complement with God, Mat. 15.7.8. 2 Timothy 3.5. Ezekiel. 33.31.
than serve him. They bring a bone without marrow. They glister, but they burn
not; like some men who lifting with others at a burden, make as loud a cry as
the rest, but yet they put to it no strength at all. In Gods account they who
do but appear godly, are nothing at all but ungodly. 4. When honor is not
given to God impartially. Ungodly men pick out one work, and reject another;
choose an easy, and forbear a difficult work; serve and honor God so far as
they may not disserve and dishonor themselves; engaging no further than they
may safely come off. Whereas nothing should come amiss to one who rightly
serves this M^ster. Psalm. 119.6.128. 1 Timothy 5.21.
One piece of his service must not be preferred before another. We must answer
to every call. We must not examine what the service is which is commanded, but
who the Master is that commands. 5. When honor is not given him cheerfully.
Ungodly men do the will of God against their will; Psalm. 40.8. 2 Cor. 9.7.
it is not their meat and drink, it goes not down as their food, but as a
potion; not upon choice, but constraint; whence it is that their services are
neither easy to themselves, nor acceptable to God, whose service is as well
our privilege as our duty. 6. When he is not honored constantly. Ungodly men
will have their rest from labor before they dye. The honor which they give to
God is full of gapps. Their heart is not steadfast with God. Psalm. 78.37.
Ungodly men want a fountain, a principle from whence their services should
issue, and therefore like a standing water, Hos. 6.4.
they will in time dry up. They are not friends, and therefore they love not at
all times. The honor they give to God is like the redness of blushing, soon
down; not like the ruddiness of complexion, abiding. 7. When honor is not
given to God fervently, and diligently with all the might and strength. Ungodly
men honor not God as a God, as the best, the greatest, but without cost,
slightly and coldly. The heart has no love, and the hand has little labor.
When the spleen swells, all other parts decay, and those who nourish any lust,
will honor God but with lean and thin services. A divided heart will be a lazy
heart. 8. When honor is not given to God with single aims, and sincere
intentions. Ungodly men propound not to themselves glory-ends; God is not
honored by them for himself. They love not the lesson wherein there is not
some gay of pleasure, or profit; they seek themselves and not God, 2 Kin.
10.28, 29.
and therefore they lose God and themselves too, remaining ungodly here, and
unrewarded hereafter.

1. Observe. 1.
Its possible for men to attain to highest estimation for godliness, and yet to
be inwardly at the same time ungodly. Men may be accounted the godly party, and
yet not have a dram of true godliness in them. Had not these seducers been
seemingly godly, they had never been admitted by the Church; and had they not
been really ungodly, they had never been by the Spirit of God called so.
Ungodliness is a close, a secret evil: It may creep into our profession,
participation in ordinances, and Church communion, undiscerned. An ungodly
heart may be in a glistring professor, 2 Timothy 3.5.
even in those who have a form of godliness. Judas, Simon Magus, the Corinthian
teachers were not without their estimation from men for piety, nor without
detestation from God for hypocrisy. Christians should not, like some
tradesmen, live altogether upon credit. Quid juvat bonum nomen, reclamante
conscentia.
What does a good name help a rotten heart! how poor an advantage to a dying
man is it for one to come and say, Sir, I am glad to see you well! Truth of
grace is alone beyond the reach of hypocrites. Shape may be pictured, life
cannot. The Magicians imitated Moses, till God discovered his own finger in the
miracles. True godliness is Gods handywork: of this the most specious pretender
falls short. Oh Christian, put not off the soul alone, with shadows. Labor to
be what thou seem, and then seem to be what thou art.

2. Ungodliness is the root of all lewd, Observe. 2.
irregular and licencious practices. The Apostle places the ungodliness of
seducers in the forefront of all that wickedness wherewith he charge them.
A man who has no care of Gods honor, will make no conscience of any sin.
Where God is not served, man will not be obeyed. Abraham rightly collected,
Genesis 20.11.
that they who feared not God, would not fear to take away his life. By the
fear of God men depart from evil. Prove. 16.6. Prove. 8.13.
Religion in the heart, is the best means to order the hand. Education,
exigency of condition, resolutions, humane laws, shame, fear, etc. may for a
while curb, but they cannot change a sinner: They may cloak, not cure sin;
They may work a palliative, not an eradicative cure. All they can do, till the
heart be changed, is but to sow a piece of new ^loth to an old garment, new
expressions, professions, to an old disposition, which will but make the rent
the greater. How imprudent are those parents, who expect obedience to
themselves from their children, who are ever suffered to be disobedient to God!
How little policy do those Magistrates express, who only care to make men
subjects to them, willingly suffering them to be rebels to God! I confess,
Satan loves to lay the brats of wars, treason, and rebellion, etc. at the door
of Religion. But as truly may Politicians utter those words, as ever they were
uttered, O Religion, if thou had been here, our nation had not dyed. And if
that death may be attributed to the absence of religion, how little are people
beholding to them, who hinder it from coming to the Nation to cure it!

3. Observe. 3.
Eminent, if mere, profession will end in eminent prof^nenesse. A fiery
hypocrite will grow from being lukewa^m in religion to be stone-cold in
irreligion. The seeming piety and glorious appearances of these seducers in
advancing Christ; grace, and Christian liberty, was soon followed with the
utter rejection of godliness. What profane, and even godless persons, and how
purely neglective of all divine worship did they prove! The higher the building
is which wants a foundation, the greater will be its fall. No water is so cold,
as that which after greatest heat grows cold. A tradesman who breaks, having
traded much, and been trusted much, makes a great noise when he breaks. The
hypocrite who flies the highest pitch of religion, is most bruised with falls
into profaneness. Are there any who so much scorn the Ministry of the word,
and all holy duties, nay who so much deny and profess they can live above
ordinances, as they who have heretofore been the most forward to run after
them; though alas! unfruitful under them when they did so? Who can with
tearlesse eyes, or a sorrowlesse heart observe, that sundry who have given
golden hopes in their youth for godliness, and whose holy education was
followed for a while with most pious appearances, should afterward turn such
loose libertines, so atheistical and irreligious, as if now they studied only
to make up their former restraint and forbearance, with a greater profuseness
in all ungodliness, etc. How much better therefore is a drop of sincerity,
than a sea of appearing sanctity! A Land-floud which rowls and swells to day,
will be down and gone, when the fountain will have enough and to spare. Study
therefore, O Christian, to lay the foundation deep, before thou raisest the
building high. And study first to get into Jesus Christ by an humble diffidence
of thy self, and fiduciary recumbence upon him, and to evidence it by the
through work and practice of mortification, and an hearty love to holiness.

4. Observe. 4.
Every one should tremble to be branded deservedly with this black mark of
ungodliness, by the Apostle here set upon the worst of men. To this end
consider. 1. Ungodliness crosses the end of our election. Ephesians. 1.4.
We are chosen before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy.
Godliness is the eternal design which God had upon every one set a part for
happiness. 2. Ephesians. 5.26. Luke 1.75. Col. 1.22.
It opposes the end of Christ in redeeming us; which was, that we should be
holy and without blemish, and be presented holy and unblameable in his sight;
wherever Christ justifies he renewes the ungodly. 3. It Is opposite to our
profession. The name atheist we all disclaim. We have renounced ungodliness in
our baptism, wherein we took an oath of allegiance and fealty to God; and which
is not a sacrament of obsignation of the benefits, unless of obligation to the
godliness of a Christian. We have taken God for our God, who is a holy God, and
whom we profess to follow. 4. Its opposite to the end of Gods discovering his
Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.15. Tit. 2.11, 12.
which has appeared, to teach us that we should deny ungodliness. Let me go,
said the Angel to Jacob, for the day appears; much more should Christians
bid farewell to all ungodliness, the day of the Gospel so gloriously appearing.
5. It opposes the acceptance of all our persons and services. Psalm. 4.3.
God sets a part only him that is godly for himself: godly men alone are his
treasure, his portion, his Jewels: an ungodly man, though never so rich and
honorable, is but a vile person. Morality without piety is but glistering
iniquity. Mal. 1.10. Prove. 15.8. 21.7.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. God looks to the
person, before to the gift. Holy and acceptable Romans 12.1. are put together.
Without godliness our performances are provocations. 6. It opposes our
comfortable enjoyment of every benefit. All the comforts of ungodly men are
curses. Godliness makes loss to be gain; 1. Tim. 6.6.
ungodliness makes gain to be loss. It matters not what things we enjoy, but
what hearts we have in the enjoying of them. Unto the defiled nothing is pure.
Tit. 1.15.
An ungodly man tainteth every thing which he touches. 7. Ungodliness opposes
our eternal blessedness, nothing but godliness stands in stead in the great
day; then shall we fully discern between him that serves God, Mal. 3. ult. 2
Pet. 3.11.
and him that serves him not. Seeing these things shall be disolved, what
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness! An
ungodly man is as unsuitable to the work, as he is unworthy of the wages of
heaven. 1 Timothy 4.7. (...).
If you expect glory, exercise, train up your selves to godliness: labor to be
expert therein, by believing that the promises of God in Christ shall be made
good, by observing his presence in all your actions, by acknowledging his
providence over all events, by casting from you whatever offends him, by
taking upon you the yoke of obedience active and passive, doing and undergoing
his pleasure cheerfully; and lastly, by fervent prayer for the blessings which
you want, and sincere thankfulness for those which you enjoy.

This for the first and more general expression of the impiety of these
Seducers, the Apostle says they were ungodly. 2. The Apostle expresses it
more particularly, by showing wherein their ungodliness did appear, and that 1.
In their abusing the grace of God in these words, Turning the grace of our God
into lasciviousness.

In the words we may consider. 1. What these Seducers did abuse, or their
enjoyment, The grace of our God. 2. how they did abuse it, or their
mis-improvement of that enjoyment, they turned it into lasciviousness.

In their enjoyment we may take notice, 1. Of the nature of their enjoyment,
Grace. 2. Of the owner thereof, God; with the propriety that the faithful have
in him, he being called our God. (...) gratia, gratificari. Judge. 21.22. Am.
5.15. Genesis 6.8. Genesis 39.21. Number. 6.25. (...). Luke 7.42. 2 Cor. 2.10. 2 Cor.
12.12. Ephesians. 4. ult. Act. 15.40. Heb. 13.9. Romans 5.15.17 Romans 4.4.16. Romans 11.6.


1. Of the kind or nature of that enjoyment which these Seducers abused, it was
grace.

Two things I shall briefly here show by way of explication. 1. What thing it
is which the Apostle here intends by the name of grace. 2. Why that thing is so
called.

1. Not much to enlarge upon this first thing. Grace in its proper notion
signifies that free goodness, favor, or good will whereby one is moved to
benefit another, as both the Hebrew and Greek words manifest. But it is not
only taken in scripture in that primary and proper sense, but among sundry
other acceptations, for the benefits and good things themselves which of free
favor, and good will are bestowed; and in this sense, as it often in scripture
notes the benefits, alms, and beneficence which we receive from man, 1 Cor.
16.3. 2 Cor. 8.4.6, 19, so in a multitude of places, the gifts and benefits
freely bestowed by God; and among them, as redemption, life eternal, the gifts
of sanctification, Romans 6.14.15. 1 Pet. 3.7. 1 John 16.
etc. so the very Gospel of salvation, and the revelation of the Mysteries of
redemption, and the free pardon of sin through Christ. And this last way it is
taken Acts 14.3. and 20.32. where the Gospel is called the word of grace;
called also Acts 20.24. the Gospel of the grace of God; and 2 Cor. 6.1. and
Tit. 2.12. grace it self; we beseech you, that ye receive not the grace of God
in vain. And, the grace of God has appeared, etc. In this last signification I
take it in this place; wherein what the Apostle had called the faith in the
foregoing verse, for which the Christians should Contend, he calls the grace in
this, which Seducers did abuse and oppose.

2. Why is the doctrine of the Gospel called by the name of grace?

1. Because it is a gift of grace, and it was only Gods free good will that
bestowed it. These questions, Why it was ever bestowed at all, or why one age
or place of the world should receive it rather than another, why God should
discover the mystery that was kept secret since the world began, Rom, 16.25, 26.
to those who were sinners of the Gentiles, who served dumb Idols, why God
should be found of them who sought him not, and made manifest unto them who
asked ^ot after him, Isa. 65.1. Mat. 11.26.
can only be answered by that reason which Christ gives of Gods hiding these
things from the wise and prudent, and revealing them to babes: Even so, Father,
because it seemed good in thy sight.

2. Because the subject matter of the Gospel, even all the benefits discovered
in it, flowed merely from freegrace: whether blessings without us, or within
us. Without us, Ephesians. 1.5.
Election is the election of grace, and according to the good pleasure of his
will: our vocation was according to grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. Regeneration was of Gods
own will, Jam. 1.18. Faith the gift of God. Justification is freely by his
grace, Phil. 1.29.
Romans 3.24. And a free gift, Romans 5.15, 18. Forgiveness of our sins according
to the riches of grace, Ephesians. 1.7. Eternal life is the gift of God, Acts
15.11.
Romans 6.23. Even the life of glory is the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3.7. Christ
himself was a token of free love sent to mankind. And as his whole work was to
love, so his whole love was free. The portion which he expects is nothing but
poverty. Isai. 55.1.
Would we purchase any benefit of him, we must be sure to leave our money
behind us. There Is not one soul that ever he loved, but was poor and empty,
sick and impotent, unamiable and filthy, regardlesse of him and ignorant,
opposite to him and unkind; and often unfaithful to him and disloyal. And may
not the Gospel which discovers this goodness, well be called grace?

3. As the Gospel does discover and reveal, so does it instrumentally impart
and bestow these benefits of free grace. The Gospel is not only light to
discover them, but an invitation to accept them; not only a story, but a
testament. The language of the Gospel is, Luke 14.17.
Come, for all things are now ready. Nor has it only an inviting, but a
prevailing voice with some. It is made powerful to overcome the most delaying
disobedient sinner, by him who does not only ordain, Romans 1.16. Acts 6.7. 2
These. 1.8.
but accompany it. This grace brings salvation, Tit. 2.12. it brings it to
us, not to look upon, but to take.

1. Observe. 1.
What an happy difference is between the Law and the Gospel! The Law affords
not a drop of grace; it bestows nothing freely. The language of the Law is, Do
thou and live; if not, dye; No work, no wages: but in the Gospel, the yoke of
personal obedience is translated from believers, to their surety; there is
nothing for them to pay, all that they have to do, is to hunger, and feed.
Their happiness is free in respect of themselves, though costly to Christ, who
by his merits purchases for them, whatsoever they would obtain, and by his
Spirit works in them whatsoever he requires.

2. Observe. 2.
How shall we escape if we neglect the salvation which the Gospel of grace
brings! If they are unexcusable who pay not their own debts under the Law, what
are they who will not do so much as accept of free pardon, and a surety under
the Gospel! Gospel Grace neglected is the great condemnation of the world. How
mindful should we be of the Apostles counsel, 2 Cor. 6.1. 1 These. 5.1. 2 Cor.
3.6. 2 Cor. 3.18.
Receive not the grace of God in vain, not only in word, but in power, as it is
a quickening spirit, or spirit and life, not begetting only a form of
profession, but as changing and transforming into the image of God, and
altering the inward disposition of the heart. If the grace of the Gospel make a
stop at restraining, it only advantageth men, ut mitius ardeant, not to save
them.

3. Observe. 3.
The sin and folly of those is great, who though poor, are yet so proud, that
they submit not themselves to the freeness of the Gospel; who will not feed
upon the supper of Evangelicall benefits, unless they may pay the reckoning:
who mix at least their own merits with Christ's, expecting justification for
their own obedience. Alas, what is our rectitude, but crookedness! what our
righteousnesses but filthy rags! How fond an undertaking is it to go about to
establish our own righteousness; Romans 10.3. (...).
what is it but to endeavor to make a dead carcass to stand alone! How just
is the issue, that rich ones should be sent empty from the Supper! A proud
heart can no more be filled with Evangelicall grace, then can a vessel with
water poured upon its unequal outside. It Is better to be an humble sinner, than
a proud justiciary.

4. Observe. 4.
How cheerful, free, and forward should all their services be who partake of
the grace of the Gospel! Jugum Christi non deterit, sed honestat colla. Bern.
If God have removed the insupportable yoke of legal satisfaction, how
willingly should we take upon us the easy yoke of Evangelicall obedience!
Though Saints be exempted from bondage, yet not from service. Christians,
though they serve not God by the compulsive power of the Law, yet they ought by
virtue of the Spirit renewing the soul. Their spirits should be free and
willing, even when strength and power fail them. They should delight to do the
will of God. Psalm. 110.3. Psalm. 40.8.
If Gospel Grace be free, then it is most unsuitable that Gospel-service should
be forced. The Evangelicall bond to obedience is strong, though it be silken.

5. Observe. 5.
Every one should covet to be interested in the benefits of the Gospel: they
are freely bestowed. It is easy to know a house where alms are freely
distributed, by the crowding of beggars: When money is freely thrown about the
streets, at the Kings coronation, how do the poor thrust, and tread one upon
another! There Is no such crowding about a tradesman shop: why? here poor
people must pay for what they have. But alas, that men do quite contrary in a
spiritual respect, they throng after the world, which makes them pay for what
they have dearly, and neglect Christ who offers all they want freely. Why is it
that the Kingdom of heaven suffers not more violence. The world is not bread,
and yet it requires money; Christ is bread, and requires nothing but a stomach!
Pity those, who for lying vanities forsake their own mercy. Call others to
partake of this grace with thee: Eat not thy morsels alone. Say, as those
lepers did, This is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace. Have thou
received this grace, wish all men were like to thee, thy sins only excepted.
When beggars have fared well at a rich man's door, they go away, and by telling
it, send others: Tell to others how free an Hous-keeper thy God is; so free
that he most delights in comers and company.

This for the kind or nature of the enjoyment, which these seducers abused;
Grace. The owner thereof, whose grace it was follows; called here by the
Apostle our God.

In the Explication, I shall (briefly) show two things.

1. What it is for God to be our God; or what these words our God import.

2. Why the Apostle here mentioning the grace abused by seducers, calls it not
simply the grace of God, but the grace of our God.

1. What it is for God to be our God. In this, three things deserve a large
explication, which I (to avoid tediousness) shall but touch. 1. Wherein the
nature of this propriety consists, or what kind of propriety it is. 2. What
there is of God in which the faithful have an interest and propriety. 3. How
suitable and beneficial a good, this God is to those who have this interest and
propriety in him.

1. For the nature of this propriety in God. God may be said to be ours, and we
may be said to have a propriety in him by a threefold right. 1. By a right of
creation, and thus he is the God of heathens, of devils, of all creatures; Acts
14.17, 18. Acts 17.28, 29
they being all the work of his hands, having from him life, being, and motion.
2. By a right of external profession, or federall sanctity; and thus God is
often called the God of Israel; and in respect of this, the Jews are said to
be the children of the Kingdom. 3. By peculiar grace, and saving interest
through Christ; and thus only believers who are really united to Christ by
faith, Jer. 31.31.
have a propriety in him, with whom God has covenanted that he will be their
reconciled friend and father, pardoning their sin by Christ, putting his law
into their inward parts, and writing it in their hearts, that he will be their
God, and that they shall be his people.

2. For the second. The faithful have a propriety in all of God they can want
or wish. Particularly, 1. In all the three Persons of the Godhead. Ephesians. 1.6.
John 17.12. 2 Pet. 1.3.
The Father accepts them for his in his beloved; nay, he gave them to Christ,
and chose them before the foundation of the world. The Father of Christ is
their Father, to provide for, pardon, and govern them, and to afford them all
things which pertain to life and godliness. The Son is their Mediator, their
head, 1 Timothy 2.5. Col. 1.18. 1 These. 1.10.
their brother, their husband; they are his by the Spirit, and he theirs by
faith; he delivers them from all the evil they fear; he obtains for them all
the good they desire. The Holy Ghost is theirs, John. 14.16.
to direct and teach them, to purify and cleanse them, to furnish and adorn
them, to support and comfort them. 1 These. 1.10.
2. They have a propriety in the attributes of God. In his omniscience, he
knowing whatsoever they want, or hurts them. In his wisdom, to teach and guide
them. In his power to protect and defend them. In his love to delight in, pity,
and provide for them. In his righteousness, Psalm. 4.1. Romans 8.32. Psalm. 84.11.
Psalm. 23.1. 2 Pet. 1.4.
to clear and judge their cause. In his al-sufficiency, to supply and furnish
them with all needful blessings, according to every want. One God answers to
all exigences. 3. They have a propriety in his promises, great and precious
promises, wherein all they want, and infinitely more than they can conceive, or
desire, is assured to them, grace, glory, mercies for the throne, and the
footstool; nay, God himself, in whom all blessings are summed up, and
centered; all being as certain, as if already performed; and for the
accomplishment whereof, they have Gods oath, wherein he has (as I may say)
pawned his very being; and the seal of the blood of Christ, Heb. 6.17.
that being the blood of the Covenant, and he the Mediator of the Covenant,
Heb. 12.24. 2 Cor. 1.20.
in whom all the promises are yea and amen. 4. They have a propriety in the
providence of God, whereby whatsoever may hurt them, is withheld from them;
not an hair of their head suffered to perish; Mat. 10.30.
and they, though poor, persecuted, sick, dying, yet ever safe; nay, whereby
whatever befalls them, shall be beneficial to them; every stone thrown at them,
made a precious stone; every twig of every rod sanctified; the issue of every
dispensation made sweet and beautiful. In a word, whereby they are enabled to
be, and do, and bear, whatever God either commands, or imposes; and they
relieved with whatever may do, or make them good.

3. For the third, how suitable and beneficial a good God is to those who have
a propriety in him. John 4.24.
1. He is a spiritual good; drossie and earthy comforts suit not with a
spiritual soul; nor are they such food as the soul loves. Thy soul is no
fitter for gold to be put into it, than are thy bags to have grace put into
them. 2. He is a living good. Jer. 10.5.
The creature is a dead, liveless, lumpish, unactive thing; it may be said of
it as it is of an Idol, it must be born, because it cannot go. We rather uphold
it, than it upholdes us. Like Baal, it is not able to plead for it self. It
helps us not in distress of conscience, the day of wrath. Like Absaloms mule,
it goes from under us, and leaves us in our distresses; but God relieves the
soul, and affords strengthening consolation. Heb. 6.18.
He is a present help in the needful time of trouble; and ever either
preserves us from, Psalm. 50.12. Isa. 59.16.
or sustains in adversity. 3. He is an absolute, independent good. He is
self-suficient. If he be hungry, he will not tell thee. He depends no more upon
the creature, than the fountain upon the stream. He is not hindered from helping
us by any deficiencies of the creature he has sometime complained, that he has
had too many, never that he has had too few to deliver by. How safe is it to
depend upon him, who depends upon none! 4. He is an unmixed good, and has
nothing in him but goodness. He is an ocean of swetness, without a drop of
gall. Cant. 5.16.
He is altogether lovely, and a beauty without any shadow. There is nothing in
him that the soul could spare, or wish were absent. Every creature is a
bittersweet, and so poor a comfort, that its bitterness is necessary to the
very being of its sweetness; for had it not a bitterness, its sweetness would
be fulsome: but though God be altogether delightful, yet he never clogs, but
the more he is enjoyed, Luke 12.33.
the more he pleases the enjoyer. 5. He is an indeficient, never failing good;
a fountain which the hottest summer dryes not, a treasure never emptyed, one
whose perfections never leave himself, and one who never leaves any that ever
truly enjoyed him* 6. Lastly. He is a most full good, and that in two respects.
1. In respect of the comprehensiveness, or the fullness of the object. In one
God is every thing. He is a bundle of all perfections. All the dispersed
excellencies in the world are assembled in him. When he says, I will be thy
God, there is as much said as can be said. And as we can have nothing better
than God, so of good we can have nothing more. 2. He is a full good in regard
of contentment, or fullness of the subject: whoever has an interest in him,
has that (...), that abundant plenty, which observed, will not suffer him to
envy the most prosperous sinner: God can fill the vast, capacious soul, like
those water-pots of Galilee, up to the very brim. He has enough for himself,
and needs must he then have enough for us. The water which can fill the sea,
can much more fill a cup. Jer. 31.14.
My people shall be satisfied with goodness, says the Lord. My God shall
supply all your need. The tongue, the wish, the conception, Ephesians. 4.19.
all fall short of God. In heaven, though we shall comprehend so much as we
want, yet not so much as he is.

2. The second branch of Explication, was, why the Apostle, here mentioning the
grace abused by these seducers, calls it, the grace of OUR God. This he does to
make the fact of these Seducers in abusing it, the more odious among these
Christians. Dishonor offered to God, deeply affects the soul of one who has a
propriety in God. Our own child, servant, house, nay beast, or a poorer thing,
if it be our own, we suffer not to be wronged, and much more does our propriety
in God make every thing which dishonours him, hateful to us. And that upon two
grounds; 1. As he is our God who loves us, takes us into covenant, and owns us.
Holy ingenuity will constrain us to love that grace which saved us, that God
who loved us freely when we were unlovely, who loved us abundantly, bestowing
his very self, and in himself all things, and who continues thus to love us
eternally. 2. As he is our God whom we have taken by covenant to be ours, to
love and serve for ever. Now it is both against fidelity and inbred generosity
to suffer that thing to be abused, which we have undertaken to serve. This
neither agrees with honesty, nor honor; it is not only a sin, but a shame.
Hardly is any servant so low spirited, as to think it consistent with his
credit to serve an abused, a disgraced Master: but especially are all people
tender of the honor of the God whom they have undertaken to serve. The
Philistims tread not on the threshold upon which their god Dagon did fall. They
who have taken God for their own, cannot endure that his glory should suffer
from themselves, or others.

1. Great is their folly and misery who content themselves in a common
propriety and interest in God. Observe. 1.
It Is a false consequence, to say, Because God made thee, or because thou art
reckoned to belong to God by common and visible profession, Isa. 27.11.
that therefore God will save thee. A man is not contented to be the Kings
subject, he desires to be his favorite. They who have not God for their God in
Christ, have him so for their God, as they have him also for their enemy: men
think it not enough to have an opinionative, esteemed, unless they have also a
real a legal propriety in their lands; and why should they not also labor to
have their interest in God without cracks and flawes?

2. Sin is the greatest evil in the world. Observe. 2. Isa. 59.2.
It parts between us and the greatest good. Your iniquities have separated
between you and your God. We may be poor, persecuted, disgraced, and yet have
God for ours; but living in the love of any sin, we cannot. There Is more evil
in a drop of sin, than in a sea of suffering.

3. They who have God for theirs, Observe. 3.
may contentedly want all other comforts: They have enough besides. They may
answer Satan when he offers worldly glory and preferments, 2 King. 4.13
as that woman did the prophet, I live among mine own people: Psalm. 23.1.
I have enough: The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. When a Saint sees
all worldly vanities, he may say, How many things are there that I want not!
Their names I will not take up into my lips (says David;) Psalm. 16.4, 5
The Lord is my portion. The people of God are as some Countries, which can
live of themselves, without being beholden to others. A Saint, like a rich man,
may spare and spend for a good conscience as much in one day, as a poor
worldling would count his utter undoing to part with. And this is the reason
why God cuts his people short of outward comforts, they have enough in having
of God; and never does God more delight to let out himself into the soul, than
when he deprives of temporalls. Joseph, when he manifested himself to his
brethren, caused all to go out of the place where he did it.

4. It Is a false way of valuing ones worth by any worldly enjoyment. Observe. 4.
Gains or losses are to be estimated by enjoyment of more or less of God. The
titles of substance, profits, goods, are abusively given to riches: Without an
interest in God they are but shadows, losses, evils. They are only full (like
the sieve in the water) when they are enjoyed in God; empty, when without him.

5. Observe. 5.
The true reason of all the wrangling and unquietness of the soul with and in
men, is because their soul has no real interest in God. Lord, thou have made
us for thee, and we are unquiet till we come to thee! Great is their folly,
who, like the child that cries for want of sleep, and yet will not go to bed,
cannot be quiet without God, and yet are most unwilling to have him. If men
loved themselves in loving of God, man might hate, and troubles approach, but
not hurt, not disquiet them.

6. Observe. 6.
It should be the grand design of all those who are without God, to obtain this
propriety in him. To this end, 1. Be sensible that you are by nature indigent,
godless creatures, broken off from God, by the breach of the first covenant,
and without God, Ephesians. 2.12. Ephesians. 4.18. Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
hating and hated of God: alienated from his life, and from his love; children
both of disobedience and wrath. Judge your selves, for your former rebellion and
unfaithfulness in breaking covenant, unworthy that ever God should own you, and
that you stand at his mercy, either to be your God or your Judge. 2. Make a
friend, who may make up the former breach and disunion between God and you. No
readmission is to be expected without a Mediator. God will not be yours, if
Christ be none of yours. A Christless soul, is a godless soul; an absolute God
is a consuming fire. God will never be satisfied but by the mediation of a
sacrifice: nor can we ever be taken into covenant without the Blood of the
Covenant. Exodus 24.8. Psalm. 50.5.
The blood of Christ is the only Cement of reuniting and knitting God and man
together. 3. Break your league with sin. Expect not a propriety in God, if you
continue to love that which first disunited you from him. God and sin draw
contrary ways; Mat. 6.24.
there can be no accommodation between them. If God be ours, sin must be none of
ours. They are like two balances, if one goes up, the other goes down. A man
cannot look heavenward and earthward at the same time. God may take many of us
for his, we can take only him for ours. 4. Let the propriety be mutual. Expect
not that God should be engaged to you, and that you should be loose from God.
Yield your selves to the Lord, Cant. 6.3. 2 Chro. 30.8.
serve him, and give the hand to him. When he makes the strictest commands, be
as willing to say, Lord, We are thine; as to say, when he makes the sweetest
promises, Lord, Thou art ours. Receive from him the law of your life. Let him
make the conditions of the covenant, and the articles of agreement after his
own mind. Never startle at the proposal of any service. 1 Cor. 6.20.
Consecrate, resign your selves to him, and quit any interest in your selves.
5. Observe his condescending willingness to become yours. How he beseeches us
to accept him for our God; and woos us, though he wants us not: he makes the
first motion to every soul. John 6.37.
He that comes to him, he will in no wise cast out. All sight of sin which
makes the soul distrust Gods promise, is a sinful sight of sin. Say, Lord,
though I am unworthy to be beloved, yet thou art worthy to be believed. Take
hold of the Covenant, Isa. 56.6.
and commit thy soul to Gods offer; verily thou shall not be rejected. Observe.
ult. Psalm. 37.5.7. Qui misit Filium, immisit Spiritum, promifit vultum, quid
tandem de negaturus est? Psalm. 84.11.


7. They who have a propriety in God should express and show it. And that, 1.
By depending upon him for supplies in all straits. He who has given himself,
what can he withhold! he who has given a Kingdom, will not deny a staff to
walk thither. Let them fear want, who have not a God for their portion. Faith
fears no Famine. In one God is every thing. All who have this God, shall have
what they want, if not what they would. 2. By promoting the honor and service
due to him. Propriety is the foundation of true obedience. All that we are, all
that we do, all that we have should be his. His honor we should propagate, and
make it our only plot and business to make him great, and to leven the world
with holy obedience to him. His honor we should preserve, enduring nothing
that does eclipse or impair it. Psalm. 69.9.
He who touches that, should touch the apple of our eye. The reproaches of
them that reproach him, we should look upon as falling upon our selves;
mourning for that dishonor offered to him which we cannot redress, and hating
all that unholiness in the world which we cannot help.

This for the enjoyment under which these Seducers lived. viz. the grace of our
God. The second particular, their mis-improvement thereof follows. They turned
it into lasciviousness.

Three things are considerable by way of explication. Explicat.


1. What the Apostle here intends by lasciviousness.

2. How the grace of God was turned into lasciviousness.

3. Wherein appears the sinfulnes of turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness.

1. For the first. The word lasciviousness in the Original is (...). The
derivation thereof is by all, agreed upon, to be from the particle (...) and
(...), Selge; which Selge was a City between Galatia and Capadocia, whose
inhabitants (say some) were most modest and temperate, and these make (...) to
be a note of privation of modesty and temperance, and importing the
lasciviousness of these seducers, Cives istius oppidi ut vires amissas
recuperarent, nervosque debilitatos confirmarent, invenerunt oleum nervis
utile, quod de nomine illorum Veteres appellaverunt Selgiticum: cujus meminit
Plinius, l. 15. Not. Hist. c. 7. (...). Lucian. 2 Cor. 12.21. (...). Gal. 5.19.
(...). Ephesians. 4.19. tradiderunt seipsos (...). 2 Pet. 2.7. (...). Sap. 14.25. In
commemoratione flagitiorum a gentilibus commissorum, conjunguntur, (...). ^erh.
in 2 Pet. (...) usurpatur pro lascivo, qui petulanter indulget libidinibus.
(...), preterva lascivia. Complectitur omne genus obscoenitatis, quando
procacibus, verbis and gestibus interior libido proditur, Gerb. in 1 Pet. 4.3.
Perkins says, it is An open ostentation of incontinency. in Gal. 5.19.
by their being unlike the people of Selge, even destitute and void of all
modesty and temperance. Others (upon better ground) say, that this Selge was a
most dissolute and lascivious place, where the inhabitants were given to all
manner of luxury and unclean profuseness; and these make (...) to be
intensive, dilating and increasing the sense, and so importing the
lasciviousness of these seducers by their being most like the people of Selge,
namely, violent and unbridled in all lust and filthiness. The word (as all
agree) notes a monstrous open profusion, and pouring out, and spending ones
self without measure, in lasciviousness and obscene lustful practices: I it
is translated Romans 13.13. wantonness, and it is joined with rioting,
drunkunesse, chambering. And 1 Pet. 4.3. with Lusts, Excess of wine,
Revellings, Banquetings.

This word (lascivionsnesse) is 2 Cox. 12. ult. joined with unole anness and
fornication. And in Gal. 5.19. with adultery, fornication, uncleanesse. And
Ephesians. 4.19. this lasciviousness is expounded by the working of all uncleanness
with greediness. And 2 Pet. 2.7. this word here translated lasciviousness is
put for all the filthiness of Sodom. Lot was vexed with the filthy, or
lascivious conversation of the wicked; and that Apostle v. 18. speaking of
seducers, (the same kind of men of which Jude here speaks) mentions this
lasciviousness as the bait with which they baited their hook of error. They
allure (says he) those who were clean, etc. through wantonness, or
lasciviousness; which was that encouragement which they gave to people to
exercise carnal lusts, under the pretense of Christian liberty. By comparing
of these places, its conceived that this sin of lasciviousness properly
imports all kind of carnal defilements, and fleshly polutions, as also all
outward obscenity and filthiness expressed in men's behavior, either by
shameless words or gestures; and notes withal, the prosecution of these
unclean courses with impudency, petulancy, Simon docebat turpitudinem
indifferenter utendi foeminis. Aug. de haeres. cap. 1. Eusebius, Irenaeus,
Epiphanius, Augustine. Danaeus. (...). etc. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 12.
Grostici, qui a nonnullis vocati sunt Borboriti, quasi coeno^, propter nimiam
turpitudinem, etc. Aug. Ib. Menan driani omnem turpitudinem libenter amplexi
sunt, tanquam gratiae Dei erga bomines fructum; bonos etiam and sanctos mores,
qui lege Dei praescribuntur, per gratiae Dei praedicationem, ut jam inutiles
and vanum studium tolli and antiquari sentiebant. Aug. de haeres.
defense, violence and contempt of all opposition or observation from men. It
is a manifest wickedness. They who are guilty of it, do not blush at it: they
declare their sin as Sodom, Is. 3.9. they are not like the harlot, that wipes
her lips; but like Absalom, that spreads his incestuous pallet on the roof, and
calls the Sun a blushing witness to his filthiness. They glory in their shame.
Their hand is the Organ of wickedness, and their mouth the Trumpet: they
out-sin all shame; they crown uncleanness with Garlands of honor. Their sin
abandons secrecy; and admonition to it is as a pouring of oil down the chimny.
Thus Rev. 2.14. Some there were who taught fornication. Simon Magus taught that
women might indifferently be used; The prodigious impurity of whose followers,
Ecclesiastical Writers tell us, would astonish any sober hearer, and is such
as no modest man can either write, or speak without offense. The Gnostics, who
arrogated that name to themselves for their pretended excellency of knowledge
above all others, were called, for their filthiness, Borboriti, or the dirty
miry sect. They used all kind of uncleanesse, as the fruit of the Grace of God.
And they declared, that all holy and righteous courses commanded in the law of
God, were antiquated and taken away by the preaching of the Grace of God.
Carpocrates taught men how to speak filthily and uncleanly, and how to live
leudly. Carpocrates docebat omnem turpem orationem, omnemque adinventionem
peccati. Aug. de haeres.
And although by [ lasciviousnesse] is properly understood the open profession,
and ostentation of incontinency; yet must it here be taken more generally (as
the following description of these seducers declares) for a licencious profane
kind of living in, and liberty of sinning.

2 For the second, how grace is said to be turned into lasciviousness.

The word in the original, by which the Apostle expresses this turning,
(...). Oecum. Heb. 11.5. (...), Act. 7.16. (...). Gal. 1.6. Heb. 7.12.
is (...), which signifies properly, the transposing, or removing of a thing
from the place of its ordinary abode, to some other; but it is used to note the
alteration or removal, 1. Of persons from former opinions or practices which
they have embraced, and thus the Apostle tells the Galatians, Gal. 1.6. I
marvel that ye are so soon removed ((...)) from him that called you, etc. And,
2. Of things, both from their former uses, and ends; and thus the Apostle
says, ((...)) the priesthood being changed, or translated, there was ((...)) a
translation, or change of the law: and thus Jude says, these seducers did
translate or remove the grace of God from its true and appointed, to a false
and wrong use and end. The end and use of the doctrine of grace, and
justification by faith in Christ, was the serving of God without fear, in
holiness and righteousness, Luke 1.75. Tit. 2.12.
the denying of ungodliness and worldly lusts, and the living soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world; but these Seducers transposed and
removed this evangelicall grace from the ends and uses appointed by God, unto
such as were contrived by themselves; they teaching that Christ had fulfilled
the law, and freed Christians from it, that so they might have a liberty to
live as they list, and be freed from the Law not only as a Covenant, which
cursed those who broke it; but as a rule also, prescribing the good to be done,
and the evil to be avoided.

And thus the grace of God may be said to be abused and perverted to a wrong
end and use sundry ways; five especially.

1. When men abuse this grace of God to an empty, bare profession of it; to a
resting in the mere outward show of enjoying that grace, and the benefits of
the Gospel; they never laboring for a true and real interest in the benefits
themselves; Rev. 3.1. 2 Cor. 6.1.
herein resembling such bondmen, who being made free, think it enough to be
accounted free, and to be out of their time, to be such as may put on their
hats, and wear a gown; but never care for setting up, or falling to their
Trades, that they may thrive. Thus there are many who only care to have a name
to live; who receive the grace of God in vain; and are mere titular Christians,
never really thriving in godliness, and as very slaves to sin as ever: But
they who here profess vainly, shall hear God profess severely, I never knew
you, Matt. 7.23.
Depart, etc.

2. When men abuse grace, to the disobeying of Authority. A sin to which our
natures are too prone. And it is clear by the context of 1 Pet. 2.16.
Vnusquisque habet animum Regis. Calv. in 1 Pet. 5.5.
that when the Apostle forbids the Christians to use their liberty as a cloak
of maliciousness, he intends by maliciousness, disobedience to the lawful
commands of the Magistrate: and this was one way whereby these Seducers
perverted the grace of God; namely, by despising of Dominions, and speaking
evil of Dignities; as if, Jude 8.
because Christ had taken away our thraldom to sin and Satan, he had
disannulled duty to all Superiors; Non eripit mortalia, qui Sceptra dat
coelestia. Prud.
as if grace were violated by humane laws. In a word, as if, because Christ
bestows an heavenly, he takes away earthly Crowns. Thus the Papists pervert the
grace of God, who turn his grace, Docent, Christianum Magistratus partibus
omnino non posse defungi, nullumque se in Ecclesia Magistratum agnoscere quam
Christu^. Colloqu. Emdan. Act. 112.. 1. Non licet Christianis tolerare regem
haereticum, etc. Bell. lib. 5. de Romans Pon. c. 7.
in giving to his Church the power of the Keys to open and shut heaven, into
an instrument of rebellion against lawful Magistrates, deposing them, and
freeing subjects from their Allegiance; whom they stir up to seditions and
conspiracies, though obedience for conscience sake be a divine command, and
resistance of lawful Authority have a divine commination, and that no less
then damnation. Thus the Anabaptists from the grace of the New Testament, and
our freedom purchased by Christ, teach the unlawfulness of Magistracy, and of
obedience to it; pretending that it infringeth the liberty of our consciences,
which are only subject to God; Whereas the bond of conscience consists not in
the particular laws of men, but in the general command of God; the conscience
being bound to obey Gods command of obeying Magistrates.

3. 1 Cor. 8.9.
When the grace of God, in the liberty which it affords, is abused to the
offense of the weak consciences of our brethren: When we remit nothing of the
extremity of that right and power we have in things of indifferent nature, Romans
15.15. 1 Cor. 7.23. Gal. 5.13. 1 Cor. 9.19. Omnia libera per fidem, omnia serva
per charitatem. Luth.
to please our neighbonr for his good unto edification. Although we must not be
the servants of men, yet we must by love serve one another; yea all, that by
all means we may (with the Apostle) win some. We should be persuaded with the
persuasion of faith, that all things are lawful; and yet we should resolve for
charity sake to forbear the use of many things, if we find them inexpedient;
and as well consider what is useful for others, as lawful for our selves.

4. When the grace of God is abused in the excessive, immoderate enjoyment of
things in themselves lawful: When men think they are limited to no measure in
the enjoyment of a lawful comfort; suppose, recreation, diet, apparel, etc.
As if, because the thing is lawful to be used, therefore all use of that thing
is lawful; as if lawful things could not be used unlawfully. He who always
goes as far as he may, sometimes goes further than he should. Satan never
falls upon us so much to our disadvantage, as when he lies in ambush behind our
lawful enjoyments.

5. When the grace of God is abused to the casting off our obedience to the law
of God as a Rule. When men will discharge themselves from duty to, because God
discharges them from condemnation by the Law; and because grace frees from
sin, therefore they will sin freely: as if because God prohibits the opinion of
works, therefore he dispenceth with the performance of works. That we are by
nature apt Scholars to learn this hellish Sophistry, it is plain by Paul's
supposition, that some would conclude from the doctrine of free Justification
by Christ, that they might continue in sin, to the end that grace might abound:
and that evil might be done, Heb. 6.1.
that good might come of it: that there are some who are forward to teach it,
is clear from Peter's description of Seducers, who allure people through much
wantonness, 1 Pet. 2.19.
promising them liberty. Conformable to whom are 1. the Antinomians, who from
the grace of God in mitigating the Law, would infer an utter abrogation of the
Law; denying that it has a directive, regulating power over a believer. True
it is, the Law is abrogated 1. In respect of Justification, believers expecting
acceptance from God not for what they are, or do; but by relying upon Christ.
2. In respect of condemnation, Christ having been made a curse for them. 3. In
respect of compulsion by terror, so far as they are regenerate, there being in
them a delight in the Law. 4. In respect of rigid and perfect obedience:
imperfect, Phil. 2.24, 25. (...), Heb. 7.12. (...). Heb. 7.18. (...). Heb. 8.
ult. (...).
if sincere obedience being accepted through Christ, though by the Law we are
obliged to that which is perfect. 5. In respect of the irritation and increase
of sin by the Law, it not stirring up, but subduing corruption in believers,
who partake of sanctifying grace: But yet as a Rule of life, it ever continues,
even to believers. That the Ceremonial law vanishes, decays, waxes old, is
broken down, changed, disannulled, abrogated, the Scripture testifies; but not
one of these words are used concerning the Moral Law. And of what does the
Spirit of God more frequently admonish believers, than not to refuse obedience
to the Law, under pretext of Christian liberty, Gal. 5.13. Use not your liberty
as an occasion to the flesh, not taking a rise (as the word signifies) from
your deliverance from the Law, (...), Noli liberate abuti ad libere peccandum.
Aug. Tr. 41. in Johan.
to the satisfying of your lusts. And 2 Pet. 2.16. Use not your liberty as a
cloak of maliciousness: i. e. Abuse not your liberty, by grace to cover
licenciousnesse in sin. In a word, If disobedience to the Law be still a sin in
the believer, the power of the Law is not abolished: For there can be no sin,
unless it be a transgression of a Law. 2. The Papists abuse the grace of God
to a rejecting of the law; who from the doctrine of absolving repenting
sinners, plead for a power in the Pope to give Licenses and Indulgences to the
greatest of sins; who for his Corban, forgives sins both past, and future,
(both alike;) and sends his Briefs to be left in as many Countries as he
pleases, for granting liberty to sin for many years to come, the price whereof
is set by the Court of Faculties in Rome; which fills up the measure of Europe's
sins, by exhausting of Europe's Revenues. How great a wantonness must this
produce? Why should any rich man now care how he live or die, seeing all shall
be well with him for a little money?

3. Wherein appears the sinfulness of turning this grace into lasciviousness?

1. It comprehends the sin of hypocrisy. Sin is the fouler for receiving a
cover. To do that which is in it self evil, must needs offend God: but to do
evil by appearing to do the contrary, comprehends both the sin it self which
we endeavor to hide, and a sinning by endeavoring to hide it; to the sin it
self is added a practical lie, by speaking in our practice, that we are and
do, contrary to what we are or do. As God is a God of pure eyes, he hates all
sin; but as he is a God that loves a pure heart, of all sins, he most hates
hypocrisy. All Murderers sin hainously; but none so hainously as those who
employ a man's own hands to kill himself. An hypocrite labors to destroy
Religion by Religion.

2. As it is hypocrisy to cover lasciviousness, so is it even heightened
profaneness to cover it with the grace of God. Will no cheaper stuff then
grace serve to cloth lasciviousness? The excellency of any thing adds to the
fault of abusing it; To make a King's Son Lacquey to a beggar, to make hay with
the Scepter Royal, to dig in a dunghill with a golden spade, to stop an oven
with the Robes of an Emperor, are all actions of greatest unworthiness, and
wild unsutablenesse; but to make Religion a stirrup to profaneness, and the
grace of God a credit to lasciviousness is a presumption of an higher and far
more unsufferable degree. This is to make God accounted a patron of impiety,
and the Judge of all the Earth to seem the greatest malefactor, Ezekiel. 36.20.
and to profane his holy Name

4. This turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, argues the grossest
folly; it is a forsaking of our own mercy, a receiving the grace of God in
vain. What is, if this be not to neglect great salvation; to be prodigal of
blessednese; to ravell out, and to wanton away the offers of Christ himself?
Who would not heartily chide himself, that by toying, trifling, or unnecessary
lingering in the way to the Exchange, misseth of a bargain by which he might
have gained a thousand pounds? Foolish Sinner! Lasciviousness under grace is
the loss of glory: and the loss of heaven can never be redeemed with the
tears of hell.

4. Grace turned into lasciviousness is the top of all Ingratitude. What
greater unkindnesse, then to be evil because God is good? If it be a sin for
thee to have an evil eye against another, because God is good to him; what is
it to have an evil eye against God, because he is good to thee? If it be a sin
to reward a man evil for evil, what is it to return to God evil for good? To be
lascivious because God is gracious, is to fight against God with his own
weapons, to wound God with that arm which he has cured, Hos. 7.15.
to kill and crucify him who has freed us from death: In a word, to make that
a pillow for presumption, which God appointed for an antidote against despair.

5. by grace to grow lascivious, is destruction even to desperate
irrecoverablenesse. No poison is so deadly as the poison extracted out of
grace. Abused mercy pleads against a sinner most perswasively. If that which
was appointed for a sinners rising and standing, makes him fall, how
irrecoverable must his falling be! If Mercy be his foe, how should Justice ever
be his friend! Lamentable was the death of Zimri, who was burnt by the flames
of that house which was for his safety. Grace is the sweetest friend, but the
sorest enemy. Lead, of it self, is very cold and cooling, but nothing so
scalding, if it be thoroughly heated. The lowest place in hell is provided for
those who have been lifted up nearest to heaven. Grace discovered and abused,
is THE condemnation. Out of him who lavishly spends riches of grace, God will
recover riches of glory. God will not lose by any.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
Great is our natural propensenesse to grow wanton against God by his
goodness. Seldom is God provoked so much by any, as by those who most deeply
partake of his indulgence. It Is very hard for God to smile, and for us not to
be wanton. How frequently does God complain of the unkind requitals returned
for his loves! Do ye so reward the Lord, O foolish people! Deuteronomy. 32.6. Jesurum
waxed fat and kicked: who, because laden with fatness, therefore forsook God
that made him. And Isa. Isa. 1.2.
1.2. I have nourished children, but they have rebelled against me. It Is pity
(as we say of fair weather) that the goodness of God should do any hurt: but
we are commonly not more unsubmissive under corrections, then wanton under
comforts. Gods severity restrains from that impiety which his indulgence draws
forth, by meeting with a sensual heart, that turns the favors of God into the
fuel of lust. It Is much easier to walk steddily in a path of deep dirt, than of
slippery ice. How just, nay, how good is God to abridg us of that comfort
either inward or outward, which we abuse! to turn us (like sheep) into short
pasture, if there we thrive best; and rather to deny us mercies in mercy, then
to bestow them in wrath.

2. Observe. 2.
The best and choycest of outward administrations cannot better a bad heart.
Even grace may be received in vain. The best preaching and Preachers in the
world have not seldom been sent to a gainsaying people. Romans 10.21. Luke
16.31.
Neither Moses and the Prophets, nor one raised from the dead, nay, nor the
preaching of Christ himself can of themselves work upon the heart. Moral
swasion comes far short of effectual grace; and the word of grace much differs
from the grace of the word. Warm clothes and strong waters cannot fetch life
into a dead man. The plentifullest showers leave the heath unfruitful. Nature,
after all imaginable improvements, is still but Nature, till supernaturally
renewed. How happy were we, if men would attribute the unreformednesse of the
times under the Gospel of grace, more to the strength of their own lusts, then
the weakness of the Ministers labors: and if, in stead of glorying (I had
almost said, of placing religion) in the parts of Ministers, they would humbly
and ardently seek God for that blessing, without which, the fattest Ordinances
devoured, leave but lean souls.

3. Observe. 3.
The most holy and happy enjoyments are not without their snares. There Is
danger in enjoying the best things, even the grace of God. Men ordinarily
conceive that there is danger in wanting the Ordinances, in sinning, in being
in sinful company, and using worldly comforts; but they consider not that even
their graces, their good works, their comforts, every Ordinance and duty have
their snares accompanying them. Diabolus surgit armis quibus dejicitur. Cave
non tantum ab operibus malis, sed etiam a bonis. Luth.
Our very graces may occasion us to be proud, and our very comforts to be
secure. Luther was wont to advise men to take heed of their good works. There
are no services so holy, but Satan creeps into them, and when he cannot hinder
the external, he endeavors to spoil the spiritual performance of them. He
labors to wind himself even into Paradise, and loves to stand among the Sons
of God. How often does he show men the beautiful buildings of their late
performances, to a worse end than the Disciples did Christ the buildings of the
Temple! And how rare is it to find that Christian, who by self-debasing,
leaves not (as it were) a stone upon a stone which he casts not down by having
low thoughts of high services! Eccl. 5 1.
Thou must not only keep thy foot from entering into places of vanity, but also
keep thy foot when thou entrest into the house of God: not only take heed
that thou neglectest not hearing, but also take heed how thou hear. How often
have the servants of God been humble and hungry in the want of those tokens of
grace, under the enjoying whereof they have been proud, unprofitable, and (the
sin of these Seducesrs being natural) almost lascivious!

4. Observe. 4.
An unholy heart sucks poison out of the sweetest and holiest enjoyments: Even
the grace of God he abuses to his own perdition. Unto them who are defiled and
unbeleeving (says the Apostle) is nothing pure. Tit. 1.15.
They taint every thing they touch. Prove. 15.8.28.9.
Their best services are abomination to the Lord. Their prayers are turned into
sin. The word is to them the savor of death, and the grace of God pernicious.
The Sacraments are poison and damnation, Christ is a stumbling stone: Their
table snares them, their prosperity slayes them. Whatever we have, till Christ
be ours, cannot be enjoyed profitably: the guilt of the person must be removed,
before the comfort of the gift can be enjoyed. Out of Christ, all comforts are
but like a funeral banquet, or the prison provisions of him who is fed against
his execution. And a sinner is as far from returning any enjoyment by love to
God, as he is from receiving it in love from God: His heart is the heart of an
enemy, even under the dispensations of grace. And what are all blessings (til
the heart be changed) but furniture to oppose God, and fuel to increase sin? O
Christian, in stead of boasting how good thy enjoyments are in themselves,
labor to find them good to thee. It matters not what the things are which
thou receivest, but what thou art who do receive them. The same promise which
purifyes a Saint, (through thy sin) pollutes thee. The same breath which warmes
him, cools thee; he being near, thou far from him that breaths. Till grace
savingly work upon thee, thou art but a wanton under grace.

5. Observe. 5. 1 King. 21.13. 1 Samuel 15. Mat. 23.25.
Corrupt nature can cast even upon foul and lascivious courses, the cloak and
color of a religious pretext. The murderous contrivements of Absalom and
Jezabel, The disobedience of Saul, the devouring of widows houses, the
maliciousness spoken of by Peter, 1 Pet. 2.16. had their several cloaks and
covers. The unlovelinesse of lusts in themselves, and the love of sinners to
them, put sinners upon this covering of them: by reason of the former, this
covering is required; by reason of the later, it is contrived. But of this more
before.

6. Observe. 6.
God is gracious even unto them who abuse his grace. He affords the means and
offers of it, to them who turn it into lasciviousness. He holds the candle to
them who will not work by, but wanton away the light. He calls men, though they
will not hear; and woos them who will not be entreated. Certainly, God does not
only show himself a God in powerful working, but even in patient waiting
upon the wicked; none but a God could do either. Oh sinner, how inexcusable
will thou be in that great day, when God shall say, Isa. 5.4.
What could I have done more; or how could thou desire me to wait longer for
thy good? Certainly, thine own conscience shall be Gods deputy to condemn thee.
If thou shall give an account for every idle word which thou thy self have
spoken; how much more for every unprofitable word which thou have made God
speak to thee! For the Lords sake, Christians, take heed of receiving the grace
of God in vain. And how should this goodness of God put us (especially
Ministers) upon imitating of him! though sinners be wantons under grace, yet
let not us be weary of dispensing it. 2 Timothy 2.25.
Let us wait, if peradventure at any time God may give sinners repentance.
Ministers are spiritual fishers: and fishing, we know, is a tedious work to
him who has no patience. The catching of one soul will make amends for all our
waiting. Our patience cannot be so much abused, as is Gods.

7. Observe. 7.
The doctrine of grace is warily to be handled by Ministers. It Is hard to set
up Christ and grace, and not to be thought to destroy the Law. Christian
Liberty is to be propounded as giving no allowance to libertinism. Satan has
in no one point more drawn teachers to extremes. Because he could not keep them
in Popery, by the doctrine of satisfying the Law as a Covenant; he labors to
drive them to Antinomianisme, by the doctrine of casting off the Law as a Rule:
because they have rejected the merit of works, he labors to make them cast off
the obedience of works. But the man of God should observe the Methods of the
Devil. The Apostle Paul having at large proved the doctrine of Free
justification by Christ, Romans 3.4, 5. Romans 6.1, 15.
subjoyns (and that twice in one chapter) a most vehement denial (by way of
interrogation) of any liberty to sin by grace: Shall we continue in sin, that
grace may abound? and, shall we sin because we are not under the Law, but under
grace? The like he had expressed before, chap. 3.31. Do we then make void the
Law through faith? To all which he answers with a (...), God forbid: words of
defiance and detestation. What though Ministers, for their preaching holiness
of life, be represented as those who preach not Christ? And what though their
names be crucified between the slanders of the Papists and Antinomians; the
former calling them Libertines, for defending the doctrine of justification by
Christ; and the later Legallists, for urging the Law as a rule? yet let them
hold fast the faithful word against both; Tit. 1.9.
and remember, that as Jesus is to be preached in opposition to the former; so
is Christ as an anointed King, in opposition to the later; and that, as there
was a resurrection of the body of their crucfied Master, so shall there be a
resurrection of the crucified names of his servants; and that it is their duty
to preach the Lords Christ, as Simeon calls him, and not the drunkards, the
Libertines, the Antinomians Christ.

8. No expressions of Gods grace or goodness of any kind, Observe. 8.
ought to be abused and perverted unto sin.

1 Not the temporal gifts, and worldly blessings which God bestows.

1. We must not abuse the gifts of outward estate, whether riches, or honors.
1. Riches must not be abused, 1. to Covetousness: the possessours of them
should not, be possessed by them. Siut soltiotia, non negotia.
They should rather be refreshments, than employments; rather used as steps to
raise us toward, than stops to hinder us from heaven; rather as those things
without which we cannot, than for which we do live. Only such things must be
loved much, which cannot be loved too much. 2. Riches must not be abused to
Creature-confidence. Job 31.24. 1 Timothy 6.17.
Gold must not be our hope; we must not trust in uncertain riches, lying
vanities, mammon of unrighteousness. Non fallitur qui nullifidit.
Riches never deceive us, but when we trust them. The creature may be used as a
staff to walk with, not to lean upon. 3. Nor must they be abused to
prodigality. Abundance requires sobriety: they who walk in slippery and dirty
ways, had need to gird up their loyn^. 1 Pet. 1.13.
Men should not feed upon, but only taste pleasures; like Jonathan, who did
but dip the end of his rod in the honey comb.

2. Honors must not be abused to pride. Height in place requires lowness in
opinion. There Is no advantage comes by having honor from men, but only the
having thereby an opportunity of honoring God. It Is sacrilege and Idolatry, to
accept of honor to Gods dishonor.

2. Nor must the gifts of the body, as strength, and beuty be abused. 1.
Strength must not be abused to luxury. It must not be given to Pro. 7.26.
wine, and women. 2. Nor to the wronging and oppressing of the weak, nor be a
weapon of any unrighteousness; nor 3. be abused to Jer. 9.23.
boasting. If God withdraw his manutenency, the most strongly built body drops
into the grave; and he who cannot be overcome by others, may by God be suffered
to be his own executioner. 2. Beuty must not be abused to the enticement of
others to sin, or the contempt of others who want it, or to a sinful Manus Deo
inferunt, quando id quod ille formavit reformare contendu^t; nescientes quia
opus Dei est omne quod nascitur, diaboli quodcunquemutatur. Cyp. lib. de
discip. and hab. virg.. 12 Bona domus, malus hospes. Vestite vos serico
probitatis, byssino sanctitatis, purpur a pudicitiae. Taliter pig mentatae,
Deum habebitis amatorem. Tert. de cult. Foe^^. Quaenam perfidia armari
eloquentia, ut contra suum do minum praelietur? Camp. Orat. de Juv. Acad. Jer.
4.22. Exodus 1.9.
mending, or rather marring of Gods wise handy work, by paintings and
spottings; as if the form bestowed by God should be reformed by the devil: Or
to a neglect of that true beuty of the soul, by being transformed from glory to
glory, by the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.18. as if the house were more to be regarded
than the inhabitant; and the casket more to be prized than the pearl.

3. We must not abuse the gifts of the mind. Parts, wit, understanding must not
be employed against God, to plotting against, or opposing of Christ and his
truth. The edge of wit must not wound religion. Men must not be wise to do
evil; or as Pharaoh, deal wisely against Gods people. Parts are never used
aright, but when they are Engines to set up a building of glory to Christ, and
when employed (as once the Ass was) to exalt their Master.

2. But especially should we take heed of perverting spiritual favors.

1. How pernicious is that abuse of the Decrees of God, to a liberty in sin l^
by concluding, that if we be elected, a wicked life shall not hurt, and if we
be reprobated, godliness shall not help us. Whereas, he who has elected to
salvation, Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 8.30.
has likewise ordained those means whereby salvation shall be obtained, and
that we shall walk in the way which leads to the same. But of this before.

2. We should fear to pervert the patience and long suffering of God to a
presumption, and a delaying of repentance. Eccles. 8.11. Romans 2.4.
This being a despising that goodness which leads to repentance, and a
treasuring up wrath by Gods forbearance. God intended mercy to be prized, not
despised; and he who has made a promise to repentance, Heb 3.7.
has not made a promise of repentance, when we please; nay, how justly may God
punish the contempt of his grace with final impenitency? Repentance delaid
till death, is seldom unto life.

3. Take heed o^ perverting the Seriptures to countenance thy sin, either in
opinion or practice. 2 Pet. 3.16.
Wrest them not, wrack them not to make them speak that which they never
intended; bring not the Scriptures to thy opinion, but thy opinion to the
Scripture; and every doctrine that cannot endure to look upon that sun; cast it
down as spurious. Take not occasion by Scripture to be sinful in practice; 1 John 2.1.
Scripture was written that we should not sin, not that we should sin. Let not
the idle person be occasioned from Matthew 6.34. Take no thought for to morrow,
etc. to neglect his calling; nor the Covetous, from 1 Timothy 5.8. if any man
provide not for his own, he is worse than an infidel, to be immoderate in
following it; let him as well remember, that as he is worse than an infidel
who is defective in regarding his own; so likewise that he imitates the
Gentiles, Matt. 6.32.
who seeks after all these things more then he should. Take not liberty from
the recording of the infirmities of saints in Scripture, to follow them in sin;
Rather let the falls of the stronger, be the fear of the weaker; and the
punishments which Saints brought upon themselves by their sins, be the terrors
of those who have nothing of sanctity in them. The falls of holy men set down in
Scripture, are like stakes fixed in a pond, not to call us, but to caution us.

4. Tit. 2.12. Luke 1.74, 75.
Let us be eminently careful, lest our deliverances obtained by Christ from
the Curse, be perverted to looseness of life. Let that which was a pledge of his
love, be a spur to our duty. Though some abuse this grace to a wrong end; let
us use it to a right end. To this end,

1. Admire and study the excellency of this grace. 1. in its fullness and
sufficiency: abuse not that which is so able to help thee. Who but a mad man
would throw away a Cabinet filled with the richest pearls, and purest gold? But
we were not redeemed with such corruptible things, 1 Pet. 1.18.
but with the precious blood of Christ; The blood of God. 2. In its freeness.
Gods bestowing it upon thee, when thou did not deserve it, when thou had no
other merit but misery to call for it, aggravates thy sin in abusing and
contemning it. Thankfulness becomes the distressed, rather then scornfulnesse.

2. Get an experimental taste of this Grace. Grace has no Enemy but the
ignorant. They who abuse it, show they never found benefit by it. A notionall
professor may be wrought to a contempt of that grace, which an experimental
partaker will highly esteem. Grace is never good in the souls valuation, till
it be possessed. Those who love it they know not why, will soon disrespect it
they know not how.

This for the first particular expression of the ungodliness of these
seducers, Their perverting of the grace of God. The second follows, viz. their
denying of the God of grace, Denying the only Lord God, etc.

In the words I consider,

1. The description of his dignity whom they opposed: the only Lord God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. How they opposed him, or wherein that opposition did stand; They denied him.

1 The description of his dignity.

I conceive with Beza and the best interpreters, that it is not to be
understood partly of God the Father, and partly of Christ, but altogether of
Christ; and that not so much because it seems to be parallel with that place of
Peter, denying the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1.
as because in the Original, the prefixing of only one article to all these
titles, seems to require this reading; The only Lord who is God, and, or even
our Lord Jesus Christ.

In this description of the dignity of Christ, I shall not (that I may avoid
tediousness and repetition) speak of his person and offices, as they are held
forth in these later words, Jesus Christ; but I shall principally consider from
these words, The only Lord God,

Our Saviors dignity, 1. In respect of his place and authority: So he is
called the only Lord.

2. In respect of his divine nature and essence; and so he is called, God.

1. In our Saviors dignity in respect of his place and authority; he is Lord
((...),) which title is set out by the peculiarity of it to himself; The only
Lord.

In the explication of Christ's dignity in this first respect, I shall briefly
show, 1. In what respect he is called Lord. 2. Only Lord.

EXPLICATION.
The title given to Christ is (...), Lord.

(...) is a word betokening a private right to rule; Herile Imperium.
such as is exercised in the guiding and governing of a family, and it most
properly signifies a Master, Ruler, or governor over servants, who are bound
to him. And such a Lord and ruler is Christ; whether we consider, 1 His Title
to this rule and dominion. 2 His exercise of this rule and dominion.


1. His Title to it: And a title he has to it,

1. By a right of Creation, Joh. 1.3. All things were made by him, and without
him was nothing made, that was made. Col. 1.16. by him were all things created.
And this his Creation of all things the Apostle makes the argument of his
dominion, 1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him.

2. Joh. 5.17. Sicut vasis beneficio, potius quam sua natura accidit, ne percat
aqua diffluendo; sic Deus in se creaturae labilitatem continet, ita ut ejus
action conservetur, ne pereat in nihilum recidendo. Gers. de vit. spir. lec.
1. Joh. 17.6. Psalm. 2.8. Mat. 28.18. Col. 1.15. Joh. 3.35. Act. 10.42.
Of sustentation and preservation: Col. 1.17. By him all things consist. If he
withdraw his divine power and manutenency, they all fall into nothing; He is a
being by his own nature, but all others have their beings by their
participation of essence from him, and his continuation of that action whereby
he gave them being. Heb. 1.3. He upholding all things by the word of his power.

3. By a right of ordination, designation, and appointment from God: Act. 2.36.
God has made him Lord and Christ. God has given his elect to Christ, that he
should be their Lord and head: that they should be his possession. God has
given him power over all flesh: he has the right and prerogative of the first
born, to be the Lord of all. God has given all things into his hand: he has
ordained him to be judge, he has appointed him over his own house, Heb 3.2.6.

4. By a right of unction, and reception of that furnishment and fullness of
the spirit of grace, whereby he was abundantly meet to be the Head and Lord of
his Church. He had as much of grace as there was of grace. All fullness dwelt
in him; Col. 1.19.
and he received not the spirit by measure. He had not the fullness of the
vessel, but of the fountain; all others had only a measured fullness, Luke
1.15. Act. 7.55. 1 Cor. 12.11. 1 John 16. Isa 61.1. Luke 1.74, 75. Tit. 2.14. 1
Pet. 1.19. 2 Pet. 2.19. Romans 14.7.8
and for themselves; Christ had a fullness of redundancy for the whole Church.

5. By a right of redemption. He is our Lord, because he has delivered us
from the hands of our Enemies; and when we were bondslaves to sin, Satan, and
death, paid our ransom. The ransomer of a bondslave was wont to be his Lord.
No bondage so great as ours was, no price so great as that which Christ paid;
and therefore no service so great as that which we owe.

6. Lastly, by right of Covenant he is the Lord of Christians. We promise to
take him for our Lord, both, 1. By a marriage Covenant: so we take him for our
head, guide, governor and protector. And 2. By a Covenant of hiring, and
binding out our selves to his service; not only baptismally and visibly, but by
an effectual and saving resignation of our selves to all the works of new
obedience.

2. Christ is a Lord, if we consider his exercise of Dominion: And this he puts
forth,

1. By giving Laws to bind his servants to obedience. None but Christ can give
laws; and there are none of Christ's servants but receive laws from him. Only
Christ can ordain laws to bind the conscience; Man's laws bind not as they
are man's, but as they are backed by Christ, nor can any beside Christ so give
laws to which we should be obedient, as withal to make us obedient to the
laws which he gives. Humane laws can make men cover sin, but not make them
cast off sin. Christ only can write his laws in the heart: Nor are there
any servants of Christ, but so far forth as they are such, receive laws from
him. Christ's servants are no sons of Belial. Every one must have a yoke upon
him, though it be made by the spirit sweet and easy. By becoming servants of
Christ, we do not cast off, but only change our yokes.

2. Ephesians. 4.11, 12
Christ exercises his dominion, by appointing officers in his house. These he
furnishes with gifts suitable to their places: He makes them able Ministers,
and appoints them to be his Stewards, 2 Cor. 3.6. 1 Cor. 4.1. Luke 12.42
to distribute to every one in his family, their due proportion, by way of
feeding and governing. The carriage of these Stewards is not arbitrary, but
appointed. They are all accountable to their Lord, for, and from whom they rule.

3. By finding his family with all necessaries for body and soul. Psalm. 23.1.
Psalm. 84.11
His servants shall want no good thing. They shall neither pine for want, nor
surfeit with abundance; they shall never have so much or so little, as to make
them unfit for service. Christ loves to keep them in working case. Even of
outward necessaries they shall have what they want, if not what they would:
Christ gives them all things that pertain to life and godliness; he
encourages them, 2 Pet. 1.1, 4.
he assisteth them in their work; he gives them exceeding great and precious
promises; he feeds them with his own flesh and blood, 2 Pet. 1.4.
he clothes them with his own righteousness, he directs them with his own
spirit.

4. By protecting his family from all dangers. There Is no safety but in Christ's
family; never are his servants in danger but when they go out of it. 1. Sam 2.9
He is the keeper of his Israel peculiarly. Though he sometimes suffers evils
to touch, Psalm. 105.14, 15.
he never suffers evils to hurt them; he visits them in, and delivers from all
their troubles, he suffers not Kings to hurt any of his servants. He takes the
wrongs offered to his servants, as offered to himself.

5. 1 Pet. 4.17.
By correcting it for its miscarriages. Judgment commonly begins at the house
of the Lord. His servants are safe, but must not be secure; he suffers the
world to do that which he will not endure in his own family. His servants will
never be faithful to him, nor find him faithful to them, if he did not
sometimes chastise them. He judges them, 1 Cor. 11.32.
that they may not be condemned with the world. And whenever the chides, he
does it not because he loves it, but because they want it.

6. By rewarding every servant according to his service. He is indeed the only
Lord, but he has sundry sorts of servants. He is a good master; but most that
call themselves his servants, are unprofitable, and only titular and
complementall, wearing his badg, but refusing his, work: using the name of the
Lord, and crying Lord, Lord; but shunning the rule of their Lord. The reward of
these, is, to be cast into utter darkness, Mat. 25.30. who heretofore were
unprofitable under light. His good and faithful servants shall be rewarded
with the joy of their Lord, even the presence of him whom they served
faithfully in his absence. Mat. 25.21.
Their labor of love shall not be forgotten by Christ; but all their former
toil shall be forgotten. Their work, though never so great, is but small to
their wages; nor is the weight of their labors, comparable to that of their
crown; Jesus Christ will pay them for every work which they have forgotten.
Their services are all book'd. He who formerly gave them abilities to work,
will now give them a recompense for working.

2. In what respect is Christ called Only Lord?

1. Not to exclude the Father and the Holy Ghost, 2d Branch of Explicat.
to whom with the Son, all outward works are common: and frequently to the
whole Trinity of Persons is this name of (...), or Lord, given in Scripture,
Act. 4.24. Rev. 6.10. God the Father, Joh. 17.3. is called the only true God,
not to exclude the Son: and God the Son is called the only Lord, not to exclude
the Father, who is represented in the natural glory of the Deity, as the Son
in the voluntary office of a Mediator.

But secondly, in respect of all creatures is Christ called only Lord, 1 Cor.
8.6. One Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.5. One Lord, and that,

1. To exclude the partnership of any other in the government with him. The
rule is not shared between him and other Lords. In government he has no
copartner: He is Gods only Vicegerent. There is no ^ther name under heaven
given among men. Act. 4.12. Mat. 28.18. Heb. 1.2. Isai. 63.3. Isai. 54.16.
To him has the Father committed all power in heaven and earth, as Pharaoh did
set Joseph over all the land of Egypt. God has appointed him heir of all
things. And as Christ had no co-adjutor in the work of redemption, so has he
no partner in the glory thereof.

2. 1 Timothy 6.15.
To note his superiority and preheminency above all other Lords. In which
respect he is called King of Kings and Lord of Lords: for,

1. He is the only absolute Lord. All other Lords are subordinate to him,
dependent on him, advanced by him, receive authority, laws, gifts from him,
are responsible for the use and abuse of these to him, and are therefore
punishable by him. The supreme of earthly Lords are, in respect of him,
inferior Lords.

2. Phil. 2.10.
He is the only universal Lord. To him every knee must bow. The three
kingdoms of heaven, earth and hell, never had any Lord but Christ; In the first
of these he does eminently show his glory and beauty; in the second his power
of ruling and directing; in the third his strength and severity. Angels and
glorified Saints in heaven; Saints, sinners, and every creature on earth; the
damned, and devils in hell, are all his subjects. He is Lord of all, Act. 10.36.

3. Psalm. 110.3.
He is the only Lord for power and might. He is able to subdue all things to
himself, Philip. 3.21. and 1 Timothy 6.15. He is called the only Potentate: He
made, and he can annihilate the world with one word. He can kill the soul, and
throw both body and soul into hell. Happy we, that earthly Lords, though never
so tyrannical, cannot do this. He can subdue the hearts of men, even of his
deadliest enemies, unto his love and obedience. Happy would earthly Monarchs
think themselves, if they could do thus. But he who only made, can only mend
the heart.

4. He is the only Lord for majesty and glory. All the glory of all the
Caesar's, Emperors, Kings who ever were, combined in one heap, is but a black
coal in comparison of the splendour of his glory. Mat. 6.29.
If Solomon in all his glory, was not arraied like the lillies of the field,
how much less was he like the Lord of the world. The glory of Agrippa and
Bernice was but a great fancy. Act. 25.23. (...).
How easy and often does Christ stain the pride of the glory of the greatest,
and even cause shameful spewing to be upon it. The glory of Kings is but a
borrowed ray, or spark, from his Majesty. When he shall appear in his glory,
all the nightly glowworms of worldly splendour shall be put out, and all
worldly majesty shall be exstinguish'd. Nay, the poorest Saint shall appear with
him in that glory, of which all the splendour of Emperors is not so much as a
shadow.

5. He is the only Lord in respect of his deportment toward his servants. 1. He
is the most discerning Lord and Master: no earthly Masters are so able to
observe the ways and works of their servants as he is; for the closest and
subtilest among them cannot deceive him; he spies them in every corner, nay
every corner of their hearts in them. He now (in some sort) is absent, and yet
he needs no informer, but knows what every servant does in his absence, and
will manifest every ones work to all the world. His eyes are as a flame of
fire, and clearer then ten thousand Suns; Heb. 4.12.
all things are naked and open before him. Exodus 3.7
Nor does he less observe the wants and troubles, than the ways and works of
his servants. He has an eye therefore as pitying, as it is piercing. For 2.
He is the most gracious Lord and Master. No Lord ever bought servants so dear,
he having bought them from slavery by laying down his dearest and most precious
blood for them; (never such a price!) He has given not his money, but himself
for them. 2. No Lord ever fed his servants so highly and so plentifully. The
servants of Christ have various and sumptuous dishes: First the word, after
that the Sacrament. The table of the Lord is furnished with the body and blood
of the Lord to nourish the servants, not only to labor, but also to eternal
life. 3. No Lord ever clothed servants so sumptuously: their garments are made
of that web which was woven out of his own bowels; they put on the scarlet of
his righteousness, and the merit of his death. The fine linen of holiness
and sanctification, yea, the beautiful robes of glory and immortality, which
they shall change for the filthy rags of sin and mortality. 4. No Lord ever
used his servants so gently and mercifully. He puts them only upon honorable,
safe, comfortable employments. He puts no more upon them than they can go
through. He is not only their Lord and Master, but their helper and fellow
worker; when they grow faint and weary, Phil. 4.13. Psalm. 25.4. and 5.9. Hab.
1.12.
he strengthens them; when doubtful, he teaches them; when slothful,
sometimes indeed, he corrects them; yet not to kill, but quicken them; and not
to destroy them, but their slothfulness; when they are sick, he pitties and
spares them; when old, he turns them not out of his service; but the longer
they live in it, the more they love it, yea, the more able they are to perform
it. In a word, when they die, he neither suffers them to lie still, nor sends
them to seek another master; for then they change not their master for another,
but their work for a better, or rather for their wages. For 5. No Master ever
rewarded his servants so bountifully. As Christ gives more for, so more to his
servants than any master. That happiness which Christ gives his servants in
this life is unspeakable; their work seems to have more of wages than work: but
in the next life, their joy will be so great, as that it cannot so well be said
to enter into them, as they to enter into it. Mat. 25.21.
For why? it is the joy of their Lord, whose bosom is the hive and center of
all goodness, and that in which all the scattered parcels of blessedness are
bundled up. Study, but yet expect not to understand either the comfort or
condescension of that promise, made Luke 12.37. to the faithful servants of
Christ, He shall gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and come forth
and serve them. Lord! did I not think that the cheer and the attendance were
both one, I should say, the attendance were infinitely better then the cheer.
Think what it is for Christ himself to serve at the table. What is it but
infinite delight for the guests to have him set himself to sollace them, who
is infinite, as in sweetness, so in knowledge, to make his sweetness please
them? Nor will the dignity of those servants be less then their delight, who
have majesty it self to serve them. Certainly, in heaven there shall be as many
kings as subjects.

6. He is the only Lord, for the duration of his dominion: Of his government
there shall be no end, Luke 1.33. He is the King immortal, 1 Timothy 1.17. He
only has immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. To other Potentates, though they be called
Gods, yet he who is the true God, says, that they shall die like men, Psalm.
82.7. Of our twenty five Monarchs since the conquest, thirteen (taking in three
who are thought to be poisoned) are said to have had violent and untimely
deaths.
Few earthly Monarchs there are whose lives are not tyrannical, and their
deaths untimely. Who ruling by the sword, commonly die by it. And should they
escape the ponyards, the poisons, the powder-plots, bullets, axes, which have
swept away the most, one disease or other will lay all their glory in the dust.
In an evening, a midday, yea, perhaps a more early cloud shall be the sunset
both of their lives and raigns. But Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to day,
and for ever; his throne is for ever and ever. Death it self, the King of
terrors, and the terror. of kings is subdued by Jesus Christ, and that not
only so as it shall never touch him, but also never hurt any of his servants.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observe. 1.
All our obedience to earthly Lords must be only such as this only Lord
allows, and only in the Lord. We must take heed of the sin of the
Israelites, Hos. 5.11. Regula regulans. Regula regulata.

willingly to walk after the Commandment; and of that of the Papists, blind
obedience to any superior. The greatest Lords in the world are but rules
ruled, Jesus Christ is the only rule ruling.

2. Observe. 2. Mat. Romans 12.11
The greatest diligence and servency of spirit is requisite in the service of
this only Lord. We must not do the work of this great Lord negligently, nor
offer him a female in stead of a male. This only Lord must have, as it were,
our only service. We must not serve him as if we served him not. Though the
best servant of this Lord be but an unprofitable, yet the least must not be an
idle servant. We must not offer to this Lord, that which cost us nothing. The
blind and the maimed are too bad for our ordinary Lords: Our Only Lord must
have our best, our hearts, our all, even the whole of our created abilities.
This great Lord has much more business than all the time and strength of his
servants can bring about. If every hair of the head were an hand, we might have
our hands full of work. Our Lord requires the service of thoughts, 2 Cor. 10.5.
of words, Ephesians. 4.29. of works, 1 Cor. 10.31. Of body and spirit, 1 These.
5.23. A vast deal of diligence is requisite about the honoring of God, the
attending of our own heart and ways, the helping and edifying of others.

3. Observe. 3.
How warily and conscionably should all other Lords govern. They are Lords, but
not only Lords; they are but servants to this only Lord, and must as well be
accountable to him for their commanding, as others must be responsible to them
for their obeying. They must remember they have a master in heaven with whom
there is no respect of persons, Ephesians. 6.9. Col. 4.1. The wrath of God in his
crectures, fire, sword, sickness, makes no distinction between the greatest
Lords, and the poorest slaves: How much less will Christ himself make, when
all shall stand naked before his tribunal?

4. Observe. 4.
Christ has power to do what he will with us or ours. This only Lord has no
master to whom to give an account. And how far should any of his servants be
from expecting that he should give an account of any of his actions to them!
It should suffice them, that whatever befalls them, it is from the Lord: Job
1.21.
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away. Whenever he removes any comforts,
if we find our selves too ready to say to instruments, as did the Owners of the
colt, What do ye loosing and removing it? we should be silenced, though not
with that answer which was returned by the Disciples to them, The Lord has
need of it; yet with this, Luke 19.33, 34
He sees it needful for us, that thus it should be. Whenever he commands the
hardest duty, inflicts the smartest stripes, etc. every servant of Christ
should stop their murmuring mouths with this, The Lord will have it thus.

5. Observe. 5. Ephesians. 4.4, 5. Luke 12.45.
The servants of this one and only Lord should be at unity among themselves.
Fellow servants must not fall out and beat one another: The servants of this
one Lord should be of one mind: Though some may have higher, some lower
employments in Christ's family, yet all are but servants to this only Lord, and
all their services meet in this one end of glorifying him. In this respect the
Apostle says, He that planteth, 1 Cor. 3.8.
and he that waters are one. The servants of Christ should shun division
because Christ is not divided. They cannot forgive one another so much, or so
often, 1 Cor. 1.13.
as their Master has forgiven them.

6. Observe. 6.
How careful and wary should we be in using the creatures! All the comforts
which we enjoy are the goods of this Lord; we are but stewards of them. What we
use, must be used for, not against our Lord; learning, riches, honor, nay our
selves, are of, and from him, and therefore should be for him. All our
enjoyments are but borrowed, we must therefore use them well, not spot and
stain, tear and cut them by sin, least we be ashamed when we are to return them
back to the owner.

7. Observe. 7.
We should neither give nor receive ambitious and flattering titles of honor.
Christ gives us the reason, one is our Lord and Master, Mat. 23.8, 9, 10.
even Christ. We should so acknowledge a superiority among men, as to be
fearful of causing pride in men. The carriage of a servant to his earthly
Lord, must be such as that his Lord may know himself not to be the only Lord.
When they cried up Herod's voice for the voice of God and not of man, Act.
12.23. (...).
God would not bear it. He made him immediately to become worms meat, who but
just now was men's idol.

8. Observe. 8.
There Is no possible escape for Christ's enemies. If they had another Lord or
potentate to match Christ in strength, they might fly to him to defend them
from Christ; but Christ is the only Lord, and woe to them who have him for
their only enemy. Can thy heart endure or thy hands be strong in the day when
this Lord shall deal with thee? Ezekiel. 22.14. Isai. 10.3. Jer. 4.13 Foolish
sinner! who if thou will needs be contending, do not choose one of thy
fellow-worms to contend with. But thou do as vainly contend with thy maker,
as does the smoke with the wind, the wax with the fire, the stubble with the
flame, or the snow-ball with the sun, when thrown against it. Acts 9.5. Psalm.
2.12.
Its hard to kick against the pricks. Thy greater wisdom is to kiss the Son
with a kiss of sincere and hearty love, worship, homage, lest he be angry, and
thou perish from the way. There Is no flying from him, but by flying to him. All
must, one way or other, be subject to him; Romans 14.10, 11.
either as servants, or as slaves; either under his grace, or under his wrath.

9. Observe. 9.
All doctrines and practices are to be abhorred which derogate from the dignity
of this only Lord. Doctrines; especially the popish, which deprave our
redemtion by this Lord, with the doctrine of merits: The worship due to this
Lord, by the doctrines of image-adoration, and the Popes headship: the
authority of this Lord, by the doctrine of Saints intercession, and the Popes
pardoning of sins. Practices, of those who serve the times in stead of serving
the Lord, love their pleasures more than God, serve their bellies, Romans 16.18.
their lusts, themselves, as if they were their own Lords; the humors of vile
men, their father the devil, Joh. 8.44. Quam multos habet dominos qui unum non
habet!
Oh how many, how ignoble, how poor, how cruel are the Lords of that man, who
has not this one, this only Lord!

10. Great is the happiness of, Observe. 10.
and strong are the engagements upon every servant of this only Lord. But of
this largely before, Page 12.13.14.15.16. VER. 1.

Thus much for our Saviors dignity in respect of his place and authority, as
he is called the only Lord. His dignity in respect of his divine nature and
essence follows; He is called also [ God.]

For Explication whereof briefly, Thus:

This title is not here to be taken 1 Improperly, as it is, Explicat.
1. given to false gods or idols, Per (...). Polyphemus Cyclops dicit se tantum
offerre victimas ventri suo, qui maximus esset deorum. Eurip. Exodus 21.6. and
22.8. Deuteronomy. 19.7. Psalm. 82.16. and 138.1. Joh. 10.34, 35. Number. 10.35 36. Isai.
4.7. and 6.20 2 Samuel 7.6.
which are accounted gods in the depraved apprehensions of blind and seduced
heathens, Act. 14.11, 12. 1 Cor. 8.4, 5. Act. 17.29. 2. To the devil, who is
called the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. In regard the wicked world obeys him,
and fulfils his commands, as if he were a God; John 8.44. 3. To those things
which men prefer before God, as the belly is called the God of some men; Who
serve their bellies, and not Christ, Romans 16.18. 4. To Kings, Princes,
Magistrates, who are in the room and place of God, exercise the judgments of
God, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. and are ordained by God, Romans 13.1. 5. To the Ark of the
Covenant, to which metonymically the name of God is given, the sign being
often put for the thing signified.

But 2. Properly, for God the maker and preserver of all things though not 1.
(...), essentially, and indefinitely, signifying the whole Trinity, the divine
essence, common to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Mat. 4.7.10. Joh. 4.24.
etc. But 2. (...), personally, and as signifying some one person of the
Trinity; thus the Father is called God, Mat. 16.16. Joh. 3.16. Romans 7.25. etc.
thus the Holy Ghost is called God, Act. 5.4. compared with verse the 3. Thou
have not lied to men, but to God; Satan has filled thine heart to lie to the
Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 6.16, compared with 1 Cor. 6.19. And thus the Son is called
God, Act. 20.28. The Church of God which he has purchased with his blood, 1 Timothy 3.16. Tit. 2.13. The great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, etc. and this
is the person which is here called God. To whom,

1. Are given the same Titles which are given to God; Isai. (...) Numb. 14.22.
Psalm. 95.8.
9.6. He is called The mighty God, and chap. 6.1. He is called Jehovah; for
there Isaiah is said to see Jehovah sitting upon a throne, etc. And Joh. 12.41.
This is expressly by the holy Evangelist applied to Christ, of whom he says,
that Isaiah saw his glory, and spoke of him. Exodus 17.7. The people are said to
tempt Jehovah: and the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.9. Let us not tempt Christ, as
some of them tempted. It is said of Jehovah, Of old have thou laid the
foundation of the earth, Psalm. 102.25.
and the heavens are the work of thy hands: they shall perish, but thou shall
endure, etc. And the Apostle clearly testifies, Heb. 1.10. that these words are
spoken of Christ. Zech. 13.7. Christ is called the Fathers fellow. Joh. 1.1.
The word which in the beginning was with God, is expressly said to be God. And
Romans 9.6. He is called God blessed for evermore. And 1 Timothy 3. ult. God
manifested in the flesh. And 1 John 5.20. The true God.

2. The same essential Attributes and properties of the Godhead are ascribed
to him, as 1. Eternity; Prove. 8.22. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of
his way, before his works of old --.Joh. 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am. John.
17.5. Glorify me with the glory which I had with thee before the world was:
And ver. 24. Thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world. Col. 1.17 He
is before all things. 2. Omnipresence: Mat. 18.20. Where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. And chap. 28.
ult. I am with you always, even to the end of the world. 3. Omniscience: Joh. 2.
ult. He knew what was in man. Mat. 9.4. and 12.25. Luke 5.22. and 6.8. Luke
11.17. and 24.38
He is also frequently said to know the thoughts; yea, Joh. 21.17. to know all
things. 4. Omnipotency; All power is given unto me. Phil 3. ult. He is able to
subdue all things. Joh. 5.19. What things soever the Father does, these also do
the Son.

3. The same works which are peculiar to God, are ascribed unto Christ. As 1.
Election: the Elect are ( Mat. 24.31.) called his Elect. 2. Creation: 1 John 3.
All things were made by him: and ver. 10. The world was made by him. Col. 1.16.
By him were all things created. 3. The Preservation and sustentation of all
things: Col. 1.17. By him all things consist. Heb. 1.3. He upholdeth all things
by the word of his power. 4. Remission of sins. Mat. 9.6. The Son of man has
power to forgive sins: 5. Working of miracles, works either above or against
the order of nature: Joh. 9.32. He opens the eyes of the blind. Joh. 11. He
raises dead Lazarus. Yea, he both raises from the grave of sin, Joh. 5.21, 25
And raises all the dead, Joh. 5.28, 29. 6. The bestowing of eternal life.
Joh. 10.28. My sheep hear my voice, and I give unto them eternal life,

4. The worship which is due to God alone has been both given to, and accepted
by Christ. First Inward worship: as 1. Believing on him. Faith is a worship
which belongs only to God, enjoined in the first Commandment: and against the
trusting in man is there a curse denounced, Jer. 5.17. But Christ bids us
believe in him. Joh. 14.1. Believe in me. Joh. 8. ult. He that believes in the
Son, has everlasting life. 2. Loving him with all the heart; commanded above
the love, nay even to an hatred of father, mother, wife, children, yea our own
lives, Luke 14.26. and for the gaining of him, Blessed Paul accounted all
things but loss and dung, Phil. 3.8. Secondly, Outward worship is due to
Christ, 1. Dedication in baptism is in his name, Mat. ult. 19. 2. Divine
Invocation is given to him; Act. 7.59. Steven calls upon the Lord Jesus to
receive his spirit. 1 Cor. 1.2. All that in every place call upon the name of
Jesus Christ. 1 These. 3.11. God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ direct our way unto you. Revel. 5.9.12. Praises are offered to him. 3
Divine adoration is also given to him; Mat. 8.2. A leper worshipped him. Mat.
2.11. Though the Wise men of the east, who saw Herod in all his royalty,
worshipped not him; yet they fell down before Christ. Yea not men only, but
Angels are commanded to worship him, Hebr. 1.6.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observe. 1.
As groundless, as blasphemous, are all the cavils against the deity of
Christ. For though he be from, and begotten of the the Father, by an ineffable
communication of the divine essence to his person; yet if we consider his deity
and essence absolutely, he is God of himself, and has being from none, and he
is only God of God, as we consider the divine essence in the Son, and as it is
under a certain, and distinct manner of subsistence.

Though the Father be greater than the Son in respect of his manhood; Joh.
14.28. Joh 10.30. Phil. 2.6.
yet the Son is equal with the Father in respect of his Godhead.

Though the Son be truly called the image of God, Col. 1.15. yet he is as truly
said to be very God. For when the Apostle says, that he is the image of God,
this word [God] ought not to be taken essentially, but personally; and by it we
are to understand not the divine nature, but the person of the Father. Christ
is the image of the Father, not of the deity, and the person of the Son bears
the image of the person of the Father, but the divine essence in the Son, is
one and the same with that which is in the Father: I and my Father are one.

2 Inconceivable was the wisdom, Observe. 2.
justice, love, and humble condescension, manifested in Gods becoming of Man.
1. Wisdom: None but a God could have contrived it; and so far was Man from
inventing this plot of Mercy, that it had been blasphemy, should it have
entered into his thoughts before God had discovered it to him. The hypostaticall
union was purely a divine invention: Poor short-sighted man cannot conceive it
now since it was, much less could he have contrived it before it was. Infinite
was that wisdom which found out a way for God to begin to be what he was not,
and to remain what he was: In Christo, (...).
that the two Natures should be united 1. (...) and (...), so as that there
should be no confusion, mutation, commixtion of them; but that both natures
should remain distinct and entire in their properties, wills and actions,
without any change of one into the other. 2. (...) and (...), individually and
inseparably, so as one nature should never be separated from the other, no not
by death; there never being two Christ's, but one Son of God manifested in the
flesh. How great was that wisdom which found out a way for the Mediator
between God and Man, to partake of the natures of both those parties between
whom he mediates! and which contrived a Reconciliation between God and Man, by
the marriage of the natures of both! 2. How eminent was that Justice of God,
that would be satisfied no way but by the Son of God his assuming the nature of
man, the vailing his Glory, emptying himself of Majesty, and a debasing to the
death of the Cross! Phil. 2.8.
So that God may seem more severe in sparing man this way, then if he had
punished him without sending his Son thus to redeem him. 3. How transcendent
was the Love of God to poor lost man, to weave the garment of his spotted and
defiled nature anew in the Virgins womb! to become a new and living way over
that gulf of separation which was between God and Man, whereby God might be
willing to come to man, and man able to go to God! to disrobe himself of
Majesty, and to cloth himself with the rags of Mortality! Did ever Love
cause such a condescension as this? The Thistle did not here send to the Cedar,
but the Cedar comes to the Thistle, to woe for a marriage. Let the deepest
apprehensions despair to dive to the bottom of this humble undertaking. Angels
themselves may stoop to look into it, 1 Pet. 1.12.
and be Students in this piece of Divinity; but never can they be completely
apprehensive, what it is for the Maker of the World, to be made of a woman; for
the everlasting Father, to be an infant in the womb; for Majesty to be buried
among the chips; for him who thundered in the clouds, to lie in the cradle; for
him who measured the heavens with a span, to be a child of a span long.

3. Observe. 3. Isai. 43.11. Hos. 13.4.
Any other Saviors beside Christ, are altogether needless and fictitious. If
Christ be God, there is no other Savior: and he no more wants the help of men
or Angels in the Redemption of the world, then he did in the Creation. To an
infinite power, nothing can be added; and the strength of Christ to save is
infinite: What brings the creature to God but wants and weaknesses? That which
receives all its strength from God, adds no strength to God. There Is none but a
God able to do the Work, and fit to receive the Honor of a Savior. The
highest of all Popishly voyced Saviors throw down their Crowns at the feet of
Christ, and with one voice acknowledge him their Savior. The Crown of
purchasing our salvation, is too heavy for any created head. Did those
glorified spirits in heaven know how much honor is taken from Christ, by
casting it upon them, some think, that heaven should be no heaven to them.

4. Divine Justice is completely satisfied, Observe. 4.
and the sins of believers are perfectly removed. The Merits of Christ are of
infinite value: the least sin was a burden too heavy for all the created backs
of Men and Angels to undergo: None but he that was God, Heb. 7.25. John 1.29.
Mic. 7.19. Isa. 44.22. Isa. 38.17. Psalm. 32.1. Jer. 31.34.
could perfectly satisfy a God. Christ is able to save to the uttermost; He
takes away the sin of the world. Our iniquities are said to be subdued, Thrown
into the bottom of the sea, Covered, washed away, Blotted out as a cloud,
Utterly forgotten, and Cast behind the back of God. Believers have nothing to
pay to Justice. The payments of Popish Merits are not in current, but copper
coin, which will not go in heaven, but will certainly be turned back again.
The sins of one believer are ten thousand times greater than Satan can
represent; but yet the merits of the blood of God infinitely exceed all the
sins of all men put together; The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. 1
John 1.7.
Christians, take heed of a sacrilegious ransacking of the grave of Christ,
wherein he has buried your sins. If Christ be God, desperation is the greatest
of sins. Is there any spot so deep, which the blood of God cannot wash out? any
disease so desperate, which the blood of God cannot cure? any heart so faint,
which the blood of God cannot revive? any debt so great, which the blood of God
cannot satisfy? any burden so heavy, which the shoulders of God cannot bear
away? Oh believer, Luke 1.47.
let thy spirit rejoice in God thy Savior.

5. How high is the advancement of humane Nature! Observe. 5.
He who has taken it into the unity of his Person, is true God. Hebr. 2.16.
Phil. 2.10.
The seed of Abraham is now more highly dignified then the nature of Angels.
There Is not a knee either in heaven, in earth, or under the earth, but shall
bow at the name of Him who is God and man in one person. Let us fear to debase
that nature which Christ has magnified. Psalm. 15.4.
There Is nothing but sin that makes a man a vile person. How unworthy a
condescension is it for that nature to stoop to Devils, which is advanced above
Angels! 1 Samuel 5.5.
The Philistims tread not on that threshold upon which their Idol Dagon fell;
and shall man suffer lust and Devils to trample upon and defile that nature
which the Son of God assumed! Oh man, acknowledge thy dignity, and being made a
companion of the divine Nature, be not so degenerous, as to become a slave to
Sin.

6. Observe. 6.
How peculiarly dignified and blessed are all Believers! Their Head, their
Husband is very God. They have not only the common honor of all men, in the
union of humane nature with the Son of God; but a special privilege, in being
united to him by his Spirit, through Faith. Man is advanced above other
creatures in respect of the first; Believers are advanced above other men, in
respect of the second union: And if thus we are united to him who is God, what
influences of holiness, wisdom, power, etc. shall flow to us from such a Head!
A Prince, who has all the gold and ornaments of the world, will not suffer his
Wife to want necessaries: and certainly, the Spouse of Christ shall have what
she wants, if not what she would.

7. Observe. 7.
Whatever it is that Christ, who is God, ordains and owns, deserves our highest
estimation. The Day instituted by Christ deserves rather to be esteemed holy,
than any days of man's ordaining: It should be accounted both a good day, and
an high day, having such an Instituter. The Ordinances of Christ should be
preferred before humane traditions: No Institutions but his shall stand, nor
should religiously be esteemed. I fear, Luke 19.27.
that the great and bloody Controversies which so long Christ has had with
England, are about some Ordinances of his which yet we will not take up; and
some Traditions of our own which in stead thereof we will keep up. What is
become of those men, and of their wisdom, Sapientes sapienter in infernum
descendunt
whose wise work it was heretofore to invent and impose their own Innovations
for Christ's Institutions? The Servants and Messengers of Christ should be more
loved and honored than the servants of any earthly Potentate. They are the
servants of God: We should love as he loves. It Is more honorable to be a
servant of God, than a King over men. Our delight should be in those excellent
ones, who bear the image, Psalm. 16.2.
and wear the badg of Christ. The feet of his Ambassadors should be beautiful,
whether we regard their Master, Romans 10.15.
or their Message. Lastly, his Word should be preferred before any other
writings: Col. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in us plentifully; Let it be taken in, not stand
at the doors, or lodge only in our books, or on our shelves: let it dwell there,
not be turned out again: Let it dwell plentifully, in all that is within us,
Understanding, Will, Affections, Memory; and plentifully in all that is of it,
in its Threatenings, Commands, Promises: It is the word of God, who has
strength to back it. In a word, Take heed of opposing this great God in any
kind. If God the Father be offended, Christ is our Advocate: but if Christ be
provoked, who shall mediate!

Thus far of the description of the dignity of him whom they opposed. Next we
must show How they opposed him; or, Wherein that Opposition did consist: They
Denied him.

EXPLICATION.
Two things are here to be explained.

1. How Christ may be said to be Denied; and particularly, What Denial of him
is here to be understood.

2. Wherein the sinfulness thereof shows it self.

1. How Christ may, be said to be denied.

Denying, (...).] Denial (properly) is verbal, respects our words, and
signifies the contrary to affirmation. Thus those envious Rulers spoke
concerning the notable miracle of healing the lame man, Acts 4.16.
that they cannot dis-affirm, or deny it. Mat. 26.70. Joh. 18.25, 27. John 1.20.
Thus Peter denied openly before them all, that he had been with Jesus. Thus
John denied not who he was, etc.

But improperly, and figuratively, denial may be taken for such a renouncing
or rejection of a thing as may likewise be expressed by the actions, and in
realitie; And thus Moses is said to deny, Heb. 11.24.
or refuse to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; and so some are said to
have a form of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5.
and to deny (namely, in their course and carriage) the power thereof. And

Christ may be said to be denied, 1. Doctrinally, and by our words. 2. Really,
and by our works.


1. Doctrinally, and by our words: And thus Christ has been denied, 1. In his
Person. 2. In his Offices.

1. In his Person: and thus 1. the Jews deny his Person wholly, or that he was
the promised Messiah, Act. 3.13, 14. And the followers of Simon Magus taught
(as he himself had taught them) that he was the Son of God. Epiphan. lib. 1. c.
21. Aug. de Hares. cap. 1. Joseph. l. 2. c. 12 Tertul. lib. de Haeres.
The like is reported of Menander, Judas of Galilee, and he who styled himself
Bencocab; all which (as credible Stories relate) gave out, that they were
Christ's, and Messiahs; the later whereof, though he called himself Bencocab,
the son of a Star, applying to himself that prophecy of the Star of Jacob, was
afterward by way of derision, called Barcozba, the son of a lie. 2. Christ, in
respect of his person, has been denied in either of his Natures: In his
Godhead, by the Ebionites, Cerinthians, Arians, Samosatenians, and of late by
Servetus and his followers. In his Manhood, by the Valentinians, Marcionites,
Manichees, Apollinarists, and of late by some Anabaptists. 3. The Person of
Christ has been denied by those who opposed the hypostatical union of the two
Natures; and thus he was denied by Nestorians, Euticheans, Sabellians; the
first dividing Christ into two persons. The second confounding and mixing his
two Natures. The third mixing him with the person of the Father.

2. In his Offices. 1. Christ in his Prophetical Office is denied by Papists,
who impose upon us a new Scripture; 1. 1 Cor. 11.26. Hebr. 13.4. 1 Timothy 4.3.
By taking away from it, in denying the Eucharistical Cup to the people, meats
also and marriage, and (which is worse) in denying the food of life, the
reading of the holy Scriptures to the common people. 2. Col. 3.16.
By adding to it, in bringing in a second place for punishment after this life,
the fained fire of purgatory; by inventing five sacraments, and introducing
their own unwritten traditions, which they equally esteem with, and often
prefer before the Scriptures; and by making a Pope the infallible judge of the
controversies of faith.

2. In his Priestly office, Christ is denied, 1. 1 John 2.2. Mat. 20.18. Mar.
10.45. Heb. 10.12, 14 2 Cor. 5.21.
By Socinians, who teach that he dyed not for us, that is, in our place and
stead; but only for our benefit and profit, to show us by his example the way
which leads to salvation. 2. By Papists, who teaching that the Mass is a
propitiatory sacrifice, make the sacrifice of Christ imperfect; and by joining
many other mediators and advocates with Christ, deny him to be the One and Only
Mediator. They mingle the blood of Martyrs, yea of traitors, with the blood of
Christ; teach that images are to be worshipped, Angels invoked, relics adored,
etc.

3. In his Kingly office, Christ is denied by Papists, who acknowledge the Pope
the head of the Church, and teach that all power is given to him in heaven and
earth, and that he can make laws to bind the conscience, and is universal
Bishop, etc. In a word, the eastern Turk denies the person of Christ, and the
western his offices.

2. Christ is denied really and by our works. And this denial (I conceive) the
Apostle here principally intends, for had these seducers in word denied Christ,
the Church would easily have espied them. In speech therefore they professed
Christ, but in their deeds they denied him. Tit. 1.16.


Christ may be denied by men's works sundry ways, 1. Heb. 10.29.
By a malicious and dispitefull opposing Christ and his Gospel; of the truth
and benefit whereof the holy Ghost has so evicted a person, that he opposes
the Gospel, even against the inward operation, and supernatural revelation of
the holy Ghost. This (as I conceive) is the unpardonable sin, and was the sin
of Alexander the copper-smith, 2 Timothy 4.14.
and of Julian.

2. By an open and wilful apostatizing from the faith, and profession of
religion, happily for fear of persecution, and out of too much love of this
world. This (I conceive) was the sin of Demas and Spira. 2 Timothy 4.10.


3. By a politic and terme-serving neutrality, a lukewarmenesse, and halting
between two opinions, for fear, or shame, when a man is often on either side, but
truly on neither. They on that side think him theirs, we on this side think him
ours, his own conscience thinks him neithers. To hold our peace when the honor
of Christ is in question, is to deny Christ, even to a mistaking of the end of
our redemption, 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify
Christ in your body, Joh. 1.20.
and spirit: Christ is not glorified, when his name is concealed. John Baptist
confessed and denied not. Whosoever does not openly confess Christ, Pet. 3.15.
does secretly deny Christ. Christ is not to be hid, as the woman hid the spies
in the deep well of our hearts, and covered over (as she did the mouth of the
well with corn) for worldly concernments. Romans 10.10. Christum deseserit, qui
Christianum se non asserit.
If it be enough to believe in the heart, why did God give thee a mouth? He
denies Christ that does not profess himself a Christian. We are bound both
consentire and confiteri, both to consent to, and confess Christ. If it be
sufficient for thee to know Christ without acknowledging him for thy Lord, it
shall be sufficient for Christ to know thee, but not to to acknowledge thee for
his servant. 2 Timothy 2.12.
He who refuses to suffer for, dinies Christ. He who is not for Christ, is
against him: There may be a sinful, a damnable moderation. The following
Christ a far off, in this life, is no sign that thou shall be near to him in
the next. No man will be afraid of being too professed a Christian at the day
of judgment, or will think that he has lost too much for Christ, when he is
presently to lose all things by death. If the time wherein we live be a night
of profaneness, its our duty the more brightly to shine as lights. Phil. 3.15.


4. By despairing of salvation offered through the merits of Christ, in the
promise of the Gospel. This is a thrusting from us the hand that would, and a
casting away the plaster that should cure us. 1 John 5.10.
This sin makes God a liar; changes his truth into a lie, and Satan's falsehood
into a truth; and justifies the devil more than God. He that despairs of mercy
(whatever he pretends) practically denies the faithfulness, sufficiency, and
sincerity of the Lord Jesus, and asserts the faithfulness of him who is the
father of lies.

5. Lastly, By a loose and profane conversation; and this kind of practical,
real denying of Christ (I conceive) the Apostle particularly charge upon
these seducers; They walked after their own ungodly lusts, their lives being
full of earthlinesse and epicurism, and their mouths of reproaches against holy
obedience; they encouraging themselves and others herein, by perverting the
sweet doctrine of the grace of God. Ii qui sanguine Christi redempti fuerant,
diabolo se rursus mancipantes, incomparabile illud pretium irritum faciunt.
Calv. in loc.
They professed the grace of Christ, but led most graceless lives. Their
practice gave their profession the lie. If they were not ashamed of Christ, yet
were they a shame to Christ their Lord, who kept such servants: they walked not
worthy of their Lord. They had the livery of Christ upon their backs, and the
works of the devil in their hands: The merit of his redemption they
acknowledged, but they denied the efficacy thereof, whereby he fanctifieth and
renews the heart, subdueth sin, and quickneth to new obedience. They
acknowledged Christ a Jesus, but denied him as a Lord; Christ they took for
their Savior, but Satan for their master. They like it well to come to Christ
for ease, but they will not take his (though easy) yoke upon them.

II. 2d Branch of Explicat.
Wherein appears the sinfulness of this denial of Christ.

1. It plainly comprehends the sin of Atheism. There Is none who denies this
only Lord God in his life, but first denied him in his heart, and they who
serve him not as the word commands, apprehend him not as the word discovers.
They who are corrupt, and do abominable works, Psalm. 14.1.
have said in their hearts, there is no God. Life-Atheisme is but the daughter
of heart-Atheisme. All outward actions are the genuine productions of the
inward man; they are (as I may say) the counter-panes of the spirit, and so
many derivations from that fountain. Now think, O Christians, what an heinous
sin it is to deny that being, which thine own proves; nay, to hear, to speak of
God, to plead for God, to pray to God so frequently, and (in appearance)
feelingly, and yet to deny that this God is.

2. The denial of this Lord as clearly contains the sin of unbeleife and
distrust. They who deny the service of this their Lord, truly think what that
wicked servant in the Gospel said; namely, that Christ, notwithstanding all his
promises, Mat. 25.24.
is as an hard man, that reaps where he did not sow; and that there is no
profit in serving him. Heb. 3.12.
It Is this evil heart of unbelief that makes men depart from the living God.
When men see no excellency in Christ, it is easy for them to be persuaded to
reject him. He who believes not a jewel is precious, will easily part with it.
He who denies Christ, plainly shows that he has no trust in him, to receive
any benefit from him. And how great a sin is this unbelief, whereby fullness it
self is esteemed empty; Mercy it self is reckoned cruel; Gain it self deemed
unprofitable; and all because faithfulness it self is accounted false!

3. The denial of Christ is notorious and unspeakable profaneness: it
evidently shows, that a man preferrs other things before, and loves other
things more than Christ. No man ever denies and leaves this best of Masters,
till he be provided of a Master whom he thinks and loves better. But how great
a disparagement and indignity do they, who set up any thing above Christ, offer
to Him, who has sent and designed Christ ( Joh. 5.23. and 6.27.) the
masterpiece of all his merciful and wise contrivements, and to Christ
himself! For there is nothing which can come in competition with Christ, but is
infinitely below him. All the combined excellencies of creatures, put into the
balance with Christ, bear not so much proportion as does a feather to a
mountain. To forsake Christ for the world, or a lust, is to leave a treasnre
for a trifle; a mountain of gold, for an heap of dung; the pure lasting
fountain, for the muddie broken cistern; Eternity for a moment; realitie for a
shadow; all things for nothing. And therefore;

4. The denial of Christ is the height of folly, and the forsaking of our own
mercy. Acts 4.12.
Christ is the only remedy against death; to deny the remedic, is to perish
unavoidably: He who denies him who is the Savior, nay, Salvation, cannot be
saved, no, not by Salvation it self. No disease kills that soul who casts not
away this Physic; but he who refuses the means of recovery, concludes himself
under a necessity of destruction. How shall we escape, if we neglect this
great salvation? Hebr. 2.3.
Other sins put men upon a possibility, the denial of Christ upon a
necessity of damnation. They who deny Christ, shall be denied by Christ: He
often denies them in this life, 2 These. 2.11. Ps. 81.11, 12.
by leaving them to serve and love those lords whom they have chosen in stead
of him; and by a denial of any power to them ever to return to him whom they
have renounced; yea, Apoc. ult. 12.
As in the case of Spira, and Judas.
by a denying them to their own consciences, which often flash into their faces
the flames of hell, for the quenching whereof, they sometimes relinquish
(though in vain) those trifles for which they denied Christ: But most assuredly
will Christ deny these Christ-denyers at the last day; he will be ashamed of
them, not know them, and banish them from his presence, notwithstanding their
calling Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.23.
and hypocritical claiming of former acquaintance with him. He that denies
Christ, denies a Lord who will destroy all Rebels, Luke 19.27. he denies a Lord
not weak, titular and mortal; but just, everliving, and omnipotent.

5. The practical denial of Christ discovers a most rotten and unsound heart.
What greater falsness imaginable, than to profess and deny Christ at the same
time? to put on his cloak for security in sinning? to speak service, and live
opposition to him? to call him Master, only to mock him, and to do the work of
his enemies? not to serve him whom we do serve? to be in the skin a Christian,
and in the coar an Heathen? Certainly, this mere outside, complementall
Christianity, that bows to Christ, and yet buffets him, shall one day be found
to have had profession only for an increase of judgment. Oh how just will it
be for those who never truly loved Christ, notwithstanding their professions,
to hear Christ professing that he never-knew them! The rotten professor is the
fittest fuel for eternal flames.

6. The denial of Christ implies the greatest unthankfulness. If it be an
unkind wickedness to deny a creature, a servant that fears thee; what is it
then to deny that Lord whom thou should fear? If to deny a Father that begat
the body; what is it then to deny God, that created the soul? If to deny a
wife, with whom thou art one flesh; what is it to deny the Lord, with whom thou
art one spirit? What evil have any found in him, to forsake, to renounce such
a Master? How great was his goodness, to take such unprofitable servants as we
are into the family of his Church! What saw he in in us more then in heathens,
to reveal to us the light of his truths, and the mysteries of salvation! What
an honor did he put upon us, when he took us for his by baptismal initiation!
Were not the employments ever noble, safe, and sweet, which he put upon us? is
not the reward rich and bountiful which he has promised? Must not our own
consciences be our own accusers, when he requires of us the reason of denying
him?

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Christ accounts a verbal, outside profession, Observe. 1.
contradicted by an unholy conversation, to be no better then a renouncing of
him. The profession of the lip, without the agreement of the life, most
dishonours God. How ready will the ignorant be to think that God allows the
sins, Ezekiel. 36.20.
or that he cannot punish the impiety of those who profess profanely! Deus non
quaerit obsequiorum speciem, sed affectus puritatem. Ambr. in 9. Luc.
How hateful to the God who loves truth in the inward parts, must he be who
has nothing but falseness in the inward parts! God seeks none to serve him,
but such as serve him in truth. The service of the soul is the soul of service:
The singleness of the intention is the sweet of a performance, and makes it
even a Sacrifice with marrow. Sacrificium medullatum.
All our professions and speculations without holiness, are but profanations;
And of him that hates instruction, Psalm. 50.46.
God justly requires the reason of his taking his Covenant into his mouth.
Profane professors are but wens upon the face of Religion, which God will one
day cut off. The higher the building is raised which wants a foundation, the
greater will be its fall; and the more eminent men's appearances of religion
are, the more shameful will be their apostacy, if they want the foundation of
sincerity. A sincere Professor, though he do not actually forsake all for
Christ, is habitually prepared so to do, when Christ shall require. A mere
formal professor, though he do not (as yet) openly renounce Christ, yet is
prepared to do so, when his interest shall call him to it.

2. The excellency of any way or person, Observe. 2.
is not to be judged by the regard it ordinarily finds among men. Christ
himself cannot want a denial by foolish men. If it be put to the vote,
Barrabbas will have more voices then Christ. The ways of Christ are never the
worse because wicked men renounce them; rather their rejecting of them speaks
them holy. Let us not be offended at Christ, because he is by most denied.
Bless God if thou have an heart to own him; and remember, it is a sign of a
gracious heart, Psalm. 119.127
when the wicked make void the Law of God, therefore to love his Commandments.

3. Observe. 3.
It is the great Interest of Christians to take heed of denying Christ. To this
end,

1. Deny your selves. That man which sets much by himself, will never reckon
much of a Savior. He who has not learned to deny himself, when Christ and
Self come in competition, and meet on a narrow bridge, will endeavor to make
Christ go back. Quando a me ipso alienabor, me perdam. Revelle te a teipso, ut
Deo inseraris: Divide te a teipso, ut cum Creatore uniaris. Bern.
He who does not account himself nothing, will soon esteem Christ so. Let the
heart be taken off from any thing which may take thee off from Christ. Crucify
every inordinate affection. Beseech God to alienate thee from thy self, and to
annihilate in thee whatever opposes Christ. Reserve nothing in thee from his
stroke, although the lot fall upon Jonathan: And resolve to part with thy
dearest comforts for Christ, rather then deny him. Know nothing to be thine,
but himself.

2. Make a right estimate of the comforts which are to be enjoyed in Christ: 1.
Account them realities, not notions; not imaginary, though invisible: Look upon
them as substantial and indeed. John 8.36.
2. Account them not as scanty, but abundant, so large, that thou need not
go to other things for additions: Look upon Christ only as having enough for
thee, and able to fill thy vast receptions to the brim. 3. View them as
sublime, precious, not as low and vile: so excellent, that a holy generosity
may be kindled in thee, and all these dunghill delights accounted unworthy thy
stoop. 4. Account them useful and efficacious, not idle and unhelping; such,
as want not thee to uphold them, but as are able in all distresses to relieve
thee; and will procure strong and strengthening consolations. Heb. 6.18.
5. View them as thine, not another. Christ is never good in the souls account
till it has a propriety in him. Nor can a soul be contented when it sees a
parting from other things, unless it considers its propriety in Christ, who is
far better. 6. View them as near and at hand, and always prepared to relieve the
souls exigencies: Let faith as a prospective glass make remote comforts appear
hard by. 7. Lastly, view them as eternal, not as finite, such as are above the
reach of thief and moth, and which alone triumph over time and enemies; and
which shall live and last when all worldly enjoyments are dead and gone. Oh, who
would deny such delights as these for a blast, a bubble, a nothing! what poor
nothings of comfort are the sweetest delights which would allure us! what poor
nothings of misery, are the sorest sufferings that would affright us from
Christ!

3 Labor for an inward real Implantation and rootednesse in Christ. The
advice of the Apostle is to be rooted in Christ. Col. 2.7.
A stake in the ground may easily be plucked up; but a tree rooted in the
ground, stands immovable. They who are in Christ only by way of external
profession, may be pulled from Christ; and outward troubles will overcome a
merely visible and outside professor: but they who are in Christ by way of
real and internal implantation, will keep their standing. He who is but a
visible Christian, may in a short time cease to be so much as visible. He who
speaks for Christ only notionally, will soon be won to speak against him. From
him who professes not Christ truly, may soon be taken away his very
appearances. Please not your selves with the form of religion. Realities are
only durable. The color of blushing is soon down, that of complexion remains
longer. Si ista terrena diligitis, ut munera amici, ut arrham sponsi diligite.


4. Let no wordly comfort be beloved, but only so far as it is a pledge of
Christ's love to thee, or an incentive of thine to him. Let not Christ content
thee with any thing, without himself. Love not thy enjoyments as gifts, but as
mercies and love tokens. Look upon every thing out of Christ as a sieve plucked
out of the water, as a coal without fire, as a cipher without a figure. Were it
not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat, I would not look toward thee,
said Elisha to Jehoram: and were it not for a taste of the love of Christ in
our worldly comforts, we should not much regard them. Love nothing but as it is
a step to raise thee up higher and more toward him, only as a Phylactery and a
remembrancer of thy Friend; as that which incites to him, not as that which
bewitcheth from him. If Christians would study thus, by, and in every comfort
to taste Christ, they would not for gaining these comforts be willing to part
with Christ.

5. Take heed of professing Christ for by-ends. Serve him not to serve your own
turns: Make not Religion a design. Let every interest be subservient to Christ.
Be willing to set up a building of glory for him upon your own ruins. Learn to
perish, that the glory of Christ may live. Let Christ be sweet for himself:
Love him for his beauty, not his clothes. In serving him, let nothing else be
your scope; and then nothing will divert you; aim not at profit, so gain will
not allure you; not at pleasure, so ease will not corrupt you; not at friends,
so favor will not seduce you. Let none but Christ be your end.

6 Daily increase sweet acquaintance and humble familiarity with Christ. Stand
not at a stay in taking in his comforts. Stint not Communion with him. Oh
labor to take in hissweetest consolations fresh and fresh every morning. If
communion with Christ be but a while intermitted, the love of the world will
soon be admitted. When the people were without their wonted converse with
Moses, they began to think of a golden Idol. The soul cannot live without some
comfort or other. If it finds no sweetness in Christ, it will look out for it
else where: and if it taste nothing in his ways to whet and keep it up, it will
be ready to go down (as the Israelites went down to the Philistims, to sharpen
their instruments) to earthly delights for relief. But if Christ be sweet, the
world will be bitter. And if thine eyes have but looked steadfastly upon his
Glory, they will not suddenly behold beuty in any thing else.

VER. 5. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this,
how that the Lord having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward
destroyed them that believed not.
AT This verse the Apostle begins the second Argument, whereby he proves it the
duty of these Christians Earnestly to contend for the Faith once delivered to
the Saints, and now opposed by the seducers of those times. The Argument is
taken from the certainty of the destruction of those Seducers: the Apostle by
the zealous prosecution thereof, declaring, that these Christians must avoid
their Doctrines, if they would not be involved in their downfall.

The Apostle, in the managing of this Argument, does these three things; 1. He
gives us several Examples of Gods severe wrath upon others in former times,
for sundry heinous sins, to the 8th Verse. 2. He declares that these Seducers
lived in the same sins which God had formerly punished in others; to the 11th
verse. 3. He concludes, that they practicing the same impieties, shall partake
of the same plagues with those who were before them, to the 17th verse.


For the first of these, the Apostle propounds three Examples of Gods most
severe displeasure against the sinners of former times:

The first is of the Israelites, who were destroyed in the wilderness.

The second of the wicked Angels, who are reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness.

The third of the Sodomites, who suffer the vengeance of everlasting fire. The
Apostle with admirable wisdom making choice of these Examples, to prevent the
plea which might be made for these Seducers, in regard of their privilege, as
visible professors, of their eminency for place, and of their reputation for
sanctity: For though they had Church Priviledges, yet so had the Israelites;
though they were eminent for place and station, yet so were the Angels; and
though they were desirous to be accounted in the highest form of religion and
sanctity, yet were they as filthy and guilty as Sodomites, a people as famous
for Gods judgments, as they were infamous for their own impurities.

The first of these Examples, that of the Israelites, who were destroyed in the
wilderness, etc. is set down here in this fifth verse; wherein are two parts:
1. A Preface prefixed. 2. An Example propounded.


1. He sets down a Preface before the Example, in these words, I will put you
in remembrance, though ye once knew this. Wherein two things are expressed.

1. The duty of the Apostle; or, what he would do: I will therefore put you in
remembrance.

2. The commendation of the Christians; or, what they had already done: Though
ye once knew this, namely, the following example of the Israelites.

1. For the duty of the Apostle: I will put you in remembrance.

EXPLICATION.
Two things briefly for the explication of this.

1. What the Apostle means by this putting of them in remembrance.

2. Why he would put them in remembrance.

1. What he intends by putting them in remembrance.

The word in the Original, (...), In memoriam revocare. (...).
here translated to put in remembrance, properly signifies, to recall a thing
past to mind, or memory: a thing (I say) though formerly understood, yet
possibly almost forgotten, or at least, for the present, not duly considered or
remembered; and thus its used Luke 22.61. Peter remembered the word; etc. and 2 Timothy 2.14. Of these things put them in remembrance, etc. and Tit. 3.1. Put them
in remembrance to be subject etc. and 2 Pet. 1.12. I will not be negligent to
put you in remembrance, etc. and 2 Pet. 3.1. I stir up your pure mind by way of
remembrance. So that the word rather notes reminiscence, than memory; a calling
back of that which heretofore they had thought of, but for the present was not
duly and thoroughly thought of.

2. Why did the Apostle thus put them in remembrance. Great reason hereof there
was, both in respect of 1 The Apostle who wrote. 2 The Christians to whom he
wrote.


1. In respect of the Apostle: It was his duty, not only once to deliver, but
again to recall Truths to their minds, formerly delivered. Upon this duty the
Apostle puts Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.6. If thou put the brethren in remembrance of
these things, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ. And sending him to
Corinth, he gives him the same command, 1 Cor. 4.17. and this was also
practiced by Paul himself, Rom 15.15. I have written to you (says he) the more
boldly, as putting you in remembrance. A course practiced by Peter likewise,
who tells the Christians, that he thinks it meet to stir them up, 2 Pet. 1.13. 2
Pet. 3.1.
by putting them in remembrance; and that his second Epistle was written to
that end. Hence it is that Ministers are called the Lords remembrancers; Isa.
62.6.
not only for putting the Lord in mind of the peoples wants, but also in
whetting holy instructions upon the people, and putting them in mind of their
duty unto God.

2. In respect of those to whom he wrote, he puts them in remembrance. Phil.
3.1.
It was safe for the Philippians, to have the same things written to them,
Phil. 3.1. Those eminent Christians, Romans 15.14, 15 2 Pet. 3.1.
the Romans, to whom Paul* wrote, and the Saints who had pure minds, to whom
Peter wrote, wanted this putting in remembrance: for,

1. The best are imperfect in their knowledge. The greatest part of those things
which we do know, is but the least part of what we do not know. The plainest
and best known Truths are not so well known, but they may be better known. The
most experienced Christian may say of every Truth, as a man uses to say to his
new Friends, I would be glad of your better acquaintance. Our knowledge is but
in part, 1 Cor. 13.9
even in respect of the plainest Truths. We cannot name any Number so high and
great, but a man may reckon one still beyond it and there may be always an
addition to our knowledge: A Christian should grow in his head, Col. 2.2. and
1.9, 10. Fateor me Catechismi discipulum.
as well as in his heart; in his light, as well as in his heat. 'Twas an humble
speech of Luther, I acknowledge my self a Scholar even in the Catechism. Every
point of Divinity has a vast Circumference; every command is exceeding broad;
and what one article of Faith, or precept of the Law is there of which a man
may say, There is nothing contained in it, which I fully know not? Christians
should often be remembered of the plainest truths, that they may conceive of
them the better.

2. The memories of the best Christians stand in need of frequent remembrances:
Heb. 2.1.
They are frail to retain the things of God naturally. The most precious truths
laid up in our memories, are Jewels put into a crazy Cabinet. Memory is like a
sieve, that holds the bran, lets the flower go; remembers what is to be
forgotten, and forgets what is to be remembered: and like a sieve that is full
in the water, but empty being taken out: the memory is full perhaps, while men
are hearing, but empty so soon as their hearing is ended. If we would have our
garment hold its color, it must be double dyed; so, that a truth may take a
deep impression, it must be pressed again and again. And this natural
unfaithfulness of the memory is furthered by the tentations of Satan, who
labors to steal away the most useful truths: like a thief, who robs a house
of the best housholdstuff. In times of tentation to sin, how hard is it to
remember the truths that should defend us! How far from Peter's memory was the
speech of Christ, Luke 22.61.
till the crowing of the cock remembered him? Ye have forgotten (says the
Apostle) the exhortation, Heb. 12.5. In every sin there is some kind of
forgetfulness. When passion is violent, and tentation strong, the use of
memory is commonly suspended. Thou have greedily gained of thy neighbors by
extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 22.12. And in all true
obedience there is remembrance; Isa. 64.5. working righteousness, and
remembering God are put together.

3. The best Christians are subject to abate and decay in spiritual fervency of
affection to the best things. Now frequent remembrances do not only recall
truths to the mind, but quicken the heart to affect them. We are dull to le^rn
what we should do; and more dull to do what we have learned. The sharpest knife
grows blunt without whetting; the most honest debtor sometimes wants calling
on. The Apostle Peter puts the Christians in remembrance, to stir up even their
pure minds, 2 Pet. 3.1. The freest Christian sometime wants the spur: Our
very sanctified affections are like heated water, which of it self grows cold;
but neither retains nor increases its heats, unless the fire be put under,
and blown up. Good things in the heart, lie as embers under ashes, and need
daily stirring up.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Great is the sin of those who contemn repeated truths. Observe. 1.
A Christian must not have an itching, but an humble and obedient ear. Sinful
is that curiosity that despises a wholesome truth because it is common. Truths
delivered of old, may possibly now be freshly useful; and those delivered now,
may be helpful in old age, or on our deathbeds. Who would neglect a friend,
that may stand him in stead hereafter? Every truth (like a Lease) brings in
revenue the next year, as well as this. He that knows truth never so fully,
knows no hurt by it; nay, the more he knows, the more of worth he sees in it.
How foolish are those Christians, who count no doctrine good, but what is new?
who, as it is storied of Heliogabalus, cannot endure to eat twice of one dish?
How just will it be for want to overtake the wantoness of these hearers?

2. Observe. 2.
Christians must not only receive, but retain also the truths of God. Our
Memories must be heavenly storehouses and treasuries of precious truths; not
like hour-glasses, which are no sooner full, but they are running out. The
commandments must be bound upon our hearts, and holy instructions (like Books
in a Library) must be chained to our memories. Keep these words in the midst of
thy heart, says Solomon, Prove. 4.21. And, I have hid thy word in my heart,
that I might not sin against thee, says David, Psalm. 119.11. The slipperinesse
of our memories causes many slips in our lives. Peter forgot his Master, and
then forgot himself: First he forgot the word of a Master, and then he forgot
the duty of a servant. Conscience cannot be urged by that truth, which memory
does not retain. The same truths which being taken in, begat our graces, being
kept in, will increase our graces. To help us in remembering heavenly truths,
Let us 1. be reverent and heedfull in our attentions, as receiving a message
from God. He who regards not a truth in hearing, how shall he retain it
afterward? 2. Let us love every heavenly truth, as our treasure: Delight helps
memory, Psalm. 119.16. and what we love we keep. 3. Our memories should not be
taken up with vanities: A Christian should be most careful to keep that, which
Satan is most industrious to steal away; and he is like a thief breaking into
an house, who takes not away earthen vessels, but plate and jewels; Satan
empties not the head of worldly trifles, but of the most precious things. The
Memory which is filled only with earthly concernments, is like a golden
Cabinet filled with dung. 4. Let Instruction be followed with meditation,
prayer, conference, Deuteronomy. 6.6.7. Psa. 119.97.
and holy conversation; by all these it is hid in the heart the more deeply,
and driven home the more thoroughly.

3. Observe. 3.
There is a constant necessity of a conscientious Ministry. People know and
remember but in part, and as children; and till that which is imperfect be done
away, we cannot spare ministerial remembrances. We shall want Pastors,
teachers, Ephesians. 4.12.13.
etc. till we all meet etc. in a perfect man: And there are none weary of the
Ministry, but they who love not to be remembered of their duty. Of this before.

4. The forgetfulness of the people, Observe. 4.
must not discourage the Minister. A Boat is not to be cast up and broken in
pieces for every leak: the dullest and weakest hearer must not be cast off for
his crazy memory, but pitied. The very Lambs of Christ must be fed; the
feeblest child in his house attended. Paul was gentle among the Christians,
even as a nurse cherishes her children. If the preaching of a truth once will
not serve the turn, if it be not understood or remembered the first time,
Ministers must declare it more plainly the next time, and put people in
remembrance again and again.

5. Observe. 5.
The work of Ministers is not to contrive Doctrines, but to recall them. They
should deliver what they have received, not what they have invented. Their
power is not to make, but manifest laws for the conscience. That good thing
(says Paul to Timothy) which was committed to thee, keep, etc. Ministers are
not Masters, but Stewards of the mysteries of God.

Thus much the first part of the preface, The duty of the Apostle. The second
follows, the commendation of the Christians, Ye once knew this.

EXPLICATION.
It may be demanded, Why the Apostle says that the Christians once knew this
following example of the Israelites, of which he puts them in remembrance.

The Apostle mentions this knowledge of the Christians, that he may gain their
good will and favorable respect to the truth of which he was now speaking, and
that his arguing from these examples might the more easily find entertainment
with them: For by saying that they knew this, 1. He labors to win them to a
love of himself by commending them, and acknowledging that good to be, which he
saw in them. He commends them for their knowledge and expertnesse in scripture,
and declares that he spoke not to rude and ignorant, but to expert Christians.
2. He gains the reputation of certainty to the truths of which he was speaking,
he appealing for this to their own knowledge, which was so clear herein,
Concerning the word once, I have spoken largely before, page 231, 232.
that he amplifieth it, by saying, that they knew it once, that is, certainly,
unchangeably, and once for all, never to revoke and alter this knowledge: and
both these insinuations uses Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.15. I speak as
to wise men, judge ye what I say: And to Agrippa, for the gaining his favor to
that cause which he there defended, Acts 26.3. I think my self happy, that I
shall answer for my self before thee, etc. because I know thee to be expert in
all customs, and questions which are among the Jews. And ver. 26. The king
knows of these things, before whom I speak freely. 3. By saying that they
knew this, he prevents the objection which might be made against what he was
about to speak, in regard that it was old and ordinary; he insinuating, that of
set purpose be did produce a known and ancient truth, rather then a new and
unheard of uncertainty.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Knowledge is very commendable in a Christian. For this the Romans are (chap.
15.14.) commended. I am persuaded, brethren, that ye are full of goodness, 1
Cor. 1.5.
filled with all knowledge. For this grace given to the Corinthians, 2 Timothy 3.15.
the Apostle blesses God. The knowledge of the scripture from a child, was the
praise of Timothy. True wisdom gives to the head an Ornament of grace, and a
crown of glory; it makes the face to shine. Pro. 4.9. Eccles. 8.1.
When the Apostle says that some had not the knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 15.34.
he spoke it to their shame. How little to the honor of others was that
complaint of the Apostle? that when for the time, Heb. 5.12.
they ought to be teachers of others, they had need that one should teach them
again, which be the first principles, etc. And as Paul speaks of some, Ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. 2 Timothy 3.7.
The whole life of an ignorant person is an aberration from the rule: Gal. 6.16.
he sayls by no Card. All his actions are wild and roving wanderings. His
sacrifice is the sacrifice of a fool, Psalm. 119.5.
and devout idolatry. He cannot pray, unless it be to the unknown God. He
cannot believe; Romans 10.14.
for only they can trust God, who know his name. Psalm. 9.10. John 4.10.
Nor can he fear and love God, or desire Christ: Wait therefore on the
ordinances (O ye ignorant ones) with humble, hungry souls. Be wisdoms Clyents.
Prove. 8.34. Psalm. 25.9 1 Pet. 2.3.
Purge your hearts of conceits of a Laodicean fullness. God teaches only the
humble. Taste the sweetness of divine truths. Lay up what ye hear. Not he who
gets, but he who saves much, is the rich man. Yield conscionable obedience to
that of Gods will which you know. Hold not the truth in unrighteousness. The
more you practice what you know, the more shall you know what to practice:
Knowledge is the mother of obedience, and obedience is the nurse of knowledge;
The former breeds the later: the later feeds the former. And yet put not off
your selves with every kind of knowledge, labor for a soul humbling knowledge.
Job. ult. 5.6. 1 Cor. 8.2. Job. 5. ult. Prove. 9.12.
The more the light shines into you, the more you must see your own
imperfections. Every man is so much a fool, as he thinks himself wise. Let your
knowledge be applicative. If ye be wise, be wife for your selves. Let not
knowledge swim in the brain, but sink into the heart. Endeavor to possess for
thine own, Psalm. 119.104. Joh. 13.17. 1 John 2.3.
the good of every threatening, command, promise. Let your knowledge be
influentiall into heart and life; not informing only, but reforming; not as the
light of torches, which scatter no influences where they shine, but as the
light of the sun, which makes the earth and plants green, and growing. He who
is rich in knowledge, must be plentiful in holiness; and not like the rich
Indians, who have much gold in their possessions, and go naked and beggarly. In
a word, let your knowledge be useful and helpful to others. Know not to know,
that's curiosity; nor to be known, that's vain glory; but to do good by your
knowledge, that's Christian charity: Knowledge increases in pouring out: And (as
some have experimentally found it) the Teacher learnes more by the Scholar,
than the Scholar by the Teacher.

2 Ministers ought to commend their peoples proficiencies in holiness. Observe.
2.
Jude here mentions the knowledge of the Christians to their praise. When
people do what is commendable, Ministers should commend what they do. If the
former find matter, Romans 15.15. 1 Cor. 11.2.
the later should find words. I am persuaded of you (says Paul to the Romans)
that ye are full of goodness. And I praise you, brethren (says he to the
Corinthians) that you remember me, etc. A Ministers prudent commendation wins
that love to his person without which the best doctrine is often but
unprofitable. Rare is it to find that Christian who embraces a message, which
is brought him from a messenger not beloved. A wise commendation will make a
Reproof go down the better. Constant chiding is like Physic, which being too
frequently taken, grows natural, and therefore proves not operative. Ministers
should be wise in choosing a fit object for commendation; the commendable
actions of every one must not be presently commended: some can less bear the
sweetness of praise, then they can the bitterness of reproof: A little wine
will turn a weak brain. Nor should we commend any to flatter, but benefit them;
to encourage the humble, not to content the proud. But truly, Christians,
'twere happy for Ministers, if the time you make them spend in weeping and
reproving, they might fill with encouraging and cheering you. The work and
delight of a Minister, is, (with the Be) to give honey; he puts not forth the
sting, unless you by sin provoke him. Of this more page 183. 184.

3. Observe. 3. Col. 3.16. Joh 5.39. Romans 15.4. Acts 17.11.
Every private Christian should be acquainted with the Scripture. It Is sinful
to clasp up the Scriptures in an unknown tongue. The end of the writing the
Scriptures, was the instruction of every one. None are so much commended in
Scripture, as those who most diligently searched into it. To private Christians
Paul writes sundry Epistles. The study of Scripture is useful and needful to
people, as well as Ministers: Illumination, Conversion, Direction, preservation
from sin, Psalm. 19.8.9 Psalm. 119.24.
belong to the one, as well as to the other: and if for the abuse of Scripture,
the use thereof should be denied to people, why would Christ and his Apostles
preach and write to those who perverted and wrested their doctrines? yea, why
should not the reading of Scripture be denied, not only to ignorant Monks and
Priests, but erroneous Clerks and Bishops, from whom by abuse of Scripture most
heresies have proceeded? But whether Satan has not by his methods wrought us
into the other extreme, when in stead of general restraint from reading, he
puts people upon a general liberty of preaching and expounding the Scripture,
our present distractions sufficiently witness.

4. Observe. 4.
The knowledge of truth is a strong engagement upon Christians to embrace and
love it. The Apostle, from their knowing the examples, hopefully expects that
they will lay them to heart. Truth known and not loved, is unprofitable. Not he
who knows a trade, but follows it, grows rich. It will fare ill enough with the
ignorant, worse with the obstinate; and many stripes are reserved for the
opposing of much knowledge. But of this before.

5. Observe. 5.
Ministers ought not to content the curiosity, but to consult the benefit of
their hearers. They should rather deliver Truths old and useful, then
doctrines new and unprofitable. Their work is not to please the Athenian, but
to profit the Christian. They are not Cooks, but Physicians, and therefore
should not study to delight the pallat, but to recover the Patient: they must
not provide sauce, but physic. If to preach the same things be safe, it
matters not whether it be sweet or no. Jesus Christ has given us no commission
to study the pleasure, but the preservation of our people. Its better that our
people should be angry for not pleasing their lusts; than that God should be
angry for not profiting their souls.

6. Observe. 6.
The truths of the word are to be known unchangeably, Gal. 1.6. Ephesians. 4.14. Si
fidem scrutari haesitando caeperimus, omnium patiemur jacturam. Theophylact. in
Romans 1. Col. 2.2. Helps hereunto, see pa. 238, 239.
steadfastly, once for all. Christians must not be removed from the truth: they
must labor to be men in understanding; and not be children, tossed to and fro
with every wind of doctrine. They must be known by the truth, (as men say they
will by the gift of a friend) many years after it is delivered. Holy
instructions must be entertaind with full assurance of understanding, and
looked upon, not as opinions, but assertions, more sure than what we see with
our bodily eyes. A seepticall, doubtful, staggering Christian will soon prove a
falling, an apostatizing Christian. A Christian must be rooted and grounded in
the love of the truth. Ephesians. 3.17


Thus far of the first part of the verse; viz. the Preface prefixed. I come now
to the second, namely, the Example propounded, in these words, How that the
Lord having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them
that believed not.

In the Example I consider,

1. A famous deliverance; The Lord having saved the people out of the land of
Egypt.

2. A destruction following that deliverance; Afterward destroyed.

3. The meritorious cause of that destruction, Unbelief; Those that believed
not.

I. The deliverance is contained in these words; The Lord having saved the
people out of the land of Egypt.

EXPLICATION.
The greatness of this mercy in delivering the Israelites out of Egypt is
frequently mentioned in Scripture. Deuteronomy. 4.20. Lev. 26.13 Psa. 77.15, 16, 19,
20 Psa. 78.12, 13, 14. and from ver. 41. to 54. Psalm. 105. form ver. 23. to 39.
Psalm. 106. from ver. 6. to 13. Psalm. 114.3, 5. Isa. 63.11, 12, 13 Psalm. 136.
from ver. 9. to 17. Acts 7.18, 19, etc. to 37.
Besides the large history thereof in the book of Exodus, it is prefixed
briefly to the ten Commandments, as a most prevailing motive to obedience; and
often set down as one of the most famous deliverances that ever God bestowed
upon his Church. And indeed, so it was, if we consider,

1. What the Egyptians did to the Israelites in abusing them during their abode
in Egypt.

2. What God did both to the Egyptians and Israelites, when he delivered the
Israelites from the abuses of the Egyptians.

For the first: 1. The Egyptians offered many cruel injuries to the bodies of
the Israelites. 2. By their heathenish idolatry they were great enemies to
their souls.

The first of these the Scripture expresses in setting down,

First, The bondage and servitude of the Israelites whereby their liberty and
ease were taken away.

Secondly, The murderous Edicts which were given out for the taking away also
of their lives.

First, The cruel bondage of the Israelites was so great, Exodus 20.
that Egypt is called in Scripture the house of bondage: and Egyptian bondage
is even become a Proverb. The Israelites were not more lovingly received by one
Pharaoh, Exodus 1.6.
then they were cruelly retained by another. They who of late were strangers,
are now slaves. With Joseph, died the remembrance of his love to Egypt.
Thankfulness to him by whom under God the lives and beings of the Egyptians
were preserved, is swallowed up in envy at the increase of his kindred and
posterity. The great fault of the Israelites is this, that God multiplieth
them. To pull them down, though by opposing of God, and to make them as unfit
for generation, as resistance, the Egyptians make them serve with rigor, Exodus
1.13, 14
and make their lives bitter with hard bondage in mortar and brick: Every word
notes Egyptian cruelty. The word translated to make them serve, signifies to
oppress by mere force: (...) Hanc habet vim praepositio (...) a (...) Frangere.
and it is a word noting properly a tyrannical abuse of power, and therefore
translated by the Seventy (...), which signifies such a proud and cruel
domineering as is used by tyrants. Nor is the word translated with rigor,
without an emphasis; it signifies (says Cajetan) a making them to serve, even
to the breaking of their bones. It is added, that the Egyptians made their
lives bitter: a word transferred from the body to the mind, to note the
grievousnesse and unpleasingnesse of a thing. The same word is used Lam. 3.15.
where the Church says, He has filled me with bitterness, (...) unde (...)
he has made me drunk with wormwood. And (as Lorinus thinks) Miriam the sister
of Moses had that name given her, which signifies bitterness, because she was
born in those times. The Seventy in their Translation, express this
imbittering of the Israelites lives by a word which signifies the most sharp
and cutting pains in childbearing. And much (doubtless) was this bitterness
increased by the nature of the work wherein the Israelites were employed, which
was in mortar, dirt and brick, and all manner of service of the field: they
were put upon the most sordid and servile employment. Philo and Josephus, with
others, report, 2. Antiq. c. 5.
that the works of the Israelites were mere drudgeries, the most mean and
dirty, as scouring of pits, the casting up of banks to keep out inundations,
the digging and cleansing of ditches, and carrying the dung out of the Cities
upon their shoulders. And it is said, Psalm. 81.6. I removed his shoulder from
the burden, and his hands were delivered from the pots. And that which yet made
their servitude more extreme and bitter, was, that being in these dirty
drudgeries of mortar and brick, Exodus 5.10.
the tale of the bricks is by the taskmasters laid upon the people, though the
straw wherewith to make brick be denied them: The poor Israelites now take more
pains to please, and yet please their cruel masters less than ever before:
They are commanded to gather straw, and yet cruelly beaten, because while they
were gathering of straw, they were not making of brick; that is, because they
performed not impossibilities; and did not make straw as well as brick. Do what
may be, is tolerable; but do what cannot be, is cruel. Hereupon the Israelites
cry and complain to Pharaoh of their want of straw, and their plenty of
stripes: In a word, all that they desire is, that they may but work; as for
wages, they desire none: In stead of relieving them, he derides them, and with
a cruelly cutting scoff, and a sarcasticall insultation, he wounds their very
wounds, and tells them, against hisown knowledge, they are idle, they are idle.
Hereupon, Si quis labori ob infirmitatem se subtraheret, capitalis noxa
judicabatur. Philo lib. 1. de vit. Mos.
the Egyptian rigor is continued, and the people of God (who after all their
toyling received no other rewards but stripes and scorns) are worse handled
then Egyptian beasts: So great was this cruelty, that (as Philo reports) if
any Israelite, through sickness of body, abstained from labor, it was
accounted a crime deserving death. Eusebius says, That by reason of their
excessive labor and heat, many were taken away by the pestilence. By this we
may gather, why the Lord tells them, Levit. 26.13. Deuteronomy. 4.20.
I brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their
bondmen; and I have broken the bonds of your yoke, and made you go upright.
Servitude is a kind of death, nay, by free people, accounted worse then death;
who have often chosen rather to die valiantly, than to live slavishly. Nor is
it any wonder therefore to read of the groaning, sighing, and crying of the
poor Israelites, Exodus 2.23, 24 Exodus 6.9 (...). Septuag.
yea, of their anguish, shortness and straitness of spirit by reason of
cruel bondage.

2. The second discovery of the cruelty of the Egyptians toward the
Israelites, Exodus 1.15.
was in the bloody commands for the taking away of the lives of the male
children. This was a blow at the root: 'Twas out of policy, not any
tenderness of conscience, that this murderous command took not in the females
also: The females did not constitute families; the taking away of the males
would suffice to hinder the multiplying of the people. The females could not
make war, join with the enemies of the Egyptians, or by force endeavor to
depart from Egypt; and the sparing of some might make the murders less
suspected. From bondage these Egyptians proceed to blood, and from slavery to
slaughter. Women are suborned to be murderers, and those whose office is to
help, must destroy the birth; the Midwives were put upon this bloody work,
because, as they had more opportunity of doing, so would others have less
suspicion of them for doing the mischief. The male children must be born and
die at once; and poor babes, they must be killed for no other fault but for
their Stock and their Sex, because they are Israelites and males: pure and
downright bloodiness! Needs must the Hebrew women, contrary to all others, not
joy, but mourn, when they saw men-children born. (...). Acts 7.19
This device of employing the Mid-wives not succeding, the tyrant gives
commission to all his own people to cast every son that is born into the river.
Josephus writes, This seems to be opposed by Exodus 1.22.
that the command was given also to the Hebrews to kill their own children: but
most barbarous it was, although it were only given to the Egyptians. Pharaoh's
cruelty smoked before, now it flames out. 1 Obstetricum dolo nisus est, etc. 2
aperta persecutione, Rupert.
He practiced secretly in his commands to the Mid-wives, he now proclaims it
openly to all the world: No Egyptian now could be obedient, unless bloody;
every man is made an executioner; the reins are laid upon the neck of Cruelty:
Every Egyptian may rifle the houses of the Israelites, and search for children
as for prohibited commodites. How difficultly are these poor babes hid, and yet
how dangerously found! They who had no armor but innocence and tears, are
exposed to authorized rage. How poor a shelter is the arm of an indulgent
mother against the command of a King, and the fury of his heathen Subjects;
whose vigilance and violence were so great, that as the mother of Moses was
unable long to hide him; so was she more willing to trust him with the mercy of
beasts and waters, than of Egyptians? And how hard was it for the strongest
faith of the best Israelite, to bear up against this tentation! So long as the
Israeltes saw themselves increasing, though oppressed, their faith in Gods
promise of blessing the seed of Abraham, might be comfortably relieved; but now
this cruel Edict of murdering their children, by whom the seed of Abraham was
to be propagated, seems to cut off all hope, and to make void all the promises.

2. The Egyptians from whom the Israelites were delivered, may be considered as
heathen Idolaters, and so enemies to the Souls of the Israelites. Had the
outward ease and prosperity of Israel in Egypt been never so great, yet eminent
had been the mercy of being drawn out of such peril for the soul, as was in
idolatrous company. Joshua thankfully records the mercy of God to Abraham, in
bringing him out of Vr of the Caldeans, where his Ancestors served strange
gods. And how great this mercy was, appears by observing the forwardness of
the Israelites to be infected by the contagion of Egyptian idolatry. The
Egyptians were a most idolatrous people, Isa. 19.1. Jer. 43.12. Jer. 46.25.
Exek. 20.7, 8
whence it is, that so often we read of the idols and gods of Egypt. No people
idolized so many, and such vile creatures as did the Egyptians; the Mole, the
Bat, the Cat, the dung-flie, Monkies, Birds, Crocodiles; P^r allia ccpe, and
porros jurant. Plin. l. 19. c. 6. -- Crocodilon adorat Pars haec, illa pavet
saturam serpentibus ibim. Effigies sacri nitet aurea Cercopitheci Porrum et
Cope nefas violare et frangere morsu. O sanct as animas, quibus haec nascuntur
in hortis Numina. -- Juv. Sat. 15. Sanctius in Ezekiel. 20.7. Nauseas, Symmach.
Inquinamenta, Aquila.
yea, Leeks, Onions, Garlic, etc. were adored by them as Gods. So gross was
their superstition herein, that the Heathens deride them for it. Pliny says,
that they were wont to deifie and swear by their Leeks, Onions and Garlic. And
Juvenal lasheth them for adoring these garden Gods. And from the vileness of
those creatures, Sanctius supposes that the gods of the Egytians are called
abominations. It is evident also that the Israelites were too forward to
worship the ldols, although they were weary of the oppressions of the
Egyptians. Hence it is, that ( Ezekiel. 20.7, 8.) the Prophet complains of their
rebelling against the express prohibition of God, that they should not defile
themselves with the idols of Egypt; and that they did not forsake those idols.
And the same Prophet, Chap. 23.3. reproving Israel for their early adulteries,
(by which he means their idolatries) says, that she committed whoredoms in
Egypt in her youth, (i. e. when the Israelites were but a young and new
Nation.) And verse. 8. that she left not her whoredoms brought from the
Egyptians; for in her youth they lay with her, and bruised the breasts of her
Virginity, Clear likewise to this purpose is that command of Joshua to the
Israelites, Chap. 24.14. Put away the gods which your fathers served in Egypt.
Nor are there wanting learned men, who conceive that the reason why the
Israelites in the wilderness made them an idol which had the figure of a Calf
or an Ox, Exodus 36 4. Psalm. 106.20.
was, because they had often seen the Egyptians, under that kind of image to
worship either their greatly adored Apis, who had formerly been their King and
benefactor, and whom now they esteemed their tutelary god; or else (as other
learned men think) the River Nilus, which by its inundation did make the land
of Egypt fruitful. And very probable it is, that God intended this bitter
oppression of the Israelites by the Egyptians, partly as a punishment for
joining with them in their idolatry formerly; partly as a remedy, to prevent in
the Israelites that familiarity and friendship with the Egyptians for time to
come, whereby they might easily fall again in love with their superstitions.
For if after all the indignities and cruelties which the Israelites suffered in
Egypt, they were desirous again (as they were) to return thither; Number. 14.4.
how forward would they have been, had the Egyptians always favored and loved
them? If they loved to be handling of thorns, how would they have delighted in
Roses?

And this may serve for the explication of the greatness of this deliverance
from the Egyptians in this first consideration; namely, of what the Egyptians
had done to the Israelites, in abusing them during their abode in Egypt.

II. But secondly, This deliverance will yet appear much more eminent, if we
consider what God did both to Egyptians and Israelites, in delivering the
Israelites from the abuses of the Egyptians.

And first, What God did to the Egyptians. He powered his plagues upon them; he
made Egypt the anvill of his angry strokes. He punished them, 1. Powerfully. 2.
Justly.


1. Most powerfully did God punish the Egyptians. For this cause did God raise
up Pharaoh, to show in him his power. All the judgments which befell the
Egyptians, Exodus 9.17.
came as soon as God called them. At his command the waters run blood, the
frogs, the lice, the flies, the grasshoppers, the darkness, the hail, the
thunder, and all those wrathful troops of plagues obey the will of him who
commanded in chief, and revenge the wrongs of their Maker. The most despicable
of creatures, lice and flies, the weakest twigs of Gods rod shall fetch blood,
when managed by the hand of Omnipotency. Nor was his power less conspicuous in
setting a stint to the very flies, and making that winged army to acknowledge
their limits, and to keep at a distance from Goshen. Yea, let but God speak the
word, and frogs, and flies, and grasshoppers depart as readily as ever they
came. And to show that he could plague without them, the greatest of Egypts
plagues is inflicted when they are gone. The strength of Egypt, their
firstborn die, and are but worms and weakness to the strength of Israel. All
this was much; 'twas admirable strength which broke the backs of the Egyptians;
but nothing but pure Omnipotency could break such rocks and oaks as were their
hearts; but even these also are bowed and broken. None so forward now to thrust
the Israelites out of Egypt, yea, to hire them to go, as they who even now
tyrannically detained them. Their rich jewels of silver and gold are not too
deer for them whom lately they spoiled of their substance. Glad they are now to
pay them for their old work. Those who lately were detained as slaves, are now
sent away as Conquerors, with the spoils of their enemies. Still the power of
God appears; No sooner were the backs of Israel turned to depart, but the
warlike Egyptians, furnished with horses and chariots, pursue the feeble and
unarmed Israelites: who hereupon give up themselves for dead, and are now
talking of nothing but their graves. They know not whether is more merciful,
the sea before them, or the Egyptians behind them: but the sea retires and
flies, and the Israelites put their feet into the way that it has made them.
Pharaoh thinks he may adventure as well as they; he marches smoothly, till he
be come to the midst of that watery trap, and would fain return when it was too
late. The rod of Moses is now more powerful than the scepter of Pharaoh.
Gurges in gurgite.
The sea is now again unbridled, returns in its force, and devours the late
devourers of Israel; And therefore,

2. How justly did God punish the Egyptians? Was it not just that the bold
blasphemer, who even now asked, Who is the Lord? should be made to know him by
feeling him, and that this Lord should be known upon him to all the world? The
river Nilus which by its inundations made Egypt fruitful, was by the Egyptians
regarded more than heaven, and worshipped for a deity; and how righteously are
they punished by the blood and frogs of that which they make a corrival with
God? They had lately defiled the rivers with the blood of infants; See now
their rivers red with blood, and they themselves are afterward overwhelmed in
the red sea. He who had rather satisfy his own curiosity by the feats of
Magicians than labor for humility under strokes, not more, smart than
miraculous, is at once both deluded and hardened. They who, to spare
themselves, burdned and inslaved poor groaning Israelites, are now plagued,
when Israel is preserved. How justly does God distinguish, when they had done
so before? They who are hardened, are at length broken by judgments. They who
sinned by the removal, are justly punished by the renewing of plagues. They
who so cruely oppressed Gods firstborn son, his Israel, are now plagued in the
destrustruction of their own firstborn. They who lately made poor Israel
drudge, and toil in dirt and mire, without allowing them any wages but scoffs
and stripes now pay them wages for their old work, with interest; and with
their gold and silver, bear the charges of that journey, which all this while
they were hindering the Israelites from taking. They who are not taught, justly
stumble by the people of God. To conclude this, How just was it, that he who
with his people hoped that the Israelites were so entangled and shut up in the
wilderness and the sea, as they should not be able to make escape; that he and
his (I say) should by this bait be drawn so far to pursue the Israelites, as
neither to be able to go backward or forward.

2. The mercy of saving the people out of the land of Egypt, will yet more
fully appear, if we consider what God did to the Israelites. He delivered them;
and this he did, 1. Most Wisely. 2. Most Graciously.


1. Most Wisely did God deliver his people, in raising up of Moses to be their
deliverer. The mother of Moses brought him forth in a time wherein she could not
but think of his birth and death at once, and hourly expect some cruel
executioner to tear her tender and lovely babe out of those arms, Admiranda est
Dei providentia tam pulchre Aegyptiis illudens, ut quo tempore cogunt Hebraeos
servire sine mercede, adiguntur a Deo ut alant ministrum futurum liberationis
eorum, idque mercede^ ultro praebentes. Dum infantes in ruinam Ebraeae gentis
interimunt, propriis sumptibus unum in suam ruinam educantes. Riv. in 2. Exodus
wherein she was as unable as she was willing to hold him. For fear of such an
one, she puts him into an Ark of bulrushes, and hides him among the flaggs of
the river. God showed, that he knew the place where Moses lay, by guiding
thither even the daughter of Pharaoh, to deliver Moses. She soon espies and
causes the ark to be opened: the tears and beauty of the child move her
compassions; which Moses his sister observing, offers to procure a nurse for
the babe, and fetches his mother She who even now would have given all her
substance for the life of her child, has now a reward given to her to nurse
him. How admirably did the wisdom of God deceive the Egyptians! The daughter
of him, whose only plot was to destroy Israel, is made the instrument of saving
Israel, by preserving him who was to be their deliverer, and the instrument of
Egypts destruction. The Egyptians also, who compel the Israelites to serve them
without paying them wages, are compelled by God at the same time to pay for the
nursing of him, who shortly after overthrowes the Egyptians. At length Pharaohs
daughter takes Moses home from nurse, and gives him as good breeding as the
Egyptians Schools and Court can afford him. Moses was not in more danger among
the flaggs, than among the courtiers: but God, who of late kept him from hurt
by Egyptian cruelty, keeps him now as wisely from hurt by Egyptian courtesy.
The honors of Egypt cannot make him either own an heathen for his mother,
though a kings daughter, or forget his Hebrew brethren, though the kings
bondmen. He observes their sufferings, and suffers with them. He having from
God an instinct of Magistracy, mortally (though secretly as he thought) smites
an Egyptian, unjustly smiting an Hebrew. The fact is known, and Moses warned
thereof by a churlish word which was intended to wound him, flies from Pharaoh
seeking to slay him. In Midian God provides him a shelter. Moses has now
changed his place, yet neither has he changed his keeper and acquaintance, nor
Israel lost their deliverer. Quid sibi vult ardere, and non exuri rubum? nempe
Israelem Aegyptiis superiorem futurum. Theod. in loc.
In a strange land God appears to Moses, and calls him to this honorable
employment of saving Israel. God confirms his faith by vision and voice: by the
vision he taught him, that if the tinder of a weak and most combustible bush
could overcome a flame of fire, that a poor Moses and an oppressed Israel might
as easily prevail over cruel and armed tyranny: by the voice, which was the
comment upon the vision, God, being moved by Isreal's afflictions, and not
hindered by Moses his objections, expresses his resolution, that Moses shall
bring Israel out of Egypt. Whereupon Moses yields to undertake the employment.

2. Most wisely did God deliver the people, in respect of the time of their
deliverance. How wisely did God time this deliverance, considering the extreme
and distressed lowness of Israel at that time wherein God began to work it!
The darkness was very thick immediately before the daybreak; the tide was at
the lowest, before it began to turn; Moses himself was too faint to believe
without the double support of a promise and a vision: now was Egypts cruelty
high, Isreal's strength low; all their arms were toil and tasks, tears, and
sighs, and groans, (weapons which overcame him who overcame the Egyptians:) For
thus it faring with Israel, Moses the deliverer comes and serves Pharaoh with a
warrant from God himself, to let Israel go. But Israel is not yet fit, that is,
weak enough to break out of Egypt. They must be required to make brick without
straw; and in effect, to make straw; and then God creates deliverance. The
deliverance from their tasks of brick seems as unpossible, as was the
fulfilling of these tasks; and they for very anguish are as unable to hearken
beleevingly and patiently to Gods messenger, promising deliverance, as they
were desirous to receivie it. Oh how did the desperateness of Isreal's disease,
commend the skilfulnesse of Isreal's Physician!

2. How eminent was the wisdom of God, in timeing of Isreal's deliverance, so
as that they should be compe^'d by Pharaoh to depart, that very day in which
God had promised that they should depart four hundred and thirty years before!
Pharaohs choice of time for the departure of Israel, meets with Gods exactly;
that very night when the four hundred and thirty years were expired, Israel
must go; God will have it so, yea, Pharaoh will have it so, who neither can,
nor can will to keep them any longer.

But secondly, God delivered Israel out of Egypt as graciously as he did
wisely. 1. How tender was he of his Israel, when his wrath was hottest against
the Egyptians! He commands his plagues to distinguish between Egypt and Goshen.
Israel was now like a man upon an high hill, that sees the dreadfully stately
spectacle of a bloody battle, but is himself out of gun-sho^. All Isreal's work
is but to behold and believe. 2. Afterward in their departure, how good was God
to give them furniture for their journey, at the voluntary charges of their
late oppressive enemies! 3. Further, how indulgent was God in having such
respect to the infirmities of his people! as not to choose them the shorter but
the safer way; and to preserve them from war, whose I ate and long condition
of slavery had made them unfit for soldiery; he intending them no fighting,
till after more preparation; and not suffering evils to be ready for Israel,
till Israel were ready for those evils; dealing herein as gently with his
people as does the Eagle with her young ones (the resemblance used by Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32.11.) for the Eagle turns not her young ones presently out of her nest,
either for flight or prey, but first nourishes them, and then by little and
little accustomes them to fly, by bearing them on her wings. 4. Mercy still
proceeds: it both chooses a way for Israel, and guides Israel in that way. In
the day God appoints a Pillar of a cloud to guide them, and not of fire,
because the greater light extinguisheth the less. In the night he errects a
pillar of fire, because in the night nothing is seen without light. The cloud
shelters from heat by day: the fire digests the rawnesse of the night. Day and
night God suits himself to Isreal's exigency. 5-Yet more mercy; Pharaoh and his
formidable army are now within sight of Israel, and Israel more fears Egypt,
than believes God. They voice Moses in their murmurings not to intend to
deliver them from, but to betray them to the Egyptians. And Josephus reports,
that the unbeleeving Iraelites were about to stone Moses, and to yield up
themselves again to their late cruel masters the Egyptians. Gods patience is
no less miracle than their deliverance. 6. But mercy stops not yet; The sea
forgets its natural course, and stands still to wait upon the servants of the
God of nature. The sea made them way, reared them up walls on both sides, and
dares not stir till Israel have passed through it. That which Israel feared
would destroy, now protects them from their late destroyers, and present
pursuers.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observe. 1.
The goodness of God to his Israel, stirs up envy in the Egyptians. Because
Gods eye is good, theirs is evil. Joseph was envied by his brethren, because
God blessed him with the love of his father. Saul envied David, because God was
with him: Pharaoh the Israelites, because God multiplied them. Its a sign of a
wicked heart, to look upon every addition to another happiness, as a
diminution of its own: an envious man in one thing is worse then other sinners;
for whereas others rage and fret, Vberior seges est alienis semper in agris.
Vicinique pecus grandius uber habet. (...).
that the world (as they conceive) is so bad, the envious are angry it is so
good. And wisely does God suffer his own bounty to be mixed with his emies
envy, lest his people being too much glued to his footstool-favours, should
not enough look up to that place where envy shall be no more. Only in heaven
is so much plenty, that there is no envy.

2. Observe. 2.
The kindnesses of Gods Israel to Egypt, are often but unkindly requited by
Egypt. To Joseph (under God) did the King and kingdom of Egypt in the time of
famine, owe their preservation: but a new King and generation arising, old
favors are forgotten. Had Joseph been an enemy to Egypt, it would have been
well enough remembered; but as his brethren remembered not his afflictions, Si
quid been fa cias, levior pluma est gratia: si quid peccatum sit, plumbeas iras
gerunt. (...). Pind.
so the Egyptians remembered not his favors. Light injuries, like a feather,
will easily swim upon the water; weighty favors, like a piece of lead, sink to
the bottom, and are forgotten. The loyal love of Mordecai to Ahasuerosh had
been utterly buried, if the Annals had not recorded it. Gideon, who had been
that famous Deliverer of Israel, is so far forgotten after his death by the
Shechemites, that they slew his sons. God would have his people in all the good
they do, not to seek the applause of men, but to eye his command, and to look
to him, who registers the slenderest performance, even the giving a cup of cold
water to any in his name; and with whom our reward is, and who will make our
favors coals of fire to consume and destroy, Romans 12.20.
if not to thaw and dissolve our hardened enemies.

3. Affliction is the lot of Gods Israel. Observe. 3.
The holy Patriarck who had the name of Israel, had a life made up of sorrows.
Affliction was his daily bread, Genesis 32.28.
and his constant diet drink. His brother threatens to kill him: His uncle, to
whom he flies for refuge, is churlish and deceitful: His eldest son is
incestuous: His only daughter ravished: Two of his sons turn cruel murderers*
His best beloved wife dies in childbirth, and his dearest child is given over
for murdered He and his family are soon after punished with a sore famine: in
sending for food, he loses (as he thinks) Simeon: Genesis 47.9.
His days (by his own computation and confession) were few and evil. The
posterity of Israel have afflictions left them for their legacy. Egypt, the
wilderness, Canaan, Babylon, were the stages of Isreal's tragedies. The
Spiritual Israel is in all the parts and ages of the world a distressed
number: Witness that book of Martyrs epitomized, Hebr. 11. Of all people, Heb.
1^.10.
God would have his Israel holiest, and he corrects them to make them partakers
of his holiness. If he suffers weeds in the forest, he endures them not in
the garden. Affliction is appointed for the consumption of sin. It is as fire
to the raw flesh, to roast out the cruditie; Parisiensis.
and blood of our corruptions. It is poison to lusts, and food to graces. The
sheep of Christ thrive best in shortest pasture; faith, humility, patience,
prayer, heavenly mindedness, etc. in affliction, like spices under the pestle,
are sweetly fragrant. How sweet is music upon the water! How heavenly are the
prayers of a weeping Saint! Affliction is Gods touchstone, to difference
between the precious and the vile; his fan, to sever between the wheat and the
chafe; Judge. 7.5.
his waters, like to those to which Gideon brought his soldiers, for the
^ryall of their fitness for war. His furnace, to separate between the me^ tall
and the dross. Of all people therefore, true Israelites should never promise
to themselves outward ease. God sees it best for his people (like waters) to be
in motion: Should they stand still, they would soon putrify. Heb. 4.9.
The rest of the people of God remains. Its too much to have two heavens. He
who said, He should never be removed, like Peter in the mount, knew not what he
said. That Saints may be always safe, they must never be secure. Of all people,
those should be least censured who are most corrected; they may be, nay are
most like to be Israelites. The happiness of Israel is not to be judged by
outward appearances. The Isreal's, the Princes of God, are in this world but
princes under a disguise. This life is but the obscurity of their adoption. We
see their combats, we see not their crowns: We veiw them in the tents of
Kedar, not within the curtains of Solomon.

4. Observe. 4.
More particularly, Its no new thing for Egypt to be unkind and cruel to
Israel. Israelites and Egyptians are of contrary dispositions and inclinations;
the delight of the one, is the abomination of the other. Besides, its the duty
of Israel to depart out of Egypt. Israel is in Egypt in respect of abode, not
of desire. Egypt is not Isreal's rest. If Egypt were an house of hospitality, it
would more dangerously and strongly detein the Israelites, than in being an
house of bondage. The thoughts of Canaan would be but slight and seldom, if
Egypt were pleasant. Its good that Egyptians should hate us, that so they may
not hurt us. When the world is most kind, its most corrupting; and when it
smiles most, it seduceth most. Were it not for the bondage in Egypt, Mundus
arridet and irridet.
the Onyons and idols of Egypt would be too much beloved. Blessed be God, who
will by the former, weane us from the later; and will not let us have the one
without the other: far better that Egypt should oppress us, than we oppose
God. Further, Its the endeavor of Israel to depart out of Egypt; and never was
any known to forsake Egypt without persecution. This world loves its own, but
it loathes them who show that they belong to another. To forsake the courses of
the world is practically to speak our dislike of them; and therefore he that
will not associate with sinners, shall be sure to smart by them. 1 Pet. 4.4.
They think it strange (says the Apostle) that ye run not with them to the
same excess of riot, speaking evil of you. The wicked speak evil of Saints,
not for doing any evil against them, but only for not doing of evil with
them. I wonder not that Israel was either so courteously sent for and invited
out of Canaan into Egypt; or so cruelly opposed when they offered to depart out
of Egypt into Canaan. When thou art coming to Egyptians, they will love thee:
When thou go from them, they will hate thee.

5. Judgment begins at Gods Israel. Observe. 5. 1 Pet. 4.17.
God whips his children, before he beats the servants; and corrects Israel,
before he kills the Egyptians. First God performs his whole work upon mount
Sion, before he punishes the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Assyria.
Isai. 10.12.
God ordinarily makes use of Egypt for the base and low service of punishing
Israel; and the wisp must first scour the vessel, before it be thrown on the
dunghill. The building must first be erected, before the scaffold be taken
down. The corrupt blood must be drawn out, before the Leech fall off. Domini
sumus non tantum in genitivo singulari, sed in nominativo plurali. Luth.
The wicked in all their tyranny and Lordship, are but servants, (the lowest)
scullions to serve and scour the godly. They are spared and punished in order
to the Saints exigency; and when wicked men are advanced; it is not for their
own worth, but for the Church her want* not because the wicked deserve to have
such servants as the godly, but because the godly deserve such masters as the
wicked. God sets them up, not out of love to their sin; but out of hatred to
the sins of his people: and the best prognostic of the downfall of
Egyptians, is the reformation of Israelites. Besides, God will render Egypt
inexcusable, when he comes to plague them. What can Egypt say for it self,
when God has dealt so severely with his own Israel before their eyes, yea by
their hands? so many crosses as befall Israel, are so many evidences against
Egypt. Luke 23.31.
If God do these things in the green tree, what will he do in the dry? If he
scourge the children with rods, he will whip the slaves with scorpions. They
whose judgment was not to drink of the cup, have assuredly drunken; Jer. 49.12.
and art thou he that shall altogether go unpunished? thou shall not go
unpunished, but thou shall surely drink of it. I begin to bring evil upon the
city which is called by my name, Jer. 25.29.
and should ye be utterly unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished. When Egypt
has seen God so severe, and have themselves been so cruel against Israel,
what can they say why judgment should not pass against themselves? Yet
further: Judgment begins first with Israel, that so they may be the more fitted
to see judgment come upon Egyptians. Israel would not know how to manage the
mercy of Egypts overthrow, if God had not first humbled Israel. Too many sails
are dangerous for a small vessel. The heart of Israel is so slight and giddy,
that it would not be able to sail without the ballast of correction. Yet
aagain: Israel would not so much rejoice in Egppts after-overthrow, if God had
not first corrected Israel; the people of God cannot be thankful in the
downfall of their enemies, when they cannot tell but that judgments may
afterward fall upon themselves. How can the throwing of the rod into the fire
delight the child, when as the child knows not but that the parent may throw
it into the fire afterward? If an house be not finished, 'twil soon decay; if a
sore be not thoroughly cleansed, 'twill break out again. If Israel be not well
purged by corrections, before the Egyptians be destroyed, punishments seven
times worse may again return to Israel: And a new deliverance bestowed upon an
old heart, will but make the rent the greater. All this shows us the reason why
Egypt still is unpunished; truly, Israel is not yet corrected, or at least not
humbled and reformed by corrections sufficiently. The plaster falls not off
till the sore be healed; the people of God are beholding to themselves for
their lingering calamities. All times are not seasonable for Egypts overthrow.
Praepostera celeritas. Calv. in 10. Isai. 12.
Though the enemies of God may be high enough, yet the people of God may
possibly not be low enough for the accomplishment of such a work. We, poor
creatures! have short thoughts; and like silly children, are desirous to have
the apple taken out of the fire, before it be roasted enough: and like them, we
love green fruit; I mean, mercies before they be ripe; but green fruit breeds
worms, and mercies bestowed before we be fit to enjoy them, make us but proud
and unreformed.

6. God often brings his Israel into such straits, Observe. 6. Exodus 6.9.
as out of which they see no possibility of deliverance. So bitter was Isreal's
affliction, that they had as little patience to hear of their deliverance, as
to endure their bondage. Gods people are sometime brought into a condition so
strait, that it is resembled to a prison; to note, that they are so confined
and enclosed to and in their troubles, that they see no way of escape. David
prays that God would bring his soul out of prison. Psalm. 142.7. Zech. 9.12.
The afflicted servants of God are called prisoners of hope. Abraham was in a
great strait when God commanded him to sacrifice his only son Isaak, in whom
the promises were to be fulfilled. 1 Samuel 30.6.
David was greatly distressed when Ziklag was burnt with fire, and his wives
taken captives, 2 Samuel 24.14
and his soldiers spoke of stoning him. And in a great strait he was, when
God, by the Prophet, offered him his choice of plague, famine, and pursuit by
the enemies. Jehoshaphat was in a great strait, when at the approach of so vast
an army of enemies, he said, We know not what to do, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Israel was
in a great strait, when in stead of deliverance which Moses had promised them,
Exodus 5.8. Exodus 14.10.
their tale of bricks was continued, and their straw taken from them; and
afterward when Pharaoh was pursuing them, and the sea was before them. Gods
Israel would never be humble in, nor thankful for enlargements, if God did
not sometime bring them into distresses. How sweet is liberty after a prison!
how pleasant is the haven after a storm, which brought the distressed mariner
to his wits end! Psalm. 107.27.
Israel would not so believe God in future distresses, if they had not been in
them before. Israel might have gathered strength against their distress at the
red sea, by considering Gods delivering them from the distress of oppression.
Their faith should also have been upheld against straits in the wilderness, by
remembering their deliverance at the red sea. And their distrustfulnesse after
deliverances from their distresses, is often recorded as their sin. The graces
also of Gods Israel are much manifested by encountering with, and overcoming of
distresses. Their graces hereby are discovered both in their truth, and their
strength. Weak grace cannot go through strong tentation: but the distresses of
an Abraham, a David, a Job, a Paul, prove in the end trophies of triumphant
faith. And all the power of grace does but discover the power of God; who
delights not that his saints should be distressed, but that the world and
devil should be vanquished by poor believers, and ultimately that himself
should be glorified by all. In stead of murmuring under lesser trials,
consider that these are nothing to the distresses of your betters. Remember,
Christians, that if your drink be water or wormwood, some have drunk blood.
Prepare for distresses. Christians, pray for increase of faith: the journey may
belong, desire God to help you to feed heartily upon the promises, even again
and again, as God bids Elijah, when he was to go to Horeb. By bearing lighter,
labor to grow fit for heavier pressures. A delicate Christian will not endure
to be a distressed Christian. He who by the daily practice of selfe-denyall and
mortification, does not displease himself, will never endure that another
should distress him. How fearful (further) should we be of censuring the most
distressed! Abraham's distress, David's strait, Paul's viper, proved them neither
wicked nor forsaken. Oh, how much better is it to be a distressed Saint, than
an enlarged sinner! to be in Gods pound, than in Satan's champain! If the one
condition has more liberty, the other has more safety. Where God loves, there
he corrects; and where he loves most, there he distresses. To conclude this; In
distress, take heed of despondency: Recollect former deliverances out of as
great distresses. When you meet with such a strait, 2 Cor. 1.10.
pinching Egyptian yoke, which God cannot break, with burdens which he cannot
take down; with a red sea, which he cannot divide; when you are pursued by a
Pharaoh, which he cannot devour; and are in a distress which he cannot remove,
then, and not till then, distrust him. Improve your interest in God, 1 Samuel
30.6.
and with David in distress encourage your selves in your God.

7. Gods Israel shall not be utterly destroyed, Observe. 7. Exodus 1.12.
though it be in an Egyptian furnace of Affliction. The Church is supported,
even when oppressed. When Israel was afflicted, they multiplied. Thus it was
with the seed of Israel; yea thus with the Savior thereof: After his death,
his name, his glory lived more vigorously than ever; and they who in his life
time sought to destroy him, as unworthy to live; after his death, sought to
live by believing on him. This he foretold of himself: If a corn of wheat die,
Joh. 12.24.
it brings forth much fruit. Thus was it with the ancient Christians. The
more we are mown down, the more we grow up (says Tertullian.) Plures
efficimur, quoties metimur a vobis. Tert.
The Church is in Scripture compared to things, which though weakest, yet are
fruitfullest; as Doves, and Sheep, the Vine. The Church, like the Palm Tree,
rises up, the more men endeavor by weights to press it down. The Egyptian
flames cannot devour the Israelitish bush: the gates of hell cannot prevail
against the Church. Gods blessing overcomes all humane opposition. If God
says, Increase and multiply, all the enemies of the Church help it, when they
most endeavor to hinder it. Its neither from the weakness of the flames, nor
the strength of the bush, that it is not consumed; but from the gracious
presence of him who dwelt in it; and his dwelling there he manifests, Psalm.
76.10.
1. by restraining the fire, and heeping in its fury. All the wrath of man
which shall not praise God, shall be restrained by God. 2. By strengthening the
bush against it; if not by bestowing worldly, yet spiritual power to oppose
it. How much was Pharaoh mistaken when, intending to oppress the Israelites,
he said, Let us deal wisely with them! Exodus 1.10. The sun may as easily be
blown out with bellows, and battered with snow-balls, as Israel may be
overthrown by opposition. But how great therefore is that folly, which puts
worms upon contending with the great God! What do the Egyptians in contriving
against Israel, but besides the disappointment of their hopes, curiously weave
their own woe, by torturing themselves with envy, and making way for Isreal's
deliverance by their own overthrow? Against the God of Israel there is no
wisdom, Prove. 21.30.
nor understanding, nor counsel. Oh how happy were we, if the time which we
spend in fearing and shunning of trouble, were only improved in hating of sin,
and cleaving to God!

8. Observe. 8.
Satan and his instruments then begin to rage most furiously, when God calls
and stirs u^ instruments to help and releeve his Church. Before Moses went in
to Pharaoh for Isreal's releasment, the Israelites were used unkindly; but
afterward they were oppressed tyrannically. How cruel was Egyptian rage upon
the entrance of Moses into his Ministry! As soon as David was anointed King,
how bloodily did Saul rage! In all ages of the Church the Devil endeavors to
obscure the dawnings of the Gospel, with a bloody cloud of persecution. When
God begins to cast the devil out of his hold, he deals with the Church,
Promissam gratiam crux sequitur. Rivet. in Exodus page 133. Hos. 7.1.
as with that man possessed by him, whom, when Christ was about to cure him, he
did rend, and tear, and lay for dead. In the beginning of reformation
Antichrist filled all places with blood and slaughter. When God begins to heal
his Church, the Antichristian humor of violence and persecution discovers it
self. The cross follows the entrance of the Gospel; hence we should be
encouraged, and cautioned. Encouraged; for it is a good sign, that when Satan
wars and rages, God is wounding and dispossessing him; and that his time is
but short. We should also be cautioned: Let us look for trials, even after
Moses has promised deliverance. Commonly, when God has given his Church hopes
of mercy, he seems to threaten inevitable disappointment of it. After God had
given Abraham a son, in whose seed all the promised mercy was to be
accomplished, God seems to put Abraham upon the pulling down the foundation of
all this happiness with his own hands. And we should take heed that we impute
not our troubles to the reformation endeavored, but to that opposition which
Satan and the distemered world put forth, And not to blame Gods care of our
recovery, but our own frenzy.

9. No difficulties can hinder Isreal's deliverance. Observe. 9.
God can command, yea create deliverances for his people. Psalm. 25.22. Psalm.
34.7. Psalm. 71.20. Isai 43.13. Genesis 18.14.
When there is none left and shut up, when there is no force and might to
relieve, he can deliver them alone. When there are mountains of opposition, he
can level them, and make them become a plain. Jesus Christ comes skipping and
leaping over them all. The wisdom, power, malice of his enemies, do but make
his strength tiumphant; yea, the unworthiness and unkindness of Israel, cannot
stop the course of delivering mercy. So unexpectedly can he scatter
difficulties, that his people have been like them that dreamed, when mercy
came; they thinking it too good to be true. Yea, their enemies have been
amazed, and been compelled to profess, that God has done great things for his
Church. How strong must the forces of Gods decree, power, love, wisdom,
faithfulness, the prayers and tears of his people, needs be, when they are all
united! And hence it is that as the enemies of Israel, have cause to fear,
though they are high: So the true Israelites have cause to hope, 1 King. 2.15.
Fides in periculis secura est, and in securis periclitatur.
though they are low. There Is no defeat so great, but faith has a retreating
place. Means can do nothing without, much less against God; but God can do all
things without, yea against means. A Saint abhorres indirectly to wind himself
out of any trouble; Why? he has a God who can help in every strait: when as a
sinner who wants God, shiftingly betakes himself to any unworthy practice. Oh
Christian, shame thy self, that every slight trouble should so dismay thee,
having such a deliverer. That the mountain should be full of horses and
chariots, and thou should not have thy eyes open to see and believe them.
Psalm. 126.4.
What Is a Pharaoh, an house of bondage, a puissant army, a red sea? delivering
mercy makes way through them all, and is a mighty stream that bears all before
it: Its infinitely stronger than the strongest blast of gunpowder, to blow up
all opposition. Oh Christian, fear not thy danger, but believe in thy deliverer.

10. God loves not to give deliverance, Observe. 10. Deus ad suorum liberationem
manum admovet cum omnia videntur desperata. Riv. in Exodus p. 70. Psalm. 12.5.
till it be welcome. When the bricks are doubled, then, and not till then,
Moses comes. When Israel is parched with the heat of persecution, then come the
showrs of deliverance. God is an help in the needful time of trouble. Then is
it Gods time to deliver, when there are no visible helps or hopes of
deliverance: For the oppression of the poor, and sighing of the needy, now will
I arise (says the Lord.) In such a case it was, that God said to Moses, Now
shall thou see what I will do to Pharaoh. Times of extreme oppression, Exodus
6.1.
are times of earnest supplication: and God loves to bestow mercies, when they
are by prayer desired. The cry of Israel must come up to God, before mercy from
God comes down upon Israel. Further, Judge. 6.10.
where deliverance comes in a time of extremity, it will be entertained upon
its own terms; Israel will part with any thing that offends their deliverer:
they will submit to strict reformation, which before they would not hear of,
and say with Saul, Act. 6.9.
Lord, what will thou have us to do? and with the Egyptians, who were pinched
with the famine, Genesis 47.19.
Buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants to
Pharaoh. Lastly, when deliverance is afforded in the Churches extremity, the
glory of Gods power, wisdom, and free goodness is most clearly discovered;
God loves so to work for his people, as to gain most by them; he will have the
tribute of praise out of every salvation. And this discovers the true reason
why mercy is delaid; why God only (as it were) shows a mercy, and then pulls it
in again: we are not yet so pinch^d by the want thereof, as to stoop to Gods
conditions, to accept of an exact universal reformation; to be willing that
God should do with us what he pleases: and to those whom God has so fitted,
mercy shall not long be delayed; nay, God has given to them the best of
mercies, in bestowing a heart meet to enjoy them.

11. Observe. 11.
God often proportions the sin to the punishment. The Egyptians encompasse poor
Israel with affliction, neither suffering them to go from, or remain in Egypt;
and now they themselves can neither go backward or forward in the sea. The
bloody rivers, and their destruction in the red sea, tell them their cruelty in
drowning the Israelitish children. Sodom was inflamed with the fire of lust,
and God consumes them with the fire of wrath. Joseph's brethren sell Joseph for
a slave, and they themselves are detained as bondmen. Adonibezek cuts off the
thumbs and great toes of seventy Kings; Judge. 1.7
and as he did to them, so did God requite him. Haman was hanged upon his own
gibbet. David's murder and adultery were followed with the death of his
children, and the ravishment of Thamar. It Is thy duty to trace sin by the
foot-prints of punishment; and observe what sin thou have lived in, which
bears most proportion to thy punishment. Art thou sick? consider whether thou
have not abused thy strength to sin. Does God take away thy sight, thy hearing,
thy tongue, thy estate? ask thy conscience whether these have not been employed
against God. And if this direction seem to put thee upon an uncertain course of
finding out thy beloved sin, imitate the example of Herod, who, that he might
make sure work to kill our Savior, slew all the children in Bethlehem. In like
manner let us impartially destroy all our sins. If we know not which was the
thorn that pricked us, cut down the whole hedge. If we know not which was the
Be that stung us, let us throw down the whole hive.

12. Observe. 12.
When the enemies of God labor most to oppose and frustrate, they accomplish
and fulfill the will of God. Pharaoh studies to destroy Israel; but even then
Pharaoh by his own daughter preserves and nourishes him who was to be Isreal's
deliverer. Pharaoh resolves to detain Israel in bondage; but even he shall
shortly not only send them away, but compel them to go; yea in that very night
which God had four hundred and thirty years before set down and prefixed.
Joseph's brethren sell him that his dream might prove false, and that they
might not be brought to bow before him; but so did God order it, Ideo
veneratus, quia venditus.
that therefore they came to do obeisance to him, because they sold him. The
Jews killed Christ, to extinguish his fame and glory; but by his death was his
glory and fame advanced. Oh the folly of Gods enemies! how can God want weapons
to beat them, when he can beat them with their own? how impossible is it but
God should prevail over them, when he does so by being opposed by them? how
should this encourage the afflicted Church of God! when his enemies most resist
him, they are against their wills compelled most to serve him and his Church.

13. Observe. 13.
God is most faithful in keeping promise with his people. God mis-reckon'd not
his people one day, nay not one hour in four hundred and thirty years. All the
paths of God are mercy and truth. Psalm. 25.10. Psalm. 89.33. Isai. 55.3. 2 Cor.
1.20. Josh. 21.45. and 23.14. 1 King 8.56. Jer. 33.20. Isai. 54.19.
The faithfulness of God never fails, nor will he alter the thing which is
gone out of his lips. The promises of God are called, the sure mercies of
David: sure unto all the seed of David, that are in covenant with God, as David
was: They are yea and amen. There shall not fail one word of all the good which
God has promised to do for his people. The promises of God are built upon the
unchangeable purpose of God, which is a sure and unshaken foundation, 2 Timothy
2.19. Hence it is that God is said to have promised eternal life before the
world began, because the promises which are made in time, are according to that
purpose of God in himself. And Hebr. 6.17. the Apostle grounds the truth of
the promise upon the stablenesse of Gods counsel; so that unless Gods
counsel and purpose change, the promise cannot fail. Psalm. 89.3.35. Heb.
6.17. Heb. 9.16, 17
To assure us of the certainty of his Covenant, God has given us the pledges
of his oath; his seal of the blood of Christ, the Mediator, the earnest of his
spirit, 2 Cor. 1.22. Let the true Israelites hence gather strong consolation.
Christians, you are not worthy to be beloved, but God is worthy to be believed.
The promises are as sure as they are great. Though all the world falter and
deceive you, yet the promises of God are firm and stable. God will try your
faith, but never disappoint it. Judge of his faithfulness, not by his
providence, but by his promises. Of this more in the last part of the verse.

14. Observe. 14.
The great God has all the creatures at his command. He commands in chief,
and the creatures are his hosts; even from the least of the lice that crept
upon the poorest Egyptian, to the most glorious Angel in heaven. Psalm. 148.8.
Psalm. 77.16.
If he say to a plague, Go, it goes; if, Come, it comes; they all fulfill his
word, the unruly sea tamely stands still, if God command it; yea though of it
self it be unkind and raging, it lovingly opens its bosom to entertain the
Israelites. He can make the swift sun to stop its course, yea to go backward.
Josh. 10.12. Isai. 38.8.
The greedy and cruel Lions are muzled up, and grow gentle at Gods command. If
God speak unto the fish, it shall take, retain, and restore Jonas. How should
this relieve the faithful in all their exigencies! Their friend, their father,
has all the world at his command to supply their wants, to deliver them from
troubles, to destroy their enemies. Man roweth, but God blows: The Egyptians
pursue, but the wind, the sea, the chariot wheels shall all obey the God of
Israel. Never need a true Israelite fear, who has such a friend. Never can an
Egyptian be fafe, that has such an enemy.

15. Observe. 15.
Wicked men grow not wise till it be too late. Why could not the Egyptians as
well refrain from the pursuit of Israel, as endeavor a retreat? It had been
better for them not to have entered into the sea, than to struggle to get out
when once they were in it. They might with more wisdom have said, Let us not
follow after; than have said, Let us fly from the Israelites. Wicked men do
not believe their danger til they feel it. Satan suffers not their eyes to be
opened till they be (with the blinded Syrians) in the midst of their enemies.
Oh sinner! Labor to be wise betimes; in this thy day, know the things that
belong to thy peace. Its easier to be warned of the wrath to come, than to wade
out of it.

16. Observe. 16.
God makes those conditions and employments easy to his people when they are
once in them, which before seemed impossible. Israel rather thought, that the
wilderness should have given them graves, then that the sea should have given
them passage. They who feared that none could role away for them the stone of
the sepulcher, when they came, found it rolled away to their hands. The works
of God are sweet in the performance, which are unpleasing in their
undertakeing: the yoke of Christ is grievous to take up, but easy to bear and
undergo; its otherwise in the employments of sin; they are easy and
delightful in the beginning, but bitterness in the end. The Israelites find
the sea shut against them, when they approach it; but it was open in their
passage through it. The Egyptians found it open at their approach, but shut
when they would return. The ways of God are narrowly broad; The ways of sin
broadly narrow. Israel has nothing to do but to follow God, and to believe.
For their way, if mercy do not find it easy, it will make it so.

The second part of this example of the Israelites is their destruction after
their forementioned deliverance, in these words. [ Afterward destroyed*]

EXPLICATION.
Two things may here be explained.

1, What this destruction was which befell Israel afterward. 2. Wherein the
eminency and remarkablenesse of this destruction which was afterward, did
appear.
1. For the first. The Scriptures record sundry destructions brought upon the
Israelites while they were in the wilderness, after their deliverance from
Egypt: As 1. Some were destroyed after their idolatrous worshipping of the
Golden Calfe, Exodus 32.28, (...) by the command of Moses, to the number of
three thousand men. 2. There was a destruction by fire which the Lord kindled,
mentioned Number. 11.1, 2, 3. whether this fire brake out of the earth, or came
from the Pillar of fire which went before the Israelites, or was poured upon
them from heaven, it is not expressed; certain it is, that it was a grevious
burning; and therefore the place where it burnt was called Taberah. 3. Another
destruction by the plague, we read of in the same chapter, ver. 33. at Kibroth
Hataavah, after the people had impatiently and discontentedly, lusted for
flesh. 4. There Is a destruction by fiery serpents, recorded, Number. 21.6. Where
after their murmuring for want of water it is said, much people of Israel dyed.
5. Many of the Israelites were destroyed, about the conspiracy of Corab and his
accomplices, related Number. 16.31. Where, besides the swallowing up of sundry in
the earth, and the consuming by fire of two hundred and fifty who offered
incense, fourteen thousand seven hundred more were destroyed for murmuring and
raging against the former judgments. 6. For committing whoredom with the
daughters of Moab, and bowing down to their gods, we read Number. 25.9. of a
plague, by which dyed twenty five thousand. 7. Besides the death of ten of the
spies who brought up a slander upon the promised land, a discomfiture of the
Israelites by the Amalekites and Canaanites is recorded, Number. 14.45. for a
rebellious attempt to invade it against the will of God; These destructions by
violent death are the principal which are mentioned particularly in the sacred
story. But though the destruction which is here intended by the Apostle, be not
exclusive of these, yet is it to be extended beyond them, and to be understood
of that more general destruction which Numb. 14.29. etc. is threatened against
all the Israelites from twenty years old and upward, whose carcasses for forty
years fell in the wilderness, in regard of their rebellious and unbeleeving
murmurings against God, upon the evil report which the spies had brought upon
the land of Canaan.

For the second, viz. the eminency and remarkablenesse of this destruction, it
was a dispensation compounded of Severity, principally intended, Mercy also
comprehended. in the setting down of this example.

I. First, For its severity. This appears in these two considerations.

1. The persons who were destroyed. 2. The season when they were destroyed.
1. The persons who were destroyed, are considerable, 1. in their quality, and
privileges. 2. In their quantity and number.

1. In their quality, noted in the word them; They were the seed of Abraham,
the friend of God, Israelites according to the flesh. Not heathens, but a
peculiar, a chosen people, privileged above all the people of the earth, to
whom belonged the covenant, sacrifice, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. Romans 3.2. Romans 9.4.
Deuteronomy. 4.33. Psalm. 147. ult. Deuteronomy. 33. ult.
sacraments, worship; of which Christ came according to the flesh. A people who
so heard the voice of God speaking out of the fire, as none other ever did; to
whom God had shown his statutes and his judgments, after which manner he had
not dealt with any nation. In a word, a people whose privileges Moses thus
admires; Happy art thou O Israel; who is like unto thee, O people, etc. How
conspicuous was divine severity in destroying a people so near, so dear to him;
and whom he only knew of all the families of the earth! Oh Lord, (says
Joshuah) what shall I say, Josh. 7.8.
when Israel turns their backs before their enemies? Oh smart severity, thus
to fetch blood from a son, a first born; to destroy not Egyptians, Canaanites,
but even Israelites! Docet Paulus quadringentis triginta annis post
promissiouem a Deo factam Abrae, legem Mosis latam esse: Cum ergo ab hoc
tempore usque ad ingressum Jacob in Aegyptum, anni ducenti quindecim
effluxerint, necessario sequitur restare usque ad legem datam tertio mense
egressionis populi ex Aegypto, annos omnino ducentos, and quinde cim. Lorin. in
Act. 7. and Rivet. in exercit. in Genes. Psa. 102.10. Job. 29. per totum. and
cap. 30


2. The persons destroyed are considerable in their quantity and numbers. The
power and mercy of God were not more remarkable in the recruting of seventy
souls in two hundred and fifteen years to six hundred thousand, besides women
and children; than in the reducing of so many hundred thousand in forty years
to two persons, a Joshuah and a Caleb. Oh how angry was their father, to go
round his family with his rod! yea how just was their judge, to ride such a
large circuit with his sword!

2. The severity of this destruction is considerable in the season when they
were destroyed. noted in the word Afterward: after they were saved out of the
land of Egypt; and so it was a severity which admits of a threefold
amplification.

1. This destruction of the Israelites afterward, was a fall after an eminent
advancement. The higher a place is from which a man falls, the more dangerously
does he fall. How woeful is it to have been happy! Its a double mercy to be
raised up from a low, to an high estate; and it is a double misery to be thrown
down from an high, to a low degree. Thou have lifted me up, and cast me down
(says David.) And thus Job amplifieth his misery with admirable elegancy;
Young men saw me, and hid themselves; Princes refrained talking, etc. But now
they who are younger then I, have me in derision; whose fathers I would have
disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock, etc, Oh how glorious was
Israel in their Egyptian preservation! their red-sea-deliverance, their
wildernesse-provisions and protections! being (as Moses in admiration of their
happiness breaks out) a people to whom none was like, in being saved by the
Lord. And if so, then was no people so miserable in being forsaken by the Lord.

2. This destruction of the Israelites afterward, was a miscarriage after vast
cost and expenses laid out upon them. How angry is that father with his Son,
who casts him off after all his care and costs of education! How hateful is
that house to the owner, which he pulls down after vast and immeasurable
expenses about its structure and furniture! How much anger did God express in
the destruction of the Temple, when after all the cost which David and Solomon
laid out upon it, the Babylonians burn it to ashes, and carry away all the gold
and sumptuous monuments thereof! Was ever God at such charges with any nation
as he was at with Israel? For their sake he turns Egypt up side down, he
rebuked kings, he scattered and destroyed armies; the wild water waits upon
them in a standing posture; the Pillar of a cloud and fire conducts them; the
heavens pour them down miraculous shours of Angels food; the rock splits it
self into cups, and gives them drink; their garments continue fresh, and grow
not old; and which is infinitely beyond all this, God renewes his Covenant with
them, and gives them a law from heaven, speaks out of the fire, and sends them
an epistle to instruct them, written with his own hand; and after all this cost
and care, how great must Isreal's destruction be!

3. Yet further, this destruction of the Israelites, afterward, was a sad
disappointment of highest expectations. Israel was now cast away, as it were,
in the haven. They who not long since were singing and dancing, at the
spectacle of floting Pharaoh and his followers; they who had past through the
furnace and the sea, and escaped both their oppressors and pursuers; they who
had safely marched through an hot howling wilderness, even unto the borders of
the promised land, and were now safely arrived at the confines of Canaan; In a
word, they who had nothing now (as they hoped) to do, but to enter and take
possession of a land flowing with milk and honey, Numb. 14.25, 29.30.
are not only farbidden to enter it, but commanded back to the sandy and
scorching wilderness, there to spend the residue of their few and evil days:
Oh sorrowful, stupendions disappointment!

II. And yet secondly, even in this destruction of Israel, the mercy of God was
more remarkable then his severity. If Isreal's scourge be compared with Isreal's
sin, they had no cause to complain. They might rather wonder at what did not,
than at what did befall them; rather at the mercy which was left, than at what
was removed. Ezra. 9.13.
Well might Israel say with Ezra, The Lord has punished us less then our
iniquities; and with the Church afterward, It is the goodness of the Lord that
we are not consumed. Look upon Isreal's provocations, in Egypt, at the sea, in
the wilderness, their murmurings, idolatry, their unthankfulness for, and
sorgetfulnesse of Gods multiplied mercies, their rebellion against their godly
Governors; their hypocrisy, Covenant Breaking, lingrings after their old
Egypt, unreformednesse under all the dealings of God with them; especially
their distrust of Gods power and goodness after frequent and abundant
experience of both; Look, I say, upon all these, and then wonder that this
destruction should be, 1. So slow, and not more speedy. 2. But in part, and not
total, and universal.


1. It was a destruction mercifully mitigated, in respect of the slownesse and
deferring thereof. How much longer was God about destroying a handful of
sinners, than he was in creating the whole world? Israel, a people that could
not be kept from sinning, had a God that could hardly be brought to punish
them. Had the fire of Gods wrath been proportioned to the fuel of their sins,
he would have destroyed them in^al moment. Forty years long was I greived
(says God) with this generation, Psalm. 95.10. Act. 13.18. (...)
and so long endured he their manners in the wilderness; daily suffering that
which he beheld, abhorred, and was able to have punished every moment in those
forty years; in stead whereof, all that while he waited for their repentance,
and was at the expense of supplying them with mitaculous provision, direction,
protection, feeding them, and attending them as carefully, as does the nurse
her froward infant.

2. The destruction of the Israelites was but in part, not total: For besides
the sparing of Caleb and Josuah, who believed the promise of God, all who
believed not, were not destroyed; for all under 20 years were exempted from the
forenamed destruction, and reserved, Number. 14.19.
that God might still have his Church among them, and that there might be of
them a people left to possess the good land, according to the promise. Number.
14.13.
And in this respect it was, Non personis, sed gencri data venia. Calv. in loc.
that upon the prayer of Moses for the pardoning and sparing of the people, God
answers, that be had pardoned them according to the word of Moses; For although
he spared not the persons of the elder and rebellious multitude, yet he spared
the stock of Israel, remitting the punishment of present and universal death,
and not blotting out their memory, lest the seed of Abraham being extinguished,
his Covenant should have failed and fallen to the ground. The distrustful
refusal of the parents to accept of the promised land, made not God to be
unfaithful, in regard that the blessing which they rejected, was performed to
their children; God reserving a seed to propagate his Church, and tempering his
severity inflicted upon some with mercy afforded to others; though deserved by
none.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observe. 1.
The most numerous company of sinners are unable to withstand an angry God. He
can easily destroy six hundred thousand persons in a few years; and an hundred
four score and five thousand Assyrians in one night. Though hand join in hand,
yet shall not the wicked go unpunished. 2 King. 19.35. Prove. 11.21.
He, to whom it is all one to save by a few, and by many, can as easily destroy
many as one. Numbers are nothing with God. The whole old world of sinners are
no more in the hands of God, than an handful of worms. The greatest
combination of sinners are but stubble to the flame, and but as snow-balls to
the sun. He can as easily cast down multitudes of sinning Angels, as they (nay
he) can crush an Ant upon a mole-^ill. There Is no proportion between created
strength and increated omnipotency. The powers of all the world are but
borrowed of him, and as purely dependent upon him, as the stream upon the
fountain, the beam upon the sun. How can that power be too hard for him who
gave it, and can withdraw it at pleasure? Never let multitudes dare to oppose
him, nor one poor weak Saint, fear to trust him.

2. Observe. 2.
The worst cause commonly has the most abettors. Had this been put to the
question, whether will God keep his promise in giving to Israel the land of
Canaan? Caleb and Josuah would have been over-voted by almost six hundred
thousand Israelites; who nevertheless would have as much failed in their cause,
as they exceeded in their numbers. The multitude is but a weak argument to
prove a strong cause. The most have ever been the worst. Righteous Noah stood
in a manner by hmselfe, against the whole world of ungodly. The Prophet Elijah
was not the worse for being opposed by four hundred Baalites, nor they the
better for having only one Elijah to withstand them. Let us walk by rule, not
example. Numbers commonly do no more please God, than they can oppose him. Its
better to go to heaven with an handful, than to hell in a crowd. and to enter
in at the strait gate with a few, than at the broad with many; to go into
Canaan with Caleb and Josuah, than to fall in the wilderness with six hundred
thousand.

3. No privileges abused, Observe. 3. Jer. 6.8. Isa. 29.1. Jer. 7.12. Ps.
78.60, 61. Jer. 22.24.
can exempt from punishment. The soul of God may depart from Jerusalem; and
Ariel, the city where David dwelt, has woe denounced against it. God may
forsake his tabernacle in Shiloh, deliver his strength into captivity, his
glory into the enemies hand; and pluck the signet from his right hand. 1 Cor.
10.5.
With many of the Israelites God was not well pleased, for they were overthrown
in the wilderness. To him that breaks the law, Romans 2.25. Matthew. 11.23.
circumcision is made uncircumcision. Corazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, get
nothing by the mighty works of Christ, and their Elevation to heaven, but
greater woes and falls. Job. 4.23.
God delights not in outward privileges, but in inward purity. The new
creature, worship in spirit and truth, a Jew inwardly, Gal. 6.15
an Israelite indeed, circumcision and brokennesse of the heart, only please
the eye of God; and without these, external service is but painted Atheism. As
the pure in heart shall only see God, Matt. 5.8
so God only sees the pure in heart with contentment: God loathes sin wherever
he sees it, but most of all when it is sheltered with appearances, professions
and privileges. A name to live, external ordinances, circumcision in the
flesh, the Temple of the Lord, commend us not to God. I will punish (says God)
the circumcised with the uncircumcised. Egypt and Judah, and Edom, Jer. 9. ult.
the children of Ammon and Moab; for all these nations are uncircumcised, and
all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart. The Bible in thy house, the
word of grace in thy ear, will not avail, unless the grace of the word be in
thy heart; and the former without the later will but prove like Vriahs letters,
which he carried for his own destruction: Paul accounted all his privileges as
dung in regard of the knowledge of Christ. The means of salvation in word and
sacraments must be used in faith and repentance. Otherwise they being out of
their holy use enjoyed, will turn to our destruction.

4. Observe. 4.
God labors to win people by mercies, before he wounds them by judgments.
Israel is first solicited by love; God destroys them not till afterward; and
if his goodness had made them blush, his greatness should not have made them
bleed. Oh how propense was that God to save his Israel! and how unwilling to
destroy them! He gave them the honey of deliverance and provisions freely, and
of his own accord; he put not forth the sting of punishment till he was
provoked. Israel shall first have the cloud to guide them, the sea divided,
Egyptians drowned, Mannah showred down, the roks gushing them drink, and they
by all left inexcusable before they be destroyed. Oh that the longsuffering of
God might be salvation, and lead us to repentance, and that by submission to
mercy, we may prevent a conquest by judgment: and not put the Lord upon a work
more unpleasing to him than to our selves, whose backs do not suffer so much as
his bowels, Hos. 11.8.
when we are beaten.

5. Observe. 5.
Miraculous mercies do not benefit an unholy heart. After all the salvations
that God had bestowed upon Israel, they were fit for nothing but destruction.
Every step they took in the red sea, they trod upon a miracle of merciful
preservation: Every time they tasted a crumb of bread or a drop of water, they
took in a miracle of merciful provision: Every time they looked up to the
heavens, they beheld a miracle of merciful direction; but none of these could
work upon stubborn hearts: Only he who commanded that more soft rock to give
them water, could make their hearts obedient. They who will not be taught by
the word, will not be bettered by the rod of Moses; and without the spirit, we
shall be benefitted by neither.

6. Great deliverances abused, make way for severest judgments. Many times did
God deliver Israel; Psalm. 105.44
but they provoking him with their connsel, were brought low for their
iniquity: The whole book of Judges is the Comment upon this truth, a book made
up of the vicissitudes of deliverance, provocation, and punishment. Sins
committed against the love of a God, are committed most against the happiness
of a people. Every deliverance is a bil of Enditement against the unthankful.
This makes God to call to the heavens and earth as witnesses against those
children which he had brought up, Isa. 1.2.3. Josh. ult 20. Judge. 10.13. Jer.
15.6. Ezra. 9.13, 14.
and rebelled against him. Yea, to profess, that the owner of an ox, and the
Master of an ass were more respected by their beasts, than he was by his
Israel. This makes God to profess, that he will consume his people, after he
has done them good; and that he will deliver them no more: and elsewhere,
that he is weary of repenting. After all this is come upon us (says Ezra)
should we again break thy Commnadments, would not thou be angry with us, till
thou had consumed us? Oh that England would, in stead of murmuring at its
present distresses, mourn for its abuse of former deliverances: and more fear,
without a speedy reformation, that the mercies which still we enjoy shall be
removed, than hope that those we want shall be bestowed.

7. Sin disappoints the hopefullest expectations of mercy. Observat. 7. Jer.
8.15. Jer. 14.19.
It stifles it even when it seems to be come to the birth. We looked for peace,
but no good came; and for a time of health, and behold trouble. Who could have
expected but that Israel, after so many miraculous mercies, being now upon the
confines of Canaan, should instantly have entered? but behold, their sin sends
them back into the wilderness, there to linger and pine for forty years
together. Sinners disappoint Gods expectation, and justly therefore may God
disappoint theirs. Isa. 5.2.
After all the costs bestowed by God upon his vineyard, he looked that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. Israel gives God
appearances of holiness, and God gives Israel an appearance of deliverance.
They flatter God with shows of that obedience which he deserved; and how justly
does God disappoint them of those mercies which they desired? They fall short
of promised duty, and therefore of expected delivery. Oh that we could condemn
our selves, and justify God in the sad disappointments of Englands recovery.
We made show at the first of a through reformation; but we soon faltered and
made an halt; and why should God be bound, when we would needs be loose? Our
goodness was as the early dew, and the morning cloud that goes away; Hos. 6.4.
and justly therefore was our deliverance as a morning sunshine, soon clouded
and overcast with unexpected troubles.

8. Observat. 8.
Even in judgment God remembers mercy. God was good to Israel, when he
destroyed Israel. God in his smiles will be feared, and in his frowns will be
loved; as its said of Asher, that his shoos were iron and brass; and yet that
he dipped his foot in oil; Deu. 33.24, 25
so does God ever mix the hardest and heaviest severities toward his Israel,
with the oil of mercy and gentleness. He spared the children, when he
overthrew the parents. He did as well remember his own Covenant, as their
provocation. He cut off some luxuriant branches, but did not cut down the tree:
he punished some for their sins, he punished not all, Psalm. 106.8. Ezekiel. 23.9.
for his own glory. He wrought for his Names sake. I said, I would scatter them
into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men,
were it not that I feared the wrath of the Enemy, Deuteronomy. 32.27. So good is God,
that he raises arguments of pity toward rebellious Israel, out of himself,
yea out of his enemies, when Israel affords him none. Though justice made him
cast his Church into the fire to be scorched, yet mercy made him pluck it like
a brand out of the fire, lest it should be consumed, Zec. 3.2. And a seed he
reserves, a remnant, that his Church may not be as Sodom, Isa. 1.8. In the
vintage of a judgment, he leaves the gleanings of grapes upon the Vine of his
Church. He never shakes his Olive tree so thoroughly, but he leaves at least
two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the
outmost branches, Isa. 17.6. Though I make a full end of all Nations whither I
have driven thee, Jer. 30.11 Jer. 46.28
yet will I not make a full end of thee, but correct thee in measure; yet will
I not leave thee wholly unpunished. Let not Israel presume upon mercy, if they
will sin; but yet let them not despair of mercy, though they suffer. God will
not cast off his people. Ps. 94.14. Though the destruction of his Israel be
never so great, yet it shall never be total; and should many fall, yet all
shall not: the cause, the interest of Christ shall not; and though possibly in
a wilderness of common calamities, the carcasses of some of his own, may fall
among others, so as they may never live to enter the Canaan of a longed for
peace and reformation in this life; yet by faith ascending up to the Nebo of a
promise, they may behold it afar off, and see it possessed by their posterity;
they themselves mean while, repenting of their unbelief and unworthiness, and
so entering that heavenly Canaan, where they shall enjoy the fullness of that,
which here they could have enjoyed but in part.

The third branch of the example of the Israelites, is the cause of their
destruction, viz, their infidelity, contained in these words, That believed not.

EXPLICATION.
For the Explication whereof, two things are considerable.

1. In what respect these Israelites are here said not to believe. 2. Why they
were punished for this their not believing, rather then for any other sin.
I. For the first: Unbeleevers 1. are frequently in Scripture taken for Pagans
and Heathens; 1 Timothy 5.8 2 Cor. 6.14, 15 1 Cor. 14.23
who are always without the profession of the Faith, and often without the very
offer of the Word, the means of knowing that Faith which is to be professed;
and then its termed an unbelief of pure negation. 2. Unbeleevers are said to be
such, who though they profess the faith, and hear and know the word, yet deny
that credence to it which God requires, and their unbeleef, called an unbeleef
of evil disposition, is either a denial of assent to the truths asserted in
the word; or of trust and affiance to the promises of good contained in the
same; and both these are either, temporary, or total and perpetual. Into the
former sometimes the elect may fall, as particularly did those two disciples,
who by their unbeleef drew from Christ this sharp reproof, Luke 24.25. Mark.
16.11.13.14.
O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have written. And
for this it was that Christ upbraided the eleven, when they believed not them
who had seen him after he was risen. Luke 1.20.
And of righteous Zecharie is it said, that he believed not those words which
were to be fulfilled in their season. Into that unbeleef which is total and
habitual, Joh. 6.64.65. Joh. 10.25.26. Jo. 12.37.38.39
the reprobabate only fall; of whom Christ speaks, Ye believe not, because ye
are not of my sheep; and afterward the Evangelist, They believed not, nay, they
could not believe, because that Isaias said, he has blinded their eyes, etc.
as also Act. 10.9 diverse were hardened, and believed not. These abide in
unbelief, John 3. ult.
and the wrath of God abides on them; This unbeleef of the Israelites, did
principally consist in their not yielding trust and affiance to the gracious
and faithful promises, made by God to their forefathers, and often renewd to
themselves, of bestowing upon them the land of Canaan for their inheritance.
Vide Numb. Chapters 13. and 14.
These promises, upon the report of the spies concerning the strength of the
Canaanites, and their Cities, were by the people so far distrusted, and deemed
so impossible to be fulfilled, as that they not only wished that they had dyed
in Egypt, but resolved to make them a Captain to return thither again. And
probable it is, that the unbeleef of the most was perpetnal; Certumest,
complures fuisse pios, qui vel communi impietate non fuerunt impliciti, vel mox
resipuerunt. Call. in Heb. 3.18.
but that others (even of those who at the first, and for a time did distrust
the faithfulness of Gods promise) by the threatenings and punishments denounced
against, and inflicted upon them, repented afterward of their infidelity, and
so believed that God was faithful in his promise, though they by reason of
their former unbelief did not actually partake of the benefit thereof. However
this their sin of distrustfulnesse was their great and capital sin, that sin,
like the Anakims which they so feared, much taller than the rest, and which
principally was that provocation in the wilderness, spoken of so frequently in
the Scripture. Heb. 3.8.12, 16.18 Psalm 95 8. Incredulitas malorum omnium caput.
Call. in Heb. 3.18.
And hence it is that God explaines this provoking him, by not believing him:
How long (says he, Numb. 14.11.) will this people provoke me? how long will it
be ere they believe me? and that it was their great stop in the way to Canaan,
is evident, in that the punishment of exclusion from Canaan, was immediately
upon their unbeleef, inflicted upon them; as also by the express testimony of
the Apostle, who says, that they could not enter in because of unbelief.

II. For the second: Why they were destroyed rather for their unbelief, then
for other sins.

1. Their unbelief was the root and fountain of all the rest of their sins:
Heb. 3.12. Jer. 17.5.
This evil heart of unbelief made them depart from the living God by their
other provocations. All sins would be bitter in the acting, if we believed that
they would be bitter in their ending: Faith is the shield of every grace,
(...), 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Acts 15.9.
and Unbelief the shield of every sin: Faith purifies, Unbelief pollutes the
heart. Unbelievers and disobedient are in the Greek expressed by one word, Heb.
11.31. What but unbelief was the cause of all those impatient murmurings of the
Israelites? Had they believed a faithful God, Number. 14.27.
they would quietly have waited for the accomplishment of his promises: Had
they believed in him who is Alsufficient, they would in the want of all means
of supply, have looked upon them as laid up in God. The reason why they made
such sinful haste to get flesh, was because their unbelieving heart thought
that God could not furnish a table in the wilderness. What but their not
believing a great and dreadful Majesty, made them so fearlesly rebellious
against God and their Governors? What but their not believing an All-powerfull
God, made them to fear the Giants and walled Cities of Canaan? Faith went out,
and fear and every sin got in. They believed God too little, and man too much;
by their unbelief making God as man, and man as God. Genesis 12.7. 13.15. 15.18.
17.7.8. 26.4. Deuteronomy. 1.8. Exo. 3.17. and 6.8.


2. God had afforded many helps and antidotes against the unbeleef of the
Israelites. God had given promises, first, to their Fathers, and afterward to
these Israelites their posterity, of his bestowing upon them the land of
Canaan for an Inheritance. His promises, like himself, were faithful and true,
and impossible it is that he who made them should lie. These promises were
often repeated to their forefathers and themselves; and the very land of
Canaan is called the Land of Promise. Heb. 11.9 1 King. 8.56
And afterward Solomon professed, There has not failed one word of all Gods
good promise which he promised by the hand of Moses. All his promises are yea
and Amen. The promises of giving to Israel the land of Canaan, Genesis 22.16 Genesis
26.3. Psalm. 105.9. 1 Chr. 26.26. Genesis 17.10
God had sundry times confirmed by oath: the oath God followed with his seal of
Circumcision, whereby was confirmed the promise of the earthly and heavenly
Canaan. To all these God had added the abundant examples of those their holy
forefathers, who openly professed their believing of the promise, that their
Seed should inherit Canaan. Heb. 11.9. Act. 7.5
Hence Abraham sojourned contentedly in the land of promise, where he had not
so much room as to set his foot on, without borrowing or buying. Hence also he
purchased a burying place in that land, In terra promissa sibi emit sepulchrum,
ut spem suam vel mortuus testaretur: Rivet. Exerc. 119. in Genesis
of which, though living, he had not possession, yet dying, nay dead, he showed
his expectation. How holily solicitous was Jacob and Joseph, that their bodies
after their deaths should be carried out of Egypt, into that Canaan, where
their hopes and hearts had been while they lived. To all these Examples, God
had given them (to prevent unbelief) their own multiplied and astostonishing
Experiences of his former Power and Love. Could not he, who by the lifting up
of the arms of one Moses, destroyed an Army of Amalekites, as easily overthrow
the Armies of the Canaanites by the hands of six hundred thousand Israelites?
Could he who commissionated the very lice and flies to plague Egypt, and at
whose command are all the hosts of heaven and earth, want power to deal with
the sons of Anak? Could not he who made the weak and unsteady waters of the red
Sea to stand up like walls, as easily make the strongest walls of the
Canaanitish Cities to fall down? Psalm. 78.32.42
But they believed not for his wondrous works, they remembered not his hand, nor
the day when he delivered them from the enemy.

3. Their unbelief most of all robbed God of his (though not essential, yet)
declarative glory. It was a bold sin, it rifled his Cabinet, and took away his
chiefest Jewel, Isa. 42.8. 1 John 5.10. Romans 4.10.
even that which he says he will not give to another. 1. It takes away the
glory of his Truth; it no more trusting him, then if he were a known Liar, and
as we say of such a one, No further than we see him: It endeavors to make God
in that condition of some lost man, whose credit is quite gone, and whose word
none will take: now to discredit, is to dishonor a man. Unbeleevers account it
impossible that he should speak true, for whom to lie it is impossible. After
all the promises of giving them Canaan, though repeated, sworn, sealed, Israel
believed not God. 2. The Israelites by their unbelief obscured the glory of
Gods Goodness: They did not only labor to make their misery greater then
Gods Mercy; but even his very Mercy to appear Tyranny. They often complained,
that he had brought them into the wilderness to slay them; Number. 14.3. Psalm.
106.24.
and they despised that pleasant land which God had promised them: yea (as some
note) in regard that the land of Canaan was a type of the heavenly Canaan, See
M. Perkins on the place.
they believed not that God would bring them to heaven, and give them
inheritance in that eternal Rest by means of the Messiah: So that they
rejected at once both the blessings of the footstool, and the throne; the
earthly and the heavenly Canaan at the same time. 3. Their Unbelief did blemish
the glory of his Omnipotency; Psalm. 62.11.
They proclaiming by this sin, that He to whom power belongs, and nothing is
too hard, who can do all things, but what argue impotencie, as lying, and
denying himself; who made heaven and earth with a word, Isa. 40.15
and before whom all the nations of the world are as the drop of the bucket,
and the small dust of the balance, could not crush a few worms, nor pull down
the height of those Giants, whom by his power he upheld.

4. Of all sins, the Unbelief of the Israelites most crossed their own
Professions: They voyced themselves to be, and gloryed in being the people of
God; and they proclaimed it both their duty and privilege, to take God for
their God. They sometimes appeared to believe him; but the unbelief of their
hearts gave both God and their own tongues the lie: they professed that they
believed the power of God, and remembered that God was their Rock; Psalm. 78.34,
35, 36, 37.
but at the news from Canaan, they showed that they believed that the Anakims,
and the walled Cities were stronger. They professed that they believed the
Mercy of God, and that the most high God was their Redeemer; but at the very
supposall of danger, they thought that they were brought into the wilderness to
be slain. They professed that they believed the Sovereignty of God; They
returned and enquired after him, and promised obedience to him; but upon every
proof, they showed themselves but rebels. So that by reason of their unbeleef,
and unstedfastnesse of heart in Gods Covenant, they did but flatter God with
their mouth, and lie unto him with their tongues. How heinous a sin is it for
Gods professed friends do distrust him! How shall a stranger take that man's
word, whom his most familiar friends, yea his own children will not believe?
Thine own Nation (said Pilate to Christ) have delivered thee unto me. Thine own
people (may heathens say to God) will not trust thee, and how should we?

5. Of all the sins of the Israelites, unbelief was that which properly did
reject the mercy by God tendered to them. Canaan was by him frequently in his
promise offered; and though all the sins of the Israelites deserved exclusion
from Canaan, yet they did not, as unbeleef, by refusing the offer of it, reject
the entrance into it. As the faith of the Ninivites overthrew a prophecy of
judgment, Psalm. 78.32, 33
so the unbelief of the Israelites overthrew the promises of mercy. The breasts
of the promises were full of the milk of consolation; and yet these froward
children refused to suck and draw them by believing: and in stead thereof
struck and beat them away by unbeleef and rebellion. Unbeleef (as to the
Israelites) cut asunder the sinews of the promises, so as they could not stir
hand or foot to help them, and turned the promises into fallacies. Heb. 3. ult.
Number. 20.22.
Only unbeleef concluded this people under the necessity of destruction. Needs
must they perish who cast away the means of recovery. What shall be a remedy
for him who rejects the remedy? other sins are sores, but unbeleef throws
away the plaster. Every sin made Israel obnoxious to destruction, but unbeleef
made them opposite also to deliverance. This sin stopped (as it were) the spouts
and passages of grace. Christ Mark 6.5. Significatur hoc loquendi modo, quod
incapaces scipsos reddiderint, indignosque divinis beneficiis, et propensioni
animi Christi beneficae impedimentum objecerint: non permittunt, ut virtutis
divinae rivus se in ipsos diffundat. Brugens. in loc.
could do no mighty works because of their unbeleef. They who believe not,
render themselves incapable of blessings, and lay rubs in the way of mercy
binding the hands of God lest he should help them. Other sins lay persons (as
it were) in the grave, this of unbeleef lays the grave stone upon them, and
makes them rot therein. Upon them wrath abides, Joh. 3.18.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observat. 1.
Difficulties soon discover an unbeleeving heart. Many seemingly believing
Israelites, upon the news of the Anakims, and the walled Cities, believed not.
Jorams profane pursuivant discovered his temper, when he said, This evil is of
the Lord, why then should I wait upon the Lord any longer? 2 King. 6.33.
Saul appeared to depend upon God, and sought to him in his troubles; but when
God seemed to neglect him, and gave him no answer, then left he God, and sought
to a sorceresse. Rotten fruit will not hang upon the tree in a windy day. A
shallow, a highway-plash of water will soon be dried up in a scorching
sunshine. One who is only a believer, by a shallow outside profession, will
soon leave believing and professing. 2 Chro. 32.31. Deuteronomy. 8.2. and 13.3
For a while he will believe; but in time of persecution he falls away. Wisely
therefore does God seem sometime to disregard and reject his own children, to
try the sincerity of their confidence in him; and whether they will cease to
depend upon him, because he seems not to provide for them. Nec iratumcolere
destitit numen. Virtus fidei credere quod non vides, merces fidei videre quod
credis. Aug. in Ps. 109.
They who depend upon God continually, depend upon him truly. God makes it
appear to all the world, that his people serve not him, to serve their own turn
upon him, and that they are neither hirelings, nor changelings. It is the
efficacy of faith to believe what we see not, and the reward of faith to see
what we believe. How improvident are those mere professors and appearing
Israelites, who please themselves with shows of believing and cleaving to God?
their paint will not endure the washing, nor their refuge of lies keep out the
storm: when sufferings, death, or judgment approach, their confidences will be
rejected. Christians! labor for a faith unfeigned, yea both true and strong;
there may come times that will require it.

2. In vain do they who live in unbeleef, Observat. 2.
pretend against their other sins. So long as that lives, no sin will dye,
notwithstanding instructions or corrections. Sin may be brought to the place of
Execution, but it will not die, so long as unbelief brings it a protection; and
while it is backed by this, it will but laugh at all the means used to mortify
it. As faith quenches the fiery darts of the devil, so will unbeleef quench
the holy darts of the Spirit. The sin which is armed with it, will not be
wounded by the sword of the word; but will save its skin, much more its heart,
till faith set it naked to the strokes of that sword. Our neglect of, and
coldness in holy duties, comes from our not believing a benefit, that will
bear the charges of fervency and frequency in performing them. Unbelief clips
the wings of prayer, that it cannot ascend; and turns much praying into much
speaking. Whence is all our trouble, and impacience in adversity, but from want
of that grace which comforts the heart in God, and makes us quietly to rest and
trust on, and in him? Whence are those base indirect courses to get a living by
lying, deceiving, etc. to be made rich by a worse than the king of Sodom, but
from the not believing God to be an alsufficient portion, that he will never
leave or forsake us, etc? From what but unbelief proceed all the temporizings,
haltings, and sinful neutralities? In tentations to all these, faith is our
victory, and unbelief our defeat, which makes men unworthily to render
themselves prisoners to every promise, and threat; causing them either to have
two hearts with the hypocrite, or no heart with the coward. They who have
little faith, have much fear; and they who have no faith, Jer. 17.5.
will be all fear; even slain, and not by the sword. Whence proceeds all our
carnal confidence, and trusting in an arm of flesh, but from this sin, which
makes the heart depart from the Lord. Peccatum furti and homicidii sunt peccata
carnis, et facile intelliguntur in part superiore, anima scilicet and
intellectu: sed ipsa anima suum incomparabiliter majus vitium, et trabem in
oculo suo non sentit, sed festucam corporis facile videt. Luth. Trabenses
judicant festucenses. Id.
Whence come the unbrotherly breaches and divisions among brethren, but from
the distance which by unbeleef is between God and us; Christians being like
lines, which come the nearer to one another, as they come nearer to the Center
Unbelief lies at the bottom of all these sins. And all mortification of sin,
which comes not from a principle of affiance in God through Christ, is
imaginary. How short sighted are they into their misery, who are troubled for
their scandalous sins of drunkenness, adultery, murder, etc. but neither
observe, nor sorrow for their unbelief, the mother sin, the main sin, the
nursery of all sins? The soul (says Luther) is an hypocrite, that sees a mote
in the eye of the flesh, but not a beam in its own eye; namely, infidelity,
which is incomparably greater than all sins committed by the body.

3. Great is our forwardness to fall into the sin of unbeleef. Observat. 3.
God seemed to study the prevention of this sin among the Israelites, but it
broke the bars that he put in the way to stop it. Covenants, Oaths, Miracles,
Plagues, were all as easily snapt in sunder by this sin, as were the Cords by
Samson. Even Christ himself marvelled at the strength thereof, in opposing the
power of all he had said and done, Mark. 6.6. We are carried unto unbelief both
by the tide of our own natures, and the wind of tentation. Our hearts, ever
since we left God, crave and look for relief from sensible objects; and having
forsaken the true, embrace even any opinionative God or good, which has enough
to flatter into expectations, though nothing to fill, or to yield satisfaction.
And so great is our natural pride, that we had rather steal than beg, rather
rob God of glory by resting upon our own crutches, then go out of our selves to
depend upon another for happiness. The batteries of Satan are principally
placed against faith. He would not care for taking away our estates, names,
liberties, unless he hoped hereby to steal away our faith. He fans not out the
chafe, but bolts out the flour. Luke 22.32.
Satan (says Christ to Peter) has desired to winnow thee as wheat; but I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Satan's first siege in Paradise was
laid against the faith of threatenings. He knows that all our strength, like
Samsons in his Locks, is from laying hold upon another: If therefore he can
make us let go our hold, which is our faith, he desires no more. Faith is the
grace that properly refisteth him; and therefore he principally opposes it:
unbelief befriendeth Satan, and therefore he most promotes it in our hearts. Oh
that we might most fear and oppose that sin, which is most difficultly avoided,
and most dangerously entertained. Of all keepings, keep thy heart; and of all
means principally use this, of keeping out unbeleef.

4. Nothing more displeases God, Observe. 4.
than the forsaking of our own mercies. In the true loving of our selves, we
cannot provoke God. He is angry with Israel because they refuse that which
might make themselves happy. God loves to be giving, and is pleased with them
who are always taking in his goodness. Unbeleef obstructs mercy, and God
opposes unbeleef. He delights in them who hope in his mercy. He has such full
breasts, that he is most pained, when we will not draw them by believing. The
great complaint of Christ was, that people would not come to him for life. He
was grieved for the hardness of their hearts; and incensed against those
guests that would not come, when they were invited to the feast of his
Gospel-dainties. He is so abundant a good, that he wants nothing; or if he
does, he wants only wants. If he be angry with us, how should we be
displeased with our selves, for rejecting mercy? Its the proud and unbeleving
soul, which God only sends empty away. They who will buy his benefits, must
leave their money behind them. How inexcusable are they who perish! they starve
and dye in the midst of fullness. But alas, we are the poorest of beggars,
not only without bread, but without hunger. Oh beg that he who bestows
grace upon the desires, would first give us the grace of Desire.

5. Observat. 5. Nullum genus insipientiae, infidelitate insipientius. Bern. de
Consid.
None are such enemies to unbeleevers as themselves; nor is any folly so great
as Infidelity. The business and very design of unbelief, and all that it has
to do, is to stop mercy, and hinder happiness. Every step which an unbeleever
takes, is a departing from goodness it self, Heb. 3.12. And no wonder if such
an one carry a curse along with him, Jer. 17.5. and ( ver. 6.) if he be like
the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good comes. Unbelief is like
the unwary hand of him, who being without the door, pulls it too hard after him,
locks it, and locks himself out. Faith is the grace of receiving, and unbelief
the sin of rejecting all spiritual good. How vainly does the unbeliever expect
refreshment by going from the fountain; or gain, by leaving the true treasure?
Distrustful sinner! who is the looser by thy incredulity; and who would gain
by thy believing, but thy self? What harm is it to the cool and refreshing
fountain, that the weary passenger will not drink? and what benefit is it to
the fountain, though he should? What loses the Sun, if men will shut their
eyes against its light? what gains it, though they open them? What good comes
by distrusting God, unless the gratifying of Satan in the damning of thy self?
How foolish is that disobedience, that will not wash, and be cleansed from a
worse leprosy then Naaman's: that like a man in a swoun, shuts the teeth
against a life-recalling cordial: that will not open a beggars hand for the
receiving of a Jewel, more worth then all the world: that believes the Father
of lies, who cannot speak truth, unless it be to deceive; and will not trust
the God of truth, nay Truth it self, to whose nature lying is infinitely more
opposite, than to our good? O Unbeliever! either thou shall believe before thou
dyest, or not: if not, how scalding will be this ingredient, among the rest of
those hellish tortures which hereafter shall complete thy pain, to consider,
that offered, sincerely offered mercy was despised! that the promise of grace
and truth daily desired thy acceptance, but had nothing from thee but contempt!
That thou, who art now crying eternally and vainly for one drop, had lately
the offers and entreaties of the fountain, to satisfy thy self fully and for
ever! If thou should believe before thou die, how great a trouble to thy
heart holily ingenuous, will it be, that thou had so long together such
unkind thoughts of Mercy it self: that thou did deem Truth it self to be a
Liar! How angry will thou be with thy self, that thou did so slowly believe;
and so hardly were brought to be happy!

6. Observat. 6.
Our greatest dangers and troubles are no plea for unbelief. Notwithstanding
Israel's tentation, their unbelief was a provocation. A houling wilderness, and
dismal tidings excused them not from sin in distrusting of God. Even he who
hides his face from the house of Jacob, is to be waited for. When we sit in
darkness, and see no light, we should trust in the Lord, and stay our selves
upon our God. Faith goes not by feeling and seeing, but should go against
both: It must both believe what it sees not, and contrary to what it sees.
Psalm. 119.49, 114. Verbum fidei pabulum.
Not outward props, but the stability of the word of promise, should be the
stay of our Faith; a stud that ever stands, though heaven and earth should
fail. In thy word (says David) I do, and thou have caused me to hope. The
greatness of danger must not lessen Faith. Dangers are the element of Faith;
among them faith lives best, because among them it finds most promises. When
the world is most against us, then the word is most for us. Faith has best
food in famine, and the fullest table in a time of scarcity. The very earth
which we tread on should teach us; this so massy a body, hangs in the midst
of the air, and never stirs from its place, having no props or shores to
uphold it, but the bare word of God alone. Cum rogo te nummes fine pignore, non
habeo, inquis: Idem si pro me spondet agellus, habes. Quod mihi non credis,
veteri fidoque sodali; Credis coliculis arboribusque meis. Mart. Ep. 25. l. 12.
Fides non habet meritum, ubi ratio humana praebet experimentum, Gregin Evang.
God must be trusted upon his promise without a pawn. An usurer will trust a
beggar, a liar, a bankrout, for his pledge. And shall we believe God no further?
this is not at all to trust him, but his security. It is a lame faith that
cannot go without crutches. He that cannot stand when his stilts are taken
away, was held up by them, not by his legs. He whose faith keeps not up when
outward comforts are removed, stood not upon the promise, but upon earthly
props. The faith which Christ commends, is that which believes much, and sees
nothing. Blessed (says Christ) are they who have not seen, and yet have
believed. This was the Commendation of Abraham's and Stevens faith, Romans 4.18,
19, 20. Act. 7.5. Such a faith quiets the heart most, in testimony of its own
sincerity, and against expectation of any threatened, and in the sustaining of
any incumbent difficulties. Oh how sweet a life leads that Christian, who does
all by another! who gets the blessing without hunting; and whose only work is
to sit still and trust God; and (like Joseph's Master) to leave all in the hand
of another; to have all its comforts compendiously from one object, and not to
take a wearysome circuit about the whole world for contentment; to sit at his
fathers table, and not to beg for food from door to door? And such a faith
honors God as much as it quiets the soul. It proclaims that God is (...), to
be believed for himself; it desires not that the creature should be bound for
God, though he seem never so backward to perform his promise, and accounts it
self as rich in respect of what it has in hope, as what it has in hand. Yea,
in the enjoyment of comforts, it places its trust only in God; and if God does
not withdraw created props from it, yet it will withdraw its confidence from
them; using them, indeed, in thank fullness to the giver; not trusting them in
stead of the giver. O noble, glorious life of believing! to draw our comforts
thus out of the bosom of God himself; not to be beholding to the dunghill for
our delights; not to live (with worldly men) upon mud and corruption, but upon
the pure and heavenly breathings of the spirit in the promise. A life emulating
that of the Angels; for though indeed, believers use the world, feed, and
sleep, marry, and are given in marriage, yet they only enjoy God, and their
better part is wholly sollaced with him that shall suffice them in glory.

7. Observat. 7.
It should be our principal care to get believing hearts. Even such an holy
affiance in the promises, as may shelter from that destruction which befell
these unbeleeving Israelites. To this end,

1. Truly, and upon the terms of the Gospel, wholly and solely accept of him,
who is the Mediator of the Covenant, and through whom alone, every promise in
it, is made good to the soul, and is yea and amen. 2 Cor. 1.20.
Out of Christ, promises are but mere speculations; nor can we, unless united
to him by faith, challenge any blessing by virtue of a promise. A Christlesse
person receives blessings, as one that finds a piece of silver accidentally in
the streets, and not as a man who receives a sum of money due upon covenant.

2. In relation to the promises to be believed, which are the element wherein
faith lives, 1. Find them out, and lay them ready: find out a promise suitable
to every exigency of thy condition. How can a man claim money upon a covenant,
who knows not where that distinct bond is laid, upon which he is to demand it?
Go to the several promises for the supply of thy several wants. Mark what
promises God has made for pardon, grace, direction, protection, provision, and
ever make choice of some one or two of every kind, which thou may run to with
speed. A Christian should do in this case with the promises, as one which is
given to fainting fits, who carries his aqua-vitae bottle always about him,
and sets it constantly at his beds head, that it may be at hand. 2. Ponder the
promises: Go aside, separate thy self, suck and hide their sweetness, dwell
upon them. Dive in thy meditations into their freeness; Consider that promise
has made God a debtor, and freegrace made him a promiser: Into their fullness;
there being enough to relieve the largest capacity, and gretest necessity; they
having more oil then thou have vessels; even enough to be revealed from faith
to faith: Romans 17.
Into their stability; they being bottomed upon Truth and Strength it self,
the strength of Israel who cannot lie; as sure as Gods own essence, which is
pawned by an oath for their accomplishment, (for he swears by himself;) they
being further confirmed by the death of him, who has bequeathed all the
benefits of the promises by his will and testament; in which respect they are
the sure mercies of David. 3. Be convinced by the promises, to see the whole
heart and meaning of God in them, (...) Heb. 11.1. significat (...),
convincere, and causam aliquam eo deducere, ut objici aut praetexi nihil
amplius queat. Hyper.
and to be under the authority and evidence of them. Faith is an evidence,
conviction, or a convincing demonstration: Laban, when he saw how matters stood
between the servants message, and the affection of Rebeccah, said, The thing
proceeds from the Lord, we cannot speak bad or good, Genesis 24.50. The Lord
having brought thee under the condition of the promise, and since thou can
not deny but that the promise has a stable foundation, say, Lord, I must needs
yield, I am unable to gainsay thee, I confess my self overcome. 4. Consent,
cleave to, clasp about the promises, Isai. 1.9.
as the ivy about the oak; roll thy soul, and rely upon it; concur with it,
and be carried down the stream of it, against the motion of thine own
rebelling heart. As Rebeccah, convinced that the marriage was from God, being
called to speak, answered, I will go. 5. Plead the promises: In tentation and
sense of unworthiness, strong unlikelyhood of making them good may be
represented to thee, but even then cling to them closely. The woman of Canaan
would not be put off by silence, and vilifying terms; she was called a dog,
yet she held close to the word, that Christ was the Son of David; happy she,
that in this, she was like a dog, namely, in that she would not be beaten off.
2 Chronicles. 20.9
Thus Jehoshaphat pleaded with God by the promise made to Solomon, and so
prevailed against the children of Ammon.

3. Beware of giving way to the love of any one sin. The love of sin hinders
believing. Sin will not act beleevingly, nor faith sinfully. Its the nature of
sin to cause guilt and fear, it expects not performances, but repulses from
God. How can any one depend upon me for a courtesy, who knows that I am
acquainted with his underhand and unkind contrivances against me? Besides, the
love of any one sin, hinders from yiedling to the terms of the promise; it
would be loose, and yet have God bound; whereas he never made his promises to
gratify lust, but to engage us to holiness. Nor will faith act sinfully.
Faith embraces the whole word of God, even precepts as well as promises, and
respects the rules prescribed, as well as the rewards promised; it works
uniformly, and it trusts to God in the way of his commands, not in the
precipices of sin; Trust in him, and do good, Psalm. 31.3. Besides, it acts
warily, and in the eye of God, and therefore holily, and tells us, that if we
must not tell a lie to promote Gods cause, much less to procure our own
comforts.

4. Limit not Good for the way of accomplishing of his promise. This is the
noted sin of Israel; Psalm. 78.41.
They limited the holy one of Israel; they circumscribed him for the way of
bestowing of mercy, Dcum metiri suo modulo. Call. in loc.
within the narrow bounds of their own apprehensions. Whereas, if he will
work, who shall hinder him? Faith triumphs over difficulties, and measures not
God by the narrow scantling of reason; knowing that things that are impossible
with us, Romans 4.19.
are easy with God. This was the excellency of Abraham's so much commended
faith, that he considered neither the improbability of performing the promise
of having a son when his body and Sarahs womb were both dead, Heb. 11.17.
nor the incongruity of performing the command of sacrificing his son, which
seemed to destroy both Gods faithfulness and his own expectations. And this
is indeed the duty of believers, only to consider who promises, and who
commands, and neither to question what is promised, though never so impossible;
nor to forbear what is commanded, though never so unpleasing.

5. When God affords thee creature-props, trust not to them. Men would never be
distrustful when the creature departs, if they did not confide in it, when it
stays. If we would not account our selves the stronger for having worldly
helps, we should not esteem our selves the weaker for the wanting them. Could
we live upon God alone in the use, we might live upon him alone in the loss
of the creature. Its a noble faith that depends upon God in the strength of
means; like that of Asa and Jehoshaphat, the former of whom having an army of
five hundred and fourscore thousand to rest upon, 2 Chronicles. 14.8.11. 2 Chronicles.
17.14, 15 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
when Zerah the Ethiopian came against him, adventured not upon so feeble a
crutch, but expresses himself thus in his prayer: Lord, we have no power, and
we rest on thee: and the later, when his enemies made war upon him, though he
had an army of eleven hundred and threescore thousand fighting men, professing
thus: Lord, we have no might, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon
thee. He who will account God to be all, when the creature is at the best and
fullest, will surely account him so, when the creature proclaims its
nothingnesse.

6. Trust God in the serving of his providence, and in the use of such means as
he has appointed and sanctified: He that will not do for himself what he can,
may not trust that God should do for him what he would: Though man lives not
by bread alone, but by the word (of blessing) which proceeds out of the mouth
of God, yet that word is by God annexed unto bread, not to stones; and that man
shall not trust God, but tempt him, In viis custodiet, nun quid in
praecipitiis? Bern. ser. 14. in Psalm. Qui hab.
who should expect to have stones turned into bread. If God has provided
stairs, it is not faith, but fury, to go down by a precipice; thus David's
trusting in the name of the Lord, made him not to throw away his sling when he
went against Goliath. Jacobs supplicating of God, made him not neglect the
sending a present to his brother: The fast of Esther made her not forget to
feast the king: second causes are to be used in obedience to Gods order, not in
confidence of their own help; the creature must be the object of our diligence,
though not of our trust. Faith, while it causes us to be so diligent in the
use of means as if God did nothing for us, causes us so to withdraw our trust
from the means, as if God were to do all for us. He who in observing the other
rules, has also added this, may quietly rest upon God for promised mercy, lay
the matter before God, and humbly put him to the accomplishing part.

VER. 6. And the Angls which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day.
IN this second example of Gods severity, which was expressed against the fallen
Angels, these two parts are contained.

1. The revolt and defection of the Angels. 2. The ruin and downfall of the
Angels.
I. In the first, these three particulars are principally considerable.

1. By whom this defection was made. 2. From what this defection was made. 3.
Wherein this defection was made.
1. It was made by the Angels. 2. It was from their first estate, and their
own habitation. 3. It was 1. in not keeping the former, and 2. In leaving the
later.
II. In the second, are considerable these two parts.

1. The punishment which now they undergo in the prison; they being in that,
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness. 2. The punishment which shall
hereafter be laid upon them at, and after their appearing at the bar. They
being reserved, etc. unto the judgment of the great day.
In the former, their punishment of the prison is twofold.

1. Reservation in everlasting chains. 2. Under darkness.
In the later, their punishment is considerable, 1. In that to which they shall
be brought, viz to judgment. 2. In the time when they shall be brought to
judgment, viz. at the great day.


I begin with the first part, Part 1.
their defection and revolt; and therein I consider, 1. The persons by whom
this defection was made, viz. the Angels.

EXPLICATION.
The word (...), Angels, Angelorum nomen sacrae scrip turae peculiare: prafani
Scriptores Graeci per vocem (...), Latini Geniorum, fere exprimunt. Synop. pur.
theol. disp. 12. p. 117.
is a term peculiar to the Scripture; profane Writers among the Grecians,
express them by the word (...), and those among the Latin, by the word Genii.
It properly is a word which intends the office of angels, and signifies no
more than messengers, or those who are sent at the command, and by the
commission of their superiors. And yet it comprehends and recalls to mind the
essence of Angels, which is considerable before the office, and without which
the office is but a mere notion. Briefly therefore for the explaining thereof,
I shall consider, 1. The nature and essence. 2. The office and employment of
Angels.

1. For their essence: Angels are spiritual and incorporeall creatures,
subsisting by themselves. 1. By the name of spirits the Scripture uses to
express the essence and nature of angels: Nomen spiritus nomen est naturae.
Aug. (...) Psalm. 104.4. Heb. 1.14.
and its used both to denote good and bad angels: of the former its said, he
makes his angels spirits; a place cited in the New Testament, Heb. 1.14. Of
the later, 1 Kings 22.21, 22. its said, There came forth a spirit to persuade
Ahab to go to Ramoth Gilead; Who afterward proved a lying spirit in the mouth
of all his Prophets. And Mat. 8.16. when they brought to Christ many who were
possessed with devils, the Evangelist immediately subjoyns, that he cast out
the spirits with his word. And our Savior plainly expresses that such persons
who have not flesh and bones (and such are angels) are spirits, Luke 24.39. Nor
is it imaginable but that those are spirits, of whom a legion, that is, at
least six thousand (according to Hierom) may be in one man; but this is clearly
asserted concerning the devils, or evil angels, Luke 8.30. Where its added,
that many devils were entered into the man. Nor can any but spirits get entrance
into bodies, without moving or hurting them, and into prisons and other places,
when closely shut up and most narrowly watched. It Is true, angels have often
appeared in humane bodies and shapes. The Son of God, before his incarnation,
as also the holy Ghost afterward, did so; and yet it follows not hence, that
their essence is corporeal; as neither can it be evinced, that souls are
corporeal, because Moses appeared to the Disciples in an outward shape. These
their bodies might either be such only in show and appearance, or if they were
true bodies, they were only joined to them for a time by Gods power, and
afterward resolved again into their own principles, as also were their
garments, which the angels did wear, while they conversed with men. And whereas
Tertul. lib. de carne Christi et contra Praxeam. Aug. de Trin. lib. 2. c 7.
lib. 3 c. 1. De div. Daem. cap. 3 5. l. 15 c. 23. de Civ. Dei. Bern. ser. 5. in
Cant. Angeli compa ratione nostrorum corporum, sunt spiritus; sed comparatione
summi et incircumscripti Spiritus, sunt cor pora. Greg. Mor. l. 2. c. 2. Angeli
non sunt absolute simplices: compouuntur ex actu and potentia, ex subjecto and
accid eutibus, ex esse and essentia. Polan. Syn^ag. 1779. page
sundry of the Fathers have asserted, that the angels are corporeal, and have
bodies of their own; they are to be understood commonly as speaking of them in
comparison of God, as if though being compared with us, they are spirits; yet
compared with God, they are bodies.

And certain it is, that angels are not spirits purely and altogether simple,
as God is, who only is that most simple Spirit; and yet its conceived by
learned Zanchy, that their bodies are more refined, subtle, and pure than
either bodies aeriall, or celestial, which were created out of the first
matter, and that the substance of the bodies of the angels is very like to the
substance of the heavens of the blessed, or the Empyrean, wherein (he says)
they were created, and which are of a corporeal substance, but far more
excellent for their purity, than the other heavens. From this spiritual nature
of the angels, flows their immortality, incorruptibility, or immutability; for
since they are immateriall, and free from all contrary qualities (composition
of matter and form, and the contrariety of qualities being the causes of
intrinsecall corruption) they are rightly termed incorruptible. Indeed, only
God is simply immutable, who is a being of himself, and not by participation,
and every creature is mortal, mutable, (...).
and may be brought to nothing, by him who made it of nothing, should he only
withdraw his sustaining power. Easi in angelorum naturg null la proprie est
potentia passiva, propter quam possunt dici corruptibiles; propter potentiam
tamen Dei activam, a qua illorum esse dependet, simpliciter dici
incorruptibiles non possunt. Zanc. de op. Dei.
But a thing may be said to be mortal and corruptible two ways, either by a
passive power which is in it self, or by an active power which is in another,
and upon whom it depends; now although in the nature of angels there be no
passive power whereby they are corruptible; yet in respect of the active power
of God, upon which their being depends, they cannot simply be termed
incorruptible, because if God withdraw his power, they would instantly perish,
though denomination being from the nearest and internal cause, they may
properly be called incorruptible. 2. Angels are true subsistences, or
substances by themselves and separately subsisting. The Sadduces of old, and
the Libertines of later ages, have held that angels are only certain
inspirations, motions, and inclinations of the mind; and that the good of these
are the good angels, and the bad of these the bad angels. But that they are
Vera (...), that they are substances, and truly subsist by themselves, is most
clearly evinced, 1. From their creation: Accidentia sunt concreata. Psalm. 104.
Actiones sunt suppositorum.
God created no accidents separately from their sustances; accidents were
concreated in and with their substances. But angels were created by themselves,
and not in any subject. 2. From their actions; they praise God, they worship
the Son; they are heavenly messengers, they assume bodies, defend the
faithful, they have wrastled, eaten, been received as strangers, had their
feet washed, etc. they shall gather the Elect from the four corners of the
earth, they shall come with Christ to judgment; none of which actions could be
done, unless they were substances. 3. From their endowments; they have life,
power, understanding, wisdom; they are immortal, they are excelling in
strength; some things they know not, as the day of judgment. Some of them
sinned, others abide in the truth. 4. From their happiness and misery: Some of
them behold the face of God, and are blessed and glorious; Mat. 18.10. Mat.
25.41. Mar. 12.25.
others are punished in everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels. 5. From that likeness which we shall have to them in heaven, where we
shall be as the Angels: Shall we there cease to be true substances? This for
their Essence.

2. The consideration of the Office of angels, follows, and this the word
Angels properly denotes, Angelus nomen officii, spiritus naturae. Aug. in Psalm.
104. Luke 7.24. (...), Nuncii, legati. Mat. 11.10 (...). Ex co quod est,
spiritus est: ex eo quod agit, angelus est. Aug. ubi sup. Mal. 3.1. Dan. 4.17.
which is not a word expressing the nature, but the office of angels; and the
words both in the Hebrew and Greek intend the same; they importing messengers,
or such as are sent. The word Angels or messengers, is applied in Scripture
both to good and bad angels. 1. To good angels most frequently, who are those
ministering spirits, spoken of Heb. 1.14. and are in Scripture more commonly
called by a name of office, than of nature, because God delights in their
service, and they themselves are more glad of obeying God, than of their very
being. In regard of office, that Christ himself accepted the name, and is
called the Angel of the Covenant. They are by God, sent forth for the good of
his people. Hence they are called watchers, ministering spirits, etc. And for
those who shall be the heirs of salvation, they minister three ways.

1. In their life: 1. By defending them from their enemies. Their angels (says
Christ) always behold the face of my Father. Matt. 18.10. Apoc. 12.7. 2 Kin.
6.16. Psalm. 91.11. Dan. 10.20. Psalm. 34.7. Isai. 37.36. Act. 12.23.
Michael and his angels fought in defense of the Church; and the prophet Elisha
spoke of the angels, when he told his fearful servant that there were more
with them then against them. The angels of the Lord pitch their tents about
them that fear him. An angel it was that slew the army of the Assyrians; that
delivered Peter out of prison; as also preserved Lot. 2. By comforting them.
Thus an angel encouraged Jacob, Genesis 32.5
when he feared his brother Esau; an angel it was, who bid Mary not to fear,
Luke 1.30. and who stood by Paul, and bid him be of good cheer, Act. 27.24.
when Daniel had fasted an prayed, and angel it was who said, O Daniel, greatly
beloved, etc. And afterward, fear not. Dan. 9.13. and 10.19 Luke 22.43. Mat.
28.5.
The women at the sepulcher meet with an angel, who comforted them. Yea an
angel appeared unto Christ and strengthened him. The servant comforted the
master. 3. By inciting and stirring them up to holiness, and in furthering
their salvation: they suggest nothing but what is agreeable to the will of God;
they can no more suggest a doctrine contrary to that which is revealed in the
Scripture, Gal. 1.8. Rev. 22.16. Act. 7.53. Gal. 3.19. Luke 1.31. Act. 1.11.
Rev. 19.10. Act. 8.26. Act. 10.5. Act. 12.7.
than they can be accursed; The law was revealed by the disposition of angels,
in respect of their service and attendance in the giving thereof: by an angel
was the incarnation of Christ foretold to the virgin, and by a multitude of
angels was it proclaimed afterward. These instruct the Apostles concerning the
coming of Christ to judgment, and forbid the worshipping of themselves as
idolatrous. An Angel leads Philip to expound the Scripture to the Eunuch; sets
Peter at liberty to preach the Gospel; bids Cornelius send for Peter, to be
instructed by him; Act. 16.9.
and prays Paul to come over to Macedonia to help them, namely, by preaching
the Gospel.

2. In, and after their death. An angel strengthened Christ when he was in his
great heaviness of soul. Angels conveyed the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's
bosom: Luke 16.22.
he who living, was licked by dogs, is, now dead, attended by angels. The
glorious angels are as forward to carry the souls of the faithful to heaven,
as every one is to share in the bearing the body of a great prince to the
grave. The good angels in this work of conveying souls, are thought to watch,
for prevention of the bad, who always seek to devour the Saints, living and
dying. At the end of the world the angels shall be the glorious attendants of
the great Judge; shall cite all to appear, and shall separate between the good
and the bad; gathering the elect from the four winds, Mat. 24.31.
from one end of the heaven to the other, so that there shall not one be lost.

2. The term Angels or Messengers, is also in Scripture bestowed upon the
wicked and unclean spirits. Thus its said, Diodat. Annot. Psalm. 78.49. 1 Cor.
6.3.
that God sent evil angels among the Egyptians; and of this the Apostle speaks
in that Scripture, Know ye not that we shall judge the angels? and 2 Pet. 2.4.
He spared not the angels that sinned. And these evil angels are employed; 1. In
exercising the faithful with tentations, which God always turns to their
good; Job. 1. Luke 22.31.
these angels stir up terrors against the faithful inwardly, and troubles
outwardly: Satan sent his messenger to buffet Paul. 2 Cor. 12.7 Apoc. 2.10.
He casts the faithful into prison. He casts his fiery darts, sometime
tempting and alluring, at other times, affrighting and dismaying. 2. In being
the executioners of Gods displeasure against the wicked, whom for their
wickedness, 2 Cor. 4.4. Gal. 3.1
God delivers up to these wicked angels, to blind, harden, and bewitch them
with sin, and then to drive them to despair for sin; Satan imployes them as
slaves in the basest of work, and rewards them as slaves, with the smartest of
stripes; often in this life, as in the case of Saul and Judas, and Abimilech;
always after it, both by dragging away those souls to punishment who have
followed him in sin; and by being a tormentor afterward of those, of whom first
he was the tempter.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observe. 1.
How glorious a majesty is the God of Angels! If the lowest of earthly
creatures, if a spire of grass, a worm, an ant, speak his wisdom and power,
how much more do those glorious spirits, who excel in strength and
understanding! How pure and simple a being, is that God, who is the father of
all these spirits, How glorious he whom angels adore, and before whom
principalities fall down! How strong is he, who with one word of his mouth,
made so many thousands of those angels, one of whom overthrew an hundred
fourscore and five thousand men in one night! How wise he, who is the father of
all that light which angels have, and which is but one ray of his sun!
Infinitely greater is the disproportion between one God, and all the angels,
than between all those glorious hosts and the least ant upon the molehill. How
can that king of glory want forces, who has such a militia, so many thousands
of such Chariots to ride upon, Psalm. 68.7.
such a heavenly host as all the millions of angels! Wonder, O man, that this
Majesty, who is furnished with the attendance of angels, should accept of the
services of worms. That he, the beholding of whose face is the heaven of those
blessed spirits, and who has their beuties constantly before him, to look
upon, and the sweetness of the exactly skillful and melodious music of a
consort, a chore of angels to delight him; that this God should accept of the
chatterings of cranes, the blackness of Ethiopians, the stammerings, the
lispings of infants, the jarrings of our poor broken instruments, the bungling
services of which, even poor we our selves are ashamed. What a word of
condescension is that of Cant. 2.14. Let me see thy countenance, let me hear
thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely; and Joh.
4.23. The father seeks such to worship him. Lord! thou do not seek thus,
because thou want servants, but because we want work; not because thou art
defective in attendants, but abundant in grace and rewards, and delighted with
that of thy self, which thou see, wherever thou find it.

2. How highly advanced is he who is God and man! Observat. 2.
The excellency of angels speaks the greater excellency of him, who is above
all principalities, and power, Ephesians. 1.21. Phil. 2.9.
and might, and dominion, who has a name above every name, Heb. 1.4, 6.1 Pet.
3.23.
who is made better than the angels, whom all the angels are to worship, and
unto whom angels, and authorities, Mat. 4.11.
and powers, are made subject. When Christ was upon earth, the angels were his
ministers: angels proclaimed his entrance into the world. Yea, not only at his
incarnation, but tentations, resurrection, ascension, angels attend him, serve
him, woship him. Our King has not a guard of men, as the great princes of the
earth, but a guard of princes; and not of princes only, but even of
principalities and powers. Christ is the Lord of the holy angels. Exodus 25.20.
The eyes of the Cherubims are fixed upon the Mercy-seat, the angels look upon
Christ as their Master, expecting his commands. The vail of the tabernacle
which covered the most holy, Exodus 26.31.
(expressly signifying the flesh of Christ, which hiding his divinity, made way
for us to heaven) was made of broydered work with Cherubims; there being hereby
noted unto us, the service which the angels give to Christ as man. They are
called, Mat. 16.27. the angels of the Son of man. Christ took not upon him the
nature of angels, and yet they undertake the service of Christ. Blush, O man,
that angels should obey him, and that thou should rebel against him. Oh,
since he is come to his own, let them receive him. Let not Christ suffer for
his condescension. If submission to Christ, be the grace of angels, contempt of
Christ is the sin of devils. Oh kiss the Son, subject your selves to him, and
so stoop to your own blessedness. And take heed of disgraceing that nature by
sin, and of making it lower than devils, which Christ has advanced above
Angels.

3. Observat. 3. Psalm. 8.3.
How much below angels is poor mortal man! When David saw the Moon and Stars,
he had selfe-debasing thoughts; how much more should we, when we contemplate
angelical excellency! Angelus, si cum anima rationali comparetur, dici potest
anima perfecta, quemadmodum and a nima dici potest angelus imperfectus. Angelus
est integr a perfectaque substantia spiritualis; anima human a dimidiata and
imperfecta, quia est forma corporis ac pars hominis. Angelus est totus
spiritus; homo partim spiritus, partim caro, vel partim Angelus, partim bestia.
Bell. de ascensione grad. nov.
Even the best part of man, his soul, is lower then angels. An angel is a
perfect soul, and a soul but an imperfect angel, for the angel is an entire,
perfect, spiritual substance, but the soul is a spirit but imperfectly, and by
halfs, because it is the form of the earthly body, and hereby a part of a man.
An angel is all spirit; man part spirit, and part flesh: partly like an angel,
and partly like a beast; an angel is all gold; a man partly gold, partly clay.
How childish, yea brutish and dull is our understanding, in comparison of that
of angels! What great pains does man take for a little knowledge, how is he
beholding for it to his senses, and discouse from the effects, to their causes;
and after all industry, how doubtful, superficial, and staggering is he in his
apprehensions! but angels behold things with one view, at once discern things,
both effects and causes, and pierce into the substance as well as the accidents
of things. As much difference between the knowledge of men and of angels, as
there is between the sight of an Owl and an Eagle; an illumined Doctor, and a
sucking child. How weak and impotent are the operations of the soul of man in
comparison of those of an angel! the soul by the command of its will, can only
move its own body; and that too, how slowly, how creepingly, and with what a
dull progressivenesse, upon the dunghill of this earth! nor can it bear up this
upon the water, in the air, and carry it whithersoever it will; whereas these
spirits, with their alone force, can carry vast and heavy bodies upward, and
whither they please. One angel wants no weapons, nay no hands to destroy a
whole army. How far below the angels are we in habitation! The poorest
pigeonhole is not so much inferior to the ivory palaces of Solomon, or the
blackest underground dungeon to the most magnificent mansions of a king as is
man's habitation to that of the angels. How glorious is that court which is
adorned with the presence of the King of glory; and how blessed those
attendants which ever behold his face therein! Poor man has no better lodging
for his noble, heaven-born soul, than a cottage of clay, and that too so frail
and crazy, as were it not once or twice every day daubed over, it would fall
about his ears; and whethersoever he goes he is forced to carry, to drag this
clog, this clay, this chain with him: whereas angels, free from the shackels
of flesh, can move from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven, even as swiftly
as can our very thoughs! Poor man! will thou yet be proud? Oh that we were as
low in heart as in condition. How uncomely a garment is pride, for those who
embrace the dunghill, when the glorious angels are clothed with humility! But
alas, as the height of heaven cannot make an angel proud, so neither can the
lowness of earth, no not of hell, make sinners humble. Oh that we might only
have high thoughts of that condition, Luke 20.36.
wherein we shall be equal to the angels. Lord, though I beg that I may be
more thankful for the metcies which I enjoy, than dejected for the troubles
which I endure in this life; (...).
yet grant, till I come to be like the angels in the full enjoyment of thy
self, that about the sweetest of earthly comforts, I may rather be employed
with patience, than delight.

5. Observe. 4.
Angelical services require proportionable abilities As angels excel in
forwardness, so in sufficiency* to be Gods messengers; they are wise, strong,
swift. Provide thou (said God, when he directed Moses what Officers to choose
for public employment) out of all the people, Exodus 18.21.
able men, such as fear God, men of truth, etc. not favor, money, seniority,
etc. but grace, wisdom, and courage must advance men unto rule: A steed is not
commended for prancing and trappings, but for swiftness, and holding out;
officers in Church and State are not for sight, but for service. We judge not of
a pillar by its beauty, but its strength. Should the pillars of a building be
all gilded and adorned, yet if within they were rotten and crazy, we should
fear to abide within that building. Its better to be under a zealous faithful
John Baptist, though his raiment be hair and leather; than under a silken
Diotrephes, who is all for pre-eminence, nothing for performance. Oh with what
unworthy trash and rubbish have we, and still do we put off the gerat King! In
prelaticall times, he that could but sing, and cross, and cringe; and since,
he that can but make a noise, and has but boldness enough for an hour, was,
and is sufficient for that work which requires the abilities of an angel. Mal.
1.14.
Cursed be that deceiver, who has a male in his flock, and sacrifices to the
Lord a corrupt thing. And what but curses from God and man those will meet
withal, by whose means such corrupt and contemptible services are offered to
the great King, I do not understand. Is thy lame, thy sickly, thy dullest
child, the refuse of all thy number, good enough to make a Minister? Had Achish
no need of mad men, and has God need of Idiots?

5. Angelical abilities require proportionable services. Observat. 5.
Angels excel in sufficiency, and they likewise excel in forwardness to be
Gods messengers. They are wise, strong, swift; but they think not their best
and greatest gifts too good, too great for him that is the best and greatest.
God expects his tribute out of all our receipts, and they should be all for him,
as they are all from him; Luke 12.48.
Where much is given, much again is required. They who are full, should be
free, and pour out to others. We must return as we have received. They who
have received the endowments of angels, should return their employments. He who
has ability to do better than others, and yet is but equal to them, does
therefore worse, because he does not better. How unworthily do those deal with
God, who are angels for taking in, and yet, below the very brutes for laying
out of their abilities! even the very Oxen are strong to labor. How bad, how
hard a master is God proclaimed, by such servants, who can, but will not work!
How little is the place, the age wherein they live, beholding to them! David
served his generation, and then fell asleep; but these fall asleep while they
should be serving their generation, and rest from their labors, even before
they are dead. How just with God is it that these who will not give God the
interest, should forfeit the principal! and that they who will not use, should
lose what God has given them! Gifts will not be augmented, unless acted; nay,
how frequently, but sadly, have I observed, that they who have been even angels
for their abilities; have by sloth and sensuality grown even below men, and
lost the edg and smartnesse of all their parts; and like unsavory salt, been
good for nothing but the dunghill!

6. Observe. 6.
Greatly is that God to be feared who has all the angels at his command.
Sinners are never safe when most securely sinning. If God speaks the word,
angels will execute his pleasure upon them. Who dares to provoke a General,
that is in the head of a puissant army! The heavenly hosts do but wait for the
word, to destroy the enemies of their Master, and Commander in chief. An angel
smote proud Herod, who robbed God of his glory. How foolishly-bold is that
sinner, who thinks to prevail against God by rebellion! The best policy is for
us to cast down the weapons of sin, and to make him our friend in Christ, who
is the Lord of all those glorious hosts; and if a King should consider whither
he be able with ten thousand, to meet another King coming with twenty, how
should we consider whether our hearts can be strong in contending with that
God, between whom and us, there is an infinite disproportion, and as we are
sinners, an infinite opposition.

7. Observe. 7. Psalm. 34.7.
Gods people are always safe. The angel of the Lord pitcheth his tents about
them that fear him. None are so nobly attended as Saints; they have a
lifeguard of angels to encompasse them about: Angels are as careful of the
faithful, as a nurse of her sucking child; they bear them up in their arms,
that they dash not their feet against a stone. Psalm. 91.11.
God at the birth of the faithful, puts them (as it were) out to these to
tend; and at their death, he makes these nurses to bring home his children
again. They keep them from receiving hurt from others, and offering hurt to
themselves. The faithful are not to be judged by what we see of their danger,
but what we read of their safety. Could they but open the eyes of their faith,
they might see the mount ains full of horses and Chariots in all dangers, and
more with them then against them.

8. Observat. 8.
Its our duty to take the care of those who are below us. None can be so much
under us, as we are under angels. If those heavenly spirits attend upon a lump
of earth, how regardfull should we be one of another, Heb. 13.3. Isai. 58.7.
as being in the body! How unsuitable is it to hide our eyes from our own flesh!
The angels are not ashamed to serve us though we smell of the earth, and the
dungeon; and do more condescend, than a Prince in attending upon a man full of
sores and vermin; Romans 12.16.
let us condescend to men of low estate; and account no work too low for us,
but sin.

9. The higher the privileges are which any abuse, Observe. ult. Psalm. 103.20.
Mat. 12.29. Rev. 10.1. 2 Kin. 19.35. 2 Chronicles. 6.17. Psalm. 68.17. Psalm. 14.20.
Dan. 8.16. and 10.14.
the greater shall be the punishment for abusing them. Angels were creatures
placed in the highest form of the Creation; for their nature, they are spirits;
for their dignity, they are principalities and powers; for their employment,
the messengers of the most high; in strength they excel; the Devil is called
the strong one. Angels can break iron chains, open prison doors, and iron
gates; one can destroy whole armies. They are the hosts of heaven, Gods
militia, his chariots. For their wisdom, they are termed by Philosophers
Demons and Intelligences; admitable is their knowledge, natural,
experimental, revealed. The widow of Tekoah told David, that he was wise
according to the wisdom of an angel of God, 1 Samuel 29.9. 2 Samuel 19.27.
to know all things on the earth. And when the Scripture attributes the highest
praise to inferior creatures, the comparisons are borrowed from the angels.
The king of Tyrus is called an anointed Cherub. Ezekiel. 28.14. Mat. 11.10. Rev.
2.1. Act. 6.15. Videtur haec apud Judeos, pa. raemialis locutio. Lorin. in Act.
6. Psalm. 78.25.
The most eminent among men are called angels. David admiring man's glory,
breaks forth thus, Thou have made him little lower than the angels. They saw
the face of Stephen, as if it had been the face of an angel. If I speak (says
Paul) with the tongues of angels. If they had tongues, they would speak
incomparably better than the most eloquent Orator. Man did eat angels food.
But the higher the created excellencies of angels were, the lower did sin pull
them down. Sin will make one who is an angel for perfections and privileges,
to become a devil for impiety and punishment. If an angel sins, he makes
himself a devil; if he falls, he falls as low as hell. The more accomplished
any one is, with abilities, when that is wanting which should sanctify and
season them, the more destructive their abilities become to themselves and
others. The better the weapon is, which a mad man holds, the more dangerous is
his company. Nothing more precious and beneficial than an Uuicorns horn in the
Apothecaries shop, but nothing more deadly than it, when used by the fierce
creature to wound men. None have done the Church of God so much hurt, or
tempted so many to sin, as some whom we may call fallen angels; who, by their
places, were the Lords messengers, and for their knowledge, as the woman of
Tekoah said of David, 1 Samuel 14.17. Ingenium Galbaemale habitat.
like an angel of God. Great pity that their abilities had so bad a lodging;
and that either their heads should be so good, or their hearts no better. Whom
has the devil made use of in all ages for Heresiarcks, and ringleaders into
heresy and profaneness, but fallen angels, Popes, Popish prelates, Jesuits, and
men reputed, at least for subtilty, and often for piety. But the eminency of
their abused parts and places, Non datur sal salis; ejus deperdita vis non
potest restitui.
makes a dismal addition to their wretchedness. None has God left to fall so
irrecoverably; nor is the lost savor of this salt, again to be restored; for
what salt is there that shall season unsavory salt? Nor has God spared to
throw some of them (the popish Apostates) already on a dunghill of disgrace,
and made them trampled on by all: and without repentance, the present seducers
must look for the same reward. In a public Minister of Church or State,
smallest sins are abominations, blasphemies. God will be sanctified in those
who draw near to him in any eminency of employment. If a Princeh ave servants
in places remote from his person, he looks they should not disgrace him by
their carriage; but if they wait upon him at his table, then he expects more
exactness of deportment from them. God looks for holiness in all his
servants; but most of all in his angels. Those whom he prefers to places of
ministry and nearest service about himself.

The second particular considerable in the revolt of the angels is, from what
they made their defection.

1. From their first estate.

2. From their own habitation.

EXPLICATION.
1. For the Explication of the former.

These words first estate, are in the Greek contained in one word, (...),
Augusti principium clade variana memorabile factum. Suet. in Octav. In Graeco,
principii vocabulum, quod est (...), non tantum ordinati^ vum, sed and
potestativu^^ capit principatum: unde and (...) dicunt Principes and
Magistratus. Tert. advers. Hermog. Sunt quidem adhue inter Angelos malos (...),
Ephesians. 6.12. sed infernales, non coetestes. Geth. in 2 Pet. 2.
which sometime signifies principality; sometimes, and most properly,
beginning. And hence it is, that Oecumenius and some others, conceive that the
angels are here said to leave their principality, height, eminency, principal
dignity which they had by creation above all the creatures; angels being by
Paul called ( Col. 1.16.) principallities ((...).) This interpretation (says
Junius) seems too narrow, though not altogether (as Beza thinks) to be
excluded. Others by this beginning understand God himself, who was the author
of their first being; but this seems to be an harsh phrase and expression, to
make the keeping of their beginning, Non servaverunt suam originem, id est,
rectitudinem in qua conditi erant, q. d. justitiam origin^lem. Est. in^^. 2.
Sentent. did. 3.
or first estate, to be the adhering to, and acquiescing in God, who gave them
their first being. The best interpretation and that which is most agreeable to
the scope both of these and other Scriptures, seems to be that which makes this
their first estate to be that original and primitive condition of angels, not
as they are substances spiritual and immortal (for such even the fallen
angels are) but, as they were created with their original holiness,
righteousness, or integrity of nature; in which respect, the Elect angels
which were preserved from falling, are called the angels of God, of the Son of
man, holy, and such as behold the face of God. This first estate, which Jude
says, these wicked angels kept not, Christ expresses by this one word, Truth;
where he says, Joh. 8.44.
that the devil did not abide in the truth, and, has no truth in him. By
truth in this place is to be understood that righteousness and true holiness,
holiness of truth, (...).
wherein stands the image of God, Ephesians. 4.24. nor is it unusual in Scripture to
express that rectitude of heart and life which is bestowed upon renewed
persons, by the word truth. Remember (says Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.2.) how I have
walked before thee in truth. And fitly may holiness be called truth, in regard
it neither deceives him in whom it is, by false hopes; nor any other by mere
shows. Bonam voluntatem in eis, quis fecerat, nisi ille qui eos, cum bona
voluntate, id est, cum amore casto quo illi adhaererent crea vit, simul in eis,
and condens naturam and largiens gratiam. Aug.l. 11. de Civ. D. c. 11. Sicut
lapsus corporum fingi non petest, nisi e loco superiore; ita lapsus animorum
non est, nisi a quadam celsitudine boni, quam prius habuerint. Quod de coelo
cecidisse diabolus in scriptura dicitur, non tam ad localem motum referrendum
est, quam ad mutationem ejus ex justitia in peccatum. Estius in 2. Sent. Did.
3. 4.
We must not think that angels were inferior to men. If man from the
beginning was holy, why not angels? And as bodies cannot be said to fall, but
from a higher place than is that into which they fall; so neither can there be
a fall of spirits, but from the height of some good, which formerly they had;
which fall from good, is not so much in regard of local motion, as of their
defection from righteousness to sin, whereof their change of place is
afterward a punishment. And how can any, but most impiously imagine, that he
who is perfectly and absolutely good, and goodness it self, should create evil?
And if God does righteously punish the sin of Angels, then God did not create
them sinful; for how can God punish for the being of that which he himself
made to be? And it is by all the Learned exploded for impious Manicheism, to
hold that any creature is evil by a necessity of nature. Its plainly expressed,
God saw all that he had made, and it was very good. Singula bona sunt bonitate
naturae suae, sed omnia valde bona, quia bonitati singulorum accedit
pulcherrimus ordo, quo cuncta sibi invicem aptissime congruunt. Est. in 2 sent.
Did. 1.. 7. Tantae excellentiae in comparatione pecoris est homo, ut vitium
hominis na tura sit pecoris. Aug. de pec. Orig. c. 40.
The creatures were good with a goodness of nature, and very good, because to
the goodness of every particular creature, there was an accession of the
goodness of that order, whereby they did all harmoniou^^sute and agree with
one another, for the making up the beauty of the whole. And whereas some
object, that the Wolf is by nature ravenous, and the Fox subtle and
deceitful, Therefore that angels may possibly be subtle and cruel by nature*
its answered, That this is the dignity and excellency of intellectual nature,
either angelical or humane, that what is the nature of beasts, is a sin in
angels and man. To which may be added, that the forenamed qualities, of cruelty
and subtilty in angels and man, would be against a law given to them; but this
cannot be said of those beasts which are not capable of a law.

Holiness then it was which at first God bestowed upon the angels, and from
this first estate of holiness they made a defection. An heinous offense!
whither we consider what this holiness was, bestowed upon them; and when it
was bestowed. 1. It was a conformity to the original pattern of purity and
excellency. It was that by which they as much resembled the great and glorious
God, as creatures, yea the best of creatures could do. That whereby they who
stood, are still called the sons of God, yea Gods. To cast dirt upon, Job. 1.6.
Gen 33.10.
or to cut in pieces the picture of a King, is an heinous offense, but to
trample upon, and spoil the image of God, is an infinitely more heinous
indignity. We are wont to burn, or openly disgrace, the pictures only of
traitors, or eminent offenders; and we account that the dishonor of the
picture, is the dishonor of the person; the image of God in man was very
excellent, but it was far more excellent in an angel, who was a subject more
capacious to receive it, and wherein it might more gloriously appear. But 2.
When was this holiness bestowed? it was bestowed upon angels at their
creation. It was given to their nature; it was their first estate: These angels
were, as it were, crowned in the cradle. God was a benefactor to them betimes.
And what an impiety was ^o trample upon so early a mercy? That land which comes
to us by inheritance (with Naboth) we love to keep, though bequeathed by an
earthly father; yea a gift which is bestowed upon us as soon as we are born, we
love to keep all our days; but these angels threw away a gift even born with
them, as old as their beings, conveyed by God himself.

2. The angels forsook also their own habitation y these words (...), their own
habitation, some understand those heavenly places of happiness and glory, in
this sense, as if for their defection from their original holiness, they were
cast out, and compelled to depart from them: but because the punishment of
their fall is subjoyned in the second part of the verse, I conceive, with
learned Quidam illud accipiunt de domicilio coelesti, sensu eo, quod ob crimen
laesae majestatis, pristinum suum domicilium relinquere fuerint coacti; sed
quia de poena lapsus in verbis sequentib. demum agitur, rectius acci pitur hoc
modo, quod cum primum fuerint in certa statione collocati, transfugae facti
illam deseruerint. Gerhard. in 2 Pet. 2.4.
Gerhard and others, that by their own habitation, we are rather here to
understand that proper station, and set office in heaven, wherein their great
Lord and Master was pleased to fix them, for serving him. The Apostle comparing
them to a company of fugitive soldiers, who leave their colors, and that
station in the army, where by their Commander they are placed. And this
interpretation seems to be much favored by these words (...), their own,
that place properly and peculiarly appointed, allotted, and set out for them by
God: viz. to serve and honor him in; and this is the force of the word in
other places of Scripture, when used either concerning persons or places. God
in the beginning, appointed several places for his creatures, wherein they
were to perform their services unto him; and (like a Master of a family who
has sundry servants) distinct offices to all sorts of creatures. Heaven was
the place of angels, and the melodious praising of God in heaven, the work of
angels: and possibly, in heaven those glorious spirits might have their
several parts peculiarly appointed to each of them, all of them together,
making up the celestial harmony; and because there are sundry titles of
dignity given them in Scripture, it seems to follow, That there are sundry
sorts of duties allotted to them; from which several duties (for in respect of
their nature, angels are all alike) some are simply called angels, some
archangels, some powers, some principalities; though what the particular
differences between these are, and what the offices of these, I confess (with
Quid inter se distant, dicant qui possunt: si tamen possunt probare quod
dicunt, ego me ista ignorare confiteor. Tom. 3. in Euchr. c. 29
Austin) I understand not. I conceive its neither my duty to know, nor my
danger to be ignorant of these things. The bold determinations of Aquinas, and
other Schoolmen herein, are by the learned and godliest Writers, rather
noted, than liked. And this forsaking of their own habitation, seems in a due
and proper sense to be subjoyned to the former expression, of the falling of
these angels from their original holiness, and intended by the Apostle to be
the effect thereof; as if, because they kept not their natural integrity, they
therefore forsook their appointed duty and office, wherein God had set them:
For (as Natura angelorum quum non posset esse otiosa, non amplius inclinat et
agit in iis quibus privata est, sed in contrariis: Posita privatione hac,
effectiones ejus in isto genere poni necesse est. Itaque optime Christus,
privationi huic, (...), impotentem incl nationem, (...), actionem inclinationis
istius attexuit, dicens, Verit as non est in eo and a principio homicida fuit.
Jun. in Jud.
Junius well notes) These angels having deprived their nature of what good was
in it before, since it could not be idle, it did not now incline to, and act in
former, but contrary ways and employments; for that privation being put, the
effects thereof must needs follow accordingly in the same kind; as a man being
blind, suitable effects and operations will succeed. Hence it is that Christ, to
this privation of holiness, and not abiding in the truth, most fitly annexeth
the impotent inclination of the devil to sin, in these words, There is no
truth in him; and the action whereby he expressed that inclination, which was,
in being a murderer. By reason of this defection then from his original
holiness, he became a liar, an adversary to God and all his, a tempter, a
murderer, a spirit of uncleanness, a slanderer, a devil. So that from the
former privative action of forsaking his primitive integrity, as from a
fountain, flowed a voluntary and uncessant acting suitable thereunto, and
opposite to the duty which at the first God appointed him.

And now for the high nature of this offense of the angels, in leaving their
own habitation, needs must it be answerable to the forementioned cause thereof,
viz. The revolting from their original integrity. Bitter was that stream which
came from such a fountain; how high a contempt of God was this? 1. To slight
the place of his presence, in which is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand
there are pleasures for evermore; Psalm. 16. ult.
If it be an heinous sin not to attain that presence when we are without it;
how unsufferable a provocation is it to despise it, when we have it? The
presence of God is heaven upon earth, and the heaven of heaven. The forsaking
of this was the despising of all good at once, even of that which was able to
satisfy all the desires and capacities of all the creatures to the brim. Nay,
the glorious perfections of God, satisfy God himself; and if they can fill the
sea, how much more a little vessel?

2. Heinous was the impiety of these angels in leaving their own habitation, as
it was a forsaking of that office and station wherein God had placed them. Job
1.6.
1. They were the creatures, nay, the sons of God: He made them, and therefore
it was their duty to serve him; the homage of obedience was due to God for
their very beings. He gave them those hands which he employed; he planted in
them those endowments of which he desired the increase. 2. They were of the
highest rank of all the creatures. If he expected work from the weakest worm,
how much more might he do so from the strongest angel? If God required the tax
of obedience from the poorest, how much more due was it from those richest,
those ablest of creatures to pay it? And 3. As God had bestowed upon them the
best of all created beings and abilities, so had he laid out for them the
happiest, the honorablest of all employments. All creatures were his subjects,
but these his meniall servants: or, other creatures did the work without doors;
these waited upon his person, by an immediate attendance. This employment was
both work and wages. What was their work, but to behold the face of the King of
glory, and to praise the glory of that King? and what other happiness is
desirable, imaginable!

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Holiness, Obser. 1.
the image of God makes the difference between an angel and a devil. When an
angel leaves his integrity, he becomes a devil. If he keep not his primitive
purity, he parts with his primitive pre-eminence. The original holiness of
the angels is set out by the word (...), which signifies dignity. Cut off
Samsons locks, and he will be even as another man. Though never so many other
accomplishments be left behind, as spirituality, strength, wisdom,
immortality, etc. Yet if holiness be gone, the truly angelical part is gone.
That which is to be desired in a man, yea an angel, is goodness. All the stars
cannot make a day. Should a whole sheet of paper be filled only with ciphers,
they could not all amount to the smallest number; nor can the rarest endowments
without grace, make a person excellent. The righteous, not the rich, the
honorable, the learned, is more excellent than his neighbor. There Is nothing
will have a luster at the day of Judgment, but purity. Riches, honors, etc.
like Glowworms, in the dark, blind night of this world, glister and shine in
men's esteems; but when the sun of righteousness shall arise in his glory, all
these beauties will die and decay. How much are they mistaken, who shun and
abhor Christians as devils, because they are poor, deformed, disgraced, though
they keep their integrity! and how great their sin, who hate them because they
keep their integrity! but the world will love its own. Black-mores account the
blackest beautifullest. Would we look upon men with a renewed eye, and
Scripture spectacles, we would judge otherwise. The poorest Saint is an angel
in a disguise, in rags; and the richest sinner is (for the present) little
better then a gilded devil. Holiness, though veyled with the most
contemptible outside, is accompanied with a silent majesty; and sin, even in
the highest dignity, bewrayes a secret vileness.

2. Observe. 2.
Truth and holiness can only plead antiquity. The first estate of the fallen
angels was holy: Sin came, or rather crept in afterward; Holiness is as
ancient as the Ancient of days; and the essential holiness of God, the
pattern of that which was at the first created in angels and man, is eternal
and increated. Sin is but an innovation, and a mere invention of the creatures.
A sinner is but an upstart. They who delight in sin, do but keep alive the
adventitious blemishes of their original, and the memory of their traitorous
defection from God. O that we might rather remember from whence we are fallen,
and in Christ recover a better than our first estate. To any who pretend the
greatest antiquity and longest custom for error, or any other sin, it may be
said, From the beginning it was not so. Mat. 19.8. Consuetudo sine veritate,
vetustas est erroris. Tert. Hos. 5.10. Prove. 22.22.
And custom without truth, is at the best, but the antiquity of error. The old
path and the good way, are put for the same, Jerem. 6.16. If the removal of
the ancient bounds and landmarks which our fathers have set, be a sin so
frequently prohibited; how heinous is the violation of the ancient boundary of
holiness, which at the first was fixed by God himself?

3. The depravation of nature, Observe. 3.
introduces all disorder in practice. When these angels had left their
original purity, they soon forsake their original employment: and, Mat. 7.18.
the devil abiding not in the truth, becomes a murderer. All the irregularities
of life, are but derivations from unholy principles. The corrupt tree yields
not good fruit: Luke 6.45.
Out of the evil treasure of the heart, are evil things brought forth. The
wheels of the Clock going wrong, needs must the hand do so; the Translation
will be according to the Original. We see at what door to lay all the
prodigious impieties in the world, which are but the deformed issues of
corrupted nature. How foolishly are men angry with themselves for outward and
visible transgressions in their lives, when they tamely and quietly endure an
unchanged nature? like men who dung and water the roots of their trees, and yet
are angry for their bearing of fruit. How preposterous, and how plainly begun
at the wrong end, are those endeavors of reformation, which are accompanied
with the hatred of renovation. If the tree be bitter and corrupt, all the
influences and showrs of heaven cannot make the fruit good. When these angels
had lost the integrity of nature, even heaven it self did not help them to it.
How miserable, lastly, is he, who has no better fountain than corrupted nature
for the issuing forth of all his services! Even the best performances of an
unrenewed person, cannot be good, coming not from a pure heart, Phil. 1.11. Ephesians
2.10.
a good conscience, and faith unfeigned; they are but dead carcasses embalmed;
and at the best, but hedg-fruit, sour and unsavory, till they who bear them
are ingrafted into Christ, and partake of his life.

4. Corrupt nature cares not for the joys, Observe. 4.
joined with the holiness of heaven. As soon as these angels had left their
first estate of integrity, they forsook even that holy, though most happy
habitation. Heaven it self, was no heaven to them, when they became unholy. A
sinner may not unfitly be compared to a common beggar, who had rather live
poorly and idly, than plentifully in honest employment. How great is the
antipathy of corrupt nature to heavenly performances, when they will not down
though never so sweetened! The enmity of sin against God and holiness, is not
to be reconciled. How little are we to wonder, that heaven is a place only for
the pure in heart, and that Christ at the last day, will say to the workers of
iniquity, Mat. 7.23. Job 22.17
Depart from me; since they not only in this life say to God, Depart from us,
Job 21.14. but should they be admitted into that habitation of bliss with
unholy hearts, they would be unwilling there to continue with him? Let it be
our care to be made meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light, if we
expect to have, nay to love the joys thereof.

5. Observe. 5.
How irrational is every sinner! There Is no person in love with any sin, but
is indeed out of love with his own happiness; These angels, for a mere
supposed imaginary happiness of their own contriving, part with the real
blessedness of enjoying the satisfying presence of the blessed God. None can
become a devil, till first he become a beast. A sinner can with no better plea
of reason yield to any tentation of sin, Jud. 16.6.
then could Samson to that motion of Delilah, Tell me where thy great strength
lies, and wherewith thou might be bound to afflict thee. Wicked men are
rightly called unreasonable, 2. These. 3.2. (...). Jud. 10. Psalm. 49. ult.
or absurd, such whom no reason will satisfy; and brute beasts, led with
humor and sense against all reason. Who, that had not laid aside even reason,
would lose his soul for a trifle, a shadow, and die (as Jonathan said) for
tasting of a little honey? He who accounts it unreasonable to part with the
poorest worldly commodity without a valuable consideration, much more to
exchange a conveyance of a thousand pound per annum for a painted paper, is yet
much more absurd in sinning against any command of God, which is backed with
the very height of reason, both in respect of our duty to the Commander, and
benefit by the command.

6. Its a sin for any, even the highest, Observat. 6.
to exempt himself from service. Angels have their tasks set them by God,
which they must not leave: There Is no creature but has an allotment of duty.
Though we cannot be profitable, yet must we not be idle. God allows the napkin
to none, upon whom he has bestowed a talent; nor has he planted any to cumber
the ground, and only to be burdens to the earth. If we are all of him, we must
be all for him. Its not consistent with the sovereignty of this great King, to
suffer any subject within his dominions who will be absolute, and not yield him
his homage; nor to his wisdom, to make any thing which he intends not to use.
The first who adventured to cease from working was a devil, and they who follow
him in that sin, shall partake with him in the suitable punishments of chains
and darkness. Its a singular mercy to have opportunities of service, abilities
for it, and delight in it at the same time. Its the privilege of the glorious
angels to be confirmed in their work, as well as in their happiness. God never
is so angry with any, as those whom he turns out of his service.

7. The glorified are in heaven as in an habitation. Observe. 7. Luke 16.9. Joh.
14.2. 2 Cor. 5.1. Heb. 11.10, 16 Heb. 13.14. Heb. 4.9. Omnis homo est advena
nascendo, incola vivendo, quia compellitur migrare moriendo. Aug. in q. 91.
sup. Lev.
Heaven is in Scripture often set out by expressions importing it to be a place
of stability, setlement, and abode; as, Everlasting habitations, a Fathers
house, Mansions, a building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens. A city, a city which has foundations, a continuing city, a Rest.
How suitable are fixed and immovable affections to this permanent and steadfast
happiness! everything on this side Heaven is transitory. The fashion of this
world passes away: here we have no continuing city. Our bodies are tabernacles
and cottages of clay, which shortly shall be blown down by the wind of death;
(...). Isid. Pelus. l. 1. ep. 65.
yea their falling begins with their very building; and this whole world is an
habitation which ere long will be consumed by fire. Let us love the world, as
always about to leave it; and delight in the best of earthly enjoyments, only as
refreshments in our journey, not as in the comforts of our country; only as
things without which we cannot live, not as things for which we do live; not
making them fetters, but only using them as furtherances to our place of
setlement. Wicked Cain was the first that ever built a city (and yet even then
the Holy Ghost brands him with the name of a Vagabond.) The godly of old dwelt
in tabernacles, Heb. 11.9. and the reason was, because they looked for a city
which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. To conclude, Let the
sin of these angels in leaving this habitation, make us fear lest we should
fall short of it; let us be thoroughly sensible of our misery by nature, in
being born without a right to it, and interest in it. Let us speedily get into,
and constantly keep in the way that leads unto it: Christ is that way, let us
by faith procure him, as one who has purchased it for us by the merit of his
obedience; and in him let us continue, that he may prepare us for it by his
spirit of holiness. Let us profitably improve those ordinances which are the
gates of heaven; let us content our selves with no degree of proficiency by
them, but proceed from strength to strength, till at last we appear before God
in this habitation.

The third branch of this first part of the text containing the sin of these
angels, Wherein this defection of the angels was seen, and did consist.

This is expressed two ways. 1. (...) 2. (...). Gerh. in 2 Pet.
1. Negatively, They kept not, etc. 2. Affirmatively, They left their, etc.

EXPLICATION.
The nature of the subject, and indeed, the very expressions of the Apostle, of
not keeping, and leaving, puts us upon explaining three particulars.

1. What was the original cause that these angels made a defection; or that
they kept not their first estate. 2, What was that first sin whereby this
defection was made, or, their first estate not kept. 3. In what degree and
measure it was made, it being here said, they kept not their, etc. but left
their own, etc.
1. For the first.

1. God, who is infinitely and perfectly good and holy, the fountain of all
goodness, and goodness it self, was not the cause of the sinful defection of
these angels; nor had it been justice in God to have condemned them, for that
which himself had caused; or to make them fall, and then to punish them for
falling: And whereas it is objected, that God might have hindered them from
falling, therefore he was the cause thereof. I answer, 1. Not every one who can
hinder an evil is accessory to it, unless he be bound to hinder it; but God
was not here so bound. Angeli and homines ex officio debeut Deo. Deus nihil
debet nisi (...), quum se ipse obstring it ultro, ex promissionibus gratiae.
Illi ex nature a debent; Deo natura debetur ipsa. Junius in loc. Asserunt malam
esse natural, quae immutari nullo modo potest. Aug. con. 2. ep. Pet.
Nor owes he any thing to any of his creatures, further then he binds
himself. Angels and men are bound to God Ex officio, by duty: nothing from God
is due to them, but of his own good will and pleasure, when freely and of his
own accord he binds himself to them by his promise of grace. Angels and men owe
to God all they are, all they have, all they have lost; they are debtors to God
by nature, and even nature it self is owing to God.

2. Nor secondly, Were the angels made to sin (as the Manichees fondly and
falsely imagined) by some first evil cause, which (as they held) was the
original and fountain of all sin; and whereby a necessity of sinning lay upon
creatures from the very being of nature, which therefore could not be changed
from being evil, but was so, unavoidably, unalterably.

3. Nor thirdly, Do I conceive that this sin of the angels proceeded from any
error or ignorance in their understanding before their sin, as if their
understanding first judged that to be good, which was not, and therefore they
afterward sinned in willing and embracing that good; for this were to make
them erroneous before they were unholy; miserable, before they were sinful;
whereas the ignorance of that which ought to be known is a part of sin, and all
misery is a fruit of sin. Illa ignorantia five error secundum quem omnis
peccans ignorant et errat, proprie non est causa peccati, sed potius aliquid
peccati. Peccat enim homo eo ipso, quod ratio prave judicat. Peccat inchoative,
sicut consummative peccat, in eo quod voluntas male eligit. Nam omne peccatum
quasi duabusillis partibus constat, etc. Error judicii non est separandus a
peccato, sed in plena ejus ratione includitur. Estius in l. 2. sent. did. 22.
That ignorance or error (says Estius) whereby he who sins is ignorant and
erroneous, properly is not a cause of sin, but something of sin; for a man who
judges amiss, sins inchoatively; as he whose will chooses wickedly, sins
consummatively and completely; for all sin (he says) does as it were consist,
and is made up of two parts, false judgment, and evil election; and the error
of judgment is not to be separated from sin, but to be included in, and
Involvitur ignorantia malae electionis sub ipso malae electionis peccato,
tanquam aliquid ei intrinsecum: proprie dicimus omnem qui peccat, eo ipso quo
peccat, errare: improprie autem omnem peccantem ex errore peccare. Id. ib.
involved under the sin it self of evil election, as something intrinsecall to
it; and that every one who sins, properly is said to err in that he sins, and
improperly said to sin, by, or from error. And thus the soundest among the
Schoolmen, answer the Objection against the possibility of the fall of the
angels, taken from this ground, that every sin proceeds from ignorance; which
cannot (say they) be true of the sin of the angels.

4. Fourthly, I conceive that sin, being a defect, a privation of good, and a
want of due rectitude, has not properly any cause whereby it may be said to be
effected or made. Sin is not a nature or a being, for then it should be a
creature, and appetible (every creature desiring it is being) and by consequence
good. Nor yet is it a mere negation of good, for then the bare absence of any
good belonging to another creature, would be a man's sin. But sin is a privation
of that good, which has been, and should be in one. Now in regard sin is a
privation and defect, Let none (they are the words of Augustine) enquire after
the efficient cause of an evil and sinful will, of this their being not an
efficient, Nemo quaerat efficientem causam malae voluntatis; non enim est
efficiens, sed deficiens. Causas defectionum istarum, cum efficientes non sint,
sed defiicientes, velle invenire, tale est, ac si quisquam velit videre
tenebras, vel audire silentium, quod tamen utrumque nobis notum est, neque
illud nisi per oculos, neque hoc nisi per aures, etc. Aug. l. 12. d. c. D. c.
7. Vitio depravari, nifiex nihilo facta, natura non posset: per hoc ut natura
sit ex eo habet, quod a Deo facta est; ut autem ab eo a quo facta est,
deficiat, ex hoc, quod de nihilo facta est. Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 14. c. 13. Non
ex condition naturae, sed ex dono gratiae. Aquin. par. 1. q. 63. Esti. did.
7. 9. Solum illum actum a rectitudine declinare non contingit, cujus regula est
ipsa virtus agentis: si enim manus artificis esset ipsa regula incisionis,
nunquam possit artifex nisi recte lignum incidere: sed si rectitudo incisionis
sit ab alia re gula, contingit incisionem esse rectam, vel non rectam; Divina
autem voluntas sola est regula sui actus, quia non ad superiorem finem
ordinatur; omnis autem voluntas cujustibet creaturae rectitudinem in suo actu
non habet, nisi secundum quod regulatur. Id. Ib.
but only a deficient cause; for to depart from that which is chief and
highest, to that which is less and lower, is to begin to have an evil, and a
sinful will: To enquire therefore after the causes of that defection, when as
they are not efficient, but deficient, is as if a man would go about to see
darkness, or to hear silence: both which notwithstanding, are known to us; the
former by the eye, the later by the ear; and yet not by any species, or
representation, but by the privation thereof: darkness cannot be seen, unless
it be by not seeing: nor silence perceived, unless by not hearing.

5 The original or beginning of the sin of these Angels, was the defectibility
and mutability of their own will; whereby, though for the present, they willed
that which was good, and might have willed to have persevered therein; yet
being mutable, they might also will evil, and so fall from God. Every creature
as its made of nothing, may again, unless sustained by God, return to nothing;
and in that respect it was that the intellectual creature might make a
defection from him who created it, and deviate from the rule of divine
righteousness: for (as St Augustine observes) the being of nature comes from
hence, that its made by God: the defection of nature from hence, that its made
of nothing. If there be any creatures therefore, which cannot sin, they have
not this from the condition of nature, but from the gift of the grace of God:
And Aquinas seems to argue rightly, that according to the condition of nature,
none is exempted from a possibility of sinning, but only God: in regard that
sin being the declining of an act from the rectitude of the rule, it is only
impossible for that act not to decline from rectitude, the rule of which, is
the very power and will of the agent; for (as he well illustrates it) if the
hand of the artificer, were the very rule of cutting a piece of timber, the
artificer could not but cut the wood evenly and rightly; but if the rectitude
of the cutting, be by another, an external rule, the cutting may either be
right, or not right. The divine will is only the rule of his act, as not being
ordained to any higher end: but the will of every creature has in its act no
rectitude, but as it is regulated by the will of God, which is its ultimate
end. And hence it is, that notwithstanding the nature of the intellectual
creature was good, yet evil is said to arise and proceed from it; and that
Augustine so frequently, and others after him, assert, that evil has its
original and beginning from that which was good: For though evil does not
proceed from good, (says Saint Augustine) as that good was made by God, yet it
did proceed from good, Vid. l. 1. cont. Jul. Pelag. c. 3.
as that good was made of nothing, and not of God. And whereas it is objected
against this, that a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit; Catholica fides
dicit, non prolatum esse malum, nisi de bono; and iniquum, nisi de justo; ex
bouis mala orta sunt. Et de nup. and concup. c. 28. Ecce ergo ex bono oritur
malum, nec fuit omnino unde oriri posset nisi ex bono: nec ideo tamen potuit ex
bono criri malu^, quia bonum factum est a Deo, sed quia de nihilo factum est,
non de Deo. Vide August. in. Enchirid. cap. 15. Nec fuit prorsus unde primitus
oriretur voluntas mala, nisi ex angeli and hominis natura bona. Esti. in l. 2.
did. 34.. 1.
therefore evil could not arise from the nature of angels; and the angels could
not sin of themselves: it is answered by the forementioned Father, That though
a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, yet good ground may bring forth
evil plants; out of the same soil may grow both thorns and vines: and though
from the good act of the will, sin cannot arise, yet out of the same nature,
may sprout and arise a will either good or evil. Nor was there any beginning,
from whence at first a sinful will should arise, but from the intellectual
nature which was created good. Nor does this defectibility of the intellectual
creature at all countenance the profane cavils of those, who hence would needs
infer, That God might have made the world better then he did; and that he had
done so, if he had made the intellectual creature free from all possibility of
sinning. For 1. It is a Question (though perhaps too curious) and by some
learned among the Schoolmen diversely maintained, whether it was possible for
any creature to have been made impeccable by nature, Johan. Major. in 2 did.
23. q. Ambr. l. 3. de fid. ad Great. l. c. 2. Vna sola substantia divinitatis
quae mori nescit. Anima moritur, nec angelus immortalis, etc. in angelis
naturae capacitas vitio obnoxia. Nec ex immortali natura habet, sed ex gratia,
si se ad vitia non mutat. Hierom in 6. Gal. Excepta Trinitate, omnis creatura
etiamsi non peccat, tamen potest peccare. Aug. cont. Max. cap. 12. Jun. in Jud.
Creaturaru^ natura coelestium moripotuit, quia peccare potuit. Angeli qui non
peccaverunt, peccare potuerunt. Per hoc solus Deus habet immortalitatem, quia
non cujusquam gratia, sed natura sua, etc. Greg. de Val. q. 14. punct. 1.
Aquin. 1. p. q. 63. Esti. l. 2. d. 7. Etiamsi ab initio tales conditi fuissent
quales nune per gratiam confirmationis facti sunt, nec sic tamen ex condition
natura impeccabiles essent, sed ex dono gratiae; quod etsi hactenus natural
dici posset, quia cum ipsa natura datum esset, and in natura insitum, ea them
tamen natura, atque essentia salva, posset auferri. Solus Deus est qui non
gratia cujuspiam, sed natura sua, non potest, nec potuit, nec poterit peccare.
Aug. l. 3. cont. Max. c. 12.
or free from all possibility of sinning. Some of them indeed determine it
affirmatively: but herein they oppose the Fathers, Ambrose, Augustine, and
Hierome. The two former of whom teach, that, because its said that God only
has immortality, it follows, that he only has immutability, and so by
consequence, only by nature impeccability. The same argument is also used by
the learned Junius, who denies that simply God could have made the Angels
better then they are by nature, because then they should have been most
constant in their own perfect goodness by themselves, which can only be
attributed to God. Also to the forecited Fathers, agree the Schoolmen of the
greatest note, among whom Estius asserts, That supposing that the Angels had
been from their beginning created such as they are now made to be by the grace
of confirmation, yet even so they had not been impeccable, or free from a
possibility of sinning, by the condition of nature, but by the gift of grace:
which although it may be termed natural, as given with, and implanted in their
nature: yet it might have been taken away and removed, without the destruction
of their nature. And he says, Its no derogation from the power of God, that a
Creature cannot be made by nature impeccable: for the thing spoken of is not in
the number of possibles; Res de qua agitur non est de numero possibilium.
Includit enim contradictionem, ut quod creatum est, i.e. ex nihilo productum,
deficere non possit. Ideo non potest Deus facere creatura^ ex natura
impeccabilem, quia facere non potest ut creatura non fit creatura. Siquidem eo
ipso quo creata est, defectibilis est, Deo potente subtrabere vel esse, vel
operari, vel ipsius operationis rectitudinem, ex quo manifestum est, non
negatione, sed positione creaturae per naturam impeccabilis derogari potentiae
Dei. Est. in 2. sent. Did. 7. 9.
and it is a contradiction to say, that a Creature, that is, a thing made of
nothing, should not be able to change, and that therefore God cannot make a
creature by nature immutable, because he cannot make that a creature should not
be a creature; which as such, is defectible, God being always able to withdraw
its being, or the operation of its being, or the rectitude of its operation.
Whereby (says he) its manifest, that not by the denying, but by the granting
that a creature may be impeccable by nature, we derogate from the power of God.

But 2. I answer with Aquinas p. 1. q. 36. a. 2. that God appointing an
inequality in the things which he created, hereby made the world after the
best manner. The perfection of the whole, requires, that there should be an
inequality in the several Creatures, that so there might be all degrees of
goodness made up: and this is one degree of goodness, that something be so
good, that there should be an impossibility for it ever to swerve from its
goodness; and another degree of goodness is, that some things should be made
defectible, and in a possibility of leaving their goodness. And as the
perfection of the world requires, that there be not only incoruptible, but also
corruptible creatures; so likewise, that there should be some things defectible
from goodness. If angels might have been made more excellent in themselves,
yet not in relation to that goodly order, and admirable beuty which God has
caused in the world, by making them in that capacity wherein they were created.
A Captain, a Colonel, are better then a common soldier in an army; but yet its
better for the order and beuty of the army, that some should be common
soldiers, and commanded, than that all should be Officers and Commanders. And
God (as Aug. Ench. c. 11.27. Melius judicavit de malis been facere, quam mala
nulla esse permittere.
Augustine says) thought it better to bring good out of that which was evil,
then not at all to suffer evil to be. For he that is perfectly good, would not
suffer evil in his works, unless he were so omnipotent, as to bring good out
of that evil.

2. By way of explication of this second branch, 2d Branch.
it may be enquired, what was that first sin, whereby this defection was made,
or this first estate of the angels not kept. And here sundry opinions offer
themselves.

Some falsely expounding that place of Genesis 6.2. Philo. Orig. Josephus,
Irenaeus, Justin Mart. in Apol. pro Chr. Clem. Alex. strom. l. 3 Tertul. l. de
hab. mul. Lactant.
The sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, and they took
them wives, etc. imagined, that the angels being taken with the love of women,
sinned by lust. Strange it is, that so many learned men among the ancients,
should embrace an opinion so flatly opposite to Scripture and reason. For not
to speak of the spiritual nature of angels, whereby they are incapable of
Carnal and sensible pleasures, or of the different nature of their (by some
supposed) bodies from ours, theirs being (if they be at all) not compounded of
the elements, but so pure, and thin, that its impossible they should be fit for
generation; the Scripture plainly teaches that the angels fell from their
integrity before there were any daughters of men in being; besides, Christ tells
us, that the angels in heaven neither marry, nor are given in marriage, Mat.
22.3. Others conceive that the first sin of the angels was hatred of God; Odium
omne ex amore est. Nascitur odium Dei tanquam prohibentis amantem ab eo quod
inordinate amat. Est. in 2. l. sent. did. 6.. 2.
the adhering of the angels unto God being by love, their departure from God
(they say) must needs be by hatred; but this opinion seems false, because
hatred of God must needs proceed from inordinate love of something else, God
being hated because he hinders the creature from something which it loves
inordinately. Hatred therefore could not be the first sin, but the irregular
affecting of something else, or some other sin.

A third opinion is of those who hold, that the first sin of these angels, was
envying the dignity of man, in being created after the image of God; but this
is confuted by Augustine, who says, That pride must needs go before envy; and
that envy was not the cause of pride, but pride the cause of envy; for none can
by envy hate another excellency, unless by pride he first inordinately love
his own, Superbi endo invidus, non invidendo quisquam superbus est. Aug.
Invidus ex hoc, de bono alterius dolet, in quantum bonum alterius aestimat sui
boni impedimentum. Aquin. 1. p. q. 63. a. 2. Bern. in Cant. ser. 22. Greg. l.
34. moral. c. 14. Ambros. in Psalm. 37. Hierom. in Es. 14. August. l 12. de Civ.
Dei c. 6. Ab illo qui summus est aversi ad se conversi sunt, and hoe vitium
nihil aliud est quam superbia. Proprium objectum superbiae est excellens
mensuram a Deo praefixam. Bona vero spiritualia cum secundum se excessiva esse
non possunt, consequens est, ut ex hoc primum habeant rationem vitiosi
appetibilis, ex quo primum habent rationem excedentis and in commensurati
alicui; hoc autem constat esse divinam dispensationem and regulam: Cajetan. in
1. p. sum. q. 63. a. 2. Quid est supcrbia nisi perversae celsitudinis
appetitus? Aug. de civit. D. l. 14. cap. 13.
which he apprehends to be impaired by another.

A fourth (to add no more) and the most probable opinion, is, of those who
hold that the first sin of these angels was pride. And this is the opinion most
received and commonly embraced by the Fathers: and after them received
generally by the Schoolmen and others. Aquinas seems strongly to prove, that it
could be no other sin but pride. A spiritual nature (and such is the
angelical) can only (says he) affect some spiritual object, as being that
which is only agreeable to it; now there can be no sin in affecting spiritual
objects, which in themselves are good, unless it be because in affecting of
them, the rule of the superior is therein not obeyed; and this is the sin of
pride. For the proper object of pride (says Cajetan) is something exceeding
that measure prefixed and limited by God. Now in regard spiritual things
cannot be excessive, nor can we have too much of them in respect of themselves,
because the more of them the better; it follows, that then they come to be
sinfully desired, when they begin to exceed, and to become incommensurate to
the divine rule and dispensation: the affecting them in which inordinate
measure, namely, beyond the limits prescribed by God, was the sin of pride in
the angels. That this pride then, or an affecting (as Augustine calls it) of
some spiritual highness, beyond the bounds of Gods will, was the first sin,
seems very probable by reason; but more then probable by that of Paul, 1 Timothy
3.6. where the Apostle gives this reason, why a Bishop must be no novice, Ne ob
superbi am incidat in eandem damnationis poenam cum diabolo. Est. in Loc.
lest (says he) heing lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of
the devil; in which place I understand not why the Apostle expresses the
condemnation or punishment of the devil to deter from pride, unless the
devil had fallen into condemnation for that sin, and unless the Apostle had
intended to show the danger of being proud, by setting down the punishment of
the devil for that sin.

But more particularly, if it be enquired, wherein this pride of the angels did
consist, and what that highness was, which they did affect beyond their
measure; I think, the answer hereunto can be but conjecturall and uncertain.

Some conceive that it was revealed to the Angels, soon after their creation,
that the humane nature should in time be hypostatically united to the divine,
that the Son of God, in humane nature, should be the head of men, yea of
angels; that hereby man's nature was to be exalted above the very angels, Heb.
1.6.
and that they were commanded to worship and submit to him. Hereupon (say some)
they desired that the dignity of this union with the divine might be afforded
to their own angelical nature. But (say others) they refused to consent and
submit to Gods pleasure in the former discovery; Vid Zanch. de op. Dei.
in this (say they) stood the pride of angels. And of this opinion is Zanchy,
whose chiefest argument is taken from that deadly hatred which Satan has ever
put forth against the doctrines of the Person and Offices of Christ, and his
incessant opposing of believing and affiance in him.

Others conjecture (for indeed none in this point can do much more) that the
angels desired to be equal with God, and that they aspired to the divinity it
self. And here they distinguish of a twofold will in the angels; 1. A will of
efficacy, which others term a will of intention. 2. A will of delight and
complacency. According to the former, they say, that the angels did not desire
to be equal with God, as if they had intended or used means to attain to
divinity; For this the angels knew was absolutely impossible; but according to
the later will of complacency, they say, the angels might desire to be equal
to God; namely, wish it as a pleasing and delightful thing to them: as a sick,
a dying man, who despaires of recovery, desires health, though not as using
means to procure it, because he judges it impossible to be obtained, yet as a
good and most pleasing benefit; and thus (they say) these angels had this will
of delight, or a velle conditionatum, such a will, whereby, if it had been
possible to have attained to the divinity, Scotus in l. 2. sent. did. 6.
Estius in did. 6.. 6.
they would have used means to have done it; and this was the opinion of
Scotus, and after him of sundry others, who consider the tentation that Satan
laid before our first parents, Ye shall be gods: And afterward being blinded
with pride, his endeavoring to have Christ worship him, and his propagating
the adoration of himself among heathens, under the names of sundry gods.

The most probable opinion is that of Augustine, Sua potestate delectati, velut
bonum suum sibi ipsi essent, a superiore communi omnium beatifico bono, ad
propria defluxerunt. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 12. c. 1. It seems that there was
no other way for angels to sin, but by reflex of their understanding upon
themselves, who being held with admiration of their own sublimity and honor,
their memory of their subordination to God, and their dependency on him was
drowned in this conceit; whereupon their adoration, love, and imitation of God,
could not choose but be also interrupted. Hooker. L. 1.. 14.
and after him, Aquinas, Cajetan, and others, who think that the pride of the
angels, was in desiring and resting in their own natural perfection, as their
ultimate end. That as God is blessed by his own nature, having no superior
from whom to draw his blessedness, so did these angels desire to be, and would
needs rest in the perfection of their own nature, neglecting that rule of their
superior, whereby they were called to desire the attaining supernatural
blessedness by the grace of God. Or as some express it, this pride stood in a
staying within themselves, a reflecting upon their own excellency, and by
consequence, an affecting an independency upon any superior virtue in being
and working, making themselves the first cause, and the last end of their own
motions; for, since next unto God, every reasonable created being is nearest
unto it self; we cannot conceive how it should turn from God, and not in the
next step turn unto it self.

The third particular to be explained in this first part of the Text, Nemo
sanae fidei credit apostatas angelos ad pristinam pietatem correcta aliquando
voluntate converti. Aug. ep. 107. Prosp. l. 1. de vit. contempt. c. 3. De
angelis hoc Deus disposuit, and implevit, ut si quis eorum bonitatem voluntatis
perderet, nunquam eam divino munere repararet. Fulgent. l. de sid. c. 3.
Daemones nec mala unquam possunt carere voluntate, nec poena. Vid. Aquin. at 1.
p. q. 64. a. 2. Angeli boni non habent ex sua natura, immutabilitatem ex bono
in malum, sed ex sota gratia, qui tamen cum plena deliberatione, bonum
eligerunt, atque ita nec mali habent natura sua, immutabilitatem ex malo in
bonum, sed ex sola privatione gratiae. Greg. de Valent. Disp. 4. q. 15. punct.
2.
is the degree and measure of the defection of these angels; they fell finally,
they kept not, etc. they left their, etc. they quite forsook God, his image,
heaven it self, and that office therein assigned unto them. And as the holy
are confirmed in goodness, so the fallen angels are hardened in the love of
that which formerly they made choice of. This is intended by Christ, in those
words, John 8.44. There is no truth in him, they cannot so much as will to do
well, but they do immovably cleave to wickedness. These trees, as they have
fallen, so they lie. Angels went so far, that they never turn; they fell so low,
they never arise. This is proved from their eternal misery, which the
Scripture mentions in this verse, and else where frequently; this
everlastingnesse of their punishment, including the perpetuity of their
sinning; and such an eternal forsaking of them by God, that they shall never
have righteousness repaired in them again. The schoolmen are too curious, in
inquiring into the ground of this total and final fall of the angels into sin.
Aquinas, and his followers hold, that their obstinacy proceeds from the very
nature of the wills of angels, according to which (say they) angels are so
inflexible and immovable, that they can never hate that which once they have
chosen, nor choose that which once they have hated; but, as I conceive, Valentia
overthrowes this opinion, by arguing, that if the immutability of the good
angels from good to evil, be not from nature, but from grace only, who yet did
with full deliberation choose that which was good; then the immutability of the
evil angels from evil to good comes not from nature, but from the just and
total deprivation of grace. Others of them assert, That God preserves in the
wills of the devils an hatred of himself, and that this preservation is an act
of punitive justice, and that God causes that wicked habit in the wills of the
devils, whereby they are necessarily inclined to sin; and this impious opinion
is asserted by Occham, Biel, and Aureolus; which I note by the way, as wishing
that while the Papists behold a supposed mote in the eye of holy Calvin, they
would observe those real beams which are in the eyes of their own most famous
Schoolmen, as to this point of making God the Author of sin. But those who
speak more modestly and piously, then either of the former, give this reason of
the obstinacy of the fallen angels: namely, the total and perfect privation of
all holiness: which is considerable, 1. On their part; and so its that
defective and depraved quality (as Junius calls it) that utter impotency to all
good, Qualitas defectiva.
intended by those words of our Savior, [There is no truth in him,] and
flowing from that defection (as its fountain) called by our Savior, a not
abiding in the truth; and here by Jude, a not keeping their first estate: which
defection is so set down by Jude, Si non servaverunt, sed dereliquerunt,
profecto habcre destiterunt, and privati sunt eo quod habebant; quod autem
privati sunt, semel, id est, (...) privati sunt, ut qui naturam suam eo
privaverint, quae cum non possit esse otiosa, etc. Jun. in loc.
(says Junius) as that this total impotency to, and privation of all good in
the angels, is also comprehended; For (says he) what they kept not, they
ceased to have, and were deprived of; and what they were deprived of, they lost
totally, ((...), as he expresses it) once for all, as those who deprived their
very nature thereof. And since the nature of these angels, (though it cannot be
holy, yet also) cannot be idle, it enclines incessantly to the contrary to that
of which it was deprived, there following effects of the same kind with this
constant privation. 2. On Gods part, who has determined never to bestow upon
the fallen angels relief and assistance for their recovery, (which being
denied to them, it is impossible that ever they should turn from their sin to
God) but to deliver them totally up to the bent of their own depraved nature.
God having so laid out their state, and ordered the nature thereof, that their
fall should be the term of their being holy (and it is natural for every thing
not to move when once arrived at it is term, Hoc est angelis casus, quod
hominibus mors.
but there to stop) and that as the end of life is the term beyond which God
will not offer to sinners his grace, so that the fall should even be the same
to the angels, which death is to man.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observat. 1.
The best of created perfections are of themselves defectible. Every excellency
without the prop of divine preservation, is but a weight, which tends to a
fall. The angels in their innocence were but frail, without Gods sustentation.
Even grace it self is but a creature, and therefore purely dependent. It Is not
from its being and nature, but from the assistance of something without it,
that it is kept from annihilation; The strongest is but a weakling, and can of
himself neither stand nor go alone; let the least degree of grace make thee
thankful, let not the greatest make thee proud. He that stands, should take
heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. 10.12.
What becomes of the stream, if the fountain supply it not? what continuance
has the reflection in the glass, if the man who looks into it turn away his
face? The constant supplies of the spirit of Jesus Christ are the food, the
fuel of all our graces; The best men show themselves but men, if God leave
them; He who has set them up, must also keep them up. Its safer to be humble
with one talent, then proud with ten: yea better to be a humble worm, than a
proud angel.

2. Nothing is so truly base and vile as sin. Observat. 2.
It Is that which has no proper being, and is below the lowest of all
creatures; It Is very nature stands in the defection of nature, and privation of
goodness; what is it but the deflowring and fall, the halting and deformity of
the creature? So obscure is its extract, that there can be no being properly
assigned to it, as its original cause. It came not from nature as it was, but
as it was of nothing. Sin alone debaseth and disennobleth nature: What
prodigious folly is it to be patient under it, much more to be proud of it?
what generous princely spirit can contentedly be a servant of servants? A slave
to sin is guilty of a more unsuitable condescension; sin alone is the souls
degradation. We never go below our selves, but in sinning against God. Omnis
elongatio ab altissimo est descensio. Parisiens.
They who glory in sin, glory in their shame; they who are ashamed of
holiness, are ashamed of their glory. Sin removes from the highest, and
therefore it must needs be a descending.

3. Observe. 3.
In defection from God, there is an imitation of the devil. He was the first
who left his first estate. Every backslider follows Satan, though every one
goes not so far as he; all decays in holiness are steps toward his
condition; Satan's chiefest industry is to pull others after him; he loves to
have followers, and not to be sinful and miserable alone; if he can make men
to decline in grace, Luke 22.31.
he can be contented to let them thrive in the world; he cares for no plunder
but that of jewels: and being the greatest enemy, he studies to deprive us of
our greatest happiness. Christians! of all decays, take heed of those that
are spiritual. Better to lose thy gold, then to lose thy God; to be turned out
of thy house, then to part with holiness and heaven. He that loses all the
comforts in the world, can but be a beggar; but he who forsakes God, becomes a
devil. Of this largely before.

4. Observe. 4.
It Is hard to be high, and not to be high-minded, to be adorned with any
excellencies, and not unduly to reflect upon them. Its a natural evil to make
our selves the centers of our own perfections, 2 King. 18.33, 34, 45. Romans
10.3. Phil. 3.6, 9. Ezekiel. 38.2, 6.
to stay and rest in our excellencies. Men of power are apt to deify their own
strength; men of morality to advance their own righteousness, and to rely on
their merits; men of wisdom to set up their own reason. How just is it with
God to hinder the creature from inchroaching upon his own prerogative; to make
those low, Humiliatio humilitatis matter, Psalm. 9.19, 20.
who otherwise would not be lowly; and to let them know that they are but men?
God singles out such to be the most notable monuments of his justice, and their
own folly, who vie with him in divine prerogatives. Act. 12.23.
If God has appointed that we should go out of our selves unto things below
for a vital subsistence, to bread for food, to clothes for warmth, etc. much
more will he have us to go out of our selves for a blessed and happy
subsistence; more being required unto blessedness then unto life. Psalm. 10.14.
Zeph. 3.12. Hos. 2.7.
It Is the poor who commits himself to God: Nothing will make us seek for help
above our selves, without an apprehension of weakness in our selves. The vine,
the ivine, the hop, the woodbind, are taught by nature to cling and to wind
about stronger trees. Men commit themselves to the sea naked, and do not load
themselves with gold, treasure, and rich apparel. How fearful should poor
worms be of that sin, which God allowed not in angels, and whereby they became
devils! Let us be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. The adorned with this
grace, are only meet to attend upon the King of Glory; Quis sicut Deus.
even an Archangel, Michael, has humility imprinted on his name; Humility is
the ornament of angels, and pride the deformity of devils; If heaven will not
keep a proud angel, it will keep out a proud soul. In all conditions of
highness, we should take heed of highmindednesse. As 1. in the highness of
worldly advancements; poverty and disgrace are the food of humility; Riches and
honor are the fuel of pride. I have read of a bird that is so light and
feathery, that it always flies with a stone in its mouth, lest otherwise the
winds should carry it away. In high conditions we shall be carried away with
pride, unless we carefully keep our hearts. David and Asa were both lifted up
in their outward greatness: Its hard to walk in slippery places of prosperity,
and not to slip by pride; we commonly most forget God and our selves when he
remembers us most. 2. In the highness of raised endowments, abilities and
performances; Its said of Nazianzen that he was high in his works, and lowly in
his thoughts: a rare temper! our very graces and good works not seldom
occasion pride. I have heard of a man who having killed an Elephant with his
weapon, was himself killed with the fall thereof. And nothing is more ordinary
than for high services (possibly the conquest of some corruption or tentation)
to usher in that pride which may hurt the performers. Sciendo bona opera,
nesciamus illa. Magna and rara virtus, manifestam omnibus, tuam te solum,
latere sanctitatem.
We should know our good works, as if we knew them not. It Is a rare and noble
temper, when that worth which all others observe, is only hid to him, in whom
it is. How few are there who hide their beautiful endowments by humility, as
Moses's parents did their beautiful son for safety; and with Moses, when he
spoke with God, pull off their shoos, and hide their faces; Uncover and
acknowledge the lowness, the infirmities, and cover the beauty and comeliness
of their services! When Satan spreads our gifts and graces, let us spread our
sins, our weaknesses before our eyes; and so the soul may have its ballast
evenly proportioned, and on both sides. There Is no poison hurts so dangerously,
although delightfully, as the contemplation of, and reflection on our seeming
deservings. Scotus did. 6. q. 2. art. 2.
Scotus calls the sin of the angels Luxuriam spiritualem, a kind of spiritual
luxury, whereby they were too much delighted in their own excellencies. Its
only a Christian of strong grace, that can bear the strong wine of his
commendations without the spiritual intoxication of pride. Its as hard, humbly
to hear thy self praised, as it is patiently to hear thy self reproached. That
Minister (of whom I have heard) was a rare example of humility, who being
highly applauded for a sermon preached in the University, was by a narrow
observer found weeping in his study (presently after) for fear that he had
sought, or his auditors unduly bestowed upon him applause. Lutb. pref. in Genesis
Ridiculum est si anxius es quomodo honoraretur homo nondum creatus: tu es
nihil. Nieremb. de ador. in spir.
How heavenly was the temper of John the Baptist; when he said, Christ shall
increase, but I shall decrease! It was a good fear of Luther; namely, lest the
reading of his books, should hinder people from reading the Scriptures. Would
we account our selves nothing (and indeed in our selves we are so) we should
think it as ridiculous a thing to be solicitous for our own, as for that man's
honor who is not yet created.

5. The better the persons are who become wicked, Observe. 5
the more obstinate they are in wickedness. When angels fall into sin, they
continue in it with pertinacy; the hottest water cooled, becoms the coldest.
They whose light of knowledge is most angelical, sin with highest resolution,
and strongest opposition against the truth. The greater the weight of that
thing is which falls, the more violent is its fall, and the greater is the
difficulty to raise it up again. They who leave God notwithstanding their clear
light, are justly left by God to incurable darkness. None should so much
tremble at sin, as those who are enlightened; obstinacy is most like to follow
their impiety. It may be impossible to recover them. Seducers (says the
Apostle) wax worse and worse, and do not only show themselves men in erring,
but devils in persevering. But of this before. Ver. 4.


6. The happiness of believers by Christ, Observe. 6. Est in nobis per hanc Dei
gratiam in bono recipiendo and perseveranter tenendo, non solum posse quod
volumus, verum etiam velle quod possumus. Aug. de cor. and gra c. 11. 1 Pet.
1.5. 1 Pet. ult. 10.
is greater than that of Angels merely as in the state of nature. These had a
power to stand, or fall; we by Christ have a power whereby we shall stand and
never fall. By creation the creature had a power, either to abide with God, or
to depart from him; But by Regeneration, that fear of God is put into the
hearts of his people, whereby they shall not depart from God. Jer. 32.40. And
this power of not falling, is in them indeed, but not from them. The faithful
are kept by the power of God, through faith, unto salvation. They are
stablish'd, settled, strengthened. Created will, has a power to will to
presevere in that which is good, Prima gratia data primo Adamo, est qua fit ut
habeat homo justitiam, si velit; sed gratia potentiae est in secundo Adamo, qua
fit ut velit, tantoque ardore diligat, ut carnis voluntatem contraria
concupiscentem, voluntate spiritus vincat. August. de Cor. and gra. c. 12.
but it has not the will it self, to presevere, neither the act of
preseverance, as the regenerate will has. Of this before, p. 64, 65. 83, 84,
85, etc. 72, 73.

Thus far of the sift part of this verse, viz. the defection of these angels.
The second follows, namely, their punishment; and herein first, that of the
prison is considerable; which is twofold. 1. Everlasting chains. 2. Darkness.

EXPLICATION.
For the first, Everlasting chains. It may here be inquired.

1. What we are to understand by these chains. 2. How, and why these chains are
everlasting.
1. What is meant by chains. The word in the Original is (...), in bonds,
which bonds are not to be taken literally for those material instruments or
bonds, whereby things are bound, that they may stand firm and steady, or
persons are hindered from acting what they would, or drawn whither they would
not; but metaphorically (as are also those chains into which Peter says these
fain angels were delivered) for that condition, 2 Pet. 2.4.
of punishment and woe, wherein they shall remain like prisoners in bonds.
Certus inclusos tenet locus nocentes, utque fert fama impios supplicia, vinclis
saeva perpetuis domant. Senec. in Herc. Fur.
The Metaphor being taken from the estate of malefactors, who in prison are
bound with chains, to hinder them from running away, that so they may be kept
to the time of judgment and execution; or who by the Mittimus of a Justicer
are sent to the Gaol, there to lie in chains till the Sessions. And thus these
angels are kept in chains or bonds of three sorts. 1. They are in the chain of
sin, bound by the bond of iniquity, as the phrase is (...).
Act. 8.23. and Prove. 5.22. the wicked are said to be holden with the cords of
their sins; and deservedly may sins be called bonds or chains, they both
holding sinners so strongly, as that without an omnipotent strength, they can
never be loosed; as also being such prison-bonds as go before their appearing
at the bar of the last and dreadful Judgment. The bonds of sin, wherein
wicked men are held, are often by the goodness and power of God loosed; but
the bonds of sin, wherein wicked angels are held, shall be everlasting; there
is, and ever shall be a total inability in those cursed creatures to stir hand
or foot in any well-doing; they are in arcta custodia, Non dicit Apostolus,
peccavit ab initio, sed peccat: nam ex quo diabolus peccare coepit, nunquam
peccare definit. Bed. A peccatis nunquam feriatur, quia sicut non dormitabit,
neque dormiet qui custodit Israel, it a nunquam dormitat, neque dormit qui
impugnat Israel. Est. in 1 John 3.8. Vid. Jun. in. Jud. Non voluntatis
confessio, sed necessitatis extorsio. Hier.
close prisoners in these chains of iniquity, staked down, wedged, wedded to
sin, chained as it were to a block; hence it is said, 1 John 3.8. that the
devil sins from the beginning; whereby may be noted, not only how early he
began, but also how constantly he poceedeth in sin: for (as Bede well observes)
it is not said, he sinned, but he sins from the beginning; to note (says
he) that since he began, he never ceased to sin: he keeps no holy days, makes
no cessation from pride and other impieties; and as he sleeps not who keeps, so
neither does he who opposes Israel, he walks about, seeking, etc. 1 Pet.
5.8. to this purpose our Savior says, John 8.44. that the devil has no
truth in him, to note his utter impotency (says Junius) to any thing of
goodness and integrity; and when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own,
according to his custom and disposition; and when he speaks truth, he
borrows that, to the end, he may deceive. Satan cannot lay down his sinful
inclination; he is totus in mendaciis delibutus, (says Calvin) stained and
soaked in sin. In a word, this chain of sin, which he has put on, Calv. in
Joh. 8.44.
he never can or will put off.

2. These fallen angels are in, and under the chains of Gods power, The strong
man is bound by a stronger then himself: The old Dragon was bound for a
thousand years, Rev. 20. and the chain which curbed him, was the power of God:
this power hinders him both from escaping the evil which he undergoes, and
from effecting and causing that evil which he desires. Satan shall for ever be
miserable in sustainingwhat he would not, and in not obtaining what he would:
The impossibility of his being happy, Quod aufertur nocendipotestas, pro maximo
tormento reputant. Esti. p. 60. in 2. Sent.
necessarily follows his impotency to be holy, purity being the path to
blessedness. All the forces of hell cannot scale the walls of heaven: There is
a gulf fixed between fallen angels, and happiness, which they can never pass
over; as they can never return to God, so as to love him; so never, so as to
enjoy him; they are debarred from these joys unavoidably, which they forsook
voluntarily: nor is it a small matter of their punishment to be curbed against
the bent and violent inclination of their own will, from stirring an hairs
breadth for the hurting any, further then God lengthens out their chains. How
painful a vexation is it to Satan, that he cannot hurt the soul by
affrighting, alluring, and seducing, nor our bodies by diseases and pains, nor
our estates by losses, nor Luke 22.31. Tormentum diaboli erat exire ab homine,
nec posse ei diutius nocere. Vid. Est. in sent. ibid.

Quod abyssum deprecantur eo spectat, quod ipsis volupe fit inter homines
versari, quo illos seducant, and ad se plures semper pertrahant, id quod in
abysso non possunt, ubi sunt nulli quos seducant.

Luc. Brugens. Dolet illis in abyssum demergi, in qua ablata sit laedendi and
perdendi facultas.


our names by disgraces, unless our God gives him chain. Satan has desired to
have you, etc. (says Christ.) And when the devil besought Christ (Luke 8.28.)
not to torment him, it is by many interpreted, that the torment against which
Satan prayed, was that his ejection out of the possessed, whereby he was to be
hindered from doing that hurt which he desired; it being immediately subjoined
by the Evangelist, For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the
man: And whereas ver. 31. the devils further desired Christ, that he would not
command them to go out into the deep; Calvin, with others, refer this
petition to the great desire of the devils to continue among men, to annoy and
molest them: They grieved (says Calvin) to think of being cast into the deep,
wherein they could not have so much power and opportunity of doing harm to
men, the destruction of men being the delight of the devil. And this seems
further to be confirmed by the words of Mark, Mark 5.10.
who says that the devils desired that Christ would not send them out of the
Country; whereby they should want opportunities of doing harm to the souls
and bodies of men. See Perkins on Jude.
Needs then must the chain of divine power, which restrains the devil from
hurting men, be a considerable part of his torment, whose work is to go about,
seeking whom he may devour.

3. own guilty consciences, which by the tenor of God's justice, bind them
over to destruction; they know they are adjudg'd to damnation for their sins.
Let them be where they will, in the earth or air, these chains of guilty
consciences bind them over to judgment; they can no more shake off these, then
leave themselves. In these the devils are bound like madmen and band-dogs;
they must endure what they cannot endure. Jam. 2.19.
The devils fear and tremble; horror is the effect of diabolical assent.
Judicis sui prae. sentia expavefacti, de poena sua cogitarunt. Mala enim
conscientia quid meriti essent, ipsis, tacente Christo, dictabat; quemadmodum
enim scelerati ubi ad Tribunal ventum est, etc. Calv. in Mat. 8.29.
How evidently did this guilty trembling appear, when they ask Christ, whether
he was come to torment them before their time? The sight of the Judge (says
Calvin on the place) made these guilty malefactors to tremble at the thoughts
of their punishment; their evil conscience told them (Christ being silent)
what they deserved: As malefactors, when they are brought to the bar,
apprehend their punishment, so did these devils at the sight of their Judge.
The fallen angels shall ever contemplate what they have done, and how they have
finned, as also what they shall undergo, and how they shall suffer: and hereby,
as God delivers the damned men into the hands of guilty angels, so he delivers
guilty angels over to themselves to be their own tormenters. This fiery furnace
of a tormenting conscience (which of all others is the most scorching and
scalding) every devil shall carry in his bosom This inward and silent
scourge, shall torment him, this arrow shall stick in his side, Daemones
quocunque abeant, ubicunque degant, suum secum circumferunt infernu^. Beda in
c. 3. Jacobi. Aquin. 1. p. q. 64. Art. 4. ad ob. 3. Gr. (...) ab (...), sicut
sempiternus a semper. Though Lorinus upon the place mentions a conceit,
according to which (...), should be derived of (...), and (...), as if the word
should signify, [ not their own] such chains as belonged not to them by
nature, but were put upon them after their sinning, as a punishment. Iren. l.
3. c. 33. Greg. l. 4. mor. cap. 10. Ansel. l. 2. c. 21. Cur Deus homo.
Sicutceciderunt nullo alio nocente ut caderent, itanullo alio ad juvante,
resurgere debent. Aug. Enchir. c. 29. Quoniam non tota multitudo angelorum Deum
deserendo perierat, ea quae perierat perpetua perditione remaneret; alia vero
creatura rationalis, quoniam tota perierat, etc.
this vulture shall prey, this worm shall gnaw, and this hell shall he carry
about him where ever he becomes though he may change his place, yet he never
changes his state. As the happiness of the good angels is not diminished, when
they come to us, and are not actually in the heavenly place, because they know
themselves blessed; (as the honor of a King is not impaired, though actually
he sits not in his chair of State) so neither is the misery of the wicked
angels lessened, when they are not actually in the very place of the tormented
in hell, because they know that eternal woes are due to them; as the scorching
distemper of one in a burning fever is not removed, though he be removed into
a bed of ivory, and the most refreshing place.

2. The second particular to be explained, is, How, and why these chains are
everlasting?

By the word in the original, (...), which singnifies always, continuing,
perpetual, is intended that the forementioned chains, shall never be shaken
off; and that these angels shall stand guilty for ever, expecting the last
judgment, despairing, and without any hope of recovery and redemption, they
having no Savior, nor any means allowed them by God for their release. And if
it be here demanded, why the fallen angels, rather then fallen man, stand guilty
for ever without any deliverance, or hope of recovery; its by several men
differently answered.

1. Some say, Because man was seduced to sin; but the devil sinned merely by
his own will, without instigation from any other: he fell alone, and must (if
at all) rise alone.

2. Others say, Because in the fall of angels, the whole angelical nature of
angels perished not; but the first man sinning, the whole humane nature had
perished, if the goodness of God had not afforded a remedy, 1 Cor. 15.22. In
Adam all die. Id. in Joh. Tr. 110. Tanto damnabilior eorum judicata est culpa,
quanto erat natura sublimior. In offend endo creatorem, tanto execrabilius,
beneficio ejus ingrati extiterunt, quanto beneficentius sunt creati. (...).
Damascen. l. 2. Orth. Fid. cap. 3. and 4. Gerh. m 2. Pet. 2. Praestat grato
cord, Dei (...), in remedio generi humano praestito agnoscere, quam
profunditatem divinorum judiciorum curiosius, extra verbi limits, scrutari.


3. Others say, That the nature of the angels being more excellent, and
sublime, their fault was more damnable then that of man's; and that so much the
more ungrateful to God were they in their fall then man, by how much the more
bountiful in their Creation, God was to them, then to man. But I humbly
conceive, we may more safely say with Gerhard, It Is better thankful to
acknowledge the love of God to mankind, in affording him a recovery, then to
search into the depths of divine judgments, without the warrant of the word,
with curiosity.

OBSERVATIONS.
They whose course and trade of life is in sin, Observe. 1.
do most resemble Satan; Sin is a chain to the godly, to weary and trouble
them; but its a chain to the devil and wicked men, wholly to subdue them to
its power and obedience; The holiest may sometime fall into sin, but the
ungodly only live and lie in sin: the godly are like a sheep, which sometimes
may slip, and be tumbled into a dirty ditch; but the wicked are as swine, who
tumble and wallow in the ditch. The former beat themselves with striving to get
out, the later are ready to beat and hurt any who labor to help them out. The
former cry out of sin and sinning, as their torment; the later (like the
devil) when any go about to reform and hinder them from sin, cry out, What
have we to do with you? are you come to torment us before our time? The godly
sin, but the wicked are (...), workers of iniquity, witty and skillful
practitioners in impiety. Sin is the woe of a Saint, and the work of a sinner:
To the former its a thorn in the eye; to the later as a crown upon the head.
In the former, sin is; but the later are in sin; a sober man may have drink in
him, but the drunkard only is in drink. A Saint, when he sins, is as a poor
child when he falls into a pond of water; but a wicked man as a fish in the
water, sports and swims in sin as his element: his bibere is his vivere, he
drinks in sin as the fish drinks in water. A sinner performs good duties by
fits and starts, but sin is his course, and standing employ meant; a Saint sins
by fits, but holiness is his course, and he walks with God, though sometmes he
be drawn away by a tentation. Oh that they who live in sin, cannot sleep
unless they sin, who are sick with Amnon, till they have fatisfied their
lusts; who can walk in sin from morning to night, week after week, year after
year (yea, and if they had more lives, they would do so life after life) would
consider who is their father, and whom they resemble, and never be at rest,
till they get from under the cruel slavery of sin, into the service of Jesus
Christ, which is the true and only liberty. And let them fear lest the Lord at
length give them up to final obstinacy, Revel. 22.11.
and say in his wrath, Thou that art filthy, be filthy still; my spirit shall
never more strive with thee; I will never give one blow more to knock off thy
chains, but they shall be like the devils, everlasting chains: and thou who
hold thy sin so fast, here upon earth, shall be held and bound by that chain
for ever in hell.

2. Observe. 2.
Torments cannot reform devils. Hellish horrors cannot change hellish hearts.
Sinners will not be persuaded either by the rising of one from the dead, or
their own remaining among the damned. The braying of sinners in a mortar,
cannot make their folly depart from them. Outward troubles may break the back,
only God by his supernatural working, can melt the heart. Notwithstanding
smiting, Isai 1.5.
people may revolt more and more. After all the repeated plagues upon Pharaoh,
and Egypt, their hearts were hard: And though God battered the Israelites with
successive judgments, yet he testifies, they returned not to him. Am. 4.8.
Judgments move only by way of outward and objective persuasion, they cannot
reach, really work upon, or turn the heart: The smartest outward poverty,
cannot make a man poor in spirit. The glorified angels are humble in the joys
of heaven; the devils are proud in the torments of hell. It is not the
inflicting, but the sanctifying of troubles that can benefit us. Whenever the
Lord chastens us, Psalm. 94.12. Jer. 6.29.
let us beseech him likewise to teach us; otherwise we shall continue
unreformed.

3. Restraint much differs from reformation. Observe. 3.
Devils may have a chain upon them, and yet no change within them. A
necessitated forbearance of sin may accompany a divilish nature; divine
chastisements and humane laws may hide sin, and hinder sinning; it is only a
principle of renovation whereby we hate sin: Let none please himself with such a
conversion as he is forced unto by his earthly superiors. They who only leave
sin because men forbid it, will upon the same ground be brought to forsake any
way of holiness. And yet what is the religion of the most, but a mere
restraint; and hence it is that so many have proved Apostates: Constrained
goodness is never constant. The fear of man's laws may make a good subject,
it is only the fear of God in the heart that makes a good Christian.

4. Satan can do nothing but by Gods permission. Observe. 4.
God keeps him in a powerful chain. Wicked angels are potent, only a good God
is omnipotent. When God gives way, one devil may overthrow a legion, Mat. 8.31.
1 King. 22.21 Job 1.12.
a million of men; but till God lengthens out his chain, a legion of devils
cannot hurt one man, nay not a silly beast. God who made, can ruin them; and
would do so, were he not able to overruled them, and to advance his own glory
against, nay by all their endeavors. The consideration of this, should both
quiet and counsel us. 1. Quiet us, because our worst enemy is wholly in the
power of our best friend; Satan takes out a new commission from God for every
undertaking against us; and (as Christ told Pilate) He could have no power over
us, unless it were given him from above. It was in the power of Satan to carry
Christ up, but not to cast him down; he that fears God neither need, nor will
fear Satan. As the rage of men, so that of Devils, shall also praise God, and
the residue thereof will he restrain. 2. Counsel us, to take heed of that
heathenish error whereby men commonly give the honor due to God to Conjurers
and Impostors; and of that common fault among Christians, in being more angry
with the instrument, then patient under the hand that smites them.

5. Observe. 5
Satan cannot hurt us, unless he gets us within the compass of his chain. If
we go not to him, he cannot come to us. All the ways of Satan are deviations
and swervings from the way and rule of the word. He who keeps in this way, Non
extorquet a nobis consensum, sed petit. Aug. Non potest vincere nisi volentem.
Hierom.
and walks according to this rule, keeps himself from the destroyer, and peace
shall be upon him. Satan was fain to beg of Christ to cast down himself; he
cannot cast us down, unless we cast down our selves; he can suggest sin to us,
he cannot force us to sin. No man is hurt but from himself, and out of the
voluntary inclination of his own mind unto evil. The devil cannot infuse
wickedness into us, but only stir up wickedness in us; he cannot bend the
will as God does, who by his own absolute power, works in a way of creation in
us; who without our selves, and against our selves, gives a new heart, and
changes an heart of stone into an heart of flesh. Satan moves not our wills
either by any proper power which he has over them, or without our assent first
gained unto him, but by a working upon the imagination; sometimes so presenting
objects to the understanding, as that it apprehends evil in the color of
good: Sometimes stirring up the corruption, passions and lusts already in us,
to darken the understanding, and incline the will. If Satan could hurt us
without our own wills, he could never be resisted in any tentation. The devil is
not so dangerous an enemy as our own sin; this slayes us without him, he hurts
us not without this. If Satan plow not with our own Heifer, he can get no
advantage. Many having sinned, lay the blame on the devil, who (they say) owed
them a spite; whereas it is their sin, not the devil, which paies it; had they
not cast down themselves, the devil could never have done it. The thief indeed
is to be blamed for stealing thy money, but it was thy fault and folly to leave
thy doors open, and give him entertainment. Satan never beats us but with our
own weapons: Though David was stirred up to number the people by Satan, 1 Chronicles. 21.1
yet when he came to see his folly, he thought not his sin less because
Satan moved him to it, but took all the blame of sin to himself, and said, I
have done very foolishly. Let therefore the time we spend in blaming of Satan
when we have sinned, be spent in opposing of Satan, Jam. 4.7. Ephesians. 4.27. 1 Pet
5.10. Ephesians. 6.13.16.
that we may not sin; let us not give place to the devil, but resist him, by
faith applying the victory of Christ, and viewing present assistances, and
future recompenses; by prayer bringing God into the combat, by sobriety in the
use of comforts, and watchfulness against all tentations to sin, continuing
our allegiance and Gods protection. Adventure not within the chains of a mad
dog; supply not their want of length, by thy want of watchfulness. Our natures
are tindar, and gunpowder; we had need beware, not only of fiery darts, but the
least spark.

6. God can make an offender his own afflicter, Observe. 6.
a Magormissabib, a terror to himself, and constantly to carry his own chains
of terror and torment about him. That which makes us enemies to God, makes us
enemies to our selves; Wickedness is it is own vexation. A sinner, though he be
truly a friend to none, yet never is he so great a foe to any, as to himself.
Powder which blows up the house, cannot it self escape from burning. Such is
the power of Gods justice, that without any trouble to himself, he can make a
transgressor his own tormentor, industriously to fetch in matter of excessive
horror to himself out of his own bosom; to gaze willingly into that false
glass which Satan sets before him, to be led by that lying cruelty which
mis-represents to the sinners affrighted imagination, every gnat as a camel,
Nihil potuit adeo apt proponi, nihil tam accommodate adferri, quod non ille
vel refelleret argutissime, vel eluderet callidissime, vel-dissolveret
promptissime. Saepe intra meipsum cogitavi eum nequaquam fuisse ita perspicacem
in judicio dogmatum, ita porro exercitatum in disputationibus theologicis, cum
sanus esset. Hist. Fran. Spira. p. 120.121. In tantis suis malis, filiorum
suorum non aliter vultus and manus quam tortorum suorum semper exhorrescere,
etc. Ibid. p. 84.
every mote as a molehill, every molehill as a mountain, every lustful thought
as a Sodomiticall vallany, every idle word as a desperate blasphemy, every
angry look as a bloody murder, every transgression against light of conscience,
as a sin against the Holy Ghost. In this amazedness of spirit, God can cause a
man to turn his own artillery, his wit and learning upon himself, to argue with
subtility against the pardonableness his sins, to wound his wounds with a
conceit that they are incurable, to vex his very vexations with refusing to be
comforted. In a word, to turn to his own torment, not only his crosses and
tentations, but even the very comforts of his life; wife, children, gold,
goods, honors, as that woeful Spira did. If God speak the word, the hand shall
rebel and strike the head, the nails shall tear the skin, the teeth shall gnaw
the flesh. Those who are made to take one another parts, shall become
mutinous, like the Midianites, who sheathed their swords in their fellows
bowels. A man forsaken of God has least mercy for himself. Never let us
please our selves, or envy the enemies of God in any sinful quietness, since
God can make men selfe-destroyers. To conclude this, if ever you would be
reconciled to your selves, 1. Labor to be reconciled to God in Christ. Never
will conscience (Gods deputy) speak peace, if God himself speak war: Nor will
God be at peace, but through him who is our peace. 2. Let us maintain a
constant war with sin. Such is the cruelty of sin, that it always torments
those who loves it: and such is its impotency, that it cannot hurt those who
hate it. 3. Let us constantly walk in those ways, which ( Prove. 3.17.) are
called peace; remembering, that holiness troubles nothing, but what we should
not only trouble, but destroy; our lusts.

7. Observe. 7.
There Is no liberty to be found in forsaking of Gods service. As soon as these
angels had thrown off the yoke of obedience, they put on the chains of bondage;
they were in bondage to sin, and for sin; Every sinner is a captive, he cannot
stir hand or foot in heavenly employments. A Saint only walks at liberty, the
service of God alone is freedom. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty, and a changing of the chains of flavery, for an heavenly activity.
None but Saints can run the ways of Gods Commandments, and willingly wait upon
their Master: and hence it is, that only they can perform duties either
delightful to him, or themselves. The ways of obedience which are torments to
a sinner, are the pleasures of a Saint; that which the one counts his yoke, the
other esteems his privilege, and knows not how to live without the daily
performing of them. And how comfortable is their condition, in having their
chains of guilt beaten off by Christ! As their services are, so their usage is
that of sons, not of slaves and captives. Their duties savor of the Spirit of
adoption, and a filial ingenuity. Their services are without fear; whereas
others are all their life long subject unto bondage. How are sinners mistaken,
in thinking that liberty is inconsistent with sanctity! A Saint loses nothing
but his bonds and fetters, by becoming holy; nor is holiness a chain to any,
but those who know no other freedom then an house of bondage.

8. The pleasures of sin, bear no proportion to the horrors thereof. It Is
pleasures are light and momentany, its chains are heavy, horrid, and
everlasting. The act of sin is instantly ended, and the delights of sin soon
fall off; but its chains are strong, and not to be broken; there is no aqua
fortis, to eat them asunder: How happy were it that sinners would be but as
wise in preventing, as they will he woeful in undergoing the everlasting
sorrows which follow their short sinning! Oh that when you say, you know not
how to forbear the breaches of the law, you would ask your self whether you
are able to bear, or knock off the chains of the prison? Foolish sinner! say no
more, (as I have sometimes heard thee in thy sits of passion) I must speak, and
then I have done; when chou have done, God has not done, he then begins; and
should he (as thou deservest) once chain such a wild offender in that black
dungeon of hell, he would not have done with thee to eternity. Look upon sin
with Scripture spectacles: Oh view the chain, the everlasting chain of guilt
and horror, through every tentation. Let the meditation of eternity damp and
stop thee in thy sinful heats and fury. If thou can not find a man, who to
gain the world, would be compelled to lie bound upon a bed of roses a hundred
years; how shall thou endure the flames and chains of hell to eternity?

9. Observe. 9.
How eminently is the goodness of God manifosted to men, more then to angels!
The fallen angels continue under the chains of eternal guilt, helpless
without, Aug.
and hopeless of recovery. Man, who deserved no better, is loosed from those
chains by a strong Redeemer, and by the blood of Jesus Christ they are broken
asunder. How should so great mercy quicken our hearts to thankfulness! Wonder,
O man, that God should break in pieces, and throw on to the dunghill of hell to
eternity, those golden vessels, the angels, beset with the most precious gems
of most shining and glorious endowments, when they had contracted rust; and
that he should cleanse the earthen pot, poor man, in stead of breaking it, when
the uncleanness of sin had defiled and eaten into it. I only add, that in one
thing the sins of men admit of a greater aggravation, then those of devils;
these never sinned against the offers of a Savior: Unbelieving sinner! the
very devils will condemn thee. If all the examples in the world of ingratitude
to God, and unkindnesse to ones self were lost, they might be found again in
thee.

Thus far of the first part of the punishment of these fallen angels in the
prison, viz. their being in everlasting chains.

They are said secondly, to be under darkness.

Two things may here needfully be opened.

1. What the darkness is under which they are. 2. What is their misery in
being under it.
EXPLICATION.
1. Darkness is in Scripture taken taken two ways, 1. Genesis 1.2, 4. Isai.
45.7. Isai. 45.19. Isai. 45.3. 1 Cor. 4.5. 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. 2 John 2.8. Romans
1.21.2.19.1 These. 5.8. 1 John 2.11.
1. Properly, for the negation, defect and privation of light. 2.
Metaphorically: 1. for a secret, hidden, or private place; What I tell you in
darkness, that speak you in light, Matthew. 10.27. so Luke 12.3. 2. For error
and ignoorance; Acts 26.18. to turn them from darkness to light, Ephesians. 4.18.
having their minds darkened, Ephesians. 5.8. Once were ye darkness, etc. In which
tespect principally, sins are called the works of darkness, Romans 13.12. Ephesians.
5.11. 3. For great calamities and punishments, 1. External, Job 50.26. When I
looked for good, Jer. 23.12.
evil came unto me; and when I waited for light, there came darkness. Isai.
5.30. If one look unto the land, behold darkness and sorrow, Isai 8.22. They
shall look unto the earth, and behold trouble and darkness, Isai. 59.9. We
wait for brightness, but we walk in darkness, Isai. 47.5. Get thee into
darkness, Jer. 13.16. Ezekiel. 32.8. Mich. 7.8. Psalm. 143.3. Afflictus, vitam
tenebris, luctuque trahebam. Virg. Aeneid. 2.
O danghter of the Caldeans. 2. Internal. Thus Heman complains, Psalm. 88.6.
That God had laid him in darkness. Isai. 50.10. Who is there among you, etc.
that walks in darkness, and sees no light. 3. Eternal, for the
uncomfortable condition of the damned in hell, by reason of the absence of Gods
presence. Jude 12. Matthew. 8.12. Matthew. 22.13. we read of some cast into utter
darkness, i. e. without the Kingdom of God, which is light, and a Kingdom of
light. In this phrase of utter darkness, (according to some) is an allusion to
the darkness which God sent upon Egypt, Metaphorice, per tenebras, scriptura
horrendum maerorem designat. Call. in Mat. 8.12. Tenebrae exteriores domesticae
luci opponuntur, quum antiquitus nocturnae ut plurimum coenae essent, quas
plurimae faces and lampades illustrabant: qui ejiciuntur e regno Dei, Christus
eos dicit, extra in tenebras, ejici in tenebras. Call. in Mat. 25. Comprativus
superlativi est loco, ut sit in tenebras extimas. Luc. Brug. in Mat. 8.
Exodus 10.23. that Egyptian darkness, being without the habitations of the
Israelites, in all which was light; Or (as Reverend Calvin conceives) to the
darkness wherein they are, who are excluded in the night time from places, in
which are suppers or feasts, where they set up many lights and lamps: or as
others, to the darkness of prisons, which were often wont to be without the
City, Acts 12.10. Whatever the allusion is, by this utter darkness, is
intended a state of the greatest remoteness and distance from the light of
Gods presence, the joy, yea the heaven of heaven; for as Brugensis well notes
by the comparative note, (...), outer, may well be intented the superlative,
utmost, or most without, furthest, or most distant from the Kingdom of light,
as 1 Cor. 13.13. the greater, i. e. the greatest of these is charity. This
eternal darkness, which stands in the withdrawing of the light of Gods
pleased and pleasing countenance, wherein is fullness of joys, and pleasures
for evermore, is that here by the Apostle intended, to be the portion of these
angels in their prison of hell. And most fitly is this their woeful estate of
separation from Gods presence called darkness; because, as the (though but
deficient) cause of darkness, is the departure of the light, so the separation
from the favorable presence of God is the greatest misery of the damned: as
the face and comfortable presence of God is the heaven of heavens so absence
from God is the hell of hell. It is not heaven to be in the place of heaven,
but to be with God in heaven; and it is not hell to be in hell, but to be
without Gods loving and gracious presence in heaven.

The misery of which condition of darkness, or separation from Gods presence,
is in the second place to be explained; and it may be amplified two ways.

1 Considering from what this separation shall be.

2 How the misery thereof shall be further heightened.

1 There shall be a separation from the favorable presence of God, which is 1 A
full good, comprehending all good; that wherein all good things are assembled
and combined. He who has him who is all things, must needs have all things. To
him there can be made no addition of goodness; in parting with him, the damned
part with whatsoever is good. 2 A filling, satisfying good, enough and
sufficient for himself; and that which can fill the Ocean, can undoubtedly fill
the vessel. God satisfies all the wants and exigences of the soul: My God
shall supply all your wants: The favor of God is better then life: The Lord is
my shepherd, I shall not want. Every good besides God, is but of a limited
nature, answering but to this or that exigency; but one God answers to every
want: Bread relieves hunger, water thirst, clothes nakedness, money poverty;
God relieves in every want, Summa mors animae est alienatio a vita Dei, in
aeternitate supplicii. Aug. lib. 6. de civ. Dei c. 12.
and has infinitely more oil then we have vessels. Deservedly therefore is
this punishment of loss frequently expressed in the Scripture as the great woe
of the damned, Matthew. 7.23. Luke 13.27. Mat. 25.10, 41. The throne of iniquity
shall have no fellowship with God, Psalm 94.20. Needs must hell be a dismal
dungeon, where the sunshine of Gods presence never comes.

But 2. The misery of the loss of this blessed presence of God is further
heightened, aggravated, and made intolerably tormenting; Considering, 1. The
damned in hell know the incomparable worth of what they have lost: Their
Understandings are clear, though they are not changed: Their knowledge
increases their sorrow. How happy (comparatively) would they be, if their
Understandings were taken from them, if they could but put out their eyes!
Though they see not God so fully and clearly as do the blessed in heaven; yet
they see enough of him to rend and grind them with inexpressible vexation for
losing him. A company of wretched beggars, who in a dark night stand at the
door of that house where there is a Wedding feast, though they see not the
stately preparations, the furnished tables, the costly ornaments of the married
Couple and Guests, so fully and clearly; and though they hear not the sweet
Music within so distinctly, as do the guests themselves who sit at table; yet
by lights in the windows, the voices of mirth, and Musicians, with the confused
sound of instruments, the passage to and fro of attendants with their cheer,
they cannot but observe enough to think themselves, being excluded, very
miserable, in comparison of those who are attended at the table, and in the
midst of all their mirth and plenty. Christ makes the Application, Luke
13.25.28. Where he speaks of those who stand without and knock, etc. and shall
see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God,
and they themselves thrust out. The rich man sees Abraham and Lazarus, but a
far off: see them he must, though he would not; get to them he must not,
though he would never so fain. And certainly, the large vessel of an Angels
understanding holds more matter of this torment, then can more shallow
capacities.

2. These damned spirits remember, that this loss of the presence of God was a
rod of their own making, a woe of their own most wilful procuring; The door
which shuts them out of heaven was pulled to with their own hands. How much
will it sharpen the edg of their horror, to consider, that none forced them to
sin; that the forsaking of God was the choice of their own will; that they had
no enemies but themselves? The treasures of glory were not stolen from them,
but voluntarily dissipated, and prodigally misspent with their own hands. How
easily could they have prevented that loss which now is irreparable! and have
kept their foot out of that snare, out of which they can never wind themselves!
The arrow which falls down upon their heads, was shot up with their own hands;
and (as its said of birdlime, that its made of the dung of birds) the
destruction which has caught them, was spun out of their own bowels.

3. They consider how poor a trifle, and contemptible a toy it was for which
they have lost the blessed presence of God. How does it cut them, to remember,
that they have lost all things for nothing; a massy crown, a weight of glory,
for a bubble, a butter-flie; the inheritance of heaven for a song! What
proportion is between a notion, a fancy, and the satisfying fruition of a real
good! how do men blame themselves for lodging in a dear Inn, where they are
compelled to pay as much more as their entertainment is worth! How heartily
have I heard men beshrew themselves, for parting with great sums of money, for
which (they say) they never drunk! A minute of pleasure, a poor, silly, slight,
shallow nothing (may the damned say) was all I had (for have he cannot say) to
show for my self, my blessedness, my God. (Oh mad exchange! Oh amazing
disproportion!) deservedly miserable wretch that I am, I had but a dream of
delight, for heaven it self. Did ever any fool buy so dear, and sell so cheap?

4. They consider who it is that excludes them from this blessedness, even God
himself, who is not only a God of power, and therefore able to hinder them from
entering, ( for if he shuts, none can open;) but a God of tender compassions, to
some; This God, who made them, will not have mercy on them. Mercy it self is
now made wrath. He now thunders in his fury, whose bowels once made a noise,
which though sometimes tender, are now harder then flints. What shall open the
door, when he who is goodness and love it self, shuts it?

5 They are therefore hopeless, Semper cogitur ut and mortem sine morte,
defectum sine defectu, finem fine fine patiatur, quatenus ci and mors
immortalis fit, and defectusindeficiens, and finis infinitus. Greg. Mat. 25.10.
Luke 13.
and utterly despairing ever to be admitted to the presence of God, the anchor
of hope is now broken; the bridge of mercy is now drawn; the gulf of separation
shall never be past. The heaviest rock can as easily take wings and fly, and
kiss the body of the Sun, as can a damned spirit get up into the gracious
presence of God. When the door is shut, its too late to think of entering.
Knocking, weeping, entreating are altogether fruitless. How deeply did the
departure of Paul pierce the heart of the Christians with sorrow, when he had
told them, that they should see his face no more! Oh dreadful word, never! the
bitterest word, in comparison of it, is sweet.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Separation from God is the evil indeed. Observe. 1.
It separates from the greatest good. Worldly evils hurt the skin, not the
soul: Its possible they may be corrective, but the loss of God is destructive.
God, in depriving men of his gifts, whips them; but in the final removal of
himself, he executes them. Scourging is often the lot of sons, but separation
from God is the portion of devils. God may take away every thing in love,
unless it be his love. Separation from God is a distinguishing judgment. How
much are men mistaken in their estimations of misery! The most know no other
hell, but poverty, or some such worldly woe* Whereas outward evils are but
appearing, and opinionative, and all their deformity is in the eye of the
beholder; if they drive us (as often they do) nearer to God, they are good for
us; and nothing is truly bad which separates. not from the chiefest good. There
is more bitterness in a drop of sin, than a sea of suffering.

2. Observe. 2.
How gross is the delusion of sinners! Who for the tasting of the slight and
superficial pleasures of a tentation, will lose the soul-satisfying presence
of the everblessed God! If all the delights of the earth cannot countervail one
moments loss of the light of Gods Countenance in this life, what proportion is
there between a moments taste of worldly pleasures, and the everlasting loss of
the fruition of God in glory! Could Satan make his promise good, in saying, All
these things will I give thee: truly it would be but a slight performance in the
esteem of that soul, who knows that the gain of the world would be followed
with an eternal loss of God. The eternal weight of the loss of God,
infinitely more weighs down all momentany delights, than does a mountain of
lead a feather. Could sinners part with God upon some valuable consideration,
their folly were not so much to be pitied; but nothing can be given them in
exchange for God, because God whom they lose, is all things.

3 The wisest care imaginable, Observe. 3.
is that of enjoying the presence of God in glory. Show your care hereof, 1 By
observing, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 12 Ephesians. 4.18
and laying to heart your distance from God by nature. We all came into the
world with our faces toward Satan, and our backs turned upon God: let no
worldly enjoyments bribe your consciences into a false and fained quietness
while you so remain. If the poor Jews would not be made to sing in a strange
land; let not siners please themselves in this condition of estrangement from
God. How have the Saints mourned under the apprehension of Gods departure!
Their lamentations show what sinners must do, either here, or hereafter. 2 By
making him your friend, who only admits us into the presence of God. Jesus
Christ is that way whereby that gulf between God and the soul is only passed
over. There Is no seeing his face, without bringing Christ along with us: nor
can we more endure the presence of God without an interest in Christ, then can
the stubble endure the flames. Every Christless soul is a Godless soul. The
blood of Christ is the only cement which can join God and us together. 3 By
laboring to be made fit for his presence: Holiness becomes all those who shall
enjoy it. Heaven is no place for dogs; and without holiness no man shall see
God. Heaven must first be in us, before we can ever get into heaven. God
forbids his people to have fellowship with the works of darkness; and much less
will he himself delight in such company. Sin hinders from enjoying God here,
Isa. 59.2.
much more bereafter: Nor will heaven ever be sweet to that soul, which here
accounts not sin bitter. The light of glory would dazzle those eyes which only
have been used to the darkness of sin: filthy garments may (undiscerned) be
worn in the dark, but not in the light. It Is the happiness of heaven, that all
its inhabitants are of one mind: The company of sinners would spoil the
harmonious consort of glorified spirits. 4 By delighting in the presence of,
and acquaintance with God, while we are here upon earth. How shie are men of
admitting strangers into their houses! and how readily do they open their doors
to those with whom they are acquainted! No wonder, if Christ bids those depart,
whom he never knew. Account those duties, conditions, companies to be but
empty, in and by which thou enjoyest not something of God. Content not thy self
with that Prayer, Sabbath, Ministry, wherein God has not discovered his
humbling quickening, strengthening presence to thee, in thee. Let no Sacrifice
please thee, without fire: Love the Ordinances, because God meets thee in them.
If God be not at home, think it not enough that his servants, his Ministers
have spoken to thee: Let the society of Saints be thy solace, and deerly esteem
those in whom thou beholdest any resemblance of God: With the wicked, converse
rather as a Physician to cure them, than as a companion to delight in them. Let
not thy heart be taken with any comfort, any further then thou beholdest the
heart of the giver in it, or find thine own raised to serve and delight in
him.

4. No distress should dishearten those here, Observe. 4.
to whom God will not deny his presence hereafter: Though God brings them into
miseries, yet he will not exclude them with the miserable: If men cast them out
of their company, yet Christ will never say to them, Depart from me. If they
want an house to hide their heads in, and a bed to rest their bodies on, yet
their Fathers house and bosom will supply both. Let men do their worst, they
may send Saints to him, not from him. How little do those rods smart, in
striking with which, the Lord takes not away his loving-kindnesse? What has
that poverty more then a name, which is not accompanied and followed with the
loss of God himself? In a word, Though sometimes the Saints sit in darkness,
and see no light, yet is light sown for them; they shall not lie under
darkness: but after the darkest night of desertion, shall arise to them that
glorious Sun of Gods presence, which shall never go down again, but make an
eternal day.

Thus far for the first part of the punishment of the Angels, viz. that which
they undergo in in the prison. The second follows, viz. that which shall be
laid upon them at, and after their appearing at the bar: and in that, first,
to what they are reserved, viz. to judgment.

EXPLICATION.
There are two things may here be enquired after.

1 What we are to understand by the judgment to which these angels are
reserved. 2 How the angels which are punished already, are yet said to be
reserved to judgment.

1 For the first, Though the word (...), judgment, be frequently in Scripture
taken more largely and improperly, for the cause of punishment, John 3.19. for
the government of the world, John 5.22. amendment or reformation John 12.31.
etc. for the place of judgment; Matthew. 5.22.
yet in this place it comes more close to its own proper signification
according to which, it imports a judiciary trial of, and proceeding about
causes: In which respect its taken in this place, and often in the new Testament,
for the solemn action of the last and general judgment, Mat. 10.15. Mat.
11.22, 24 and 12.36. Mark 6.11. 2 Pet. 3.7. Where we read of the day of
judgment, and Ecc. 11.9, 12.14. Luke 10.14. Heb. 9.27. and 10.27, where there
is mention made of this judgment. Which judgment consists of three parts.
Veritas in inquisitione, nuditas in publicatione, serenitas in executione.
1 A discussion and manifestation of the faults for which the prisoners were
committed. 2 A pronouncing sentence upon them for every crime discussed and
manifested. 3 A severe executing upon them the sentence so pronounced.

1. Act. 23.3 1 Timothy 5.24. Act. 16.15. 2 Cor. 5.14.
In this judgment faults and causes shall be discussed, and manifested; and
judgment is sometime in Scripture put for this discussion and discerning of
causes: some men's sins are open before hand, going before to judgment, etc. 1 Timothy 5.24. etc. And this knowledge of the cause is intended, Cunctaque cunctorum
cunctis arcana patebunt. Ezra 4.15.19. and 6.2. Est. 6.1 Deu. 32.34. Psalm.
56.8. Jer. 3.22. Hos. 7.2. 1 Cor. 4.5.
Rev. 20.12. Where we have mention of those who stand before God, of the
opening of the books, and the judging out of those things which were written in
the books. For though at the last judgment, God will make use of no books,
properly so called, yet all the works of the judged shall be as manifestly
known, as if God kept registers, rolls and records of them in heaven: and at
his coming, he will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will
make manifest the counsels of the hearts, that the righteousness of his
proceedings may appear to all. These books of discovery, are two; 1 that of
Gods omniscience. 2 that of the creatures conscience. 1 According to the
former, every creature is manifest in his sight, and all things are opened unto
his eyes: Heb. 4.13. Mat. 3.16. Joh. 2.25. Jer. 23.24. Mar. 4.22. Romans 2.5.16.
he has a book of remembrance, he needs not that any should testify of man;
for he knows what is in man. As God hates sin wheresoever he knows it, so he
knows it wheresoever it is. Men may hide their sins from men, from God they
cannot. Men may, like foolish children, when they shut their eyes and see none,
think that none sees them; but the light and the darkness are both alike to
God: Nor can any, Isa. 29.15.
by seeking deep to hide their counsels from the most High, help himself: Never
has one sin since the creation of the world, Deus nec fallitur, nec flectitur.
slipped from the memory of Gods knowledge; though he has been pleased to put
away the sins of some out of the memory of his vengeance: Nor does he forget
any sin out of necessity, but merely out of mercy. 2 According to the later Ad
hunc librum emendandum omnes alii libri sunt inventi: Quid libri aperti nifi
conscientia, non atramento scripti, sed delictoru^ inquinamento. Amb. in Ps. 1.
Psalm. 51. Idem judex, reus, testis, tortor, flagellum.
, the book of Conscience, the Lord will, in the general Judgment, bring to
every man's remembrance what he has done; he will set the sins of the wicked in
order before them, Psalm 50. their consciences shall then be dilated and
irradiated by the power of God. Here in this life Conscience is bribed, and
gives in an imperfect, but then it shall bring a full and impartial evidence
against sinners, who shall be speechless, and have their mouths stopped: Hence
Jude 15. it is said, that God shall (...), convince all the ungodly: Their
faults shall be so demonstrated to them, that they shall have nothing to
object, but shall be compelled to acknowledge all, both in point of fact and
desert. That which before was almost imperceptible, shall, being held to the
fire of vengeance, and the light of conscience, be made legible.

2 In this judgment to which these angels shall be brought, there shall be a
decisive, definitive sentence: Isa. 5.3. Matt. 7.1. John 18.31. Acts 24.6. Acts
17.31. Matthew. 19.28. 1 Cor. 6.3 Acts 4.19.
And frequently and most properly in Scripture is judgment taken for a decisive
passing of sentence. To the former sentence, viz. that of their own
consciences, shall be added that of the Judge, whereby they shall be adjudged to
the punishment of loss and pain for ever: A sentence which shall be openly
promulgated. Quo maledicti acrius doleant videntes quid amiseri^; and justi
videbunt et laetabuntur, considerantes quid evascrint. Bern. Ser. 8. in Psalm.
Heretofore it was written down in the book, now it shall be pronounced before
all the world. A sentence which shall be published soon after that of
benediction has been uttered to the godly, that so the damned may grieve the
more, to consider what they have lost; and the saved rejoice to observe what
they have escaped. A sentence, every syllable whereof is more dreadful then
ten thousand thunderclaps, roaring in their ears to all eternity. Wonder one
may, that so much woe can be couched in so few words. In being sentenced to
depart from God, what pleasure are they not adjudged to lose! In being
sentenced to the flames, what pain are they not adjudged to feel!

3 In the judgment to which these angels shall be brought, Mat. 5.22 Mar. 3.29.
Joh. 5.24.29. Act. 8.33. 2 These. 1.5. Jam. 2.13. (...) put for (...). Ille
judex nec gratia praevenitur, nec misericordia flectitur, nec pecunia
corrumpitur, nec poenitentia mitigatur. Aug. l. 3. de fid. and symb. 2 These.
1.9. Expulsi a facie, hac terribili ipsius voce^. Sicut servi fugitivi, post
multum temporis, dominum suum videntes, nihil aliud, nisi de verberibus
deprecantur; sic and daemones videntes Dominum in terris ad judicandum se
venisse credebant, Hierom. in Mat. 8.
there shall be an execution of the sentence denounced: and frequently in
Scripture is judgment taken for punishment to which men are adjudged. The
sentence shall not be an empty sound, as a report without a bullet, a noise
without a sting; but it shall be executed without any exception, delay, reply,
appeal. The sentence of malediction shall be a fiery stream proceeding from the
throne of the Judge, and sweeping the condemned into hell. The wicked shall be
punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the
glory of his power: which place Beza expounds of their expulsion from the
presence of the Lord by that terrible voice, Go ye cursed. Others thus
interpret it, The glorious power and majesty of Christ's presence, shall suffice
to destroy the wicked. If the devils were unable to endure the presence of
Christ upon earth, when emptied of glory, upon considering that hereafter
Christ should be their Judge; crying out, and asking whether he was come to
torment them before their time; how shall they abide his presence, when filled
with dreadful majesty!

For the second. 2 Branch of Explicat. Justin. in Apol. 1. daemones igni
sempiterno nondum traditi sunt, sed in die judicii tradendi: Hanc opini. onem
amplectitur Irenaeus, l. 5. cont. Haer.

Diabolus non statim in primordiis transgressionis ad poenam detrusus est a
Deo. idque ut hominem malitia sua exerceret ad virtutem. Lactant. lib. 3.
Divin. Instit. cap. 28.


How the angels who are already punished, and therefore judged, can be reserved
to judgment. We must not conceive (with some) that, because they are said to
be reserved to judgment, therefore for the present, they are not punished: For
if the good angels are before the general judgment, in a state of happiness,
(...), always beholding the face of God, then why should not the bad be in a
state of misery? Besides, if the souls of wicked men are now tormented in hell
(which nevertheless may be said to be reserved to judgment;) why may it not be
asserted, that the angels who seduced men, have been ever since their fall
tormented, considering that the fall was that to the angels, which death is to
ungodly men? And further, if the fallen angels be in hell (a place of punishment)
with the damned souls, then it is as certain they partake of the same
punishment with them; as it is absurd to imagine that the holy angels should be
in heaven with the souls of the blessed, and not be with them partakers of the
fruition of Gods presence.

There is therefore a threefold judgment which the fallen angels incur: That
wherewith they were punished immediately upon their fall, when by God they were
thrown into misery. Of this speaks Peter, 2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels
which sinned, but cast them down into hell, etc. 2 That whereby they are cast
out of their dominion, Joh. 12.31.
and their power over us destroyed by the death of Christ. 3 Their full and
final judgment, to which they are here by Jude said to be reserved; in
respect whereof, though they are in part punished already, yet by it there
shall be a dreadful addition and accession to their present torments; in
regard, 1. of Ignominy. 2 Restraint. 1. Ignominy: for they being most proud
creatures, cannot but deem it an unspeakable shame, 1. To have all their malice
and mischeifs that ever they committed since their fall, manifested to all the
world; whereby all who have heretofore honored them as gods, shall know their
vileness, and look upon them as abominable deceivers, and never be brought (as
formerly) to worship them. 2 To have it publicly seen, that poor man, whose
nature is so much inferior to theirs, has done that which they were not able
to do, in embracing of holiness, and honoring his Creator, and obtaining those
mansions of glory which they have lost. 3 To have it known to all the world,
how often they would have done evil when they could not; and how frequently
even women and children have overcome their fierce and fiery tentations. 4. To
have judgment passed upon them not only by Christ himself, but even by those
(sometimes poor) Saints whom formerly they so vilified and persecuted; even
these shall judge the Angels, 1 Cor. 6.3. And that not only 1 By having their
practices compared to those of the damned (as the Ninivites, and the Queen of
the South are said to rise up in judgment:) Mat. 12.41.42 Luke 11.31.32
Nor 2 Only by their consenting to, and approving of the Sentence which Christ
shall pass upon the wicked: But also 3. In regard of that dignitas assessoria,
that dignity whereby they shall be advanced to an honorable assessorship with
the Lord Christ, in sitting (as it were) with him upon the Bench, Dolet
diabolus, quod ipsum and angelos ejus, Christi servus ille peccator judicaturus
est. Tert. lib. de poen. c.7.
or about the Throne of Judicature: As likewise, 4. (they in that judgment
being to appear with Christ manifest victors over all their enemies) By
trampling upon all the pride, malice, and weakness of Devils, before the whole
world; and holily insulting over them as vile, vanquished, and contemptible
enemies: A greater punishment (undoubtedly) to those proudest of creatures,
then was that to Bajazet, whose back famous Tamberlane used for an horsblock to
raise him up to his Steed, when he caused him to be carried up and down as a
spectacle of infamy in all his triumphant journeys.

2. By the last judgment there shall be an accession of punishment to these
angels in respect of their restraint; because then they shall be unable to
seduce the wicked, or to hurt the elect any more. Their chain, now more loose,
shall then be so strait, that they shall never come near, nor among the Saints
of God: A vehement vexation to those malicious spirits, whose element is
mischief, and their torment restraint from doing hurt. They now deem it some
lessening of their torment, to be suffered to tempt men to sin: They think
themselves hereby somewhat revenged on God; as he that defaceth the picture of
his enemy, when he cannot come at his person, eases his spleen a little; or as
the dog somewhat breaks his rage by gnawing the stone, when he cannot reach the
thrower. They now walk abroad (as it were) with their keeper; but then they
shall be closely confined, yea dungeon'd: Now they contain their hell, then
their hell shall contain them. In short, As the punishment of wicked men shall
be at the full, when their souls and bodies are reunited, and both cast into
hell; so the torment of these angels shall be completed, when at the last day
they shall be so fettered in their infernal prison, as that there will be no
possibility of stirring forth. They are now entered into diverse degrees of
punishment, but the full wrath of God is not powered out upon them till the day
of judgment.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 No secrecy can shelter sin from Gods observation. Observe. 1.
He who will make sins known to conscience and all spectators, must needs know
them himself: Sins are undoubtedly written in, if they be read out of the book:
God need not wrack, no nor ask the offender, to know whether he has sinned or
no; he searches the heart, Jer. 17.10. Psalm. 11.4.
he tries the reins, his eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men: He
compasses (he winnoweth) our paths, and is acquainted with all our ways.
Psalm. 139.
Whither shall we fly from his presence? He understands our thoughts afar off;
knows them long before they come into us, and long after they are gone away
from us. All the secrets of our hearts are dissected, anatomized, and
barefaced in his eyes. He who knew what we would do before we did it, must
needs know what we have done afterward. There Is nothing existing in the world,
but was before in Gods knowledge; as the house is first in the head, before
erected by the hand of the Artificer: He made us, and therefore knows every
nook and corner, and turning in us; and we are sustained and moved by him in
our most retired motions. How plainly discerned by him is the closest
hypocrite, and every Devil, though in a Samuel's mantle? We can only hear, but
God sees hollownesse. We do but observe the surface, but Gods eye pierces into
the entrails of every action: He sees not as man sees; Man looks on the
outward appearance, but God looks on the heart. How exact should we be even
in secret walkings, we being constantly in the view of so accurate an observer!
We should set the Lord always before us. The eye of God should ever be in our
eyes; the presence of God is the counterpoyson of sin: Whenever thou art
sinning, remember that all thou do is book'd in Gods omniscience. Latimer
being examined by his Popish Adversaries, heard a pen walking behind the
hangings, to take all his words; this made him wary how he expressed himself:
but more cause have we to fear sin, since God writes down every offense, and
will one day so read over his book to Conscience, that it shall be compelled to
copy it out with infinite horror: God did but read one page, one line of this
book, one sin to the conscience of Judas, and the terror thereof made him his
own executioner.

2 How foolish are sinners, Observe. 2.
who are so despairing at, and yet so fearlesse before the pronouncing of the
last sentence! Most irrational is that resolution, Because sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily, therefore to be fully set to do evil.
Eccles. 8.11.
How wise were it to argue contrarily! Because the sentence is deferred,
therefore let us labor to have it prevented; and to say with the Apostle, 2
Pet. 3.11. What manner of persons ought we to be! The deferring of judgment is
no sign of its prevention; the speedy repentance of sinners would be a much
more comfortable prediction. Wrath when it is to come, may be fled from; when
once it is come, it is unavoidable. Christians! be as wise for your souls, as
the Egyptians were for their cattle; who, fearing the threatening of bail, took
them into houses: Faith in threatenings of judgment, may prevent the feeling of
judgments threatened. For your souls sake, be warned to get your pardon in the
blood, if ever you would avoid the sentence of the mouth of Christ. If the Judge
give you not a pardon here, he will give you a sentence hereafter. It Is only
the blood of Christ which can blot the book of Judgment. Judge your selves, and
pass an irrevocable sentence upon your sins, if you would not be sentenced for
your sins. Repent at the hearing of Ministers in this your day; for if you put
off that work till God speaks in his day, Repentance it self will be
unprofitable. If you harden your hearts here in sin, the heart of Christ will
be hardened hereafter in his sentencing, and your suffering. The great work of
poor Ministers is the prevention of the dreadful sound of the last Sentence:
Knowing the terror of the Lord, they warn you. All the hatred we meet with in
the world, is for our loving plainness herein: but we will not cease to warn
you with tears, as well as with sweat: we can better bear your hatred here,
then either you or we bear Gods hereafter; and we had rather your lusts should
curse us here, then your souls to all eternity. If our voice cannot make you
bend, Gods will make you break; If you will not hearken, is it not because the
Lord will slay you?

3 Great is the sinfulness of rash judgment: Observat. 3
It Is a sin that robs Christ of his honor, whereby a man advances himself
into Christ's Tribunal, and which takes the work of judgment out of Christ's
hand; and therefore the Apostle, Romans 14.10. 1 Cor. 4 5. strongly argues
aagainst it from the last judgment: Christians commit this sin, both by a
curious inquisition into the ways of others, for this end, that they may find
out matter of defamation; and principally, by passing of sentence, or giving of
censure against the persons and practices of others without a calling, and not
according to the law of charity, which binds us to judge the best of others, so
far forth as may stand with a good conscience and the word of God. Judgment may
either be of persons, or their practices: In persons, their future, or their
present estate is to be considered: All judgment of men's future estate is to be
forborne; God may call the worst as well as thee. Three things (says Augustiae)
are exempted from man's judgment; the Scriptures, the Counsel of God, the
Condemnation of any man's person. For men's present estate; if we see men live in
whoredom, drunkenness, swearing, we may judge them wicked, while continuing in
this estate, and that they shall be damned if they repent not: We may judge the
tree by the fruit, and this is not rash judgment, because it is not ours, but
the judgment of the word of God. Practices are either good, bad, indifferent,
or doubtful: Good actions are to be commended: if actions be evil, judge the
facts, not the persons; yet study withal to excuse the intention, if thou
can not the fact: Indifferent, or doubtful actions are to be free from
censure; Christian liberty exempts our neighbor from censure for the former;
charity allows us not to be censurers of the later: If it be doubtful, whether
a thing were spoken or done, or no; or being certain to be done, whether well
or ill, in charity judge the best; If a man lay with a betrothed damosel in the
fields, Deu. 22.26, 27
the man was only to die, because it was in charity supposed that the damosel
cried; the best being supposed in a thing doubtful. In matter of opinion, if
it be uncertain whether an error or no, suspend thy judgment, till thou know
more certainly; thy brother may see as much, and (if he be more learned) more
than thy self, into that which is doubtful. Our ignorance as men (though never
so knowing) should be a strong bar from rash judgment. Besides, who are we that
judge another man's servant? this is to reproach God himself for receiving him:
We are fellow servants with our brethren, not fellow Judges with God; we must
love, not judge one another; Our Masters house is to be ordered by our Masters
will. He who by rash judgment destroys the good name of another, is, by some,
termed the worst of thieves, in stealing away that which is better then riches,
and can never be restored; and the worst of murderers, in killing three at
once; his own Soul in thus sinning, his Neighbor, whose name he ruins, and
the Hearer, who receives his slanders. And yet, take away this sinful
censuring from many Professors, there will nothing remain to show them
Religious; whereas a Just man is a severe Judge only to himself.

4. How happy are they who shall be able to stand in the Judgment! I know it is
doubted by some, Observe. 4. Rev. 20.12. Mat. 10.26. Vid. Aquin. q 87. suppl.
Est. in l. 4. sendist. 47. Romans 8.1.33.
whether at the last judgment the sins of the Saints shall come into the
judgment of Discussion and Discovery; Scripture seems to many, most to favor
the affirmative: but that they shall escape the judgment of condemnation, it is
not doubted. That sun which discovers the sins of the wicked, shall scatter
those of the godly. There Is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus;
Who shall lay any thing to their charge? The greater their sins are, the
greater will their deliverance appear. The more punishment they deserved, the
more they escape. The sins of the Saints will prove, as the matter of their
songs, so the trophies of victorious mercy. The wicked shall have judgment
with out mercy; and the godly shall have mercy in a day of judgment. 1 Cor.
11.32.
How contentedly may they here undergo that chastisement whereby they escape
judgment! It Is better to hear the reproofs of a Father, then the sentence of a
Judge; and the correction of a Son is much lighter then the condemnation of a
Malefactor. It matters not what shall ever be said or done against them, to
whom Christ shall never say, Depart from me. Do with me what thou will (said
Luther) since thou have pardoned my sins.

5. The greatest enemies of God will be but contemptible creatures at the last
judgment. What underlings then shall those appear, and be, who now are
principalities and powers? Satan, who has had so many followers, adorers, who
now is the Prince of the Air, yea the God of this world, shall then openly
appear to be a trembling malefactor at the bar of Christ. As once Josuahs
soldiers set their feet upon the necks of the Canaanitish Kings; so the
poorest Saint shall at the last judgment trample upon these fallen Angels. Death
speaks the impotency of men, but Judgment even that of Angels. Legions of
Angels shall no more oppose Christ, then can a worm all the Angels of heaven.
Me thinks, even all the crowned, sceptered, adorned, adored Monarchs of the
world, if enermes to Christ, should tremble at the approaching of Judgment.
The greatest safety and honor even of a King, will then be, to be a subject to
Christ, and what the Emperor Justinian was wont to call himself, the me^nest
servant of Christ. Vltimus Dei servus.
Robes will then fall off: The dimmer light of humane glory will be obscured
when the sun of righteousness shall appear. Let us neither fear nor admire the
greatness of any, but of Christ; much less that which is set against Christ.
How great is the folly of Satan's subjects! they serve a master who is so far
from defending them, that he cannot defend himself from Judgment.

6. Observe. 6.
The reason why Satan rages; he knows that his time is but short; and after
this last judgment his furious and spiteful tentatious shall be ended; and he
labors to supply the shortness of his time, with the sharpness of his
assaults; like the besiegers who having often stormed a Town or a Castle make
their last onset the most resolute and terrible. A Traveller who desires to go
far, will go fast if the Sun be near setting; The shortness of Satan's season
occasions his swiftness in wickedness: Besides, he is in an estate of
desperation, he knows there is no possibility of his recovery; and as faith is
the furtherer of holiness, so is despair of all impiety. It was the Logic of
despair which argued thus, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die. I
wonder not that these last, are the worst, and the most perilous times. Satan
now strives to add to his number, to seduce and pervert souls, because after
his judgment, he shall never be suffered to do so any more. At all times holy
vigilance over our hearts and ways is needful; but in these times, wherein
Satan's judgment draws so near, it should be our care more then ever, to keep
our hearts with all diligence, to beware of seduction, and Atheism, and of
being led away with the error of the wicked, lest we fall from our own
stedfastness. If Satan double his rage, let us double our guard. Doctor Tailor
reports of a noble Lord, who was wont to say, That he would never go without a
sword, so long as there was a Papist about the Court; Never let us lay off our
spiritual weapons, till Satan be taken from us by judgment, or we out of his
reach by death. Let us (even taught thus much by our adversary) make the
shortness of our time a motive to lay out our selves the more for God; short
seasons require speedy services. The nearer we come to judgment, the fitter
let us labor to be for it. Let the sweetest part of our lives be at the
bottom, and (as Samsons) let our last prove our greatest goodness. To conclude
this, Let those poor souls who are daily buffetted by Satan, consider that his
judgment is approaching; that all conflicts with him shall then be at an end,
and that the fury of his assaults, prove not their success, but the shortness
of continuance.

Thus far of the first particular considerable in the punishment of these
Angels at the Bar, viz, that to which they are reserved, to Judgment. The
second follows, the time when they shall be brought to judgment, viz. at the
Great day.

Two things for the Explication hereof.

1. Explication
How the word Day is here to be taken.

2. In what respect its called a Great day.

For the first: There are three opinions. 1. Some take the day here spoken of,
precisely, and properly, as if the day of the last judgment should not exceed
that space and proportion of time. 2. Some conceive that by the Day is meant a
1000 years; because some are said to sit on thrones, and have judgment given
unto them (that is, power of judging) and to live and reign with Christ a
thousand years. Rev. 20.4. But I conceive that this judgment and reign of a
thousand years, cannot be understood of the last Judgment, because death (the
last enemy) shall, in the Resurrection, be destroyed: now after the end of the
thousand years mentioned by Saint John, Satan shall be loosed out of prison,
and the nations deceived by him shall compass the camp of the Saints about,
Isai. 27.1.2. 14.3. 12.1. 4.1.2. 2.11.17. Per quot dies hoc judicium
extendatur, incertum est: scripturarum more diem poni solere pro tempore nemo
nescit, Aug. l. 20. de Civ. Dei cap. 1. Mat. 7.22. Luke 21.34. 2 Timothy 1 12.18
4.8. Joh. 6.39, 40. 44.46, 54. 2 Pet. 3.7.12 Romans 2.5.16. Act. 17.31. Apoc 6.17.
and the beloved City, and fire shall come down from God out of heaven and
devour them. 3. Others seem more safely to apprehend that the day here
mentioned is to be taken improperly, for time indefinitely, it being in
Scripture very ordinary to put a day for time: In an acceptable time have I
heard thee, in a day of salvation have I helped thee, Isai. 49.8. If thou had
known in this thy day. Luke 19.42 Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day.
Joh. 8.56. etc. There must be a day wherein that great work of judgment shall
begin, but the duration thereof is to be measured by the nature of the thing,
and the counsel of God. With Augustine, I determine nothing peremptorily
concerning the continuance of the last judgment day.

For the second, the greatness of this day. The titles given it in the
Scripture, speak it great; it being called that day, the last day; the day of
judgment, and perdition of all ungodly men; The day of God the Lord: The day
when God shall judge the secrets of men: a day wherein he will judge the world
in righteousness; the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment
of God; the day of the Lambs wrath; the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6.10. etc.
More particularly, this day of Judgment is called great in respect of the
Judge. Judged. Properties of the Judgment.


1. The Judge, who is Jesus Christ. And herein two particulars are considerable.

1. That Christ shall be Judge.

2 Wherein his being Judge shall make the day great.

The first is evident: 1. From the frequent and express mentioning him as
Judge in Scripture, which assures us that God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, Heb. 10.27. Tit. 2.13. Act. 10.42. Phil. 3.20.4.5. 1 Timothy 6.14.15.
Romans 2.16. that Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and the dead, 2 Timothy 4.1.
that the Lord Jesus shall be revealled from heaven, 2 These. 1.7. that the Son
of man shall come in the glory of his Father, Mat. 16.27. that they shall see
the son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory, Mat.
24.30. that the son of man shall come in his glory, Mat. 25.31. that hereafter
we shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, Mat. 26.64 that the
same Jesus who is taken into heaven, shall so come in like manner as he was
seen to go into heaven, Act. 1.11. that he comes with clouds, and every eye
shall see him, Rev. 1.7. In which respect the day of Judgment is called, The
day of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.8. so 1 Cor. 5.5. 2 Cor. 1.14. Phil.
1.6.10. and Phil. 2.16. And the seat of judgment is called, The judgment seat
of Christ, Romans 24 10. 2 Cor. 5.10. And some understand that place Heb. 4.12.
The word of God is (...), a discerner of the thoughts, concerning the
Hypostatical word, etc. Nor is the old Testament destitute of testimonies of
this kind, though somewhat more obscurely expressed. Abraham speaks to the son of
God, when he said, Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18.25.
And the Father spoke to the Son when he said, Thou shall break them with a rod
of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel, Psalm. 2.9 And
that of Isaiah chap. 45.23. By my self have I sworn, unto me every knee shall
bow, the Apostle Romans 14.11. applies to Christ, and thence proves, that we
shall all stand before his judgment seat. 2. By Gods appointment of him, and
giving him authority to judge; He is ordained of God to be the judge of quick
and dead, Act. 10.42. He will judge the world by that man whom he has
ordained, etc Act. 17.31. Humilitas carnis no strae throno judicator is
honorata est. Cypr. in ser. deaf. Sedebit judex qui stetit sub judice, damna
bit veros reos, qui factus est falsus reus. Aug. Homil. 150. Pater dedit ei
potestatem facere, quia filius hominis est, cum magis quasi hoc expectaretur ut
diceret quo niam filius Dei est, sed quia filium Dei secundum id, quod in forma
Dei aequalis est patri, videre iniqui non possunt, oportet judicem vivorum and
mortuorum coram quo judicabuntur, and justi videant and iniqui. Aug. lib. 1. de
trin. c. 13. Patrem nemo videbit in judicio, quia filius hominis est ut possit
and ab impiis videri; August. lib. 1. de trin. cap. 13. Talis apparebit judex,
qualis possit videri ab iis quos coronaturus, and ab iis quos damnaturus est.
Prosp.
The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, he
has given him authority to execute judgment, Joh. 5.22.27. And all power is
given him in heaven and in earth. 3. By his former estate of humiliation. As he
emptyed and humbled himself according to his humane nature, so in that he is
to be exalted. He humbled himself and became obedient to death, etc, wherefore
God has highly exalted him, Phil. 2.9. And as Christ in his humane nature was
unjustly judged, so in that nature, shall he justly judge. Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many, and he shall appear the second time without
sin, Heb. 9.28. 4. By reason of the necessity of the visibility of the Judge
and judicial proceedings at the last day. He executes judgment because he is
the Son of man, Joh 5.27. and every eye shall see him. The Judge is to be
beheld and heard by the Judged. God will judge the world by that man, etc. In
respect of the judicial process, a man must be our Judge; for God is
invisible, and the Judge shall so appear, as to be seen both of those whom he
shall crown, and of those whom he shall condemn. Nor can it be but that God
will be the more justified, and men without all excuse, having one who is bone
of their bone, and flesh of their flesh, to be judge between God and them.
Notwithstanding all which immediate, audible, visible administration of the
last judgment by the second Person, this judgment belongs to the other
Persons in Trinity; (...), in respect of Authority, Dominion, and judiciary
power, though to the Son only (...), in respect of dispensation and office, and
external exercise.

2. For the second, viz. Wherein the Judge makes the day of Judgment great.

1. He makes it a great day: 1. As he is considered in himself. 2. As he is
attended and accompanied by others.

1. As we consider him in himself, and that either, 1. as God, or 2. man.

1. As God: He who shall be the Judge, is the mighty God; It is Jehovah, to
whom every knee shall (...), Isai. 45. Hence the Apostle calls the appearance of
this Judge who is God, glorious, in those words, Tit. 2.13. The glorious
appearing of the great God. If the great God be Judge, the day of Judgment
must needs be a great day. How great is the day of an earthly Judges
appearance, a man, a worm, dust and ashes! one who though he can give, yet
cannot avoid the sentence of death; and one who has scarce a faint reflection
of that majesty with which this King of glory is adorned; think then (and yet
thoughts can never reach it) what it is for God, before whom the whole world,
though full of Judges, is as nothing and less then nothing and vanity, to come
to judge the word, God is a judge Omnipotent, and therefore one whose voice, as
the living who are distanced so many thousands of miles shall hear and obey, so
even the dead shall hear, being quickened, and shall at his beck come and stand
before his judgment seat. He shall come with great power; 2 These. 7.9.
and the wicked shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the glory
of his power. Nor shall he use the ministry of Angels for necessity, but
Majesty. God is an omniscient Judge, infinitely, only wise; his eyes are
clearer then ten thousand suns; one who will, in the day wherein the
brightness of his omniscience shall shine in its full luster, bring every
hidden work to light, and tell to all (as the woman of Samaria said,) all that
ever they did; one who does not (as earthly Judges) only know what to ask, but
what every one will answer; who wants no witnesses, nor needs he that any
should testify of man, for he knows what is in man. God is a true and a just
Judge. The Apostle 2 Timothy 4.8. calls him, The Lord, the righteous Judge: he will
render to every one according to his works. The Apostle proves the
righteousness of God, from his judging the world, Romans 3.6. and Abraham's
question asserts it strongly, Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
Other Judges may do righteously, but God cannot do otherwise. The wills of other
Judges must be regulated by righteousness; but so righteous is God, that
righteousness it self is regulated by his will, which is the root and rule of
all righteousness.

2. This Judge shall make the day great as he is Man; greatly amazing and
dismaying must his appearance, as Judge in man's nature, needs be, to sinners
who have denied him, persecuted, crucified, and put him to an open shame: all
whose designs have been to crush and keep him under. With what horror shall
the Jews then see their delusion, who would not heretofore believe him to be
the Messiah? Needs must they and others, who would not have this man to reign
over them, to whom he was a stumbling stone, when low and small, contemptible
in his former discoveries upon earth, now find and feel him a rock to fall upon
them from heaven, and crush them to powder. Greatly comforting and refreshing
must the appearance of this man be to believers; who shall not only behold him
to be the great Judge of the whole world, who has taken upon him their nature;
but who has also given to them his spirit, whereby, through faith, they are
mystically united unto him as their head, their husband; and upon whom they
have fixed all their hopes and expectations of happiness, for and with whom
they have so long suffered from the world; whom they look upon, as their
treasure, their portion, and for whose coming they have so longed, and sighed,
and groaned. In a word, How greatly glorious shall his appearance in our nature
be both to good and bad, when in it he shall be decked and adorned with
Majesty, and clothed with unspeakeable glory, above all the Angels, he being to
come in the glory of his father, Mat. 16.27. with power and great glory! Mat.
24.30. The glory of a thousand Suns made into one, will be but as sack cloth to
that wherein Christ shall appear in man's nature that great day. The glory of
the Sun scatters the clouds, but from the glory of Christ's face the very earth
and heaven shall fly away, Rev. 20.11. The beams of his glory shall dazzel
the eyes of sinners, and delight the eyes of Saints; The wicked shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from his presence, and the glory of his
power, 2 These 1.9. and when his glory shall he revealed, the Saints shall be
glad with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4.13.

2. The Judge shall make this day of judgment great, considering him, not only
in himself, but as he is attended by others; and so he will make the day
great, if we consider 1. by whom. 2. by how many he shall thus be attended.

1. By whom; They shall be creatures of great glory and excellency. The
glorious Angels shall be Christ's attendants at the great day; in which respect
Christ is said to come (Luke 9.26.) in the glory of the holy Angels: and Mat.
25.31. it is said, that the Son of man shall come, and the holy Angels with him;
and Luke 12.9. that Christ will deny some before the Angels of God; and 2 These.
1.7. the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty angels.
These angels that excel in strength, are his heavenly hosts, his Ministers to
do the pleasure of Christ their great Lord and Commander. If at the time of his
Nativity, Tentation, Passion, Resurrection, Luke 2.13.
Ascension, they readily gave Christ their attendance; how much more shall they
do it at the great day, when all the glory of Christ shall be revealed! Luke
7.53. Gal. 3.19. Deuteronomy. 33.2. Illi in obsequio, hic in gloria; Illi in comitatu,
hic in suggestu: illi stant, hic sedet; hic judicut, illi ministrant, Ambros.
lib. 3. de fid. Mat. 24.31. Psalm. 103.20. 2 These. 1.7. (...). Col. 3.4. 1 These.
4.17.
If at the promulgation of the Law upon Mount Sinai Angels waited upon him, how
readily shall they serve him when he shall come to Judgment, for the execution
of that Law! What glory shall be in that day, when the very servants of the
Judge, who shall wait upon him, run at every turn, and upon every errand; who
shall blow the Trumpet, summon to appear, bring the prisoners before the Bar,
and take them away again; when even these waiters (I say) shall be Angels of
power, the heavenly host, every one being stronger then an earthly army; holy
Angels; creatures of unspeakeable agility and swiftness; glorious Angels, who
as much exceed in glory the greatest Emperor in the world, as the Sun in the
Firmament does a clod of earth. Nor can it be, but the day must be very
illustrious, if we consider that the Saints shall appear also with Christ in
glory, that they shall meet the Lord in the air, and be witnesses for, nay
assessors with Christ in judgment, and partakers of that victory, which in the
last day he shall have over all his enemies. That all the enemies of Christ and
his Church shall stand before the Saints to be justly judged, whom they in this
world have judged unjustly; and in a word, that every one of these Saints shall
in their spiritual bodies shine as the Sun, Mat. 13.43.
when it appears in its perfect luster.

But 2 Christ as attended, will make the day great, if we consider by How many
he shall be attended. At that great day there shall be a general assembly, a
great number, even all his servants waiting upon him, both Saints and Angels;
hence 1 These. 1.13. is mentioned the Coming of the Lord Jesus with all his
Saints: and Ephesians. 4.13. the meeting of all. In this glorious concourse, there
shall not be one wanting. If Christ will raise up every Saint from the grave,
then doubtless, shall every Saint appear in glory at the last day. Joh. 6.39.
He will not lose his cost laid out upon them. But if he bestows new liveries
upon his servants, they shall all, when adorned with them, wait upon him. Nor
shall there be one Angel but shall glorify him in that day. Psalm. 148.2. Heb.
1.6.
If all the angels of God are commanded to praise and worship him, then
undoubtedly will they perform this duty at that day wherein the glory of
Christ shall be so eminently manifested; all the holy angels (Mat. 25.3.) shall
come with the son of man. And if all the Angels and Saints must wait on Christ,
the number must needs be vast, Heb. 12.
and the multitude exceeding great: of angels there must be an innumerable
company; Myriads, ten thousands of Saints, or holy ones, Dan. 7.10.
Jude 14. (a definite number being put for an indefinite.) And about the throne
(Rev. 5.11.) are said to be ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands, ten thousands of Saints. An innumerable company of Angels attended
the solemn delivery of the Law at Mount Sinai, Deuteronomy. 33.2. Vid. Rivet. in loc.
in allusion to which, the triumphant Ascension of Christ into heaven is
described, Psalm. 68. to be with twenty thousand Chariots, even thousands of
angels; and of those who stood before the throne, clothed with white robes, and
having palms in their hands, there was (Rev 7.9) a great multitude, which no
man could number, etc. Now if the glory of one angel was so great, Judge.
6.22.13.22.
that those who of old time beheld it, expected death thereby; and if for fear
of an Angel, whose countenance was like lightning, the keepers (Mat. 28.4.) did
shake, and became as dead men; how great shall be the glory of all the millions
of Angels and Saints at the great day, when God shall let out his glory unto
them, and fill them as full of it as they can hold, that he may be admired in
them! Who can imagine the greatness of that day, wherein the Judge shall be
attended with so many millions of servants, every one of whom shall have a
livery more bright and glorious then the Sun? The splendour of this appearance
at the great day will ten thousand times more surpass that of the attendance of
the greatest Judges and Kings in the world, than does theirs excel the
sporting and ridiculous acting of their more serious solemnities, by children
in their plays.

2. This day of Judgment shall be great, in respect as of the Judge, so
likewise of the Judged; and the judged shall make the day great, as they fall
under a fourfold consideration, or in four respects:

1. In respect of the greatness of their company and number.

2. The greatness of their ranks and degrees.

3. The greatness of their faults and offenses.

4. The greatness of their rewards and recompenses.

1. In respect of the greatness of their numbers. When many persons are tried
and judged, many prisoners cast and condemned, we ordinarily say, that the
Assizes or Sessions are great, though the number of the persons judged be not
so great by an hundred parts, as the number of those who stand by to hear the
Trial. How great then shall the day of Judgment be, wherein all shall be
tried and judged? It was of old prophesied by Enoch, that the Lord would
execute judgment upon all: Before the Throne of the Son of man all nations
shall be gathered, Mat. 25.32. Romans 14.10. (...). 2 Cor. 5.10 Act. 17.31.
And 2 These. 2.1. the day of judgment is called the time of our gathering
together unto Christ. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in the body, etc. He comes with
clouds, and every eye shall see him. Rev. 1.7. He is called The judge of the
whole earth, Genesis 18.25. All men are divided into two sorts or ranks, 2 Timothy
4.1. 1 Pet. 4.5. Apoc. 20.12.
living, and dead; and both these shall Christ judge, Act. 19.42. Who has
power over all flesh, Joh. 17.2. Who shall reward every one according to his
works, Mat. 16.27. And to whom God has sworn, every knee shall bow, Isai.
45.23. Romans 14.11. So that if there should but one be exempted from appearing
before Christ at the last day, the oath of God should be broken, which is
impossible. If God number all the hairs of our head, how much more all the
persons whose those hairs are! Mat. 10.30. Psalm. 56.10. Joh. 5.24.
If he number all our steps, how much more all those who take those steps! And
whereas it is said, that the Believers shall not come into judgment, Psalm. 1.5.
and that the wicked shall not stand in the judgment; the former is to be
understood of the judgment of condemnation (and Joh. 5.24. condemnation it is
translated; or rather expounded (says one) in our ordinary Bibles.) The later
of prevailing in judgment, Causa cadent.
by receiving a judgment of absolution: men may hide themselves and fly from
men's Courts and Tribunals, but the judgment seat of Christ cannot be avoided.
It will be in vain to call for the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them and
hide them, for the mountains shall melt like wax at the presence of the Lord.
There Is no flying from this Judge, but by flying to him: and death it self
which prevents judgment, among men, shall give up its dead to this great
judgment.

2. The day shall be great in respect of the judged, as they are considered in
the greatness of their ranks and degrees. Among men, not the judging of every
mean, contemptible person, but of Noble men, Princes of the blood, or great
Monarchs, makes the day of their judgment great. How solemn in this world is
the judiciary trial of a King! But how glorious and magnificent shall be the
arraignment of great and small persons, Rev. 20.12.
of all ranks and degrees at that great day! Angels and Principalities (as at
large has been showed before) as well as men: Luke 21.36.
good as well as bad. Watch and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy --
to stand before the Son of man. He that judges me is the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.4. and
Every one of us must give account of himself to God, Romans 14.12 They who have
been high and mighty, Emperors, as well as the poorest outcasts. The tallest
Cedar, the stoutest Oak, must bend, yea break, at that great day. Psalm. 110.5.
Christ he shall strike through Kings in the day of his wrath. The grave and
the Judgment Seat put no difference between Monarchs and vassals. The
grave-dust of a Queen smells no sweeter then that of a beggar; none can
difference between the ashes of an Oak, and those of an humble shrub. There
will be no other crowns worn at that day, but the Crowns of righteousness; no
other robes but those washed in the blood of Christ; and these will better fit
the head and back of a Lazarus, than a rich Glutton. True greatness,
(goodness I mean) will be the only greatness at that truly great day. The
glorious sunshine of this day will extinguish the Candle of worldly glory. Oh
great day! wherein majesty shall lie and lick the dust of the feet of Christ;
the stiffest knee bend before his majesty, and the strongest back of sinners
break under his wrath; when the great swordmen and Emperors, the Alexanders,
the Caesar's, who once made the earth to tremble, shall now tamely tremble
before him!

3. The day of judgment shall be great in respect of the judged, if we
consider them as great offenders. When men are tried before humane Judicatories
for common crimes, as for pilfering, or stealing some small or inconsiderable
sum, the day of their trial is soon forgotten, and not greatly regarded; but
when they are arraigned for such horrid and heinous offenses, as the ears of
the hearer tingles to hear, and his heart trembles to think of, some
Sodomiticall villainy, wilful murder of some good King, the blowing up of a
Parliament, etc. the day of their judgment is great, and greatly observed;
there is great admiration at their boldness in sin, great indignation against
them for it, great joy when they are sentenced, and greater when they are
executed. How great then shall this judgment day be! for how great at that day
shall every sin appear to be! Sin can never be seen to be what it is, or in
its due dimensions, but by the light of the fire of Gods wrath. In the dim and
false light of this world, it is nothing, it is nothing, a trick of youth, a toy,
a trifle; but at the appearing of the light of divine disquisition, when
conscience shall be searched with candles, and all paint, pretexts, and other
refuges swept away, the least sin will appear infinite. The cloud (a while
since) no bigger then a man's hand, will overspread the face of the heavens. The
least breach of a law infinitely holy, and the smallest offense (unpardoned)
against a God infinitely both just and powerful, will then appear
unconceivably more heinous then any breaches of the peace, or offenses against
the greatest of men; there is nothing little which (as sin does) kills and damnes
the soul; yea, Omne peccatum est deicidium; the least sin will then be looked
upon as striking even at God himself. But how great shall that day be made by
the judging of those prodigious abominations, the commissions whereof the earth
groaned to bear! Scarlet, Crimson transgressions, at which even natural
conscience is affrighted, as blasphemies, murders, open oppressions, unnatural
uncleanness! etc. How greatly shall the justice of God be magnified in the
punishing of them! How great the joy of the Saints, when the enemies of that
God, whom they so dearly love, and highly admire, shall be sentenced! against
whom the souls under the Altar have so long prayed; when every Devil, Rev. 6.9.
who has here so often tempted them; and every adversary, who for their
profession of Christ, have so cruelly persecuted them, shall be condemned?

4. Lastly, This day shall be great, in respect of the judged, if we consider
the greatness of their rewards and recompenses. The setencing to a slight
punishment, as that of a small fine, a few stripes, burning in the hand, etc.
is not regarded greatly, even by the sufferers or spectators: but the
sentencing to a loss of all; even of life it self, a terrible death, as
burning, pressing, rending limb from limb, starving, hanging in chains, makes
the judgment great. The sentence whereby a man for a while is reprieved,
recovers a little loss, or has small damages given, is little regarded, and
soon forgotten; but that whereby a man has his life, and with that, his estate
and liberty, and all that is dear and desirable granted unto him; this his
sentence and judgment (I say) is great, and makes the day wherein it passes
deservedly to be accounted such. What are all the losses sustained by, or
fines imposed on any, in comparison of the loss of Gods presence? He who loses
God, has nothing besides to lose. He who is doomed to the pains of those fires
prepared for the devil and his angels, has nothing left him more to feel; The
torments of the body are no more comparable to those of the soul, then is the
scratch of a pin to a stab at the heart; nor can there possibly be an addition
made to the blessedness of those, who shall be sentenced to enter into the joy
of their Lord, whose presence not only is in, but is even heaven it self; in a
word, there is nothing small in the recompenses of that great day; great woe or
great happiness; and therefore it is a great day in either respect. But of this
at large before.

3. This day of judgment is great in respect of the properties of it. As,

1. Its a certain day; were it doubtful, it would not be dreadful; were it
fabulous, it would be contemptible. 1. Natural conscience is affrighted at the
hearing of a judgment day. Act. 24.25. (...). Nazian. Sua quemque fraus, sua
audacia, suum facinus, suum scelus, de sanitate, ac mente deturbat, hae sunt
impiorum furiae, haeflammae, hae faces. Cicer. in Pison. Eccl. 1.2. Hab. 1.13.
F^lix tren^bled when Paul preached of it; and though the Athenians mocked when
they heard of a Resurrection of the dead, yet not at the hearing of the day of
judgment. The reason why men so much fear at death, is because they are
terrifyed with the thoughts of judgment after death; were it not for that
supreme and public, the inward Tribunal of conscience should be in vain
erected. 2. The justice of God requires that every one shall receive according
to his works. In this life the best men are of all men most miserable, and
sinners often most happy. All things fall alike to all. The wicked (says
Habbakuk) devoureth the man that is more righteous then himself. There must
come a time therefore, when the righteous Judge will (like Jacob) lay his right
hand upon the younger, the more despised Saint, and his left hand upon the
elder, the now prosperous sinner. There is now much righteousness and
oppression among Magistrates, Genesis 18.25. Job 34.10, 11, 12. Isai. 3.16, 11.
but it would be blasphemy to say, that injustice shall take place to eternity.
Every unrighteous Decree in humane Judicatories must be judged over again, and
from the highest Tribunal upon earth, the Saints of God may joyfully, and
successfully appeal to a higher Bar. Jud. 14. Romans 2.15. Eccl. 11.9. 2 These. 1
6, 7. Mat. 7.22.25.41.10.15. 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 14.10. Luke 21.34. Luke 9.26. 2
Pet. 3.9. Tit. 2.13. 1 Pet. 4.5. Omnia alia quae futura praedixerat Spiritus
Sanctus. in Scripturis, ev^nerunt, ut de primo Christi adventu, etc. Cum ergo
idem Spiritus Sanctus praedixerit secundum Christi adventum, utique certo
eveniet. Aug. Ep. 42. Luke 21.35. Mat. 25.
The day of judgment shall set all things strait and in right order; It is a
righteous thing with God (says Paul) to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you; and to you that are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed, etc. To conclude this, The Scripture is in no one point more
full and plentiful, then in assuring us that this day shall certainly come;
and if the other predictions in Scripture, particularly those concerning the
first coming of Christ, have truly come to pass, why should we doubt of the
truth of Christ's second appearance? and if the mercy of God were so great that
he should repent of the evil intended against the wicked; yet even that mercy
of his, would make the judgment so much the more necessary for the good of the
Elect.

2. The judgment of this great day shall be Sudden. Christ will come as a
thief in the night, who enters the house without knocking at the door. The
judgment will come upon the secure world, as the snare does upon the bird. The
greater security is at that day, the greater will the day and the terror
thereof be to sinners; the noise of fire is neither so usual, nor so dreadful
as in the night. The approach of the Bridegroom at midnight increased the cry
of the foolish and sleeping Virgins. Sudden destruction, or that which befalls
them who cry peace, is destruction doubled.

3. The judgment of this great day shall be Searching, exact, and accurate.
There shall be no causes that shall escape without discussion, notwithstanding
either their multiplicity, or secrecy, their numerousnesse or closeness. The
infinite swarms of vain thoughts, idle words, Psalm. 50.21. Mat. 12.36. Eccl.
12.14. 2 Cor. 5.10.
and unprofitable actions shall clearly and distinctly be set in order, before
those who are to be tried for them. God shall bring every work to judgment,
and every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. 1 Cor. 4.5.
He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the
counsels of the heart. But of this before.

4. It shall be righteous. As every cause shall be judged, so rightly judged.
Christ is a righteous Judge; 1 Timothy* 4.8. Psalm. 72.2. Act. 17.31. Romans 2.11. 2 Chronicles. 19.7 Psalm. 82.2. Job. 34.19.
In righteousness does he judge, Revel. 19.11. The scepter of his kingdom is
a right scepter; he loves righteousness, Psalm. 45.6, 7 The day of judgment is
a day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God; Righteousness shall
be the girdle of his loins, it shall stick close to him. This Judge cannot be
biased by favor; There is no respect of persons with God. The enemies of
Christ justified him in this particular, that he regarded not the persons of
men, Mat. 22.16. Kindred, Friend-ship, Greatness, make him not at all to warp
and deviate from righteousness. He is not mistaken with error, he shall not
judge after the sight of his eyes, Isai. 11.3. Joh. 7.24. 2 Cor. 10.7. Jer.
17.9, 10. Gal. 6.7.
neither reprove after the hearing of his ears. This Judge shall never be
deluded with fair shows, and out sides, or misled by colorable but false
reports, as earthly Judges may be, because they cannot pierce into men's hearts
to discern their secret intentions, as Christ can do, whom no specious
appearance can deceive; he shall never acquit any, who is in truth faulty, or
inwardly unsound; nor upon any flying report, or forged suggestion proceed to
the censure of any. He shall never be in danger of being misinformed, through
untrue depositions, but he shall always proceed upon certain knowledge, in
passing of his own sentence upon any.

5. This judgment shall be open and manifest. There is nothing hid but shall
be revealed. Sinners shall be openly shamed, their secret sins, their
speculative impurities, their closest midnight-impieties shall be publicly
discovered, and their feined hypocritical appearances shall then be unmasked.
Then Saints shall be openly honored; the good which they have done in secret,
shall be divulged; from their sins, against which they have mourned, prayed,
believed secretly, they shall be acquitted openly and honorably; from all the
censures, suspicions, aspersions, and wrong judgments upon earth, before all
the world of men and Angels, they shall be publicly cleared. In a word; As the
Judge is righteous, he will be known to be so; and therefore not only his
sentencing, but the equity thereof, shall be manifestly known. Every tongue shall
confess to God the just proceedings of that day; and Christ shall be clear when
he judges, and justified when sinners are condemned.

6. This judgment shall be immediate. Christ will not any more judge by man;
They whom he has entrusted with Judicature, have often miscarryed in the work;
acquitting where they should condemn, and condemning where they should acquit;
now therefore he will trust others with the work no more, but will take it into
his own hands: Judgment here among men is the Lords mediately, but the great
judgment shall be his immediately. Sinners might hope to escape, while sinners
were their Judges; Saints might fear cruelty while sinners were their Judges.
In a word; when frail, sinful man is Judge, he, like the unjust steward in the
Gospel, who cut off fifty in the hundred, punishes malefactors by the halfs,
and with him wicked men can tell how to deal; Ezekiel. 22.14.
but can their hearts endure, or can their hands be strong in the day wherein
the Lord shall deal with them? When Gideon commanding young Jether to slay
Zebah and Zalmunna, and he feared to draw his sword against them, Judge. 8.20.
being but a youth, Gideon himself arises and falls upon them, and as was the
man, so was his strength, for he instantly slew them; And God commands those
who should resemble him in righteousness, to cut down sin, and cut off
sinners; but alas, they are often either unwilling, or afraid to draw the sword
of Justice, and therefore the Lord himself will come and take the sword into
his own hands, and as is he, so will his strength be found and felt to be,
infinite. The mountains and hills will be but light burdens to fall upon
sinners, in comparison of this mighty God.

7. This Judgment shall be the last Judgment. The sentence that there shall
be pronounced, is the final conclusive and determinating sentence. The day of
Judgment is frequently called, The last day; The last day, Joh. 11.24.12.48.
and the Great day are sometimes put together, Joh. 7.37. Wicked men have had
in this world many days of Judgment by the word, by temporal troubles, by
the examples and warnings of the Saints; but now their last day, their last
judgment is come, after which there shall be no more trial. Former judgments
might be reverst upon repentance, but this last is irrevocable. Repentance will
not move the Judge to repent of his sentence; Jer. 11.7, 8, 9.
repentance will be hid from his eyes. From his sentence there can be no
appeal, nor is there any Judicatory above or after it.

8. This judgment is called Eternal. How great are those days wherein an
earthly Judge sentenceth to a temporal punishment of a few minutes: Heb. 6.2.
Judicium humanum est vix alphabetum illius ultimi. Luth.
But Christ sentenceth to an eternal state, the effect of his judgment shall
last for ever. An earthly Judge allows men to put the sentenced to death out
of their pain, at their execution; but this shall be the bitter ingredient
into the sentence of the great day; namely, that the sentenced shall be
executed, but never die. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire;
Departure for loss, and Fire for sense, are the greatest punishments; but this
Everlasting is that which makes both insupportable. Dreadful sentence! Without
this everlasting departure, hell would not be hell. This Everlasting burns
hotter then the fire, or rather is the heat of the fire in hell; and oh the
bottomless Ocean of sweetness in this word Ever, when joined with Being with
the Lord! this is that which (like the faggot-band) binds all the scattered
parcells of heavens blessedness together, and keeps them from dropping out; In
a word, This stability of happiness is that which makes it happiness. Great
day! wherein there is a sentence to no estate shorter then Eternity.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Great is the vanity of all earthly greatness. While we are in this world,
troubles and comforts seem far greater then they are; Observe. 1.
the former we think too great to bear, the other too great to forsake. How do
men groan under small burdens, and how do they admire the poor enjoyments of
the world! but when this great day is come, neither of these will seem great.
How small will former disgraces be esteemed by those who shall be honored
before all the world! How contemptible shall then poverty be in the thoughts of
those, who shall ever be enriched with the satisfying enjoyment of God himself!
How slight, yea forgotten will the few bitter drops of pains be to those who
shall be filled with Rivers of pleasures! What poor trifles will all the
profits and revenues of the earth be esteemed, when all the stately edifices
and the richest treasures upon earth shall be consumed in the flames! What a
bubble, a shadow, will all worldly honor and dignities appear, when the faint
candle light of the earthly glory of the greatest Monarchs shall be swallowed
up in the glorious sunshine of the appearance of the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords! How will a sentencing to the everlasting flames of fire and brimstone
blast those former dreams of pleasure in cool and pleasant Arbors, costly
Perfumes, sumptuous Banquets, etc! To those who so admire earthly enjoyments, I
say, as Christ to his Disciple, Mar. 13.2.
when he showed him the buildings of the Temple; See thou these great
buildings? There shall not be one stone left upon another; the flame of that
day will devour them, as easily as the fire from heaven did consume the stones
and sacrifice of, and lick up the water about Elijahs Altar.

2. Boldness in sin is no better then madness. The great Judgment day is by
the Apostle called The terror of the Lord. Observe 2. Eccl. 12.14. Magna peccati
poena metum fu turi judicii perdidisse. Aug. ser. 120. de Tem.
And though it may be our sin to be afrighted at men's judgment days, and to be
afraid of their terror; yet is it our folly not to fear this great day of the
Lord, and a great punishment of sin, not to fear the punishment of sin: What
Judge would not be incensed, when the prisoners being warned of his solemn
approach, should grow the more licentious and madly merry! Against that servant
(says Christ) who shall say in his heart, My Lord deferreth his coming, Luke
12.45, 46
and shall eat and drink with the drunken; shall his Lord come in a day when he
looks not for him, and cut him in sunder, etc. Although Gaal and the
Shechemites fortifying the City against Abimelech, eating and drinking, making
merry, and cursing him, at the beginning of the approach of Abimelechs army,
were told by Zebul that they saw the shadow of the mountains as if they were
men; yet his army drawing near, he who had before deluded, now terrifies them.
Where (says Zebul to Gaal) is thy mouth wherewith thou said, Judge. 9.26.28
Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? Wicked men, who now sport in sin,
and look upon judgment at a distance, make a mock of it, Adventum aeterni
judicis tanto securiores quandoque videbitis, quanto nunc districtionem illius
timendo praevenitis. Greg. mor. l. 14. c. 30. Bonum judicium quod illi
districto judicio me subducit. Bern in Cant. ser. 55.
and the Devil tells them, that all the terrifying sermons they hear concerning
the day of judgment, are but the shadows of the mountains, and the dark
productions of the melancholy fancies of some precise minister; but at the
nearer approach of this great day, when judgment is at the door, and the
armies of vengeance rushing in upon them; how will their mouths be stopped,
their confidences be rejected, and how great will their folly appear in being
so weak, and yet presumptuous at the same time! Oh sinner! more fear of this
great day would better become one that has no more force to resist it. The way
to be fearlesse hereafter, is to be fearful here: Happy is that fear which
prevents future trembling.

3 Our meditations of this great day should be deep and serious. Great things
are greatly observed, Observe. 3.
and make deep impression. Though feathers and cork being cast upon the water,
are wont to swim, yet lead and iron sink into it; though slighter thoughts
become matters of less concernment, yet serious things should be seriously
regarded, and thoroughly admitted into our meditations. It Is said of the wicked,
Psalm. 10.5.
that the judgments of God are far above out of his sight. Let not trifles
expel out of the mind the thoughts of the eternal judgment, as the eye is
sometimes hindered from viewing an object of the vastest extent, by putting of
that before it which is not bigger then a single penny.

4. Observe. 4. 2 Pet. 3.12. ^ Non potest esse verus Christianus, nec recitare
oratione^ dominicam; qui non toto cord hunc diem desiderat. Luth. Perversum
est and nescio utrum verum, quem diligis timere ne veniat, orare adveniat
Regnum tuum, and timere ne exaudiaris. Aug. in Euar. Psalm. 147
Great should be our desires and longing after this great day. Christians only
sin in seeking those things that are falsely and appearingly great; but the
blessings to be enjoyed at this great day, are truly great. We should love the
appearance of Christ, and look for, and have to the coming of the day of God;
if we would approve our selves for the Spouse of Christ, let our note be, Come,
Oh, why is his Charriet so long in coming! Res dulcis, mora molesta, the
sweeter the enjoyment, the stronger the desire. Be ashamed, oh Christian! that
the day should be so great, and thy desires so small; that a spouse should so
desire the day of her marriage, a prisoner his liberty, a Malefactor his
pardon, a labourer his rest, an heir his inheritance; and that thou should be
so sluggish and remiss in regarding that day which removes every sorrow,
supplies with every comfort!

5. Observe. 5. Judicandum se satis esse diffidit qui male* vivit. Chrysostom. ser.
59. Romans 8. Phil 3.8.
Our chief care should be that this great day may prove a good day to us, even
as good as its great. The judgment day cannot be a good day to those to whom
the Judge is not good. There Is no condemnation to those that are in Christ
Jesus. The comfort of a Christian at the judgment day will be, to be one with
the Judge, and to be found in him by faith not having his own righteousness.
The Judge will not endure, that they who are his own members should be cut off.
He who hereafter shall be the Judge, is now the Advocate of believers. It can
never be a good day to those who are in love with that which makes it and every
day evil: They who love sin, must needs fear judgment. If sinners cannot
endure the light of the Word in the Ministry; how shall they endure the light
of divine disquisition, at the day of Judgment? Men who have taken in
uncustomed goods, or prohibited commodities, cannot desire the company of the
searchers, who are appointed to open their packs. The fardels and packs of
every sinner shall be opened at the great day; the hidden things of dishonesty
shall be discovered, and every conscience ripped up. Empty your hearts of the
love of every secret sin, if you would not fear a searching. Sins unthought of,
will then seize upon the wicked unawares; Multa peccata tum proruent ex
improviso quasi ex insidiis. Plus valebunt pura corda, quam astuta verba; and
conscientia bona, quam marsu pia plena. Bern.
At this great day, the purity of the heart will more profit, then subtilty of
words; and a good conscience then a full purse. How happy were it that men
would be repenting here, prevent repenting hereafter! It cannot be a good day,
if the enjoyments of this world be accounted the chief good. He who has no
other Paradise but his gardens, no other mansions but his beautiful buildings,
no other God but his gold and possessions, cannot delight to see those flames
which shall consume them. He will certainly cry out as a man does who has laid
up all his treasures in an house set on fire, I am undone, I am undone.
Covetousness proclaims, as the worlds old age, and its nearness to, so the
unwelcomnesse of its dissolution. Wares laid up in a low, moist room, will be
corrupt and rotten; but those laid up in a high loft will be kept fafe: And if
we lay up our treasures only in this world, Mat. 6.20.
they will corrupt and come to nothing; but those which we treasure up in
heaven, will be ever safe and sound. It cannot be a good day to them who are
overtaken with it, upon whom it comes as a snare upon the birds, who are taken
as the old world was with the Flood, whose wine was turned into water, Luke
17.26.
and whose drunken security was swallowed up in a devouring deluge. Lastly, it
can be a Good day to none but to those who do good; Psalm. 50.23. 2 Pet. 3.11.
Tit. 2.12, 13. 1 Cor. 15.5, 8
who in the general are persons of an holy conversation; To him who ordreth
his conversation aright, will God show his salvation. Christ will bless
people, not by the voice, when they shall say they are Christians; but by the
hands; he will handle and feel them. And more particularly, it is a Good day to
those only who have done good to the afflicted friends of Christ. No good duty
is acceptable to Christ if we reject works of mercy. Psalm. 16.3. 2 These. 1.5,
6, 7.
How cheerfully may he look upon the Judge, that has saved the lives of the
Judge his wife and children! The Saints are tied to Christ in both relations.
Phil. 4.5. Si tanta percussione digna est pietas non impensa, perpende quid
mercatur, injustitia illata?
What can cruelty and oppression expect from Christ at that day, but the
measure which Zebah and Zalmunnah found from Gideon, who wereslain by him for
slaying his brethren! If the not relieving of the Saints deserve a curse, what
shall the robbing of them do?

6. Observe. 6.
Great should be the consolation of every friend of Jesus Christ in thinking of
this great day. It shall be to them a Good day. A day of clearing from all
undue imputations. Moses being charged with ambition in taking too much upon
him, comforted himself with the thoughts of the morrow; Numb. 16. 1 Cor. 4.4.
To morrow (says he) shall the Lord show who are his; When the counsels of
the heart shall be manifest, every one shall have praise of God. When a
Christian is called a dissembler, and an hypocrite, he may say at the great
day, the Lord shall show whether it be so or no. All slanders and defamations
shall fall off from the Saints, as do drops of water from an oyled post. The
weight of their glory shall weigh down all their light and slight disgraces: In
all the wants and losses of the faithful for Christ in this life, how great
may be their consolation! Great shall be their reward in heaven; Mat. 5.12.
none shall be losers by Christ, that are losers for him. The day of Judgment
shall be the day of restitution of all their comforts. God takes away nothing
but what he gave, and what he will again restore, yea for which he will restore
a thousand fold. This great day should relieve us against the length of our
troubles, and the slownesse of deliverance. Though God asks day for the
rewarding of his children, yet the greatness of the recompenses of that Great
day, shall infinitely more then countervail for the slownesse of the bestowing
them. In all obscurity and contempt how may the Saints rejoice, to consider
that at the great day they shall appear with Christ in glory, and shine as the
Sun in the Firmament? When a Master is absent from a School the Scholars are
mingled together; those who are of the highest Form, are perhaps standing
amongst those of the lowest; but when the Master comes into the School, every
Scholar takes his right place; so at the last day, every one shall have their
due place allotted to them, though now there be nothing but confussion. This
great day may comfort Saints in their greatest distances. In this world they
are often far from one another, Ephesians. 4.13.
both in respect of places, opinions, and affections; at this great day they
shall all meet, yea and in the unity of the faith of the Son of God. In all the
cruelties and unkindnesses of wicked men. Its the duty of the Saints in this
life to be patient among; it shall be their privilege hereafter to be freed
from the company of the wicked; Quomodo Christus eum damnabit quem propriamors
redemit. Ambros. lib. de Jacob. cap. 6. Quis venturus est judicare te, nisi qui
venit judicaripro te? Aug. in Psalm. 147.
they shall neither be troubled with sin, nor sinners, nor sorrows: the day of
Judgment shall be a day of redemption, Luke 21.28. Ephesians. 4.30. of refreshment,
Act. 3.19. the thoughts of this day may support them in their absence from
Christ: At that great day they shall meet with their Redeemer, their Spouse,
their Head: how shall not Christ save those from death, for whom he has
suffered death! Who shall come to judge the Saints, but he who came to be judged
for them?

VER. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Cities about them, in like manner
giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set
forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.
THis Verse contains the third example of Gods severe displeasure, against the
sinners of former times, and it is that of Sodom and Gomorrha, etc. which the
Apostle sets down by way of comparison, noted in these words [ Even as;] the
former part, or proposition whereof is in this verse, and the reddition, or
second part in the two next following.

In this example I observe four parts.

1. The Places punished; Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them. 2. The
deserving cause of their punishment; In like manner giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh. 3. The severity of their
punishment; Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. 4. The end and use of
their punishment; they are set forth for an example.
For the first, The Places punished; Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about
them.

EXPLICATION.
Four things may be by way of Explication inquired into.

1. What places these cities of Sodom and Gomorrha were. 2. What were these
Cities about them. 3. Why Sodom and Gomorrha are rather named, then those
Cities about them. 4. Why these places are rather named, then the persons and
inhabitants thereof.
1. For the first, concerning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, (to reserve the
speaking of their sin and punnishment unto the two following parts of the
text.) We read Genesis 13.10. upon occasion of Lots choice of the plain of Jordan
for the place of his habitation, that all that plain was well watered every
where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha, even as the garden of the
Lord, like the land of Egypt, Hoc cave cum Lyrano referas ad proxime dictum, de
Egypto, quasi Aegyptum ve^it esse feracem maxim, qua ex ea venitur ad Segor;
Id non vult, sed cum remotiori jungendum; Erat inquam illa Jordanis planicies
irrigua qua itur in Segorem Mercerus in locum. Hanc Lectionem amplectuntur.
Musculus, Mercerus, Pererius, Willetus.
as thou come unto Zoar. The River Jordan taking beginning from the mountain
Libanus, and arising (say some) out of two fountains called Dan and Jor (which
joined together make the name Jordan) after it has run (says Pererius) about
fifteen miles, falls into the lake Samechonitis (the same that is called the
waters of Merome, Josh. 11.7.) then it passing along by Chorazin and Capernaum,
falls into the lake Genesareth, and so it having continued a current of an
hundred miles in length, till it falls into the lake Asphaltites, or the dead
sea, with it is most pleasant streams inriches and adorns the plain through
which it passes (wherein these cities of Sodom and Gomorrha were contained)
with such great fertility and pleasantness, that its compared to the Garden of
God; which expression of the Garden of God (as some think) is given to these
places after the manner of Scripture, wherein things which are eminently great
and goodly, are attributed to God; all excellency, Omne spacium cursus
Jordanis a Libano usque ad Asphaltit^n centum circiter passuum millibus
definitur, and in toto eo decursu utrinque latis amoenis and fertilibus campis,
qui utrinque montibus sibi invicem succedentibus a tque cohaerentihus
circundati sunt, undique cingitur. Perer. in Genesis 13. page 489. Scriptura res
quas commendare vult solet Domino tribuere, ut montes Dei, etc. Sic hic putant
illam Jordanis planiciem dici hortum Domini, quod si in terris habitare vellet
Deus, hic esset suum hortum and mansionem habiturus. Mercer. in loc. Sed revera
intelligit de certo terrarum loco. Id. Ib. Cogito ego hunc ipsum locum fuisse
Paradisum. Luth. in loc.
both being from, and for him; and that of these places being so great, that it
might seem, if God himself-would dwell upon earth; after the manner of men, he
would make choice of them for his mansionplace, or garden. Luther rejecting
this interpretation as Judaicall, thinks (though according to my observation
without company) that this place of Sodom and Gomorrha, was Paradise it self,
or the Garden of Eden. I rather conceive with Augustine of old, Calvin, Mercer,
Rivet, and others of late, that the place wherein Sodom and Gomorrha stood, for
its wonderful delightfulness, is compared to that garden of God, properly
called Paradise; Quod terra Sodomaeorum comparatur paradiso Dei, satis ostendit
quomodo intelligi debeat ille Paradisus quem plantavit Deus, and ubi constituit
Adam. Aug. 27. q. in Genesis (...). 70. Joe. 2.3.
or that garden of Eden, called the garden of God, because planted by God
himself, wherein Adam was first placed, and whence afterward he was expelled
for sin; the rather, because, as in the description of the pleasantness of the
garden of Eden, its expressly said, that it was watered with a river; so in this
place the watering of this plain with Jordan is particularly mentioned, as that
which made it so fruitful and delightful; and thus we are in other places to
understand this Adagy of the garden of God, as Isai. 51.3. He will make her
wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord. So Ezekiel.
28.13. its said of the King of Tire, that he had been in Eden, the garden of
God. And that these places where formerly Sodom and Gomorrha stood, are
compared to that same ancient Eden in which Adam was placed, I am yet the more
inclinable to believe, because Egypt, mentioned in the next branch of the
comparison, is a place properly so called; this plain, wherein dwelt the
Sodomites, being also said to be like the land of Egypt; Horreum caeterarum
regionum Riv. in Genesis Dicuntur Aegyptii saepius in anno serere, imo singulis
pene mensibus. Id. Ib.
a country whose fruitfulness, by reason of the overflowing of Nilus, was so
great, that it was commonly called the Granary of other nations, the Egyptians
themselves sowing almost every month; in regard whereof, when other countries
were afflicted with famine, the Egyptians had not only corn sufficient for
their own use, but also for the relief of their neighbors; Nor was Sodom
unlike to Egypt in respect of this plenty of bread, the fullness whereof is,
Ezekiel. 16.49. expressly said to be the iniquity of Sodom. And in respect of the
plenty, pleasantness and pride of the cities of the plain, possibly it came
to pass that Chedorlaomer made them by force subject to himself, as also that
they afterward rebelled against him; Genesis 14.
whereupon ensued that war between him (assisted with three other Kings) and
them, wherein Chedorlaomer and his confederates getting the victory, they took
all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrha.

2. It may be enquired what these cities about Sodom and Gomorrha were, which (
Jude says) were destroyed. In Scripture we read but of two, that (besides
Sodom and Gomorrha) were overthrown, viz. Admah and Zeboim: of these we have
frequent mention in Scripture, as, Deuteronomy. 29.23. where we read only of the
overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha, Admah and Zeboim; as also Hos. 11.8. Lyra,
Theodoret, and Suidas think, that Zoar was also involved in that calamity after
Lots departure from it, mentioned Genesis 19.30. but it seems rather that Zoar was
totally spared at the intercession of Lot, Genesis 19.21. I will not overthrow
this city for which thou have spoken, and long after the consuming of Sodom and
Gomorrha, Zoar is mentioned in Scripture, as Deuteronomy. 34.3. Isai. 15.5. and Zoara
sola de quinque Sodomorum urbibus praeservata. Imminet mari mortuo praesidium
in ea positum est militum Romanorum, apud eam gignitur balsamum, etc. Hier. de
loc. Heb. Sap. 10.6.
Hierom says, that of all the five cities, only Zoar was spared, and that in
his time it stood between the dead sea and the mount of Engedy. Nor must the
Author of the book of Wisdom, when he speaks of the fire that fell down upon
the five cities, necessarily be understood to speak of the five cities
severally: But the word Pentapolis, may be taken jointly for the region wherein
the five cities stood, and of them so called. Strabo mentions the overthrow of
thirteen cities by fire, of which, he says, that Sodom was the Metropolis.
Others speak of a greater number, and these possibly do the more boldly mention
so considerable a number, in regard of the largeness of the sulphurous lake,
or the dead sea, which covers that region where the cities stood. Plin. l. 5.
c. 16. Jos. l. 5. de bell. Jud. c. 5.
Pliny says, that this sea is above an hundred miles in length, and twenty
five miles in breadth; But Josephus, who better knew, gives it but five
hundred and eighty furlongs in length; that is, seventy two miles and somewhat
more; and an hundred and fifty furlongs in breadth; that is, nineteen miles or
there abouts.

3. For the third; viz. The naming of Sodom and Gomorrha rather then the other
cities of the plain; It Is not only observable in this, Isai. 1.9. Isai. 13.19.
Jer. 23.14. Jer. 49.18. Jer. 50.40. Amos 4.12. Zeph. 2.9. Mat. 10.15. Mar.
6.11. Romans 9.29. 2 Pet. 2.6.
but in most of those places where the sin and destruction of these cities are
mentioned; See Isai. 1.9, 10. and 13.19. Jerem. 23.14. and 49.18. etc. And it
is not doubted, but that 1. These two were the chief and principal of all
those cities which were destroyed, the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrha are
eminently mentioned above the rest of the five Kings, Genesis 14.10. and though
every one of the five cities had a King peculiarly belonging to it, Genesis 14.2,
8. yet Sodom was the Metropolis, or chief city; hence we read so frequently,
Ezekiel. 16.46, 48, 49, 53, 55, etc. that the other cities which God overthrew,
are called the Daughters of Sodom: And it is probable that Gomorrha was next to
Sodom in dignity. 2. These two cities were the most infamously and eminently
wicked: Hence it is that great sinners are called the inhabitants of Sodom and
Gomorrha, Isai. 1.10. Jer. 23.14. Mat. 10.15. etc. And Jerusalem is called the
Sister of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.46. And a wicked life is compared to the Vine of
Sodom and Gomorrha, Deuteronomy 32.32. The cry of the sins of Sodom and Gomorrha is
peculiarly mentioned, Genesis 18.20. and when God expressed how much he abhord the
Prophets of Jerusalem for sin, he says, They were to him as Sodom and
Gomorrha; and when he sets forth the impiety of the rulers and people of
Jerusalem, he calls them, The Rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomorrha, Isai.
1.10. The seat of Antichrist is called Spiritual Sodom, Rev. 10.8. And it is
observable that the sin for which these Cities were so infamous, receives it is
denomination from Sodom, rather then from any of the rest of the Cities, it
being to this day called Sodomy. These cities then being more wealthy, were
also more wicked then the rest, and from them, as from the head there came a
defluxion of sin upon the rest. Jon. 1.2. It Is said that Nineveh was a great
city, and the wickedness thereof came up before the Lord.

4. For the fourth; in the description of this punishment, these Places and
cities are rather named then the Persons and Inhabitants thereof, to note, that
their overthrow was universal and total; they were all, and utterly ruined,
God has made them cease from being a people; he not only cutting off some
branches, but plucking them up by the root; not only executing the rebels, but
demolishing their fortifications, and at once both firing the Bees and the
Hive. The overthrow of Sodom was total, both in respect of the Inhabitants and
the Place it self; for the former only one Lot was excepted from this
destruction, Luke 17.39. 2 Pet. 2.7. Hence it is the Prophet says, Isai. 1.9.
Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have
been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrha. Had there been ten righteous, all should
have been spared; but there being but one righteous, there was but one
delivered. The punishment was as universal as the provocation; From the sole
of the soot even to the head, there was no soundness in them: And in Scripture
a general calamity is proverbially expressed by the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrha; Jer. 49.18.50.40.
concerning Edom and Babylon, it is said, As in the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrha, no man shall abide there, neither shall a son of man dwell in it.
Total also was the destruction of these Cities in respect of their place. To
this purpose speaks Peter, 2 Pet. 2.7. where he says, that God turning their
cities into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow: Hence we find that the
plain wherein they were seated, was overthrown with the Cities, Genesis 19.25 and
that the whole land is Brimstone, Salt, and burning; and it is not sown, nor
bears, nor any grass grows therein, Deuteronomy. 29.23. the salt, or dead sea
has not only overwhelmed the place it self where the Cities stood, but (as
seems to be gathered from this Deuteronomy. 29.33. and 32.32.) the grounds which
bordered upon them, Poma oculis tenus contacta cinerescunt. Tert. Apol. c. 40.
Forinsecus matura, intrinsecus sumea. Aug. de C. D. l. 21. c. 7.
are spoiled, the fruits whereof (if any be) are most loathsome and unsavory;
as Josephus, Solinus, Strabo, and also Tertullian and Augustine report, who say
of the apples which grow there, that to see to, they are apples, but being
touched, they fall into ashes; and that when they seem to be ripe, they are
within only smoaky; that an outward rine does keep in the filthy embers: And
hence it is, that in Scripture a total and irrecoverable subversion is
compared to that of Sodom and Gomorha: Jer. 20.16. Ezekiel. 16.53, 55 Zeph. 2.9.
The Cities (says Jeremy) which the Lord overthrew and repented not. Moab
(says Zephany) shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrha; Even
the breeding of Nettles and Saltpits, and a perpetual desolation, Zeph. 2.9.

OBSERVATIONS. Observe. 1. Terram hanc in. colatui nostro traditam, tanta
varietate locoru^ non sine magna sapientia sic distinxit, ut regionum alia sit
montosa, alia plana, alia siticulosa and arrida, alia fontibus and fluviis
irrigua; singularis quaedam diversitas, singularis Dei providentiae laudem
depraedicat, etc. Terrae Canaan fertilem regionem vicinam adjecit. Musc. in 13.
Genesis

1. With admirable wisdom has God ordered, that there should be such variety
of places for man's habitation. Sodom and Gomorrha were seated in the fruitful
valley, the country near it, was more barren and mountainous. Some countries
are high, and thirsty, and barren; Others low, and watered, and fruitful. God
could have made the whole earth to have been alike in all places, and not so
variously orderd. But this singular diversity does excellently praise the
wisdom of his providence. They who live in the barren mountains, which are
only waterd by the showers of Heaven, are compelled to acknowledge, that they
owe all their increase to a blessing from above. They who inhabit the
fruitful valleys enriched with Fountains and Rivers, are admonished of the
bounty of Gods providence to them above others, in the plenty of their
supplies. They who live in mountainous and barren places, show the goodness of
God in susteining them even in such places of scarcity, and that it is not
necessary for man's preservation to live delicately; those who fare more hardly,
often living more healthfully, then those who swim in great abundance. In a
word, by this variety, places are made helpful and beneficial one to another;
some places abound with the blessings of one kind; some with those of another;
the mountains with health, the valleys with wealth; the mountain wants the
valley for supply of food, the valley is beholding to the mountain for strength
and defense. Every place enjoys not every comfort, but is necessitated to crave
supply from a neighboring country. The City cannot live without the food of the
Country; nor the Country without the Coin and Commodities of the City; The
poor wants the rich, and the rich the poor* the one is helpful by his labors,
Pauper rogat, dives erogat.
the other by his rewards: the one by work, the other by wages; True is that of
Solomon, Pro. 22.2.
The rich and the poor meet together, and the Lord is the maker of them all;
Who by this variety both advances the honor of his own wisdom, and
provideth for the good of humane society. Observe. 2. Bona gens mala men's.
Babylon irrigua, and fertilis, Aegyptus irrigua, and amaena; and tamen utra que
quasi carcere usus est Dominus ad castigandum Israelem: Sic exposcit humani
ingenii corruption, ut locis amaenioribus utatur Deus, non ad delicias, sed ad
tristem servitutem and castigationem populi sui. Musc. in Genesis 13.


2. God often affords the richest habitations, and the greatest earthly plenty
to the greatest sinners. Sodom for wealth and fertility is compared to the
Garden of God; and yet God bestows it upon the worst of men. Egypt and Babylon
abounding with waters and plenty, are given, not only unto those who are
without the Church, but who are enemies of the Church. In these countries God
made his people slaves and captives (and truly it is safest for Israel to meet
with most woe in places of most wealth.) God gives his enemies their heaven,
their portion, their all in this life, Psalm. 17.14. they here receive their
good things: and have all in hand, nothing in hope; all in possession, nothing
in future reversion. By this distribution of earthly plenty, God would have us
to see how slightly and meanly he esteems it. He throws the best things that
this world affords, upon the worst, and (as Daniel speaks) the basest of men:
Who but the Nimrods, the Nebuchadnezzars, the Alexanders, the Caesar's, have
ordinarily been the Lords of the world? These have fleeted off the cream of
earthly enjoyments, when the portion of Saints has been thin, and lean, and
poor. Some observe, that Daniel expresses the Monarchies of the world, by
sundry sorts of cruel Beasts; to show, that as they were gotten by beastly
cruelty, so enjoyed with brutish sensuality. The great Turkish Empire is but as
a crust which God throws unto an hungry Dog. Luther.
God sometimes indeed (lest riches should be accounted in themselves evil)
gives them to the good; but ordinarily, lest they should be accounted the
chiefest good, he bestows them upon the bad; oftener making them the portion of
foes then of sons. What is it to receive, and not to be received; to have
nothing from God but what he may give in hatred; to have (with Sodomites) a
Garden of God upon earth, with the loss of the true Paradise! In a word; To
have no other dewes of blessing, but such as may be followed with showrs of
fire!

3. The plenty of places often occasions much wickedness and impiety. Commonly
where there is no want, Observe. 3.
there is much wantonness. The rankness of the soil, occasions much rankness
in sin: Sodom, which was watered with Jordan, and fatted with prosperity, was a
nursery of all impiety: She had fullness of bread, and therefore abundance of
idleness; Neither did she strengthen the hands of the poor: And they were
haughty, and committed abomination before me, Ezekiel. 16.49, 50. Jesurun waxed
fat and kicked, Deuter. 32.15. The drunkards of Ephraim were on the head of the
fat valleys, Isai. 28.1. Wealth unsanctified, is but as oil to nourish the
flame of lust. How deceitful an Argument of Gods love is worldly abundance!
Not the having, but the holy improvement of wealth, is the distinguishing
mercy. God cuts his people short of bodily supplies in much love to their
souls: His Daniels thrive best with the diet of Pulse: I never yet heard or
read, that prosperity occasioned the conversion of one soul. Cyrus (they say)
would not suffer his Persians to change a barren soil for a fruitful, because
dainty habitations, make dainty inhabitants: Rich cities have ever been the
stoves of luxury. Men have natural inclinations according to the Genius of
their country; and it is rare to see Religion flourish in a rich soil. In the
scantinesse of earthly enjoyments, want restrains, and stints our appetites;
but where there is abundance, and the measure is left to our own discretion, we
seldom know what moderation means. Islands are the richest soyls, and Ilanders
are held the most riotous people; we in this City, lie in the bosom, and at
the dugs of an indulgent mother; we live in as dangerous a place for
prosperity, as Sodom: and as the fattest earth is most slippery for footing, we
had need of special grace at every turn, and of that watchfulness whereby, in
the midst of abundance, we may not want temperance. How hard is it, with holy
Paul, to know how to be full, and to abound! How holy is that man who can be
chaste, temperate, Nullos esse Deos, inane Coelum affirmat Selius probatque quod
se factum dum negat haec videt beatum, Mart. l. 4. Epig. 21.
heavenly in Sodom! Let us not only be content to want, but even pray against
those riches which may occasion us, being full, to deny God, Prove. 30.8, 9.
It Is a most unwise choice, with Lot, to leave Abraham to inhabit Sodom! and an
ill exchange, to go (with Jacob) from Bethel the house of God, to Bethlehem,
though an house of bread and plenty. They, who for worldly advantages, betake
themselves to places only of outward accommodations, soon find, with Lot, the
recompense of their inexcusable error. How much more commendable was the choice
of holy Galeacius, who forsook all the wealth and honors of Italy, to enjoy
God in the purity of his ordinances in a poor Geneva! It Is much better to
travel to Zion through the valley of Baca, then to pitch our tents in the
Plains of Sodom.

4. Observe. 4.
Sinners are not bettered by premonition. They commonly remain unreformed,
notwithstanding the bitter fore-tastes of judgments. How soon has Sodom forgot
that she was spoiled and wasted by Chedorlaomer and the other Kings! But
sinners grow worse by afflictions, as water grows more cold after an heating.
If that wicked City had been warned by the sword, it had escaped the fire. But
now this visitation has not made ten good men in those five cities. And as
they leave not sinning, so God leaves not plaguing them, but still follows them
with a succession of judgments. There Is no greater sign of final overthrow,
then a mis-improving of judgments. Oh, that the time which we spend in an
impatient fretfulnesse under them, because they are so great, we would more
profitably employ in a humble mourning for our unprofitableness under them,
lest they be the forerunners of greater.

5. The greatest, Observe. 5.
the strongest Cities cannot keep off judgment; Nor are they shot-proof
against the arrows of vengeance. Great sins will overturn the foundations of
Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them. Nothing can defend where Gods
justice will strike, as there is nothing can offend where his goodness will
preserve. The height of a Cities proud Towers may hold the earth in awe, but
they cannot threaten heaven; and the closer they press to the seat of God, the
nearer they lie to his lightning. The bars of our gates cannot keep out
judgments. What is the greatness of Sodom, though the mother city, compared
with the greatness of the Lord of Hosts! The lands of Alcibiades, in the Map
of the whole world, could not be espied. The Nations are as the drop of a
bucket, as the small dust of the balance; Isai. 40.15.
He takes up the Isles as a very little thing: An nations before him are as
nothing, and less then nothing, and vanity: Jerusalem was the perfection of
beauty and the joy of the whole earth; yet how were her gates sunk into the
ground, Lam. 2.15.
her bars broken: Sion was so desolate, that the Foxes ran upon it. Her
strength was such before, Lam. 5.18.
that the inhabitants of the world would never have believed that the enemy
would have entered Jerusalem. Lam. 4.12.
Greatness of sin will shake the foundations of the greatest Cities upon
earth: If their heads stood among the stars, iniquity will bring them down into
the dust. Even of Babylon the great (that Spiritual Sodom) shall it be said,
Rev. 18.2.
It is fallen. Vrbs aeterna.
Ammianus Marcellinus, called Rome the everlasting City; but even she shall see
the day when the eternity of her name, and the immortality of her soul,
wherewith she is quickened, (which (says a Learned man) is the supremacy of her
Prelates, above Emperors and Princes) shall be taken from her, and as Babylon
has left her the inheritance of her name, so shall it leave her the
inheritance of her destruction. In vain do we build, unless the Lord lay the
first stone; or plant, unless he say, Let it grow. Blessed is the City whose
gates God barreth up with his power, and opens with his mercy; Otherwise
Sodoms plenty, and power, cannot secure it is inhabitants. It Is said of Tyrus,
that Her Merchants were Princes, and her Traffickers the Honorable men of the
earth; yet how does God deride her greatness, at the time of her overthrow! Is
this that glorious City? (Isai. 23.7.) her own feet shall carry her far off to
sojourne. The Lord of Hosts has purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory,
and to bring to contempt all the honorable of the earth. Sodom, Babylon,
Jerusalem, Constantinople, etc. have felt the weight of Gods power, and their
own impieties; God once asked Nah. 3.10.
Niniveh, whether she was greater then No: Let me ask London, whether she be
greater then those cities which, for sin, God has made small, yea brought to
nothing. He who in former great plagues has made grass to grow in the streets
of London for want of passengers; is able again to stretch out upon it the line
of consusion, the stones of emptiness, Isai. 34.11.
and to turn the glory of our dwellings into plowed fields. The fear of God is
the strongest refuge; and righteousness a stronger bulwark then walls of
brass. Prove. 10.25.
How great is the folly of the greatest City, to be at the same time sinful
and secure! There Is no fortification against, no evasion from the Lord. There Is
no way to fly from him, but by flying to him; by making him, in Christ, our
friend; by becoming enemies to sin, and by reforming.

6. Observe. 6. Genesis 19.35.
Sin brings a curse upon every thing that belongs to man. The sin of Sodomites
overthrew them, their houses, their cities, their children, yea, their plain,
and all that grew upon the earth. The curse of Thorns and Briars grew out of
the soil of sin. The punishment of Amalek, reached even the Infant and
Suckling; yea the Ox and Sheep, the Camel and Ass. 1 Samuel 15.3.
That which was made and bestowed for man's comfort, may justly be destroyed for
man's wickedness. Who wonders to see the children, the followers, the palaces,
and gardens of a Traitor to droop and decay; and the arms of his house, and
the Badge of his Nobility, to be defaced and reversed? That which is abused by
man to the dish^or of God, may justly be destroyed by God to the detriment of
man. How deservedly may God demolish and dismantle those fortifications, and
break in pieces those engines, in and by which rebellious man fights against
his Supreme Lord, and Sovereign! How profitably may we improve all the miseries
which we behold dispersed upon the whole creation! How fruitful a Meditation
may we raise from the barrenness of the earth! Psalm. 107.34.
A fruitful land turns he into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein. All the Monnuments of ruin, the demolished Monasteries, and
overthrown Abbeys, and subverted Cells of Sodomiticall and lazy Friars, full
fed, and unclean inhabitants, are but the scratches that sin has made upon the
fair faces of Nations. Oh, that England would look with Scripture spectacles
upon all its fired Towns, and razed mansions, and say, and believe, If sin had
not been, these had not lien here; Vestigia peccati
and that these demolitions are but the foot-prints of sin; that so having
found out sin, we may voice it, and deal with it as the Philistines did with
Samson, Judge. 16.24.
Who (said they) was the destroyer of their country. Certainly, that which
wants reason is by God ruined, that we who have reason may thereby be reformed.
We should say in the destruction of the creatures, as David in the death of his
subjects, I and my Fathers house have sinned; These sheep what have they done?
and we should look upon Gods taking away of abused comforts, as stoppages in
our way of sin, and the withdrawings of the fuel of lust; God as it were firing
our ships, and breaking down our bridges, lest by these we should depart from
him.

7. Observe. 7.
Great is the difference between Gods chastising of his people, and his
punishing of Sodomites. The universality of Sodoms ruin, followed the
community of its sin. The Church of God is never destroyed utterly, but in it
he always leaves a number; Except the Lord had left us a seed (says Paul) we
should have been as Sodom, Romans 9.29.
and like unto Gomorrha. Though an householder spend and sell the greatest part
of the corn of the Harvest Crop, yet he will be sure to reserve a little seed
corn, to sow his ground for a new corp; Though Sodom be utterly consumed by
fire; yet Jerusalem is as a brand plucked out of the fire. God makes a light
account of whole cities full of sinners, Psalm. 119.119.
he takes away the ungodly of the earth like dross, which is put into the fire
to be consumed; his own people being like gold only, put in to be purged: A man
when his house is on fire, more regards a small box full of Jewels, then a
great room full of ordinary Lumber. God having intimated to his people, Hos.
11.6. that they deserved to be made as Admah and Zeboim, (the two Cities that
were destroyed with Sodom and Gomorrha;) he subjoyns ver. 9. I will not return
to destroy Ephraim; Vid. Rivetum in loc.
by not returning to destroy, he means, he will not utterly destroy; he will
not be like a Conqueror, who having overcome a City, and in the heat of blood,
destroyed all with whom he met, at length indeed gives over, but ^^terward
returns to make a total destruction thereof; though God make a full end of all
nations, yet he will not make a full end of his people, Jer. 30.11. Jer. 46.28.
Am. 4.11. Zech. 3.2. Isai. 6.13. Isai. 10.22.
but correct them in measure, yet not leave them altogether unpunished; he will
ever have some to serve him, and to be monuments of his mercy: God will deal
with his people as he enjoined them to do, in gathering their grapes at
Vintage, Lev. 19.10. the gleaning of grapes he will leave in it. Isai. 17.6. and
as the shaking of an Olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the
uppermost bough. God will have evermore some of his people above the reach of
their enemies. This indulgence of God should both teach us Humility,
considering what we deserve; and Thankfulness, considering what we escape, it
being the Lords mercies that we are not utterly consumed.

This for the first part of this seventh verse, viz. the Places punished. The
second follows, namely, the Deserving cause of their punishment; expressed by
the Apostle in these words; In like manner giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh.

Wherein he sets down, 1. The sin of some; (namely, of the Cities about Sodom
and Gomorrha) which was to sin in like manner.

2. The sin of all the cities destroyed.

Wherein I consider 1. Into what they fell; viz. uncleanness; yea, one of the
most odious sorts of uncleanness, Sodomy, or pollution with strange flesh.

2. The Degree or measure of their embracing this sin; They gave themselves
over to the one; they went after the other.

EXPLICATION.
In the Explication of this second part; viz. their sin, three things
principally are considerable.

1. What we are to understand by this sinning in like manner. 2. What by
fornication and strange flesh. 3. What by this giving themselves to the former,
and going after the later.
For the first: These words, In like manner, in the Original (...); Sodoma and
Gomorrhae vestigia secutae. Neque nos offendere debet generis mutatio, urbium
enim nomine, incolas comprehendit. Beza. Simili modo nempe cum Sodoma and
Gomorrha. Estius in loc. Hoc non ad Israelitas, and Angelos, sed mutuo ad
Sodomam et Gomorrham refero. Nec obstat quod pronomen (...) masculinum est; nam
ad incolas potius, quam ad loca Judas respexit. Calv. in loc. Comprehendit
Apostolus, nomine fornicationis, quam alibi omnem viri and foeminae,
commixtionem extra matrimonium. Est. in 1 Timothy 1.9. (...).
Some refer them not to the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, but to the Israelites
and Angels of whom the Apostle spoke in the foregoing verses; as if he had
intended, that these Cities about Sodom and Gomorrha sinned after that manner
in which the Israelites and Angels sinned: and their only reason is, because
the Gender is changed in this word (...), which (say they) cannot be referred
to the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, but to those Israelites and Angels of whom
he spoke before, and who sinned, though not in that bodily uncleanness which
Jude afterward mentions, yet by spiritual Whoredom, in making defection from
God. But I conceive, with Beza, Calvin, and Estius upon the place, that Jude
intends that these Cities about Sodom and Gomorrha sinned after the same manner
with these greater cities, whose steps and examples they followed, and
therefore were involved in their punishment. We never find in Scripture, that
the Israelites finned in following of strange flesh, nor can we either
according to Scripture or reason, attribute this sin to Angels: and as for the
change of the Gender in the word (...), by a Metonymie of the Subject, the
Scripture often puts the City for the Inhabitants of the City, as Mat. 8.34.
The whole City went out to meet Jesus, etc.

2. We are to enquire what the Apostle here intends, 1. By Fornication; and 2.
By strange flesh.

First, Fornication, I take not properly and strictly for that act of
uncleanness committed between persons unmarried; but as in Scripture it is put
Mat. 5.32. for (...), Adultery, where Christ says, Whosoever shall put away
his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, etc. so is it here to be taken
for all sorts of carnal uncleanesse, and as comprising all breaches of
chastity.

The impure pens, of those more impure penmen, the Jesuits (and among them of
Thomas Sanchez, in his Treatise of Matrimony) have in their casuisticall
discourses run out so odiously upon this Subject (a work fit for those whose
father, his unholinesse the Pope, Talia, quae vix Diabolus ipse, studium omne
adhibendo, suggerere posset. Nonsolum genera, species, sed and modos omnes,
subjecta, objecta, minutatim examinant. Rivet. in Decal. page, 245. Genesis 38.9. 1
Cor. 6.9. Col. 3.5. Levit. 18.23.20.13. Exodus 22.19. Pudicitia non perdi^a, sed
prodita. Genesis 34.2. 2 Samuel 13.14. Romans 1.27. 1 Timothy 1.9. 1 Cor. 6.9. Levit.
18.20. Prove. 2.16.17.5. 7, 8, 20.
invites to the public profession of Whordome) that (as Rivet notes) they
utter such things as scarce the Devil himself with all his study would have
suggested, they examining not only the kinds and several sorts, but even every
manner, object, subject, circumstance of this sin so exactly, and by
peecemeall, that chaste Readers cannot read them without blushing and
abomination. To mention therefore only the principal sorts of carnal
uncleanness, and such as we find (though with sacred modesty) set down in
Scripture. This sin, if practiced with a man's own body, according to the
opinion of some, its called (...) and (...), Effeminatenesse and Uncleanness,
for which God slew Onan; if with a beast, it is bestiality, a sin forbidden, and
severely to he punished by Gods law; if with mankind unwillingly, the party
patient not agreeing, it is called ravishing; if the parties agreeing be males,
they are called (...), and their sin, to the perpetual infamy of Sodom, is
called Sodomy: The parties being of a different sex, and if the sin be
committed with more, there being a pretext of marriage, it is called Polygamie;
there being no such pretext, Scortatio, Whoredom, or uncleanesse, transported
to the abuse of many. If uncleanesse be committed by parties, between whom
there is consanguinity or affinity, in the degrees forbidden by God, it is
incest; if by parties not so allied, when both or either of them be married,
it is adultery. If the female be a virgin and not married, it is stuprum, or a
deflowring of her; if she be retained peculiarly to one, she is a Concubine,
Judge. 19.1. if the act be often repeated, it is called luxury; and he who sets
himself after it a Whoremonger. Nor is it impossible but that uncleanesse may
be between married couples, when the use of the marriage bed is in a season
prohibited, or in a measure not moderated, or in a manner not ordained, or to
an end not warranted. To all which may be added the sin called Lenocinium, when
a Female is prostituted to the lusts of another, either for gain or favor;
forbidden, Levit. 19.29. with which some join the toleration of uncleanness,
either in private families, or in public states, as in Rome that Spiritual
Sodom. As also all those things which incite, dispose, or provoke to actual
uncleanness; as immodest kisses, embraces, glances, filthy speeches, impure
books, amorous songs, mixed dancings, lascivious attire, etc. And lastly, the
concupiscence, boiling or burning lustfulnesse of the heart (out of which
proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, Mat. 15.19.) called
1 Cor. 7.9. burning; and Col. 3.5. Evil concupiscence.

It Is most probable that these impure Sodomites, at first began at some of the
lower and less heinous of the forementioned sorts of uncleanness, and that
they went through most, if not all of them, before they came to be such hellish
proficients and practicioners in their villainies, Nausea and fastidium
muliebris commercii in Sodomitis. Musc. in Genesis p. 464. Vid. Mr. D. Rogers, in
his excellent Treatise, called Matrimonial Honor. -- Liber amorque; denique
cum mentes bominum furiarit uterque, and pu dor, et probitas, and metus omnis
abest.
as to abuse themselves with mankind: the heinousness of which abomination,
either swallows up the mention of the rest; or if from them they did abstain,
it was neither for feat or shame, but because they accounted them (as Musculus
speaks) to be ranks too inconsiderable and ordinary for them, who left the
natural use of the woman, and burnt in lust toward one another, and (as Jude
says) followed after strange flesh.

Briefly (now) though sutably to this branch of Explication, I shall add to the
discovery of the sorts of uncleanness, a touch of the peculiar odiousness of
this sin (to defer the consideration of the wrath of God against it, till we
come to the next part.) 1. It Is a close and cleaving sin, much cherished by
corrupt nature. It bears (as a Reverend Divine notes) the name of it is mother,
which is called in general lust, or concupiscence; it has the name of it is
kind, and therefore it is lust, eminently; it lies near the heart, and sleeps
in the bosom. 2. It Is an Infatuating sin, Hos. 4.11. taking away the heart;
even David was led with a stupor of spirit for a whole year together, after his
uncleanness. How did this sin besot Samson? It blunts the edge not of grace
only, but even of reason also; even Solomon himself could not keep his wisdom
and women at once. 3. Its an Injurious sin to others; It loves not to go to
hell without company: An Adulterer cannot say (as some other sinners may) that
he is his own greatest enemy. How many does it (besides those whom it kills in
soul) wound in body, name, at one shoot! and for this wound there can be no
salve of restitution or recompense. 4. Its an attended sin; not only inducing
others to sin, but it brings on other sins with it; it is like the needle which
draws the thread after it; idolatry, perjuries, murders, riot, defrauding even
of nearest relations. The Apostle joins fornication and wickedness, (...), and
(...) together, Romans 1.29. An unclean person runs down the hill and cannot
stop his course in sin. 5. It Is a Dishonorable sin to be the body; and 1 Cor.
6.18. peculiarly said to be against the body. The unclean person makes himself
a stigmatick, he brands his body, and leaves upon it a loathsome stain; Other
sins comparatively are without the body, by it, not in it; this both; it being
a more bodily sin, and requiring more of the body for the perfecting of it. 6.
It Is a Sacrilegious sin: It takes away from God that which is his own; he made
our bodies, Psalm. 139.15.
and curioufly wrought them like a piece of tapestry, and he will not have them
to be spotted. 1 Cor. 6.15, 16, 18, 19.
Our bodies are the members of Christ our mystical head, united strongly,
though Spiritually. If it were heinous for David to cut off the skirt of Saul's
garment, what is it for any to divide between Christ and his members, and that
by making them the members of an Harlot? Our bodies are the temples of the Holy
Ghost, therefore not to be the Styes for Swine; dedicated, therefore not to to
be profaned. 7. Its an Heathenish sin. Gentiles walk, 1 These. 4.5. in the lust
of concupiscence: and a sin before conversion, 1 Cor. 6.9. Such were some of
you. A sin of night and darkness, wherein men care not how much their apparel
be spotted or torn. A sin not to be named amongst Christians; In a word, a sin
not of Saints, but of Sodomites: Who,

2. Are specially taxed with the breach of chastity in pollutions by strange
flesh. Quidam censent per (...), per verecundam se. synecdochen, carnis nomine
intelligi membrum genetale, vel potius nefarium illius membri in illicito coitu
abusum. Gerard. in 2 Pet. 2.10. Romans 1.27.
The words in the Original are (...), properly signifying another flesh.
Whereby the Apostle intends, such a flesh as was another, or different from
that which was afforded to their natural use by the law of nature, or a flesh
that was made by God to another use and end, than that unto which they abused
it. Or as Oecumenius thinks, that flesh which they followed may be called
another, or strange, because God never appointed that Male and Male, but only
that Male and Female should be one flesh; in which respect, as to a male, the
flesh of a Male must always be another flesh. And Chrysostom well observes on
Romans 1.27. that whereas by Gods ordinance in lawful copulation by marriage,
two became one flesh, both sexes were joined together in one; by Sondomiticall
uncleanness, the same flesh is divided into two; Men with men working
uncleanness as with women; of one sex making (as it were) two.

Of this sin of pollution with strange or another flesh, in Scripture two sorts
are mentioned; The one, carnal joining with a beast, which is of another kind,
prohibited Levit 18.23. and punished with death, Levit. 20.15 wherein it is
observable, that the very Beast is also appointed to be slain (as in another
case the Ox that goared one to death was to be killed, Exodus 21.28.) by which
was manifested the detestablenesse of that sin, in that it polluted the very
beasts, Ad ipsum innoxium annimal poena transit. Calv. (...). Nefas, de quo ne
fari licet; of which it is not lawful to speak, or as Varro deriveth it, as
though they who committed it were ne far digni, not worthy to eat bred.
Vid. Willet in Lev. p. 504.
and makes even the unclean creatures more unclean, and the beast below a
beast, and not worthy of living the very life of a beast; but especially (as
Calvin notes) the Lord would show how much this sin displeath him, when he
commands that even the harmless beast, neither capable of, nor provoking to
thesin, was punished with death. 2. The other sort of pollution by strange
flesh, was that which is properly termed Sodomy, committed when persons defile
themselves with their own sex; The sin which the Gentiles committed when God
gave them up to vile affections, or affections of dishonor and ignominy, where
by men with men wrought that which was unseemly, Romans 1.27. whereby as they had
left the author, they were also suffered to leave the order of nature. A sin
called an abomination, Lev. 20.13. sending an abominable favor unto the Lord.
Incest with the daughter in law, is called confusion; with the mother and
daughter, wickedness. This sin of Sodom is called (...), Abomination. And when
the (...), Abominable, are unmbred among the fearful, unbeleevers, etc. who
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone; by
Abominable, many learned men understand those who are given to this sin against
nature, as if abomination were properly belonging to it. In adultery, violence
is offered to marriage; in Incest, to affinity; but in this sin (as Tostatus
observes) infamy is offered to the whole humane nature. And Ex eo quod
relatione ad Deum sub nomine tetragrammaton, dicuntur valde mali and
peccatores, significatur eos contra jus naturae valde peccasse. Erant enim mali
homines, and declinabant a recto naturali, ut eorum venerea contra naturam
testantur. Per. in Genesis 13. Infamia irrogatur toti bumanae naturae Sulphur
significatus and punitus fuit Peccatorum foetor, igne libidinis ardor. Ger. l.
4. Mor. c. 10.
Pererius notes, because it is said these Sodomites were sinners before the
Lord, the word being Jehovah, that it signified they sinned against the right
and light of nature. And its called (as Gerard notes) Sap. 14.26. (...), a
changing of birth. The unsavory sulphur that was mixed with the flames of
Sodom, and (if travelers may be believed) the still continuing stink of that
sulphurous lake where Sodom once stood, seem to be comments upon the abhorred
unsavouriness of this sin. By the law of Theodosius and Ar^^dius, Sodomites
were adjudged to the fire. Among the Athenians, he who defiled the male was put
to death, and the party abused was barred from all office. In the Council of
Vienna, the templers who were found guilty of this sin, were decreed to be
burnt. Among the Romans it was lawful for him who was attempted to that abuse,
to kill him who made the assault; Probus adoleseens facere periculose quam
turpiter perpeti maluit. Orat. p^o Milon. Qua indignati one tantu^ nefas
prosequar? Vincit officium lenguae, sceleris magnitudo. Piget dicere. Lact. l.
6. c. 23. de vero cultu. Sexum nec foemineum mutat Christianus -- Christianus
uxori suae soli masculus nascitur. Non deli cta, sed monstra. Tertull. de pud.
(...), quasi (...), quia vacat pudore. Justinian. in 1 Cor. 6.9.
and thus C. Lucius did, who (as Tully says of him) had rather do dangerously,
than suffer shamefully. In short, against this sin of Sodomy no indignation (as
Lact antius speaks) is enough. The greatness of the sin, overcomes the office
of the tongue. Tertullian brings in Christianity triumphing over Paganism,
because this sin was peculiar to heathens, and that Christians neither changed
the sex, nor accompanied with any but their own wives. This and such like (as
Tertullian speaks) being not so much to be called offenses, as monsters; and
not to be named, without holy detestation by Saints, though they be committed
without shame by Sodomites.

Thus having in the second place spoken of the fornication of these Sodomites,
strange flesh, it remains that briefly, in the third place, we should enquire
what was their giving themselves over to the former, and their going after the
later; both these are contained in a double expression in the original, the
first is the Preposition (...), Vulgata barbare ex fornicarae. Bez. in loc.
being in Composition in the word (...), by the addition whereof the
signification of the word (says Gerard) is dilated, enlarged, increased; as
also are the significations of other words by the same Preposition. The second
is in the words, (...), etc. going after, etc. whereby is intended more then
the accepting or embracing, even the prosecuting the motions of their
unnatural uncleanness. In sum, I conceive by these expressions of their giving
over themselves, and following after strange, etc. here is noted, besides the
Original root and fountain both of uncleanness and all other lusts; I mean,
that fomes innatus, that imbred occasion of sin; as also, besides the arising
of unclean motions in the heart, the delighting in such motions, the consent to
those motions so delighted in, the actual performance, and execution of those
motions so consented to; I say, besides all these, which are supposed in these
expressions of the Apostle, there is intended, the more hideous hight, and
prodigious eminency of this Sodomiticall uncleanness; and that in sundry
respects. As,

1. Of their making Provision, and in projecting for their lusts; and that both
by spending their time, pains, cost in fetching in, and laying on its fuel; the
constant, providing and pouring on of oil to keep in, and increase the flame,
by fullness of bread, and excessive eating and drinking; and also by listening
after, relating of, and laying out for such objects as seemed to promise most
satisfaction to their unsatiable lusts, which appeared by the sudden notice,
and shameful resentment of the arrival of Lots beautiful guests.

2. Their excessivenesse and exuberancy in pouring out themselves upon their
lust, even to the consuming wearing, and wearying themselves by uncleanness;
the boiling over of their strength and lusts together (though with difference,
the former being hereby impaired, the later increased;) and in a word, their
becoming hereby their own destroyers, and the Devils Martyrs. And this the
Apostle Peter intends clearly in that word, (...), 2 Pet. 2.7. where he speaks
of the (...), the filthy conversation of the Sodomites; the word (...),
comprehending not only all kinds of lust and obscenity, but also a monstrous
profusion, a violent spending ones self without measure in all
lasciviousness, (...). 1 Pet. 4.4.
even the greatest excess of riot.

3. Their Impudency and shamelessness in sinning, whereby they feared not to
own their impurity before all the world. These Sodomites were not only
practitioners and proficients in, but also professors of their black and
hellish art of uncleanness. Hence it is (say some) that the men of Sodom are
said to be sinners before the Lord: Genesis 13.13.
that is (say they) publicly and shamelesly, without any regard of Gods eye or
observation. Hence likewise Isai. 3.10. Tostatus in loc. Potest idem
signifioare quod palam and public. Perer. in loc. Nihil magis in natura sua,
laudare se dicebat quam (...) Suet. in Calig.
the Prophet reproving boldness of sinning in the Jews, says, that they
declared their sin as Sodom, whose inhabitants hid not their filthiness in
corners, but by their countenance, carriage. and words proclaimed it to all
spectators. This impudence was noted by the Heathen Historian as the height of
wickedness in Caligula, one of the worst of men; but in Sodom, behold a City
full of Caligulaes. The sin of these miscreants abhon'd secrecy; they blushed
not, though the Sun was a blushing witness of their filthiness. They gloried
in their shame because they had out-sinn'd all shame. Their hands were the
organs, and their tongues the trumpets of wickedness. Would any but a company,
who had more of Monsters then men in them, have made such a demand in the open
streets, as is mentioned Genesis 19.5. Bring them out to us, that we may know them?

4. Their obstinacy, and pertinacy in sinning. The late bloody war, the
spoiling and plundering of their city, the preaching of Lots life, the
persuasions of his tongue, their plague of blindness could not reclaim them,
but they are by these rather exasperated then amended; like violent streams,
that when they are resisted by Floodgates, swell over the banks. After they
were smitten with blindness, Quamvis obcoecati essent, osti um tamen ad
fatigationem usque frustra quaerebant. Mu^. in loc.
it is said, Genesis 19.11. that they wearyed themselves to find the door, upon
which place Musculus well notes, that such was their obstinacy in sin, that
even after their blindness, they were as mad upon their lust as before, even
unto weariness of body. What were all the means which were used to amend them,
but the pouring of oil down the chimney? By an hellish antiperistasis they
become more hotly furious by calm and cool opposition; and all that Lot could
gain by his meek and earnest disswasion from abusing his guests was but a scoff
for becoming a Judge, and a threat that they would deal worse with him, then
with them. Were not these possessed with the unclean spirit of lust, who could
break in sunder all the chains of reproof and pe^swasion? Were they not
thoroughly scorched with the heat and thirst of lust, thus to break through
armies of opposition to draw the stolen waters of unnatural and poysonfull
pleasures?

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Wicked men agree in sinning. Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Cities about them,
sinned in like manner. The inhabitants of several cities, were inhabited by
the same sins; in opposing of God, they join hand in hand. Howsoever the wicked
may disagree in secular conditions and interest, yea, and may have their
private quarrels among themselves, yet in offending God they are unanimous; and
though it be possible that they may agree with the people of God in civil
concernments, yet in the matter of holiness, they will ever differ. There may
be many grudges and quarrels between the soldiers of the same army among
themselves, who yet all consent to oppose the common enemy. The heads of
Samsons Foxes were turned contrary ways, but the Foxes met in the tail and the
fire brand. The heads, the policies of sinners may be divided, but in their
lusts they are united. They are acted by one spirit, and agree in that which is
natural, though they differ in regard of what is accidental. How good is God
to his people, to divide sinners among themselves in their worldly interests!
to order that by the contests between the Pharisees and Sadduces, Paul should
find favor; and by the conflicts between Saul and the Philistims, David should
escape! yea how just is it, that they who agree against God, should disagree
with one another! And that they who sin, should also suffer after the like
manner; that they who are unanimous in the same sin of filthiness, should also
be swept away in the same shower of fire.

2. Observe. 2.
Great is our pronenesse to follow corrupt example, and a multitude to do
evil; to sin in like manner. We are apt Scholars in sinful lessons. How easy
is it to be, nay, how hard not to be carried down the stream, when at once we
go with the wind of example, and the tide of nature? The diseases of the soul
are very catching; and when the times are corrupted, the soul is more
endangered, than is the body by the corruption of air. One Proctor for Satan
shall have more Clients, then an hundred Pleaders for Jesus Christ. Rusty
Armor laid near that which is bright, infects it with rustinesse; but the
bright imparts not its brightness to that which is rusty: The finer bread in
the Oven pertakes of the courser, but seldom does the brown take away any of
the white. How great should be our care to be holy in bad times and companies!
It was the failing of righteous Lot to live in Sodom; but it was his greater
commendation, to be righteous in Sodom: Though these Cities about Sodom sinned
in like manner, yet so did not Lot, though Sodom and Sodomites were round about
him: It showed that his holiness was of a strong complexion, to retain its
healthfulnesse in so corrupt an air. He is a star, that can shine in a dark
night. If we can do the wicked no good, it is our unhapinesse; but if they do
us hurt, Phil. 2.15. Sicut gravior is culpae est, inter bonos bonum non esse;
ita immensi est praeconii, bonum etiam inter malos extitisse. Greg. l. 1. Mor.
c. 1. Non mediocr is titulus virtutis est, inter pravos vivere bonum, and inter
malignan tes innocentiae retinere ca^ dorem, versari inter spinas and minime
laedi divinae potentiae est, non virtutis tuae. Bern. ser. 48. in Cant.
its our sin. Noah was upright, and walked ^ith God, even when all flesh had
corrupted their way. ^ow kindly does Christ take it, when we will shine as
lights in the midst of a crooked, and perverse generation, and sail against the
wind of example! It Is no commendation to be good in good company. A Swine may
for a while possibly be clean in a fair meadow, the difficulty is when the mire
is presented, to abhor wallowing in it. As it is a great sin to be bad among the
good, so it is an high commendation to be good among the bad, to continue a
lilly among thorns, and to have a fire of zeal for God, the more hotly
burning, by how much the cold of profaneness is the more increased; but as
this shows the strength of grace, so yet does that grace the greatness of Gods
power. Instead of imitation, let us bewail the sins of the times, and what we
cannot bear down for the good of others, with a stream of power, let us for our
own, overcome with a flood of tears.

3. Corrupt greatness is very influentiall upon, Observe. 3.
and into inferiors. The lesser Cities sinned after the same manner with Sodom
and Gomorrha: Jeroboam the son of Nebat made Israel to sin: Ephraim walked
after the Commandment, Hos. 5.11. When the sin which we love, is joynd with
that greatness which we admire, needs must it be very drawing. Rev. 13.3 All
the world wondered at the beast, which had received power and authority. Let
those who are powerful in place, take heed lest they be strong to sin; Exodus
2.2. Dan 3.18. Amandus est generator, sed praeponendus est Creator. Tert. l. 1.
de idol. c. 12. Jussum est principis ore Galieni Quod princeps colit ut colamus
omnes Aeternum colo principem dierum, Factorem dominumque Galieni. Prud. Hyrn. 6
for if they improve their power against God, they shall be powerfully punished
by God. Who so causes the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shall
fall himself into his own pit, Prove. 28. Without the sins of others, our own
would be insupportable, if unpardoed; and it is too much to be so much as a
follower in sin. The Examples, yea the injunctions of the best, the greatest,
are limited and bounded by the pleasure of a greater. The Midwives of Egypt,
and the three servants of God, threatened with the fiery furnace, are standing
monuments of religious disoebdience: Fear God is put before that of Honoring
the King. Our earthly is below our heavenly Father: he who begat us, is to be
beloved; but he who created us, is to be preferred. The greatest, the richest
cannot put in security to save us harmless at the day of Judgment for
following their example; even their followers shall be punished. Admah and
Zeboim, the daughters of Sodom, sinned and smarted in like manner with Sodom.

4. Observe 4.
How fitly is the title of Spiritual Sodom bestowed upon Rome! Sodom has now
met with her match. Not to speak of that cloystred crew of Sodomiticall
shavelings, Vid. Speeds History.
the Leprosy of whose sin had eaten so deeply into the walls of their
Monasteries in England, Bale de act. Romans Pont. Bishop Jewel defens. Apol. p.
354. Sleid Commen. ad annum 1550 Constans fuit opinio, Casam Pauli secundi
gratiam, prae ce teris egregie au cupatum, sibi ad purpuratorum patrum decus
aditum paravisse, quorum in cortu clama pontifice adnumera tus cum esset ac
designatus, invida mox sug gerentium ex prorbatione, turpi lasciviae nota
culpatus, etc. Job. Imperialis Musae um Historic. page 27. Toll de Ecclesia
honorabile conjugium, nonne reples eam concubinariis incestuofis, masculorum
concubitoribus. Bern. Cant. ser. 66. A lupanari ad missam unus tantum passus.
Rivet.
that the justice of God both pulled down them, and plucked up their
foundations; but look upon their holy Fathers, and their purple Cardmals, their
Mitred Prelates, and you shall find a second Sodom raised out of the ashes of
the former. My pen is ashamed to write what I read concerning the two
Juliusses, the second and third, Sixtus the fourth, Paul the third, Leo the
tenth: Prodigious was that impure Monster John Casa, Archbishop of Beneventum,
and Legate Apostolical, who wrote a book in commendation of the sin of Sodomy,
and printed it at Venice: and by the license of Julius the third were other
books set forth in praise of that villainy. Perpetual will be the infamy of
that Johannes imperialis, a Popish Writer, who published a book in commendation
of this Arch Bishop Casa, and others of the same stamp, wherein he writes,
[That when Pope Paul the second (observe his Holiness) endeavored to advance
the said Casa to the dignity of a Cardinal, he was by some persons enviously
upbraided, and blamed for lasciviousness.] Nor will Rome ever be, or be
accounted other then as Sodom, a mother of Harlots, and a stable of uncleanness
(a fit place for the seat of the beast) so long as her laws for prohibiting of
Marriage, and permitting of Whoredom, are in force.

5. Observe. 5.
How hellish black is the depraved nature of man! The fountain surely was
filthy and poysonfull, that sent forth such streams of Sodomiticall
uncleanness. Sodoms lake of Brimstone is not half so unsavory, as were their
streams of Fornication; nor were these so filthy as that springing puddle of
polluted nature from which they issued. Who reads not without horror and
amazement, the overflowing of this sin of Sodom, into the lives of those
accounted the best of heathen, and the wisest of Philosophers, Romans 1.19.
(...), etc. (...) Greg. Naz. O. rat, 1. Contra. Jul. page mini. 78. Laert. in
vita Platonis. Lego partem semen^ae Atticae, in Socraiem, corruptorem a
doles^entium pronuntiatam. Tert. Apol. cap 46.
to whom that which might he known of God was manifest; who professed
themselves wise, and yet burned in lust one toward another? Tertullian, and
Gregory Nazianzen charge this foul abomination upon Socrates himself, and
others upon Aristotle, Zeno, and Periander; but most of all upon Plato (how
unworthy the name of divine!) Who might not be more then amazed to read that
Solon and Licurgus should make laws (as they did, according to Chrysostom) for
the toleration of this sin! To the fountain of this Heathenish filthiness we
are led by the Apostle, when he declares that Romans 1. this uncleanness was
Through the lusts of their own hearts. What cause of humility have the best,
when they consider they were born with the nature of the blackest Sodomites!
And how greatly should they praise and admire that love whereby, and laver
wherein they were washed and sanctified! To conclude this, What is there in the
world for which tears and blushing seem to be made, but for the pollution of
that nature, which is the same with that of a Sodomite.

6. Nor yet should the most deeply defiled, Observe. 6. Zech. 13.1.
either in nature or practice, despair. Even Sodomites returning, shall be
accepted; and washing in the fountain ( set open even for their uncleanness)
shall be cleansed. The blood of Christ can wash from the sins of Sodom. Even a
people as bad as Sodomites have been invited by, and unto mercy; for Isai.
1.10. the Prophet calls the Jewish Princes, the Princes of Sodom, and their
people, the people of Gomorrha; that is, such Princes and people as matched
Sodom and Gomorrha in wickedness; and yet he inviteth them unto repentance,
with proffer of mercy, and promise of pardon; and though their sins were as red
as scarlet, yet he says, that he would make them as white as snow, ver. 18.
The Apostle tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.9.11. that some of them had wallowed
in this sin of Sodomy; but (says he) you are washed and sanctified. The Gospel
refuses to pardon no sin, for which the soul can be humbled. Free grace can
bring those to heaven, whose sin equalized theirs who were thrown into hell.
The least sinner has cause of humility, nay in himself of despair; the
greatest has by closing with Christ ground of hope. If it be the glory of God
to pardon great sins; Multo plura quam debeamus Christus pro nobis solvit,
tantoque plura quanto guttulam exiguam pelagus excellit immensum. Chrysostom. in 5
Romans Hom. 11. Observe. 7.
it is his greatest glory to pardon the greatest sinners. There is no spot so
deep, which the blood of God cannot wash away. The Argument which David used
for the pardoning of his sin, could only be prevalent with a God; Pardon my sin
(says he, Psalm. 25.11.) for it is great. There is infinitely a greater
disproportion between the blood of Christ, and the greatest number of greatest
sins; then between the smallest pibble and the vastest ocean.

7. The toleration of some places of uncleanness is no means to prevent the
spreading of this sin. Sodom had liberty enough of sinning, but their lust
increased with their liberty. The cause of Sodoms sin against nature, was not
the penury, but the ordinarinesse of the other way of sinning with the Female.
Lust is insatiable and excessive, nor will any liberty seem enough to it;
indulgence makes it insolent; It will not be persuaded by fair means, Insania
Sodomitica non a penuria muliebris commercii, sed a nausea. Musc. in 19. Genesis
In rebus humanis non peccat magistratus si meretricibus certum locum urbis
incolend^m attribuat, quamvis certo sciat eo loco ipsas non been usuras. Potest
enim permittere minus malum, ut majora impediantur. Bell. l. 2. de amiss. gr. and
stat. pec. c. 18.
nor must this nettle be gently touched, but roughly handled and nipt, if we
would not have it sting. If the Flood-gate of restraint be pulled up, lust
keeps no measure in its pouring forth; The more we grant to it, the more it
will desire from us. To prevent sin by permitting it, is to quench fire with
oil, to make the plaster of poison, and to throw out Satan by Satan.
Improvident and impure is that remedy used in the Papacy for the preserving of
people chaste. I mean the toleration of Places of uncleanness. Romana scorta in
singulas bebdomadas Juli um pendent pontificii, qui census annuus nonnunquam
viginti millia ducatos excedit, adeoque Ecclesiae procerum id munus est, ut una
cum Ecclesiarum proventibus, etiam lenociniorum numerent mercedem. Agrip. de
van. scient. c. 64.
But so the Roman Pander may fill his own coffers with the tribute, he can be
indulgent to the sin of whoredom.

8. Observe. 8.
Corrupt nature delights in that which is strange to Gods ordination. In the
room of accompanying of Male and Female, which was appointed by God, Sodomites
go after strange flesh. Marriage was ordained by God, Genesis 2.22: but nature
being depraved, forsakes that way, and imbraceth the forbidden bosom of a
stranger, Prove. 5.20.
a strange woman not standing in the former relation. The marriage of one man
and one woman was the ordination of God; but instead thereof man's corruption
has brought in Polyga^my. Nor is the depravation of man's nature less opposite
to religious ordinations. God appointed that he alone should be worshipped; but
corrupt nature puts man upon serving strange Gods, Jer. 5.19. called also Jer.
8.19. strange vanities. The true God has appointed the manner of his worship,
and strictly does he forbid the offering of strange incense, Exodus 30.9. but the
same corruption which put the Sodomites upon following strange flesh, puts
Nadab and Abihu upon offering strange fire. Man has found out many, Numb. 3.4.
and goes a whoring after his own inventions, and delights only in deviating
from Gods way. The wicked go astray from the womb. How justly may our crooked
natures be charged with what was unjustly imputed to the Apostles; namely, the
turning of the world upside down? All the breaches of ranks, all the confusions
and disorders upon earth, proceed from our distempered hearts. How comely an
order would there be upon the face of the whole world, if sin did not meddle!

9. Little do they who allow themselves in sin, Observe. 7.
know where they shall make a stop. Once over the shoos in this puddle, rarely
will Satan leave, till he have by degrees got them over head and ears. The
modest beginnings of sin, make way for the immodest and irrecoverable
proceedings. The sin of the Sodomites, which began at the unclean motions of
the heart, at length arises to a prodigious tallnesse of impudency and
obstinacy; The smallest spark may be blown up to a flame, the flame upon the
hearth may, if not quenched, fire the chimney. None provide so wisely for
themselves, as they who kill sin in the cradle; how easily do we proceed from
one degree of sin to another; and how ordinarily does God punish one degree of
sin with another! He who allows himself in speculative filthiness, may at
length arrive at Sodomy: He who now gives way to sin, may shortly be given over
to sin.

10. Observe. 10. (...),
Sinners prosecute their lusts most laboriously. The Sodomites weary and spend
themselves in uncleanness, and painfully pull down a shower of fire and
brimstone upon their heads: Incomparably sorer is the labor of sinners in
damning, then of Saints in saving themselves: The sinner is the only true
drudge, sin the only true slavery; and therefore much greater then any other,
because they who are in it, delight to be so, and are angry with the offer of a
release. Lusts are many and opposite and yet one sinner must be servant to them
all; and they all agree in rending and tearing the soul: They are cruel,
instead of wages, giving only wounds and scourges, and that to the tendrest
part, the conscience. Nor does the body escape the tyranny of lust; Envy,
intemperance, wrath, luxury, have had more martyrs than ever had holiness:
Such is the goodness of God, and the sweetness of his service, that it is
beneficial even to the body; but through how many troubles and woes do wicked
men pass to greater! Woeful and the life of a Sodomite been, though the fire
and brimstone had never fallen; Great should be the grief of Gods servants,
that Satan's slaves should do more for him that will shed their blood, than they
can do for him, who shed his blood for them; that the former should give
themselves over to uncleanness, and the later not more willingly yield
themselves to the Lord.

11. Observe. ult.
By viewing the odiousness of this sin in the Sodomites, it is our duty to
avoid it our selves. To this end,

1. Labor for a sorrowful sensibleness of that inward corruption of nature,
from which alone arises the flame of uncleanness; Lay the foundation of
mortification deep. Throw the water at the bottom of the flame, stop the
fountain; the hating of some outward acts of this sin may go without any
abhorrence of that which is the principle and fountain thereof. Psalm. 5.5.
David began at the right end, when he abhorred and confessed that poison
wherewith his mother had warmed him in the womb. Actual abomination comes from
the natural pollution; Imbred concupiscence is the body; that outward is but a
toe or a finger of that body. The inward dunghill, if unremoved, will steam
forth into a thousand adulteries; till this be healed, thy cure will be but
Palliative (as Physicians speak) not Eradicative. Tertullian holily derides the
folly of the Heathen Democratus, who to prevent lust, would needs put out his
eyes. Christianus salvis oculis foeminam videt; adversus libidinem coecus est.
Tert. Apol. c. 46.
The Christian (says he) can safely look upon a woman, being mind-blind unto
lust. Lay thy Mine under the foundation; silence that bosom Orator which
pleads for uncleanness. The bird which gets loose from the stone or stick to
which it is tied, yet if flying with the string about its leg, is entangled in
the next bough. Though some courses of actual uncleanness be for the present
escaped, yet if the intangling inclination be still entertained, it will
ensnare upon any after occasions and tentations.

2. Banish unclean contemplations, and Ideall uncleanness; Cleanse the stie
of thoughts; stifle them when they begin to plod and plot, and contrive
uncleanly; let not thy spirit be their through-fare; Cleanse your thoughts, ye
sinners, Jam. 4.8. Satan, when he inflames with lust, throws his fireballs into
the thoughts. Fill these table-books with holy contemplations, that there may
be no room in them for the impression of unclean injections.

3. Beware of plausible excuses for the extenuating of uncleanness. Abhor the
aprons of fig leaves, of nature, constitution, allurements, example; Look upon
this sin as it is, not as it is colored; behold it with Scripture spectacles;
consider it is true complexion, under the falsenesse of paint; and contemplate
it as tumbling in the mire of its own filthiness, and in the blood of thy
precious soul.

4. Fear God. He who fears God, can never find a place dark enough to offend.
Joseph knew that all the favors of his Egyptian Mistress, or of Egypt it self,
could not buy off the guilt of this one sin. Dream not of impunity;
Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge; secrecy, power, can never carry it
away from omnisciency, omnipotency; what a filly shelter is closeness! Thou
can never shake off thy punishment, unless thy being, thy self. Its easy
for God to make thee terrible to thy self, and thine own tormentor; yea more
desirous to utter thy sin openly for thine ease, then ever thou wast to act it
secretly for thine honor.

5. Fear thy self; Renounce all self confidence, and ventrousnesse upon thine
own strength. The Lord is as truly the keeper the heart, as of the City. Rather
fear then scorn snares. The best way never to fall, is ever to fear. 1 Cor.
10.12.


6. Take heed of feeding the humor of lust. 1. Keep thy self from being fit
ground, or meet mould for the Devil to cast in his seed; Whether, 1. by
Gluttony, or 2. by Idleness: Both these were Sodoms sins, Ezekiel. 16.49.

1. Gluttony (says one) is the gallery that lechery goes through, The
nutritive faculty is the shop of the generative; The belly well fed (says
Jerome) quickly disposes a man to lust. Swine love not to tumble in dry dust,
nor does the spirit of uncleanness delight in a body exercised to fasting,
though the body be not to be starved, yet neither to be pampered; 1 Cor. 9 25.
the body must be kept down, that lust grow not mallapert; The right way to put
out the fire of lust, is to withdraw the fuel of excess; A pamperd horse is
hard to rule; A servant delicately fed, will be cheek-mate with his master;
Venture est molestus cliens
The flesh too much cherished will kick against the soul; Keep under the beast
by taking away the provender: Magna corporis cura, magna animi in curia
The belly is an unpatient suitor; but having food and raiment, let us therewith
be content. They who have taken the measure of man's throat, say, it is less
then in other creatures of answerable proportion, to teach us temperance; The
Devil chooses to enter into the greedy swine; Esau was a greedy eater and a
fornicator. The looking upon the wine when it is red, and giving its color in
the cup, and the looking upon strange women, are put together, Prove. 23.33.
Paul allows even weak Timothy but a little wine, 1 Timothy 5.23.

2. Idleness, another of Sodoms sins, is also a feeder of uncleanness:
Chambering, or lying in bed, is joined with wantonness, Romans 13.13. [Our sleep
(says Jerome) must not be the burial of one suffocated, Non sepultura
suffocati sed ^equies. lassati. Hier.
but the rest of a wearyed man. The standing-pool will gather filth, and be
full of Toads and Vermin. Labor is a good remedy against lust: The same
servant is called slothful and wicked. Slow bellies are called evil beasts.
Mat. 25.26.
Israel was safer in the Brick-kills of Egypt, then in the Plains of Moab: Lust
conquered good David, when he was idle and at ease. In troubles, when he
prevented the morning watch, he was innocent and holy; but when Satan finds him
wallowing upon his bed, he thinks him fit for a tentation. Lust can be no
stanger to an idle bosom. While we work not our selves, Satan works on us. The
sitting bird is the Fowlers mark. The earth stands still, and therefore it
becomes natures common sewer. The heavens that are ever in motion, are always
pure: Quo major sum, magis labo to; and quo magis laboro, major sum.
By how much the greater I am (says one) by so much the more I labor; by how
much the more I labor, by so much the greater I am.

2. As we must keep our selves from being meet mould or fit ground for the
devil to cast in this seed of lust, so must we also beware of those objects
and allurements which do water concupiscence: Set a watch before thy senses;
The sons of God looked on, and lusted after the daughters of men: Genesis 6.2.
35.7. 2 Samuel 11.2.
The eye of David, and Joseph's Mistress led their hearts. Thamar desiring to be
unclean with Judah, sat (as we translate it) in an open place; (but it is in the
Hebrew) in the door of the eyes, Genesis 38.14. Sin gets in at the senses, like
the wind at the crevis. The order of sin is the same with that of Achan; Tu
otiose spectas, otiose non spectaris. Tu spectas curiose, spectaris curiosius.
Bern.
I saw, I coveted, and took, looking upon a woman and lusting after her, are
put together, Mat. 5.26. and we read 2 Pet. 2.14. of eyes full of adultery, or
the adulteress. But willingly neither be, nor behold a provocation of sin; God
will preserve thee in thy ways, not in thy wanderings. Dinah was not safe out
of the woman's orb, the house; only to see, is not sufficient warrant to draw us
to the suspected places: What wise man will go to an house infected with the
Plague, only to see the fits of the visited. It is good to keep tentation at
the staves end; and not to let it into the grapple; for though possibly we may
fight and conquer, yet it was our fault that we were put to fight. The project
of Balaam was too prosperous; had the Moabites sent their strongest soldiers
to persuade the Israelites to idolatry, they had been returned with contempt;
but as God fetches glory to himself out of the worst actions of men; so men
often undo themselves by the fairest works of God.

Thus far of the second particular, considerable in this example of Sodom, viz.
the cause of their punishment; the third follows; namely the severity of their
punishment, their suffering the vengeance of everlasting fire.

The punishment being set out, 1. More generally, so its called Vengeance.

2. More particulary; so it was a vengeance manifested by eternal fire;
Wherein is considerable, 1. By what they were punished, by fire. 2. In what
measure, or how long they were punished; the fire is Eternal.


I shall here enquire, what we are to understand by this Vengeance. Fire, here
called Eternal.


EXPLICATION.
1. The word (...), here translated Vengeance, is of a signification belonging
to the proceedings of Courts of Justice; and it is taken several ways, 1.
Properly it signifies right or justice; in which respect among the Heathens,
the Goddess of just vengeance ( Nemesis) was called (...), Justice or
Vengeance, Act. 21.4. No doubt (say the Barbarians of Paul) this man is a
murderer, whom though he has escaped the sea, Non dubito quin sicut plurimis
locis (...) accipitur pro (...), and (...) pro (...), sic etiam (...) ponatur
hoc loco, pro (...). Bez. in Act. 25. (...) Comprehendit seriem totam judicii,
usque ad execu^ionem. Lorin. in Act. 25.
yet ((...)) vengeance suffers not to live. 2. It is taken for the Sentence
of damnation given by the Judge, as Act. 25.15. where it is said, that the
chief Priests and Elders, desired to have ((...)) judgment against Paul. 3.
For the punishment it self inflicted after the passing of sentence: thus, 2
These. 1.9. the Apostle says, The wicked shall be punished ((...)) and thus it
is taken in this place by Jude, who fitly expresses the punishment inflicted
by God upon the Sodomites by this word, because it was most justly, and
according to the merit of the offense and offenders, executed by the Judge of
all the world, who is righteous in all he brings upon sinners; yea, is
righteousness it self, whose very judgments, even because they are his, are
just and righteous; and as to the case of Sodom and Gomorrha, so eminent was
the righteousness of Gods judicial proceeding, Genesis 18.21. that he would go
down to see whether they had done altogether according to the cry of their sin:
where he speaks after the manner of men, who ought not to condemn any before an
accurate examination of the cause. But of this, by occasion of the words (
judgment and, the Great Day) much has been spoken in the foregoing verse.

For the second, the fire wherewith these Sodomites were punished.

They burnt with a threefold fire. 1. The fire of lust (both sin and
punishment) They burned in their lust one toward another, 1 Cor. 7.9 Romans 1.27.
and God gave them up to uncleanness and to vile affections.

2. The fire which was rained down from heaven upon them, His verbis
significatur quod preter naturalem rerum cursum, miraculum operatus est,
puniendo iniquos; ad differentiam enim naturalium causarum naturali ordine
occurentium ad generandum sulphur and ig* nem, idjunctum est illud a Jeho veb.
Cajetan. sic quoque, Tostatus, Pererius, and e nostris. Calvin. Zanch. Muscul.
Pareus. Rivet.
Genesis 19.24. the remarkablenesse of which punish meant by fire, appears in
sundry respects: It was 1. A miraculous fire, besides the course of nature.
Brimstone (to which some add salt) and all that vast quantity of fiery matter,
were never produced by natural causes; God it was who provided the matter for
so great a flame, the fall whereof also he ordered for time and place. Hence its
said, that the Lord rained brimstone and fire from the Lord, (that is) by an
elegant Hebraism, from himself, the Noune being put in the place of the
Pronoune, as 1 Samuel 15.22. 1 King. 8.1. 2 Timothy 1.18. etc.) to show, that the
raining there mentioned was not from the strength of natural causes, nor after
a natural manner, but immediately from the Lord himself, and by the putting
forth of his own omnipotent arm 2. It was an abundant fire, of a vast
quantity; and hence it is said to be rained down; it was not a sprinkling, but
a shower; Here were not sparks, but flakes, sheets of fire, rivers of
brimstone. 3. It was a Sudden fire. It came not by degrees, when the morning
arose, or at break of day there were no tidings of destruction; till then Lot
was in Sodom, and yet when the Sun arose, Genesis 19.24. Cen. 19.28.
fire was rained down; and early in the morning Abram beheld the smoke of the
country; happily the work was done in a quarter of an hour; Lam. 4.6. Sodom was
overthrown, as in a moment. 4. It was a tormenting fire: The execution by fire
has ever been accounted one of the most afflictive to sense, and therefore
imposed upon the greatest offenders. How great is the torment when the skin is
puckerd, the sinews cracked, the blood scalded: Famine, the greatest of
punishments, is but a kind of fire, whereby the natural moisture is dried up;
nay, fire lends a resemblance to the torments of hell. 5. It was a destructive
fire, utterly consuming all upon which it fell; Genesis 19.25. Deuteronomy. 29.23.
Cities, Inhabitants, the plain, and all that grew upon it; and (as Brochardus
reports) so far as the vapor arising out of lake of Sodom is carried by the
wind, it makes all places dry and barren, destroying all fruits, grass,
plants, and what ever the earth yields. And so poysonfully is that brimstony
lake tainted, which is now in the place where Sodom stood, that it is called
the Deadsea, having neither fish nor any living creature therein. Called also
Joh. 3.16. The salt sea. Ezekiel. 47.8.
And this is confirmed by the Prophet, who foretelling how these waters should
be healed by the waters running out of the Sanctuary eastward, on which side
this lake is situate, and that then the creatures should live therein, that
there should be a multitude of fish, and that the fishers should stand upon it,
from Engedy even unto Eneglaim, the two cities at either end of the lake, does
hereby imply, that for the present, before this healing, the waters were dead,
that no fish, nor any creatures lived therein, and that no fisher man did
frequent the same, as they did the lake of Genezareth and other places, Olet
adhuc incendio terra. Tert. Apol. c. 40. Penpetuo poenas luere videtur.
Brocard. 1* p. c. 7.
through which the River Jordan did run. 6. The punishment by this fire is
lasting, ever lasting, a standing monument of Gods displeasure; in Mosee's time
it was so, Deuteronomy. 29. and the Lord never repented him of this overthrow; It is
under a perpetual destruction, recorded by Authors of great credit and
reputation, Strabo Solinus Tacitus Josephus Plinius Tertul. c. 40. Augustine de
C. D. c. 21. Adrichomius. Brochardus.
and it shall continue as long as the world shall last, or there shall be any
time or age, in allusion whereunto, when the enemies of the Church are
destroyed, it is foretold that their Land shall become burning pitch. It shall
not be quenched night nor day, the smoke thereof shall go up for ever.

3. The fire of Hell: and this (some think) the Apostle only here intends,
because he calls it, Eternal fire. I acknowledge that these Sodomites were
punished with the eternal fire of hell (Gods dealing with some infants or
aged, I dare not determine; but it is sure, their children were part of their
parents enjoyments, by nature the children of wrath, and that God is an
absolute Lord; and the Lord says concerning Sodom remarkably, Ezekiel. 16.5. I
took them away as I thought good) Christ says it shall be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment, then for Corazin, etc. but a more
tolerable condition in regard of degrees, takes not away, but implies the kind
of the condition; the temporal punishment of the impenitent Sodomites, was but
a degree to the eternal, and in regard of the suddenness of their destruction,
they might want time of repentance. Notwithstanding all which, with submission
to better judgments, I conceive that the Apostle does not in this place intend
primarily (much less solely) the destruction of these Sodomites by hellfire.
Inclusively, and secondarily I suppose, he does, as the fire of hell was
typified by that which fell upon them from heaven. Nor do I clearly understand,
how these cities can be set forth as an example to sinners, by suffering the
punishment of hellfire, when of that the History of Genesis does not speak at
all, and the example (says Quomodo civitates illae per hoc quod sustinent
poenam ignis aeterni, sunt peccatoribus in exemplum propositae, cum de poena
ignis aeterni Genesis historia non loquatur; exemplum autem ab historia
petatur. Ut omittam quod exemplum sumi debeat a re not a, notum autem non. crat
peccatoribus adversus quos hic agitur Sodomitas igne aeterno cruciari. Estius
in loc. Sic Lorinus Probabilior expositio, quod ignis aet crnus dicitur, quia
civitates igne deletae nunquam restituendae sunt, and effect us illius
perseverat, nec unquam cessaret si mundus uunquam desineret. Sci Rivet. 97.
exerc. in Genesis Ignis aeternus intelligi potest cujus effectus in illa regione
perpetuo manent. Heb. 5.6.7.17. Genesis 48.4. Exodus 32.13. Jer. 7.7.25.25. Psalm.
74.1. Illud [ignis aeterni] etsi jungi potest cum illo paenam sustinen tes;
commodius tamen aptatur illi voci: [exemplum,] ut sit sensus, Sodomiticum illud
incendium fuisse exemplum ignis aeterni. Peter. in Genesis 19. Vid. Estium quoque
in Judam.
Estius) should be taken from the History, which sinners may read and hear. And
although it be said, the fire wherewith these Sodomites were punished, was
eternal, yet is it not necessarily to be understood of hell fire, for even
that fire which consumed these Cities may be called eternal, 1. Because the
punishment by this fire is rreparable, to last to the end of the world, these
cities being never to be restored; and in this sense eternal is often taken in
Scripture, where we read of the eternal hills, Deuteronomy. 33.15. Psalm. 74.3.
Perpetual desolations; That the land of Canaan was given to the seed of
Abraham, for an everlasting habitation, Genesis 17.8. and for ever, Genesis 13.8.
That the Leviticall Ceremonies are for ever, Lev. 6.22.

2. Because these cities suffering the punishment of fire and brimstone
described in Genesis, are a type or figure of Everlasting fire, and of the
eternal punishment of wicked men therein. And this some learned men seem to
make good out of the text, they reading these words, as referring eternal fire
to example, thus: are set forth for an example of eternal fire, suffering
vengeance; not as here our Translators do, who refer Eternal fire, to
Vengeance, thus, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire: by which construction they gather that the fire which
irreparably has destroyed Sodom, was a figure or type of that eternal fire
reserved for wicked men in hell, and by which sinners ought to be warned. And
(as Learned Paget (in that Treatise of his, called Meditations of death)
observes) Hell is denominated from the similitude of this place, * The lake of
fire burning with brimstone. And of the Great Whore it is said, Her smoke rose
up for ever and ever. [And God (says he) has made a visible hell in that
great lake which had once been a pleasant plain.] And Brochardus, who spent ten
years in the viewing of the Country, says, [That the Dead-sea is always
black, smoking, and the very face of hell.]

Nor yet do I conceive, because in these words [ Eternal fire] Jude may also
include the punishment of the Sodomites in hell fire; that therefore they are
there tormented with material or bodily fire; it is sufficient that the
torments of the damned, are set out by the pains of fire, then which no
creature is accounted by men more tormenting; so that undoubtedly they are
unconceivably greater, and more exquisite then are any which can be caused by
material fire; and they are more tormenting in sundry respects. Hell fire
burns the soul; Christ bids us fear none but soul-torments; Mat. 10.28.
and indeed, if we can bear them least, we should fear them most. Hell fire
though it burns, yet it consumes not; the wicked shall be its perpetual fuel,
and it shall be a living death preying upon them, not making an end of them.
Hell fire cannot, as ours, be relieving or refreshing; they who are in it shall
never say, Aha, I have seen the fire; but, Oh, I am tormented in this flame.
Hell fire is blown, not as ours, Isai. 44.16. Luke 16.24.
by the breath of man, or any other created blast, but by God himself, whose
breath is both the fire and a stream of brimstone, (Isai. 30.33.) and the
bellows. A powerful God, powerfully punishes, as is he, so is his strength.
How unsupportable must needs be the pains inflicted by angry omnipotency! Hell
fire cannot be extinguished; Mat. 25.41, 46.
Hell fire cannot be extinguished; nor tears, nor time can put it out. The many
thousands of years that the effect of Sodoms fire lasts here upon earth, are
but a faint resemblance of the true everlastingnesse of hell fire. Nor yet is
God unjust in punishing those eternally, who have sinned but a little time: He
measures the punishment by the greatness of the offense, not by the time of
the doing the crime; Treason or Murder may be committed in an instant, but the
punishment may last for scores of years; nay when men punish by death, there is
a removing of the Malefactor from the society of men for ever; and if the
offense committed against God be infinitely heinous, why may not the punishment
be infinitely lasting; besides, how ordinarily do men sell away their
possessions by bargain, or refuse an offered gift in a moment, which thereby
they part with for ever! and how justly are sinners deprived of true
blessedness (and that is not less then eternal) which, in a short time they
refused, and sold away for the satisfying of their lusts! Nor can it be unjust
with God to punish those in his eternity, who have sinned against him in
theirs, who if they had to eternity been allowed to live, would have improved
it altogether in sin; yea, and who dispositively, and in respect of their
inclination, did so?

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The sin of uncleanness, is remarkably followed with vengeance; As pleasure
is that which the unclean mainly expect, and which this lust principally
promises, so woes and pains, are afterward by God constantly inflicted:
fornication and vengeance, are by Jude joined together.

1. Spiritual vengeance attends upon this sin. 1. It ensnares and captivates
the soul; God often justly says to the lovers thereof, He that is filthy, let
him be filthy still; It is both an inlet to all impiety in the world (a
lustful man bogling at no sin that may bring him to enjoy his impure pleasure)
and also a lust which so binds down a sinner, ingulphs him in, and engages him
so deeply to the love of it self, that notwithstanding the longer he lives in
it, the more he is afflicted, and weakened by it, yet the more unable and
unwilling he is to leave it; it lies down with sinners in the dust. Seldom is
this sin found in the way of repentance; a whore is a deep ditch. Few are the
foot-prints of returners from this den, Prove. 23.27.
and they too have escaped very narrowly. In steed of repentance, it labors
concealment; and men rather study to hide it, then to turn it out of doors; to
cover it with a rag of secrecy, then to cure with the plaster of repentance.
Nor does this sin less disquiet then captivate: It wastes both the strength of
the body, and the peace of the conscience: It Is pleasures are short, It Is
terrors are lasting: By how much the sweeter Satan makes it in the mouth, by so
much the bitterer God makes it in the stomach: The fall into this sin brake
David's bones; Psalm. 51.8.
The deep impression of its stain, and the communicativenesse of its guilt and
defilement to others, are standing troubles to the conscience, when once it is
awakened.

2. This sin is pursued with External vengeance: 1. Upon the name; a dishonor
is gotten; and a reproach that shall not be wiped away. Prove. 6.33.
Though the sore may be heald, yet the scar abides, although repentance should
be the plaster. Though Samson and Solomon were pardoned, as to their own
execution, yet were they burnt in the hand, and branded in the fore head, for a
warning to others. Such was the hatred of God against this sin, that God has
not left it a blank, but a blemish in David's story: Nay, so deep was the spot
of dishonor which cleaved to this sin, that the bastard issue of the adulterer
was shut out from the congregation to the tenth generation. 2. Upon the body:
It makes a man the Devils martyr; Deuteronomy. 23.2.
this sin is the seed of diseases, and though it loves to lie hid in the shop,
yet the distempers bewray it, that are laid in open view upon the stall. The
noisome breath, the unclean botches, the inflamed blood, the consumed flesh,
the speedy age, the short life, Prove. 5.11. Lev. 20.10. Deuteronomy. 22.22.
of many are some of the favourablest productions of carnal uncleanness. The
penalty inflicted by the law of God upon adultery, was death by stoning (as it
is generally thought) and for some other excesses in this sin, death by
burning. The woman suspected of adultery, Mumb. 5.27.
drinking those waters of jelousie which (if she were guilty) plagued her with
the rotting of her belly and thigh, was a clear testimony of the heinousness
of this sin; and if these instances suffice not, remember the death of 24000
Israelites at Peor. 3. Upon the estate: Lust is a flame that has burnt down
whole families, cities, it spoiled David's posterity of the greatest part of
his kingdom; It gives rags for its livery, and though it be furthered by the
fullness, Prove. 5.10.6.26. Job. 31.12.
yet its followed with a morsel of bread. It is a fire (says Job) that
consumes to destruction, and roots up all increase. It is a secret canker and
moth in the substance of the wealthiest: Witness, the destruction of many
Noble Families, and irreligious houses in England.

3. Eternal vengeance follows this sin. Whoremongers and adulterers God
himself will judge. Heb. 13.4.
God returns flames for flames, and revengeth the hell of this fire in the
heart, with the fire of hell: The strange woman lodges her guests in the dephs
of hell, Prove. 9.18. Nor shall dogs be admitted into the new Jerusalem, Rev.
21.15.
nor the unholy see the face of God. How great then is their sin, who account
this carnal uncleanness no sin; who drink down this pleasant poison of stolen
waters, and never think of its certain operation; and throwing this fire brand
into their beds, their bodies, families, revenues, say they are in sport! What
prodigious heaven-daring impudence is it, to glory in this, both sin and shame!
What are those bold enticers to it, by paint, speeches, naked-breasts, (fire
and brimstone shall one day cover them) but the Devils dequoyes, the emissaries
and factors of hell, the stratagems of Satan, the increasers of transgressors!
Prove. 23.28.
Let it be too much for Rome to suffer it to set open shop by toleration; why
do we punish the stealing of a piece of silver with death, If we connive at
these whose theft flies higher, even at estate, health, honor, life, nay the
soul it self! In short, How nearly does it concern those who have burnt in
these impure flames of uncleanness, and thereby have also kindled the flames
of Gods wrath, to labor to cool and quench them with the blood of Jesus.
Christ, which alone can allay the heats of sin in them, and wrath in God; as
also to cast their tears of Godly sorrow into the flame; because they have not
been pure hearted Joseph's. to become broken hearted David's? while for future
they carefully avoid all those objects, whereby their lust has too frequently
been, and is too forward again to be inflamed.

2. God punishes sinners in a way of judiciary process; Observe. 2.
even with the greatest equity and righteousness. His vengeanceeven upon Sodom
was (...), A vengeance of Justice. Genesis 4. Genesis 11.
In his proceedings with our first parents after their sin, as also with Cain
and the Babel-builders, first he accurately examines and inquires into the
fact, and afterward he pronounces sentence. As the word Vengeance, here used
by Jude, has righteousness included in its signification; so in the work of
vengeance, as storyed in Genesis, righteousness is as openly displayed as
wrath. The cry of Sodoms sin, was no uncertain rumor, requiring that God
should go down and see, for his better information, Genesis 18.
whether they had done altogether according to the cry thereof. He who knew the
secret sins of the heart, could not be ignorant of the proclaimed sins of
Sodom; nor was any proper descension consistent with his omnipresence, nor
information with his omniscience; but hereby he would become exemplary to
Judges, who ought to take heed of their precipitancy in judgment, and never
proceed to condemnation without accurate examination. In Sodoms punishment
there was a Map of hell, a sea of wrath, not a drop of injustice: Sin can make
God angry, not unrighteous; Though sometimes he may destroy his creatures, yet
never deny himself. How contented should this make us to be under the smartest
providence! A gracious heart will justify God, when God sentenceth him Thou
art just (says Nehemiah) in all that thou have brought upon us, Neb. 9.33.
for thou have done right, and we have done wickedly. That we are spared, its
mercy; that we are punished; it cannot be injustice. Could we have harder
thoughts of sin, our thoughts of Gods dealing would be more honorable.

3. Observe. 3
Great is the patience and long-suffering of God even toward great sinners. God
overthrew not Sodom till they gave themselves over to fornication; till they
were impudent in sin, and it became crying: God did not show that he heard it,
till they proclaimed it to every one. He puts not in his siclke into Sodom,
till it was ripe. He goes down to see whither they had done altogether
according to the cry of it, altogether, Caedi aures suas Deus dicit clamoribus
peccatorum, ut non differatur poena peccantium. Ostendit Dominus quam invitus
puniat, dicens quod clamor Sodomorum ad se ascenderit. Hoc est dicere,
Misericordia mea mihi suadit ut parcam, sed tamen peccatorum clamor cogit ut
puniam. Sal. de prove. l. 1.
or (as the Hebrew has it) whether they had made a consummation, i.e. whether
their iniquities were full; God hereby showing his purpose to spare them till
it was so: He loves to clear his justice before man, as well as to execute it
upon man: He shows how mercy pleases him, even when he puts forth justice.
There is no judging of Gods love, by our impunity, or having the space, without
the grace of repentance. God bears with the wicked, but yet not that they may
be so. The longer the sinner is spared, the more the sin is aggravated. Sinners
are beholding to God for their being spared so long, to themselves for their
being spared no longer. Unsesse Sodoms sin had cried importunately, God had not
answered it: Even by this expression of the crying of sin (says Salvian) God
shows how unwilling he is to punish sinners; and that mercy persuades him to
spare them, did not the cry of sin constrein him to punish them.

4. The justice of God is not abolished by his mercy. Observe. 4.
So good was God in his gracious condescension even to the lowest step of
Abraham's request for Sodom; unto such a measure did God suffer the sin of
unpunished Sodom to swell, that justice seemed to be laid aside; but though it
had woollen and leaden, silent and slow feet, yet had it also iron hands, which
at length the Sodomites felt to their cost. Justice may be dormant, and yet not
cease to be; it may be said of it (as once Christ did of Lazarus) it is not
dead, but sleeps. God is long suffering, not ever suffering; The rising of
the Sun in the morning was no sign that fire and brimstone should not fall upon
Sodom before the evening. Gods forbearance to strike, shows not that he will
always spare, but that we should now repent. If we will sin by his
long-suffering, we shall smart by his severity; These things have thou done,
and I kept silence, and thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy
self, Psalm. 50.21.
but I will reprove thee, etc. When God comes to exact the punishment, he will
require interest for his forbearance; and indeed, God is never more angry then
when he suffers men to go on securely, and un-interrupted in sin, by sparing
them. Let not the indulgence of God make us presume, but let us understand the
language of love, that we may not undergo the load of his wrath. These
Sodomites, notwithstanding their sin, Luke 17.28.
were so securely asleep in their delights of eating, drinking, buying,
selling, planting, building, that nothing could awaken them but the fire which
destroyed them; This point should also be improved for imitation: To spare all
offenders, is cruelty equal to a sparing of none. Deuteronomy. 33.24.25.
Ashers foot was dipped in oil; yet his shoos were iron and brass.

5. Observe. 5.
Nothing is so dreadful as the wrath of God. Sodoms fire and brimstone showred
down in a sweeping and overwhelming plenty, are but shadows of the wrath of God
incensed. Heb. 12.22.
Our God is a consuming fire, his wrath is the fire, yea, the very hell of
hell. When God Almighty sets himself to be tormenting, and to show what he is
able to do against a worm; God (I say) who can marshall and draw into a body,
all the forces of the Creation together, and then can draw forth all their
virtue and vigor, and which is more, set on every degree of that force and
vigor, according to the strength of his own all-powerfull arm, yea, and
create infinitely more and greater torments, then we can either oppose or
apprehend; how sorely, how unsupportably, shall his wrath wrack and torment the
creature! How great and how inexcusable, is the stupidity of every sinner! the
fire on earth is but painted and imaginary, in comparison of that of Gods
wrath. If he who cries Fire, Fire, at midnight, at once both wakens and
affrights us, how amazingly should they affect us, who know and denounce the
terror of the Lord! Psalm. 90.11.
Who knows the power of his anger, even according to his fear, so is his
wrath! What interest have we in the world comparable to that of making him our
friend in Christ! he is the severest enemy, but the sweetest friend; Psalm. 2.12.
When his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their
trust in him; Greater is the disproportion between the pleasure and pains of
sin, then between a drop of honey and an Ocean of gall. Consider, O sinner,
when thou art bathing thy soul by the fire of lust, how thy soul shall burn in
the flames of hell; and remember that fire and brimstone lie under the skin of
every Sodomiticall apple, and are in the belly of every lust. Meditate, Oh
Saint, of the love of Christ in delivering thee from this eternal fire, this
wrath to come, in becoming a skreen between that flame and thy soul, in cooling
of thee, thoughby scorching of himself. To conclude this, If he has delivered
us from this eternal, how patiently should we endure any trying fire, and how
cool should we account the hottest service in which God imployes us in this
life! (All is mercy besides hell.) And how should we pity and pull back those
who are posting (and that painfully) toward these pains of eternal fire!

6. Gods anger changes the use of the creatures; Observe. 6.
It turns helps into plagues. The fire which God appointed to warm and purify,
shall, if God be our enemy, consume and burn us to ashes; the air shall poison
us, our houses shall be prisons to keep us for execution by flames. The Sun
shall hold, or rather be the candle to give light to our slaughter, as in
Joshuabs time; the earth which should bear, shall devour us: The seas which
serve for conveyance, shall swallow us up; the Stars which at sometimes are
sweetly influentiall, shall (if God be angry) fight in their courses against
Sisera; the Heavens which are wont to afford there fruitful drops shall shower
down fire and brimstone, and by both barrenness. The usefullest creatures of
God, if he bid them, shall go upon errands of destruction, in obedience to
their Commander in chief, who can commissionate and empower for services of
bloodyest severity and revenge not only his chief officers, the glorious
Angels, but even his Common soldiers, the poorest of creatures. If he be our
foe, even those shall hurt us from whom we have formerly received, and now
expect most friendship. Our greatest comforts shall become our greatest
crosses. The wife of the bosom, the children that came out of our loins, may
become our butchers and traitors; yea God can make our selves our own deadliest
enemies: Let none be secure in their freedom from enemies, till God be their
friend; nor in the multitude of friends, so long as God is their enemy. God can
punish unexpectedly, even such a way as we never dream of. Jerusalem (says the
Prophet) came down wonderfully, Lam. 1.9. and what Sodomite ever heard before
of a shower of fire? but unheard of sins, procure unheard of punishments.

7. Observe. 7.
Most heinous is the sin of contempt of the Gospel. These Sodomites were
sinners and sufferers even to amazement. Sodom was a hell for sin, and
typically a hell for punishment, and yet Christ says, It shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, Mat. 10,
15.
then for the City which is guilty of this sin: Unbelief is worse then Sodomy:
Of all sins, Gospelsins damn most unavoidably. The pollutions of Sodom defile
not so deeply, as does the refusing of that blood which should eleanse us. How
dangerous is the condition of that man, who pleasing himself in a civil
conversation and freedom from those sins which bring, him within the compass
of man's law, allows himself in that one which concludes him under the curse of
the law of God. Of this before.

8. Observe 8.
God often proportions the punishment to the sin. Sodoms sin was against the
light and use, their punishment against the course of nature; they fetch up
hell to the earth, and God sends hell out of heaven. Their sin was notorious,
and proclaimed in the face of the Sun; their punishment was, nay yet is visible
to all the world. Their sin was universal, and the raining of fire and
brimstone (says Christ) destroyed them all. Luke 17.29. Exodus 21.24. Psalm.
55.23. Mat. 26.52. Job. 31.9, 10. Judge. 1.7.
Their sin was a flame of lust, and their punishment a flame of fire. Their sin
was filthy, not without abominating it, to be named; their punishment, as by
fire, so by brimstone, was so unsavory to the smell, as not to be endured. How
happy were it for us, if as our sins lead God to inflict such a kind of
punishment, so that punishment may lead us back again to find out the sin!
But of this before, ver. 5.

9. Great is Gods care of man's safety, Observe. 9.
and humane society. How angry was God with the Sodomites for a sin committed
against their own bodies, and the honor of one another. God has appointed and
executed punishments for and upon any that shall abuse poor sinful man; and
with whom is God so angry as with those who hurt themselves most! How strong an
hedge has he set about man's welfare in his ten Commandments; in them he
distinctly provides for man's authority, life, chastity, estate, name, and
generally in them all for his soul. All the rebellions, murders, rapes,
oppression, defamations, etc. in the world, whereby men suffer from men, are
from hence, that God is not obeyed by men; and all the violencies among men
proceed from the violation of the law of God, which were it observed, what a
face of calmnesse and comeliness would be upon the whole earth! God is
infinitely better to us, then we are to our selves, to one another. How
observable is the difference between those places where the fear of God swaies,
and others, even in respect of civil, comely, and honest behavior! To
conclude, Though God might have enjoined us the worshipping and serving of
himself, without any regard of our own benefit, yet such is his love to man,
that as no command does hinder, so most are intended for the furthring of man's
outward welfare. How strong an engagement lies upon us to be studious of giving
him that honor which we owe, who is so careful to make that provision for us
which he owes us not.

Thus far of the third particular, the severity of the punishment inflicted
upon the Sodomites, viz. the vengeance of eternal fire. The fourth and last
follows, the end and use of that punishment, in these words, Are set forth for
an example.

EXPLICATION.
Two things here for Explication.

1. What kind of example these Sodomites were set forth to be. 2. Why any
example of this kind was thus set forth.
For the first; (...) five (...) ostendo, Indico. Mar. 14.15. Joh. 2.18. (...).
Traduco palam. Ostento. Col. 2.15. Significat aliquem per publicum caetum
spectantium, ducere sicut olim, Romani victores, hosts victos, manibus retro
de vinctis, in conspectum ho minum, ad perpetuam illorum ignominiam ducere
solebant. Significat spectandum omnibus proponere. Vide Laurent. in 2 Pet. 2.
The word example in the Greek is (...), and it signifies not only that which
is openly shown, and pointed at, and exactly to be observed, as Matthew. 8.4.
Christ commanded the leper, whom he had cleansed, to go and show himself to
the Priest; so Mar. 1.44. Luke 5.14. But also a showing by way of exposing to
open infamy and disgrace; and thus it is said, that Christ having spoiled
principalities and powers, (...), made a show of them openly, where the word
signifies (says Zanchy) a leading, a showing them in the public view of all
spectators to their perpetual infamy, as captives were wont to be led with
their hands tied behind them; the Compound word, (...), signifying to set an
offender before others as a public spectacle of shame and infamy, for the
warning of all the beholders; in which sense this word (...), is to be taken in
this place, as also is that word (...), used in that place 1 Pet. 2.6.
(paralelled with this of Jude) and translated also Example, it also signifying
the setting before the eye, or subjecting of something to a man's view or sight,
not only for caution and warning (says Gerhard) as in that place of Peter, but
even for imitation also, as Joh. 13.15. Jam. 5.10. and sometimes it signifies
a type or figure of something, as Heb. 8.5.9.23.

These punished Sodomites, then, were set forth for an example, not of
imitation, their courses thus described and punished, requiring rather our
detestation; nor therefore, 2, Of Gods mercy and compassion, as Paul says of
himself, that in him Jesus Christ showed forth all long-suffering (...), for a
pattern and example to them who should heafter believe.

But, 1. For an example, by way of pattern, type, and figure of those who are
tormented in hell with fire truly eternal, Ipsa verha (...), vel legipossunt
cum commate post vocem (...) ut fit sensus, propositae sunt exemplo; vel cum
commate post vocem (...), proposita sunt exemplo ignis eterni: prior tamen
lectio magis congrui^ cum loco Petri, and communiter probatur inter pretibus.
Laur. in 2 Pet. 2.
in which respect (as I noted before) some read the text not with a Comma after
the word (...); example, as our Translators, and most interpreters do, who read
the words thus, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance, etc; but
with a Comma after the word fire, thus; are set forth for an example or figure
of everlasting fire, suffering vengeance; though when I consider that parallel
place in Peter, where it is said, that they are made an example to those that
afterward should live ungodly: I conceive, we should rather keep the ordinary
reading, viz. are made an example, suffering, etc. It being nevertheless
plain from what was said before, that the fire wherewith the Sodomites were
punished, was a type of hell fire, and that the Sodomites are set forth as
punished with fire from Heaven, that they who afterward should live ungodly
might be cautioned and warned to shun that Eternal fire in hell, whereof the
Sodomiticall fire was a type. And therefore,

2. And principally, these Sodomites were set forth as an example of caution,
warning or admonition, that sinners for time to come, might by their plague,
take heed of their sin. Noct. Attic. l. 6. c. 14.
The Philosophers of old (as Gellius says) thought there were three causes of
punishing offenses. 1. That which is called (...), when punishment was
inflicted for the amendment of the party punished for the time to come. The
second they called (...), when any were punished for the preservation of the
honor of him, against whom the offense was committed, lest indulgence should
occasion contempt of his dignity. The third they called (...), when an offender
was punished for examples sake, that so others might be deterred from the like
practice; this was the end (here mentioned by Jude, and before by Peter) of the
judgment of these Sodomites; God dealing with them as a Judge does with some
notorious murderer, whom he sentenceth to hang in chains by the way side, to
warn others by his suffering; or as a pilferer or cheator is set forth upon the
pillory in some public place of the City, with his crime written and pinned
upon his breast. And that in this punishment of Sodom, Deuteronomy. 29.23.32.32, Isai.
1.9.13.19. Jer. 23.14.49.48.50.40. Lam. 4.6. Ezekiel. 16.46, 48, 49. Hos. 11.8.
Am. 4.11. Zeph. 2.9. Mat. 10.15.11.23, 34 Luke 10.12.17.29. Romans 9.29.
God did intend a special example of Caution, seems evident, because no one
judgment of God upon sinners is so frequently in Scripture recalled to the
minds of sinners, as this, repeated even above twenty times; as also because
God has made the signs and effects of Sodoms overthrow, to continue to this
very day, as Historians unanimously report, as if he intended the laying forth,
or public placing of this standing monument of his wrath, before the eyes of
men, as a warning to all the world. Nor are these examples of Caution strange
in Scripture. God ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh (says God unto the
Jews) where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it, for the
wickedness of my people Israel. God commands, Deuteronomy. 13.10. that the entiser to
idolatry should be put to death, to which he immediately subjoyns, ver. 11. the
end thereof, and all Israel shall hear, and fear, and do no more such
wickedness as this is among you. And the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that
the destructions of the Israelites in the wilderness, happened unto them for
ensamples; and they are written (says he) for our admonition, upon whom the
ends of the world are come. And these things were our ensamples to the intent
that we should not lust after evil things, 1 Cor. 10.6, 11
as they also lusted; and he warns the Hebrews to take heed of falling after
the same example of unbelief; as likewise does Christ his Disciples, Heb. 4.11.
by remembering Lots wife, Luke 17.32.

For the second; viz. Why the Lord would show forth such an example of Caution.
Hereby he would show,

1. Our natural forwardness to sin in like manner. He who says, Take heed of
such a practice, shows a likelihood (without care) of doing the very same. The
natural inclination of our hearts, answers to that of the greatest sinners, as
face answers face in the glass. Their practices are but expositions upon our
natures: It is a Proverb [What fools speak, wise men think] I am sure it is a
truth, To that which the worst man acts, the heart of the best man without
grace, inclines. And though the godly are not companions with the wicked in
sin, yet should they be humble, for the very sinning of the wicked.

2. His constant abhorrence of sin. Examples of Caution speak both Gods hatred
of the sin of those who went before, whose punishments are the monuments of his
vengeance, as also his equal dislike of it in those who succeed, against whom
(if they will sin) he is prepared to do what he has done against the former.
Though Gods forbearance toward some, shows that sometime he can spare sinners;
yet his punishing of others, shows that he never loves sin.

3. The aptitude of examples for to prevent sin. Greater is our forwardness to
be affected with what we see executed, then with what we hear denounced; My eye
(says the Prophet) affects mine heart. Examples either of imitation, or
caution, work more on us then Doctrines. The rod has a louder voice then the
word; a man's word will not be so soon taken, as his hand and seal: God has not
only set seals to his promises, but to his threatenings also; and such seals as
are examples. Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon the Egyptians,
and the people feared the Lord, and believed, etc Exodus 14.31. When thy
judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness, Isai. 26.9. When a scorner is punished (says Solomon) the
simple is made wise, Prove. 21.11. At the death of Ananias and Saphira, Act.
5.11. Luke 16.30.
great fear came upon all the Church: If one went from the dead (said that
tormented Glutton) they will repent.

4. His merciful willingness to prevent our ruin. The Lord gives us to see,
that so we may not be examples; and lets us read the stories of others, that so
we may not be stories to others: Such is the goodness of God, that he had
rather we should be drove away from, then destroyed in sin. Often does God recall
to the minds of Israel the sins and punishments of their forefathers, and his
plagues upon the Egyptians. It had been as easy for God to have destroyed them
with, as warned them by others, had not mercy p^^ased him. Quot vulnera, tot
ora: Every wound of another, is a mouth that calls upon us to repent.

5. The inexcusablenesse of sinning after the setting examples before us. Dan.
5.22.
This was the great aggravation of Belshazzers pride, that he humbled not his
heart, though he knew the judgment which God had laid upon his father, for the
very sin of pride. Thus likewise the Prophet hightens the impiety of Judah, in
that notwithstanding Judah saw the idolatry which Israel had committed against
God, and what judgments God had laid upon Israel, yet Judah feared not, but
went and played the harlot also. How just is God in hitting those, to whom he
had said before, Stand off. They who sin against examples, sin presumptuously,
and even to a contempt of all Gods attributes, his Immutability, Power,
Righteousness, Long suffering, etc. They cannot sin at so cheap a rate, as
those who never were warned. He who will ride into the depth of the river,
notwithstanding the stake, deserves irrecoverably to be drowned. That thief
offends obstinately, who will rob in that place where his fellow hangs in
chains.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The works of God, especially his judgments, Observe. 1.
have a language, as well as his word. Examples of judgment, are visible
Sermons, and speak the pleasure of God. When God forbears to punish, he is said
to keep silence. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath (says the
Psalmist) and vex them in his sore displeasure. A word is significative, and
God is not only known by his word, but even by his works also, and particularly
by his judgment which he executes. Psa. l 9.16. Idem Deo facere and loqui.
A word is not more easily uttered, then the greatest work is performed by God.
There is nothing done by God, but (as a word is filia mentis produced by the
mind) was first determined before in his secret counsel. There is no word so
diffusive and scattered among so many as the works of God are, (there being no
speech nor language where their voice is not heard.) In short, Quot verbera,
tot verba.
No word or speech requires so much attention, as the works of God do
observation. It is a shame for us, that God has spoken so often, and so loud,
so long, so plainly by them, and that we will not hear. If that voice be not
loud enough, and if he has stood too far to be heard, he will speak more
loudly, and come nearer to us to our cost. Entreat the Lord to open the ear, as
well as to speak the word, and to teach, as well as to speak. Psalm. 94.12


2 Great, Observe. 2.
is the excellency of the word in point of purity. It sets not forth sins by
way of mere relation, much less by way of imitation, but by way of caution. As
in it, the filthiest of sins are spoken of modestly and purely; so they are
mentioned as punished severely. Genesis 39.5. Genesis 38.26. Lev. 18.6, 7.
Sodoms filthiness is set forth in Scripture, but so likewise are Sodoms
flames, and both to warn us, not to allure us. The Scripture mentions the
scourge as well as the sin of the holiest man, the Medicine as well as the
Malady; how groundless is their impiety who take liberty to sin from reading
of sins (especially of good men) in the Word; what is this but to read it with
Satan's spectacles, who, as he cites, so always shows Scripture by halfs. To
sin without examples of caution is bad, to sin against them is worse, to sin by
them is worst of all; the first is to walk, the second to run, the third to
fly to hell.

3 Public and notorious offenders, Observe. 3.
ought to be open examples. Sodom is not afraid to declare their sin, and God
declares it to make others afraid. Though punishment should reach but a few,
yet fear should reach all: Secret punishment is a plaster not broad enough for
an open, a scandalous fault. God threatens, even his otherwise dear David, that
he who had made the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.12.
should be punished before all Israel, and before the Sun. Private corrections
for open crimes, are not plasters to cure, but only to cover the sore. If sin
be impudent, reproof and correction should not be bashful. If a Minister sees
that error and profaneness seek no corners, he should not hide truth in a
corner. Public offenses are like a bag of poison thrown into a common
fountain, serving for the use of a whole city: And the end at which God aimed
in the punishing of offenders, Deuteronomy. 17.7.
was that all Israel should hear, and fear, and do no more any such
wickedness. The Syrians cared not to fight with small or great, but with the
king of Israel, and Magistrates and Ministers should principally strike at
reigning sins. All the reproofs of the Prophet's and Christ were bent against
the impieties of their times. I verily believe that one main sin, whereby God
is provoked to make public officers in Church and State, so contemptible as
they are, is their fear to oppose public and spreading sins so freely as they
should.

4. Observe 4.
In this our present condition we want as well the affrightments of fear, as
the allurements of love to keep us from sin. The burnt Sodomites should make us
fear the fire. The overthrow of the Israelites are examples to Saints under the
New Testament. And let us (says the Apostle) therefore (he means by the
example of the unbeleeving Israelites) fear, lest a promise being left us of
entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. I am (says
holy David) afraid of thy judgments. Psalm. 119.120. Jer. 10 7.
Who (says Jeremy) would not fear thee, Oh King of Nations? and Rev. 15.4. Who
shall not fear thee, O Lord etc. for thy judgments are made manifest. Fear him
(says Christ) who is able to throw soul and body into hell. Faith is as truly
due to Threatenings, as Promises; and Holy fear is the proper effect of that
faith; By faith Noah being warned of God, moved with fear, etc. Nor is it
possible or profitable, so long as we have such an eager pronenesse to sin, to
want a stoppage by fear. So unwilling are we to be weaned from the forbidden
breasts of sinful pleasures, that we daily need to fear the wormwood and
alloes wherewith the Lord imbitters them; and all little enough; only heaven
perfects love and casts out fear.

5. There is a pronenesse to sin in every age of the world. Observe 5.
Why should God make Sodom an example of Caution to succeeding ages, if these
were not forward to make Sodom an example of imitation? Peter says expressly,
that these overthrown cities were made an example to those who after should
live ungodly. The world always was, Mundus semper fuit, est, and erit mundus,
Lutb.
is and will be the world (says Luther.) The several ages of the world have
differed in their other fashions, but sin was never out of fashion. Look over
all times and places, and it will be found true in both the whole world lies in
wickedness; And of all times (so true was that prediction of the Apostle) the
last days are the most perilous. We now live in the sink, the dregs of time,
Satan now labors to do much mischief, and posteth the faster because he shall
not long have day-sight. Men likewise by long practicing, and by the sinful
experiments of former times, are now grown (as in other things so) in sin
greater Artists then heretofore. How careful should we be that God may have
some the more for us (even in these worst of times) who may love holiness,
when most leave it; control, if not conquer sin; who may shine as lights in
the world; and who, if they can do no good to others, yet may get no hurt from
others: To conclude this; Though evil times should not damp our zeal, yet
neither should they make us impatient: The tares and wheat will grow together
till the approaching Harvest. Mean while, none is so much provoked, as that God
who is most patient. Nor should we forget, that all foregoing ages have
abounded with those sins and difficulties, which much imbittered the lives of
holy men who lived in them; in which respect we may wisely make use of that
counsel of Solomon, Say not thou, What is the cause that the former times were
better then these? Eccles. 7.10.
The errors and impieties of these, were in former times, and are now but
newly acted over; and let us rejoice, that though the sins of the times should
make us mourners for them, yet they cannot make us followers of them.

6. Observe. 6,
In all ages God is the same. He hates the same sins in after times, which he
hated in the former. Sodomy is now as abominable in his sight as heretofore; He
is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; in him there is no shadow of
change; he loves the same holiness now which he ever loved. How great a terror
is this to those who live in those sins against which God has formerly
declared his wrath. God will not go out of his way to gratify their lusts; no,
it is the duty of the sinner to change: Psalm. 7.12.
If he turn not, he will whet his sword, etc. Much may this comfort those who
walk in the steps of former Saints. 1 Timothy 1.16.
Paul was a pattern to those who hereafter should believe: They find God as
ready to accept them as any heretofore. Psalm. 22.4.
This comforted the Psalmist, Our Fathers (says he) trusted in thee, and thou
did deliver them. We are forward to entertain hard thoughts of God: if he
continue not the same favors to us, which he afforded to others: we think he
changes, whereas we alone are to be blamed. Its not the shore which moves, but
the boat: If we will turn to God, we know where to have him; our prayers and
repentance will make a change in us, and make us fit to be accepted, they make
no alteration in him at all: as they who being in a ship, and pull at a rope
fastened to a Rock, move not the Rock to them, but themselves to the Rock.

7. God is gracious even in his greatest severity. Observe. 7.
Even when he was punishing of Sodom with fire and brimstone, he had thoughts
of preventing the like punishment upon others for the time to come. He warns
even when he wounds, and punishes a few, that he may spare many: he takes
occasion by the sin and punishment of Sodom, to do good to following ages; his
justice magnifies his mercy. God lays up Manna with the rod; and is not
forgetful to feed us, even when he smites: In his smiles he will be feared, in
his frowns he will be loved: in the midst of judgment he remembers mercy. If
God be so sweet in his bitter administrations, how sweet will he be when he is
altogether employed in the ways of grace! We should herein look upon the Lord
as our pattern; severity should not make us forget and throw off
tender-heartednesse: We should have merciful ends in our severest punishing of
offenders, and not wound like murderers to destroy, but like Chyrurgeons to
cure, and to prevent the spreading of sin yea punishment.

8. Observe, 8.
It should be our great desire by all our own sufferings for sin, to prevent
the like sin in, and sufferings of others. We must not be like those that have
the Plague, who love to inffect others with it. A gracious heart rather desires
to hear of converts by his falls and woes, then to have companions in either.
They who have been by sin examples of imitation, should pray that by their
sufferings they may become examples of Caution; How rare is this heavenly
temper in sufferers? Most Christians when they are in troubles, only desire the
removal of them, perhaps the sanctifying of them to themselves; but who prays
for the sanctifying of them unto others! Its ordinary for men under their
sufferings, to have thoughts of impatience against God, and of revenge against
the instrument of their troubles; but unusual for men to have aims of
benefiting beholders by their troubles. If the Lord would thoroughly affect us
with love to his glory, and hatred to sin, we should be willing to have the
house pulled down upon our own heads, so as sin may be destroyed in others; and
hereby we may do more good at our death then we have done throughout our whole
lives.

The sinners of these laters times sin more heinously then they who lived in
former ages. Observe. 9.
The sins committed by those who have others for an example, are greater then
those committed formerly, though they be the same for kind. He who falls by
stumbling at the same stone at which he dashed who went before him, falls
without apology. We in these times stand upon the shoulders of those who lived
of old, and therefore ought to see further; we may behold by what means they
stood, where also, and how they fell, and how by either they sped. More
exactness in working and walking becomes us who have more light to guide us.
How happy were we if as we strive to excel our forefathers in other arts, we
did not come behind them in that heavenly art of a holy life, though their
helps were fewer then ours! It is a common observation concerning our
buildings, that though they are of more curious contrivement, yet less
substantial and durable then those of old time; Non tulit nos sine exemplo^ ut
inveniat sine delicto, vel tollat sine patrocinio.
I fear this may be more truly said of our religion then of our buildings; It
will be more tolerable at the last day for those who lived in the times of
Sodom, then for sinners in these days, upon whom the ends of the world are
come. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required, Surely, as
we pay dearer for our worldly commodities, we must pay much dearer for our
sinful pleasures then our forefathers have done. We had better never have
heard of Sodoms ruin, then not to mend our lives by the example.

10. Observe. 10
Its our duty to make an holy improvement of the worst things which fall out in
the world. Even Sodom and Gomorrha were our examples, and we should make lie to
cleanse us of their ashes. A good man should sail (as they say of skillful
Mariners) with every wind, and (as Samson) take honey out of the carcass of the
Lion. Vespasian raised gain out of an excrement; the Estrich concocts iron.
Even the waters of jelousie which rotted the bellies and limbs of some, made
others healthful and fruitful. The sins of the worst should, and sometimes do
teach the godly to walk more closely and humbly with God. Were we not wanting
to our selves, the sin of Sodom might be to us felix culpa, an happy fault. But
alas, most men more imitate then shun the sins of others, nay which is much
worse, they rather take occasion to oppose, deride, and so get hurt by seeing
the holy strictness of the godly, then to grow more watchful and holy by
observing the sinful looseness of the wicked. But here is the excellency of
grace, to make a man like David, Therefore to love the Commandments of God,
Psalm. 119. i 27.
because wicked men make void the Law.

11. Observe. ult.
It is our wisdom to learn how to behold the examples of caution which God
has set forth (especially in Scripture) with most advantage to our souls.
Against that which God shows, we must not shut our eyes. To this end.

1. Let us give our assent to the truth of examples, as delivered in Scripture,
which does not only relate the judgments themselves, but their causes also, the
supreme, God; the deserving, sin. Faith takes into its vast comprehension,
every part of Gods word. It has been the Devils policy to strike at the truths
of Scripture-stories, either by denying, or adulterating them. Prophani quidam
ex Schola Porphirii ut miraculu^ elevarent Confinxerunt Mosem peritissimum
naturae, observasse fluxum and refluxum maris Erithraei and refluente illo suos
traduxisse. Riv. in Exodus
Porphiry, to overturn the miraculousnesse of the Israelites passing through
the Red sea, says, that Moses took the advantage of a low ebbing water, and so
went through safely, which the Egyptians not understanding, were drowned by the
flowing of the water. Strabo likewise perverts the truth of this story of the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, Graeci Scriptores Sodomam cum vicinis
civitatibus, eam ob causam incendio periisse sentiunt, quod regio illa
cavernosa esset and sulphurea, atque ita hujusmodi exitio obnoxia. Muscul. in
19. Genesis
by attributing it to natural causes, and reporting that these cities were
seated on a soil sulphurous, and full of holes, from which, fire breaking
forth, consumed them. Examples of the dreadfullest aspect, will never affright
us from sin, when we look upon them in the Devils dress. Let us not sport at
examples, and make them our play-fellows. Read not the example of Lots wife as
the Poetical fiction of turning Niobe into a stone. What judgment thou
read believe, though never so severe, never so far beyond thy apprehension.

2. Look upon examples with deep and diligent observation. They must sink into
us, we must set our hearts to them: Steep our thoughts in them, and ponder them
in their certainty, causes, severity. Posting passengers cannot be serious
observers of any place. How profitable is it sometime to dwell in our
meditations upon these monuments of divine justice? Assent must be followed
with consideration: Transient thoughts become not permanent examples.

3. Look upon these examples with an impartial examination. Enquire within
whether was such an one whom vengeance overtook, a greater sinner then I am.
Ask thy conscience that question, which the Prophet put to the Israelites, are
there not with me, even with me, the same sins against the Lord? Ransack thy
soul to find out the traitor; hide not that in secret, which has made so many
public examples.

6. Behold examples in a way of particular application; not with self
exception, but as bringing thee tidings of thine own ruin. Without repentance,
never say, What is this to me? unless I repent, I shall likewise perish. Most
hearing of examples of Gods judgment, say to themselves as Peter to Christ,
These things shall not be to us. Look not upon any outward thing, as able to
ward off the blow, or privilege thee from punishment. Wealth cannot raise a
ransom, power cannot prevail, wisdom cannot contrive, secrecy cannot shelter
one from wrath: God has as many arrows in his quiver as he had before ever he
began to shoot any. We have no protection against the arrest of justice.
Outward privileges, nay, saving grace it self, can give thee no dispensation
to sin.

5. With an eye of prudent prevention. Fly from that wrath of which thou art
now warned; it is easier to keep out then to get out of the snare; even beasts
will avoid the places where they see their fellows have miscarryed. Happy
would they, who are thy examples, think themselves, had they the opportunities
of preventing that which they now feel. While the enemy is in the way, agree
with him; while judgment is approaching, consider whether thou beestable with
thy ten, to meet him that comes against thee with twenty thousand. Oh weak
sinner, while he is (as yet through his forbearance) at some distance, send an
Embassage, and desire conditions of peace, in the way of sincere turning to the
Lord. All the armies and examples of vengeance, which compass thee about in
the world, shall retire from thee, if thou will throw the head of Sheba over
the wall, the sin that God struck at in others.

6. Lastly, Look we upon examples with humble thankfulness. Not as rejoicing
in the sorrows of others, but as blessing God for his mercy toward our selves.
How happy were we, and how cheap our Schooling, to have all our learning at the
cost of another! Admire that free grace which made a difference between us and
the filthiest Sodomites; our sins have some aggravations which neither these,
nor the sins of thousands in hell admitted. It was the mere pleasure of God
that Sodomites were not in our room, and we in theirs, and that we should not
equalize those in punishment whom we have exceeded in sin.

VER. 8. Likewise also these filthy dreamers, defile the flesh, despise
dominions, and speak evil of dignities.
HEre Jude sets down the second part of the Second Argument, which he brought
to incite these Christians earnestly to Contend for the faith opposed by the
Seducers; The Argument was taken from their certain destruction: In the
managing whereof having first mentioned sundry Examples of Gods Judgment upon
the Offenders of former times; He now in the second place adds, that these
Seducers lived in those sins which God had punished in others; and this he
prosecutes in the eighth, ninth, and tenth verses.

In the eighth verse two parts are considerable.

1. The faults with which these Seducers are charged. 2. The Fountain from
which these faults issued.
1. For the first, the Faults, etc. We may consider, 1. Their Specification. 2.
Their Amplification.

1. Their Specification; 1. Defiling of the flesh. 2. Opposing of authority,
set down by the Apostle here in two branches: 1. Their despising of Dominion,
inwardly. 2. Their speaking evil of dignities, outwardly. 2. Their
Amplification, in these two words, Likewise also. They sinned both as the
former sinners had offended, and although they knew they were punished.
2. The Fountain from which these their faults issued, viz their spiritual
security, and delusion; both contained in the word [ Dreamers.]

EXPLICATION.
Concerning the Explication of the first fault specifyed in these Seducers,
their defiling the flesh, which was the abuse of their bodies by Fornication,
and carnal unchastity, even as Sodom had done before them, I have at large
spoken in the foregoing verse; and therefore I shall here (that I may forbear
needless repetitions) pass it over, only three Observations I note, and then
shall proceed to their next fault.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Sins of carnal uncleanness are peculiarly against the body or flesh of
men. In many (if not all other heinous sins, the thing abused is without the
body, as in murder, theft, etc. but in this, the body it self is abused. More
does the body, as concur to, 1 Cor. 6.18.
so suffer by this sin, then any other, both by dishonor and diseases:
Dishonor, in the stayning and defiling that noble piece of workmanship,
curiously wrought by the finger of God himself: By Diseases; this lust being
not only a conscience-wasting, but a carcasse-wasting enemy. Sensual men kill
that which they pretend most to cocker. Wherein are the inslaved to this lust
wiser then Samson, in his discovering to Delilah where his strength lay? though
that impudent Harlot plainly told him, she desired to know it, to afflict him.
I have heard of a drunkard that said, (having almost lost his sight by
immoderate drinking) He had rather lose his eyes then his drunkenness, And of
an old Adulterer, who was so wedded to, and yet so weakened by his lust, that he
could neither live with, or without his unclean companion. Were not these
boared slaves? Truly such sinners are no better then the Devils hackneys,
meeting with nothing but stripes and drudgery, and when they can no more, the
filthiest ditch, even hell it self, is their receptacle. Our bodies did never
cost the Devil any thing; and he like the harlot (who was not the mother of the
child) pleads indeed vehemently to have them for his own, but yet withal cares
not though they be cut in pieces. The worshippers of Baal slashed their poor
carcasses for a God that was not able to hear them. Idolaters have not thought
their own dear childreen (themselves repeated) Sacrifices too dear for Moloch.
How do Papists tear and marcerate their bodies in their will worship! among them
the Fratres flagellantes, who once (as Hospinian reports) for thirty three days
together went up and down slashing their carcasses with whips, till they had
almost whipped themselves to death, expressed more madness then mortification.
Superstition neglects and punishes the body, Col. 2. ult. How different from
these, how gentle and indulgent even to the poor body are the services of God!
he calls for honorable services, Laxus et liber modus abstinen di ponitur
cunctis. Prud. Hymn. post jejun.
and merciful sacrifices; nay, mercy and not sacrifice. Chastity, Temperance,
etc. are severe only to those lusts that are cruel to us; even fasting it
self, which seems one of the sorest services, furthers the health of the body.
God might (and yet mercifully too (have appointed, since the body is such an
enemy to the soul, that (like medicines given to those that are troubled with
contrary diseases) the services which are beneficial to the one, should have
been hurtful to the other: But so meek and indulgent a master is the Lord,
that his commands are profitable to both.

3. Sins of unchastity are peculiarly defiling. Besides that spiritual
uncleanness, wherewith every sin defiles, carnal chastity defiles with that
which is bodily. All sin in general is called uncleanness, but fornication is
the sin which is singled out particularly to be branded with that name. Some
think that Adulterers are especially compared to Dogs [unclean creatures] The
hire of a whore and the price of a dog are put together; and both forbidden to
be brought into the house of the Lord, Deuter. 23.18. And when Abner was by
Ishbosheth reproved for defiling Rizpah, he answers, Am I a dog? Weems on the
seventh Commandment.
The child begotten in adultery is ( Deuteronomy. 23.2.) called Mamzer, which some
learned men derive from two words, signifying another man's spot or defilement,
how foolish are they who desire to have their dead bodies imbalmed, and their
living bodies defiled! There Is a peculiar opposition between fornication and
sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your sanctification,
that ye should abstain from fornication. The Saints of God should have a
peculiar abhorrence of this sin; fornication and uncleanness, etc. let it not
be once named among you, as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5.3. they should cleanse
themselves from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. A man who is of
a cleanly disposition, loves to wear clean garments. The body is the garment of
the soul, and a clean heart will preserve a pure body. Remember (Christians)
by what hand your bodies were made, by what guest they are inhabited, to what
head they are united, by what price they are purchased, in what laver they have
been washed, and to whose eye they shall hereafter be presented. Consider
lastly, whether Delilah's lap be a fit place for those who expect a room in
Abraham's bosom.

3. Observe. 3.
The love of lust makes men erroneous and seducers. They who make no conscience
of ordering their conversation, will soon be heretical. These Seducers who
opposed the Faith were unclean, and Flesh-defilers. The fool said in his heart,
that there was no God, Psalm. 14.1.
and the true ground thereof immediately follows, they are corrupt, and have
done abominable works.

They who put away a good conscience, concerning faith, will soon make
shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1.19. The lust of ambition and desire to be teachers of the
Law, makes men turn aside to vain jangling, 1 Timothy 1.7. Diotrephes his love of
pre-eminence, puts him upon opposing the truth, 3 John ver. 10. The lust of
covetousness did the like. They who supposed that gain was godliness quickly
grew destitute of the truth, 1 Timothy 6.5. while some covered money, they erred
from the faith, Mich. 3 5.
1 Timothy 6.10. They who subverted whole houses, and taught things which they
ought not, did it for filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1.11. The blind Watchmen and
the Shepherds which understood not, were such as could never have enough, and
looked every one for his gain, and they were dumb, because greedy dogs, Esa.
56.10, 11. The lust of voluptuousness produced the same effect; they who caused
divisions contrary to the Doctrine which the Romans had learned, were such as
served their own belly, Romans 16.17. They who lead captive silly women laden
with diverse lusts, resisted the truth, were men of corrupt minds, and reprobate
concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3. Wine and strong drink made the Prophets err
and go out of the way. The Heretics of old, the Gnostics, Basilidians, Epiph.
adv. haer. c. 24, 25, 26. Aug. de haer. c. 5, 6. Perit judicium cum res transit
in affectum.
Nicolaitans, etc. were so infamous for carnal uncleanness, as Epiphanius,
Augustine, and others report, that a modest ear would even suffer by the
relation thereof. Nor have the Papists and Anabaptists of late come far short
of them. The lusts make the affections to be judges; and where affection
swayes, judgment decays. Hence Alphonsus advised, that affections should be
left at the threshold, when any went to Council. We are prone to believe that
to be right and lawful, which we would have to be so. Lusts oppose all entrance
of light which opposes them. Repentance alone makes men acknowledge the truth,
2 Timothy 2.25. How can ye believe (says Christ) who receive honor one from
another? Sensual men taught that the Resurrection was past, 2 Timothy 2.18.
because it troubled them to think of it. The consideration of a Resurrection,
an Hell, an Heaven, disturbs them, and therefore they deny these: If the light
be too much in men's eyes, they will either shut their eyes, or draw the
curtains. Lusts will pervert the light which is brought in, making men instead
of bringing their crooked lives to the strait rule, to bring the strait rule to
their crooked lives; and in stead of bringing their hearts to the Scripture, to
bring the Scripture to their hearts. Hence it is, that wicked men study the
Scripture for distinctions, to maintain their lusts: and truly a carnal will
is often helped by the Devil to a carnal wit. Lastly, God in judgment gives
up such who will not see, to an inability, and utter impotency to discern what
they ought, and to a reprobate mind; they who will not be Scholars of Truth,
are by God justly delivered up to be Masters of Error: And because men will not
endure sound Doctrine, God suffers them to heap unto themselves teachers after
their own lusts, to turn away their ears from the truth, and to be turned unto
fables; because that when the very Heathen extinstuish'd the light of Nature,
and knowing God, did not glorify him as God, professing themselves wise, they
became fools, and God gave them up to uncleanness and vile affections; much
more may God send those who live under the Gospel, and receive not the love of
the truth, strong delusions, that they should believe lies, 2 These. 2.10, 11.
Wonder not therefore at that apostasy from the truth, which abounds in these
days, and the opposing of those old precious Doctrines which heretofore men
have embraced in appearance; some unmortified lust or other there was in them;
some worm or other there was of pride* licenciousness, etc. in these beautiful
Apples, which made them fall from the tree of truth to the dirt of error; in
stead therefore of being scandalized at them, let us be careful of our
selves: if we would hold the mystery of faith, let us put it into a pure
conscience. Let us keep no lust in delitiis; love we no sin, if we would leave
no truth: Let us love what we know, and then we shall know what to love; let us
sincerely do the will of Christ, and then we shall surely know the Doctrine of
Christ; I understand more than the Ancients (says David, Psalm 119.100.)
because I keep thy precepts. The Lord will teach such his way, and guide them
in judgment. Evil men (says Solomon) understand not judgment, but they that
seek the Lord understand all things, Prove. 28.5. If we will turn from our
iniquities, we shall understand the truth, Dan. 9.13. Who is wise, and he shall
understand these things.

This for the first specifyed fault wherewith these Seducers were charged, viz.
Their defiling the flesh: The second follows; their contempt of Magistracy;
and in that, first of the first branch thereof, viz. They despise Dominion,
inwardly.

EXPLICATION.
Three things I here propound by way of Explication.

1. What we are here to understand by Dominion. 2. What by despising that
Dominion. 3. Upon what ground does Jude here condemn them for that despising
thereof.
In the first, we may consider two things: 1. To whom this Dominion is
attributed. 2. What it is, and wherein it consists.

1. The word in the Original (...), Dominion, is the same with that mentioned
in Peter, (...) 2 Pet. 2.10.
2 Pet. 2.10, and tranflated Government. And though it properly signify
Lordship, Domination, or Government in the abstract, the Power and office of
Magistracy, or any ruling over others, yet must it necessarily comprehend the
persons themselves governing, or in the place of Authority; Government without
Governors is but a notion; and were it not for Governors, there would be no
hating of Government. Paul, Romans 13.1. by Higher powers, understands both the
Power or Authority it self; as also the Persons vested with that Power and
Authority: And when Peter (1 Pet. 2.17.) commands the Christians to love,
(...), the Brotherhood, he intends the whole company of the brethren, as we
understand by the Nobility of the Land, the Nobles themselves; and yet here
Jude names in the abstract, rather Dominion and Authority it self, then those
who were placed therein, to show what it was which these Seducers opposed and
struck at, namely not at officers, so much as at their office; not at
Magistrates, but at Magistracy; they loved not this same ruling over others,
and such a difference among men. They aimed at Anarchy (as Calvin notes upon
the place;) being proud, they could not endure superiors; and being licencious,
they were impatient of restraint. So me by this Dominion of which Jude speaks,
understand the Dominion and Authority of the Lord Christ, received from his
Father; and so refer this despising of Dominion, to that sin of ungodliness
mentioned ver. 4. Domina^i^nem contemunat, i. e. Christ^m, qui non solum
dicitur Dominus in Concreto, sed etiam Deminati^ in Abstract^, propter
excellentians Domi^ii. Lyran.
where these Seducers are said to be ungodly, and to deny the only Lord God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ. Lyranus thus, they despise Dominion, that is, (says
he) Christ himself, who is not only called Lord in the concrete, but even
Dominion in the abstract, because of the excellency of his Dominion. But though
it be true, that Satan has ever endeavored to overthrow the Domination of
Christ by Heretics, who have denied his natures sometimes, his offices at
other times, and have indeed showed themselves Antichrists, 1 John 2.4. Yet
under correction, I conceive, that the Dominion and dignities whereof Jude here
speaks, are to be referred to the civil Magistrate. The word (...), or
Dominion, is never attributed to Christ in the New Testament, but always
either to Angels, Ephesians. 1.21. Col. 1.16. or Magistrates; and it is only
agreeable to the scope of this place to interpret it of the Magistrate. Even
they who by these words understand the Dominion of Christ, yield, that the next
words, despise Dignities, are to be understood of Magistrates. And the Apostle
in this verse (as is conceived) compares these Seducers, as for uncleanness,
to Sodomites; so for contempt of Government, to the Israel^^s, who rebelled
against Moses; he most sutably also subjoining this sin, to the former of
uncleanness, in regard the love of their lusts, and dissoluteness of life,
made them hate that Government which was appointed to restrain them.

2. For the second, What this Dominion and Power is that is attributed to the
Magistrate, and wherein it consists.

1. More generally, it stands in Superiority, Preheminency, Supereminency above
others, as is evident, 1. By those names by which it is set forth in Scripture,
(...) Luke 20.25. (...). Mat. 20, 25. Romans 13.3. Luke 12.11. Tit. 3.1. 1 Cor.
15.24. (...) Act. 27.11. (...). Xen.
as Power, Authority, Rule, as Romans 13.1. 1 Timoth. 2.2. Tit. 3.1. 2. By those
Titles which are given to Magistrates, as, Kings, and such as exercise
Authority, Luke 22.25. They that are great, Mat. 20.25. Rulers, Romans 13.3.
Powers, in the Abstract, Romans 13.1. Magistrates, Luke 12.11. Governors, Luke
20.20. And elsewhere Nobles, 2 Chro. 23.20. Jerem. 14.3. Dukes or Mighty ones,
Exodus 15.15. Ezekiel. 31.5. Great men, 2 Samuel 3.38. Captains, 1 Samuel 9.16.
Princes, Psalm. 83.11. Ezekiel. 32.29. With sundry Metaphorical Names also; as,
Gods, Exodus 22.28. Psalm 82.1. Psalm. 138.1. Chrildren of the Most High, Psalm.
82.6. The sons of the Mighty, or of the Gods, Psalm. 89.7. Fathers, tender
fathers (as the word may be, and according to Hierom, is to be rendered) Genesis
41.43. 1 Samuel 24.11. David calls Saul, Father; Deborah is called a Mother in
Israel, Judge. 5.7. Heads, Number. 14.4 Judge. 11.7. Judge. 1* 15. Mountains,
Mich. 6.7. Anointed. 1 Samuel 24 7. Shepherds, Numb. 27.17. Isaiah 44.28. etc.

2. More particularly, this Dominion or Power consists in three things. 1. In
Ordinando, in ordaining laws for the good of the subjects. This is called.
Potestas (...), the Legistative Power. Laws are like the Line and Plummet of
the Architect, without which there is no right working, and they are to a
Commonwealth, what the Sun is to the earth; without them people would not see
whither to go, what to do, and all places (as is usual in darkness) would be
filled with filthiness, and violence; they are the cords of the tent, which
being cut, it fallls to the ground. Laws are the best walls of a City; without
them, even walled cities want defense; they are as Physic to the body, both
for preventing and removing Diseases; nay, they are as the soul to the body;
without them the Commonwealth would neither have beauty nor being. Laws have
been ever esteemed so necessary, that no Commonwealth under any form, could
ever be without them: Nor do these Positive laws derogate at all from the
perfection of the Law Moral, or of Nature, but only discover the depravation
of man's nature; in whose heart, though that (...), that work of the Law be
written, which inclines all to some kind of natural goodness; yet by the
fall, is the knowledge of the Law of nature so obscured, and the force of
inordinate affection so prevalent over reason, that there is need of Positive
Laws, for directing, restraining, encouraging. And indeed Positive Laws are
but rivulets derived and drawn from the Law of Nature, and particular
conclusions formed out of the universal principles thereof. The Law of Nature
only in general, prescribes what is to be done or avoided, not descending to
particulars: now all being not able from those general principles, to deduce
that which is to be practiced in particular cases, which admit of innumerable
variations, according to circumstances, Positive Laws for the good of
subjects, are necessarily to be suited to the condition of every Commonwealth.
Nor can it justly be alleged by any, that Dominion may be committed as well to
men alone, as to Laws, for the Law is the voice of God, being a deduction from
the Law of nature, whereas a man is a servant of affections, and apt to be
biased by hatred, anger, fear, friendship, foolish pity; by reason whereof It
is (as a learned man once said) easier for one wise man to make, then for many
to pronounce law. It was a wise speech of Solon, who said, "[That only that
Common wealth could be safe, where the people obeyed the Magistrate, and the
Magistrates the Laws. L. 4. de leg.
And of Plato, who said, That City cannot be far from ruin, where the Laws are
not above the Magistrate, but the Magistrate above the Laws. And if against
this it should be argued, that the Law must needs be defective, speaks
generally, and cannot come up to sundry contingent and special cases and
circumstances, which it cannot foresee and determine: I answer, Let
conscientious prudence supply the forefaid unavoidable defects; and that we
may not set the Magistrate and Law at variance, let the Law have power to
hinder the Magistrate from transgressing by the force of affection, and let the
Magistrate have power with rational and religious regard of circumstances, to
explain and apply the Law: this power of the Magistrate serving to make an
happy temperature of jus and aequum, strict justice and Christian equity, and
being as necessary as it is for a Physician to have one eye to the rules of his
Art, and another to the condition of his Patient; not suffering himself so to
be bound up by the precepts of the former, as by laying aside his own prudence,
to endanger the life of the later. And that God has given to the Magistrate
this Legislative power, is most evident, in regard dominion without such a
power would be in vain, and never obtain its end, either in the advancing of
godliness, or the public peace; Good Laws made and executed, Number. 11.16. 1 Samuel 10.6.
being the direct means to promote both: As also in regard God has given the
Magistrate the prudence and power requisite to the making of Laws; and all the
Commands given by God to people, of being obedient, would be void, and to no
purpose, unless the Magistrate might impose Laws. And yet he must remember
that the matter of his Laws must be possible, else they cannor obtain their end;
profitable also to the Commonwealth, and just or righteous; for else they
destroy their end; nor can that be said to be a Law, but rather anomie, or a
breach of the Law, which commands any thing against Gods Law.

2. The power and dominion here spoken of, consists in administrando
Jurisdictionem, by way of execution or administering of justice to the people,
according to the forementioned good Laws. A Law without execution is neither of
force nor fruit. Miserable is that Commonwealth, Omnia judicia, aut
distrabendarum controversiarum aut puniendorum maleficiorum caus^ reperta sunt.
Cic. pro Cecin.
whose manners have brought their Laws under their power, and miserably
confined and nailed them to the pillar: This Jurisdiction, or execution of the
Laws is twofold.

The first is seen in judgments, or the determinations of Civil Controversies
between parties according to the rules of the Law; that this is part of the
Magistrates power, is evident,

1. From Gods Ordination and Command, Prove. 8.15. By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice. How long will ye judge unjustly, etc? do justice to
the afflicted and needy, etc. Psalm. 82.3. and Jer. 22.2. O King of Judah, that
sit upon the throne, thou and thy servants, execute yet judgment and
righteousness, deliver the spoiled, etc. and Chap. 21.12. Oh ye house of
David, execute judgment in the morning.

2. From the direction which God gives to people to seek judgment at the hand
of the Magistrate; Exodus 22.9. for all manner of trespass, whether it for Ox,
for Ass, for Sheep, for Raiment, or for any manner of lost thing which another
challenges, etc. the cause of both parties shall come before the Judges, and
whom the Judges shall condemn, etc. And Deuteronomy. 19.17. Both the men between whom
the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before the Priests and the
Judges.

3. From the use and necessity of Judgments: 1 Truth often lies in the
bottom, and falsehood lurks in corners. A prudent Magistrate brings both to the
light, the one because it seeks it, the other because it shuns it. 2. Good men
by reason of their fewness, weakness and meekness, are often great
sufferers, and the wicked are numerous, potent, and oppressive. The public
judgment of the Magistrate is in this case, to the former a hiding place from
the wind, Isa. 32.2. and as a wind to scatter the later, Prove. 20.8. And
without these public judgments, what would places be but as mountains of
prey, dens of wild beasts, and habitations fitter for Cyclops, than
Christians! God has not by grace given to any, a right in another estate, nor
taken away from any an orderly and regular love of his own welfare; and nature
in the best, dictates and desires, and the God of Nature, by these public
judgments, has granted helps for self-preservation from injury and
oppression. Only it must be here heeded, that these suits and judgments be not
transacted unduely, either by the judged or the judges; 1. By the Judged, they
must not desire judgments out of envy, revenge, covetousness, or a desire of
contending. 2. The matter about which judgment is desired must not be slight
and frivolous. 3. The remedy of the Law must not be desired till after patient
waiting and Christian endeavors to compound differences, and to procure an
amicable reconcilement. Sic certent causae, ut non certent pectora. Zec. 7.9.8,
16. Judex q. jus dicens. Var. (...)
4. The parties who differ must not manage their contestation with bitter and
unchristian animosities, railings, briberies, false accusations, etc. 5. The
end of desiring judgments must not be the undoing, or defaming of our
adversary, but the preserving of our selves, and the administration of justice,
the welfare of others.

2. The Judges must not wrongfully transact these judgments, they must give
every one his due, Deuteronomy, 16.20. Justice, Justice, or that which is altogether
just shall thou do, and chap. 1.16. Moses says, he charged the Judges to hear
the causes between their brethren, to judge righteously between every man and
his brother: Jerem. 21.12. Execute judgment in the morning: Justice is the
soul of Judgment: An unjust Judge is a Solecism, a contradiction. A Judge
should be the Law enlivened: To this end; Judges must be godly: Righteousness
will not stand without Religion: Jethro's advice to Moses, was, Choose men
fearing God, Exodus 18.21. Let the fear of the Lord be upon you (said
Jehoshaphat to the Judges) 2 Chr. 19.6, 7. The Aethiopians apprehended that the
Angels attended on all Judicatories, and therefore (as I have read of them)
they left twelve chairs empty in the judgment-place, which they said were the
Seats of the Angels; but Judges must believe that a greater than the Angels is
there. 2. Impartial: He must not respect the person of the poor, nor honor
the person of the mighty, Lev. 19.15. and Deuteronomy. 1.17. He must hear the small as
well as the great. There must no man's condition be regarded in judgment, nor
must the Judge behold the face of any ones person, but the face of his cause,
Job 34.19. God accepts not the persons of Princes; A Judge will be a sun of
righteousness, it shining as well upon the beggar as the noble. 3. A Master of
his affections: Anger, hatred, pity, fear, etc. the clouds of Affection will
hinder the Sunshine of justice. The Athenian Judges used to sit in Mars-street,
to show that they had Martial hearts: Constantine is termed a man-child, Rev.
12.5. So Brightman.
for his courage. He who will go up to the mount of Justice, must leave his
affections (as Abraham did his Ass and Servants) at the foot thereof. Love and
wisdom seldom dwell under one roof, and the fear of man is a snare; A Coward
(we say) cannot be an honest man, nor will a fearful and flexible Judge be
able to say injustice, Nay.

4. Deliberate: In the case of information about false Worship, Deuteronomy. 17.3.
Moses directs to this deliberation before sentence be given. If it be told
thee, and thou have heard of it, and enquired diligently, and behold it be
true, and the thing certain, etc. then shall thou bring forth the man, etc.
What plenty of words are here to prevent precipitancy in Judicature! It much
commended the integrity of Job, who professes, Job 29.16. The cause which I
knew not, I searched out. See the example of the Heathen Festus, Act. 25.16
Both sides must be heard, the small as well as the great. Though a Judges Qui
statuit aliquid part inaudita alera, aequum licit statuerit, haud aequus fuit.
Sen. in Med.
sentence be right, yet he is not right in giving it, if he give it before
either party be heard. 5. A lover of truth: A man of truth, Exodus 18.21. Hating
lying, executing the judgment of truth. Zech. 8.16. His heart must love, his
tongue speak the truth; Exodus 18.21.23.8, Deuteronomy. 16.19.27.26. 2 Chronicles. 19.7.
nor will the hand without go right, if the wheels within go wrong. 6.
Incorrupt: Hating bribes, because hating covetousness. A gift blinds the
wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous. Of whose hand (says Samuel)
have I received any gift, to blind mine eyes therewith? 1 Samuel 12.3. A Judge
must neither take money to be unjust; nor to be just; Righteousness is its own
reward. The Thebeans erected the Statues of their Judges without hands; the
gain of bribes is sum'd up, Job 15.34. Fire shall consume the Tabernacles of
bribery. 7. Sober and Temperate: He that follows the pleasures that attend on
Majesty, will soon neglect the pains which belong to Magistracy. It was a
prudent instruction of Lemuel's mother, Prove. 31.4, 5. It is not for Kings, It
is not for Kings, O Lemuel, to drink wine, nor for Princes to drink strong
drink, lest they drink and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any of
the afflicted. Whoredom and wine, and new wine take away the heart, Hos. 4.11.
Some understand those words, Jer. 21.12. Execute judgment in the morning,
properly, as if they should perform acts of judgment early, before they were
endangered by abundant eating or feasting, to render themselves less able to
discern of causes.

2. The second branch of Jurisdiction which belongs to the Magistrate,
consists in the Dstribution of rewards and punishments. 1. Of Rewards to
those who keep; 2. Of Punishments to those who break the Laws.

1. Of Rewards: Of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 13. Do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise. Of this the Supreme Lord gives an example, who joins
showing mercy to thousands, with visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon
the children, Exodus 20. Nor must a Magistrate be a Sun only for luster of
Majesty, but also for warmth and benignity.

2. Of Punishments: These are of sundry kinds: Some concern the name, as
degradations; some the estate, as pecuniary mulcts; some the body, and these
are either Capital, or not Capital, as mutilation of some part, etc. Evident
it is from Scripture-commands, that it is the Magistrates duty to punish, Deuteronomy.
19.21. the Judges shall make diligent inquisition, etc. And thine eye shall not
pity, but life shall go for life. 2. From his Function, Romans 13.4. He bears
not the sword in vain: Governors are for the punishment of evil doers. 3.
From the Benefit of these punishments. To the punished, who may grieve for what
they have done; to the Spectators, who may be warned from doing the like. Prove.
19.25. Deuteronomy. 19.19r Indulgentia flagitiorum illecebra. Exodus 21.12. L^v. 24.17.
etc.
Sinful indulgence, silently, yet strongly invites to a second wickedness.
Even Capital punishments are enjoined by Scripture, Genesis 9.6. Who so sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. A Law, which being before the
erection of the Mosaicall Polity, shows that the Laws which afterward
commanded Capital punishments, did not simply and absolutely, but only in
respect of some circumstances, concern the Israelites. The capital punishment
of Malefactors, by the Magistrate, was dictated by the Law of Nature. And as
the force of the foresaid command was before, so did it continue after Moses;
Christ himself, even from it, drawing an Argument to dissuade Peter from
shedding of blood, Mat. 26.52. Nor do I understand but that (if all punishments
of Malefactors by the sword be now unlawful, as Anabaptists dream) it must
necessarily follow, that all defending of the subjects by the sword against an
invading enemy is unlawful also; the public peace being opposed by the one,
as much as the other; nay, may we not argue. That if the power of the sword
belong not to the Magistrate to defend the Commonwealth, that it belongs not
to any private man to defend himself against the violent assaults of a murderer?

In sum, Capital punishments may be inflicted, but sparingly, slowly. It is
observed by some, That God was longer in destroying Jericho, then in making the
whole world. Satius est ut euret pharmacum, quam sanet ferrum.
As many Funerals disgrace a Physician, so many executions dishonor a
Magistrate. The execution of Justice should, like Thunder, fear many, and hurt
few: Let all means be tried, before the last be used. A Magistrate must not be
bloody when he sheds blood: the Master Be alone is (they say) without a sting.
If a Butcher may not be of the Jury, much less may he be a Judge. In a
doubtful case it is better to spare many nocent, then to punish one innocent;
nor must vehement suspicion, but clear evidence satisfy a Judge: Punishment
delayed, Potest poena delata exigi, non potest exacta revocari.
may afterward be executed; but being once executed, cannot be recalled; and
even when the Malefactor is condemned, the man should be comiserated; though as
an offender his blood be debased, yet as a man it is precious.

This for the Explication of the first thing considerable in this part,
Dominion.

In the second we are to enquire, What is to be understood by Despising of
Dominion.

The word (...), says Beza, properly signifies to remove something out of the
place as unworthy any longer to abide and remain therein, Proprie signicat
aeliquid suo loco ut indignum amovere. Bez. in 6 Mar. 26,
and it is in Scripture either spoken of Persons or Things; when of Persons, it
is declared (says he) most fitly by disdain, or contemn, as Mar. 6.26. Luke
10.16. 1 These. 4 8. and it is spoken of Things, properly which being removed
from their place, are accounted of no value, effect or force; and thus it is
declared by rejecting, Luke 7.30. Disannulling, Gal. 3, 15. Casting off, 1 Timothy
5.12. and here, because we reject that which we despise, its rendered despise.

Now these Seducers did not reject, disanull, cast off governing, so as to make
it cease to be (that was not in their power) but in their judgment, desires,
insinuations, and as much as in them was, they labored to make it accounted
void, abrogated, and of no value, or force. And their pretense for this
practice was the liberty which was by Jesus Christ purchased for them, with
which, they taught that obedience to Magistrates was inconsistent. This seems
to be plain by that more general sin which the Apostle lays to their charge (
ver. 4.) Of turning the grace of our God into wantonness, Of this more has
been said upon that place
i.e. the goodness of God in bestowing liberty by Christ, into Libertinism.
And hence it was that these Seducers 2 Pet. 2.19. allured their poor seduced
followers, under the pretense of liberty obtained by Christ, 2 Pet. 2.19.
to all manner or wickedness and licenciousnesse of life; bearing them in
hand, that as they were not now bound to any holiness of life, so particularly
that Christ having redeemed them, they were free from all subjection and
obedience to others. A Doctrine which as its very taking with flesh and blood*
so is it frequently by the Apostles Paul and Peter opposed, who grant indeed a
liberty wherewith Christ has made a Christian free, Gal. 5.13. 1 Pet. 2.16.
but yet withal they add, that this liberty is spiritual, a liberty from the
law, sin, death, and hell, not an immunity from civil obedience; and therefore
not to be used for an occasion to the flesh, or for a cloak of maliciousness*
Nor indeed is any thing further from truth, then that because of Spiritual
liberty, Christians should be free from civil subjection. For as this liberty
exempts us not from obedience to the commands of God (for as the Apostle says,
Romans 6.18. Being made free from sin, we became the servants of Righteousness;
and ver. 22. servants to God) so neither does it exempt from obedience to the
Magistrate ordained by God. Yea so far are the godly commands of a Magistrate
from opposing spiritual liberty, that they rather advance it; for true liberty
stands in the choosing of good, and the rejecting of evil, and this is
furthered by the righteous commands of superiors. Licenciousnesse is not
liberty, but slavery, and makes inners to affect their own insensible bondage.

3. Quamvis in acquisitione and usu potestatis potest esse deordinatio, tamen
in ipso ordine superioritatis in quo consistit Dominium, non potest esse
deordinatio, sicut ordo non potest esse deordinatus. Vid. Durandum de Origin
jurisdictionum. Aug. de C. D. l. 5. c. 21. Et. qu. ex vet. Test c. 35. Aug. Tr.
116. in Joh. Gerh. in 2 Pe. 2 Pareum in Romans 1 King. 15.27 1 Kin. 16.2.7. 1
Kin. 14.14 Dan. 4.17, 25. Pro. 8.15.
Lastly, by way of Explication, we shall enquire upon what ground the Apostle
condemns them for this Despising of Dominion. Of this briefly.

1 This was a sin against an Ordinance of God: By me Kings reign, Prove. 8.15.
There is no power (says the Apostle) but of God: The Powers that be, are
ordained of God. And though Magistracy be an Ordinance of man in regard of the
subject, it being born by man; the object, it being employed about men; the end
also, the good of men; the kind or sort thereof, left unto the choice of
several Nations: yet not in regard of the Invention or Institution thereof,
which is only from God.

In it are considerable also, The Power it self, The Acquisition thereof, and
the Execution of it. The acquisition may be from the Devil, by bribery, fraud,
cruelty, intrusion, invasion: The execution, or manner of using this power may
be from him likewise, as when Superstition is set up in stead of Religion, and
cruelty for equity, by those who govern. But Authority it self, Dominion,
Principality, are from God, though not Tyranny. Riches gotten by Usury,
Extortion, etc. cease not to be good in themselves, yea, and the gifts of God:
And as the owner of these unjustly procured riches, may be said to be a rich
man; and he who has Learning, though procured by unlawful means, may be said
to be a learned man; so the possessor of a most unjustly obtained Authority may
be said to be a Magistrate, and in Authority.

2. This sin of the Seducers was a sin against the welfare and happiness of
the Public: They being weary of Magistracy, were weary of all the comforts and
blessings of Peace; and in being desirous to throw down the pillars, they
endeavored to pull down the building upon their own and others heads. What
would Nations be without Government, but the dens of wild beasts! Judah and
Israel dwelt safely every one under his vine and fig tree, all the days of
Solomon. 1 Kin. 4.25.
Even Nebuchadnezzar was a tree under which beasts of the field had shadow, in
whose boughs the fowls of the heaven dwelt, and of which all flesh was fed,
Dan. 4.12. The funerals of a Political Parent millions of Children will
celebrate with tears. Over Saul, who was wicked and tyrannical, does David bid
the daughters of Israel to weep, who clothed them in scarlet, 2 Samuel 1.24. Nor
was it (according to some) any of the best of Kings, who is called the breath
of our nostrils, Lam. 4 22. And it is observable, when God threatens the taking
away of the staff of bread, and the stay of water, he adds (as no less a
judgment) the taking away the Judge and the Prophet, Isa 3.2.
the Prudent and the Ancient, etc.

3 By this Despising of Government, they were in an especial manner their own
enemies, and sinned against their own happiness. The overturners of lawful
Magistracy, shall find their calamities to arise suddenly. Prove. 24.22, He who
breaks an hedge, a serpent shall bite him: Eccl. 10.8. An evil man seeks
only rebellion, therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him. It has
been observed by some, that (most, if not) all those whom the Scripture
mentions as opposers of Magistracy, have been punished by violent death, God
not vouchsafing them so much as reprieval to a deathbed. Corah and his
Company, Athaliah, Absalom, Zimri, Joab, Sheba, Adonijah, with many others will
prove this, and besides the vast supply which foreign histories afford, how
has vengeance pursued all the rebellious mentioned in our English Chronicle?
Who has not heard of Becket, Montfort, Mortimer, The Piercies, Tyler, Worbeck,
the Salt Peter-Saints, with sundry others, whom God made marks of vengeance for
removing the ancient Landmarks set for order and propriety in the Nation? Nor
do I remember that ever God suffered any one Godly man, mentioned in Scripture,
to put any lawful Magistrate out of, or indirectly to put himself into
Government. I say, I remember no instance of either.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obser. 1.
How provident is God for man's peace and welfare! Without Dominion we should be
worse than Beasts: It is the breath which so many thousand creatures draw; take
it away, and none can say, This is mine. If the Magistrate were not a God to
man, man would soon prove a Wolf nay a Devil to man. There Is no creature which
so much wants a Ruler as man: We may say of all other creatures, Nascuntur
artifices, they are born crafts-Masters, they were apparelled and armed by
Nature, they are their own Cooks, Physicians, Builders, even at their first
entrance; only man came in without strength, weapon, clothes, or skill. How
good is God to provide protectors for him! violent and bloody men fear not hell
so much as the halter, like beasts, they are more afraid of the flash of
powder, than the bullet; and though their fear of the Magistrate saves not
their souls, yet many a time has it saved our lives: Without Magistracy
Robbery would be a Law, and men (like dogs) try all right by their teeth; where
there is no ruler, every one will be a ruler; he who has no ruler over him,
will be a tyrant over another. Judge. 17.8.18.1, 14.
When there was no King in Israel, every Micha had an house of Gods, and the
Levites went a begging It Is just with God that they should feel the curse of
Anarchy, who never were thankful for regular Dominion.

2. Obser. 2.
God is highly provoked by sin, when he suffers Magistrates to be burdensome to
a people, and Dominion to be abused; when their deliverers and saviors become
their destroyers, and they (like Ephraim) oppressed and broken even in
judgment. Secundum merita subditorum disponit Corda praepositorum.
It was threatened as a sore judgment, I will give children to be their
Princes, and babes to rule over them; For the sins of a people, many and bad,
are the Princes thereof, Prove. 28.2 And God often sets up wicked Governors
over people, not because they are worthy to rule, but these worthy to be so
ruled; God may give a King in his anger. He speaks often of Princes who were
Wolves ravening to the prey to shed blood, Ezekiel. 22.27, Mic. 3.1.2, 3. Zeph.
3.3.
How righteous was God in making Abimilech a scourge to the Shechemites, who
had made themselves the stirrup to his ambition! And undoubtedly if God may
suffer the Prophets of a people to be fools, and the spiritual^ men to be mad,
to delude and misguide the people, Hos. 9.7.
for the multitude of iniquity, and the great hatred; he is not hindered from
suffering the Princes of people, who refuse^ to be reformed, to be Jeroboams to
their souls, and Rehoboams to their bodies, pernicious to both. O that people
would spend more time in blaming of their sins, and less in complaining of
men, and but sadly and impartially examine their hearts, whether the parting
with the Gospel and Ministry would ever fetch a quarter so many complaints
from them, as an inconsiderable Sessment; or whether sin startle them so much
as a Tax, and if they find their Consciences to give in verdict for God, let
them adore his righteous severity.

3. Obser. 3.
God is much seen in causing men's subjection to Magistrates. All naturally love
to excel in worldly greatness, and like not superiority in others. Every one
(says Calvin) has in him the mind of a King; On 1 Pet. 5.5
that one therefore should keep millions of men in order, restrain, constrain,
correct, command; how could it be but that God himself has imprinted the
characters of Divinity upon him? and but that there is a divine Constitution in
an humane Person? It is thou, O Lord, that subduest my people under me, says
David. And Psalm. 65.7. Psalm. 144.2.
The stilling the noise of the Seas, the noise of the waves, and the tumult of
the people, are put deservedly together, the later manifesting the power of God
as much as the former. How did David allay the fury of those furious spirits,
who so eagerly desired to take away the life of Saul, but by this, He is the
Lords Anointed? and hence Princes should gather, when people cast off
subjection and despise their Dominion, that they themselves have despised God,
provoked him to pour contempt upon them; and to make them for cutting off their
lock of loyalty to God, to become even as other men; and hence also people
should learn to whom to return the praises of their peace and safety, not only
to the power and policy of their Governors, but principally to the ordination
of that God by whom Kings reign.

4. Observe. 4.
The power given by God to Magistrates should be improved for the Giver. Their
Dominion should advance that of the chief Lord; The greatest Kings are his
Vassals: The Highest Earthly Powers shall give an account to an Higher
hereafter, and must therefore be regulated by, and serve for the promoting of
an Higher for the present. The King is commanded to write him a copy of the
Law, and keep all the words thereof. Deuteronomy. 17.18.
When the Crown was put upon the head, the Testimony was also put into the hand
of Joash. 2 King. 11.12.
The first Table should be first in the Magistrates care: Even Kings and Rulers
must kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.12.
and advance his Kingdom, and provide that their subjects may not only live
under them in peace and honesty, but also in Godliness: if this must be the end
of the subjects prayers, it must be the end of the Magistrates Government.
These Shields of the earth should protect Gods glory; Psalm. 47.10. Psalm. 22.29.
Psalm. 72.11. Isai. 49.23.
the fat upon the earth, must worship Christ, and all Kings fall down before
him. The Church (infant-like for weakness) must be nourished and nursed, yea,
and that by Kings and Queens. How unsuitable is it for them who are called Gods,
to cast off all care of the honor of God! and for them who are called
Shepherds to take no care that their subjects should have the Pastures of
wholesome Doctrins! Isai. 43.28.
to suffer them to wander in the ways of sin and hell, without any care to
reduce them; and to give leave to grievous wolves, Seducers to devour them!
They who make all the care of the Magistrate to concern the worldly welfare,
without any regard of the souls of people, make him like an Ox-herd, who thinks
he does enough in providing f^^ pasture for his cattle, suffering them
willingly to be carried by droves to the Shambles. And why political as well
as natural Parents should not take care that their children be brought up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4.
I understand not. Ample testimony is given to David, Solomon, Asa,
Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, of their Zeal for Religion: Nor ever is the
contrary mentioned in any of the other Kings, but as their great sin and
infamy: Nor ever will the names of Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, cease to
be precious in, for their care of the Church of Christ. Even the Heathens,
Aristotle and Plato, acknowledge that the chief care in a Commonwealth should
be about Religion; the beautifullest structure of a Civil Government, is
erected upon the sand, unless Religion be the foundation.

In sum, Though the power of the Magistrate (as such) in the holy things of
God, be not formal, intrinsecall, and Spiritual, so as that himself should
administer therein (as if Christ had committed the keys to him) yet is it
objective, 2 King. 15.14. 2 Cor. 15.17. 1 Cor. 9.14. 2 Chronicles. 31.3. 2 Chronicles.
29.4 2 King. 23.1, 2.
to be employed about Ecclesiastical causes (though politically) and to
provide for the benefit of the Church, and that, as by removing the impediments
of Religion, by preserving its maintenance, by convening Assemblies for
reformation, etc. so by taking care that matters-Ecclesiasticall be duly
managed by those who administer therein, as, though the Magistrate himself
exercises not the art of Physic, yet he takes care that none shall abuse
that Art, or exercise it hurtfully.

5. Observe. 5.
The enemies of godliness soon become opposers of civil Dominion. The Apostle
had told us, that these Seducers denied the only Lord God; and here he says,
they despised Dominion. They who fear not God, will not be afraid to speak
evil of dignities. The despisers of Saul, were the sons of Belial. Good men
will not be bad subjects; nor will bad men conscienciously be good subjects.
The fear of God is the best foundation of obedience to the Magistrate:
Remarkable is the order of obedience prescribed by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, honor the King; and by Solomon, Prove. 24.21. M^ son, fear thou the
Lord and the King. Men may from a principle of policy, forbear the opposing of
Magistracy, as a danger; but only from a principle of conscience can they abhor
it as a sin. The fear of man is but a weak bond, and as easily broken as were
the cords by Samson. What a noise leave these words [ Submit to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake] in a religious ear! Whatsoever interest, reputation,
etc. dictate, the declaration of Gods will is to a gracious heart, the end of
all strife. The discovery that such or such a course has a sin against God in
it, is enough for a Saint; No more disputes then; the threats of a thousand
hells shall not be so disswasive. Humane Laws may make men hide, only Gods
laws can make men hate disobedience. A mere man is firm and steady in no
relations. The greatest interest of Magistracy is to advance religion. If they
provide for the keeping of Gods laws, the observation of their own will follow
of course. David discovered himself to be a good man both in sparing of Saul
in the cave, (Oh how well was is for Saul that he fell into the hands of a
David! Psalm. 101.6.
) and a wise man in setting his eyes upon the faithful of the Land, and in
taking the perfect in their way to serve him. The way for the Magistrate to
bring men under his subjection, is to plant the Gospel, and to make them
subject to Christ. The power of the word in the consciences of people,
Christianus inimicus nemini, multo minus Imperatori, Tert.
binds more strongly to obedience, then the power of the sword over the bodies
of the people. And, if God always restrain people from rebelling against
Governors, who shall tolerate in people all sorts of rebellion against God,
What means that of 1 Samuel 2.30? Them that honor me, etc. and they that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed?

6. Christianity does not destroy, Observe. 6.
but strengthen Magistracy. The Seducers and Libertines are here by Jude
condemned for despising Dominion: One Ordinance of God does not abolish
another. The Laws of Christ in his Church, bring not in lawlesnesse into the
Commonwealth; nor is God a God of order in the first, and the Author of
confusion in the later; yea contrarily, he maintains Government in the
Commonwealth for the good of his Church, that it may find an harbor therein;
and keeps up the pole of Civil Dominion, that the weak Hop bine, the Church may
be sustained. The spiritual Authority of Christ divides not Civil inheritances;
His Scepter swallows not up (as did Aarons rod the other) the Scepters of
worldly Monarchs; nor does he who came to give heavenly, take away earthly
Crowns. The weapons of Christ's kingdom are not carnal: He who, when he had a
right, would not be made a King, gives no liberty to those who have none, to
put out those who have, It Is the labor of Satan to persuade civil Governors,
That Christ's Kingdom is the greatest enemy to theirs: Est, 3.8.
Thus Haman represented the Jews to Ahashuerosh, as a people that would not
obey the Kings Laws: Thus the Courtiers of Chaldea accused the three Companions
of Daniel, Dan. 3.12.
of rebellion against the Kings Edict. By this fetch likewise the enemies of
the Jews hindered the building of the Temple. How often was Paul accused for
sedition among the Jews? Nay, Ezr. 4.13. Act. 17.18.19.16.
Christ himself was accused and executed for an Enemy to Caesar. Thus Papists
seek to wash themselves, by throwing dirt upon the servants of Christ: Were
ever accusations more senseless, then for Harding to say, that Luther animated
Munzer in his Rebellion, which was by that man of God so zealously opposed? But
the Whore of Babylon loves to lay her own brats at her Neighbors doors. In
short, the weak ground of this imputation of Rebellion to the Godly, has been
their refusing to obey such commands of Magistrates as they apprehended
sinful. And truly, in this case, Been quod apposuit, ^t quae sunt Det Deo; hoc
est, imaginem Caesaris Caesari, quae in nummo est, and imaginem Dei Deo, quae
in bomine est: ut Caesari quidem pecuniam reddas, Deo temetipsum. Tert. lib. de
idol. c. 15. Extra territorium jus dicenti impune non paretur. Observe. ult.
when Christ calls another way, I neither owe burial to my dead, nor obedience
to my living (though Political) Father. And (as Tertullian holily descants
upon those words of Christ, Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and
to God, etc. Its well added, [ And to God the things that are Gods,] that is,
give the image of Caesar to Caesar, which is on his Coin; and give the image of
God to God, which is in man; so as Caesar may have thy money, but God thy self.
And as (according to the Civillians) we must not give obedience to him that
gives Law out of his own Territory, so neither obey man when he goes beyond his
bounds in commanding against the word; and in this the Apostles Act. 5.29. and
the three servants of God in Babylon, have been our examples

7. Lust opposes restraint, is an enemy to Dominion, loves not to be bridled.
Libertines despise Dominion, and reject Magistracy, because thereby their
licencious humor is restrained. The mad upon lust like the mad dog, are the
more enraged by the chain which curbs: They who run to excess of riot in this
their pouring forth, if they meet with opposition (like the stopped stream)
swell the higher and overflow the banks. Act. 19.28. 1 Samuel 2.22.25. Judge.
20.14.
This opposing of restraint goes along with every lust; but especially with
that of carnal uncleanness; they who defile the flesh, reject Dominion. The
sons of Eli were lustful, and withal disobedient to the command of the
Magistrate. The Gibeonites were as refractory to the message of Israel, as they
were addicted to filthiness: The Sodomites were at the same time both set upon
their uncleanesse, and enraged against Lots counsel. The Anabaptists of Munster
were grown to that height of uncleanness, that they openly taught, men might
marry as many wives as they pleased, and John of Leyden their King (upon a
pretended revelation from Heaven) presently married three; and they who were
most bold in this kind, and took most wives, were accounted the best men, and
most commendable. But the fruit of this Doctrine, was their teaching that
before the day of Judgment, Christ had a worldly Kingdom, and in that the
Saints only had Dominion, that this Kingdom was that of the Anabaptists newly
begun, wherein Magistracy was to be rooted out; and although Christ and his
Apostles had no civil government, yet that they had committed the same with the
power of the sword to those who after them should teach in the Church. Nor is
it possible, but that lust should vehemently oppose restraint, considering its
propensions and motions are natural, and therefore strong, as also furthered
by all the helps which a powerful and impure spirit can invent and apply.
False then is the pretense of Libertines, who would be thought only to oppose
the irregularities of Magistracy or Ministry, when as it is clear that their
lusts are most offended at the being of their ordinations, and the
conscientious discharge of them. And much should this comfort those who are
thus conscientious, in the midst of all the rage and reproach with which they
are followed for their faithfulness. It is a sign they have disquieted men's
lusts, and (as Luther once said) that when Satan roars, they have given him a
full blow. Nor yet should the unquietness and troubles of the world, be laid
at the door of restraint and Dominion. If religious opposition, draws out men's
rage, it does it by laboring to keep it in, or rather to take it away; From
men's lusts are wars, in that they will not stoop to God, who will not lay
aside his dominion to gratify licenciousnesse. In a word, We may hence gather
the insufficiency of humane laws, nay any external means to change the heart
from a love of sin: they may possibly restrein and curb, and frequently they
irritate and enrage sinners, its only the power of grace at once to take away
the disobedience of the life, and the despising of the heart. To conclude, We
may hence learn the direct way to avoid the sin of these Seducers; oppose
lusts, these put people upon opposing of Magistracy; Such are, 1. Covetousness,
when men desire to set the Nations on fire, that they may steal away the goods,
and to have States wrackt that the goods may be cast upon their costs. 2.
Discontentednesse with our condition. The trees in Jothams Parable pleased
themselves in their own station, of privacy and usefulness; and she was a wise
woman who contented her self with her abode among her own people. 3. Ambition,
and affectation of superiority; its better to be fit to rule, then to rule and
not to be fit. He is only worthy of honor, of whom honor it self is unworthy,
and to whom it even sues for acceptance. Absalom aspired to be high in his
life, and he was in his death as high as the boughs of the tree, a fit reward
for his ambitious climbing. 4. Envy at the height of others, whereby men look
into the failings of Magistrates to blemish them, and will not see the gifts
and graces of their Superiors, but only with repining; grieving not because
things go ill, but because they go no worse; A cursed temper! 5. Self
conceitednesse, whereby (with Absalom) men think themselves fitter to sit at
the stern, then any placed there already. 6. Implacablenesse, whereby private
injuries are retained with a watching of all occasions of revenge, though to
the involving of multitudes in the co-partnership of their own sedition and
destruction. In a word, So long as we love lust, we cannot conscienciously obey
Magiserates; and yet so long as we have luft, we cannot be without Magistrates;
The Lord fit us for that condition, wherein we shall not be troubled with the
former, nor stand in need of the later.

FINIS.

