The Armies Jndempnity.
UPon the publishing of the Ordinance of the 22. of this Instant May for the
Indemnity of the Army, certain Gentlemen well affected to the Peace of the
Kingdom, and safety of the Army, desired me to set down in writing, whether
by the Law of the Land, the said Ordinance did secure them from danger, as to
the matters therein mentioned? For whose satisfaction in a business wherein
the lives and fortunes of so many men were concerned, and also the Peace of the
Kingdom involved; I conceived I was bound in duty and Conscience faithfully
and truly to set down what the Law of the Land therein is; which accordingly I
have withal sincerity expressed in this following discourse.

The danger of the Army by the Law of the Land is apparent ^o all men. 25. Ed.
3. Cap. 2. 11. Ri. 2. Cap. 3. 1. Hen. 4. Cap. 10. 1. and 2. Phi. and Mary Cap.
10. 3. Pars institutes page 22. and 2 pars instituts page 47.48. and 4. pars
instituts page 23.48.29^.
It is high treason by the Law of the Land to levy war against the King, to
compass or immagine his death, or of his Queen, or of his eldest Son, to
counterfeit his money, or his great Seal. They are the words of the Law, other
treasons then are specified in that Act are declared to be no treasons until
the King and his Parliament shall declare otherwise, they are the words of the
Law.

King and Commons, King and Lords, Commons and Lords cannot declare any other
thing to be treason, then there is declared: as appears by the Lord Cook in
the places cited in the Margin: a law-booke published by the order of the House
of Commons this Parliament, as appears in the last leaf of the second part of
the institutes published likewise by their order.

The resolutions of all the Judges of England; upon the said Statute of the 25.
Ed. 3. (as appears in the said 3. part institutes Chap. 3. pars institutes
Cap. treason: page 9. and 10.12. Mr. St. John the Soliciter in his speech upon
the arraignment of the Earl of Strafford, printed by order of the House of
Commons page 7.13. 4. pars institutes, Cap. Parliament page 25. 11. Hen. 7.
Cap. 1. Stamford. lib. 2. fol 99. 18. Ed. 3. Statute at large 144. 20. Ed. 3.
Capa. 11. Ri. 2. Cap. 10. 4. pars institutes page 23.48.29. 3. pars institutes
page 22. 2. pars institutes 47.48. 1. pars institutes 195.
High Treason) have been that to imprison the King until he agree to certain
demandes is high treason to seize his Ports, Forts, Magazine for war, are
high treason: to alter the Laws is high treason.

The word King in the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. Cap. ^. must be understood of the
Kings natural person: for that person can only dye, have a wife, have a
Son, and be imprisoned.

The privilege of Parliament protects no man from treason or felony: howbeit
he be a member, much less can they protect others: Those who cannot protect
themselves, have no color to make Ordinances to protect others who are no
members.

The Statute of 11. Hen. 7. Cap. 1. does by express words free all persons who
adhere to the King.

The Army by an act of Indemnity free themselves from all those dangers, which
an Ordinance can no more do, then repeal all the Laws of the Land, the whole
and sole power by law to pardon all treasons and fellonies, being solely and
wholly in the King as is cleared by the 27. H. 8. Chap. 24. and the Law of the
Land in all times.

Having showed the danger of the Army by the Law of the Land, next consider the
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons published the 22. of May instant for their
Indemnity. By the ensuing discourse it does appear they have no Indemnity at
all thereby.

The Indemnity proposed by the Ordinance, is for any act done by the Authority
of Parliament, or for the service or benefit thereof, and that the Judges and
all other Ministers of Justice shall allow thereof.

This Ordinance cannot secure the Army for these reasons.

I. Their Judges are sworn to do Justice according to the Law of the Land:
This Ordinance is no Law of the Land, and therefore the Judges must be
forsworn men, if they obey it, and no man can believe they will perjure
themselves so palpably and visibly to the eye of the world.

II. If the Judges conceive (as they may) that the taking of other men's horses
or goods is not by the Authority of Parliament, or for the service and benefit
thereof, the soldier dies for it: Prince, case, 8. reports.
they may say to steal or robany man of his goods is not for the Parliaments
service, but against it.

III. This Ordinance is against their Ordinances which expressly prohibits
plundering, and so there is one ordinance against another, whereby their Judges
have an outlet to proceed upon the one or the other, and thereby the Army has
no manner of security.

IIII. 28. Augusti. 1642. collect of Ordinances first part 565. 592. 605.
several Ordinances. 4. pars institutes page 1. 3 pars institutes page ^2 1
pars institutes page 1. 11. Hen. 8. 3. Dier 28. Hen. 8. f. 60 12. Hen. 7.20. 1.
pars institutes 159. Princes case 8. pars reports. 1. pars institutes 109 1.
pars institutes page 110. 4. pars institutes p. 49.
This Ordinance is restrained to the Ordinance, service, or benefit of the
Parliament. The Lords and Commons make no more a Parliament by the Law of the
Land, then a body without a head makes a man, for a Parliament is a body
composed of a King their head, the Lords and Commons, and all make one body,
and that is the Parliament and none other, and the Judges may, ought, and I
believe will accordingly to their oaths proceed, as not bound at all by this
Ordinance. For it is restrained to the Ordinance of Parliament, service, or
benefit thereof, whereas the two Houses are not the Parliaments, but only
parts thereof, and by the abuse and misunderstanding of this word Parliament,
they have miserably deceived the people.

V. The word Parliament is a French word (howbeit such Assemblies were before
the Northern conquest herein are) and signifies in that language to consult
and treat: that is the sense of Parlet in the French Tongue. The writ whereby
the two Houses are assembled, which is called the writ of Summons of Parliament
at all times, and at this Parliament used, and which is the warrant, ground and
Foundation of their meeting, is for the Lords of the House of Peers, the Judges
and the Kings Council, to consult and treat with the King (that is the Parlet)
of great concernments touching, 1. The King, 2. The defense of his Kingdom, 3.
The defense of the Church of England. It cannot be a Parliament that will not
parle with the King, but keep him in prison, and not suffer him to come to
them and parle, and therefore the Law, and sense, and reason, informing every
man that this is no manner of Parliament (the King with whom they should parle,
being so restrained, that they will not parie with him) the Army has no manner
of security by this Ordinance. For their Indemnification refers to that which
is not in being, until the King be at liberty.

VI. It is more then probable, that their Judges before the last Circuit, had
instructions to the effect of this Ordinance: but they the Judges making
conscience of their oath, laid aside the said instructions, and ought and may,
and it is believed, will no more regard this Ordinance, then the said
Instructions: The common Soldiers second apology. 6 Grievances of the Army
published 15. May instant 3 Grievances of colonel Birches Regiment.
what was done the last Circuit, notwithstanding the said Instructions, the
Army well knows, touching many of their fellow Soldiers.

VII. The Houses in their first Proposition to his Majesty for a safe and
well-grounded peace sent to Newcastle, desire a pardon from His Majesty for
themselves: they who desire a pardon, cannot grant a pardon (common reason
dictates this to every man) and therefore that the army should accept an
Indemnity from them, who seek it for themselves, or should conceive it of any
manner of force, is a fancy, that no man in the whole Army, but may apprehend
that it is vain and a mere delusion.

VIII. His Majesty by his gracious Message of the 12, of this instant May, and
published two days sithence, has offered an act of oblivion, a general
pardon to all his people; this done the Law does indemnifie the Army without
all manner of scruple, for any thing that has been done: for it is an Act of
Parliament, when the King and two Houses concur, and binds all men: there is no
safety by the Ordinance, there is safety by an Act of Indemnity; and will not
reasonable men prefer that that is safe, before that which is unsafe.

IX. His Majesty by his said Letter agrees to pay the arreares of the Army; I
am sure that is a public debt, and the chiefest and the first that by the two
houses should be paid, and before any divident among themselves, for their
blood, limbs, and lives have put and kept them at rest in the power they have.
So by this concurrence of his Majesty for your indemnity, and for your arrears,
the Army have not an Ordinance, or the public Faith, but the Law of the Land
to make sure unto them their indemnity, for all acts, and for their arreares,
and therewith also bring peace to the Land.

X. The Kingdom and People generally desire these things. To such an army just
and reasonable things must not be denied, the things formerly proposed are most
just and reasonable: you may have them if you will; if you will not, you will
render this Kingdom miserable, Mr. Pyms Speech against the E. of Strafford,
page 16. 6 Consideration printed by command of the House of Commons.
wherein you will have your shares of misery: the head and the body is such an
incorporation as cannot be dissolved without the destruction of both.

I say again, it is a certain truth, this Kingdom without an Act of oblivion,
and a general pardon, and the payment of Soldiers arreares, and a meet regard
had to tender consciences will unavoydably be ruined.

24. May, 1647. DAVJD JENKINS, Prisoner in the Tower of London.

25. Edw. 3. Chap. 2. A Declaration what Offenses shall be adjudged Treason.
WHereas diverse opinions have been before this time, in what case Treason shall
be said, and in what not: The King at the request of the Lords and of the
Commons has made a Declaration in the manner as hereafter follows: That is
to say, When a man does compass, or imagine the death of our Lord the King, or
of our Lady the Queen. or of their eldest Son and Heir: or if a man d^e
violate the Kings companion, or the Kings eldest daughter unmarryed, or the
wife of the Kings eldest son and heir: or if a man do levy war against the
Lord our King in his Realm, or be adherent to the Kings enemies in his Realm,
giving to them aid and comfort in the Realm, or elsewhere, and thereof be
probably attainted of open deed by people of their condition; And if a man
counterfeit the Kings great or privy Seal, or his Money: and if a man bring
f^lse money into this Realm, counterfeit to the money of England* and the
money called Lusburgh, or other like to the said money of England, etc.

11. Hen. 7. Cap. 1. None that shall attend upon the King, and do him true
service, shall be attainted, or forfeit any thing.
THe King our Sovereign Lord calling to his remembrance the duty of allegiance
of his Subjects of this his Realm, and that they by reason of the same are
bound to serve their Prince and Sover. Lord for the time being in his wars, for
the defense of Him and the Land, against every rebellion power and might
raised, reared against him, and with him to enter and abide in service in
battle, if case so require, and that for the same service what fortune ever
fall by chance in the same battle against the mind and will of the Prince (as
in this Land sometime passed has been seen) that it is not reasonable, but
against all laws, reason and good conscience, that the said Subjects going
with their Sovereign Lord in wars, attending upon him in his person, or being
in other places by his commandment within this Land or without, any thing
should lose or forfeit, for doing their duty or service of Allegiance. It be
therefore ordained, enacted, and established by the King our Sovereign Lord,
by the advice and assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons
in this present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that from
henceforth no manner of person or persons whatsoever he or they be, that attend
upon the King and Sovereign Lord of this Land for the time being, in his
person, and do him true and faithful service of allegiance in the same, or be
in other places by his commandment in his wars, within this Land or without,
that for the said deed and true duty of allegiance he or they be in no wise
conviet or attaint of high treason, nor of other offenses for tha^ cause, by
act of Parliament, or otherwise by any process of Law, whereby he or any of
them shall lose or forfeit life, lands, tenements, rents, possessions,
hereditaments, goods, chattels, or any other things but to be for that deed and
service utterly discharged of any vexation, trouble, or loss. And if any act
or acts, or other process of the Law hereafter thereupon for the same, happen
to be made contrary to this Ordinance, that then that act or acts, or other
process of the Law, whatsoever they shall be, stand and be utterly void.
Provided always, that no person or persons shall take any benefit or advantage
by this Act, which shall hereafter decline from his or their said allegiance.

Cap. 24. In the Statute of 27. H. 8. I^ is enacted, that no person or persons
of what estate or degree soever they be of, shall have any power or authority
to pardon or remit any treason, murders, manslaughters, or any kind of
Fellonies, etc. but that the K. shall have the sole and whole power and
authority thereof united and knit to the Imperial Crown, as of right it
appertains, etc. And in the same it is enacted further, that none shall have
power, of what estate, degree, or condition soever they be, to make Justices of
Air, Justices of Assize, Justices of the Peace, etc. bu^ all such Officers and
Minister shall be made by Letters Pattents under the Kings great Seal in the
name and by the authority of the King and his Heire^ and Successors Kings of
this Realm.

In the first year of Queen Mary, and the first Chapter, It is enacted by the
Queen, with the consent of the Lords and Gommons, That no deed, or offense by
Act of Parliament, made treason, shall be taken, deemed, or adjudged to be
high treason, but only such as be declared and expressed to be treason by the
Act of Parliament, made 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. before mentioned.

FINIS.

