A SERMON Preached at MARY ALDERMANBURY, ON The 5. Day of NOVEMBER, 1651.

Being a Day set apart in remembrance of that Great Deliverance from the
Gunpowder Treason.

By WILLIAM JENKINS, sometimes Minister of Christ-Church London, and late
Prisoner in the Tower.

Being the first Sermon he Preached since his Releasement.

Phil. 2.21. For me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain.

1 Cor. 6.20. For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your
body, and in your spirit, which are Gods.

S. Chris. Homil. 5. in Ep. ad Romans In having nothing, I have all things,
because I have Christ; having therefore all things in him, I seek no other
Reward, for he is the Universal Reward.

Published by special Authority.

London, Printed by R. Wood, for G. Horton, 1651.

A Sermon preached by Mr. JENKINS at Mary Aldermanbury: being the first Sermon
he preached since his Releasement from the Tower of London.
DEUTERONOMY. 32. VERSE. 10. Later part of the Verse. He found him in a desert Land;
and in the waste howling Wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he
kept him as the apple of his eye.


MOses that man of God, being about to leave the World, bestows his Legacies on
his friends that were about him; and it is a blessed thing indeed, when we come
to die, to have that liberty of Heart and Spirit, that we may be benefactors to
others, and not to have Oil only for our own Lamps, but to have some also for
our friends. The Song that Moses here made was for to engage the people of God
more strongly and firmly unto God; for those men that are unprofitable persons
they dye whilst they live; but the children of God that live to God, live when
they dye; nay they live after Death. There are in this Text three things
considerable.

First, The great proness and readiness of the people of God, to apostatize
from him on all occasions; as you may see at large in the six first verses of
this Chapter.

Secondly, By way of ingageing them to stedfastness to God: he not only tells
them of the proness of their hearts to fall away from God, but shows them also
the goodness of God in keeping and preserving them from apostatizing from him
in the next nine verses, Deuteronomy. 32.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

Thirdly, He also lays down the Denunciation of the Judgments of God against
those that do apostatize from him, in the following part of the Chapter.

I shall speak of the second thing, and that is the goodness of God to his
Israel, which he sets out several ways, but more especially in the Text, which
is two ways.

First, His directing (...).

Secondly, His protecting Goodness to his people. 1 His directing Goodness, he
hedgeth them about, he keeps them, and instructs them, says the spirit of
God, it is most properly understood, Gods hedging them about in all their
journeys, and occasions, he is a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by night to
guide them, he is their God and Guide. 2 God instructed them, and that two
ways.

First, he taught them to see the wickedness of their own hearts, by the
goodness of his ways; he watered them and gave them water out of the Rook, and
gave them bread from Heaven.

Secondly, He instructed them in the Laws of God in the Wilderness, as it is
said, There was none like Jacob who had all the Statutes of God.

Thirdly, The Spirit of God does not set out his goodness to his people by
directing them only, but by protecting them also; as in the later part of the
Text which I shall principally insist on at this time.

First, for explication, out of which, I shall draw some proper inferences for
your own benefit. 1 He kept them as the apple of his eye: Here you may see the
great love and goodness of God in preserving his people, as you may see in that
devouring Wilderness which the Israelites were in, where the red Sea was before
them, and Pharaoh with an Army behind them, and so many furious Beasts in the
Wilderness round about them, ready to devour them; yet their God preserved
them, and kept them as tender as the Apple of his eye.

Now for application, there are three things.

First, Why the Church of God may be compared to the Apple of his eye.

Secondly, Why does the care of God extend it self to Israel, as the care of
the Apple of the eye.

3 God will express his care to Israel, as men do express care to the Apple of
their eye.

First, The Church of God may be compared to the Apple of the eye.

First, Because of its meanness and small esteem it has in the World; so the
Apple of the eye is the smallest part, and of as little esteem as any part of
the whole body: What? the Apple of the eye? that is a very mean part indeed; and
the Apple of the eye by reason of its smallness, is called in the Hebrew, the
little man in the eye.

Secondly, The Church of God is final in its own account, it accounts of it
self but lowly, for there is no high self-advancing soul enters into the
Kingdom of God.

1. It Is small and low in the account of wicked men, nay of the godly men
themselves, it is small also in comparison of the few that go to Heaven, and the
number that run headlong to Hell, there goes but here one and there one, but
one of a Family, and two of a Tribe, but there are many that run into the Gulf
of everlasting perdition.

2. It Is mean in regard of its blackness; for it is continually in mourning, and
it is black and black all over with natural corruption, and black with original
impurity, and black with actual Rebellion against God, and black with the
adversity of its condition here, as well as in regard of its disposition, by
reason of persecution: this is the perpetual habit and condition of the Church
of God, as long as it is on this side Christ; it is called Nigerrimus occulus
sicculus, as long as she is without her Savior, she is defiled with much
corruption, and will never lay off her mourning apparel, till she arrives at
the beauty of Eternity.

Thirdly, the apple of the eye, it is mean by reason of the hiding of it felf,
it is not always seen: so the Church of God is not always visible by reason of
its external condition or prosperity, as the goodness of God to his enemies is
no token of their being a true Church, so neither are the corrections of God to
his people any token of Gods anger against his Church.

And the people of God are resembled to the Apple of the eye.

1. In regard of their not appearing in themselves to others, their life is hid
in God, but when he who is their life shall appear, then shall they also appear
with him in glory, they are separated from the world, as the grane is separated
from the chafe.

Secondly, there is a resemblance, between the Apple of the eye, and the
Church, in regard of the receptivity of light for the whole Body, the light of
the body is the eye, it directs the whole man, it keeps him from stumbling and
falling, and by that he sees to do the work which he has; The Church of God is
the Lanthorn and Candle of Gods Ordinances, its the pillar of truth, as it is
there called, because it holds forth a pillar whereon God is pleased to hang on
the Proclamation of his truth, in which he shows his word unto Jacob, his
Statutes and his Judgments to Israel: All the world beside sits in darkness,
and therefore may well be filled with violence.

Thirdly, in regard of its tenderness and weakness: what more tender then the
Apple of the eye? do but touch it, and it hurts it; yet you see such things as
are most tender are most fruitful; sheep are very weak, let but one Wolf in
amongst them, and he will devour many, yet they are very fruitful; so worms
are very weak and contemptible Creatures, though there be thousands of them
killed, yet still there are abundance: though they are contemptible and weak,
yet they are increasing creatures. So the people of God, though they are weak
and undervalued, yet they are an increasing people, and shall not be destroyed,
because all their strength is in another. Fourthly, There is a resemblance
between the Apple of the eye, and the People of God, in regard of the dearnesse
and care a man has of the Apple of his eye; there is no part of the body so
dear to a man as that; he had rather lose any limb of the body then sustain one
prick with a pin in the eye. And indeed so are the Churches of God dear and
precious in the sight of Christ, he has a great care over them further says
he, Of all those thou have given me, I have not lost one. The People of God are
very dear to him. Sampson when he lost his eyes, it made him desire God that he
might be avenged of the Philistines; And Sampson called unto the Lord and said,
O Lord God remember me I pray thee, and strengthen me only this once, O God,
that I may be once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes. God will not
suffer his people to be wronged. 2 Wherein is Gods care to his Church, expressed
as men express care to the Apple of their eyes, in these following
Considerations.

First, His Cura protectionis, his care of protecting them, is manifested to
his Church and People, as the care of man's protection to the Apple of his eye;
He watches and keeps Israel which neither slumbers nor sleeps. There is a
two fold Gift that God bestows on the eye, which likewise may be said he
bestows on his Church.

First, Inward protection. Secondly, Outward protection and more Formal.

First, Inward protection God bestows on the eye, which are of diverse sorts,
and do much preserve the eye. So God bestows inward protection, which is
strength of heart to bear their afflictions; I can do all things through Christ
that strengthens me, says the Apostle: and again Strengthened with all might
according to his glorious power unto all patience and long suffering with
joyfulness; this is inward protection when being weak we are made strong.

Secondly, God gives the eye Outward protection, which may be also said to be
given to his people, and that in several respects. First, In regard of the Eye
lid, and the hairs of it, which defends it, and keeps it from danger. Secondly,
Eye brow: so also there is a kind of Trench to take in the water, that it may
not offend it. Thirdly, The Arms to be lifted up to defend it, and to apply a
remedy to it. So first, Sometimes God is as the eye lid to the eye, he warns
his people of dangers to come, that so they touch not his Church or people.
Secondly, When dangers do fall on his Church he protects them so, that they do
not break them in pieces, it may be they bruise them a little, as the eye brow
is black and blew, but it touches not the Apple of the eye. Thirdly, Sometimes
God gives his people Hands and Arms to defend them against the enemies of his
Church.

Secondly, In regard of his care of protecting his people, and compassion to
them, he is as tender of them as a mother is of her sucking child. Can a woman
forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her
womb; yea she may forget, yet will I not forget thee, says the Lord: and
again, In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence
saved them in his love and in his pity, he redeemed them, and he bare them, and
he carried them all the days of old. It is between God and his Church as
between two Lute. strings that are tuned one to another, no sooner one is
struck but the other trembles: Such a Sympathy there is between Christ and his
people, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, says our Savior? and the
children of God will be so when their brethen are persecuted and affli^^^.

Thirdly, In regard of a Senative and healing care God has of people, whereby
he labors to heal the wounds of his people: Come let us return unto the Lord,
for he has torn, and he will heal, he has smitten, and he will bind us up. If
there lie any wounds in thy body, or in thy estate, or in thy name, or in thy
spirit, God will pour Oil into thy wounds, and will heal and recover thee. 4
There is a vindicating care in God to his people; he will wound those that
wound his Church: As in the old Law, there was taken an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth; so now, God will have a retalliation of punishment. And
although he forbear long, yet he will avenge himself on the enemies of his
Church; and the longer he stays, the more use he requires, For he that touches
you, touches the Apple of his eye: as if he should have said, he that touches
my people, had as good put out his own eye, he does but make a halter for his
own neck, he does not only that which is a vain thing, but he shoots up arrows
against heaven, and they fall down upon his own head. Thirdly, Why GOD
expresses such great care to his people, as men express care to the Apple of
their eye, here is three things to be considered,

First, Consider what the Apple of the eye is in it self.

Secondly, Consider what other things are to the Apple of the eye.

Thirdly, Consider, what the Apple of the eye is to God.

1 What is it in it self, it is an exceeding weak and low thing, not able to
endure a blow, it is very tender. So the people of God are in themselves very
weak and low, and when none are able to do good for them, then God arises and
appears to help them: When God sees the Oppression of the poor and needy, then
will he arise, and set them at liberty, says the Psalmist; and in another
place, Who remembrest us in our low estate for thy Mercy endures for ever. As
it is with a Ball, the higher it arises, the harder it is stricken; so the
higher the Enemies of God act against his People and Church, the harder will
their punishment be: God will defend them.

Secondly, What other things are to the Apple of the eye, they are annoyance to
it, let but the least sand that is get into the eye, and it troubles and hurts
it, or never so small a peble stone touch the eye, and it offends it; nay, the
very wind offends it if it blows but into it, and the Sun it self is a great
annoyance to it. So the Devil, that great enemy of Gods Church, is continually
seeking ways and means to offend Gods people, so that the Church of God is
another Mesopotamia.

Again, they are very hurtful to the people of God, their hate is implacable
against them: Arrians agree with Heathens, and Sectaries agree better with
Heathens then with the people of God, because their ends are destructive to
them; yet for all this God he keeps them as tender as the Apple of his eye; I
have interest in thee, says God. Psalm. 119. v. 94. thou art mine, and I am
thine; we are his by Election, he has elected us to all eternity; we are his
by donation also, God has given us to him; we are his too by purchase, he has
laid down the price of the richest Pearl, John 7.6. he has laid down his
dearest Blood for his people, he has bought them with a price; and we are his
likewise by stipulation, he has entered into Covenant for to protect and defend
us, Ezekiel. 16.6. and protection (you know) draws Legions after one.

Lastly, we are his in regard of habitation, and also in point of
participation, you know a man regards his own, and cares not for another; so
if a woman see another woman's child crying, or tumbling in the dirt, why (says
she) that is none of my child, mine is in mine arms, she does not at all regard
it: So say some, it is very strange that God should in the Scripture, Genesis 31.
set down the story of Jacob, a poor countryman, that he had a few ewes and
lambs, ring-streaked and spotted, and to take no notice of the actions of the
great Emperors of the world, this seems very strange to some, but this shows
the great love and estimation he bears to his own people. Thus much shall serve
for explication. Secondly, For Information.

First, to take notice of the great malice of the enemies of God, and
adversaries of Chist, that they will be content with nothing but the Apple of
Gods eye, which is his people, and by how much the more they bear the image of
their Father in their faces, so much the more vehemently do wicked men hate
them, as it is with a Traitor, that is escaped out of the Country where he
committed the Treason; yet if they can but get his picture they burn it, so the
enemies of Christ, rend and tear his Church and People, or any that are like
them.

Secondly, Herein you may see the great Patience of God in enduring and
suffering to have his tender eye plucked at, but indeed though it be strange to
us, yet he manifests himself to to be as great a God in sparing the enemies
of his Church as in punishing them, for none but God could keep their hands
from them. But he is God and not Man, therefore shall the seed of the Serpent
be destroyed: we think it tedious to let our enemies ride on our backs a few
years, but consider the year of recompense is to come, his forbearance is no
part of payment, God he is the greatest Martyr in the world, he suffers
continually in regard of the similitude which is between him and his Members,
should he but give one slip of hand, they would fall into hell yet he upholds
them, he causes the Sun to shine on the just and on the unjust, he lets the
rain water their habitations. Yet this is no argument of his love to them,
therefore let us submit our selves to the good will and pleasure of God.

Thirdly, Another reason why God suffers his Church and people to be so weak
is; because his care may be the more seen in protecting them, and delivering
them, that it may be seen to be done by the power of God and not of Man.

Fourthly, God is wonderfully provoked by his people, when he suffers his eye
to be pulled out by wicked men. Consider therefore if thy eye, has not been a
wanton and a proud eye, if it had not God would never have done so. If one drop
of Gall could possibly make a stream of honey bitter and loathsome: So one sin
is enough to make God very angry with his people. Oh! it is a very vile thing of
his people to sin against him; he will chastise them with the Sword and Rod of
Man.

Fifthly, Hereby you may see the great misery of those that have no shelter to
help them: men that have no interest in God, he casts them off from his care;
he has as great a care of the Devils, he casts them off by six and sevens: But
God bestows a gracious preservation to his people, he keeps them to his
everlasting Kingdom. Having promise of the life that now is, and that which is
to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. The wicked they are preserved too: but how? as men are
kept in prison till the day of execution come. Think of this I beseech you that
have no interest in God, that he takes no care of you: A woman when she sees
another child crying, takes no care as long as she sees her own quiet in her
arms. And so a man is not much taken with the hearing of a fire that happens
some 20 miles off, so long as his own house is free, he regards not another
man's. So its with God, They are none of my people (says he) let them go on:
Gods Mercies to the Wicked are avenging Mercies: Thus much shall serve for
Information.

Secondly, Now for Exhortation, several lessons:

First, by way of Duty: If the people of God be as dear to him as the apple of
his eye, then let God be as dear to you as the apple of your eye, God in his
Ordinances, God in his Ministers, God in his Servants, God in his glory. Say,
Lord he that touches these touches the apple of thine eye; not because they
are mine enemies Lord, but because they are thy enemies: Lord if thy honor be
any ways impaired, then the apple of mine eye is pricked: does any of you do
this? Do any of you lay the sufferings of Christ to heart? You should mourn and
weep at these things as if the apple of your eye were hurt: when you see God
suffer by Heresies, Blasphemies, and Profaneness, you should lay your sins also
to heart, and say; Lord, when I arise up in the morning I sin against thee, and
when I lie down I offend thee; every corruption should be as a Thorn in your
Foot, or as a Thorn in your Eye, this is a gracious temper of a truly humble
heart; 'twill say, Lord who will deliver me from this Body of sin.

Secondly, By way of Exhortation, please not your selves in your bodily
protection; do not only give God the Casket of your body, but give him thy
soul, fling it into the Arms of Christ, and commit thy soul to him as to thy
faithful Creator: Say as our Savior did: It Is a great honor for a man to be
Protector to a Kings son; but who will regard the Protectorship of a Beggars
son: give thy soul into the hands of God, he is willing to receive it, and say,
Lord, keep my soul, that my soul may not offend thee in sinning.

Thirdly, labor to bring others under the keeping of God, if he be such an
excellent Keeper; say to him: Lord keep thou my husband, keep thou my wife;
Lord, keep thou my child, keep thou my Father, keep thou my Mother: You know it
is a very sad complaint of many in the world, that they have not money where
with all to keep them; but it is a far sadder complaint not to have a God to
keep them: that is very sad indeed.

Fourthly, If God does promise to keep thee, do not leave entreating him; let
it be thy daily prayer to Christ Jesus to keep thee daily. The prodigal son
was never better then when he lived with his Father; 'twas better he thought to
be one of his Fathers servants, then to leave him; the Saints and servants of
God: their work-day is better then the sinners Holy Day.

Fifthly, for some good Directions. Let it be the chief study of the people of
God to be brought under this care of God, that he may be their Keeper. First,
be sure you be Gods, every man loves that which is his own, so does God love
his own people. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day
that I make up my fewels; and I will spare them, as a man spares his own son
that serves him. We must not be Gods only in a visible profession, but in a
real Implantation: I know in visible profession every one will be Gods; but
that is not enough to be his in regard of outward compliance only, but you
must be his by inward alliance, to kill sin, as well as to save your soul. If a
man have a wooden leg or a glass eye he values not a blow on his leg, or a
prick in his eye: So a man must not be visibly Christ's only, but must change
his nature, and be at union with him, and he must take Christ for his Savior
and Lord, he must be Christ's own if he expect mercy by him. Secondly, Be sure
that you be weak in your own esteem, the apple of the eye is weak, therefore
there is the eyelid to defend it from harm: self-diffidence is self-downfall; it
is the humble Christian that lies down in his own apprehension that stands
before God longest.

Thirdly, Be wary of all places and occasions that may hurt you, for when you
go into the way of temptation and sin, you do put your self out of Gods
protection, it is neither Gods way nor thy way.

Fourthly, Labor to rest quietly in thy protection, confide there: They
trusted in the Lord, therefore he defended them, the people of God must depend
on him in troublesome times, and then they will never be in trouble, they must
commit their souls to God, as into the hands of a faithful Keeper; and then the
greatest hurt their enemies can do to them will prove their greatest good,
though they may take away your head, yet they cannot take away your heart.

Last of all, rest on God. And there rest until his wrath be over. I coulst
here make a Sermon only of the deliverances God has vouchsafed us of this
Kingdom. And I could show you how we were once as the Apple of Gods Eye, in
weakness and blackness, and in having dangerous Enemies, and they many and
hurtful; and how God has been pleased to bestow on us his protecting care,
his compassionate care, his vindicating care: For all which let us give God the
glory of our praises, praise him with your tongue, praise him with your hearts,
praise him with your lips. God says, the Lions shall die for hunger, but Gods
people shall not want: therefore let us not neglect the mercies of God, and
regard every light affliction; let us rejoice in the sight of God, and bless
and praise his name for all his mercies, it is not with the Devils good will
that we have another fifth of November; for as heretofore he labored to
destroy us by the Papists, so now he does his endeavor to do it by Heresies,
and filthy blasphemies against the name of God, but the praises of his people
are the tributes which God expects: I say, again let us praise God with our
Tongues, Hands and Hearts, Let the praises of God be seen in our conversing on
what God has done for us.

An Apology to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
Entering into a serious consideration of publishing this Sermon, and
considering with my self, the great benefit that may redound to the Church and
people of God by it, and supposing that the Author thereof would not publish
it, I have adventured to make it public; for by this means, that which was
delivered then only to a few, by the publishing of it, Multitudes may be built
up to a higher degree, of stedfastness and resolution in God, who has such a
tender fatherly care over his people, and indeed it is very useful for these
backsliding times wherein we live, where it is so common a thing, for men to
fall off from Gods care and protection, and to rest wholly in the strength of
men. And although God does hold forth himself so comfortably in his holy word,
unto his people, that he will be their God and guide, to direct and protect
them in all their ways, and does promise them, (as is shown in this portion of
Scripture, which is here handled) to be their instructor and protector, and
will keep them as tender as the apple of his eye: yet to ^u^ shame be it
spoken, we are so apt to apostatize from God, that we set light by his Fatherly
tenders and proffers unto us. And indeed one of the chiefest ends and purposes
in making this Sermon public was, that both thou and I, and all the people of
God, may so read and make use of this Sermon, that we may see plainly, that too
too common error of most men, in falling off from the protection of God, who
is so loving to us, and that we may learn to rest with confidence (in him, and
in him only) of his protection in all our adversities, and I hope that many of
the Generation of those that seek Gods face, and favor here on earth shall
find this Sermon, if rightly used, some help to keep them steadfast to God; you
know that many and wonderful have the mercies of God been in preserving his
Church and people, as he has done by preserving us from that hellish
Powder Plot, besides many other mercies and deliverances he has bestowed on
us, at sundry other times. O then let us not forget these his deliverances
bestowed on us, let them not be bestowed in vain, but labor to requite these
his loving kindnesses, and labor to abound more and more in every work toward
God. In this short Sermon you may find many comforts, if you live in dangerous
places, or perseeuting times, here is great comfort for you, God still keeps
you as the Apple of his eye: here you may see the danger thou runnest into by
apostatizing from God. To be short, this Sermon affords variety of comfort, you
may see also the protecting, directing, compassing, and preserving care God
has of his people, whereby you may be encouraged to a more cheerful
dependence on him. Reader, let me desire thee to read it over, and meditate
seriously on what thou read, and thou may reap benefit by it, frustrate
not the Authors intent, who when he preached it intended the benefit of his
Hearers, and give God the glory of all; And whereas diverse had a desire to
peruse it, but complained it was too dear, for their sakes I have published
this sheet; desiring thee to pass by the errors in it, and attribute them to
the Printers, and to me, and not any way to the reverend Author; and in so
doing, you shall obliege him unto you on the like occasion, who esteems
himself to be a Servant, to the Servants of God, in Christ Jesus,

G. H.

FINIS.

