A Ministers Mite: Cast into the stock of a weak MEMORY: HELPED BY RULES AND
Experiments.

With a winter Night school tutoring Discourse to Generous Youth.

LONDON, Printed by T.H. and are to be sold by John Saywell, at the Greyhound
in Little Britain 1650.

The Book to the Buyer.
I Do not promise here for some few ponce,
In Schools of Knowledge, thou shals so commence
To be Pansophos by this little book,
Gnostick, or Beauclarke, if on it thou look.
As with a Magazine and Treasury
To furnish thy discourse and memory;
I no Philantist am, Narcizzide else.
So far to be conceited of my self,
As though my Crows were Swans, my mental issues,
Phoebus or Pallas darlings cloathd in Tissues;
Yet confidently this I do aver,
Such Rules and Cannons here prescribed are,
That for some triple part of one poor shilling,
Thou shall have some few mites if thou beast willing,
Cast to the stock of thy memorative,
So much in knowledge and discourse to thrive
That by short practice thou shall in thy brain
Learned notions read or heard, more strong retain:
This being but a Pinace of small worth
To afraught ship ere long to be launcht forth,
The Brain-book to be called, most brains it will
With subjects sacred, secular so fill.
By the Lucubrations of Steven Hierome, Ecclesiastes Grenewichensis.
Good Reader take notice of some few Errors escaped in the Printing.

Page 17. line 23. read diverted.

Page 21. line 10. read Urine.

Page 23. line 15. read Vinum.

A Ministers Mite: Cast into the stock of a weak Memory: Helped by Rules and
experiments. With a winter nights school tutoring discourse to generous youth.
Preceptor. COme near, my best of Pupills, the flower of my School; as besides
your public Lectures have dictated unto you many things in private, for your
profit in hearing and reading, by remembering; your ear more then your eye,
being the sense of Knowledge: so as a trial of your wit to attain, and memory
to retain, what I lately Dialoguized with you; now play the pretty talking
Echo, and before your father and your friends, resonate our discussions: and
wherein your memory is short, (like some Minister of much reading in his Pulpit)
read the rest in your Notes.


Puer I thank you Sir, that I am so much in your Books, as to afford me the
benefit of my Book with Notes: I note it as a special favor and amongst the
rest of my studies, I will study to deserve it.


Pr. Not to pluck the least feather out of the wings of Time, what thing has
perfection, but not period, in Unity?


Pu. God, ens ontium, the thing of things, the Alpha and Omega, beginning of
beginnings, and end without end, an Unity of Essence in a Trinity of Persons,
as one and the same light, in the Sun, Moon, and Stars; one and the same
fire in three kindled sticks, one and the same flame in three lighted candles,
one soul in man in three faculties; so three persons in one God: three in one,
a Trinity of persons, in an unity of Essence, in Triune Jehovah Elohim.


Pr. What things are sole and alone without Dualls or Pluralls, besides this
Triune God?


Pu. One humane nature, one divine nature, making one Messiah, (as body and
soul make one man) one sole-justifying faith, one Christ, one immortal spirit
in man, one true Church of Saints militant in earth, one of saints and spirits
triumphant in Heaven, one Arc in the Sanctuary, one of Noah, (types of one
Church) one sun, one moon, one way, one truth, one life, one salvation, one
rock to build on, one Phaenix writ on, one Baptism to believers, (not to be
reiterated in Cyprians error) and one Bible to be believed and rested on, as
the rest and touchstone of all our facts and faith; without building on the
sands of Popes erring, Councels, Fathers, Superstitions, and Traditions bogging
and sinking thousands of souls into that bottomless pit which sends forth
Locusts of Jesuits, Familists, new Donatists, Enthusiasts, Swinckfeldians, and
all Hell hatched Heretics.


Pr. In what things for use may a wise modest, and moderate man, terminate and
limit his will and desire in one?


Pu. In the prime place, in one God, crushing (as the Arc did Dagon) all
Paganish, Turkish, and Popish deities: one Christ weighing down to hell, all
old and new Antichrists, one Orthodoxe truth dissolving all errors and
heresies, as the sun mists and clouds.


Pr. And what more?


Pu. One good horse is enough for a journey by Land, one stauncht ship, as a
Seahorse for the Sea, one good Pilot for a ship, one Pastor for my soul, one
Physician for my body, a Tutor for my learning, a book for my present reading.


Pr. What book should that be, as your choice delight besides the Bible? Such
as Homer was to Alexander, Tertultian to Cyprian, Quintus Curtius to Alphonsus,
and Livie to Prontisperge.


Pu. In History, as you told me, to be confined unto one book it should be
Pliny, or Diodovus Siculus, or Gesner, or all epomitizing Zuinglius. In
Morality, Plutarchs Ethics, Picolomineus, in positive Divinity, Calvin's
Institutions, or Polanus Syntagme, or the works of Zanchy, or Gerauld: for
Logic, Keckerman or Downam on Ramus: for Rhetoric Vossius, for common places,
Peter Martyr, or Aretius, or Musculus: for Philosophy, Zabarell: for witty
passages the French Stevens his translated World of Wonders, or Boccace his
Decamerou, or the Queen of Navarres Novells, or the Be Hive of the Romish
Church.


Pr. What Catechismes did I tell you, were best to acquaint you with the
Fundamentalls of Religion?


Pu. Vrsinus and Bastingius Catechismes, which now speak English: that of Mr.
Ball, and the Lancashire Ministers, purposely compiled for Families: those for
brevity compiled by Mr. Perkins, Egerton, Burton, chiesly the large Body of
Divinity, by the learned Primate, deserving prime place: and next to it in our
tongue, the Questions and Answers of Dr Babington, on the Creed, Lords Prayer,
and Ten Commandments.


Pr. What parents trained up their children and families in the Rudiments of
Religion in private, as Origin, and Didimus Alexandrinus in Alexandria, Vrsinus
in Belgia, and others in public.


Pu. Adam trained so his sacrificing Abel, Abraham his Isaac, his soldiers and
servants, Joshua his household, David his, Job his, Buthshebah her Solomon,
Helena her Constantine, Macrina her nurse-child St. Basil, Monicah her
Augustine, Auna her consecrated Samuel, Euuice and Lois good Timothy, with
others, who prooved excellent instruments of Gods glory, in their times and
great comforts to their Parents.


Pr. What is the heart and mind of a Child nakedly in it self considered?


Pu. Its white paper, fit to take any writing, soft wax fit for any impression,
tabula vasa, a plain board or stone fit for any carving or sculpture, a new
vessel fit for any seasoning, with bad tar and smelling oils, or sweet
wines, and white Cloth fit for any color or tincture in dying.


Pr. But to reflex a little further on your Unities, what only one may content
a wise man, as a Sculler without a fellow?


Pu. One Caesar in Rome, one General in a Camp, as one Master Be in a Hive,
one Master in a house, one friend like Jouathan, Socrates or Crates the
Thebane, to converse with, one Plato in stead of all, one Cato to consult with,
one Fedus Achates to walk with, one wise Abigail, or patient Grizel, or
Willobeyes Avisa, or Overburies Wife, described to live with, and that Wife to
have but one good tongue to talk with; many tongues of Dutch, French, Spanish,
Italian, Latin, in a woman, being suspicious to be all good, often breeding a
Babels confusion.


Pr. What is the first thing that lives in Man?


Pu. His heart, which is also said to be the last that dies, as in some women
the tongue is the last which moves, aut metiuntur Poetae.


Pr. What is the tamer of all shrewes?


Pu. Not words nor swords, nor blows, which quiet a Zantippe, as stones thrown
at an angry dog, or red colors, Turkey cocks and Unicornes, but Morpheus or
Mors, death or deadly sleep, which makes a shrew a sheep, a sounding vowell, as
silent as a Turkish mute.


Pr. What creatures begin their works in the midst?


Pu. All Birds, and Swallows their nests, the silk worms their clewes, the
bees their honey-combes, and the spiders their webs, as in generation God first
framed the heart in the midst of man, and in regeneration infuseth grace into
that midst as was seen in the Jews pricked and repentant, and in the
Ethiopian Eunuch, believing first in their hearts, ere grace was known and
shown in their lives, Romans 10. v. 10.


Pr. What is it for mere Legal Preachers to preach and press duties to be
done, and sins to be left and loathed, to carnal Auditors, ere ever they
know or feel the power of Faith, or Evangelicall Repentance, the roots of
duties, and the conque^^rs of corruptions, Heb. 11.6. John 15.1.2.3.4. 1. John
5.4


Pu. This is to require an apple ere there be an ingrafted tree, an egg where
there is no hen, breathing where there is no soul, yea to expect sucking and
crying in a dead child, Ephesians. 2.1. Music in Organ-pipes, where be no blowing
bellows, feeling in a wooden leg, and an eye of glass, where there is no
participation of vital and animal spirits, and to look for fruit of dead
trees, dried up, cut down, and withered, this merely sets the cart before the
horse, the effect before the cause, and will needs bring forth a son to God,
to believing Abraham, Gal. 3.7. and a daughter to Sarah, ere there be any
mother, or any regenerating immortal seed, 1. Pet. 1.21. in which most of our
strict stearne Legal and austere Ministers, who neither experimentally know
Christ, nor how to reveal him to others, go in a tract to convert souls, as
if they should walk with their heads downward, and heels upward, or rear up
a firm house without a foundation, urging moral duties to unbeleevers, which
honest Pagans Jews and Turks have done, and may do to no purpose without a
Christ, Acts 4.12. Matthew. 15.13. Acts 10.43.


Pr. What is the best knowledge in a Preacher?


Pu. As in a Physician that which is experimental, drawing that which he
preaches and presses to others, as the spider her webs, and the silkeworme
her clew, out of the bowels of his own experience, without which he talks as a
Parret by rote, connes by heart his part and his Quew, like a Player, patcheth
up as a Taylour his shreds, what he can scrape and snap from Polyanthea,
Granateusis his Silva, and every Author; and often as the echo of Mr. Perkins,
Smith, Bisiald, Taylour, Bayne, Greenham, Dike, Deering, repeats as good
Sermons, or homely Homelies, as any he can buy for money.


Pr. What Is the best Emblem of a Preacher?


Pu. A Cock, first clapping his wings to awaken himself, then crowing to
awaken others; like that Cock which preached Christ's rehearsal Sermon to
Peter, peceant and penitent.


Pr. What Is the best Emblem of a good Hearer?


Pu. First, to be as swift to hear, as slow to speak, and as studious to
meditate, as the Scholars of Pythagoras, or Thomas Aquinas (of a long time
called Bos mutus, a dumb Ox, for his silent Soliloquies) as is said of young
Nightingales, that they sit solitarily on boughs, and repeat by themselves,
what notes and tones they hear from the old ones. Camerarius reports the like
of Elephants, musing on their Masters lessons, directing their dancings on hard
stones, to the sound of music.


Pr. What helps did I prescribe you for Memory, with the reasons that most
remember Sermons no better?


Pu. First, want of attention, their wandering eyes or walking tongues carrying
their hearts a woolgathering from their ears, whereas a History, Music, and
Sermons, should have strict attention, Luke 4.20 21.

Secondly, the seed of the word is choked with the thorns of carking cares,
Luke 8.7. or drowned in the bogges and quags of lusts, or washed out of their
minds with the lutulent waters of sensual thoughts, or overgrowne with weeds
of wrath, James 1.21.

Thirdly, one nail drives out another; the rusty nail of the world, the
golden nail of the word; carnal discourses causing forgetting of that in the
Churchyard, which they got in the Church: their streams turned into other
torrents, makes their hearts so dry, their lives so barren and their brains so
shallow.

Fourthly, want of love to the word: for had a man as many children, as Ahab
and Prianus, a schoolmaster as many scholars as Jo. Scotus, Erigona, or
Orbilius once, or Ramus, they would be remembered, because all are loved; it
being no marvel, that Cynus, Mitloridates, and Scipio, remembered their
soldiers names so well, because their hearts were upon them, and they loved
them as well as Alexander and Caesar their soldiers, whom they called their
Commilitones, fellow soldiers.

Fisthly, want of compunction, because their hearts are not pricked, nor their
consciences wounded in hearing, nor cut with the sword of the spirit, Heb.
4.12. Jer. 22.29. more then the Smiths Anvile or the scales of a Dragon, harder
for beating and hammering, being unmelted with the fire, their hearts take no
print; for a man remembers where, when, and how, he was wounded, by pike,
sword, or pistol, all the days of his life.

Sixthly, want of practice; the soldier scarce forgetting the postures he has
learned to practice.

Seventhly, there is often most fault in Preachers, 1. either in their dull and
dead preaching, without light, life, or power, which charms them asleep, as
Mercuries pipe did Argus; 2 or stupifies them as Henbane does payned teeth. 3.
Or claws them like Tigers to a tamenesle, 4. or sowes pillows under their
elbowes for the drowsy naps of security, 5. or by their immethodicall luxate
and unoynted preaching, they lose themselves and hearers, method being the
mother of Memory: 6. or by too high and sublime preaching, they entangle their
hearers in intricate Laborinths and Meanders, out of which they cannot unwinde
themselves: 7. or their truantly reading their Sermons, like words from a faint
sick man, making no impression: in egregious folly calling on their hearers to
remember their Sermons, when they cannot remember them themselves: or lastly,
the fowls of the air pick up the uncovered seeds, as soon as they be sown:
and therefore as when gold and plate is stolen, men cry Thieves, thieves, those
who presently forget what they hear, may cry, the Devil, the Devil.


Pr. These rules I did dictate unto you, as removalls of the Remoraes and
obstructions, both to youth and to years, in remembering of Sermons, and you
do well to remember them, and yet you have not repeated all.


Pu. Indeed Sir, I find what you told me, that my memory was like a Sive or a
Riddle, which leakes out the pure water, and keeps in the dirt and dross. I
can remember toys and tales, and Ballads, and bables, better then solid
matter; as weak stomachs be more filled often with wind then with good meat, and
as a child's pocket is sild with trash and pibble stones, rather then with gold
and good things. Yet now I call to mind some other Rules you prescribed to my
memory.


Pr. Tanaom aliquaudo, let us further hear them.


Pu. I must as a main help to memory, meditare of what I hear or read;
meditation chewing the cud, digesting all mental cares, and turning them in
succum and sanguinem, into blood and nutriment, Ps. 1.3. For want of
meditation, the word heard or read, takes no more impression then a serpents
way over a stone, an Eagle in the air, or a ship in the sea: like the sands
which run in an houre-glasse, out in one hour, as they run in, in another;
that running out at one ear, which comes in at another.

Secondly, you prescribed me conference, which brings much to light, as the
repercussions of steel and flint, bring forth fire, and as laying of stick to
stick, and coal to coal, both keep in fires, and as beggars every one of
them bringing several scraps, make a beggars feast, so it is when hearers meet
and confer notes, (not of Randalls Aristippus, or Aristotle, but) of Sacred
Scripture and Sermons.

Thirdly, noting and quoting (by penning) principal heads of Sermons: and
after recollecting and examining them, as the noble Bereaus did, Acts 11. is a
tried help to memory, that being most tenatiously revited and infixed, which is
done by most circumstances: one circumstance like links in a golden chain
drawing on another, pull one, the rest follow.

Fourthly, Hearts must be free from cares, griefs, sorrow, fear, boiling
anger, and all passions, perturbations, and regnant lusts, which fill the mind
as puddle waters fill the Vessels, and keep out the Rosa solis, and the true
Aqua vita of the Word, it being hard to see any face reflexed fair in a
lentulent and troubled water.

Fifthly, its both a trial of a sincere heart and love to the Word, and a
help to the memorative faculty, to give the word heard, the prime and first
place in the thoughts and cogitations of the heart. In our first morning
wakings when the mind is most cleared, and the brain least clouded, then a
heart opening to the Word, as the Marygold to the Sun, brings a great stock
to the treasury of Knowledge, and to the Magazine of Memory.

Sixthly, as usur promtos facit, use makes perfect; use legs and have legs,
the child first creeps and then goes; so use memory and have memory. Augustine
by often preaching prosited, and by prositing preached; and Miloes shoulders
not by any increased strength, but by daily, constant exercise, bore a Calfe
till it grew to a ponderous Bull. And in the Art of Memory, those young Tirees
who have begun at first to lodge but seven or eight words in a chamber, which
they ever bear as an Idea in their minds, in few days by degrees have lodged
thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty, not only words but sentences in the upper
middle, and lower places of the said chamber divided into several Continents,
and its probable that Seneca, Cyrus, Hortonsius, Portius, Latro, and our
Doctor Fuller, with others famoused for memory, attainned their perfections by
such degrees prescribed.

Seventhly, it brings no small adjument to memory, presently ere any action be
intervenient, to strike whilst the Iron is hot, and to set the Seal whilst the
Wax is soft, in writing down what ere we can remember as soon as ever it is
heard; for though writing by characters or at large be more gainefull as
communicable to others, yet it so takes away or duls the edge of affection in a
ducerted course, turning the care into a pen, that for to heat devotion its
more powerful to hear attentively, and to write what we receive retentively,
after we have pondered what we heard.

Eighthly, you told me, for remembering other Classical Authors, whether
divine or humane; it was most profitable to extract the very marrow and
quintessence of them into short Epitomes and Abridgements, as some have
abridged Calvin's Institutions, and some Master Rogers his Directories, as
Lucius Florus, Livies History.

Ninthly, some to remember some Author have transcribed him wholly, as
Demosthenes writ out Thucidides eight times.

Tenthly, some have read over an Author very often, as Cyprian did Tertullian,
and Alphonsus the Bible fourteen times, as its said in one year.

Eleaventhly, others have committed to memory whole books, or parcells of
them, as some the book of the Psalms, some younger Boys and Girls in our
Times all the Epistles of St. Paul.

Twelfthly, some have extracted out of the Bible all the Promises, as Mistress
Alice Fenuick; some all the parallel places, as Junius; some all that mainely
confute Popery, as Pelargus in his Jesuitismus, and the zealous Father of Sir
James Ware in Ireland.

Thirteenthly, others have ripened their Judgments, and strengthened their
Memories by translating Authors, as Calvin's Institutions, and his Comments on
Job, Pareus his Comments on the Revelations, Musculus and Peter Martyrs Common
places, Philemon Holland, Plutarks Lives and Morralls, Plinny, Suetonius (not
suffered to be Tranquillus) our Tapsell, Gesners History, with others, which
Plebeians read, rather then understand in our English tongue.

Fourteenthly, others have incorporated other Authors into their own styles,
and molded them into their memories by a near imitation of them, as
Theocritus in this kind imitated Hesiod, Virgil, Homer, our Laureat, Spencer,
and the Latin Lucan, Virgil, Doctor Hall, Seneca, Gesner, Pliuny, our late
Aeobanus Hessus, and our Draiton, and Daniell, Ovid, and Coquier, Lipsius in
his Political Aphorisms.

Fifteenthly, its advantageous to memory, to take the opportunity of the
morning, which is said to be Musis amica, ever a friend to the Muses; studies
and serious recollections after a full and free repast, in a dinner, chiefly
night studies being as prejudicial to the brain as to the body.

Sixteenthly, you acquainted me also with some helps in diet, as amongst the
rest such a moderate use of mine, as Paul prescribes to his Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.
and the Mother of Solomon to her Lamuel, Prove. 31. Secondly, Birds whose bloods
by reason of often motion be more pure then the waterish blood of Fishes, or
grosser bloods of Beasts. Thirdly, of Birds the wild, of Teale, Duck, Mallard,
Pheasant, Partridge, rather then the tame, though as the Friar said, who
desired but the leg of a Capon, and the wing of a Goose with the brains of a
Woodcock, neither comes amiss. Fourthly, for flesh, Veales, Muttons, Pigs,
Rabbets, and these of purer bloods, and lighter digestion then Beeves, Porkes,
Bulls, or such as dainty Dames call the grosser Butchers ware. Fifthly, of wild
Venisons, Hares, Dear, Stags, Roe-Bucks, rather those which are hunted, then
shot with Pieces and killed (as many Innocents) by clublaw. Sixthly, of all kind
of flesh, rather that which is roast, (which dries up the humidities) then what
is sodde, whose strength goes into the broth. Seventhly, the often eating of
Raisins of the Sun, Candid Ginger, Coriander prepared, Chestnuts, and all
Stypticks. Eighthly, the often mistication and clawing of white frankincense
called Olybanum, the anointing of the head, with that which is called the
Philosophers Oil, the speedy expulsion of all excrements from the brain by
the nose, from the body by the draught, or by urim, often frication and rubbing
of the head with a Scarlet or Linen cloth moderately warmed, as also the often
washing the head with the sweetest Herbs, and the feet with the decoction of
Fennel, the leaves of Laurel, and Camomile, with the use of Buglesse, how
ever it be taken. Ninthly, moderate exercise before meat as a preparative to a
supping or dining stomach, and after meat as a digestive, with washing the
hands chiefly in Rose Water, which washing though some scoff it before meat
to be Pharisaicall, though after meat Physical, yet neither before nor after
(even Fish and Oysters) may be thought slovinnicall, and intrinching on
Gorbianus and Gorbiana, he and she slovens, though indeed above all these
prescribed. Sepe recordari medicamine fortius omni.
No Paracelsians, Gallenists, supplyings
Help memory so much as Vsus Magister aerris. Morat.
exercizings.
Lectio lecta placet, decies repitita placebit,
Vsus and ars decuit, quod sapit omnis homo.
Ten times repeating, what does please being read,
Rivets all readings, in the weakest head:
With art, use, right commixt, makes rich supplies
Of what man needs to cure all maladies.



Pr. Who usually have the weakest memories?


Pu. Old men, by reason of the too much dryness, Children by reason of too
much moisture in their brains, Drunkards by too much in their bellies, which
not only rots the Livers of such wicked livers, as Raines and Mildewes rot the
Livers of Hares, Dear, Sheep, and Rabbits: But as thick fogges from an Irish
bogge, ascend from the lower Region of their bellies, to the upper Region of
their clouded and dulled brains; withal sick men by the commotions of their
spirits, and distemper of their heads; especially timorous and fearful ones,
whose heads are in their trembling hearts, and hearts in their heels, have
seldom so good memories as the sound and courageous; neither have the
melancholy in their thickened blood, and clouded spirits, so strong memories as
the sanguine in their purified bloods and spirits.


Pr. What things are obnoxious to memory, besides these we have already
discussed?


Pu. The greedy gulphing of all raw fruits, with the use of Vinegar, or Wine
aegar, is as far short of sweet Wines, Malmsie, Muscadines, Greek Wines,
Canary Sacks, and Vivium Cos, for memory, as Eringoes, and hot Drugges, are
short of cold Lettice, steeped Rue, Tobacco, and Agnus Castus, for Chastity.
Withal the too much ingurgitations of meats and drinks in our Gluttons, and
Hellicons Hogs of Epicurus his stye, drown both their minds and memories in
Hogsheads, as the Duke of Clarence once in a Butt of Sack: Much sleep also
like a Dormouse, or the Beast Colus after Rut, and the Mauritanian Asses, after
their Hemlocks stupisies the memorative faculties; so do also all meats which
are gross and of hard digestion: chiefly the immoderate use of Venus, which
dulls the brain, spends, spoils, and soyls the vital and animal spirits; and
shortens life, as we know in the Cock sparrow the quail, and other salatious
Creatures: withal no less obnoxious to memory, are all sharp vaporous
liquids from Onions, Garlicks, Mustard seed: as also our too cold and moist
Cucumbers, water Cresses, and Sorrells.


Lastly, many things accidentally hurt memory: as the corrupting of it, when
the species of things past are forgotten; as also the diminution of it, by
accidental passions, sicknesses, and diseases: or the ablation of it utterly
lost, by the wounding of the brain or some part of it: hence, besides many
brain-sicke Heretics, whose brains had need be purged, with Helibore
(chiefly our new Seekers beyond the moon for some fifth Gospel, like that
once of the Carmalites; as though the Religion of the Prophets and Apostles
were imperfect) we have some other Fantasticks, called men of cracked and crazy
brains.

Pr. Hence we have so many learned, and famoused men in Authors, quite losing
their memory, and turning as oblivious as the Ostridge which forgets her eggs
which she has hid in the sands, upon several occasions: as Bambo the King of
the Goths, by a draught of poison administered unto him by Heringius his
successor. Gregory Trapezuntius by old age forgetting all letters, both Greek,
and Latin; which was also the case of Francis Barbarus the learned Venetian,
and of Orbilius the great Gramarian, and some by a cold Palsy, as Lycosthenes,
Anno Dens 1555. who lost his memory, as Nabuchaanezzar lost his Reason for
seven years; and after recovered it: some by long sickness, as Messala
Corvinus after a long sickness forgetting his own name: as those nominated
with others are recorded more largely, by Solinus, cap. 7. Polihist Pliny, lib.
7. hist cap. 24. Sabellicus, lib. 10. cap. 9. Volaterau lib. 21. Authrop, and
Valerius, lib. 1. cap. 8.

Therefore the sum of all this is, that all hearers of the Word, all students
in humanity, and Divinity, should by frequent and fervent prayer, be
Petitioners to the Throne of Grace, to the giver of all gifts, both general
and special, common and sanctified; that he who gave wisdom to Solomon,
tongues to the Apostles, inspirations to the Prophets, a mouth unto Aaron, the
door of utterance unto Paul, eloquence to Apollo, and gifts unto men when he
ascended up unto heaven, Ephesians. 4.12. would in mercy bestow his spirit upon them,
not only to enlighten their understandings as the Sun does the air, and to
open their eyes, Acts 26.18. as he did the Disciples, Acts 24 and their hearts,
as he did Lidiaes, Acts 16. and to lead them into all Truth, Joh. 16.13. but to
strengthen their memories according to his promise, Joh. 14.26. as he did the
memories of his Disciples, Joh. 2.22. and of his Virgin Mother, who hid all his
words in her heart, Luke 2.51. without this influence of Grace on our hearings,
and readings, as the fruit of prayer, all the means for memory prescribed be
but in vain, 1 Cor. 3.6.7. and by prayer watering them, our poor prescriptions
may be blessed. Quod omen exoptat Hieronymus Ecclesiastes Greenewickensis.


Cum facilis sit inventis addere,
si quid rectius istis noveris,
Candidus imperti, si non his utere mecum.

A Winter nights School tutoring Discourse to Generous Youth.
Philologus. COme my ingenious Pupil, as I have put your Brothers wits and
memory to the test and touchstone: So to make some experience of yours to pass
the time this Winter night in the best pastime to your Parents and Friends, I
require you to repeat unto me, what you writ lately from my dictates unto you?


Puer. By the help of my Notes I hope Sir, I shall answer your Demands: for I
assure you I have not left out, nor lost any thing out of them which I heard
from you.


Ph. Then you have like most Schooleboyes tosesm in saculo all in your satchell.


Pu. No Sir, all in my Pocket, though not in my Pate.


Ph. It seems you begin betimes to pocket up a great wrong to your memory?


Pu. No Sir, I desire to allege, scripturus est, and litera scripta manet,
cum verba volaut; words are but wind, but writings are firm, Authentic, and
obligatory, paper chains being often stronger then those of Iron, in this Iron
Age full of Ire, and full of Iron.


Ph. It seems you trust more to your writings, like Scriveners, Brokers, and
Usurers, then to your wits like a Scholar: As some Preachers have their
Sermons, and some Players their Parts (which they con) more in their Notes (as
men of note and great readings) then in their hearts, trusting their books
more then their brains, in which posture, as some Mercers with their debts,
and some cold Christians with their prayers you book all; for take them from
their booke-formes which they follow, as Boys their written Coppies, and
Girls their Samplers, and you take props from hops, Crutches from Cripples,
and Oaks from Ivies.


Pu. Indeed Sir, I thought a man sandblinde might have used his Spectacles,
and a lame man his crutches, and a weak memory some Notes?


Ph. They are Notes indeed of a weak memory, but howsoever since it will be
no better, I grant you your book.


Pu. Its a great mercy Sir, in a Judge to a Prisoner, though I hope my tongue
has not broke the Jayle, nor like a Gentleman Usher gone before my wits.


Ph. You are a pretty Spark, and since you can find your tongue so soon, and
(as a womanish weapon) wield it so well, tell me why the tongue is not joined
to the heating, seeing, smelling, touching, and tasting, as a sixth sense?


Pu. Because as a Bedlam or mad man, or rather mad women, Lingua being of the
Foeminine Gender, it often runs wild Goose chase after Sir Gregory Nonsense.


Ph. But to render further your Repetition Lecture, how many eyes have you?


Pu. Not so many Sir, as Argus, or a Lamprey, only two.


Ph. How many hands have you?


Pu. Fewer then Briareus, only two.


Ph. How many feet?


Pu. Not so many as a Gnat, and the Poetizing pediculus in her hexametrizing
feet.


Ph. How many ears have you?


Pu. Though I never saw them whether they be long like Midas his ears, or
short like a Mouse, yet I am sure I have but two.


Ph. How many Tongues?


Pu. One?


Ph. Why have you two legs, two hands, two eyes, two ears, and but one
tongue?


Pu. Because one is enough, if it be a good one, two tongues being as
needless as two strings at once to a bow, two Horses for one man in a little
journey by Land, or two wooden horses by Sea.


Ph. And why besides?


Pu. Because as I have but one tongue, it should only express the thoughts of
one heart, without playing at Doublets, by Jesuiticall Equivocation doubling,
as is writ of Pope Alexander the sixth, and Caeser Borgias his Bastard son
(Machiavills patterns of his politic Prince) that the one never spoke as he
thought, the other never thought as he spoke, their words and thoughts (like
Germans lips) being nine miles a sunder.


Ph. And what more?


Pu. I have two Ears, to hear much; two eyes, to see much; two hands, to work
much; two legs, to walk much; and but one tongue to talk little, according to
the old Caution; Aude, vide, tace; si velis vivere pace: hear, see, and say the
best, if thou will live in peace and rest: let not the Warehouse of thy heart,
all to thy tongues shop impart.


Ph. To reflex a little further upon your senses: What Creature has quicker
sight than Man?


Pu. The Hawk, the Eagle, the Serpent Epidaurus, and the Lynceus, which is
said to penetrate even sollid bodies.


Ph. What Creatures exceed man in smelling.


Pu. The Dog, the Fox, the Swine, the Badger, the Puttock, the Vulture, who
will smell carrion as far off, as a thief will smell a Purse, or a wife man a
Rat, called a Knave masked in the habit of honesty.


Ph. Who exceed Man in exquisite touching?


Pu. The Spider, who feels the least touch in her Web (as a wife man feels
the least touch on his name and reputation) though some man has an exquisite
touch on a Lute and Instrument, as an artificial supply in this sense


Ph. Who exceed Man in hearing?


Pu. The Heart, the Hare, the Boar, and the Moale; yea almost every Beast and
Byrds, chiefly in these times, in which it is hard to hear any good news.


Ph. Who hear the worst?


Pu. Kings and Tyrants, such as Dionisius once, Herod, Alexander, and such as
delight like Tigers to be clawed by flatterers, who seldom or never hear the
truth told them by their Court Scycophants in private, or Ahabs Chaplains, and
Jezabels Priests in public.


Ph. Who are most blind?


Pu. Those that will not see Woods for trees; also those that like the
Pharisees, the Laodiceans, and self-conceited fools, think they see when they
are more blind then Beetles, and Moales, and those who suffer their eyes to
be put out with white and yellow dust blown into them as high as the seat of
Justice: Like some Ormondized Grandees in Ireland, who could not see Kernes and
Rebels enclosed in some Castles (as Cacus, and five Kings of Midian in their
Caves) but let them fly out, as Woodcocks in a Mist:


Ph. But who were those, who being blind saw more then those that had eyes?


Pu. Sampson, who never saw his folly with Dalilah, and the Harlot of Zoreck,
till his eyes were out.


Ph. Who else?


Pu. Mauritius and Zedekias who never saw so far into Gods justice on their
sins, as when the first was blinded by Phocas, the other by the Caldeans
vexation giving understanding, as it did to Manasses, David, Adonizebeck the
Gospels Prodigal, and many more.


Ph. And who else?


Pu. Blind Homer, blind Didimus, Alexandrinus, blind Mr. Fisher late of
Cambridge, who saw more internally then most that had eyes externally, as a
blind man cured by Christ, saw more then the occular Pharisees, John 9. and a
blind man burned in Queen Mary's time, saw more into Gods truth then bloody
Bonner, Bishop Morgan, Gardener, Friar Alphousus, and all the Sons of the
scarlet Whore.


Ph. But who saw as clearly by night as by day?


Pu. Some say Scanderbeg, Tamberlaine, and Tiberius Caesar, as though they had
the eyes of Fowmarts, Ferrits, Wolves, Foxes, and Rats, yea of Draytons Owl
(the Emblem once of an occular Courtier) who saw not only day at a little
hole, but so clear in the night in Queen Elizabeth's Time, that she needed
not Diogenes his Candle, nor the dark Lanthorn of a Faux, or our Catilinarian
Firebrands; but not to come too near to Courts nor Camps, lest Guns and
Cannons deaf us that we cannot hear, flashes and lightnings blind us that
we cannot see the truth at noone day.


Ph. To return to the Creatures, which of them in the nearest Sympathy love
the dearest?


Pu. The Olive and the Pine, the Myrtle and the Rose, the Ivy and the young
Oak amongst Plants.


Ph. Who amongst Birds?


Pu. The Doves and the Peacocks, the Felfars and Stares who feed together, and
all Birds of a Feather that flock together, as Cranes, Teales, Crows,
Wilde-Geese, and Scotch sollem Geese called Barnacles.


Ph. Which amongst the Fishes?


Pu. The Sword-fish, and the Flaylefish, who as two Dogs against a Bear,
join together to plague the Whale that is so great, the one pricking him under
his belly, the other threshing his back, as ne Hercules contra duos.


Ph. Who also?


Pu. The Sea-Lamprey, and Viper, who couple together, and the little Musculus,
who as the Whales Harbinger, goes before him to sound the depths, that he
welter not on a sand-bed, or come too near the shore.


Ph. Who amongst Beasts?


Pu. The Sheep and Dear who feed together in one Park, the little Ibis also
for a Bird, the Crocodiles Barber-Surgeon, who picks his teeth when he sleeps
with open mouth, as though he gaped for a Benefice, or some Golden Gudgeon.


Ph. Betwixt what Creatures is the greatest hatred and antipathy?


Pu. Betwixt the Elephant and the Unicorne, the Lion, the Gryphin and the
Dragon, the Crow and the Ass, the Horse and the Wolf, the Fox and the Lamb,
the Dog and the Dear, with many more who agree together like two snarling
Hounds in a couple, two Cats at a Mouse, two Wives in a house, two Beggars at a
doale, two Hawks at a Partridge, two Dogs at a Boar, two Kings at a Throne,
who seldom agree in one, more then two Corrivalls in one Office, in one Love,
in one Crown.


Ph. What Is the way to quiet Bees when they are fighting?


Pu. To throw dust amongst them, the remembrance of Mortality that we must all
lodge in, the lap of one common Mother the Earth persuading Unity: else our
wraths are like flamiferous Aetua, and the Coals of Juniper, unquencheable,
unless the milk of the Word, the waters of the Sanctuary, the blood of the
Pascall Lamb, and the wine of the Encharist quench our devasting wild-fires.


Ph. But what is the cause of most Lawsuites, and Westminster quarrels?


Pu. Two words (Meum and Tuum) Mine and Thine, as the two Mothers before
Solomon for a Child, and the three Goddesses before Paris contested for a
golden Ball.


Ph. Who desides the controversy?


Pu. Not liberty of Conscience which plays sweep stake, and rakes all: But
the Law, and often Ambodexter the Lawyer, in such Equity, as that Arbitrator, who
gave two that contested about an Oyster, either of them a shell, and himself
eat the Fish, or in such a fate and state as the Butlers box, that wins all
when every Gamester loses, after much shuffling and cutting.


Ph. Who are the greatest sleepers?


Pu. Not Dormice, nor Russian Bears, nor the beast Colus after Rutting, nor
Poetized Endimion with the Moon; but those of the leuder Laity, profane
Plebeians, drousie Clergy, and somniferous Magistracy, who paralleld with the
seven sleepers in Dioclesians Time, will not, nor cannot be awakened with the
golden Bells of Aaron, for this late seven years, nor with the Trumps of the
word, nor the warning Cannons of War, nor the pricks of swords, nor the voices
of Cryers louder then John Baptist, yea as loud as the bloods of many
Innocents, Abells, Naboaths, and Zacharia's.


Ph. Who was the wisest man of mere men in the World?


Pu. Solomon, a Type and Figure of Christ, wiser then Socrates, Solon, Bias,
Thales, Periauder, Cleobulus, Cato, Plato, or any Sages of the Romans or
Athenians, who had their wisdom either by study: As Abraham, Isaac Jacob, who
had Wells by digging, or by experience and observation; but he had wisdom
without study; as the Prophets and Apostles their tongues and gifts by
immediate inspiration.


Ph. Wherein was his folly for all his wisdom?


Pu. In his unsatiable effeminacy, more then ever was read of Horcules,
Claudius, Clodius, Heliogabulus, Proculus, or the most luxurious Goats: As the
Canker in his Rose, and the Colloquintida in his pot, polluting all his best,
and befooling all his wisdom.


Ph. This womanishnesse indeed has been the Cantharides in the ointment of
the most wise, worthy, and valiant, even of Sampson the strongest, of Haniball
the Martialist, loosing all that glory in Capua, which he won in Canna, and
of famous Casar called Meehum calvum, the bald Lecher, and omnium mulierum
virum, a Jack for every Gill, and beauteous Trull, such as Terentia, Servillia,
Postbumia, and others, pretermitting how much Paris was eclipsed by Heleua,
Troilus by Creseida, and both Achilles and Agamemnon by Briseis, for whom they
contended: Hence tell me who were most allured by their eyes in this nature?


Pu. David by Bathsheba, (as fabled Acteon by Diana) the two old Goatish-Judges
by the beauty of Susanna, Sichem by Dinah, and the Sons of God by the
Daughters of men, by whose commixtions Giants were first produced, as monstrous
Births, from monstrous Lusts.


Ph. But were no women snared and inflamed by their eyes, by, or through which,
banefull beauty shot a poisoned Bullet into their hearts, called by Poets,
blind Cupids Darts?


Pu. Yes, the whorish Egyptian was scorched by looking and lusting after chaste
and fair Joseph. Phadra by beholding Hippolitus (the Paganish Joseph) and more
then a good many others, in Burtons love Melancholy: for, Femina vidit, uritq
videndo: a woman when she looks on men desired, her heart is Tinder, Powder,
Match love fired: whence the poor lover sighed; Cur perii, cur lumina noxia
vidi? Why did I eye the beauty bright, fired by Cockatrices sight?


Ph. What is the best preventing Physic for such poison?


Pu. To guard well the Cinque Ports against traiterous Love-passions; not only
with Ulysses to stop our ears from the charms of such Sirens; but to close our
eyes from beholding vanity, chiefly in a luring Dalilah, and a painted
Jezabel, according to the Caution, Quid facies, facies Veneris, cum Veneris
ante, ne sedeas, sed eas ue Pereas per cas: What will thou do when Venus comes
thee nigh? Oh sit not nigh her! lest thou perish by her.


Ph. He indeed that will prevent sin, mustprevent the occasion, as he that
has a dizzy brain must not walk over a narrow Bridge, and he that will not be
bit with Wine as with a Serpent, must not look at the color of it: as the
fond Fly, if she will not be scorched, must not dally with the flame; besides,
he must quench the heates, of Love or lust, (as Factions in the Church, and
fractions in a State) in their first sparks; cruch them like serpents in the
head, and Cockatrices in their shells, in their first risings, ere they get
head, as young Hauks are caught in Ayries, ere they get wing: but among those
who were culpable in their eyes, who most abused their tongues?


Pu. Ahab who falsely accused, Jezabel who threatened, the Zealous Thisbite,
Turtullus who traduced Paul, Diotrephes who prated against John the Divine,
Shemei who reviled, Michall who mocked, Saul who vituperated, Goliab who
blasphemed, holy David (as Rabshekah, both God and Hezekiah:) with all the
Priests, and false Prophets who scandalized Jeremiah; the proud and profane
Jews, who smote him with the tongue; the same Jews who contradicted,
blasphemed, and scandalized both Paul and Steven, and Christ himself; as the
Arians in the Primitive times did Athanasius, Narcissus, Eugenius, and all the
Orthodox; and as Cocleus, Belserus, Stapleton, Feverdentius, Scurrilous,
Kellison, and all the Romish Rabshekah's tongue poisoned, Luther, Melancton,
Calvin, Beza, and all our most famous Belgic Divines, praetermitting the
muttering mouch-murthering tongues of Corah, Dathan, Abiram, and the hard
hearted Idolatrous Jews, against Moses and Aaron, and the poisons in the
tongus of some Priests (as if like Popery and frenzy running in a blood)
against old Hierom the Trilinguist, Hierom of Prague, Hierom Savanorola,
Hierom, Zanchius, and others.


Ph. Who like many a Monsieur mendax, gulling Guzman, lying Lazarillo, lewd
Lentulus, and Hell hatched heretics of our days had his lying tongue more
than Latin tongue?


Pu. Gehezi, who was a Leaper for his labor, and his seed after him.


Ph. Who used their tongues as instruments of Gods glory, and the good of
others?


Pu. Moses, Aaron, Samuel, Daniell, Phineas, old Simeon, in praying and
Prophesying, Deborah, and Baruck, Elkanaes, Anna, Judith the Beththulian, and
the Virgin Mother in praising God, chiefly David, whose tongue was the Pen of a
ready Writer, who had ever an Eucharisticall Song and Psalm for God, as God
had a mercy of Adornation and Preservation for him, in delivering him from the
Bear, the Lion, Doeg the Dog, Achitophel the Fox, Saul the Tiger, Goliath the
Monster, the treacherous Ziphims, Shebah, Absolous, and the Philistines.


Ph. It is remarkable also, that when Augustine and Ambrose met, they composed
in mutual answers: that, te Deum, we praise thee O God. And when our Doctor
Sibbs, and Doctor Preston met, they found ever to discourse on some further
excellencies in God: as did also (as the best president for women) Elizabeth
and the Mother of Christ, reasonating Gods praises, not like carnal Gossips,
abusing their tongues, and mispending their time in pratlings, traducing the
absent, often the innocent. Hence its easy to resolve which be the best or
worst of all Dishes.


Pu. Aesop long since told his Masters, they were tongues as they were well or
ill dressed, and laid in Pickle, seasoned with the salt of the Sanctuary, yea
washed in the best holy water, and sage the best of them, or Rotten, ripe for
rotting, like the tongue of Nestorius the worst of them.


Ph. What trade is most profitable, least prejudicial to others, least envyed,
most honored with the greatest, which yet at last will fail, though now the
most profess it?


Pu. It is neither Law, Physic, Divinity, Merchandising, Surgery, nor any
other Function, Liberal, or Mechanic, by sea, nor by Land; but in one word,
begging.


Ph. You say true; for to illustrate all my proposalls by demonstration: first,
its most profitable literally, 1 and English, or a Scotch Courtier
(praetermitting all the quondam gains of it in the Courts of Alexander,
Pirrbus, Augustus, as also in their Camps) getting more in one morning by
begging, whilome from King James than a Preacher by spending his Lights and
Lungs, or an Advocate by pleading half Nestors years. 2. Withal, Its least
prejudicial in a metaphorical sense, begging by prayer: it being in the Order
of Petitioners, as in the Order of Predicants, and true Elemosinarians, the
more the better, though it hold in few other professions in Troynovant: the more
Hounds the better hunting, more Spaniels beter Hauking: there multitudes being
as prejudicial to their thriving, as many Physicians were to the health of
Adrian, one (in a manner) devouring another; not as Pharaohs lean Kine the fat,
and empty ears the full: but the fat the lean, as great Pikes the little fry,
and greater beasts and birds, the lesser. 3. Withal, whereas in other trades
aemulation is a great stickler, plaguing it self and others, this is the least
envyed. 4. Withal, however other trades are respected by men chiefly liberal
Artists: yet never had any Galenist, Justmian, Baldus, Bartolus, or Hermolaus
Barbarus that respect with Grandees: no not Ennius with Scipio, Virgil with
Augustus, or Cyneas with Pyrrhus, as the poor soul has with Christ, by a
praying spirit. 5. Last of all, its most gainful, though not with the men of
the earth, yet against the men of the earth, and with the great God of Heaven:
as for instance, this begging and petitioning by prayer, has brought fire from
heaven, shut and opened the heavens in Elias his time: stayed the course of the
Sun in Joshua's time: brought Manna from heaven, water out of a Rock: plagued
Pharaoh: drowned an Army: divided the Sea in Moses his time: raised two
children, with Dorcas, Lazarus, and Jairus his daughter, healed Ezekiah,
divided Joraane twice: wrestled and prevailed with God, and with men: healed
Leprosies, and all diseases: dispossessed Demoniacks: and as Faiths Daughter,
did ever as great marvels, and miracles as did the mother: yet for all this,
this trade must at last fail; after the Resurrection there will be no more use
of it in the full fruition of foelicity, than of Faith and hope. But this
subject having drawn on an enlargement, to abbreviate the rest: Who were
Martyrs, yet never Confessors, nor Disputants for the Faith, nor Petitioners to
the Court of Heaven?


Pu. All the Infants of Bethelem, as innocent Lambs destroyed by Herod the Fox.


Ph. Who was wiser than his Teachers?


Pu. David more wise than Gad, and Nathan: Moses wiser than Jethro his
Counselor: Paul a greater Proficient in Christ's College than Gamaliel:
Apollos more eloquent than Aquila, and Priscilla: and amongst Moralists,
Aristotle in his Philosophy exceeded his Master Plato: and of Divines, Thomas
Aquinas out shined his Master Albert, how ever like Basil called great.


Ph. Where was virtue truly in the midst?


Pu. Christ in the midst of the Doctors in the Temple, and in the midst of his
Disciples, after his Resurrection, as the Sun in the midst of the Planets, as
the true Center in the Worlds circumference.


Ph. Where was virtue in the midst betwixt two extremes, as a Shippc betwixt
two Rocks?


Pu. When Christ was crucified on the Cross betwixt two Thieves, and as the
Scotch Buchanan descanted, when in Italy he saw him pictured betwixt Friar
Francis and Friar Dominick, and when Peter slept betwixt a quaternion of
Soldiers in Herod's Prison, where the Angel was his Goale-deliverer, as also
Paul and Silas in the like case at Philippos, and Queen Elizabeth, when she
was tanquam ovis, as a sheep, betwixt her Sister and Gardener, designed for
the slaughter; in Caesar's case when he was stabbed by Bodkins in the midst of
the Senate, and John Scotus Erigona with Penknives in the midst of his
Scholars.


Ph. Where is the Earth higher then the Heavens?


Pu. In Christ's human nature, exalted above the visible Heavens, and above
invisible Angels glorified, as that true body took from Earthly Adam.


Ph. Where did the Earth water the Heavens?


Pu. When Mary Magdalen an earthly sinful woman, did wash the heavenly feet of
Christ, her eyes being the Basin and Ewer, and her hair the Towell.


Ph. What waters ascend to Heaven?


Pu. The tears of penitent sinners, wronged Widows and Orphans.


Ph. At what Feast were most Guests fed with the least meat?


Pu. When five thousand were fed in the Desert with five Loaves and two Fishes.


Ph. Where did the Hawk and the Partridge, the Hound and the Hare, the Wolf
and the Lamb, the Elephant and the Unicorne, and all creatures now opposite,
live, lodge, and love together.


Pu. Not only before man's fall, but in Noah's Arc, a Type of the Unity of the
Church.


Ph. Where did the Lion roar, the Ass bray, the Wolf howl, the Cock crow,
the Nightingale sing so loud that all the World heard them, the Fox and the
Fowmart smell so strong, that all the World felt them, yet unheard, unfelt in
all parts of the Earth?


Pu. In the same Noah's Arc.


Ph. Why was Cham saved in the Arc, being a wicked man?


Pu. To show Gods general Providence over all, and his bounty to all in the
common blessing of Preservation; as still he givea food to all flesh, who
live, move, and have their being in him. Secondly, that he and his Posterity
might be a whip and corrective Rod to the sinning Posterity of Sem and Japhet,
as the seed of Moab and Amon, and Ashur, were to the Israelites, the Turks to
sinning Europe, the Imperialists lately to the Palatinate, and Arminianized
Germany, the bloody Kerne to our Peccant Colonies in Ireland, and perhaps Gog
and Magog, Turk and Pope ere long unto us, armed already against us by our
crying sins Regnant in our yet deformed Reformation.


Ph. What are the swiftest things of Inanimates in their motions?


Pu. An Arrow out of a Bow, a Bullet out of a Gun or Mortar-piece.


Ph. What of Fishes?


Pu. The Dolphin, and those Fishes which are said to fly so long as their
finnes are wet, in Lapland, Finland, and other parts in the Mediteranean Sea.


Ph. What of Beasts?


Pu. The Horse, the Heart, the Hare, the Greyhound, and Dromedaries, on which
its thought those wise men rode from the East to worship Christ.


Ph. Who of men?


Pu. The Jewish Hazaell, the Pagans Atlanta, and our Irish Kernes, who by
turns will run a Dear to death on the Mountains, they being wilder and
vilder themselves then the worst Rascals.


Ph. What of Naturalls in their motion?


Pu. The Sun the great Peripatetick running daily his course through the
Heavens, and in a short space through all the signs of the Zodiac; darting
also his beams in a trice upon the Earth.


Ph. What is the swiftest thing in man?


Pu. In his body his tongue, most swift and voluble in motion, and as unwearied
(chiefly oyled in Lawyers and heated in women) and the thoughts of his heart
as swift as lightning.


Ph. What of Birds?


Pu. The Hawk, the Eagle, and the Swallow; but of all these the influence of
grace on the heart and soul, the motions of the spirit, and the reflections
and dartings of the spirit of man by the spirit of grace, in mental and
ejaculatory prayer, as was said of the Monks of Egypt and Lybia in their
darted devotions, are swifter then all those, in a trice piercing the clouds,
and having access unto, and success with the God of Heaven, without any
froathy formalities or verbal vaniloquies or liplaboured stultiloquies, either
with a book or without a book.


Ph. Who was borne as a man, dyed as a Lamb, rose as a Lion, and ascended into
Heaven as an Eagle?


Pu. Every mean Christian can tell you it was Christ the Son of God.


Ph. How many kinds of Sons has God?


Pu. Sons by Creation, as the Angels, Sons by Adoption, as the Elect, and
only one Son by Nature, Christ our Emanuell, God with us.


Ph. Who were Types and Figures of Christ?


Pu. Of Types personal, Isaac was a Figure of his Birth, Joseph of his
betraying, Sampson of his Death, Jonas of his Resurrection, Enoch and Elias of
his Ascension, Solomon of his Wisdom, Noah and Abraham of his active
obedience, Melchisedech of his Priesthood, David of his Kingly and Prophetical
Office.


Ph. What were his Real Types?


Pu. The Manna from Heaven, the Rock in the Widernesse, the escape Goat, the
Propitiatory, the Sanctuary, the Sanctum Sanctorum, and the bloody oblations of
Sheep, Goats, Bullocks, and Turtle Doves.


Ph. What things were reserved in the Arc?


Pu. The Book of the Law, the pot of Manna, and the Rod of Aaron which always
budded.


Ph. How often was the Temple of the Jews polluted by the Gentiles?


Pu. By the Babilonians, by Antiochus, and by the Romans, when Pompey made it a
stable for his Horses.


Ph. What three Languages were honored and sanctified by Pilates writing them
upon Christ's Cross?


Pu. The Greek, the Hebrew, and the Latin: These not only flourished when
one of the Ancients was called a trilinguist; but in later times, as the
Egyptians were robbed of their Jewels, the Pagans of their Arts and Sciences,
to the use of the Sanctuary; so for the same purpose these tongues of late have
been wonderously adorned, spread and polished; the Greek by Budaeus,
Turnebus, our late Seapula, and the French Stevens; the Hebrew by Drusius,
Buxendorffius, Martinius, and our Broughton; and the Latin by Erasmus,
Agricola, and others, rubbing the rust from it, as it was overspread with such
Barbarism (as some Levellers aim at now) by the inundations of the Goths and
Vandals over Italy and else where.


Ph. But to proceed, who was wiser dreaming then her Husband waking?


Pu. Pilates Wife forwarning him not to meddle with the King of the Jews.


Ph. Now we reflex on meddling, what are Medlars?


Pu. Chiefly without gifts and calling, as Vzziah meddled with the Arc which
belonged to the Levites to touch, and Vzzah with the Office of the Priests, for
which he was as leprous as most ungifted and uncalled medlars since (for such I
only stigmatize whether in black or colors) who skip from shops and ships,
yea from a seven years Academicall Prentiship dyed black or block, into Pewes
and public Pulpits, such medlars are never ripe till they be rotten, chiefly
such as meddle with other men's matters, and come to counsel before they be
called, it being a bad Dog which is not worth whistling for.


Ph. How did I describe such unto you?


Pu. As Bishops in other men's diocesses, fond Mariners with their oars in
other men's boats, fond Cooks scalding their lips in other men's broth, fond
Husbandmen and Gardiners weeding other men's grounds, and idle sluttish
Housewives sweeping other men's houses, when their own are nasty, and
overgrowne with Cobwebs, and critticall if not hypocritical Pharisees, who see
other men's moates, but not their own beams, strangle others Gnats, and
swallow their own Camels.


Ph. What is that proud and curious Princock, who rejects and repudiates great
and good proffered matches, till at last she be neither well sped nor clean
without?


Pu. She has gone through the Wood, and chosen the crookedest stick, fondly
put on a strait glove or shoe which she cannot put off, when she had choice
enough in large and wide shops, and looked so high till a moate is fallen in
her eye, and as a plague to her cogs, she is tied as an Ape to logs, having
time enough to repent what she did not prevent, roasting her self at a
lingering fire, and gnawing her own heart as Vultures and Eagles the Livers of
Titius and Poetized Prometheus.


Ph. What are these things which once lost or past, can scarce or never be
recalled?


Pu. Winged Time, a word once spoke, though it be Treason, a Bird once flowne
out of the bush or bosom, a Ship sunk in the bottom of the sea, lost
Virginity, lost opportunity, hairy before and bald behind, and usually a loss
in Honor, in Nobility, and loss of a good name in a woman, a scandal once
raised and blazed, being as hard to be laid even by innocence it self, as the
Northern Winds stirred up by Norway-Witches, or the Devil himself once
conjured up by a Junior Faustus, or Cornelius Agrippa.


Ph. What Is the best way to keep credit with man, and conscience with God?


Pu. Moral honesty (such as was in the two Catoes and Fabritius) called once
by King James the best Policy: Secondly, to do well and say little, good Acts
as the best letters of Commendations, speaking a man better then words:
Thirdly, so to converse with God in sincerity, as though men saw, and every
Momus had a Window into his heart, and so to converse with men as if God saw,
as indeed he does; And lastly, so to live, that men's eyes at last shall give a
lie to their tongues and ears.


Ph. What is the issue of false reports?


Pu. At last truth prevailing, as little David over great Goliab; like Diamonds
(though unworthy that name) they are cut in their own dust: as waves dashing
on the Rock of innocence, they wash it whiter, and break themselves to froath,
as a brass Ball thrown up into the air, hurts not the air, but hits upon the
head of the thrower, as Egyptian Dogs barking at the Moon, they hurt not the
Moon, but show their own tongues and teeth: as the wrathful Weasill biting
the hot iron they hurt not the iron, but often so burn their lips and tongues,
they can never bite more; chiefly when their heels are bolted, though not
tongues more then Xerxes could shackle the Hellespont, or King Canutus stay
flowing waves. Lastly, lewd and loose Rumors, as lying, as flying; squib-like,
flash, Crack, stink, and dye.


Ph. What Is the best salve for every sore, in name soul and spirit?


Pu. Faith, and Evangellicall repentance salving and balming all sins,
guilts, and sores better then Homers Moli, Grinaeus his Panacea, or all the
drugs of Galenists, or Elixars of Paracelsians.


Ph. Since, Ille vere dolet, qui sine test dolet: who wept with a Witness,
when he wept without a witness?


Pu. Peter, when after his blamefull, and shameful denial of Christ, he went
out and wept bitterly, Et delevit, quod deflevit, after he had denied his Lord
and Master he salved the sores of sin with sorrows plaster, and was more
faithful after he had bewailed his want of faith, as is more fully seen in
Origens Repentance versified he never after hearing a Cock crow, but he sight
or wept, as is recorded.


Ph. Though the Lion is said to be afraid of a Cock, what courageous Cock was
frighted with the cackling of a Hen?


Pu. Peter when he cried Craven at the voice of a Damsel, in whom its
probable the Devil spoke as in Paul's Pithonist Acts 16. (as he daunced in the
Daughter of Herodias) as he spoke also in Apollos Oracles, and in the serpent
to Eve.


Ph. What Creature preached a Remembrance Sermon to a forgetful Hearer and
Preacher?


Pu. The Cock preaching a memento to Peter.


Ph. Who without any soap or water, either from Fountain, or River, or Clouds
from above, laudrest and washed every night his couch and his sheets?


Pu. David with his own Tears; such warm water as Richard the Second gave
his cruel Barbers, when they barbed him with cold water, and Sylvia a
Curtizan, and Pelagia, that Pelagus lachrimarum, who only for thirty years
together washed her face with naught else but her own tears as a second Niobe.
In font frontem, in flumina lumina vertens. Her front into a fountain ever
running, Her eyes to floudgates by repentance turning.


Ph. But Claudite jam rivos! For this night the Clock striking ten to bedward,
we shut up our mouths shop ere Morpheus bind our tongues to peace in John a
Nox his dark Jayle, till Phoebus or Aurora be our mornings Jayle deliverer.


Ad lectorem hoc tantum.
Like to Noah's Dove, these are sent out to try
Their welcomes to the World; if all be dry
And clear, swift Time (truths Mother) will send forth
If Jove please, something soon of much more worth.
Mean time Alcides by his foot was shown,
And following floods may in these drops be known,
Suddenly falling from an aged brain,
Sans Books, Writs, Scrouls, even in a talking strain.
FINIS.

