A PREPARATIVE TO THE TREATY: OR, A short, sure, and conscientious Expedient
for Agreement, and Peace; tendered to the two Houses of Parliament. WITH An
Appeal to the Assembly of Divines. ALSO, An Admonition to the People,
concerning the present Engagements.

By Da. J. P. N.

NUMB. 30.2. If a man vow a Vow unto the Lord, or swear an Oath to bind his
Soul with a Bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that proceeds out of his mouth.

JOSH. 9.20. Lest wrath be upon him, because of the Oath which he swear.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

A short, sure, and conscientious Expedient for Agreement and Peace.
THe KING and the two Houses of Parliament declaring mutually, that they took
up Arms for the same reasons, intents, and purposes, it is a wonder how at
first they fell out, and a greater wonder that hitherto they are not reconciled.

The Declarations of the two Houses of Parliament.
They have the precedence, The Declarations of the two Houses of Parliament.
because they were first in Arms.

In the conclusion of their Declaration of 26 May, 1642. apprehending very
justly, that their expressions there would beget at least a great suspicion of
their Loyalty, they say, They doubt not but it shall in the end appear to all
the world, that their endeavors have been most hearty and sincere for the
maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the KING's just Prerogatives, the
Laws and Liberties of the Land, and the Privileges of Parliament, in which
endeavors by the grace of God, they would still persist, though they should
perish in the work.

In like manner, June 2. when they published their Propositions for bringing in
Money or Plate to raise an Army, they declared, That whatsoever is brought in
shall not at all be employed upon any other occasion, then to maintain the
Protestant Religion, the KING's Authority, and His Person in His Royal
dignity, the free course of Justice, the Laws of the Land, the Peace of the
Kingdom, and the Privileges of Parliament. Infinite are their Declarations
and professions in this kind.

The KING's Declarations.
June 16. The King's Declarations.
His Majesty published a Declaration to all His loving Subjects, exciting them
to bring in ready Money and Plate, and to furnish Him with Horse, Horsemen,
and Arms, for defense of the Protestant Religion, the preservation of His
royal Person, the Laws, Liberties, and Peace of the Kingdom, and the
vindication of the Privilege and Freedom of Parliament.

In His Declaration to all His loving Subjects concerning the proceedings of
this present Parliament, Aug. 12. His Majesty says, That nothing, but the
preservation of the true Protestant Religion, invaded by Brownisme,
Anabaptisme, and Libertinisme, the safety of His Person, threatened and
conspired against by Rebellion, and Treason, the Law of the Land, and Liberty
of the Subject, oppressed, and almost destroyed by an usurped, unlimited,
arbitrary Power, and the Freedom, Privilege, and Dignity of Parliament awed
and insulted upon by force, and Tumults, could make Him put off His long Robe
of Peace, and take up defensive Arms.

And in pursuance of these ends did His Majesty offer Propositions accordingly,
The King's Propositions conform to his Declarations.
at all Treaties, where He might propose any thing.

But concerning the Propositions of the two Houses of Parliament, at the Treaty
at Uxbridge, The Propositions of the two Houses differing from their
Declarations.
His Majesty's. Commissioners truly observed, That after a War of near 4 Years
for which the defense of the Protestant Religion, the Liberty and Property of
the Subject, and the Privileges of the Parliament, were made the cause and
grounds, in a Treaty of 20 Days, nor indeed in the whole Propositions upon
which the Treaty should be, They alter the state of the war.
there has been nothing offered to be Treated concerning the Breach of any
Law, or of the Liberty and Property of the Subject, or Privilege of
Parliament, but only Propositions for the altering a Government established by
Law, and the making new Laws, by which almost all the old are, or may be
cancelled.

I will not here dispute the Power of the two Houses of Parliament separate
from the KING, but

That they cannot assent to any thing in Parliament, What the two Houses cannot
do in respect of the King and Crown.
that tends to the disherison of the KING, and His Crown, whereunto they are
sworn, is acknowledged by the Lords and Commons in full Parliament, 42 Edw. 3.

And, that they neither meant, nor had power, The Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy.
to hurt the KING's Prerogative, is declared by the House of Commons at the
passing of the Petition of Right, 3 Caroli.

Besides, What they are bound to do for the King and the Crown.
by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy they are bound positively, to defend
and maintain His Majesty's royal Person, with all the Prerogatives,
Privileges, and Preheminencies belonging or annexed to the imperial Crown.

And they have bound themselves by the Protestation, The Protestation.
with their Lives, power, and Estates, to defend and maintain His Majesty's
royal Person, Honor, and Estate; together with the power of the Privilege of
Parliament, and the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject: And to their
power to oppose all such as shall by force, counsel, conspiracy, or otherwise,
do any thing to the contrary of any thing in the Protestation contained: And
that they will not for hope, fear, or other respects, relinquish this Promise,
Vow and Protestation.

And by the Solemn League and Covenant, The League and Covenant.
In the preservation of Religion and Liberties, to maintain and defend the
KING's Person and Authority, without diminishing His just Power and Greatness:
And that they will all the days of their lives continue in this Covenant
against all opposition whatsoever.

The Expedient for Peace.
Now let the Lords and Commons at the Treaty proceed, The expedient for Peace.
not according to their strengths and successes, but according to their
Declarations, and their legal and voluntary Oaths (i.) with Religion,
Privileges, and Liberties; Let them maintain and defend the KING, the Crown,
His Majesty's Honor and Estate, His Authority, Power, and Greatness; And an
Agreement and Peace will follow thereupon. An Oath being the end of all strife,
Heb. 6.16.

An Appeal to the Assembly of Divines.
And I appeal to the Assembly of Divines (for their Assent, An Appeal to the
Assembly of Divines.
or Answer) whether in point of Religion and Conscience they may proceed
otherwise then according to their Declarations, Protestation, and Covenant? And
whether they are not guilty of disloyalty and perjury proceeding otherwise? The
Parl. and the Army have altered the state of the war.
as the two Houses have done hitherto by their Propositions devesting the KING,
and the Crown of the chief Power and Government, and establishing it in
themselves: And as the Army did by their last Declaration, Resolving to settle
the Government without the KING, and against Him, and against all that take
part with Him.

And hence our late Petitions for His Majesty's Return to His Parliament and
Government (being contrary to their sense) were so unwelcome to them, Why our
late Petitions were so unwelcome to them.
that the Petitioners from Surrey and Kent were chastised by them.

An Admonition to the People concerning the Engagements.
And to involve the People in this damnable Apostasy from their faith and
allegiance to GOD, and the KING; The present Engagements.
and the better to carry on their designs against the King and the Crown, have
they framed an Engagement for us, to adhere to the authority of the two Houses
of Parliament, (i.) to Renounce the KING, His Protestation, and Government, and
to submit to the usurpation and domination of the two Houses of Parliament, and
to serve them: And this Engagement is carried on at this day in the several
Counties, Cities, and Corporations (silently, and covertly) for increasing and
strengthening their Confederacy, and for enlarging and establishing their
Dominion privily and insensibly.

There is also another Engagement on foot (of the same nature with the Negative
Oath) Not to assist the KING in this War (for Recovering His Rights and
Prerogatives) and not to do any thing to the prejudice of the affairs of the
two Houses of Parliament (in prosecution of their designs against the KING and
the Crown.) And when any become liable to them, they are forced to take this
Engagement before they can get off from their Delinquency.

The People in their several Parishes to consult their respective Ministers
about the Engagements.
But I would have the people of the Kingdom to remember when they took the
Oath of Supremacy, The People in every Parisa to consult their respective
Ministers.
That they promised from thenceforth to bear faith and true Allegiance to the
KING's Highness, His Heirs, and lawful Successors; and to their power to
assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and Authority
granted, or belonging to the KING's Highness, His Heirs and Successors, or
linked and annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm.

And when they took the Oath of Allegiance, That they swore to bear faith and
true Allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; and Him, and them
to defend to the utmost of their power, against all conspiracies and attempts
whatsoever, which shall be made against His, or their Persons, their Crown and
Dignity.

And I would have the people in the several Parishes (in the City and County)
to consult their respective Ministers, whether considering the Oaths aforesaid
they can engage or comply with the two Houses and the Army in manner aforesaid
without high disloyalty and manifest perjury? or whether considering their
Obligations by those Oaths and by the Protestation and Covenant, they ought not
rather to oppose, and fight against them for the defense and maintenance of the
KING and Crown, and the established Government of the Kingdom?

I Counsel thee to keep the King's Commandment, and that in regard of the
Oath of God, Eccl. 8.2.

[It is a pernicious Doctrine to teach Subjects they may be discharged from the
Oath of Allegiance.] Mr. Pym, p. 17. of his Speech or Declaration delivered
after the recapitulation or summoning up of the Charge of High Treason against
the E. of Strafford; and published by the Order of the House of Commons.

FINIS.

