A more exact and full RELATION Of many ADMIRABLE PASSAGES, Which happened
During the whole Siege of LIME.

Wherein Gods Mercy is oftentimes miraculously expressed toward the
Inhabitants of the said place.

As also the manner of relieving of the Town of LYME, by the Right Honorable,
Robert Earl of Warwick, Lord high Admiral of ENGLAND.

As it was sent to a special Friend, by William Iesop, Esquire Secretary to his
Honor.

Also the Names and number of such persons as came from Prince Maurice, to the
Earl of Warwick.

Published according to Order.

June 19. Printed for Matthew Walbanke. 1644.

A more full and exact Relation of many admirable Passages which happened during
the whole Siege of Lyme.
Dear Friend,
AFter many days of sadness for poor Lyme, God has at last vouchsafed a day
of deliverance, the enemy having this morning about two of the clock raised his
siege, and is gone to Excester after his loss of 105. Officers, beside some
more superior Officers, 25. Gunners, and more common Soldiers then they lost
at Bristoll and Excester, as some of themselves confessed. I was this day in
Lyme, and had a hand in pulling down some part of the Huts left in the enemies
Quarters. He that sees the Line about the Town, and compares the slenderness
of it with the sollidity and strength of the enemies, will easily grant that
the defense of Heaven has been their munition of Rocks. The truth is, it is
little less then a miracle they should hold out so long and so violent a
Siege, the Town standing at the bottom of two Hills, and their Works being
so low and thin, that I my self could in many places run over them, and a
strong hand may in many parts thrust them down. About four days ago the
enemy shot into the Town bars of Iron, pieces of Anchors, and great shot,
blown up to as great a measure of (...) as was possible (they having a forge
on purpose) which falling on Houses fired many, yet were suddenly quenched, and
with them only three men hurt. On Thursday night 26 came in from the enemy.
amongst the rest Lieutenant Fair of the Lord Barlens Regiment, he came aboard
our Ship yesterday, and this day I saw him within the Town, his wife also and
her brother came in. This day about ten of Inchiquins Regiment came in; one
Irish woman left behind was slain and pulled almost to pieces this day by the
women of Lyme. Four other women were taken, being beggars, left behind by
their companions, and set on work to pull down the enemies Fortifications, to
perfect which the Country will also be summoned in, their hands contributing to
raise them. There are very many Houses burnt, yet the other day a Granado
falling into a room, and breaking on a bed wherein lay three children, not one
of them had any harm: there is scarce a House in the town that is not
battered, and scarce a room into which shot has not been made. At the last
great fire, two maids carrying betwixt them a vessel of water, had three of
their hands shot off. The enemy is marched to Excester. This day a Messenger
came into the town from my Lord General, and brings word that his Excellency
intended to be at Dorchester this night.

My Lord Admiralls noble and faithful affection to this town has gained an
acknowledgement that they owe their lives, under God, to his Lordship.

Much praise is due to God for poor Lymes deliverance, it being of such mighty
consequence to bring in the West, who resolved long since to obey no commands
on the other side till Lyme were taken. Stir up all Gods people to
acknowledge the greatness of this mercy, though none of you can rate it as
those that beheld it, in whose eyes it is very wonderful.

From aboard His Majesty's ship the James, June 15. 1644, Your Faithful friend
W. JESOP.

Postscript.
An other Letter sent from a Gent. of worth, out of his Majesty's Ship the
James, to his Friend in London to the same effect.
THe 14 of June, Prince Maurice and the rest of the Kings Forces, were seen to
draw off their Ordnance, which encouraged the Town from a Fort they had on the
East side to play sore upon them, so that when the teames were ready to drive
away, two or three Oxen at once were cut off and seen to fall which made the
enemy (the better to get them off) to storm the Town in that part, and
thereby blinding the view of the Fort by their small shot, had the better
opportunity of conveying their Guns.

This morning the coasts being clear, we went a shore into the Town, viewed
the works thereof, and therein the greatest miracle that could be imagined;
their paper Fortifications poorly, though resolutely manned by weak Soldiers,
and the powerful batteries of the Enemy, and their general advantages over
all or part of the Town was thoroughly viewed and censured, but the observation
of the same, from those cruel intendments, cannot be sufficiently wondered at,
and as the Town frequently discourses, had Prince Maurice but obtained one
Commander of theirs (that is God and their good Cause) he had proved Victor
with half the force he brought by relation of the Country people thereabout.
The Enemy curses the unluckie hour of his coming thither, having lost from
first to last about 2000. The Town sixscore with the most.

There came in voluntarily, and with much danger into the Town the other night,
one Lieutenant Pair, an Ensign, Corporal, and 20 Soldiers that were of the
Lord Inchiquin's Regiment, and were upon the Guard that night, who have
demeaned themselves very civilly, being ready to bear Arms for the
Parliament when they shall be commanded; since that, very near a 100 of the
honestest are escaped away from the Enemies Army, and returned to the Town
offering them their service, their inducements of their coming away, being (as
themselves ingeniously confess) the cursed oaths and hellish acts of the
Soldiers, as also the great influence the Irish Rebels and Papists, (whereof
there are great store) have upon the Prince and principal Commanders. The
Town is wholly employed this day about slighting the Enemies works, the cause
of Prince Maurice so sudden have away from the siege, is (as we have it from
some of their own men this day taken) some sadding news they received
yesterday by three several posts of Sir Ralph Hoptons weakness, and their
misfortunes in all parts.

FINIS.

