OBEDIENCE ACTIVE and PASSIVE DUE TO THE SVPREAM POWER, By the word of God,
Reason, and the Consent of diverse modern and Orthodox Divines; Written not out
of Faction, but Conscience, and with desire to inform the Ignorant, and
undeceive the Seduced:

By W. J. a Welwiller to Peace and Truth.

TIT. 3.1. Put them in mind, to be subject to principalities and powers, and
that they be obedient, etc.

ROMANS 13.1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher powers.

Principi, summum rerum judicium dii dederunt: Subditis obsequii Gloria relicta
est, Tacitus lib. 6. Histor.

Scutum potius quam gladium, subditis in Tyrannose esse sumendum, quos modestia
and patientia subditorum mitigat, contumacia vero exasperat, Titus Livius, lib.
3.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Litchfeild, Printer to the University, Anno 1643.

To the Reader.
IT is a time, wherein many are become rather wilfully then really ignorant,
and more conceitedly then truly desirous of Peace with Truth, to rectify (if
not satisfy) whom, this little treatise is communicated unto public view:
wherein they shall find, (toward accomplishing their desire:) Truth from
Heaven, tending toward peace on Earth; Truth being the matter thereof, Peace the
end whereto it conduces: And I supposed, there could be no better mean,
(under God) toward the compassing and procuring, that Peace, then by rightly
informing each Subject of his duty, from the word of God, which is Truth: and
therefore I dare bebold to say, that if the Truth herein sincerely and clearly
delivered, be but lovingly embraced, and henceforth constantly practiced by us
all; we shall prove, both better servants to God our Father, and more loyal
subjects to the King our Sovereign: and so, not only again acquire, that
great blessing of internal, external, and eternal Peace to our selves, with
confluence of all concommitant felicity; but withal suddenly procure, from God
and the King, that happy and all desired Union, of his most sacred Majesty,
with his Parliament, and People: whereby all our lawful desires may be fully
effected, which is the constant, fervent, and daily prayer of the Author.

Farewell.
The SVBIECTS duty to there lawful KING. Consisting in ACTIVE and PASSIVE
Obedience.
THat the King is the Head of the people; is evident by 1 Samuel 15.17. where the
Prophet Samuel says thus unto King Saul from the Lord: When thou was little in
thine own sight, wast thou not made the Head of the Tribes of Israel? and the
Lord anointed thee to be King over Israel? And by the 1 Kings 14.7. where
Ahijah the Prophet, bids King Jeroboams wife, Go tell Jeroboam, Thus says the
Lord God of Israel; I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee Prince
over my people Israel. And 1 Kings 16.2. where Jehu the Prophet says to King
Baasha from the Lord: I exalted thee from the dust, and made thee Prince over
my people Israel: Which occasioned Optatus to say, Super Imperatorem non est,
nisi qui fecit Imperatorem; from which our Law too dissents not; for in the
year book of 1. Henr. 7.10. and Finch fol. 81. it is said, That the King is
the head of the Commonwealth immediate under God; and therewith agrees the
more ancient Law, which tells us, Quod omnes sub eo, ipse autem sub nullo, nisi
tantum sub Deo. Bracton. lib. 1. cap. 8. And therefore is it, that S. Peter 1
Epist. 2.13. Exhorts all men to submit themselves unto the King, as to the
Supreme: who is placed in that degree of eminency over the people; Not by
himself, (for Kings themselves acknowledge in their styles, that they are
such, Dei gratia, and therefore may not unfitly say with the Psalmist, Psalm.
100.3. He it is that made us and not we our selves:) Neither by the people,
(for the Jews confess, Nehem. 9.37. That Kings are set over them by God; and
therefore, we often read in Scripture, That the King is called Gods Anointed,
and the Lords Anointed, but never the peoples Anointed.) And then, if neither
by himself, nor by the people, then surely by God alone; and truly God so
asserteth, Prove. 8.15. They reign not by themselves, they reign not by the
people, But says he, By me Kings reign, that is, by my ordination and
appointment, being first settled, since upheld, and sometimes miraculously
preserved in their reigns by me, and by my will as the cause: For as the
Prophets Jeremiah and Daniel, tell us, The most high bears rule over the
Kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever he will. Ier. 27.5.6. and Dan.
4.17. He having the sole property of them; and therefore Daniel speaking to
Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 2.37. says, The God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom,
etc. And so Cyrus acknowledges Ezra. 1.2. saying, The Lord God of Heaven has
given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth.

We read Deuteronomy. 17.14.15. That if the people would have a King, like other
Nations, Then they should in any wise set him King over them, whom the Lord
their God should choose. And 1 Samuel 9.17. we read that God chose Saul to reign
over his people; and 1 Samuel 10.1. and 1 Samuel 15.1. The Lord sent Samuel to
annoint Saul to be King over his people Israel. And in the 1 Samuel 16.1. God
says to Samuel, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethleemite; for I have provided
me a King among his Sons, to wit, David, and at the 13. Verse Samuel
anointed him. And 2 Samuel 12.7. God says to David, I anointed thee King over
Israel. And David himself after he was King, 1 Chronicles. 28.4. did acknowledge,
that he did not set up himself to be King, neither was chose by the people,
but says he, The Lord chose me that I should be King over Israel. And hereto
agreeable, was the Divinity of the Primitive Church, concerning Kings, (which
had least cause to favor them, in regard they were its persecuters; and yet)
Ireneus says of them, Cujus jussu nascuntur homines, ejus jussu constituuntur
Principes: Thus we see that Kings are provided for the people and appointed by
God; anointed by his Prophets, and lastly, only approved of by the people;
and truly such people as are his, doubtless will approve both his choice and
institution, as we read the Jews did 1. Sam. 10 24. who when they saw Saul,
whom God had appointed, chose and anointed for their King, they all showted,
and said, God save the King.

Now as the institution and office, so also the power of a King is derived from
God; for as was before said, by Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.37. The God of
Heaven has given thee a Kingdom; so likewise does he add thereto, power,
strength and glory, whereby it appears Kings have power from God, which our
Savior likewise acknowledges John 19.11. where speaking to Pilate, he says,
Thou could have no power, except it were given thee from above; and
therefore says Tertullian, Inde illis potestas est, unde Spiritus, and that
we know is from God, not from the people: whereby it appears, that what Saint
Paul says, Romans 13.1. is very true, That there is no power but of God, and the
powers that be, are ordained of God. And therefore in that very place he
wills and enjoyneth, That every Soul be subject to the higher powers. And
writing unto Titus, he wills him, Tit. 3.1. To put the people in mind, that
they be subject to principalities and powers, and that they be obedient: in
which places, by subjection, he includes a necessity of not resisting: For
such who shall either dis-respect the person, or disobey the just power of the
King, resist the Ordinance of God, and shall receive to themselves
condemnation, as our Old, but damnation, as our New translation renders, Romans
13.2.

Philo the Jew, in his book de vita Moysis, thus speaks of the office of
Kings; Regis officium est, jubere quae oportet fi^ri, and votare a quibus
abstinere decet: caeterum, jussio faciendorum and interdictio cavendorum,
proprie ad legem pertinet; atque ita consequitur, quod Rex animata lex sit, lex
vero, sit Rex justissimus. And our most gracious Sovereign, not only
performs that good office, but withal admits of that rule, and for his
peoples satisfaction, has further protested before almighty God, not to
govern them by any Arbitrary power of his own, but to admit and propose the
known laws of this Realm, for his guide and the exact rule of his
government: unto which I suppose every good Christian will adhibite faith, and
unto whom I hope, every loyal subject will yield due obedience: and therefore
how great a cause have we to praise God, whose gratiousnesse is pleased to set
such over us, as do set him in all their ways before them? and how great cause
have we in all respects to honor him, who ruling us in goodness, does also
rule himself by goodness? Long may he live among us; ever may he reign by
himself, and royal posterity over us, in glory and renoune.

Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as Supreme, etc. says Saint Peter 1 Epist. 2.13. Not that Kings
are ordained by men, or that men invented that government, ( for the powers
that be are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. and that Kings are is plainly
manifested before, as also by 1 Samuel 15.11. where God complains saying, It
repents me, (not that the people, but) that I have set up Saul to be King.)
But, he calls Kingly Government an ordinance of man; (as Calvin, Beza,
Marlorate, Aretius, Piscator, Bucanus, Gerardus and Weemse, have observed upon
that text) because the power, that is conferred by God upon men, is proper to
men, exercised by men, and toward men; it is called an humane ordinance,
subjective, because men are the subject of it, and objective, because it
handles humane affairs; and lastly, in respect of the end, being instituted
for the good of man, and the conservation of humane society: So it appears by
what has been said, That Kings and Supreme Magistrates, are not politic
institutions of men, nor at first ordained by men, nor the power they are
invested with, committed to them, from men, but from God: And therefore, let
every soul be subject to them; and as omnis anima, so ex omni animo, which
shows the manner; not with the body only, but the mind also; not in show
alone, but indeed and in truth withal* and that to all just commands; yea, and
to their unjust demands, if not contradictory to the will or word of God, by
our Saviors example, Matthew. 17.27. who paid Tribute to the Polegatherers, for
quietness sake, rather then offend or resist, although nothing was due; but if
their commands and demands be contrary to Gods, then Deo potius, quam
hominibus, better obey God then man, by the example of Saint Peter and Saint
John, Acts 4.19. Yet so be, they be not dissonant or discrepant from Gods,
then Scripture wills us to yield obedience thereto, not only as Saint Peter
exhorts, 1 Pet. 2.13. for the Lords sake, that so he may be honored, who
has ordained Kings and powers, and would that we should be obedient to them;
(as Aretius, Piscator, and Lucas Osiander, observe in their Comments upon that
text:) but withal as Saint Paul enjoynes us, for conscience sake also. Romans
13.5. That so we may retain a good conscience, which we must keep void of
offense, both toward God and toward Men. Acts 24.16. That it may witness for
us, that we have not resisted Authority; for no man with a good conscience,
can resist him, to whose power God has made him subject; (as the same Piscator
and Osiander, together with Calvin and Bucanus have noted upon that text of
Saint Paul Romans 3.5.) And therefore, because we must be subject both for the
Lords sake, and for Conscience sake too, it will not be amiss to consider
what a subjects duty to his Sovereign is, and in what particulars it consists.

And first, we must honor him; Give honor to whom honor is due, says Saint
Paul, Romans 13.7. and honor the King says Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.17. and that
must be by a reverend esteem of him, and an acknowledgement of him for our
Superior; by giving him due respect in our behavior, and Titles of reverence
in our words, as David, did to Saul. 1 Samuel 24.8. he stooped with his face
toward the earth, and bowed himself, and said, My Lord the King, And as Arauna
did to David, 2 Samuel 24.20.21. and Nathan to David, 1 Kings 23.24 and Bathsheba
to David at the 31. verse of that Chapter, Who bowed her face to the earth, and
did reverence to the King, and said, Let my Lord King David live for ever.

Secondly, We must pray and give thanks to God for him: as S. Paul exhorts 1 Timothy 2.1.2. I exhort therefore that first of all, Prayers, Supplications and
Thankesgiving be made for all men, for Kings, etc. and that as the Psalmist
Psalm. 80.17. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand; upon the son of
man, whom thou made strong for thy self; that is, O Lord, let thy hand of
Providence, Power and Mercy be upon the man of thy right hand, and thine
anointed the King, ever redily and mightily to defend, preserve and protect
him; and upon him whom though thou reckonest among the Gods of the Earth, Psalm.
82.1 and 6. yet indeed, is but the son of man, whom thou have made strong by
Majesty and power, for thy self, to govern thy people as thy Vicegerant; or
as our own Liturgy teaches us, That God would be pleased to be his defender
and keeper and give him the victory over all his enemies, that God would so
dispose govern and rule the heart, of our Gracious King and Governor, that he
might evermore have affiance in him, and in all his thoughts, words and works,
ever seek Gods honor and glory, and study, to preserve the people committed
to his charge, in wealth, peace and godliness, and finally that after this
life, he may attain everlasting joy and felicity.

Thirdly, We must fear him, as S. Paul wills us, Romans 13.7. Give Fear to whom
fear is due; and as Solomon Counsels us. Pro. 24.21. saying, My Son, fear
thou the Lord, and the King; and that with a fear of love, least any hurt come
to him; and a fear of awe, least we offend and disobey him. Solomon joins
them together, because he that is a true servant of God, and fears him, will
be a true subject to the King and fear him also; For, it is but one and the
same Religious fear, which first honors, God and then the King. And as Time
Deum makes a good Christian, so Time Regem, a good Subject; and the better
Christian, the better Subject. And to speak Truth, it is God, that causes
this Fear in Subjects toward their King; for as S. Anselme speaks very
rightly, Nunquam potest fieri, nisi operatione Dei, ut tot homines vni
servirent, quem considerant vnius esse cum ipsis fragilitatis and naturae: Sed
quia Deus inspirat Subditis timorem, and obediendi voluntatem, contingit ita.

Fourthly, we must not murmur against him; For Exodus 16.8. and Number. 16.11. They
that murmur against their Governors are said to murmur against the Lord,
because they murmur against his ordinance and against his Ministers; for they
judge not for men but for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. and Pro 8.15. by me Princes
decree Justice, says God, and therefore what Christ says in another case,
Luke 10.16. may not unfitly be applied to them. He that despises you,
despises me; for as the Apostles were the Messengers of Christ, so Kings are
the Lieutenants of God.

Fifthly, We must not touch him with a virulent Tongue, like them in Jeremy,
Ier. 18.18. who said, Come let us smite him with the Tongue, that is, We must
not speak evil of him; no, though we receive wrong from him, by S. Paule's
example Acts 23.5. toward Ananias; for so soon as he knew him to be the high
Priest, he corrects himself with a Scriptum est out of Exodus 22.28. Thou shall
not speak evil, of the Ruler of my people.

Sixthly, We must not accuse him: for where the word of a King is, there is
power; and who may say to him, what do thou, says Solomon, Eccles. 8.4. and
Elihu in Job, Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked? Or to Princes, ye
are ungodly? Job. 34.18. And therefore we should be so far from judging
amiss of his actions, That we should rather excuse what is done amiss by him,
then accuse him for it; and withal to suppose him so free in himself, from
doing any Act of Injustice, that we should be ready to answer him, as did, both
that wise woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14 17 and also Mephibosheth 2 Samuel 19.27 My
Lord the King is as an Angel of God, to discern both good and bad, do
therefore, what is good in thine eyes. Wherefore though his actions may seem
blameworthy, yet we must not suppose them such, and much less accuse him for
them; and so Plantus, though an Heathen could tell us, That Indigna, digna
habenda sunt, Rex quae facit.

Seventhly, We must not curse him: for God has prohibited it, Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not curse the Ruler of my people, and Solomon gives us this lesson
by way of causion. Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no, not in thy thought:
for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall
tell the matter; to teach us, That though King and Governors have infirmities
and vices, (which being men, they are equally subject too with others,) and so
perchance may often do evil; yet we ought not to revile them, or curse them
therefore. Yea, though thou may know the King to do evil, and the land to
suffer evil by his doing; yea, though thou may know it by thine own
suffering of evil from him, yet, let not so much as thine hearts thought curse
him; as Doctor Iermyne in his Comments on that book of Ecclesiastes, has
observed upon that text, from S. Cyprian.

Eighthly, We must not touch him violently, nor lift up our hands against him.
God has inhibited it 1 Chro 16.22. and Psalm. 10^.15. Saying, Touch not mine
anointed, to wit, so as to do him harm, or kill him; for as David says to
Abishai, 1 Samuel 26.9. who can stretch forth his hands against the Lords
anointed, and be guiltless? and therefore forbear to destroy him. And we know
how David's heart smote him, when as he only did but cut off the skirt from
King Saul's garment. 1 Samuel 24.5. though he killed him not. For on whom Gods hand
has been to annoint them, he cannot endure any others hand should be, to
violate them: For there is such near alliance as it were, between God and
them, Christ and them, and the Holy Ghost and them, as that they are not to be
harmed the least way, if either God, or Christ, or the Holy Ghost, can keep us
from it; For Kings participat with the name of God. Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye
are Gods: and with the name of Christ, for they are called Christi Domini, The
Lords Anointed, frequently in Scripture; and if they be anointed, it is, with
the Holy Ghost and power from above, Acts 10.^^. as that learned and reverend
Bishop Andrews in his Second Sermon of the conspiracy of the Gowries. So in
that they be anointed with oil, not took from the Merchants warehouse, or
the Apothecaryes shop, but from the Sanctuary; it shows us, That Sacred is the
office, whereunto they are designed; Sacred the power, wherewith they are
endued; Sacred the persons, whereto it is applied, and therefore at no hand to be
touched, either virulently with the Tongue, or violently with the hand.

Ninthly, We should not desert him in his troubles and necessity, but adhere to
him, and endure the extremity of Fortune with him: and even then answer him, as
David's Servants said to him, when David was to flee with them from Absalom, 1 Samuel 15 15. Behold thy servants are ready to do, whatsoever my Lord the King
shall appoint: and likewise with Ittai the Gittite to say and do, as he did
then to King David, at verse the 21. As the Lord lives, and as my Lord the
King lives, Surely in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in life or
death, even there also will thy Servant be.

Tenthly, In time of war, if he go forth to battle, and there expose
himself to danger, for the animation and encouragement of his Host, then,
because, he is worth ten thousand of us, (as the people said of King David, 2 Samuel 18.3. We must therefore be sure that we be ready to rescue him, and to
venture our life for his deliverance, as we read Abishai, one of David's
Generals and valiant men did, to succor David from the hands of Isbbi-benob
the Philistim Giant. 2 Samuel 21 17. And then withal out of a fear of love,
lest he be again endangered; we should with the Men of David (at the same
verse) say unto him, Thou shall go no more out with us to battle, that thou
quench not the light of Israel; that is, lest if thou perish in the battle,
we loose thee, who art not only, the Joy and the glory, but also the Light of
Israel: where by the way, we may observe, the great estimation a people should
have of their King, viz. to esteem him as their Light; and withal, that when
the Light of Israel is quenched, that is, when we loose a good King, who is the
Joy and the Glory of his people, we are then rightly said to be in darkness,
and so exposed to danger, as wanting a Light to guide us.

Eleavently, We must not withhold his due from him: for our Savior wills us
Mat. 22.21. to Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's: and S. Paul, Romans
13.7. to render to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute etc. Now because
Kings are the Ministers of God for our good Romans 13.^ for the good of Peace,
Protection, Justice, Religion etc. attending continually upon this very thing,
therefore for this cause we pay tribute. Romans 13.6. And truly in regard of
their Care over us: we must not dare, but as our Savior says, Reddere Caesari
quae sua sunt; That is, because they keep our Tillage safe, they must have
Tribute out of our Lands; and because they keep the Sea safe, they must have
vectigal, Custume, and Censum, Subsidy out of our goods: and therefore it is
very remarkable, That our Savior never did any Miracle, about Honor or Money,
except that one, which we read of Mat. 17.27. about giving Tribute to Caesar;
where, although nothing was due as may appear by the two former verses, yet
says Christ to Peter, Lest we should offend, go thou to the Sea, and cast an
hook and take up the fish that first comes up: and when thou have opened his
mouth, thou shall find a piece of money, that take, and give unto them for thee
and me.

Lastly, We must be subject to them and obey them: for as Dion Cassius has
well observed, Natura quipe id necessarium and hominibus salutare, ut alij
quidem imperent, alij vero pareant. And therefore S. Paul wills Titus, Tit.
3.1. to put the people in mind, that they be subject to principalities and
powers, and that they be obedient. And again, because Christians should not
suppose they were exempted from obedience to the Heathen Governors, therefore
the same Apostle, writing to the Roman Christians, who though they lived under
cruel Nero, that Persecutor of the Church, and Infamy of his Age, and under
his wicked substitutes, yet says he, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers, and why? because the powers that be, are ordained of God,
and he that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and therefore be
obedient.

Now our subjection and obedience to the Kings and Governors who are set over
us, and who are the Powers that are of God, is to permit their will to be done,
aut a nobis, aut de nobis, that is, either of us, or on us; of us, when they
command for Truth; on us, not by us, when they command against the Truth, to
wit, Gods Truth and Word; as we see by the axample of the Hebrew Midwives, whom
the King of Egypt commanded, that when a Son was born to the Hebrew women they
should kill him. Exodus 1.16. But the Midwives feared God, and did not as the
King of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men children alive. verse. 17. for
had they, they had been guilty of murder, and therefore because the Midwives
feared God, He dealt well with them, and made them houses. verses 20.21. Also
by the example of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Dan. 3.18. Who would not
worship the golden Jmage set up by Nebuchadnezzar, yet permitted his will to be
done on them, by casting them into the fiery furnace: verses 20.21. and
therefore God preserved them, so that they had no harm, as we read in the same
Chapter. And so Daniel, who though he was interdiced by King Darius, Dan. 6.9.
Yet ceased not to pray unto God, three times a day. verse 13. yet he permitted
the Kings will to be done on him, (for he signed the decree) by casting him
into the Den of Lions. verse 16. So it appears, that we must be patients or
Agents; Agents, when he is good and godly; patients, when he is tyranous and
wicked; and then as S. Peter says 1 Pet. 2.19. It is thankworthy if a man for
Conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully: and unto a patient
bearing of the Cross, we know we are called, for Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, as S. Peter there tells
us at verse 21. Wherefore we must needs be obedient: because all powers is of
God; because they bring with them the good of order; because it is a sin to
disobey; because judgment temporal and eternal, accompany the sin of
Rebellion and disobedience; because government is the mean of our weal;
because Kings are (as it were) hired by tribute, to serve their Servants, and
take care for their subjects. Besides, it is necessary that we should obey,
both ex necessitate finis and pracepti; for hereby we shall do that, which is
acceptable to God, and profitable to our selves; acceptable to God, enjoining
obedience; profitable to our selves, as thereby enjoining the good of
government. That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godlynes and
honesty, as S Paul says, 1 Timothy 2.2 (see Doctor Boys on the Epistle for the
fourth Sunday after Epiphany.)

And thus we see, That we are taught to obey Kings, by the Word, though they
rule not always by the Word: but what of that? As the neglect of their duty
cannot excuse the neglect of ours; so neither can the breach of their Oath,
absolve us before God, from our duties of Allegiance and Obedience to them, as
Calvin, Aretius, and Marlorate, inform us. For we are bound to obey, as the
person, so chiefly the power, because it is of God.

Nor must we only preforme this duty to good Kings and Governors, but as S.
Peter says to servants, concerning their Masters, 1 Pet. 2.18. Be subject to
your Masters, with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward: so may we lawfully say to subjects, concerning their Sovereigns, Be
ye subject and obedient, not only to Good Kings, but also to the froward and
wicked, as Hugo Grotius, aptly applying that text. So also devine Seneca,
though an Heathen, wills us, saying, Aequum atque Iniquum Regis Imperium feras:
for we must consider and acknowledge with S. Chrisostom That, Reges quod sunt,
a Deo sunt; and therefore, that every King, is either Gods golden Scepter, and
so the Mirror of his goodness, when we enjoy peace and plenty and prosperity
from God, under him, and by him; Or else he is Gods Iron Rod and Scourge, and
so the Mirror of his Justice, as he says of the Kings of Assiria. Esaias 10.5.
by whom, God does afflict and chastise his people, many times permitting him to
impose taxes and hard laws upon them, yea and sometimes, the sword it self
too, when their sins arive at that height, as to provoke Gods patience, and
call for just and deserved vengeance; For God sends wicked Princes, for the
punishment of sinners; so Dan. 8.23. When tho Transgressors are come to the
full, a King of a fierce Countenance shall stand up: and he permits Hypocrites
to reign. Job 34.30. which both the vulgar, and Osiander read, Qui fecit
regnare hypocritam hominem, propter peccata populi. So that we see, if Kings be
good, then as S. Paul says Romans 13.4. They are the Ministers of God for our
good: but if evil, we must with the Jews. Nehem. 9.37. acknowledge, that they
are set over us for our sins, and yet both good and evil, by and from God.

And truly, however some men dare adventure to call their lawful, though
evil Kings, Tyants, that so they might thereby shake of their due obedience to
them, yet both Gods Word, and his own peoples example, teach us otherwise.
viz. to acknowledge, that even such Kings, though Heathens, are his Anointed,
as he says of Cyrus, Esaias 45.1. (and so we read 1 Kings 19 15. That the Lord
sent Elijah the Prophet to anoint Hazael to be King over Syria) Yea though
wicked persons, yet are his Servants, as he says of Nebuchadnezzar. Ier. 25.9.
and 27.6. and therefore to be obeyed; for says God at the 8 verse of that last
Chapter. That, that Nation that will not put their neck under the yoke of
(Nebuchadnezzar) the King of Babylon, I will punish says the Lord, with the
Sword, and with the Famine, and with the Pestilence, thereby teaching us, not
to resist or rebel against evil Kings, because they are by him advanced to
that Royal Majesty, and made his scourges, to punish us for our sins. And
as Gods word, so his own peoples example, teaches us obedience, to wicked
Kings. For the Israelites, while they were in Egypt, were (we know) as well the
Subjects of Pharaoh, as the Egyptians, and yet notwithstanding, the many
cruelties and oppressions inflicted on them, by Pharaoh King of Egypt, and the
Egyptians, who as we read. Exodus 1.14. made the Israelites lives bitter with
hard bondage, in Mortar and in Brick, and in all manner of service in the
field: all their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigor. Yet
for all this, we do not read, that ever they resisted or opposed him, but
patiently endured those afflictions, until God saw their miseries, and how
they sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up
unto him. Ex 2.23. and 3.7. and then he sent his Servant Moses, to deliver
them, as we read. Exodus 3.10. and who, when he was sent, had not, (that we read
of) any power committed to him, to incite the people to take up arms against
Pharaoh their King, thereby to free themselves from their bondage; but was only
to entreat Pharaoh to let them go, Exodus 3.18. and to show him Gods wonders,
his plagues and judgments if so be he refused. And after, when as God was
pleased, fully to avenge himself, on Pharaoh, for so oppressing his people; He
chose, rather miraculously to defeat and overthrow Pharaoh and his Host in the
Red Sea, Exodus 14.27.28. and so, wholly to deliver his people, both from their
afflictions, and the hands of their enemies, Then he would permit them any
liberty, to assume arms, whereby to avenge themselves, for their injuries, on
their lawful, (though tyranous and cruel) King. And again, we have their
example, when they were lead Captives into Babylon, Nehem. cap. 9. Where after
confession, of Gods great goodness and mercy toward them of old, and of their
own wickedness and the justness of Gods punishment, speaking of the
Babilonish Kings to whom they were subjected, they likewise confess and
acknowledge, that they were set over them by God for their Sins; and that
they had Dominion over their bodies, at verse the 37. And therefore the Prophet
Jeremiah, chapter 29. exhorts them from God (not to rebel, against those
Kings, to whom God rendered them subject, that so they might regaine their
liberty, but) at the 7. verse, to pray for the peace of Babylon to the Lord,
for in the peace thereof, they should have peace, and at the 10. verse, to
wait Gods leisure for their deliverance, from that Captivily, and bondage, for
says he, Thus says the Lord, After seventy years be accomplished at Babylon,
I will visit you, and perform my good words toward you, in causing you to
return. And after, when God did fulfill his word to them, and delivered them,
we know, that it was not, by stirring up their Spirits to Sedition, Resistance,
or Rebellion, but as Ezra the Scribe, has recorded it, Ezra, 1.1.3. by
stirring up the Spirit of King Cyrus, freely to dismiss them and manumit them
by his regal proclamacon; by both which examples, of the people of God
recorded in the Word of God, we are plainly taught Passive obedience, to the
Supreme Power under afflictions, and to leave the redress and revenge to God
alone, to whom it properly appertains.

And tauely, by the harmonious consent, of many notorious and approved good
Authors of the Protestant profession of Religion, that I have consulted, (to
wit Calvin, Zanchy, Polanus, Piscator, Martinius, Wollebius, Aretius, Bucer,
Bullinger, Pomeranus, Marlorate, Bucanus, Szegedine, Wendelinus, Sharpius,
Crotius, Alstedius, Althusius, Hugo Grotius, and the famous Authors of the
Synopsis Purioris Theologiae, viz. Polyander, Rivet, Wallens, and Thysius, most
of them, public professors of Divinity; and our own learned Bishop Andrews,
and Doctor Boys, Master Perkins, and Master Downeham, all Orthodox men and good
writers; besides, Osiander, Vogelius, Dietericus, Gerardus Brochmandus,
Gravius, Casmannus, and Schroderus, (Lutherans) and the two famous Frenchmen,
(Peter Charon, and Peter de la Primanday,) who grounding their judgments upon
Scripture, do all conclude, That we ought to obey Princes, though wicked men,
in all things, that contradict not the revealed will or Word of God: but if so
be, they command things unlawful and which are against that Rule of Gods will
and Word, then as we must not obey them, by doing; so neither resist them, by
rebelling; but either, patiently suffer their wills to be done on us, though
not by us; or otherwise, fly from them, as David did from Saul. 1 Samuel 19.12
18. and as our Savior Christ did from Herod, Mat. 2.13. and as he advises his
Desciples to do, Mat. 10.23. When they persecute you in one City, fly into
another.

And thus we see, That though Kings be not godly, but wicked persons, yet
honor and obedience is to be done unto them, because it is God that has set
them up over us, though in his wrath against us, as he says, Hosea 13.11. and
therefore, though their sins may make us disaffect their persons, yet must we
yield obedience, to the power they are invested with, because it is of God. For
as the learned Hugo Grotius, well observes ( li. 1. de jure belli and paris,
ca: 2. Set. 7.) Sicut olim, pia crant Sacrificia secundum legem, quamvis ab
impijs Sacerdotibus celebrata: Sic pia res est Imperium, quamvis ab Impio
teneatur. And so Althusius from Aretius, vitia Personae, non tollunt Officium
illius. For we ought not to obey a Superior, because he is worthy, and
worthily commands, but because he is a Superior, says Peter Charon. ca. 16.
of his 3 book of Wisdom. Wherefore, Men cannot safely resist that Authotity,
nor despise that power of Kings, without they will, as acquire the name; so
justly incur the punishmen of Rebels: whom to oppose and resist, as it is
commendable, so, to subdue and destroy is warrantable by Scripture; for,
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, as Samuel says to Saul, from God, 1 Samuel 15.23. And Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live, says God him self.
Exodus 22, 18.

Now, the Scripture records, and shows us, many Judgments of, God upon
Rebels, Revolters, Seditious and Traitorous persons, and the fearful ends
they came to; That so we avoiding the sins, might thereby also evade the
punishment: for, what a fearful end is it, to have the Earth open her mouth,
and swallow us up quick, as it did Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Number. 16.32. and
to be consumed by fire from the Lord, as the Two hundred and fifty Princes of
Jsrael were, at the 35. verse of that Chapter; to hang by the hair of our
head, between the Heaven and the Earth as unworthy of either, and whilst yet
alive, to have our heart opened, as Absol m, 2 Samuel 18.9.14. to be slain, and
drawn and dragged from the place, as Ioab was, 1 Kings 2.34. to be hanged, as
Bigthan and Teresh, the Chamberlaines of King Ahasuerus were, Esther. 2.23. to
have ones head chopped off, as Sheba's was, 2 Samuel 20 22. and both it and ones
quarters hanged up, as Baanah's and Rechabs were, 2 Samuel 4.11. to have ones
Lands, and Livelihood seized upon and given to strangers, ones Issue miserable
for our sakes, and to be Damnatae memoriae, both ones name and memory as a
curse to posterity, as we read, Psalm. 109.11.10.13. but were this all, (though
this be much and fearful too,) there might yet remain some comfort; but that
such persons might be wholly comfortless, eternal punishments remain, to be
inflicted and succeed these temporal: so says S. Paul Romans 13.2. They that
resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. And therefore that we may not
come to such untimely ends, we must be careful to avoid such particulars, as
making us partake with the persons, in the facts of Treason, Rebellion, and
Sedition; may make us share also, in the Act of punishment with them. Now
Scripture shows us many ways, whereby a man may partake with others, and so
become guilty: as by being a Champion, or Leader for them; as Ioab to Adonijah
1 Kings 1, 7. by being a Spokesman or Orator for them, as Jeroboam, to his
Crew, 1 Kings 12.4. by blowing the Trumpet, that is animating them, and setting
them on; as Sheba, 2 Samuel 20.1. by giving them shrewd advice to manage their
matters and affairs; as Achitophel to Absalom, 2 Samuel 16.21. By praying for
their success: that was all Abiathar the Priest could do, 1 Kings 17. by
bruiting infamous Speeches, or libells of the King; as Shemei did, 2 Samuel 16.7.
by harboring or receiving them; as the City Abel did Sheba, and should have
been sacked for it, had not the wisdom of the wise woman prevented it, 2 Samuel 20.14.16. by furnishing them with money, or supplies otherwise; as the men
of Sichem, to Abimelech, Judges. 9.4. by being (if not party yet) privy to
it, and not opposing, as David had been to Saul's death, if he had not hindered
Abishal, 1 Samuel 26.9. or by being, at the least privy, and not disclosing it;
which had been Mordecai's, case, if he had concealed the Eunuchs Treason,
Esther, 2.22. And lastly, (which is as bad as any of the rest,) by speaking, or
writing, in praise or defense, either of the deed or the doers; which is their
case, Numb. 16.41. calling Corah and his Company, The people of the Lord; for
sure if the Consenter be in, the Commender much more. And as Gods Law, so
likewise the Statute and Common Law of this Realm, (among many other) have
declared one grand way, whereby a man may not only become actually guilty, but
also partake with the guilty in the Act. And that is thus expressed, by the
Statute of 25. Ed. 3. ca. 2. If a man do leavy war, against our Lord the
King, in his Realm; or be adherent to the Kings Enemies in his Realm, giving
to them aid and comfort, in the Realm or elsewhere, and thereof be probably
attainted, of open deed, by people of their condition, he is guilty of Treason.
And our Books, expound this branch of that Statute thus, He does leavye war
against the King, who does encounter in fight, such as be assisting to the
King, in his wars; And he is adherent and gives comfort to the Kings
Enemies, who, in open field, gives battle to the King friends, for taking
the Kings part. So Poulton de pace Regis and Regni. Tit. Treasons. 4. Daltons
Justice of peace, fo. 224. and the year book of, 45. Ed. 3.25. and this was
the Law to before that Statute. And so, Brook, Tit. Treasons, 7. and Stamford,
fo. 1. b. and Poulton, and Dalton in the places cited, do report for Law, from
the year book 21. Ed 3. fo. 23.24. That, If a man accompanied with a
convenient number of persons, do ride toward the King, to help him in his
wars, and another does encounter him, and kill him, this is high Treason, also
it was adjudged Treason (as they report from the book of Assizes, 22. Ed. 3.
Pl. 49.) before the cited Statute, to kill the Kings Messenger, who was sent to
execute his Commandment. Whereby, we see it is Treason, not only to oppose the
King, but also to oppose and kill such, who either take his part, or execute
his Commands, in time of war: And therefore, as every one abominates, the
very Name of Traitor or Rebel; so let every one likewise be careful, how he
may avoid those Crimes of Treason and Rebellion, and that he partake not with
the Authors or Fomenters thereof, in any the kinds before specified. Wherefore
considering the Premises, If so be God should be pleased to give us a wicked
Prince, and to set an evil King over us, (which his Name be ever praised for
it, as yet we have not, and he grant our sins never provoke him to do it) my
advice then grounded upon Scripture, in this case, is, That we well pondering
that saying of King Solomon, Pro. 21.1. The Kings heart is in the hands of the
Lord, and he turns it whithersoever he will, (though he never turn them to
wickedness) That therefore if he be wickedly bent, we pray unto Almighty God,
to dispose and turn his heart right, so as it best seems to his godly
wisdom, for our good, over whom he has set him; and then, notwithstanding
our prayers, so be he still continues wicked and evil, Then neither to rebel
against him, or depose him; but only patiently wait the Lords leisure, till he
remove him from us: for, as the Prophets Daniel and Hosea, both tell us, God
sets up Kings, and he takes away Kings, (therefore we must not:) Dan. 2.21.
and Hosea 13.11. And true Piety, as it binds the Subject to desire a good
Sovera gne, so likewise does it, to bear with a bad one: which Tacitus,
(though an Heathen) could tell us, saying, Subjects must, Bonos Principes voto
expetere, qualescunque tamen tollerare.

And thus briefly, we have shown from the Word of God, That the duty of
Subjects to their Lawful King, is to obey him* as Gods Lieutenant on earth, in
all Commands, except directly against God, as the Commands of Gods Minister;
acknowledging him as a Judge set over them by God, and having power to judge
them, but to be judged only by God, to whom alone he must give account of his
Actions and judgment: and therefore to love him, as their Father; to pray for
him, as their protector; for his continuance, if he be good; for his amendment,
if he be wicked; following and obeying his Lawful Commandes; eschewing and
flying his fury, in his unlawful; without other resistance save only Prayers
and Tears, according to the practice and example of the Christians in the
Primitive Church, whose only Arms and resistance against their persecuting
Emperors, were Preces and Lachrymae: whereupon says S. Ambrose excellently,
Coactus repugnare, non novi; Dolere, potero; poteroslere; potero, gemere:
adversus Arma, Milites; Gothos quoque Lachrymae meae A^ma sunt; aliter nec
debeo, nec possum resistere: and Gregory Nazianzen gives the reason, Quia solum
hoc contra persequutorem erat rem^dium: whom the Subjects thought, might sooner
be stild and conquered by their Tears and words, then by their Reproves and
Swords.

But now perhaps, some will object, That this labor might have been spared;
forasmuch (say they) as what has been here spoken, concerns private men
alone, and not Magistrates: But to such I answer (with him, who is the Glory of
this Age, and much admired, for his incomparable and exim^ous knowledge, both
in divine and humane learning, to wit Hugo Grotius) That indeed, There have
been found some learned men in this Age, as Peter Maytyr, Pareus the father,
Iunius Brutus, Daneus, and some others, who have first persuaded themselves,
and then endeavored to persuade others, That all which has been alleged,
obliges only private Men, but not the Inferior Magistrates; in whom they
suppose to reside a power, to oppose and resist the Injuries of him, who has
the Supreme power in a State; yea, and that they offend, if so be they do
not; which opinion is not to be admitted or allowed; inasmuch, that as it is
but merely an opinion, so withal it makes against the good, and is
destructive to the very being of Peace, and to the quietness of Government:
for if this be admitted, to what a world of misery should a State continually
be subjected? For then, any Act of a Kings which the Magistrates shall please
to interpret, Injurious to the State, shall immediately become a just ground
for the people to assume arms and rebel; whereby, not only the public peace
shall be unsettled, and the people be altogether deprived of its benefits; but
also a Kings Sacred Person, (which should be precious in his Subjects eyes, as
being Gods anointed,) yea, and the whole body of the State, (which would
willingly, ever preserve it self in safety and quiet,) shall be both, very
often exposed, not only to distraction, but even to destruction too; even so
often as seems good to the Magistrates; many times for slight and tolerable
matters; yea and it were to be wished, that not sometimes too for private
revenge. And therefore as Du Bartas, says very well, Better it were, to suffer
some disorder in the Seat, and some spotts in the Commonwealth, then in
pretending to reforme-utterly to overthrow the Republike. But how ever, though
the Magistrate may both pretend and intend good, by the taking up arms yet
(according to that Divine Axiom in Theology) We must not do evil, that good
may ensue. Wherefore, as the Opinion is nor to be received or allowed of, for
the Reasons premised, and so) that it is but an opinion, (and men's opinions may
be erroneous; so also is it to be rejected, as being, neither true, nor having
any devine example whereon truly to ground it.

Now, that the Opinion is false, and that Magistrates have no such power as is
pretended, but are also bound to obey, and consequently not to resist, as well
as the Inferior sort of Subjects, will appear by Reason and Scripture: And
therefore we must consider and know, That although Magistrates; in respect of
the Inferior sort, are public persons in a state, yet being opposed to the
Supreme power, they are but as private men; and in this Respect, the Reason of
obedience is common both to Magistrate and people: For S. Paul, Romans 13.1. when
he bids That every Soul be Subject to the higher powers, By every Soul, (that
is, by Synecdoche, every Man) he does as well mean and include Magistrates, as
inferior Subjects: For as Magistrates were but private men, till such time
Kings conferd that honor and power upon them; so that being withdrawn, they
are again rendered but private men in the State.

Now that Magistrates also are the Kings Subjects, no man will deny; And that
their power is conferd on them, from and by the Supreme, themselves cannot
deny; but, that the Supreme, has transferred and committed to them, full and
lawful power, to oppose and resist him, when, and as often as he does amiss,
in their Judgments, all Men may truly deny; and no man I am sure can lawfully
prove: For all that faculty and power of governing, which is placed in the
Magistrate, is so subjected to the Supreme power, that whatsoever is done by
them, contrary to the will and command of him that rules in chief, is esteemed
and adjudged, but as the Act of a private man. Celebrions therefore is that
saying of S. Augustine, and alleged to this purpose by the said Hugo Grotius.
(li. 1. de Iure belli and pacis. ca. 4. Sect. 6.) Ipsos humanarum rerum gradus
adverte; Si aliquidjusserit Curator, faciendum; non tamen, si contra Proconsul
jubeat: aut si Consul aliquid Iubeat, and aliud Imperator, non vtique contemnis
potestatem, sed eligis Mai^ri servire: nec hinc debet minor irasci, si major
raelatus est. Which also is proved by divine authority; for S. Peter, when he
says; 1 Epist. 2.13.14. Submit your selves for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as Supreams, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him,
etc. wherein, we see he mentious both Kings and Magistrates, yet would, that we
should be Subject and yield obedience, (as the words insinuate,) one way to the
King, and another way to the Magistrate: to the King, as Supreme in all
things, and that without any exception, save alone in such things as he
Commandes contrary to Gods Will and Word; but to the Magistrates, as sent by
him, that is, in respect they derive their power, which they have received and
possess, from the King, and so represent his Person that sends them: which
also our Savior intimates, Job 19.11. Where speaking to Pilate, (who was the
Magistrate, and Deputed to the Government of Judea by Caesar,) he says to him,
Thou could have no power at all against me, (viz. to Judge me,) except it
were given thee from above, that is, as from God, so likewise from the power
above thee, to wit, Caesar. And therefore only, is it, That by the before cited
Statute of 25. Edw. 3. ca. 2. It is declared to be High Treason, to kill the
Chancellor, Treasurer, or Justice of either Bench, Justice in Eire, or of
Assizes, (who are the grand subordinate Magistrates of the Realm) or any other
Justices assigned to hear and determine, sitting on the Berch or place of
Judgment, and doing their office: Because they then represent the Kings
Person. Wherefore, if the King be the Head of the people, according to the
Prophet Samuel; and the Higher power, according to the Apostle S. Paul; and the
Supreme, according to the Apostle S. Peter, then doubtless there is no power
equal with his, and much less any power above his, within his Realm and
Dominion, and so Antiquity confessed; for S. Chrisostom tells us, that Rex non
habet parem super terram; and Bracton, that Rex non habet parem in Regno suo,
and he adds the reason, quia sic amitterat praeceptum, cum par in parem non
habet Imperium. Which is also granted and acknowledged by the 37. Article, of
the Confession of Faith, made by the Church of England, in these words, The
Kings Majesty has the Chief power in this Realm of England, and other his
Dominions, unto whom the Chief Government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes does appertain. And,
the Oracle of the Common Law, Sir Edward Cook, does inform us according to
Law, ( li. 5. Caudryes case fo. 40. b.) That it appears as well by the Ancient
Common-lawes of this Realm, by the Resolutions and Judgments of the Judges
and Sages of the Laws of England, in all Succession of Ages; as by authority
of many acts of Parliament, Ancient, and of latter times, That the Kingdom of
England is an absolute Monarchy, and that the King is the only Supreme
Governor, as well over Ecclesiastical persons, and in Ecclesiastical causes,
as Temporal, within this Realm. And truly the Oath of Supremacy, (which
ordained by Act of Parliament, And which by force of the Statute of 1. Eliz.
ca. 1. Every Magistrate, within this Realm of England is to take,) makes it
also plainly appear, for he that takes it does declare in his Conscience,
That the Kings Highness, is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and
of all other his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal. And therefore surely, if
Magistrates acknowledge a power above themselves, (as they who have took that
Oath, cannot deny but they have) then doubtless, They are not to Govern him,
but rather to Govern for him, according to that power he has committed to
them, and then consequently, be both bound to obey, and forbid to resist that
Supreme and Higher power, as well as other private Subjects be; wherefore
whatever has been said, in respect of their duty, does as well concern
Magistrates.

And further, as there is no clear Text, that declares it lawful to resist
the Higher power, in any case; so neither is there any Divine and apposite
example in Scripture, that I could ever meet with yet (no, not alleged by
the adverse party in maintanance of their opinion,) whereon truly to ground
such an opinion, and prove such a Lawful power, to oppose the Supreme, and
to reside in the Inferior Magistracy, or Optimacy of a Realm: but on the
Contrary, much may be said and deduced from thence, to disproove, and evince
that position: In contradiction whereof, S. Chrysostom has afoorded us a good
observation, (Homil. 2. in Epist. 2. ad Timoth.) Insurrexerunt adversus Aaron
post vituli formatam effigiem, Core, Dathan and Abiron; quid ergo? nonn^ illi
periere? etc. Says he; It was after That Aaron had sinned foolishly and
hainously, in making the Calfe, that Core, Dathan and Abiron rebelled against
him; but what then? did they not perish? Yes, they did; and that was to show,
that although the Governor might be wicked, yet it was not for them who were
under him, to take upon them, to correct him, or rebel against him; no, though
they were the Optimates and Peers of a Realm; for we know the Two hundred
and fifty Princes of Israel, that joined in the Conspiracy and Rebellion
against Moses and Aaron, perished as well, yea and as strangely too, as Corah
and his Company. And besides, among the Jews, where, though there were so many
Kings, who were no less contemners of the Divine, then of humane Laws, do
we read, that ever the Inferior Magistrates (amongst whom, there were no
doubt* many godly and valiant men,) did at any time assume power to oppose
their Kings, but only when they received a special command from God, who alone
has power above Kings, and to correct them: Nor ever read we, that the
Statues and Idols of the false Gods, which were publicly set up by the Kings
of Judah and Israel, were dejected or demolished, but by the command of the
good Kings which God gave them, when they came to rule over the people. And so
we see, That Idolatry continued in the Kingdom of Israel and no reformation,
from the time of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, and first King of Israel, who
made Israel to sin, and set up the two Golden Calves and the Altar at Bethel,
1 Kings 12.28.33. until the time of good Josiah King of Judah, who demolished
them, as we read, 2 Kings, 23.15. and 2 Chronicles. 34.7. according to the Word of
the Lord, spoken by the man of God, which Prophesied against the Altar at
Bethel, 1 King 13.2. after they had continued above the space of 300. years:
during which time, doubtless, there were many Religious men and Magistrates in
Israel; and yet notwithstanding, we read not of any that opposed the King,
though an Idolater, nor yet that took upon them to remove the Idols from
amongst them, till such time it pleased God, to send King Josiah to do it,
according as he had foretold by the Prophet: but it is to be presumed, that
during that space, every good man, only looked to himself, that he polluted
not his own soul by such spiritual whoredom, and withal resolved and
endeavored with Josua, (Joshua 24.15.) That He and his household, might serve
the Lord, If then Idolatry, and defection from God, tyranny over the people,
and persecution of the Saints for their profession, hindered not the Spirit of
God, to Command the people to yield due and hearty obedience to their cruel
Kings, as we have shown, before from Jeremiah and S. Paul, toward
Nebuchadnezar and Nero; what shameless presumption then is it, to any
Christian people, now adays, to claim such an unlawful liberty and power, to
resist, oppose or depose their lawful Kings, which God refused to grant to his
own peculiar and chosen people the Jews.

For in the first Book of Samuel, in the 8. Chapter, where Samuel makes the
description of a King, and shows the people the manner of their King that
should Reign over them (not that all things there mentioned by Samuel from the
Lord, were by him granted as lawful for a King to do, but Samuel relates the
manner) thereby to prepare their hearts before hand, to the due obedience of that
King, which God was to give unto them, and so he there opens to them, what
might be the intolerable quallities, that might happen either in him, or some
other of their Kings, through their inordinate appetites,) thereby preparing
them to patience, and not to resist Gods Ordinance, if so be the
licentiousness of their Kings will, should extend so far as to do such things
as he there mentions; as if he would have said; Since God has granted your
importunate suite in giving you a King; as ye have formerly committed an
error, in shaking of Gods yoke and overhasty seeking of a King: so now beware,
ye fall not into the next also, in casting off rashly, that yoke, which God at
your earnest suite has laid upon you, how hard so ever it seems to be: for as
you could not have obtained a King, without the permission and ordinance of
God; so in no wise, can ye shake him off without the same warrant: since he,
that has the only power to make him, has also, alone the power to unmake him;
and therefore be ye obedient, and patiently bear with those straights that I
shall fore-shew you, as with the finger and hand of God, which lies not in
your power to take off: For says he, verse. 11. This will be the manner of
your King, that shall reign over you; He will take your sons, and appoint
them for himself, for his Charriots, and to be his horsemen, and some shall
run before his Charriots, etc. That is briefly, He will exercise very much
cruelty, oppression and Tyranny over you, almost beyond humane patience to
endure; But yet for all this, although he should do so, Yet we do not at
all read there, That the People should then disobey him; neither of any liberty
granted to them, or power granted to the Magistrates, to oppose him for so
doing, or to restrain his power, or to redress those evils themselves, but
being destitute of all humane Remedies, they were only, to cry unto the Lord,
to remedy them; as we read at verse the 18. For indeed there is no Lawful
way of redress, but by our addresses to God by prayer, to turn his heart; and
to the King by petition, to reform his actions? and so our own old Law
teaches us, for Bracton, li 1. cap. 8. speaking of the King, says thus, Si ab
eo petatur, locus erit Supplicationi, quod factum suum corrigat and emendet,
quod quidem si non fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad poenam, quod Dominum expectet
ul^orem: Nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat disputare, multo fortius contra
factum suum ire. And therefore it is very remarkable, that amongst the many
Prophets, that God sent to reprehend the Kings of Israel and Judah, for their
Idolatry, Cruelty, and Oppression, how wicked soever the Kings were; yet never
any of them called upon the people, or persuaded the Elders of the people, to
resist, or oppose them: but whereas it seemed good to God, to punish the wicked
Kings of Judah for their great sins, (whereof some were, oppression of their
subjects) we read that he did it by the Assirians, by the Egyptians, by the
Babylonians and not by the Jews their Subjects; to teach us, That he teaches
us not Rebellion and disobedience, nor is the author thereof; and withal. That
we should not take upon us to remedy such things, but to leave that to him, to
whom Vengeance belongs, Psalm. 94.1. For Vengeance is mine, and I will repay
says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.35. and again, by S. Paul, Romans 12.19. and Heb.
10.30. And if at any time, Acts of violence were committed upon the Persons of
wicked Kings, so that they were killed, yet we do not ever read, That God
approved of the murder, but Contrariwise, that he punished the doers thereof:
nor are such passages recorded in Sacred story, in approbation of the fact, but
only as a Testimony of Divine providence, sometimes permitting it: and so we
read, that the servants of King Ioash, 2 Chronicles. 24.25. conspired against him,
and slew him on his bed. But such examples, only show us what was done by
others, not what ought to be done by us* but on the contrary, the Prophet
Samuel, by his own example, shows what the duty of Governors and Magistrates
is toward their King, though a wicked Man; even to honor him before the
people: when as, 1 Samuel 15.30. The Elders and the people looking on him, he
yet yields his wonted reverence toward King Saul, though a wicked person, and
having also, but newly transgressed Gods holy Commandes.

Remarkable also, is that passage recorded by all the Evangelists, and which
we read of, Mat. 26.50 51. Marc. 14.47. Luc. 22.50.51 and Ioh. 18.10.11. where,
when as Simon Peter drew forth his sword and cut of Malcus his ear, who was
the Servant of the high Priest, our Lord and Master, immediately touched his
ear, and healed him again, and withal rebuked Peter, bidding him put up his
sword: Now in that he healed the High Priest servants Ear again; it was to
show us, as the Power of his Divinity by the Cure, so also, that Peter had
offended by cutting it off: But in that he bidds Peter to put up his sword
again; it was to teach us, That if such who have the Supreme Power and
Authority, do unjustly injure us, we should rather bear it with patience,
then resist them by violence. For as Christ there says to Peter, They which
take the sword (viz. to resist authority, as Peter did, though in a good cause
to defend our most innocent Savior) shall perish with the Sword; and S. Paul
says Romans 13.1. They that resist the powers, shall receive to themselves
Damnation.

Wherefore, weighing the premises, and that even Magistrates are but as private
Men, in respect of the King, and so as well bound to obey him, as his Inferior
Subjects; Therefore to conclude, let every Subject, whether, Magistrate,
Optimate, or Infimate, conceive and apprehend himself in the Condition of a
private Man, (as doubtless he is, when opposed to the Supreme,) and then, if
he would feign preserve himself safe, from offending either God, his own
Conscience, or the King, and so perserve himself from error, then I am sure,
he cannot have a more safe, or better example to follow, then that which Jesus
Christ, our most blessed Lord and Savior himself has shown us, whom we all
do steadfastly believe, to have been, most holy, just, innocent and
inoffensive; and yet, though he was not only, ever falsely accused, and being
once said to have a Devil, and shamelessely abused, as being mocked, scoffed
at, blinded, and then spit on; but also undeservedly punished, as being
buffeted, scourged, and crowned with thorns, yet did endure all those
opprobries, injuries, and punishments, with so great patience; as that, though
we read. Mat. 26.53. He could have had more then twelve Legions of Angels, to
have defended him, but for praying for; yet we never read, That he did resist,
and but seldom, that he so much as answered again: And S. Peter, 1 Epist.
2.21. tells us, That Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example that we
should follow his steps; which if we do, Then the Comfort and Result will be,
That if we Suffer with him, or for him, or for his sake, We sbaell also reign
with him, as S. Paul assures us, 2 Timoth. 2.12.

Berchetus in explicat. controver. Gallicanae cap. 7. These testimonies are
clear enough, and yet to all these I will add this one memorable example,
which you may read in Berchetus, and Ioh. Servivus, which tells us, that in
France, after the great Massacre at Paris, when the reformed Religion did seem
as it were forsaken, and almost exstinguished, a cerraine King powerful in
strength, rich in wealth, and terrible for his Ships, and navall force, which
was at enmity and hatred with the King of France, dispatched a solemn
Embassy and message unto Henry King of Navarre, and other Protestant Lords,
and commanded his Ambassadors to do their best to set the Protestants against
the Pastists, and to arm Henry the Prince of Navarre, which then lived at
Bearne, under the Dominion of the most Christian King, against his Sovereign,
the French King, which thing the Ambassadors endeavored to do, withal there
art and skill, but all in vain; for Henry being a good Subject, as it were
another David, to become a most excellent King, would not prevent the day of
his Lord; yet the Ambassadors offered him many ample, fair, and magnificent
conditions; among the rest, abundance of Money, the suume of three hundred
thousand, anreorum scutatorum, French crowns, which were ready to be told for
the preparation of the war; and for the continuation of the same, there
should be paid every Month so much as was necessary; but Henry being a
faithful Christian, a good Prince, a widower, and though he was displaced,
from the public government of the commonwealth; and for his sake, for the
dislike the King bare toward him, the King had banished many Protestants from
his Country, and had killed many faithful Pastors; yet would not he for all
this lift up his hand against the Lords anointed; but refused their Gold,
rejected their conditions, and dismissed their Ambassadors, as witnesses of his
faith to God, his fedility and allegiance to his King, and peaceable mind
toward his Country,

The sum then of all, which has been said, is this; That so be, the
licentious will of a King, be not terminated by Gods Law, and the Law of that
Republike over which God has set him, but that he will needs swerue from both
rules: that then his Subjects presume not to oppose his unjust commands, by an
unlawful Sedition or Rebellion, which is most odious in the sight of God and
Men; but rather by slight, or passive obedience; according to Gods Word, and
his peoples example; by both which, we suppose the point has been clearly
proved: which if we do, then may we stand up with clean hands and unspotted
consciences, having proved our selves in all our actions, true Christians
toward God, and dutiful Subjects toward our King, having remitted the
judgment and punishment of all his wrongs to us, unto him to whom only of
right it appertains.

A Prayer.
O Almighty and Everlasting God, who have taught us by thy Word, that the
hearts of Kings are in thy rule and governance, and that thou do dispose and
turn them, as it seems best to thy godly wisdom: therefore we humbly
beseech thee so to dispose and govern the heart of CHARLES, thy Servant, our
King and Governor, that he knowing whose Minister he is, may in all his
thoughts, words and works, ever seek thy honor and glory, and study to
preserve thy people committed to his charge, in wealth peace, and godliness; and
grant that we his Subjects, duly considering whose Authority he has, may
faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in thee, and for thee, aceording
to thy blessed Word and Ordinance, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

