THE WORKS OF THAT GRAVE and LEARNED LAWYER Judge Ienkins, Prisoner in
Newgate. UPON Diverse STATUTES, Concerning, the Liberty, and Freedom of the
Subject. With a perfect Table thereto annexed.

Plebs sine Lege ruit.

LONDON, Printed for J. Gyles, and are sold at his shop at Furnivals-Inne.
MDCXLVIII.

Here JENKINS stands, who thundering from the TOWER Shook the bold Senat's
Legislative Power; Six of whose words twelve Reames of votes exceed As
mountains moved by grains of mustard seed Thus gasping Laws were rescued
from the Snare, He that will save a Crown must know and dare Sold by I. Giles
at Furnivals-Inn-gaw. J. Berkenhead



The Contents.
The Law of the Land. The King. Treason. A Parliament. The present Parliament.
Certain Erroneus Positions and Proceedings of both Houses of Parliament. The
like of the House of Commons. The Propositions of the Parliament of both
Kingdoms sent to New Castle. The Kings Party. The Parliaments Party are
Delinquents. The Army serving the two Houses. The Army Rescuing the King. The
Liberty of the Subject. Messellan^a.
The Law of the Land.
THE Law of the Land has for its ground; 1. Custom. 2. Judicial Records. 3.
Acts of Parliament. The two latter being Declarations of the Common Law, and
custom of the Realm. page 5.21.23. The Law of Royal Government is a Law
Fundamental. p. 5. The Kings Prerogative, and the Subjects Liberty, are
determined and bounded by the Law, p. 131. The King claims no power but by the
law of the land. p. 131. The Law the only Rule and Direction of the Subject in
this present War. page 42 131. Vbi Lex non distinguit, ^bi non est
distinguendum. p. 132.
The King.
THE King of England has his Title to the Crown, and to his Kingly Office and
Power, not by way of trust, from the two Houses of Parliament, or from the
people, but by inherent Birthright from God, Nature, and the Law. p. 24, 25.
38. 52, 53, 54, 56. 57. There was never King Deposed, but in tumultuous and
mad times, and by the power of the Armies, and they who were to be the
succeeding Kings in the head of them, as Ed: 3. and Hen. 4. p. 54. Usurpers
were Kings de fact^, not de jure. p. 54. The King is assisted by the advice of
the Judges, his Counsel at Law, Solicitor, Attorney, Masters of Chancery, and
counsel of State, hence the Law has settled several Powers in the King* p.
27.28. The Kings of England enjoyed that Power in a full measure till King
John's time. p: 6 7, 8. How Rights of Sovereignty continued in practice from
Hen. 3. till 1640, p. 6. The Kings Power not separable from his Person. p. 70,
71. The Body Natural and Politic in the King make but one body. p. 2.38.71.
Every Subject swears homage to the King. p. 8. The Law gives reverence to the
Person of the King. p. 10. Foul mouthed Pamphlets against the King condemned,
p. 21. The Supreme Power is in the King* p. 7.13.14.16.57, 58. The Oath of
Supremacy in relation to the Parliament. p. 67.133. The King Supreme in
Ecclesiastical causes. p. 10. The King the only Supreme Governor, and all
other persons have their power from him, by his Writ, Patent, or Commission* p.
20, 21, 22.36, 37. and 64, 65. The power of the Militia is in the King. p.
8.37. In the time of Parliament. p. 8. The Commission of Array in force. p.
13.36. The Power of making League with Foreigners is in the King. p. 8.15.17.
The power of War in the King p. 20.21. The power of making Officers in the
King. p. 8. The King only has power to make Justices of Peace, and of Assize.
p. 45.100.12^. The power of coynadge in the King* p. 8. The power of pardoning
only in the King by Law p. 8.66.74.78.84.128.130. The King has power to
remove the courts at Westminster. p. 45. The King can do no wrong, but his
Judges, Counsello^^s, and Ministers may. p. 37.41. So long as men manage the
Laws they will be broken more, or less. p. 29.
Treason.
IN the Reign of Ed. 2. the Spencers, the Father and the Son to cover their
Treason hatched in their hearts, invented this damnable and damned opinion,
that Homage, and Oath of Allegiance, was more by reason of the King^ Crown
(that is his Politic Capacity) than by reason of his person; upon which
opinion they inferred three execrable and detestable Consequences. First, if
the King do not demean himself, by reason, in the right of his Crown, his
Leidges are bound by Oath to remove the King. Secondly, seeing the King could
not be reformed by suit of Law, that ought to be done per asperte, that is by
force. Thirdly, his Leidges be bound to Govern in aid of him, and in default
of him. p. 9.70. Several Treasons by the Statute, 25. 8d. 3. p. 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 76. The word King in the 25. Edw. 3. must be understood of the Kings
natural Person p. 12, 13, 77. Other Treasons not specified in that Act, are
declared to be no Treasons, until the King and his Parliament shall declare
otherwise. p. 77.101. To seize the Kings Forts, Ports, Magazine of War, is
High Treason. p. 11. 22^ 37.77. To remove Counselors by Arms, is high
Treason. p. 22.40. To leavie War to alter Religion, is high Treason, p. 40.
To leavie war to alter the Law, is high Treason. p. 11.40.77. To counterfeit
the great Seal, is high Treason. p. 37. To adhere to any State within the
Kingdom, but the Kings Majesty, is high Treason. 24.39. To imprison the King
until he agree to certain demands, is high Treason, p. 1^.22.77. They who
imprison the King purpose to destory him, p. 163. Deposers of the King adjudged
Traitors by the Law of the Land, p. 54. A Body Corporate cannot commit Treason,
but the persons can. p. 16. Noble men committing Treason, forfeit their Office
and Dignity* p. 143. Treason how punished by the Law p. 42. Treason does ever
produce fatal destruction to the Offender, and never attaines to the desired
end: and there are two incidents inseparable thereunto. p. 135.
A Parliament.
THe word Parliament comes from the French word Parler, to Treat. p. 81. The
King is Principium, Caput, and Finis, Parl. p* 26.48.122. The King assembles
the Parliament by his Writ, Adjournes, Prorogues, and dissolves the Parliament,
by the Law, at his pleasure, p. 57. The Writ whereby the King assembled the two
Houses, which is called the Writ of Summons, at all times, and at this
Parliament used, and which is the warrant, ground, and foundation of their
meeting, is for the Lords of the House of Peers, to Consult and Treat with the
King (that is the Parler) of great Concernments, touching; 1. The King. 2. The
defense of this Kingdom. 3. The defense of the Church of England. p. 24.34. p.
25.81.120, 121. Counsel is not command, Counselors are not Commanders. p. 26.
The Writ of summoning the Judges, Counfell of L^w, and 12* Masters of Chancery,
is to appear, and attend the Parliament, to give Counsel p. 116. The Writ of
summoning the Commons, is, to do, and to cons^nt to such things, which shall
happen to be ordained by Common Counsel there (viz.) in the Parliament, p.
25.26.115. The Parliament is a Corporation composed of the King the head, and
the Lords and Commons, the Subject body. p. 5. l. 22. p.
19.20.49.50.80.122.142.145.146. And it has power over our Lives, Libertyes,
Laws, and Goods. p. 118. The Court of Parliament is only in the House of
Lords, where the King sits in person, p. 116.122.144. The Office of the Lords,
is to Counsel the King in time of Peace, and to defend him in time of War. p.
116.142. It belongs to the House of Lords, to reform erroneous Judgments
given in the Kings Bench, to redress the delays of Courts of Justice, to
receive all Petitions, to advise his Majesty with their Counsel, to have their
Votes in Voting, or abrogating of Laws, and to propose for the Common good,
what they conceive meet. p. 33. How Errors in Judgment are reversed by the
House of Lords. p. 55. At a Conferrence the Commons are always uncovered and
stand, when the Lords sit with their hats on; which shows that they are not
Colleagues in Judgment with the Lords. p. 147. Every Member of the House of
Commons takes the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, before his admission into
the House. p. 67.133. Briberies, Extortions, Monopolyes, ought to be enquired
after by the House of Commons, and complained of to the King and Lords. p. 114.
It belongs to the House of Commons to represent the Grievances of the Country,
to grant Aids for the King, upon all fit occasions extraordinary, to assent to
the making or abrogating Laws. p. 33.115, 116, 117, 118. Because making of
new, and abrogating of old Laws, both induce Novelties: and because Bills in
both Houses may pass, but by one or two voices, or very few, and perhaps of no
Judicious men (who oftentimes carry it by making the Major part, which involves
the consent of all) therefore the Law makes the King assisted therein, by a
great number of Grave, Learned, and Prudent men, the Judge of those Bills,
whether they be necessary for the Public Good, or no. p. 32, 3^.53.57.123.
And the King, upon all Bills, has liberty of assenting or dissenting. p.
18.28.39.111. And in case of the Kings Minority, the Protector has his
liberty, and negative voice, in respect of the King. p. 52. The styles of the
Acts printed from 9. Hen. 3. to 1. Hen. 7. were either, the King Ordaines at
his Parliament, etc. Or, the King Ordains by the advice of his Prelates and
Barons, and at the humble petition of the Commons etc. In Hen. 7. time the
style was altered, and has so continued to this day. p. 24.71. No Act of
Parliament binds the Subject, without the assent of the King. p. 71.72. When
an Act of Parliament is against common Right, or Reason, or repugnant, or
impossible to be performed, the Common Law shall control it, and adjudge it
to be void. And such is an Act for a perpetual Parliament. p. 139. An Act of
Parliament, that a man shall be Judge in his own cause, is a void Act. p. 139.
An Adjournment of the parliament makes no S^ssion. p. 137. There is no S^ssion,
till a prorogation* or dissolution of the Parliament. p. 137. All the Acts of
one S^ssion relate to the first day of the Parliament. p 138. The two Houses
ought to take care of the preservation of the Kings Person p. 18. The Lords and
Commons cannot assent to any thing that tends to the disinherison of the King,
and his Crown to which they are sworn. p. 11. The two Houses ought not to
meddle with the Kings Revenue. p. 11. Arms are not to be borne in London, or
Westminster in time of Parliament. p. 8.39. The Privilege of Parliament
protects no man in case of Treason or ^elony. p. 15.16 78. Parliaments are as
the times are; if a turbulent Faction prevails, the Parliament are wicked, if
the times be sober, modest, prudent, and not biassed, the Parliament are right,
good, honorable, and good Medicines and Salves. p. 41.42.
The present Parliament.
THis Parliament began 3. November. 1640, and in the beginning thereof the King
acquitted the Ship Money, Knighthood-Money, seven Courts of Justice, consented
to a Tri^niall parliament, settled the Forest bounds, took away the Clarke of
the Market, of the Household, trusted the Houses with the Navy, passed an Act
not to dissolve this Parliament without the Houses assent: No people in the
world so free, if they could have been content with Laws, Oaths, and Reason,
and nothing more could, nor can be devised to serve us, neither has been in
any time before. p. 3^. Notwithstanding all this ( Jan. 10. 1641.) the King was
driven away from London, by frequent Tumults, and 2. thirds, and more of the
Lords had deserted that House, for the same cause, and the greater put of the
House of Commons, left that House also for the same reason: New men chosen in
their places, against Law, by the pretended Warrant of a counterfeit Seal, and
in the Kings name, against his consent, leavying War against Him, and seizing
his Forts, Ports, Magazins, and Revenue, and converting them to his destruction
the subversion of the Law, and Land, laying Taxes on the people never head of
before in this Land, devising new Oaths to oppose the Forces raised by the
King, etc. p. 35. From the 3 Novem. 1640. u^^o Ian. 10.164^. they had time to
persecute all evil Counselors and Judges. p 17 4^. From that time the King was
driven away, the two Houses stood in opposition to the king and his power. p.
66. This became no Parliament when the King with whom they should parley was
driven away, and it continues so, whilst his Majestic is restrained as a
prisoner p. 35.81. And the houses now severed from the King have no power at
all, no more than the body has, being severed from the head, p. 80.112. The 2.
Houses do not now act by the Kings Writ, but contrary to it. p. 121. And so
their Acts are Null p. 122 141. The Act for continuing this parliament, so long
as both Houses please, is void, because it is; 1. Against Common right; for
thereby the parliament men will not pay their debts: And they may do wrong to
other men, Impune: besides the utter destruction of all men's actions, who have
to do with Parliament men, by the Statute of Limitation. 21. Jacob. 2. Against
common reason, for parliaments were made to redress public Grievances, not
to make them. 3. Impossible, the Death of his Majesty (whom God long preserve,
dissolving it necessarily. 4. Repugnant to the Act for a Trienniall parliament,
and to the Act for holding a parliament once a year. p. 139.140. The end of
continuing this parliament was to raise Credit for money; for three purposes:
And the three ends of the Act being determined, it agrees with Law, and
Reason, the Act should end. p. 141. A perpetual parliament (besides that it
incites men to self ends) will be a constant charge to the Kingdom, by reason
of the wages of parliament men. p. 141. Mischiefs by the length of parliaments.
p. 121.
Certain Erroneus Positions and Proceedings of both Houses of Parliament
discovered and confuted.
THe two Houses without the King are not the Parliament, but only parts
thereof: and by the abuse, and misunderstanding of this word Parliament, they
have miserably deceived the people. p. 80.156 The King is not vertually in the
two Houses. p. 12.13.20.21. The two Houses are not above the King, but the King
is Superior to them. p. 11.19.23, 24.133. The tenants of the Spencers, are the
ground of their proceedings. p. 10.22. And upon their pretenses, they take upon
them the Government at this time. They have destroyed above a 100. Acts of
parliament (even all concerning the King, the Church, and Church men) and in
effect Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta, which are the Common Laws of the
Land. p. 154. They have fifteen several illegal ways raised Money upon the
Subject this present parliament, p. 35. There is no Crime from Treason to
Trespass, but they are guilty of. p. 142. They are not to be Judges in their
own cause. p. 15. Of their League and Covenant with the Scots. p. 158.160. The
two Houses by the Law of this Land, have no color of power, to make
Delinquents or pardon Delinquents, the King contradicting. p. 119.131.
Certain Erroneous Positions and Proceedings of the House of Commons
discovered and confuted.
THey cannot be Members of the House of Commons, who were not recident in the
Counties, or Buroughs, for which they were elected, at the time of the Test
of the Writ of Summons of parliament. p. 149. If any undue Return be made,
the person Returned, is to continue a Member, and the trial of the Falcity of
the Return, is to be before the Justice of Assize, in the proper County, this
condemns the Committee for undue Elections. p. 148. The House of Commons
cannot Elect, and Return Members of that House, p. 144. The ejecting of a
Member that has sitten, is against Law, also their new elections are against
Law: And by this it may be judged, what a House of Commons we have. p. 148.
Breaches of privileges of parliament may be punished in other Courts. p. 149.
And what need then of the Committee for privileges. The house of Commons by
their Writ have no separate power given them over the Kings people, p. 144. The
house of Commons cannot imprison any who are not their Members, or Disturbers
of their Members in the service of the parliament, p. 143, 144, 145. The House
of Commons no Court, p. 115, 116.144, 145, 146, etc.
The Propositions sent by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms to His Majesty at
New Castle, page 6.
General Reasons against those propositions. p. 11.15.128. Reasons in
particular against those propositions. For disabling the King to pardon. p. 13.
For altering Religion in point of Government. 37.61.63. For sale of the Bishops
Lands, p. 36. For taking away the Book of Commonprayer, p. 37. For taking from
his Majesty all, the power by Land and Sea. p. 37. For laying upon the people
what Taxes they shall think meet. p. 128. Besides in their propositions they
do not style themselves His Majesty's Subjects, p. 128.
The Kings Party. page 36, 37 38.
THe Subjects are commanded by Law to Assist the King in War. 36. Those who
adhere to the King are freed by the Statute of the 11th. Hen. 7. p. 39.78.97.
Master Prins objections against the King, and his party answered, p. 47. etc.
The Parliaments Party are Delinquents.
A Delinquent is he who adheres to the kings enemies: this shows who are
Delinquents. p. 7.
The Army serving the Parliament.
THe sum of the Ordinance for the Indemnity of the Army, p. 79. It can no
more free the Soldiers than repeal all the Laws of the Land. p. 78. The
Judges are sworn to do Justice, according to the Laws of the Land. p. 79. An
Act of Oblivion, and a General Pardon, the only means to Indempnifie the Army
and the whole kingdom. p. 84. And the conclusion of all the other books.
The Army Rescuing the King.
TO deliver the King out of Traitorous hands is our bounden duty by the Law of
God and the Land. p. 155. By the Law of the Land, when Treason, or Felony is
committed, it is lawful for every subject, who suspects the Offender, to
apprehend him, so that Justice may be done upon him, according to Law p. 157.
As the Army has power, so adhering to the King, all the Laws of God, Nature,
and man are for them. p. 166. None by the Law of the Land, can in this kingdom
have an Army but the King. p. 153.
The Liberty of the Subject.
Our Liberties were allowed in the 17th. of King John; and confirmed in the
9th. of Hen. 3. and are called Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta. p.
6.117.130. Magna Charta is irrepealable. p. 62. Several Bills for our Liberties
passed at the beginning of this Parliament. p. 34. And how secured. The Liberty
of the Subject violated by the two Houses of Parliament. 140*
Miscellanea.
THe Lord Cooks Institutes published by the Order of the House of Commons. p.
77. Of the Bill passed this parliament for taking away the Bishops Votes in
Parliament. p. 31. Against that saying, that the King got away the Great Seal
surreptitiously from the Parliament. p. 45. Of Jack Cade. p. 160. Treasons,
Murders, Felonies, and Capital Crimes to be tried by Iuries, and not
otherwise, but by Act of parliament. p. 102. The Chancellors or Keepers Oath.
174. The present Commissioners have no Court, Seal, nor commission, 175. The
King, the Laws and kingdom cannot be severed. The only quarrel was for the
Militia, which the Laws have ever settled upon the King. 177. No peace can
possibly be had without the King, ibid. No man can devise lands till he be 21
years of age, 1. 84. An Infant of 17 years may dispose of goods by will by the
opinion of some, but by others not till 18. 181. The Court of Wards had no
jurisdiction over the personal estate. 185. Peace and plenty abounded during
his Majesty's Government. 187. Since the two Houses have usurped the power the
kingdom has been in a sad condition, 19. Nothing delivered in this book for
Law but what the house of commons have avowed for Law this Session. 194. The 24
positions of Law set out in diverse books by the House of commons order. p. 196.
It is honorable to dye for the Laws, 202. Good counsel for them, if it be
taken in time, 203. That which will save this Land from destruction, is an Act
of Oblivion, and his Majesty's Gracious General pardon, the Soldiers their
Arrears, and every man his own, and truth and peace established in this Land,
and favorable regard had to the satisfaction of tender Consciences.
God save the King.
To the Honorable Societies of Grayes Inn, and of the rest of the Innes of
Court, and to all the Professors of the LAW.
I Have now spent Forty five years in the Study of the Laws of this Land,
being my Profession, under, and by the conduct of which Laws this
Commonwealth has flourished for some ages past in great splendour and
happiness (jam seges est ubi Troja fuit.) The great and full body of this
Kingdom has of late years fallen into an extreme sickness; it is truly
said that the cause of the disease being known, the disease is easily cured.
There is none of you I hope, but does heartily wish the recovery of our common
parent, our native country (Moribus antiquis stat res Britannica.) I call God
to witness that this discourse of mine has no other end then my wishes of the
common good: how far I have been from Ambition my life past, and your own
knowledge of me, can abundantly inform you: and many of you well know, that I
ever detested the Ship Money and Monopolies, and that in the beginning of this
Parliament, for opposing the excesses of one of the Bishops, I lay under three
Excommunications, and the Examination of seventy seven Artioles in the high
Commission Court. His sacred Majesty, (God is my witness) made me a Judge in
the parts of Wales against my will, and all the means I was able to make; and
a patent formy place was sent me, for the which I have not paid one farthing,
and the place is of so inconsiderable a benefit that it is worth but 80. l. per
Annum when paid, and it cost me every year I served twice as much out of my
own estate in the way of an ordinary and frugall expense. That which gave me
comfort was, that I knew well that his Majesty was a just and a prudent Prince.

In the time of the Atturneyships of Mastor Noy and the Lord Banks, they were
pleased to make often use of me, and many referrences concerning suits at Court
upon that occasion came to my knowledge; and as I shall answer to God upon my
last account this is truth, that all or most of the referrences which I have
seen in that kind (and I have seen many) were to this effect, that his
Majesty would be informed by his Council if the suits preferred were agreeable
to the Laws, and not inconvenient to his people, before he would pass them,
(what could a just and pious Prince do more?) Gentlemen: you shall find the
cause and the Cure of the present great distemper in this discourse, and God
prosper it in your hands, thoughts, and words, as the case deserves.

Hold to the Laws, this great body recovers: forsake them, it will certainly
perish. I have resolved to tender my self a Sacrifice for them as cheerfully,
and I hope (by Gods assistance) as constantly as old Eleazer did for the holy
Laws of his Nation.

Your Well-wisher David Jenkins. Now Prisoner in the Tower.

LEX TERRAE.
THe Law of this Land has three grounds: First, Custom. Secondly, Judicial
Records, Thirdly, Acts of Parliament. The two latter are but declarations of
the Coumon-Law and Custo^e of the Realm, touching Royal Government. And this
Law of R^yall G^vernment is a ^aw Fundamental.

The Government of this Kingdom by a R^yall Sovereign, The Kings Prerogative
is a principal part of the common Law. Com. Lital 34^. 27 Hen. 8. Stamford,
Pra^. fol. 1. 2 Pars inflit. fol. 496 3 Parsinstit. page 84.
has been as ancient as History is, or the memorial of any time; what power
this Sovereignty always had, and used in war and peace in this Land, is the
scope of this discourse; That Usage so practiced makes therein a Fundamental
Law, and the Common Law of the Land is common Usage, Pl^wdens Commentaries 195.
For the first of our Kings sithence the Norman Conquest, the first William,
second William, Henry the first, Stephen, Henry the second, and Richard the
first, the Customs of the Realm touching Royal Government, were never
questioned: The said Kings enjoyed them in a full measure. In King John's time
the Nobles and Commons of the Realm conceiving that the ancient Customs and
Rights were violated, and thereupon pressing the said King to allow them in the
seventeenth of King John, the said Liberties, were by King John allowed, and by
his Son Henry the third, after in the ni^th year of his Reign confirmed,
and are called Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, declared four hundred
twenty two years s^hence by the said Charters.

Now ^ests to be considered, after the Subjects had obtained their Rights and
Liberties, which were no other then their ancient Customs (and the
fundamental Rights of the King as Sovereign are no other.) How the Rights of
Sovereignty continued in practice from Henry the thirds time until this
present Parliament of the third of November, 1640. for before Henry the thirds
time, the Sovereignty had a very full Power.

Rex habet Potestatem and jurisdictionem super omnes qui in Regno suo sunt,
Bracton. temp H. 3. l. 4 cap. 24. Sect. 1.
ea quae sunt jurisdictionis and paucis ad nullum pertinent nisi ad Regiam
dignitatem, habet etiam coercionem, ut Delinquentes puniat and coerceat: This
proves where the supreme Power is.

A Delinquent is he who adhears to the Kings Enemies, Com. Sur. Litil. 261.
This shows who are Delinquents.

Omnis sub Rege, and ipse sub nullo nisi tantum Deo, nonest inferior sibi
Subjectis, Soct. 5. Brac^ ibid.
non parem habet in Regno suo: This shows where the supreme power is.

Rex non habet superiorem nisi Deum, satis habet ad poenam quod Deum expectat
ultorem. Bracton. l. 5. tract. 3. de delaiti, cap. 3 Bracton* l. 3 cap. 7.
This shows where the supreme power is.

Treasons, Fellonies, and other Pleas of the Crown, are propria causa Regis:
This shows the same power.

By these passages it does appear what the Custom was for the power of
Sovereignty before that time, the power of the Militia, of coining of Money, of
making Leagues with foreign Princes, the power of pardoning, of making of
Officers, etc. All Kings had them, the said Powers have no beginning.

Sexto Edw. 1. Com. Sur. Eittl. 85. Lege Homage, every Subject owes to the King
(viz.) Faith de Membro, de vita, de terreno Honor, the form of the Oath,
Edward 1.
inter vetera statuta is set down; We read of no such, or any Homage made to
the two Houses, but frequently of such made by them.

It is declared by the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of the Realm,
that it belongs to the King and his Royal Segniory, ^ Ed. 1. Strasu^e at
large, fol. 42.
straightly to defend force of Armor, and all other force against the Kings
peace, at all times when it shall please him, and to punish them that shall do
contrary according to the Law and Usage of the Realm, and hereunto they are
bound to aid their Sovereign Lord, at all seasons when need shall be. Here the
supreme power* in the time of Parliament, by both Houses is declared to belong
to the King.

At the beginning of every Parliament, all Arms are, 7. Ed. 2.4. pars instit.
14.
or ought to be forbidden to be borne in London, Westminster, or the Subburbs.
This condemns the multitudes coming to Westminster, and the Guards of armed
men.

All who held by Knights service, 1 Edw. 2. de. Militibus.
and had twenty pounds per annum, were distraynable ad Arma militaria
suscipienda: This agrees with the Records of ancient time, continued constantly
in all Kings times, but at this Parliament 3. November, 1640. The King out of
his grace, discharged this duty, which proves that the power of war and
preparation thereto, belongs not to the two Houses but only to the King.

The two Spencers in Edw. 2. Edw. 3. Ca^vins Case Cook^e 7. fol. 11.
time hatched (to cover their Treason) this damnable and damned opinion (viz)
That Ligeance was more by reason of the Kings politic capacity then of his
person, upon which they inferred these execrable and detestable consequences.
First, if the King demeaned not himself by reason in the right of his Crown,
his Lieges are bound by Oath to remove him. Secondly, seeing the King could not
be removed by suit of Law it was to be done by force. Thirdly, that his Lieges
be bound to govern in default of him.

All which tenets were condemned by two Parliaments, the one called exilium
Hugonis in Ed. 2. time; the other by 1. Edw. 3. cap. 2. All which Articles
against the Spencers are confirmed by this last Statute, the Artiles are extant
in the book called vetera Statuta. The separation of the Kings person from his
power, is the principal Article condemned, and yet all these three damnable,
detestable, and execrable consequents, are the grounds whereupon this present
time relies, and the principles whereupon the two houses found their cause.

The Villeine of a Lord, in the presence of the King cannot be seized; ^^^nden.
com, 322. ^y ass. pl. 49
for the presence of the King is a protection for that time to him: This shows
what reverence the Law gives to the person of a King.

Regis, 33 Ed. 3. ^yde de roy, 203 Fitz, 30 H. 7.16
sacro oleo uncti sunt capa^es spiritualis jurisdictionis: But the two Houses
were never held capable of that power.

Rex est persona mixta cum sacerdote, ha^et Ecclesiasticam and spiritualem
jurisdictionem: This shows the Kings power in Ecclesiastical Causes.

The Lands of the King is called in Law Patromoni^n sacrum: Com. Sur. Littl
Sect. 4.
The Houses should not have meddled with that sacred Patromony. 3 Ed. 3.19


The King has no Peer in his Land, and cannot be judged? Ergo the two Houses
are not above him.

The Parliament 15. Ed. 3. was repealed, for that is was against the Kings
Laws and prerogative. 4 part instit^ fol. 25. This shows clearly the
Propositions sent to Newcastle, ought not to have been presented to his
Majesty, For that they are contrary to the Laws and his Prerogative.

The Lords and Commons cannot assent in Parliament to any thing that tends to
the dis-inherifion of the King and his Crown, 4 Part, Cook in^^it. fol. 14.
42. E. 3.
to which they are sworn: This condemns the said Propositions likewise.

To depose the King, Parliamen^ Roll. number. 7. Rex and (...) suetud^ Par^amenti.
to imprison him until he assent to certain dedemands, a war to alter the
Religion established by Law, or any other Law, or to remove Counselors, to
hold a Castle or Fort against the King, are offenses against that Law declared
to be treason by the resolution herein after mentioned, by that Law men are
bound to aid the King when war is levied against him in his Realm. 25 Ed. 3.
cap. 2.
King in his Statute must be intended in his natural body and person that only
can dye; for to compass his death, and declare it by overt Act is declared
thereby treason; to encounter in fight such as come to aid the King in his
wars, is treason.

Compassing of the Q^^ens death, of the Kings Eldest Son, to coin his money,
to counterfeit his Great-Seale, to levy War against him, to adhere to such as
shall so do, are declared by that Act to be high treason. This Statute cannot
refer to the King in his politic capacity, but to his natural, which is
inseparable from the politic; for a body politic can have neither Wife,
(...). 13.
nor Child, nor levy War, nor do any Act but by the operation of the
natural body: A Corporation or body politic has no soul or life, but is a
fiction of the Law, and the Statute meant not ^^ctitious persons, but the body
natural, conjoned with the politic, which are inseparable.

The clause in that Act, that no man should sue for grace, or pardon for any
offense condemned or forfeiture given by that Act, 21 Ed. 4.14. ^. 2.11. an.
was repealed by a subsequent Act in 21. R. ^ holden unreasonable, without
example; and against the Law and custom of the Parliament. This condemns the
Proposition for disabling the King to Pardon. 4 pars instit. fol. 42. 4. Pars
instit fol. 42.
The Act of 11. R. 2. so much urged by the other side, was an Act to which the
King consented, and so a perfect Act: yet Note the Army then about the Town:
Note that that Law is aagainst private persons, and by the 3. cap. thereof, the
treasons there declared are declared, to be new treasons made by that Act, and
not to be drawn to example, it was abrogated 21. R. 2. and revived by an
usurper 1 H. 4. to please the people, and by the tenth chap. thereof enacts
that nothing shall be treason but what is declared by 25. Ed. 3. 16. Ed. cap.
5.16. R. 2. cap. 5. H. 4.


The Regality of the Crown of England, is immediately subject to God and to
none other. Plain words, showing where the supreme power is.

The Commission of Array is in force and no other Commission, Rot. Parlm. 5. H.
4. numb. 24. an Act not printed, this Act was repealed by 4. and 5. P. and. M
cap. 2. this repealed by the Act of 1 Iacobi, and so it is of force at this
day, for the repealing Statute is repealed 4. pars institu^, fol. 51. and 125*
published fithence this Parliament, by the desire of the house of Commons,
their Order is printed in the last leaf of the commentaries upon Magna Charta.

Sir Edward Cook, A book allowed by Sir Na Brent called the reason of the War:
fol. 65.
by their party is holden for the Oracle of the Law, who wrote the said fourth
part, in a calm and quiet time, and I may say, when there was no need to
defend the authority of the Commission of Array.

For that objection, that that Commission leaves power to the Commissioners to
tax men secundum facul^ates, and so make all men's estates Arbitrary: the answer
is, that in l^vying of public aids upon men's goods and estates, which are
variable, and probably cannot be certainly known by any but the owners, it is
impossible to avoid discretion in the assesments, for so it ever was, and ever
will be. By this appears that the Votes of the two Houses against the
Commission of Array, were against the Law.

The death of the King dissolves the Parliament, H. 9.
if Kings should refer to the politic capacity it would continue after his
death, 2 H. 5 ^ part instit, ^6.
4 pars Just. 46, which proves that the King cannot be said to be there wh^^ he
is absent, as now he is* there is no inter regnum in the Kingdom the
dissolution of the Parliament by hi^ death, shows that the beginning and end
thereof referrs to the natural person of the King, and therefore he may
lawfully refuse the Propositions.

2. H. 5 Chap. 6. to the King only it belongs to make Leagues with Foreign
Princes? this shows where the supreme power is, and to whom the Militia
belongs.

8. H. 6. numb. 57. Rott. Parl. Cooks 4 pars instit. 25. H. 6.
No privilege of Parliament is grantable for treason, felony, or breach of the
peace; if not to any one Member, not to two, not to ten, not to the major part,
19 H. 6.62. The Law is the inheritance of the King and his people, by which
they are ruled, King and people; And the people are by the Law bound to aid the
King, and the King has an inheritance to hold Parliaments, and in the ayds
granted by the Commonalty. If the major part of a Parliament commit treason,
they must not be Judges of it, for no man or body, can be Judge in his own
cause, and as well as ten or any number may commit treason, the greater number
may as well.

The King by his Letters patents may constitute a County palatine and grant
Regal rights, 32 H. 6.13. Plowd. 334.
this shows where the supreme power is.

17. Ed. 4. Rot. Parl. numb. 39. Ed. 4.
No privilege of Parliament is grantable for treason, felony, or breach of
the peace, if not for one, not for two, or more, or a major part.

The same persons must not be Judge and party. Calvin's Case 7. pars fol. 11,
12.
A corporate body can commit no treason, nor can treason be committed against a
corporate body, 21. E. 4.13. and 14. but the persons of the men who make that
body may commit treason, and commit it against the natural person of him who
to some purposes is a body corporate, but quatenus corporate no treason can be
committed by or against such a body; that body has no soul, no life, and
subsists only by the fiction of the Law, and for that reason the Law does
conclude as aforesaid; Plow. com. 213.
therefore the Statue of 25. E. 3. must be intended of the Kings natural
person, conjoined with the politic which are inseparable, and the Kings
natural person being at Holmby, his politic is there also, and not at
Westminster; for the politic and natural make one body indivisible.

If all the people of England should break the league made with a foreign
Prince, 19 Ed. 4.46. 22 Rd. 4. Fitz. jurisdiction ^^st plaeite.
without the Kings consent, the league holds and is not broken, and therefore
the representative body is inferior to his Majesty's.

The King may erect a Court of Common pleas in what part of the Kingdom he
pleases by his letters patents; can the two Houses do the like?

1 Ed. 5. fol. 2 It cannot be said that the King does wrong, 1 Ed. 5. 4 Ed.
4.25. 5 Ed. 4 29.
declared by all the Judges and Sergeants at Law then there.

The reason is, nothing can be done in this Common wealth by the Kings grant or
any other act of his, as to the Subjects persons, goods, Lands or liberties,
but must be according to established Laws, which the Judges are sworn to
observe and deliver between the King and his people impartially to rich and
poor, high and low; 2 Pars. instit. 158.
and therefore the Justices and the Ministers of Justice are to be questioned
and punished if the Laws be violated: and no reflection to be made on the
King. All Counselors and Judges for a year and three months until the
tumults began this Parliament: were all left to the ordinary cause of Justice,
what has been done sithence is notorious.

For great Causes and considerations an Act of Parliament was made for the
surety of the said Kings person: R. 3. 1 R. 3. cap. 15.
if a Parliament were so tender of King Rich. the 3. the Houses have greater
reason to care for the preservation of his Majesty.

The Subjects are bound by their allegiance to serve the King for the time
being, H^n. 7. 11 H. 7. c. 1.
against every Rebellion, power and might, reared against him within this Land,
that it is against all Laws, reason and good conscience, if the King should
happen to be vanquished that for the said deed and true duty and allegiance
they should suffer in any thing, it is ordained they should not; and all Acts
of process of Law hereafter to be made to the contrary are to be void: This
Law is to be understood of the natural Person of the King; for his politic
capacity cannot be vanquished, nor war reared against it.

Relapsers are to have no benefit of this Act.

It is no Statute, ^^ H. 7.20. 4 H. 7.18. Henry 8. 7 H. 7.14.
if the King assent not to it, and he may disassent, this proves the negative
voice.

The King has full power in all causes to do justice to all men: 24 H. 8. c.
12. 25 H. 8. c. 28
this is affirmed of the King, and not of the two Houses.

The Commons in Parliament acknowledge no superior to the King under God, the
House of Commons confess the King to be above the representative body of the
Realm.

Of good right and equity the whole and sole power of pardoning treasons,
fellonies, etc. 27 H. 8. c. 2^. Note.
belong to the King, as also to make all Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Judges,
Justices of the peace, etc. This Law condemns the practice of both Houses at
this time.

The Kings Royal Assent to any Act of Parliament signed with his hand,
expressed in his Letters patents under the great Seal, and declared to the
Lords and Commons, shall be as effectual, 33 H. 8. cap. 21.
as if he assented in his own person; a vain Act if the King be virtually in
the Houses.

The King is the head of the Parliament, the Lords the principal members of the
body, Dier 38. H. 8. fo. 59.60.
the Commons the inferior members, and so the body is composed, therefore
there is no more Parliament without a King, then there is a body without a head.

There is a Corporation by the Common Law, 14 H. 8. f. 3.
as the King, Lords, and Commons, are a Corporation in Parliament, and
therefore they are no body without the King.

The death of the King discharges all mainprise to appear in any Court or to
keep the peace. 34 Ed 3.48. 1 Ed. 4.2.


The death of the King discontinues all Pleas by the Common Law, 2 H. 4.8. 1 H.
7.10. 1 Ed. 5 1.
which agrees not with the virtuall power insisted upon now.

Writs are discontinued by the death of the King; Ed 6. 2 Ed. 6. c. 7.
Patents or Judges, Commission for Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Escheators,
determined by his death: where is the virtuall power?

All authority and jurisdiction spiritual and temporal is derived from the
King, 1 Ed. 6. c. 2.
therefore none from the Housess

His Majesty's Subjects, ^. 3 Ed. 6. c. 2. 11 H. 7. c. 1. Calvin's Case. s^.
part. Cook. 1 Pars instit. 69.
according to their bounden duties, ought to serve the King in his wars, of
this side or beyond the Seas, beyond the seas is to be understood for wages:
This proves the power of wars, and preparation for war to be in the King.

It is most necessary both for common policy and duty of the Subject, 5.6 Ed.
c. 11.
to restrain all manner of shameful standers against their King, which when
they be heard, cannot but be odible to his true and loving subjects, upon whom
depends the whole unity and universal weal of the Realm. This condemns
their continuing of the weekly Pamphlets, who have been so foul mouthed
against his Majesty.

The punishment of all offenders against the Laws, Q. ^^ary. 1. Mar. Pl. 2.
cap. 2.
belongs to the King, and all jurisdictions do, and of right ought to belong to
the King. This leaves all to his Majesty.

All Commissions to leavy men for the war, 4.5 P. and M. c ^. Q Eliz. 10
Eliz. Pl. 315.
are awarded by the King: The power of war only belongs to the King.

It belongs to the King to defend his people, and to provide Arms and Force:
No speech of the two Houses.

Roy ad sble governmeni de ses subjects. Plow. 234.242.213. Calvin's case 7.
pars fol. 12. Plow. com. 213.
Corpse natural le Roy and politic sunt un corpse. That is, the king has the
sole government of his Subjects, the body politic and the natural body of the
King make one body, and not diverse, and are inseparable and indivisible.

The body natural and politic make one body, Plou. 914.243.213. Calvin's case
7. pars fol. 12
and are not to be severed: Ligeance is due to the natural body; and is due by
nature, Gods Law, and Man's Law cannot be forfeited nor renounced by any means,
it is inseparable from the person.

Every Member of the House of Commons, 1 Eliz cap. 1 Candries case, 5 pars fol.
1
at every Parliament takes a corporal Oath: That the King is the supreme and
only Governor in all causes in all his Dominions, otherwise he is no Member
of that House; The words of the Law are, in all causes, over all persons.

The said Act of 1 Eliz. is but declarative of the ancient Law, 4^ Eliz. 3.
pars instit. fol. 6.2
Candries Case, ibid.

The Earl of Essex, and others, assembled multitudes of men to remove
Counselors, adjudged Treason by all the Judges of England.

To depose the King, 39 Eliz. Hill. 1 Iacobi ibid
or take him by force, to imprison him until he has yielded to certain
demands, adjudged Treason, and adjudged accordingly in the Lord Cobbams Case.

Atising to alter Religion established, 39 Ed. Brad case f. 9. and 16. By all
the Judges of England, ibid. 10. Eli. Plow. 316
or any Law, is treason; so for taking of the Kings Castles, Forts, Ports or
Shipping, Brook treason 24.3. and 4. Philip and Mary, Dier, Staffords Case
concerning Scarborough.

The Law makes not the servant greater then the Master, nor the subject greater
then the King, for that were to subvert order and measure.

The Law is not known but by Usage, and Usage proves the Law, 10 Eliz. Plow.
31^
and how Usage has been is notoriously known.

The King is our only rightful and lawful Liege Lord and Sovereign, K.
James, 1 Iac. cap. 1 9 Ed 4 fol 8
we do upon the knees of our hearts adnize constant Faith, Loyalty, and
Obedience to the King and his Royal progeny, in this high Court of Parliament,
where all the body of the Realm is either in person, or by representation: We
do acknowledge hat the true and sincere Religion of he Church is continued and
established by the King. And do recognize, as we are bound by the Law of God
and Man, the Realm of England, and the Imperial crown thereof does belong to
him by inherent birthright, and lawful and undoubted succession, and submit
our selves and our posterities for ever, until the last drop of our blood be
spent, to his rule, and beseech the King to accept the same as the first fruits
of our Loyalty and faith to his Majesty and his posterity for ever; and for
that this Act is not complete nor perfect without his Majesty's assent, the
same is humbly desired. This proves that the Houses are not above the King;
that Kings have not their titles to the Crown by the two Houses, but by
inherent birth right, and that there can be no Statute without his express
assent; and destroys the Chimera of the Kings virtuall being in the Houses.

To promise obedience to the Pope or any other State, 3 Iae. cap. 4. 23 Eliz.
c. 1.
Prince or Potentate, other then the King, his heirs and successors, is
treason; and therefore those persons who call the houses the Estates offend
this Law.

Such Bills as his Majesty is bound in conscience and justice to pass, K.
Charles Collection of Ordinances, fol. 727. 1 pars ib. fol. 728.
are no Law without his assent.

To design the ruin of the Kings person, or of Monarchy, is a monstrous and
injurious charge.

Vbi l^x non distinguit, non est distinguendum, ibid. fol. 865.
all the aforesaid Acts and Laws do evidently prove the Militia to belong to
the King: that the King is not virtually in the two Houses; that the King is
not considerable separately in relation to his politic capacity: that the King
is not a person trusted with a power, but that it is his inherent birthright
from God, Nature, and Law, and that he has not his power from the people:
These Laws have none of those distinctions of natural and politic,
abstractum and concretum, power and person: in Caesar's time this Island had
Kings, and ever since, which is almost 17 hundred years ago.

No King can be named, in any time, made in this Kingdom by the people; A
Parliament never made King, for they were Kings before: the Parliaments are
summoned by the Kings Writs, which for Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses begins
thus: viz.

Rex vic. Wilts. Saltem. Quia Nos de avisamento and assensia consilii nri, pro
quibus. arduis and urgentib. negotiis nos statune and defensionem Regni nri.
Aug. and Eccles. Anglie. concernentibus quoddam Parliamentum nrum, apud B.
teneri ordinavimus and ibid. cum Prelatis Magnatib. and proceribus dicti Regni
nri. Colliquium habere and tractatum, ^ibl precipimus firmiter injungendo quod
facta Proclamatione in prox. Comitatu tuo post receptionem ejusd. Brevis, duos
Milites gladiis cinctos, etc. eligi faceas ad faciendum and consentiendum hiis
quae tunc ibidem de Comm^^^i Concilio uro. 4 pars Inst. 241.
Angl. foventi Deo contigerit ordinari super Negotiis ante dictis, ita quod pro
defectu potestatis bujusmodi seu propter improvidam electionem Mileum, Civium,
and Burgensium praed. dicta negotia ura, infect a non remanerent.

The King is Principium, a pars Instit. fol. 3. and 4
cap^^ and finis Parliamenti, the body makes not the head, nor that which is
posterior, that which is prior, consilium non est Preceptum, consiliarii non
sunt Preceptoris, for Counsel to compel a consent, has not been heard of to
this time in any age, and the House of Commons, by the Writ, are not called ad
co silium; the Writs to the twelve Judges, Kings Counsel, twelve Masters of
the Chancery are consilium impensuri, and so of the Peers. The Writs for the
Comminalty. Ad faciendum and consentiendum: Which shows what power the
representative body has, they have not power to give ^n Oath; neither do they
claim it.

The King at all times, The Oath of the Justices 18 of E. 3. among Statutes of
that year.
when there is no Parliament, and in Parliament is assisted with the advice of
the Judges of the Law, 12 in number, for England at least has two Sergeants
when fewest; an Attorney and Solicitour, twelve Masters of the Chancery, his
Council of State consisting of some great Prelates, and other great
Personages, versed in State affairs, when they are fewest to the number of
twelve. All these persons are alwales of great substance, which is not
preserved, but by the keeping of the Law; The Prelates versed in divine Law,
the other Grandees in affairs of State, and managery of Government; The
Judges, Kings Sergeants, Attorney, Solicitour, and Masters of the Chancery
versed in the Law and Customs of the Realm: All sworn to serve the King and
his people justly and truly; the King is also sworn to observe the Laws, and
the Judges have in their Oath a clause, that they shall do common right to the
Kings people, according to the established Laws, notwithstanding any command
of the King to the contrary, under the Great Seal or otherwise, the people are
safe by the Laws in force without any new: The Law finding the Kings of this
Realm assisted with so many great men of Conscience, Honor and skill in the
rule of Commonwealth, knowledge of the Laws, and bound by the high and holy
bond of an Oath upon the Evangelists, settles among other powers upon the King,
a power to refuse any Bill agreed upon by both Houses, and power to pardon all
offenses, to pass any Grants in his Minority, (there are many great persons
living hold many a thousand pounds a year by patents from Edward the sixth,
passed when he was but ten years of age) not to be bound to any Law to his
prejudice, whereby he does not bind himself, power of war and peace, coining
of Money, making all Officers, etc. The Law, for the reasons aforesaid, has
approved these powers to be unquestionable in the King, and all Kings have
enjoyed them till 3 Nov. 1640.

It will be said notwithstanding all this fence about the Laws, the Laws have
been violated, and therefore the said powers must not hold, the two Houses will
remedy this.

The answer to this is evident: There is no time past, nor time present, nor
will there be time to come, so long as men manage the Law; but the Laws will
be broken more or less, as appears by the story of every age. All the
pretended violations of this time were remedied by Acts to which the King
consented before his departure 10. Jan. 1641. being then driven away by
Tumults: And the Houses for a year and almost three Months, from 3 Nov. 1640.
to 10 Jan. 1641. as aforesaid, being a year and almost three Months, had time
and liberty to question all those persons who are either causes or instruments
of the violation of any of the Laws.

Examine how both Houses remedied them in former times. First, touching
Religion, what has been done this way? Both Houses in Henry the eights time
tendered to him a Bill to be passed called commonly the Bill of the six
Articles, this was conceived by them to be a just and a necessary Bill: Had not
Henry the eight done well to have refused the passing of this Bill? Both Houses
tendered a Bill to him to take the reading of the Scriptures from most of the
Laity: Had not King Henry the eight deserved much praise to reject this Bill?
In Queen Mary's time both Houses exhibited a Bill to her to introduce the
Popes power, and the Roman Religion; had not Queen Mary done well to have
refused this Bill? Many such instances may be given, The two Houses now at
westminster I am sure will not deny but the refusal of such Bills have been
just, the King being assisted as aforesaid, and why not so in these times?

For the Civil Government, what a Rill did both Houses present to Richard the
third, to make good his Title to the Crown; had it not been great honor to
him to have rejected it? What Bills were exhibited to Henry the eight by both
Houses for bastardizing of his Daughte^ Elizabeth, a Queen of renowned memory,
to settle the Crown of this Realm, for default of Issue of his body, upon
such persons as he should declare by his Letters Patents, or his last Will, and
many more of the like? had not this refusal of passing such Bil's magnified
his virtue, and rendered him to Posterity in a different Character from what he
now has?

And by the experience of all times, and the consideration of humane frailty,
this conclusion is manifestly deduced, that it is not possible to keep men at
all times (be they the Houses, or the King and his Council) but there will be
sometimes some deviation from the Laws, and therefore the constant and
certain powers fixed by the ancient Law must not be made void, and the Kings
Ministers; the Laws do punish where the Law is transgressed, and they only
ought to suffer for the same.

In this Parliament the Houses exhibited a Bill to take away the suffrages of
Bishops in the upper House of Parliament, and have sithence agreed there shall
be no more Bishops at all, might not the King if he had so pleased have
answered this Bill with Le Roys' avisera, or n^ veul^? it was against Magna
Charta, Articuli Cleri and many other Acts of Parliament. And might have
farther given these reasons, if it had so pleased him for the same: First, that
this Bill destroys the Writ whereby they are made two Houses of Parliament, 14
Hen. 7. fol. 22. Evesque est signior de grand honne^r, the King in the Writ
being ^um praelaris colloquium habtre: Secondly, they have been in all
Parliaments since we had any, and voted, but in such wherein they themselves
were concerned: And there have been Bishops here sithence we were Christians,
and the Fundamental Law of the Kingdom approves of them: If any of them were
conceived offensive, they were left to Justice, and his Majesty would put in
inoffensive men in their places; but sithence his Majesty has passed the Bill
for taking away their Vores in Parliament, it is a Law that binds us so far.

Upon the whole matter the Law has notably determined that Billa agreed by
both Houses, pretended to be for the public good, are to be judged by the
King, for in all Kings Reigns Bills have been preferred by both Houses, which
always are pretended to be for the public good, and many times are not, and
were rejected with Roy's auisera, or Roy ne veult.

This Parliament began the 3 of November. 1640. before that time in all the kings
reign no armed power did force any of the people to do any thing against the
Law; what was done was by his Judges, Officers, Refers, and Ministers from that
time until the 10. os Ia. 1641. when the King, went from London to avoid the
danger of frequent tumults, being a year and 3 months, Privy Counselors and
all his Justices and Ministers were lest to the Justice of the Law, there
wanted not time to punish punishable men.

The Sphere of the House of Commons is to represent the grievances of the
Country, to grant aids for the King upon all fit occasions extraordinary, to
assent to the making or abrogating of Laws: The Orb of the House of Lords to
reform erroneous judgments given in the Kings Bench, to redress the delays
of Courts of Justice, to receive all Petitions, to advise his Majesty with
their Council, to have their Votes in making or abrogating of Laws, and to
propose for the common good, what they conceive meet.

Lex non cogit ad impossibilia, Subjects are not to expect from Kings
impossible things, so many Judges, Councillors, Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace, Commissioners, Ministers of State, that the King should over-looke them
all, cannot be, it is impossible.

The King is vertually in his ordinary Courts of Justice; so long as they
continue his Courts; their charge is to administer the Laws in being, and not
to delay, defer, o^ sell Justice for any Commandment of the King. We have
Laws enough; Instrumenta boni saeculi sunt bon^ viri, good Ministers, as
Judges and Officers are many times wanting, the houses propose new Laws, or
abrogation of the old, both induce novelty; the Law for the reasons aforesaid,
makes the King the only Judge, who is assisted therein by a great number of
grave, learned, and prudent men, as aforesaid.

For the considerations aforesaid the Kings Party adheared to him, the ^aw of
the Lnnd is their Birth^ight, their Guide, no offense is committed where that
is not violated; they found the Commission of A^^ray warrauted by the Law; they
found the King in this Parliament to have quitted the Sh^-money,
Knighthood-money, seven Courts of Justice, consented to a Triennall Parliament,
settled the Forest hounds, took away the Cearke of the Market of the household,
trusted the House with the Navy, passed an Act not to d^^olve this Parliament
without the Houses assent; no people in the world so free if they could have
been content with Laws, Oaths, and rea^^^, and nothing more could or can be
devised to secure us, neither has been in any time.

Notwithstanding all this we found the King driven from London by frequent
tumults, that two thirds andt more of the Lords had disserted tha House for the
same cause, and the greater part of the House of Commons left that House also
for the same reason; new men chosen in their places against Law, by the
pretended Warrant of a connterfet Seal, and in the Kings name against his
consent, leavying War against him, and seizing his Ports, Forts, Magazines
and Revenue, and converting them to his destruction, and the subversion of the
Law and Land, laying Taxes on the people, never heard of before in this Land;
devised new Oaths to oppose Forces raised by the King, nor to adhere to him,
but to them in this War which they call the (...) the Oath, and the V. W. and
Covenant.

By several ways never used in this kingdom, they have raised Moneys to
foment this War, and especially to enrich some among them; namely, first,
Ex^is, secondly, Contributions, thirdly, Sequestrations, fourthly, Fift-parts,
fifthly, Twentieth-parts, sixthly, (...) money, seventhly, Sale of Plundered
gpods, eighthly, Loanes, ninthly, Benedolentes, tenthly, (...) upon their
fast-dayes, eleventhly, new Impo^tions upon Merchand^res, twelfely, G^ards
maintained upon the charge of private men, thirteenthly, Fifty Sub^^dies at ^^e
time, fourteenthly, Composs^^ons with such as they call Delinquents,
fifteentlaly, Sale of Bishpp^ Lands, etc.

From the Kings Party means of subsistence are taken; (...) R 3. cap. 3 Bract.
li. 3. c. 8. Stanford, 192. Sir Ger. Fl^^twoods Case, S. pars Cook 7. H. (...)
^ast leaf.
before any Indictment, their Lands seized, their goods taken, the Law allows
a Traitor or Fellon attained, Necessaria sibi and familiae suae invictu and
vestitu, where i^ the Covenant. Where is the Petition of Right? Where is the
liberty of the Subject?

First, we have aided the King in this War contrary to the Negative Oath, and
other Votes: Our Warrant, is the twenty fifth of Edward the third, the second
Chapter, and the said resolutions of all the Judges.

Secondly, (...) Ins^it. a 25. a Instit. 696* The Law so at the Edition of that
book. Hutton and Crook.
we have maintained the Commission of Array, by the Kings Command, contrary to
their Votes: We are warranted by the Statute of the fifth of Henry the fourth,
and the judgment of Sir Edward Cook, the ^^cle of the Law as they call him.

Thirdly, we maintained Arch^ Bisho^^ and Bishops, whom they would suppress.
Our warrant is, Magna-Charta, and many Statutes more.

Fourthly, we have maintained the Book of Common may^r, they suppress it: Our
warrant is five acts of Parliament in Edward the fixed, and Queen Elizabeth's
time, 5 Pelchae 35, Elizabeth inter placita Coronae in Ban^^ Regis, New book
of Entries, fol. 252. Penry, for publishing two scandalous Libels against the
Church Government, was indicted, arraigned, attainted, and executed at Tyburne.

Fifthly, we maintained the Militi^^ of the Kingdom to belong to the King, they
the contrary: Our warrant is the Statute of the seventh of Edward the first,
and many Statutes ^^thence, the practice of all times, and the Custom of the
Real^^e.

Sixthly, we maintained the co^^ter^eiting of the great Seal^ to be high
Treason, and so of the usurpation of the Kings forts, Do is, Shipping, Casties,
and his Revenue, and the co^^ing of Money, against them: We have our warrant^
by the said Statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third, Chapter the
second, and diverse others since, and the practice of all times.

Seventhly, we maintain that the King is the only supreme Governor in all
causes: They, that his Majesty is to be governed by them: Our warrant is the
Statutes of the first of Queen Elizabeth, Chapter the first, and the fifth of
Queen Elizabeth the first.

Eighthly, We maintain that the King is King by an inherent birthright, 9 Ed.
4. fol. ^.
by nature, by Gods Law, and by the Law of the Land. They say his Kingly right
is an Office upon trust: Our warrant is the Statute of the first of King James,
Chapter the first. And the resolution of all the Judges of England in Calvin's
Case.

Ninthly, we maintain that the politic capacity is not to be severed from
the natural. They hold the contrary: Our warrant is two Statutes (viz.)
exilium Hugonis in Edward the seconds time, and the first of Edward the third
Chapter the second, and their Oracle who has published it to Posterity, that
it is damnable, detestable, and execrable Treason, Calvin's Case years 7. fol.
11.

Tenthly, we maintain that who ^^des the King at home or abro^d, ought not to
be molested or questioned for the same, they hold and practice the contrary;
Our warrant is the Statute of the eleventh of Henry the seventh, Chapter the
first.

Eleventhly, we maintain that the King hi^h power to disassent to any Bill
agreed by the two Honses: which they deny: Our warrant is the Statute of the
second of Henry the fifth, and the practice of all times, the first of King
Charles, Chapter the seventh, the first of King James, Chapter the first.

Twelfthly, we maintain that Parliaments ought to be holden in a grave and
peaceable manner, without tumults 3. They allowed multitudes of the meanest
sort of the people to come to Westminster to cry for justice when they could
not have their will, Coll. of Ord. fol. 31.
and keep guards of armed men to wait upon them: Our warrant is the Statute of
the seventh of Edward the second, and their Oracle.

Thirteenthly, we maintain that there is no State with^n this Kingdom but
the Kings Majesty, and that to adhere to any other State within this Kingdom
is high Treason: Our warrant is the Statute of the third of King James, Chapter
the fourth, and the twenty third of Queen Elizabeth, Chapter the first.

Fourteenthly, we maintain that to ^evy a wa^^e to remove Cou^sellours, to
after Religion, or any Land established is high Treason, They hold the
contrary: Our warrant is the resolutions of all the Judges of England in Queen
Eliznbeths time, and their Oracle agrees with the same.

Fifteenthly, we maintain that no man should be impusoned, put out of his
Lands, but by due co^rse of Law, and that no man ought to be adjadged to death
but by the Law established, the C^^stames of the ^^^^me, or by Act of
Pa^^tement; They practice the contrary in London, Bristol, Ke^t, etc. Our
warrant is Magna Chanta, Chapter the twenty ninth, the P^^ition of Right, the
third of King Charles, and diverse Laws there mentioned.

We of the Kings party, did and do detest Monopolies, and Shipmoney, and all
the grievan^es of the people as much as any men living, we do well know that
our estates, lives and fortunes are preserved, by the Laws, and that the King
is bound by his Laws, we love Parliamenss, if the Kings Judges, Counsel or
Ministers have done amiss, they had from the third of November, 1640. to the
tenth of January, 1641. time to punish them, being all left to justice, Where
is the King^ fault.

The Law says the Kings can do no Wrong, 11. pars Cooks Reports Magdalen
College Case.
that he is medicus Regni pater patriae sponsus Regni qui per annulum, is
espoused to his Realm at his Coronation; The King is Gods Lieutenant, and is
not able to do an unjust thing, these are the words of the Law.

(...) matter is pretended, that the (...) are not sure to enjoy the Acts
passed this Parllament, A succeeding Parliament may repeal them; The objection
is very weak; a Parliament succeeding to that may repeal that repealing
Parliament: That ^eare is endless and remediless, for it is the essence of
Parliaments being complete, and as they ought to be, of Head, and all the
Members, to have power over Parliaments before; Parliaments are as the times
are; If a turbulent faction prevails, the Parliaments are wicked, as appears
by the examples recited before of extreme wicked Parliaments; if the times be
sober and modest, prudent and not biassed, the Parliaments are right good, and
honorable, and they are good medicines and salves; but in this Parliament
excessit medicina m^dum.

In this cause and war between the Kings Majesty, and the two Houses at
Westmiester, what guide had the Subjects of the Land to direct them but the
Laws* What means could they use to discern what to follow, what to avoid,
but the Laws? The King declares it Treason to adhere to the Houses in this
war: The Houses declare it Treason to adhere to the King in this war: The
Subjects for a great and considerable part of them (Treason being such a crime
as forfeits life and estate, also renders a man's Posterity ^ase, beggarly, and
infamous) look upon the Laws, and find the Letter o^ tho Law requ^res them to
a (...) the King, as before is manifested; was ever Subject criminally punished
in any age or Nation for his pursuit of what the Letter of the Law commands?

The Subjects of the Kingdom find the distinction and interpretation now put
upon the Laws of Abstractum and Concretum, Power and Person, body politic,
and natural, personal presence and virtuall, to have been condemned by the
Law; and so the Kings Party had both the Letter of the Law, and the
interpretation of the Letter cleared to their judgments, whereby they might
evidently perceive what side to adhere to, what satisfaction could modest
peaceable and loyal men more desire?

A verbo legis in crimin^bus and poenis non est recedentum, has been an
approved maxim of Law in all ages and times: Coll. of Ordinances, 777.
If the King be King and remain in his Kingly Office (as they call it) then
all the said Laws are against them without color; they say the said Laws
relate to him in his Office, they cannot say otherwise, they make Commissions
and Pardons in the Kings name, and the person of the King and his body politic
cannot, nor ought to be severed as has been before declared: 5 Eliz. cap. 1.
1 Eliz. cap. 1.
And the Members of both Houses have sworn constantly in this Parliament that
the King to the only supreme Governor in all causes, ever all persons at this
present time.

For what of verbal or personal commands of the King which is objected; we
affirm few things to be subject thereto by the Law: But his Majesty's Command
under his Great Seal, which in this war has been used by the Kings Command
for his Commission to ^savie and array men, that is no personal command (which
the Law in some cases disallowes) but that is such a command, so made, as all
men hold their Lands by, who hold by Patents; all Corporations have their
Charters which hold by Charters, and all Judgesa and Officers their places and
callings.

It is Objected, (...).
the King cannot suppress his Courts of Justice, and that this war tended to
their suppression.

The answer is, Sol. 7 pars The ^a le of Westmerlands Ca e. 1 Eliz. Dier. 165.
7 p^rs Cook.
the King cannot nor ought to suppress Justice, or his Courts of Justice, nor
ever did; but Courts of Justice by abuser or non user cease to be Courts of
Justice; when Judges are made, and proceedings in those Courts holden by others
then Judges made by the King, and against his command under the great Seal,
The case of discontinuance of Process.
and his Majesty is not obeyed, but the Votes of the Houses, and his Judges
breaking that condition in Law, of trust and loyalty, employed in their Patents,
are no longer his Judges; they obey and exercise their places by virtue of
Writs and Processes under a counterfeit Seal: The King only can make Judges,
the twenty seventh of Henry the eighth, Chapter the twenty fourth, Justices of
the Peace, etc. The Kings Patent makes Judges: 28 H. 8. D^^r 11.
The chief Justice of the Kings Bench is made by the Kings Writ only of all
the Judges.

The Great Seal is the key of the Kingdom, Arti^uli super chartas cap. 5. 2
pars instit. 552.
and meet it is that the King should have the key of his Kingdom about him;
which confutes their saying that the King got the Seal away surreptitiously.

The King, Britt^n. sol. 23.
and he only may remove his Courts from Westminster into some other place: at
York the Terms were kept for seven years, in Edward the first's time; but
for the Court of Common Pleas, the plac^ must be certain; for the Kings Bench
and Chancery, the King by the Law may command them to attend his person always
if it seem so meet unto him; but the removing of the Common Pleas must be to a
place certain, and so notified to the people.

All the Books of Law in all times agree, that the King may grant conusance of
all Pleas at his pleasure within any County or Precinct to be holden there
only, and remove the Courts from Westminster to some other place (for the
Common Pleas, 6 H. 7.9. 6 Eliz Dier. 226.
the place must be certain, and so notified to the people) and adjourne the
Terms as he sees cause: All which the two houses have violated.

Some seeming objections of Master Prinn's, scattered in diverse books answered,
and the truth thereby more fully cleared.
THE first of Henry the fourth, 1 Ob.
revived the Statute of the eleventh of Richard the second, and repeales the
one and twentieth of Richard the second, whereby certain persons were declared
Traitors to the King and kingdom; being of the Kings Party, by 11 Rich. 2.

True, but note, the eleventh of Richard the second, Sol.
a Parliament beset with 40000. men, and the King assents to it, so an Act, and
besides the first of Henry the fourth declares, that the Treasons mentioned in
the Act of the eleventh of Richard the second, being but against a few private
men, shall not be drawn into example, and that no Treason should be but such
as the twenty fifth of Edward the third declares: 9 Ed. 4. fol. ^0.
All these are Acts passed by the King, and the three Estates, nor to be drawn
into example in a tumultuous time, by a besieged Parliament, with an Army, and
Henry the fourth being an Usurper makes that Act of the first of Henry the
fourth to secure himself: Also what is this to the Votes of the two Houses
only at this time?

The Court of Parliament is above the King, 2. Ob.
for it may avoid his Charters, Commissions, etc. granted against the Law.

And the Law is above the King.

By the same reason you may say that the Courts of Chancery, Sol.
or any of the Courts of Law at Westminster are above the King, for they make
of no effect the Kings Charters, which are passed against the Law; and the King
is subject to Law, and sworn to maintain it. Again, it is no Parliament
without the King, and the King is the head thereof, he is principium capus and
finis of a Parliament, as Modus tenendi Parliament, has it, and two houses
only, want principiwn caput and finis of a Parliament, and it is a sorry
Parliament that wants all these: And therefore to say that Parliaments are
above the King, is to say the King is above himself.

The Parliament can enlarge the Kings Prerogative, 3. Ob.
therefore it is above him.

If the King assent, Sol.
otherwise not; and then it is an Act of Parliament, and otherwise no Act.

Bracton says, God, the Law, 4 Ob.
and the Kings Court, (viz.) his Earls and Barons are above the King, viz. in
Parliament, as Mr. Prynne expounds it.

Where is then the House of Commons? Indeed, take God, the Law, Sol.
and Earls and Barons together, it is true; but to affirm that the Earls and
Barons in Parliament are above the King (the King being the head of the
Parliament, and they one of the members) how an inferior member is above the
head, is hard to conceive; besides, that position destroys all Mr. Prynnes
discourse, who attributes much to the House of Commons.

The King is but one of the three Estates of Parliament, 5 Ob.
and two are greater then one; therefore above.

The Legs, Arms, Sol.
and Trunk of the body are greater then the Head, and yet not above, nor with
life without it; the argument holds for quantity, but not for quality; and in
truth, the King is none of the three Estates but above them all; the three
Estates are, the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the Commons; Cake,
their Oracle, in his Chap. of Parl. f. 1

In Corporations, the greater number of voices make all the Acts of the
Corporation valid; 6 Ob.
therefore so in Parliament.

By this reason the Kings assent is needless, Sol.
and to no end: and all the Acts of Parliament formerly mentioned, and
Law-bookes have quite mistaken the matter, which with unanimous voice requires
the Kings assent as necessary: besides, the Corporations are so constituted by
the Kings Charters, and the greater number of votes shall make their Acts valid.

The King, 7 Ob.
as King, is present in his Parliament as well as in all other his Courts of
Justice, howbeit he is not there.

In his other Courts of Justice he has no voice, Sol.
he is none of the Judges, in the Parliament he has; if his presence be not
necessary, his voice is not, nor his assent.

The original prime legislative power of making Laws, 8 Ob. Sovereign power
of Parliaments, 4^.44. Sol.
to bind the Subjects and their posterity, rests not in the King, but in the
Kingdom and Parliament, which represents it.

Master Prinne in the same lease affirms, and truly, that the Kings assent is
generally requisite to pass Laws and ratify them; the King is the Head of
the Kingdom and Parliament, how then can a Body act without a Head?

A major part of a Corporation binds, 9 Ob.
therefore the major part in Parliament, and so of by Laws.

The Corporation is so bound, Sol.
either by the Kings Charters, or by prescription, which sometimes had the
Kings concession; but prescription, and Law, and practice, always left the
King a negative voice.

The King cannot alter the Bills presented to him by both Houses. 10 Ob.
go.

True, Sol.
but the King may refuse them.

Acts of Parliament and Laws ministered in the Reigns of Usurpers; 11 Ob.
bind rightful Kings, go

What is this to prove the two Houses power only, which is the question? Sol.
A King de facto must be obeyed by them who submitted to him, and they are his
Subjects by their submission, and not Subjects de facto to the true King, 9 Ed.
4.
and such being Traitors and Rebels to the Regent King (having renounced the
true King) when the lawful King is restored, may be punished by him for their
Treason against the Usurper: But here is a King still in both cases, and the
proceedings at Law holds, the Judges having their Patents from the being Kings,
in the Reigns of Kings, de facto or de jure; for all Kings are bound, and
sworn to observe the Laws.

A King dies without Heir, 12 Ob.
is an Infant, non compos mentis, etc. the two Houses may establish Laws, go

There is no Inter-regnum in England, Sol.
as appears by all our Books of Law; and therefore the dying without Heir is
a vain supposition, and by their principle he is considerable in his politic
capacity, which cannot dye at all: The Protector, assisted by the Council of
the King at Law, his twelve Judges, the Council of State, his Attorney,
Solicitor, and two Sergeants at Law, his twelve Masters of the Chancery, has
in the Kings behalf, and ever had a Negative Voice; but what is this to the
present question? We have a King of full age, of grear wisdom and judgment;
the power of the two Houses in such a case to be over the King, cannot be
shown.

The King cannot dis^assent to public and necessary Bills for the common
good, 13 Ob.
go

Nor ever did good King; Sol.
but who shall be judge, whether they be public and necessary? The major part
in either of the Houses, for passing of Bills so pretended, may be but one or
two voices, or very few, and perhaps of no judicious men; is it not then fitter
or more agreeable to reason, that his Majesty and Council of State, his twelve
Judges, his Sergeants, Attorney, and Solicitor, twelve Masters of the Chancery,
should judge of the convenience and benefit of such Bills for the public good,
rather then a minor, (of which sort there may be in the Houses) or a weak man,
or a few, who oftentimes carry it by making the major part, which involves the
consent of all? Let reason determine.

The Kings of England have been elective; 14 Ob.
and the King by his Coronation Oath is bound to maintain justas leges and
consuetudines quas vulgas elegerit, go

Popery has been in the Kingdom, Sol.
and therefore to continue it still, will not be taken for a good argument;
when things are settled for many ages, to look back to times of confusion is to
destroy all repose: The Act of Parliament, of the first of K. James, Chapter
the first, and all our extant Laws say, that the Kings Office is an heritage
inherent in the blood of our Kings, and their Birthright.

And Usurpers that come in by the consent of the people, ^ Ed. 4. c. 1
are Kings de facto, but not de jure, as appears by the Acts of Parliament
declaring them so; and by all our Law-bookes, and the fundamental constitution
of the Land, Regal power is hereditary and not elective.

For the words (vulgus elegerit) if vulgus be applied to the House of Commons,
1 Hen 7.
they of themselves can make no Laws: The Peers were never yet termed vulgus;
but allowing they be so called, the Laws to be made be just, and who is fit to
judge thereof, is before made evident.

Customs cannot refer to future time, 15 Ob.
and both are coupled, Laws and Customs.

Princes have been deposed, and may be by the two Houses, go

The deposers were Traitors, Sol.
as appears by the resolution of all the Judges of England; Coke, Chap.
Treason, in the second part of the Institutes: And never was King deposed but
in tumultuous and mad times, and by the power of Armies, and they who were to
be the succeeding Kings in the head of them, as Edward the third, and Henry the
fourth.

The appeal to the Parliament for errors in Judgments in all Courts is
frepuent, 16 Ob.
go

This is only to the House of Lords, Sol.
and that is not the Parliament; the House of Commons have nothing to do
therewith; and in the House of Peers, if a Writ of Error be brought to
reverse any judgment, there is first a Petition to the King for the allowance
thereof, and the reason of the Law in this case is, for that the Judges of the
Land all of them, the Kings Council, and twelve Masters of the Chancery assist
there, by whose advice erroneous judgments are redressed.

The Parliaments have determined of the rights of Kings, 17 Ob.
as in Henry the sixts time, and others, and Parliaments have bound the
succession of Kings, as appears by the Statute of the thirteenth of Queen
Elizabeth, Chapter the first: And the descent of the Crown is guided rather by
a Parliamentary Title then by common Law, go

If this objection be true, Sol.
that the Title to the Crown is by Parliament, then we had no Usurpers, for
they all had Parliaments to back them; yea, Richard the third, that Monster.
All our Books of Law say they have the Crown by descent, and the Statutes of
the Land declare, that they have the same by inherent birthright. And the
Statute of the thirteenth of Elizabeth, the first Chapter, was made to secure
Queen Elizabeth against the Queen of Scots, then in the Kingdom, clayming
the Crown of England, and having many adherents: And that Statute to that end
affirms no such power in the two Houses (which is the question) but in Queen
Elizabeth, and the two Houses, which makes against the pretense of this time.

Master Prynne, fol. 104 of his book, entitled, the Parliaments supreme
power, etc. Objecting the Statute of the first of Queens Elizabeth, and his
own Oath, that the King is the only supreme Goverhour of this Realm;
Answers, The Parliament is the supreme power, and the King supreme Governor:
And yet there he allows him a Nega^ive Voice; and fol. 107. confesses, that
Acts of Parliament translated the Crown from the right Heirs at Common Law,
to others who had no good Title, then the Parlimentary Title makes not the
King, so powerful in truth, that it escapes from a man unawares: To make a
distinction between supreme Governor, and supreme power, is very strange,
for who can govern without power?

The King assembles the Parliament by his Writ, adjournes, Vide Speep. 645.4.
par. Instit. 27. and 2.
prorogues, and dissolves the Parliament, by the Law at his pleasure, as is
evident by constant practice, the House of Commons never sat after an
adjournement of the Parliament by the Kings Command: Where is the supreme
power?

The King by his Oath is bound to deny no man right, 18 Ob.
much less the Parliament, to agree to all just and necessary Laws proposed
by them to the King. This is the substance of the discourse against the Kings
Negative Voice.

The King is so hound as is set down in the Objection; Sol.
but who shall judge whether the Bill proposed be just and necessary? For all
that they do propose are so pretended and carried in either House, sometimes by
one or two Voices; or some sew as aforesaid, and certainly it has been shown,
the King, his Counsel of State, his Judges, Sergeants, Attorney, Solicitor,
and twelve Masters of the Chancery can better judge of them, then two or three,
or few more.

Mr. Prynne, fol. 45. In his Book of the Parliaments interest to nominate
Prnvy Counselors, calls the opinion of the Spencers to divide the Person of
the King from his Crown, Calvin's case 7 pars, fol. ^1.
a stringe opinion, and cites Calvin's Case, but leaves out the conclusions
therein mentioned, fol. 11. Master Prynne says there, But let this opinion be
what it will; without the Kings Grace and Pardon it will go very far, and
two Acts of Parliament there mentioned are beyond an opinion: And in his Book
of the opening of the Great Seal, fol. 17. The Parliament has no jurisdiction
to use the Grear Seal for Pardons General or Particular. Where is the supreme
power then?

Mr. 19. Ob.
Prynnes (opening of the Seal) page 19. says, the Noblemen and State, the day
after the Funeral of King Henry the third (King Edward the first his Son
being in the Holy Land) made a new Great Seal, and Keepers of the same; And in
Henry the sixts time, in the first year of his Reign, the like was done in
Parliament.

A facto, all jus, Sol.
is no good Argument, for than in Edward the firsts time it was no Parliament,
for King Henry the third was dead, which dissolyed, the Parliament, if called
in his time, and it could be no Parliament of Edward the firsts time, for no
Writ issued to summon a Parliament in his Name, nor could issue but under that
New Seal, it was so suddenly done after^ Henry the thirds death, King Edward
the first being then in the Holy Land, it was the first year of his Reign,
and no Parliament was held that year, nor the second year of his Reign: The
first Parliament that was in his Reign, was in the third year of his Reign,
as appears by the printed Acts: Also the making of that Seal was by some
Lords then present; What hand had the Commons in it? Concerning the Seal made
in Henry the sixths time, the Protector was Viceroy according to the course of
Law, and so the making of that Seal was by the Protector in the Kings name,
and that Protector, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, as Protector, in the Kings
Name summoned that Parliament, and was Protector made by the Lords, and not in
Parliament, as appears plainly, for that Parliament was in the first of
Henry the sixth, and the first holden in his time, and power given by
Commission to the said Duke, then Protector, to summon that Parliament, Prynne,
ibid. fol. 19. But the new counterfeit Seal was made when the King was at
Oxford, in his own Kingdom, and not in the holy Land.

Mr. 20 Ob.
Prynne in his Book of the two Houses power to impose Taxes, restraines
Malignants against any Habea^ Corpus, etc. says, that the Parliament is above
Magna Charta, and fol. 15. ibid. The Parliament has power over Magna Charta to
repeal the same when there is cause.

This Argument supposes that they have the Kings power, Sol.
which has appeared formerly they have not: But suppose they had, Magna Charta
contains many Moral Laws, which by the Law of the Land a Parliament cannot
alter, 21 H. 7.2. D. and Student, 2 Dialogue. For example, it says cap. 11.
Justice shall not be sold, delayed, nor denied to any man; but by this Argument
the Parliament may make Law to delay, deny, and to sell Justice, which surely
is a very ill position to maintain.

What they would have, does now by the Propositions sent to Newcastie to his
Majesty appear, whereby they would have him divest himself, and settle in
them all his Kingly power by Sea and Land, and of themselves to have power,
without him, to lay upon the people of this Land what taxes they think meet,
to abolish the Common prayerbooke, to abolish Episcopacie, and to introduce a
Church Government not yet agreed, but such as they shall agree on.

His Majesty finding a prevailing party in both Houses to steer this course,
and being chased away with Tumults from London, leaves the Houses for these
Reasons, (viz.)

First, because to alter the Government for Religion, is against the Kings Oath:

Secondly, against their Oaths: For every of them has sworn in this
Parliament, That His Majesty is the only supreme Governor in all Causes
Ecclesiastical and over all persons.

Thirdly, this course is against Magna Charta, the 1. Chap. and the last. Salve
sint Episcopis omnes liber tales sue, Confirmed by thirty two Acts of
Parliament: and in the two and fortieth of Edward the third, the first Chapter
enacts, if any Statute be made to the contrary, it shall be holden for none:
and so it is for judgments at Law, in the 25 of Edward the 1. chap. 1.2. The
great Charter is declared to be the Common Law of the Land.

Fourthly, they endeavor to take away by their Propositions, the Government of
Bishops, which is as ancient as Christianity in this. Land, and the Books of
Common prayet settled by five* Acts of Parliament, and compiled by the
Reformers and Martyrs, and practiced in the time of four Princes.

Fifthly, these Propositions taking away from his Majesty all his power by Land
and Sea, rob him of that which all his Ancestors, Kings of this Realm, have
enjoyed: That enjoyment and usage makes the Law, and a right by the same to his
Majesty. They are against their own Protestation made this Parliament, (viz.)
to maintain his Royal Person, Honor, and Estate; They are against their
Covenant, which does say, that they will not di^inish his just power and
Greatness.

For these reasons his Majesty has lest them, and as is believed, will refuse
to agree to the said Propositions, as by the fundamental Law of the Land he
may (having a Negative Voice) to any Bills proposed.

The result of all is upon the whole matter: That the King thus leaving of the
Houses, and his denial to pass the said Propositions, are so far from making
him a Tyrant, or not in a condition to govern, at the present; that thereby he
is rendered a just; Magnanimous, and pious Prince: so that by this it appears
clearly to whom the Miseries of these times are to be imputed. The remedy for
all, is, an Act of Oblivion, and a General Pardon.

God save the King.

DAVID JENKINS, now Prisoner in the Tower:
28 Aprilis, 1647.
The Vindication of Judge Jenkins Prisoner in the Tower, the 29. of April, 1647.
I Was convened upon Saturday the 10 of this month of April before a
Committee of the House of Commons, wherein Master Co^bet had the Chair; and I
was there to be examined upon some questions then to be propounded to me; to
which questions I refused to give any other answer then that which w^t set
down in a paper I then delivered to the said Mr. Corbet, which follows in
these words:

Gentlemen, I stand committed by the House of Commons for High Treason, for not
acknowledging, nor obeying the power of the two Ponses, by adhering to the King
in this war. I deny this to be Treason, for the supreme and only power by
the Laws of this Land, is in the King: If I should submit to any examination
derived from your vpwir, which by the Negative Oath stands in opposition to the
Kings power, I should confess the power to be in you, and so condemn my self
for a Traitor, which I neither ought nor will do.

I am sworn to obey the King, and the Laws of the Land; you have not power to
examine me by those Laws, but by the Kings writ, Patent, or Commission; if you
can produce either thereof, I will answer the questions you shall propound;
otherwiss I cannot answer thereto, without the breach of my Oath, and the
violation of the Laws, which I will not do to save my life.

You your selves, all of you this Parliament, hive sworn that the King is our
only and supreme Governor; your Protestation, your Vow and Covenant; your
solemn League and Covenant, your Declarations, all of them published to the
Kingdom, that your scope is the maintenance of the Laws; those Laws are and
must be derived to us, and enlivened by the only supreme Governor, the
Fountain of Justice, and the life of the Law, the King. The Parliaments are
called by his writs, the Judges sit by his Patents, so of all other D^cers, the
Cities and ^ownes corporate, govern by the Kings Charters; and therefore since
by the Law I cannot be examin^b by you, without a power verive^ by his Majesty,
I neither can, nor will, nor ougte you to examine me upon any questions. But if
as private Gentlemen, you shall be pleased to (...) me any questions, I shall
really and truly answer ev^ry such question, as you shall demand.

April 10. 1647. David Jenkins.


This Paper has been misrepresented to the good people of this City by a
printed one, stilling it my Recantation, which I own not; and besides is in it
self repugnant (just like these times) the Body falls out with the Head. To
vindicate my self from that Recantation, and to publish to the world the
realty of the Paper then delivered to Mr. Corb^t and the matter therein
contained, I have published this ensuing discourse.

No person who^ has committed Treason, Mutter, (...) ^elony, has any
assurance at all for so much as one hour of life, Lands or Goods, without the
Kings gr^tions pardon, 27. Hen. 8. cap. 24.

The King is not virtually in the two Houses at Westminster, whereby they may
give any assurance at all, to any person, in any thing, for any such offense.

1. The House of Commons have beelar^d to the Kingdom in their Declaration of
the 28 of November last, to the ^cots Papers, p. 8. That the King at this time
is not in a condition to gover^e. No person or thing can derive a virtue to
other men, or things, which it self has not; and therefore it is impossible
that they should have a virtue from the King to govern, which they declare he
has not himself to give.

2 The Law of the Land is, 5 Elizab. cap. 1.
That no person in any Parliament has a vayce in the House of Commons, but
that he stands a person to all intents and purposes as if he had uev^r boeu
elect^d or returned, if before he sit in the Hause, he take not h^s Dat^ upon
the holy Evangel sts, that the Kings Majesty is the only and supreme
Governor over all persons in all Canses. All the Members of the said House
have taken it, and at all times as they are returned do take it; otherwise they
have no color to intermeddle with the public Affairs. How does this Solemn
and Legal Oath agree with their said Declaration, That the King is in no
condition to govern (...) By the one it is sworn, he is the only supreme
Governor; by the other, that he is not in a condition to govern.

3. The Oath is not, that the King was, or ought to be, or had been, before he
was seduced by ill Council, our only and supreme Governor in all Causes,
over all persons; but in the present tense, that he i^ ont only and supreme
Governont, at this present, in all causes and over all persons. So they the
same persons swear one thing, and declare to the Kingdom the contrary of the
same thing, at the same time, in that which concerns the weal of all this
Nation.

4 The Ministers in the Pulpits do not say, what they swear in the House of
Commons. Who ever heard fi^hence this unnatural War, any of their Presbyters
attribute that to his Majesty which they swear? The reason is, their Oath is
taken at westminster amongst themselves: that which their Ministers pray and
preach, goes amongst the people. To tell the people that the King is now their
only and supreme Governor in all Causes, is contrary to that the Houses do
now practice, and to all they act and maintain. They, the two Houses forsooth,
are the only and supreme Governors in default of the King, for that he has
lest his great Council, and will not come to them, and yet the King desires to
come, but they will not suffer him, but keep him prisoner at Holmby: so well
do their Actions and Oaths agree.

5. They swear now, King Charies is their only and supreme Governor; but with
a resolution at the time of the Oath taking, and before and after, that he
shall not be only or supreme Governor, or only and supreme, but not any
Governor at all: For there is no point of Government, but for some years past
they have taken to themselves, and used his name only, to abuse and deceive the
people.

6. That this virtuall power is a mere fiction, their Propositions sent to
Oxford to Neweastle, to be signed by the King, do prove it so. What needs this
ado, if they have the virtuall Power with them at Wistminster?

7. To affirm that the Kings power (which is the virtue they talk of) is
separable from his person is High Treason by the Law of the Land; which is so
declared by that learned man of the Law, Sir Edward Cock so much magnified by
this present Parliament, who in the 7 part of his Reports in Calving case, fol.
11 says thus. In the reign of Edward the second, the Supencers, the Father
and Son, to cover the Treason hat head in their hearts invented this damnable
and damned opinion, that homage and Oath of Legeance was more by reason of the
I Kings Crown, (that is of his potitick capacity) theu by reason of ohe person
of the King upon which ^^inion they inferred three execra^le and detestable
consequences. h. If the King to not demeaue himself by reason in the right of
his Crown his Lieges are bound ^y Oath to remove the King. 2 seeing that the
King ^ould not be retormed by ^nte of Law, that ought so be dene per aspertes
that is by orce 3. That his Lieges be beund to govern in ^yde of him, and in
default of him; all which were condemned by two Parliaments, one in the raigue
of Edw. 2. called exilium Hugonis le Spencer; and the other in anno 1. Edw 3
cap. 2.

And that the natural body and politic maks one indivisible body, and that
these two bodies incorporate in one person make one body and not diverse, is
resolved as the Law of Eng. 4 Ed 3, Ploydon Com. fol. 213 by Sir Co, bet Catlin
L. Chief Justice of Eng. Sir I^mes D^er, L. Chief Justice of the Common pleas,
the L. Sanders, L. Chief Baron of the Exche^ner, and by the rest of the Judges,
viz. Justice Restall, Justice Brown, Justice Corbet, Justice weston, Baron
Frevyl^, Carus and Pow^rel, Sergeant to the Queen, Gerrard Auturny General;
Carell Attorney of the Duchy; P^owdon the learnedest man of that age, in the
knowledge of the Law and Customs of the Realm.

8. The Law in all ages without any controversy is and has been: that no Act
of Parliament binds the Subjects of the Land without the assent of the King, ^
H^^. 3 Mogn: Charta. So in every Age till this d^y, and in every Kings time, as
appears by the Acts in Print, 1 part of the Iustit Sect. 234. (...) fine where
many of the Law-Bookes are ^iied. 7 Hen. 7.14.12. of Hen. 7.20.
either for Person, Lauds, Goods, or Fame. No man can show any syllable,
letter, or line to the contrary in the books of the Law, or printed Acts of
Parliament, in any age in this Land: If the virtuall power be in the Houses,
there needs no assent of the Kings. The styles of the Acts printed from 9 Hen.
3. to 1 Hen. 7. were either, The King ordaines at his Parliament, etc. or the
King ordains by the adv^ee of his Prelates and Bar^^rs, and at the humble
Petition of the Commons, etc. In Hen. 7. his time the Style altered, and has
fithence continued thus; It is o^dained by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled: So
that always the Assent of the King gives the life to all, as the soul to the
body; and therefore our Law books call the King, the Fountain of Justice, and
the life of the Law.

9. 2 Han. 4 Cap 22 4 pars instit. 42. Mr. ^^in in his Treatise. of the great
Seal. fol. 17.27. Hen. 8 Chap. 24.
Mercy as well as Justice belongs by the Law of the Land only to the King.
This is confessed by Mr. Pryn, and it is so without any question: The King can
only pardon, and never more cause to have sufficient pardons then in such
troublesome times as these, and God send us pardons and peace: None can give
any pardon, but the King by the Law of the Land: The whole and sole power of
pardoning Treasons and Felonies belongs to the King are the words of the Law,
and it is a delusion to take it from any other and utterly invalid. 27. Hen. 8.
c. 24.

10. Queen Elizabeth summoned her first Parliament, to be held the 23. of
Jan. in the first year of her Majesty's Reign: The Lords and commons
assembled by force of the same Writ, the 21 day the Queen fell sick and could
not appear in her person in Parliament that day, and therefore prorogued it
until the 25 of the same Month of January: Resolved by all the Judges of
England that the Parliament began not the day of the return of the Writ, 3 of
Eliz. Dier. 2^3.
viz. the 23. of January, when the Lords and Commons appeared, but the 25, of
the said Month when the Queen came in person, which shows evidently that
this virtuall presence is a mere deluding fiction that has no ground in Law,
reason, or sense. They have the King now a prisoner at Holmby, with guards upon
him, and yet they govern by the virtuall power of their prisoner. These are
some few of the causes and reasons which moved me to deliver that paper to Mr.
Corbet, which I am ready to justify with my life, and should hold it a great
honor to dye for the honorable, and holy Laws of the Land: that which will
save this Land from destruction, is an Act of Oblivion, and his Majesty's
gracious general pardon, the Soldiers their Arrears, and every man his own,
and truth and Peace established in the Land, and a favorable regard had to the
satisfaction of tender Consciences.

April 29. 1547. David Ienkins.

THE ARMIES INDEMNITY, WITH ADDITION; Together with a DECLARATION SHOWING, How
every Subject of ENGLAND ought to be tried for Treasons, Felonies, and all
other Capital Crimes, as is set down in the Laws of the LAND.

By DAVID IENKINS; now Prisoner in the Tower of London.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

The Armies Imdemnity, etc.
UPon the publishing of the Ordinance of the 22 of May last, for the Indemnity
of the Army, certain Gentlemen well affected to the peace of the Kingdom, and
safety of the Army, desired me to set down in writing, whether by the Law of
the Land, the said Ordinance did secure them from danger, as to the matters
therein mentioned: For whose satisfaction in a business wherein the lives and
fortunes of so many men were concerned, and the peace of the Kingdom involved,
I conceived I was bound in duty and conscience, faithfully and truly to set
down what the Law of the Land therein is, which accordingly I have with all
sincerity expressed in this following discourse.

The danger of the Army by the Law of the Land is apparent to all men: 25 ^d.
3. c. 21. 2 R. 2. c. 3. ^ H. 4. c. 10. 1 and 2. Th. and Mary. c. 10.
It is high Treason by the Law of the Land to leavy war against the King, to
compass or imagine his death, or the death of his Queen, or of his eldest
Son, to counterfeit his Money, or his great Seal; They are the very words of
the Law: Other Treasons, then are specified in that Act, are declared to be no
Treasons until the King and his Parliament shall declare otherwise, 3 Pars
inst. p. 22. and 2 pars instit. page 47, 48. and 4 pars insti^. p. 23.48.29. 3
pars instit. cap. Treason, p. 9, 10, and 12.
they are the very words of the Law. King and Commons, King and Lords, Commons
and Lords, cannot declare any other thing to be Treason, than there is
declared; as appears by the Lord Cook, in the places cited in the Margin: A
Law* book published by order of the House of Como^ns this Parliament, as
appears in the last leaf of the 2. part of the Institutes, published likewise
by their Order.

The Resolutions of all the Judges of England upon the said Statute of the 25
Edward 3. (...). 5. John the Solicitor in his speech upon the Araignment of
the Flarle of Strafford Printed by order of the House of Commons.7. 13.
(as appears in the said third part of the Institutes, Chap. High Treason)
have been, that to imprison the King until he agree to certain demands is
High Treason; to seize his Ports, Forts, Magazine for War, are High Treason;
to alter the Laws is High Treason.

The word King in the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. c. p. 2. must be understood of the
Kings natural person; for that person can only die, have a Wife, have a Son,
or be imprisoned.

The Privilege of Parliament protects no man from treason or felony, 4 pars
insti. c. Parl. p. 25^
howbeit he be a Member; much less can they protect others: Those who cannot
protect themselves, have no color to make Ordinances to protect others who are
no Members.

The Statute of 11 Hen. 7. c. 1. does by express words free all persons who
adhere to the King. 11 H. 7. c. 1.


The Army by an Act of Indemnity free themselyes from all those dangers, Stamfo
d. l. 2. fol. 99. 18 Ed. 3. Statutes at larg 144. 20 Ed. 3. c. 1. 11 R^^. 2. c.
10. 4 pars instit. page 23.48.29.
which an Ordinance can no more do than repeal all the Laws of the Land, the
whole and sole power by Law to pardon all Treasons, Felonies, etc. being solely
and wholly in the King, as is cleared by the Statute of 27 H. 8. c. 24. and the
Law of the Land in all times.

Having showed the danger of the Army by the Law of the Land, next consider the
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons published the 22 of May last for their
Indemnity; by the ensuing discourse it does appear they have no Indemnity at
all thereby.

The Indemnity proposed by the Ordinance, is for an Act done by the authority
of the Parl* or for the service or benefit thereof; and that the Judges and all
other Ministers of Justice shall allow thereof.

This Ordinance cannot secure the Army for these reasons.

1. Their Judges are sworn to do justice according to the Law of the Land, 3
Pars inst. p. 21. 2 pars inst. 47.48. 1 pars inst. 19^. Princes case 8, reports.
and therefore the Judges must be forsworn men if they obey it; because an
Ordinance of both Houses is no Law of the Land, and no man can believe they
will perjure themselves so palpably and visibly in the eye of the World.

2. All trials for treasons, felonies, robberies, Magna Charta cap. 19. 25 Ed.
3. c. 4. 28 H. 3. c. 3. 37 Ed. 3. c. 42 Ed. 3. c. 3.
and such like capital offenses, are by the Law of the Land to be by
indictment of a Jury appointed out of the Neighborhood where the offense was
done: there is no common Jury-man but understands what the Law is in these
cases as well as the best Lawyers, and the Law makes the Jury Judges of the
fact, Doclaration of the Army presented at Walden, and printed by the
appointment of the Officers subscribed.
whereby the soldier is left to their mercy whom he has offended (as some of
them have lately had woeful experience, and thereupon do rightly apprehend
their danger) Now no man can think that the Jurors will perjure themselves to
acquit the soldiers for robbing and plundring of the Countries, and thereby
utterly destroy their own Rights and Properties.

3. If the Judges conceive (as they may) that the taking of other men's horses
or goods, is not by the Authority of Parliament, or for the service and benefit
thereof, the soldier dies for it; they may say to steal or rob any man of his
goods is not for the Parliaments service, but against it, which was always the
sense of the people, and doubtless the Jurors will not think otherwise.

4. This Ordinance is restrained to the authority, 4 Pars inst. p. 1. 3 pars
inst. p. 22. 1 pars, inst. p. 1. 28 H. 8. f. i^. Dier 38 H. 8. fol. 60. 12 H.
7. 20. 1 pars instit. 159. Princes case 8 Reports.
service or benefit of the Parliament: the Lords and Commons make no more a
Parliament by the Law of the Land than a body without a head makes a man; for a
Parliament is a body composed of a King their head, the Lords and Commons the
Members. All three together make one body, and that is the Parl. and no other,
and the Judges may, ought, and I believe will according to their oaths proceed
as not bound at all by this Ordinance. For it is restrained to the authority of
Parliam. service or benefit thereof, whereas the two Houses are not the Pa^l.
but only parts thereof, and by the abuse and misunderstanding of this word
Parliament, they have miserably deceived the people.

5. This Ordinance is against their Ordiinance which expressly prohibits
plundring, 28 Aug. 1642. Col. of Ord. first part, 565.592.605. several
Ordinances.
and so there is one Ordinance against another, whereby their Judges have an
out* let to proceed on the one or the other, and thereby the Army has no
manner of security.

6. The word Parliament is a French word (howbeit such Assemblies were before
the Norman Conquest here) and signifies in that language to consult and treat;
1 Pars inst. 109. 1 pars instit. 110. 4 pars p. 49.
that is the sense of the word Parler in the French Tongue. The Writ whereby
the two Houses are assembled, which is called the Writ of Summons of
Parliament, at all times, and at this Parliament used, and which is the
warrant, ground and foundation of their meeting, is for the Lords of the House
of Peers, the Judges and Kings Counsel to consult and treat with the King
(that is the Parler) of great concernments, touching, (...) the King, secondly,
the defense of his Kingdom, thirdly, the defense of the Church of England. It
cannot be a Parliament that will not parle with their King, but keep him in
prison, and not suffer him to come to them and parle, and therefore the Law,
and sense, and reason, informing every man that is no manner of parliament) the
King with whom they should parle being so restrained that they will not parle
with him) the army has no manner of security by this Ordinance; for their
indemnification refers to that which is not in being until the King be at
Liberty.

7. It is more than probable that their Judges before the last Circuit had
instructions to the effect of this Ordinance; The Common soldiers second
Apology. 6. Grievances of the Army published 15. May last. Three grievances of
Col. Riches Regiment.
but they the Judges making conscience of their Oath, laid aside the said
instructions, and ought, and may, and it is believed will no more regard this
Ordinance, than the said instructions: What was done in the last circuit the
army well knows, touching many of their fellow Soldiers.

8. The H^uses in their first proposition to his Majesty for a safe and
wellgrounded peace, sent to Newcastle to desire a pardon from his Majesty for
themselves: they who desire a pardon, cannot granr a pardon (como^n reason
dictates this to every man) and therefore that the army should accept an
indemnity for them, who seek it for themselves, or should conceive it of any
manner of force, is a fancy; so that no man in the whole army, but may
apprehend, that it is vain and a mere delusion.

9. His Majesty by his gracious message of the 12 of May last, has offered an
Act of Oblivion, and a general pardon to all his people, this done the Law
does indemnifie the Army (without all manner of scruple) for any thing that
has been done; for it is an Act of Parl. when the King and two houses concur,
and binds all men. I here is no safety by the Ordinance; there is safety by an
Act of Parliament: and will not reasonable men prefer that which is safe
before that which is unsafe.

10. His Majesty by his said Letter agrees to pay the arrears of the army; J am
sure that it is a public debt, and the chiefest and the first that by the two
Houses should be paid, and before any dividend or gratuities bestowed among
themselves: for their blood, limbs, and lives have put and kept the both Houses
at rest in the power they have: So by this concurrence of his Majesty for your
indemnity, and for your arreares, the Army have not an Ordinance, or the
Public Faith, but the Law of the Land to make sure unto them their indemnity
for all acts, and for their arrears, and therewith also bring peace to the Land.

11. The Kingdom and people generally desire these things. To such an army just
and reasonable things must not be denied; the things formerly proposed are most
just and reasonable, you may have them if you will, if you will not, you render
this Kingdom miserable; wherein you will have your share of miseries: the head
and the body are such an incorporation as cannot be disolved without the
destruction of both.

The additionall Ordinance of both Houses passed the 5. of June instant for the
fuller indemnity of the Army, makes nothing at all to the matter. 1. For that
it extends not to Felony, Homicide, Burglary, Robbery, or any other cappitall
crime, which is the main business insisted upon, and most concerns the
Soldiers security.

12. The both Houses in the said additional Ordinance say, Mr. Pyms Speech
against tho Earl of Strafford. p. 16. Six considerations printed by the command
of the House of Commons.
that it is expedient that all offenses be pardoned and put in oblivion, pardon
and oblivion cannot be understood to be for a time, but for ever; and they
themselves confess that an Ordinance is not binding but pro tempore, which with
the most advantageous interpretation can be but a reprive or delay of the
execution of the Law, and therefore that cannot pardon or put in oblivion by
their own showing.

But the Law of the Land is, (and so it has constantly been practiced in all
times) that no persons of what estate soever, 27 H. 8. c. 24.
have any power to pardon treason, felony, or any other offenses but the King
only, who has the sole and whole power to pardon all such crimes whatsoever.
And in the same manner an Ordinance is of no authority at all to take away the
right of private men's actions, by any evidence it can give; in truth all the
evidence that this Ordinance gives is, that it records to posterity nothing but
a lawless and distempered time.

For remedy thereof I say again, it is a certain truth, this Kingdom without
an act of Oblivion, and a general pardon, and the payment of Souldiers-arrears,
and a meet regard had to tender consciences, will unavoydably be ruined.

June 10. 1647. DAVID IENKINS Prisoner in the Tower of London.

Sundry Acts of Parliament mentioned and cited in the Armies Indemnities, set
forth in words at large for the better satisfaction of such as desire rightly
to be informed.
25. Edw. Chap. 5. A Declaration what offenses shall be adjudged Treason.

WHereas diverse opinions have been before this time, in what case Treason shall
be said, and in what not: The King at the request of the Lords and of the
Commons has made a Declaration in the manner as hereafter follows: That is
to say, When a man does compass, or imagine the death of our Lord the King, or
of our Lady the Queen, or of the eldest Son and Heir: or do violate the Kings
companion, or the Kings eldest Daughter unmarried, or the Wife of the Kings
eldest Son and Heir; or if a man do leavy War against the Lord our King in his
Realm, or be adherent to the Kings enemies in his Realm, giving to them aid and
comfort in the Realm, or elsewhere, and thereof be probably attainted of open
deed by people of their condition: And if a man counterfeit the Kings great or
privy Seal, or his Money: and any man bring false money into this Realm,
counterfeit to the money of England, and the money called Lusburgh, or other like
to the said money of England, etc.

11. Hen. 7. Chap. 1. None that shall attend upon the King, and do him true
service, shall be attainted or forfeit any thing.

THE King our Soueraign Lord calling to remembrance the duty of Allegiance of
his Subjects of this his Realm, and that they by reason of the same are bound
to serve their Prince and Sovereign Lord for the (...) being in his Wars, for
the defense of him and the land, against every rebellion, power, and might
raised, reared against (...) and with him to ^^er and abide in service in
battle, if ^ase so require, and that (...) the same service what fortune ever
fall by chance in the same battle against the mind and will of the Prince (as
in this land sometime passed has been seen) that it is not reasonable, but
against al laws, reason and good conscience, that ye said subjects going with
their Soueraign Lord in Wars, attending upon him in his person, or being in
other places by his commandment within this Land or without, any thing should
lose or forfeit, for doing their duty or service of Allegiance. It be therefore
ordained, enacted, and established by the King our Soueraign, by the advice and
assent of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that from hence forth no
manner of person or persons whatsoever he or they be that, attend upon the King
and Soueraign Lord of this land for the time being, in his person, and do him
true and faithful service of Allegiance in the same, or be in other places by
his commandment in his wars within this land; or without, that for the said
deed and true duty of Allegiance, he or they be in no wise convict or attaint
of high treason nor of other offenses for that cause, by Act of Parliament, or
otherwise by any process of Law, whereby he or any of them shall lose or forfeit
life, lands, tenements, rents, possessions, heriditaments, goods, chattels, or
any other things, but to be for that deed and service utterly dischar, ged of
any vexation, trouble, or loss. And if any Act or Acts, or other process of the
Law hereafter thereupon for the same, happen to be made contrary to this
Ordinance, that then that Act or Acts, or other process of Law, whatsoever they
shall. be, shall be utterly void Provided always, that no person or persons
shall take any benefit or advantage by this Act, which shall hereafter decline
from his or their said Allegiance.

Cap. 24. In the Statute of 27. H. 8. It is enacted that no person or persons
of what estate or degree soever they be of, shall have any power or authority
to pardon or remit any Treason, Murders, Man slaughters, or any other Felonies,
etc. but that the King shall have the sole and whole power and authority
thereof united and knit to the Imperial Crown, as of right it appertains,
etc. And in the same Statute it is enacted further, That none shall have power
of what estate, degree, or condition soever they be to make Justices of Air,
Justices of Assize, Justices of Peace, etc but all such Officers and Ministers
shall be made by Letters-Pa^ents under the Kings great Seal in the name and by
the authority of the King and his Heirs and Successors Kings of this Realm.

In the first ear of Queen Mary, and the first Chapter, It is enacted by the
Queen, with the consent of the Lords and Conmions, That no deed or offense by
act of Parliament made treason, shall be taken deemed, or adjudged to be ^igh
Treason, but only such as be declared, and expressed to be Treason by the Act
of Parliament made 25. Ed cap. 2. before mentioned.

A Declaration of Mr. David Jenkins, now Prisoner in the Tower of London, one
of His Majesty's Judges in Wales, for trials of Treasons, Murders, Felonies,
and all other, capital crimes, that they ought only to be by Juries, and not
otherwise, unless it be by Act of Parliament.
THe Common Law of this Land is, that every Freeman is subject to a trial by
bill of Attainder in Parliament wherein His Majesty and both Houses must
necessarily concur, for that trial and attainder is an Act of Parliament to
which all men are subject to.

Mag. Charta, 19. 2 part. inst. fol 28, 29.46, 48, 49* 50. composed by Sir Ed.
Cook and published by the Order of the House of Commons in May 1641. 4 pars
instit. fol. 41.356.
No man shall otherwise be destroyed, etc. but by the lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by the common Law of the Land. Peers to Noblemen are Noblemen,
Peers to the Como^ns are Knights, Gen* etc. Judgment of peers referres to
peers, those words, The Law of the Land, refers to the Commons; the Law of the
Land is for the trial of the life of a free Commoner, by indictment,
presentment of good and lawful men where the deed is done, or by Writ
original of the common Law, all this is declared in Magna Charta, c. 29, and
by 25, Ed. 3. c. 4.28* Ed. 3. c. 3.37* Ed. 3 c. 8.42 Ed. 3. c. 3. If the Lords
will try any man by an Ordinance, they destroy that excellent Act of Magna
Charta, and all those other good Laws.

Sir Simon de Bereford a free Commoner of England was condemned by the Lords to
death by an Ordinance, which after the Lords better considering the matter,
that they might be acquitted of that sentence, became suitors to the King, that
what they had done in future time might not be drawn into president, because
that which they had done was against the Law, Rot. Par. roll. 4. ^. 2 Number. 2.
part inst. p. 50 with this agrees Sir John Lees case, Rot. Par. 42. ^. 3. Number.
22.23. 2. inst. f. 50.
with this agrees the practice, and usage of all times in this Land, all the
free Commoners of this Kingdom has always been tried and acquitted or
condemned in capital causes by Iurers of their equals.

An Ordinance binds not in Law at all, See 4. p. inst f. 23.48.232.298.292.
2. p. inst* f. 47, 48.157.643. 4. H. 7. fa^. 1. H. 7. f. 14.3. p. inst. f. 41.
and but pro tempore, as the two Houses now affirm, a man's life cannot be
tried by that which is not binding, and to continue for all times, for a life
lost cannot be restored.

By an Act of Parliament of the 1. and 2. Phil^p and Mary c. 10. It is enacted
that all trials for Treason hereafter to be had, shall be according to the
course of the Common Law and not otherwise.

If the crime charged upon any be Treason against the two Houses (against the
Parliament it caannot be, for there is no Parliament without the King) That is
no Treason in Law, as appears by 25. Ed. 3. c. 2. 11. R. 2. c. 3. 1. H. 4. c.
10. 1. and 2* Philip and Mary, c. 10. 3. part of the Institutes, page 23*

An Act of Parliament to make any a Judge where he is party, is a void act, Dr
Bonams case, 8. part of Cooks Reports.
for none can be a Judge and party in the same cause, and therefore the House
of Peers being a party touching the crime charged upon any man, whom they
would try by an Ordinance for Treason against both Houses, cannot be a Judge.

By the Petition of Right, Petition of Right, 3. C.R.
if any man deserve death he ought to suffer the same according to the Laws of
the Land established, and not otherwise; but an Ordinance of the Lords is no
established Law.

The protestation, the Vow and Covenant, the solemn League and Covenant, the
Declarations of both houses, had, made and published sithence this unnatural
War, 3 part inst. fol. 89.
are amongst other things sworn and set down to be for maintenance of the
Laws, the people of this land ought to enjoy the benefit of their Birthright,
the Law of the Land, and the making good of the said protestation, Vow and
Covenant, League and Covenant, and Declarations, otherwise truth must be said
and will be said, that there is brought in a new arbitrary and tyrannical
government.

If the Lords have taken one man's life by an Ordinance, they are not bound to
take any more, and the case differs in case any appeal be made from a trial
by Ordinance to a trial at common Law, which was not done by that man whose
life was taken away by an Ordinance.

The Lords ought to remember that His Majesty and His progenitors have made
them a house of peers, they are trusted to counsel him in peace, f Nevels case
8 pare Cooks reports.
and defend him in war, his Majesty in Parliament is to consult and treat
with the Peers, and with his Council at Law, Judges, his Sergeants, Attorney,
and Solicitor, and Masters of the Chancery, the Lords and that counsel by the
respective Writ of Summons to Parliament are to give Counsel, g 4 pars instit.
fol. 4.9. 27 Edw. 3. c. 1.15. 3 part instit. fol. 225.
the House of Commons by their Writ to perform and consen^,

In the House of Lords, the Court of Parliament only is, for they only
examine upon Oath, h 1 Hen. 7. fol. 10.
with them, the King in person sits, and by them their erroneous judgments 14.
H. 3. c. 5
(upon a Petition to his Majesty for obtaining of a Writ of Error) by the
advice of the Judges are reversed, or affirmed, etc. The Lords are to remember
that their eminency and grandeur is preserved by the Laws, if they leave all
to will, and dishonor their King, and make nothing of the Laws, they will
make nothing of themselves in the end.

And therefore, it is well worth your observation what was said by M. John Pym
a Member of the House of Commons in his speech against the Earl of Strafford,
in the beginning of the Parliament, which speech is published by the express
order of the House of Commons, the words are these. The Law is that which puts
a difference betwixt good and evil, betwixt just and unjust; if you take away
the Law, all things will fall into a confusion, every man will become a Law
unto himself, which in the depraved condition of humane nature must needs
produce many great enormities: Lust will become a Law, and Envy will become a
Law, Covetousness and Ambition will become Laws, (...) 1 pal. book deel. page
140. 163.
and what dictates, what decisions such Laws will produce, may easily be
discerned, i. etc. They that love this Commonwealth, as things now stand, will
use all means to procure an Act of Oblivion, a general pardon from His
Majesty, the Soldiers their Arreares, and tender consciences a just and
reasonable satisfaction, else we must all perish, first or last.

May 17, 1647 God preserve His Majesty, and the Laws, wherein their Lordships
and the whole Kingdom are concerned. David Jenkins prisoner in the Tower of
London.

THE CORDIAL OF Judge Ienkins, For the good People of LONDON. In reply to a
Thing, called An Answer to the poisonous seditious Paper of Mr. DAVID IENKINS;
by H. P. Barrister of Lincolns-Inne.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

The Cordial of Judge JENKINS, for the good People of LONDON.
AFter the said Mr. H.P. has made a recital of the heads of my Vindication,
he deduced his Answer unto these eight particulars, which follow verbatim.

1.
It cannot be denied, but the Parliament sits by the Kings Writ, nay if Statute
Law be greater than the Kings Writ, it cannot be denied but the Parlia, fits,
or ought to sit by something greater than the Kings Writ: and if it be
confessed that the Parl. sits by the kings writ, but do not act by the Kings
writ, then it must follow that the Parlia. is a void vain Court, and sits to
no purpose; nay it must also follow, that the Parl. is of less authority, and
of less use than any other inferior Court, forasmuch as it is not in the Kings
power to control other Courts, or prevent them from sitting or acting.

2.
This is a gross nonsequitur, the Kings power is in himself; Ergo, it is not
derived to, nor does reside vertually in the Parliament. For the light of the
Sun remains imbodied, and unexhausted in the Glob of the Sun, at the same time
as it is diffused and displayed through all the body of the air; and who sees
not that the King, without emptying himself, gives Commissions daily of Oyre
and Terminer to others, which yet himself can neither frustrate nor elude? but
for my part I conceive it is a great error to infer that the Parliament has
only the Kings power, because it has the Kings power in it: for it seems to
me, that the Parliament does both sit and act by concurrent power, devolved
both from the King and Kingdom; and in this some things are more obvious and
apparent than in others. For by what power does the Parliament grant Subsidies
to the King? if only by the power which the King gives, then the K. may take
Subsidies without any grant from the Parliament: and if it be so by a power,
which the people give to the Parliament, then it will follow, the Parliament
has a power given both by King and Kingdom.

3.
The sending Propositions to the King and desiring his concurrence, is scarce
worth an Answer: for Subjects may humbly petition for that which is their
strict right and property. Nay it may sometimes beseem a Superior to prefer
suit to an inferior for matters in themselves due. God himself has not utterly
disdained to beseech his own miserable, impious, unworthy creatures: besides,
it is not our Tenet, that the King has no power, because he has not all
power, nor that the King cannot at all promote our happiness, because he has
no just claim to procure our ruin*

4.
We affirm not that the Kings power is separated from his person, so as the two
Spencers affirmed, neither do we frame conclusions out of that separation as
the two Spencers did, either that the King may be removed for misdemeanors, or
performed per asperte: or that the Subject is bound to govern in aid of him: we
only say, that his power is distinguishable from his person, and when he
himself makes a distinction betwixt them, commanding one thing by his legal
Writs, Courts and Officers, and commanding another thing extrajudicially by
word of mouth, Letters, or Ministers, we are to obey his power rather than his
person.

5.
We take not from the King all power of pardoning Delinquents, we only say it
is not proper to him quarto modo: For if the King pardon him which has
murdered my son, his pardon shall not cut me off from my appeal; and it is more
unreasonable, that the Kings pardon should make a whole State which has
suffered remediless, than any private man. So if the King should deny
indemnity to those which in the fury of war, have done things unjustifiable by
the Laws of peace, and thereby keep the wounds of the state from being bound
up, it is equitable that an Act of Indemnity should be made forcible another
way. And if his will not hold, yet this is no good consequence, the King is,
absolute in point of pardons, therefore he is absolute in all things else; and
the parliament has no power to discharge Delinquencies, therefore it has no
power in other matters.

6.
The Parliament has declared the King to be in no condition to governs but
their must not be interpreted rigidly, and without distinction; for if the King
with his Sword drawn in his hand, and pursuing the Parliament and their
Adherents as Rebels, be not fit for all Acts of Government, yet it is not
hereby insinuated that he is divested of the habit or right of Governing: if he
be unqualified now, he is not unqualified for the future; if he may not do
things destructive to the parliament, he is not barred from returning to the
parliament, or doing justice to the parliament. This is a frivolous cavil, and
sub^erfuge.

7.
We swear, that the King is our supreme Governor over all persons, and in all
causes; but we do not swear he is above all Law, nor above the safety of his
people, which is the end of the Law, and indeed Paramount to the Law it self.
If he be above Law, or liable to no restraint of our Law, then we are no freer
than the French or the Turks, and if he be above the prime end of Law, common
safety, then we are not free as the French or Turks* For if the total
subversion of the French or Turk were attempted, they might by Gods Law,
imprinted in the book of Nature, justify a self-defence; but we must
remedilesly perish, when the King pleases to command our throats. Besides, how
achieved the King of England such a Supremacy above all Law and the community
it self, for whose behoof Law was made? If Gods donation be pleaded, which is
not special to him, or different from what other Kings may pretend to, then to
what purpose serve our Laws, nay, to what purpose serve the Laws of other
Countries? for by this general donation, all Nations are condemned to all
servitude as well as we. If the Law of this Land be appealed to, what Books
has Mr. Ienkins read, where has he found out that Lex Regia, whereby the
people of England have given away from themselves all right in themselves? Some
of our Books tell us, that we are more free than the French; that the King
cannot oppress us in our Person^ o^ Estates, by imprisonment, denying justice:
or laying Taxes without our consents. Other Books tell us, that the safety of
the people, is the supreme Law, and that the King has both God and the Law for
his Superior. But all this is nothing to learned M. Jenkins.

8.
We admit, that no Acts of Parliament are complete, or formally binding,
without the Kings assent: yet this is still to be denied, that therefore
without this assent particularly expressed, the two Houses can do nothing, nor
have any virtual power at all, no, not to examine M. Ienkins, nor to do any
other thing of like nature, though in order to public justice and safety. I
have done, and wish M. Ienkins would call in and lick up again his black
infamous execrable reproaches, so filthily vomited out against the Parliament.

To the first.
I Was examined by a Committee appointed by the House of Commons: I say, and
said that the House of Commons have no power to examine me, for that it is no
Court; every Court has power to examine upon Oath; this power the House of
Commons never claimed: The Court of Pye-powders, Court Baron; Hundred court,
County court, and every other Court of Record, 5. H. 4. c. 3. 3 H. 6.46. 19 H.
6.43. ^5 H. 6.5.
or not of Record has power to examine upon Oath, and an examination without
Oath is a communication only: examination in Law is upon Oath.

There is no court without a power of trial* Sir Anthony Maynes ^ase. Cook 1.
par. Reports. Lit. 2. lib. Sect. 194. 6. H. 4.1.
the House of Commons have no power to try any offense, nor ever practiced it
by Bill, Indictment, Information, Plaint, or Original Writ, to reduce it to
trial, nor to try it by Verdict, Demurrer or Examination of Witnesses upon
oath, without which there can be no condemnation or judgment: and that which
can attain to no reasonable end, the Law rejects as a thing inutile and
useless, Sapiens incipi^a ^ine.

The Writ whereby they are called gives them power, Ad faciendum and
consentiendum: ^ pa^s instit. fol. ^. and 9.
To what? To such things Quae ibidem de communi consilio ordi^^^ contingerint
(viz.) in the Parliament: This makes nothing at all for a Court for the House
of Commons: that consilium which that Writ intends, is cleared partly by the
Writ for choosing Knights, etc. For the King by that Writ is said to resolve to
consult and treat with the Prelates and Peers of the Kingdom, for and
touching the great concernments of the Commonwealth (for the King never sits
in the House of Commons:) and this also is made evident by the Writs to the
Prelates, Peers, Judges, and to his Counsel at Law: The words in the Writ
are, To appear and attend the Parliament, Consilium impensuri* the one does
con^ulere, the other sacere and conse^tire.

The House of Lords, where the King sits in person assisted by His Lords,
Judges, Sergeants, Attorney, 7 H. 6.28. 1 H. 7.^0* 13 Ed. 3. c. 5. 4 pars inst.
p. 21.
Solicitor. Masters of the Chancery, is a court of Record to many purposes,
set down in the Books of Law, and the Statutes of the Land and that court is
only in the House of Lords, where the King sits.

A court must either be by the Kings Patent, Statute Law, or by the common
Law, Plowd. Com. 319.
which is common and constant usage: the House of commons has no Patent to be
a court, nor Statute Law to be a court, nor common usage: they have no
Journall Book, but since Edward, 6. time, was there ever Fine by the House of
Commons estreated into the Exchequer? For murder or Felony they can imprison no
man, much less for Treason; that House which cannot do the less, cannot do
the greater.

It is ordained, 25. ^. 3. c. 4. 3. Car. Petition of Right.
that no man shall be imprisoned or put out of his Franchise by the King or his
Council, but upon indictment or presentment of his good and lawful
Neighbors, where the deed is done, or by original Writ at the Common Law, and
so is Lex terrae the Law of the Land mentioned in Magna Charta, cap. 29.
expounded, and the said Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta are declared by
the Statute of 25. E. 1. c. 1. to be the Common Law of the Land. All Judges
and Commissioners are to proceed Secundum legem, and consuetudinem Regni
Angliae, as appears by all proceedings in all Courts, and by all Commissions:
and therefore the house of Commons by themselves proceeding not by Indictment,
Presentment, or Original Writ, have no power to imprison men, or put them out
of Franchise.

This no way trenches upon the Parliament; 4 pars instit. p. 1. 3 pars instit.
p. 23.
for it is in Law no Parliament without King and both Houses; I have only in
my Paper delivered to Mr. Corbet, 12. H. 7.20: Princes case, 8 Pars Cook. 1
pars instit. p. 159. 14 H. 8.3. Dier 3^. H. 8.60.
applied my self to that Committee, that had not power to examine me, but I
never thought, said, or wrote, that the Parliament had no power to examine me.
The Law and custom of this Land is that a Parliament has power over my life,
liberty, lands and goods, and over every other Subject, but the House of
Commons of it self has no such power.

For the Lord Cooks relation, 1 pars inst. 19. b.
that the House of Commons have imposed Fines, and imprisoned men in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and since; Few facts of late time never questioned, make no
power nor Court; a facto ad jus is no good argument; for the words of the
Statute of 6. H^n. 8. c. 16. that a license to depart from the House of Commons
for any Member thereof, 4 P. Inst. c. Parl.
is to be entered of Record into the Book of the Cleark of the Parliament,
appointed, Hobbarts reports fol. 152.
or to be appointed for that House, does not conclude that the House of Commons
is a Court of Records.

For first, that Law of 6. H. 8. c. 26. handles no such question, as that,
whether the House of commons be a court; it is a maxim in all Laws, Hobbarts
reports, fol. 154.
Le^ ali^d tract^us nil probat, the word (Record) there mentioned, is only a
memorial of what was done and entered in a book: A plaint removed out of the
County Court to the Court of the Common Pleas, has these words in the Writ of
remove, Recordari facias loquelam, Fitz. Not. Br. 70. Fitz. Not. Br. 13. 12 H.
4.33. 34 H. 6.49.
etc. and yet the county court is no court of Record: and so for ancient
Demesne in a Writ of false judgment, the words are Recordari facias loquelam,
etc. and yet the court of ancient Demesne is no court of Record; and so of a
court Baron, the Law and custom of England must be preserved, or England will
be destroyed, and have neither Law nor custom.

Let any man show me, that the court of Lords, or the House of commons in any
age has made any man a Delinquent (Rege dissentiente) the KING contradicting
it under his Great Seal. Mi^hell, and others of late were condemned by the
prosecution of the House of commons in King James his time; did King James ever
contradict it? And so in ancient times, where the House of Peers condemned the
Lord Latimer in 50, E. 3. 4 Pars Inst. Tit. Parlia. p. 23.
The Kings pardon freed him; which shows clearly, that the Kings express or
implied assent must of necessity be had to make a Delinquent. The execution of
the sentence is in the Kings name.

The Gentl. says, That the Parliament sits, or ought to sit by something
greater than the Kings Writ, etc.

No Parliament did ever sit without the Kings Writ* 4. Pars inst. p. 4. and 6.
nor could ever Parliament begin without the Kings presence in person, or by a
Guardian of England by patent under the Kings Great Seal, the King being in
remotis, or by Commission under the Great Seal to certain Lords representing
the Kings person, and it has been thus in all Ages unto this Session of
Parliament, wherein his Majesty has been pressed, and has passed two Acts of
parliament, one for a Triennial parliament, and another for a perpetual, if the
Houses please, to satisfy their desires; how these two Acts agree one with
another, 4 H. 3. c. 14. 36. H. 3. c. 10. 21. Iac. the Act of Limitation of
Actions. c. 22.
and with the Statute in Ed^. the Thirds time, where parliaments are ordained
to be holden every year, and what mischiefs to the people of this Land such
length of Parliaments will produce by protections and privileges to free them
and their menial servants from all debts during their lives, if they please to
continue it so long, and how destructive to men's actions against them, by
reason of the Statute of Limitations, which confines their actions to certain
years, and many other inconveniences of greater importance, is easy to
understand.

How can any man affirm, that the two Houses of Parliament do act now by the
Kings Writ, which relates to counsel and treaty with the King, 4. p. inst. p.
14. Vow any Covenant, p. 11.
concerning the King, the defense of his Kingdom and of the Church of England,
these are three points which it tends to, as appears by the Writ. They keep
their King prisoner at Holmby, and will not suffer him to consult and treat
with them. They have made a Vow and Covenant to assist the Forces raised and
continued by both Houses against the Forces raised by the King without their
consent, and to the same effect have devised the Oath which they call the
Negative Oath: Is this to defend the Kings Kingdom? or their kingdom?

When by their solemn League and Covenant they extirpate Bishops, Deanes and
Chapters root and branch, Is this to defend the Church of England? 3. pars,
Cook Dean and Chapter of Norwich.
(that Church must necessarily be meant, that was the Church of England when
the said Writ bore test) they were not summoned to defend a Church that was not
in being; to destroy and defend the Church are very contrary things; the Church
is not defended, when they take away and sell the Lands of the Church.

The Gentleman says, The King cannot control other Courts of Justice, or
prevent them from sitting, or acting, and therefore not the two Houses, etc. 14
H. 8.3. 36. H. ^. Dier. 60. 4. p. inst. p. 1.
It is true, the King cannot control or prevent his other Courts, for that
they are his ordinary Courts of common Justice, to administer common right unto
all men, according to the fixed Laws. The Houses make no Court without the
King, they are no Body corporate without the King, nor Parliament without the
King, they all make one corporate Body, one Court called the Parliament,
whereof the King is the Head, and the Court is in the Lords House, where the
King is present: and as a man is no man without a head, so the Houses severed
from the King, as now they are, have no power at all, and they themselves by
levying War against the King, and imprisoning of him, have made the Statute for
not dissolving, adjourning, or proroguing this Parliament of no effect, by the
said Acts of their own: they sit to no purpose without his assent to their
Bills, they will not suffer him to consult with them, and treat and reason with
them, whereby He may discern what Bills are fit to pass, and what not, which
in all Ages the Kings of this Land have enjoyed as their undoubted Rights, and
therefore they sit to no purpose by their own disobedience and fault.

For the ordinary Courts at Westminster, 27. H. 8. c. ^4. 28. H. 8.11. Dier.
the Judges in all those Courts are Judges by the Kings patent or Writ,
otherwise they are no Judges: the Houses can make no Judges, 2. ^. 3.11.
they are no Judges at all who are made by them; the whole and sole power of
making Judges belongs to the King: the King cannot control or prevent his own
Judges from ^itting and acting, but the Houses He may, for they are not the
Kings Judges but the judges of the ^^ Houses. In his other Courts the King
commits his power to his Judges by his patent, and they are sworn to do common
right to all men, and the King is sworn not to let them from so doing, the King
cannot judge in those Courts, nor control; but the King is both Judge and
Controuler in the Court of Parliament: Quoad Acts for his assent or dissent
does give life or death to all Bills. Many Lawyers have much to answer to God,
this Kingdom, and to posterity, for puzling the people of this Land with such
Fancies, as the Gentleman who wrote the Answer to my Paper, and others have
published in these Troubles, which have been none of the least causes of the
raising and continuing of them. And so I have done with the first part of this
Answer.

AD. 2.
For the Non sequitur, in the second Section of the Gentl. Answer, the
Antecedent and the Consequent are his own.

Quem recitas meus est (O Fidentine!) libellus:
Sed male dum recitas incipit esse tuus.
My words are, that the King is not virtually in the two Houses at Westminster,
to enable them to grant pardons, for that whole and sole power by the Law
belongs to the King: My paper has no such thing, 27. H. 8. c. 24.
as that the Kings power cannot be derived to others, or the virtue of his
power* For his power and the virtue of his power, ^ in all patents to his
Judges, in har^ers to Corporations, in Commission of all sorts, and in the
Parliament assembled by force of his Writ of Summons, so long as they obey him:
but when they renounce that power, and claim it not from the King, and declare
to the Kingdom that he is not in condition to govern, and imprison him, and
usurp to themselves all Royal Authority, as the two Houses now do, no
reasonable man can affirm that they Act by the power of their Prisoner, who
has no power to give them, that by force of Arms take all power unto
themselves.

The Gent says, The King grants Commissions daily of Oyre and Terminer, which
he cannot frustrate nor elude. The King may revoke and discharge the Commission
by his Writ, as he may remove all Judges, and place other men in their room*
and any Kings death determines all the Judges Patents at Westminster Hal,
Commission of Oyre and Terminer, etc And so he might dissolve both Houses in
all times, 4. ^. 4.39. 5. ^. 4.4. 1. Eli^ Dier 165. 1. Mar. Brooks case (...).
by his Writ under the Great Seal, until that in this Parliament, by his own
concession, the King of his goodness had secluded himself; which goodness
has been full ill requited.

The Gentl. affirms, That the power the Parliament has is concurrent from the
King and Kingdom; which, he conceives is proved by the grant of Subsidies to
the King by the Parliament. 4. pars (...). page
The mistaking of this word [Parliament] has been mischievous in these times
to this Land, and it is affectedly mistaken, which makes the sin the greater,
for the two Houses are not the Parliament, as before is declared, and at this
time so to inculcate it; when all men know, that of the 120. Peers of this
Kingdom, who were temporal Peers before the Troubles: there are now not above
30. in the Lords House, and in the House of Commons about 200. of the principal
Gentlemen of the Kingdom left the House and adhered to his Majesty, who is
imprisoned by them, shows no such candor as is to be desired.

It is true, that no Tallage can be laid upon the people of this Land but by
their consent in Parliament, as appears by the Laws mentioned in the
Margent; but you shall find in M. Seldens learned Book, called Mare clausum, a
number of presidents in Henry the Thirds time for Ship-mony justly condemned
this Parliament, to the which his Majesty assented; and in truth that
Ship Money was condemned before by the said two Statutes of 25. E. 1 and 34. E.
1. de Tallagio non concedendo. 25. E. 1. confirmatio chartarum c. 6. 34. H. 1.
c. 1. de Tallagio non concedendo.
Dangelet, Englishely, and many grievous Burdens were laid upon the people,
and born, until that memorable Princes time. But I am of opinion that the
common Law of the Land did always restrain Kings from all Subsidies and
Tallages, but by consent in Parliament; which does appear by Magna Charta the
last chapter, where the Prelates, Lords, and Communalty gave the King the
fifteenth part of their movables. In truth it is no manner of consequence,
because the King cannot take what he pleases of the Subjects goods, that
therefore they have a concurrent power in Parliament: there have been many
Parliaments and no Subsidies granted, parliaments may be without Subsidies, but
Subsidies cannot be without parliaments: of ancien^ times parliaments rarely
granted any, unless it were in the time of forr^igne Wars; and in my time,
Queen Elizab. refused a Subsidy granted in parliament, and in the parliament
of 1. Iac. none were granted. The Gentl. should make a conscience of blinding
the people with such untrue* colors to to the ruin of the King, and people.

AD. 3.
The Gentl. affirms, That the sending propositions to the King, and desiring
his concurrence, is scarce worth an answer, for Subjects may humbly petition
for that which is their strict right and property, etc. The propositions sent
to Newcastle, are in print; wherein the two Houses are so far from humbly
petitioning, that they style not themselves his Majesty's Subjects, as appears
by the propositions.

That they have a strict right or property to any one of these propositions is
a strange assertion, every one of them being against the Laws now in force.
Have the two Houses a strict right and property to lay upon the people what
Taxes they shall judge meet? To pardon all Treasons, etc. that is one of their
Propositions. Have they a strict right and property to pardon themselves? and
so for all the rest of their Propositions.

These propositions have been Voted by both Houses, the Kings assent (they
being drawn into Bills) makes them Acts of Parliament: Has the King no ^ight
to assent or dis-assent? 12 H. 7 20. 1 Iac. c. 1.1. Car. c. 7.
Wa^ the sending but a Complement? All our Law Books and Statutes speak
otherwise. This Gent. and others, must give an account one time o^ other for
such delusions put upon the people.

AD. 4.
The Gent. says, They affirm not, that the Kings power is separated from his
person, so as the two Spencer affirmed, etc. His Majesty's person i^ now at
Hol^by under their Guards* have they not severed his power from him, when by no
power they have left him, he can have two of his Chaplains, who have not taken
their Covenant, to attend him for the exercise of his conscience?

For the three conclusions of the Spencers, 15. Ed 2. Exilium Hugonis Calvin's
case 1 E. c. 2.7. pars, ^^ports, 11.
do not the two Houses act every of them? They say, his Majesty has broken his
Trust, touching the Government of his people: They have raised armies to take
him, they have taken him and imprisoned him; they govern themselves; they make
Laws, impose Taxes, make Judges, Sheriffs, and take upon them omnia insignia
summae potestatis: Is not this to remove the King for misdemeanors, to reform
per asperte, to govern in aid of him; the three conclusions of the Spencers?
Do they think the good people of England are become stupid, and will not at
length see these things?

The Gentleman says, Plowd, 4. Eliz. 213. the Kings Power and his person are
indivisible.
They do not separate his power from his Person, but distinguish it, etc. His
power is in his legal Writs, Courts, and Officers: when they counterfeit the
Great Seal, and seal Writs with the same, make Judges themselves, Courts and
Officers by their own Ordinances against his consent, declared under his true
Great Seal of England (not by word of mouth, letters, or ministers only),
their Seal is obeyed, their own Writs, their own Judges, their own Courts,
their own Officers, and not the Kings: The time will come when such strange
actions and discourses will be lamented.

AD. 5.
The Gentleman goes on, We take not from the King all power of pardening
Delinguents, we only say it is not proper to him quarto modo: etc. What do you
mean by quarte modo? I am sure, Omnis Rex Angliae, solus Rex and semper Rex,
can do it, and none else; read the books of the Law to this purpose,
collected by that reverend and learned Judge Stanford, Stanford. pleas 99. 27
H. 8. c. 24. Dier. 163.
from all Antiquity to his time, who died in the last year of King Philip and
Queen Mary's Reign, you shall find this a truth undeniable; and this power
was never questioned in any Age in any Book by any until this time, that every
thing is put to the question: You Gentlemen, who pro^esse the Law, and
maintain the party against the King, return at length, and bring not so much
scandal upon the Law, (which preserves all) by publishing such incredible
things.

We hold only what the law holds: Bract. lib, 3 cap 14. fol. 132. 1. pars
Instit. page 344. Plow 3. Eliz: 236. 237.
the Kings Prerogative and the subjects Liberty are determined, and bounded,
and admeasured by a written Law what they are; we do not hold the King to have
any more power, neither does his majesty claim any other but what ^he Law
gives him; the two Houses by the Law of this Land, have no color of power,
either to make Delinquents, or pardon Delinquents, the King contradicting: and
the Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax (howbeit but Soldiers) do now understand
that to be Law, and do now evidently see, and assuredly know, that it is not
an Ordinance of the two Houses, but an art of Parliament, made by the King,
Lords, and Commons that will secure them, and let this Army remember their
exccuted fellow-Souldier, and the Law was always so taken by all men until
these troubles, that have bego^ Monsters of opinions.

AD. 6.
This Gentleman says, The Parliament has declared the King to be (...)
condition to govern, etc.

There is no end of your distinctions, I and you profess the Law; show me Law
for your distinctions, or l^tter, syllable, or line, in any Age in the books of
the Law, that the King may in one time be in no condition to govern, and yet
have the habit of governing, and another time he may (viz) when the two Houses
will suffer him: the Law says thus, Vbi lex non distinguit, non est
distinguendum.

He says, The King is not barred from returning to His Parliament, (as he
calls the two Houses) he knows the contrary, the whole City knows the
contrary, Nos juris consulti sumus sacerdotes, (as Justinian the Emperor has
it, in the first book of his Institutions) and therefore knowledge and truth
should come from our lips: Worthy and ingenious men will remember, and reflect
upon that passage of that good and wise man Seneca, Non qua itur, sed qua
eundum, follow not the ways of the Lawyers of the House of Commons: God
forgive them, I am sure the King will, if they be wise and seek it in time.

AD. 7.
The Gent says, ^e swear that the King is our supreme Goverour over all
persons and in all causes, 5 Eliz. chapter 1. Cawdreys case 5 pars, fol. 1.
etc. Why has he left out the word (only?) for the Oath the Members now take,
is that King Charles is now the only and supreme Governor in all causes, over
all persons, and yet they keep their only Supreme Governor now in prison, and
act now in Parliament by virtue of their prisoners Writ, and by a concurrent
power in this Parliament, and by their own strict right and property (as the
Gentleman affirms in his Answer) These things agree well with their Oath, This
Oath is allowed by the Common Law Law of the Land
that the King is the only Supreme Governor in all causes over all persons,
This Oath is taken now in the Parliament time by all the Members of the House
of Commons, and is required by the Law to be taken in all Parliaments,
otherwise they have no power, nor color to meddle with the public Affairs.

This Oath being taken in Parliament, that the King is the only and Supreme
Governor in all causes, then it follows in Parliament causes, over all
persons, then over the two Houses; Let them keep this Oath, and we shall be
sure of Peace in the Land* and good Lawyers ought to desire peace both for the
public good, and their private, and not dishonor that Noble profession, as
many do in this miserable time.

The Gent. says, We do not swear that the King is above all Law nor above the
safety of his people; neither do we so swear, but his Majesty and we will
swear to the contrary, and have sworn and have made good, and will by Gods
grace make good our Oath to the world, that the KING is not above the Law, nor
above the safety of his people: the Law, and the safety of his people are his
safety, his Honor and his Strength.

AD 8.
The Gent. concludes, That Acts of Parliament are not formaly binding nor
complete without the Kings assent, yet the Houses have a virtual power with out
the Kings particular assent, to do things in order to public justice and
Safety (viz.) In setting up the Excise, in raising and maintaining of Arms, in
Taxing the people at pleasure with Fifth and Twentieth part, Fifty Subsidies,
Sequestrations, Loans, Compositions, imprisoning the King, abolishing the
Common prayer Book, felling the Churchs Lands, etc. all these are in order to
the public Justice and Safety.

Mr. H. P. you are of my profession, I beseech you, for the good of your
Country, for the Honor of our Science persuade your self and others, as much
as in you lies, to believe and follow the monition and council of that
memorable, reverend, and profoundly Learned in the Laws and Customs of the
Land, the Lord COOKI, 3 par. Inst. page 36.
who writes as becomes a great and a learned Judge of the Law (a person much
magnified by the two Houses) in these words: Peruse over all Books, Records and
Histories, and you shall find a Principle in Law, a Rule in Reason, and a
Trial in Experience, that Treason does ever produce farall and final
destruction to the offender, and never attains to the desired end (two
incidents inseparably thereun^o) and therefore let al men abandon it as the
poysonou^ bait of the divil and follow the Precept in Holy Scripture. SERVE
GOD, HONOR THE KING, AND HAVE NO COMPANY WITH THE SEDITIOVS.

Conclusion.
I say again, that without an Act of Oblivion, a gracious General pardon from
his Majesty, the arrears of the Soldiers paid, a favorable regard had to
tender Consciences, the^e will he neither Truth nor Peace in this Land, nor any
mans^cure of any thing he has.

By me David Jenkins Prisoner in the Tower.

A DISCOURSE TOUCHING The Inconveniences of a Long-continued PARLIAMENT
A Perpetual Parliament is repugnant to the Act made this Parliament for a
Triennial Parliament; for how can every three years a Parliament begin, if
this be perpetual, which may be so if the two Houses please?

2. An adjournment of the Parli^ment makes no Session, 4 pars; institut. fol.
27. Howbeit, before the adjournment, the KING gives His Royal assent to some
Bills. Cookeibid.

3. There is no Session till a Prorogation or dissolution of the Parliament.

4. This Parliament, as appe^res by the Act for not dissolving thereof, set
down in the printed Statutes of this Parliament, Plowd. com. 33.8. Bro.
relation 35. Bro Parl. 86. D^^. 1. Mariae 8
fol. 138. cannot be prorog^ed or dissolved, but by Act of par liament. There
has been as yet no Act of Parliament in that behalf: And therefore all the
Acts of this Parliament, are Acts of one Session.

5. All Acts of one Session relate to the first day of the Parliament, and all
the Acts of such a Parliament are acts of one day: so the Act for the
Trienniall, and the Act for this Perpetual, are two Acts of one day by the Law.

6. 4 Ed. 3. cap. and 36. Ed. 3. cap. 10. A Parliament is to be hol^en once
every year, and more often if need shall be; those Acts are confirmed by the
Act for the Trienniall Parliament. How does a perpetual Parliament agree with
a Parliament once every year, or with the intention of those Laws? How does a
Parliament every three-years agree with a Parliament for ever, which may be if
the two Houses please?

7. The result is this; at^ent day in Law this Parliament two acts have passed
(for howbeit the one was in 16 Carol. and the other in 17 Carol. yet both in
Law are Acts of one day) the one says there shall be a Trienniall Parliament
after the end of the sitting of this Parliament: The other, this Parliament
shall sit for ever if they please. The one will have a Parliament with an end,
the other a Parliament without an end.

When an Act of Parliament is against common Right or Reason, 1 Pars. Doct.
Bon. hams case. ^o 11 8. 8. E. 3 3.30.33 E. cassa^it, 32. 27. H. G. Anuity 41.
1. Eliz. D^er, 113.
or repugnant, or impossible to be performed, the Common Law shall control it,
and adjudg this Act to be void; they are the words of the Law.

An Act of Parliament, that a Man shall be judge in his own Cause, is a void
Act. Hobbart Fol. 120.

Begin with Common Right. It is against Common Right, that indebted men should
not pay their debts: That if any Member of the House of Commons do any Subject
wrong by disseising him of his land, or dispossessing him of his goods, or
blasting of his fame, or doing violence to his person, that such persons during
their lives should not be questioned by a Privilege of Parliament, and that
extended also to many other beside themselves, common right does abhor these
Enormities, which a perpetual Parliament does beget, besides the utter
destruction of al men's actions, real, personal, or mixed, 21. Iac, c. 16.
who have to do with Parliament Men, by the statute of Limitation, which
confines Suites to certain years.

For Common Reason. Parliaments were ordained for remedies to redress public
greivances, it is against reason they should make public and insufferable
Grievances. The Law of the Land allows no protection for any men employed in
the service of the Kingdom but for a year, to be free from Suites, and in
many Suites none at all, howbeit he be in such service, 39. H. 6.39.
but a Parliament perpetual may prove a protection, not for a year, but for
ever, which is against all manner of reason.

For impossibility. The death of his Majesty (whose life God prolong) dissolves
(...) necessarily; for the Writ of Summons i^, Carolus Rex in hoc individuo,
and Carolus Rex is in this particular, habiturus colloquium and tractatum cum
prelat is and proceribus, etc. King charles being to have conforence and Treaty
with his Prelates and Peers; carolus Rex cannot have colloquium et tractatum,
Conference and Treaty when he is deceased, 2 H. 5. Cook title Parl. 3. pars
and therefore it is as impossible for any Parliament to continue as long as
they please, as for a Parliament to make a dead man alive.

For Repugnancy. That which is but for a time cannot be affirmed to have
continuance for even, it is repugnant.

The end of the Act 17 Caroli Regis, which is to continue at pleasure, is in
the said act expressed to be to raise credit for Money for these three purposes.
First, for relief of his Majesty's Army and People in the North. Secondly, for
preventing the imminent danger of the Kingdom. Thirdly, for supply of other
his Majesty's present and urgent occasions. These ends are ended, the relief of
that Army, the imminent danger supposed was six years ago^, the supply of his
Majesty has been a supply against Him; take away the end, the means thereto
are to no purpose; Sir Anthony Maines case, 5. pars 1. H. 4.6. Littl. cap.
Villen.
take away the cause, the effect cease; and therefore the three ends of this
Act being determined, it agrees with Law and reason, the Act should end, the
Law rejects things unprofitable and useless.

A perpetual Parliament (besides that it incites men to selfe-ends,
destructive of the public, of which the whole Kingdom has had sufficient
experience) will be a constant charge to the Kingdom; for that every County and
Borough, who send Members to the Parliament, are by the Law to pay Wages to
their Parliament Men, which to many Counties will amount above some Subsidies
yearly: there are many poor Borough-Towns in each County of this Kingdom, who
being to maintain two Burgesses in Parliament, will be quickly beggered, if the
Parliament have no end, for all which reasons it is clear, that such long
continuance of Parliaments will instead of a remedy (which is and ought to be
the proper and true ends of Parliament) become an insufferable Grievance and
Oppression to all the People of the Land.

The Writ of Summons this Parliament is the Basis and Foundation of the
Parliament. If the foundation be destroyed the Parliament falls. The Assembly
of Parliament is for three purposes. Rex est habiturus colloquium and tractatum
cum Praelatis, magnatibus et proceribus super arduis negotijs, concernentibus,
1. nos. 2. Defensionem regninostri. 3. defensionem Ecclesi^^-Anglica nae. This
parliament has overthrown this foundation in all three parts, 1. Nos. The King
they have Chased him away, and imprisoned him; they have voted no prelates, and
that a number of other Lords, about forty in the City must not come to the
House, and about forty more are out of Town, the colloquium and tractatus are
made void thereby. For the King cannot consult and treat there with men removed
from thence. 2. Defensionem regm^nostri, that is gone; they have made it their
Kingdom, not His, for they have usurped all his Sovereignty. 3. Defensionem
Ecclesiae Anglican^ that is gone, that Ecclesia Anglicana must be understood
necessarily that Church, that at the test of the Writ was Ecclesia Anglicana,
they have destroyed that too, So now these men would be called a Parliament,
having abated, quashed and made nothing of the Writ whereby they were summoned
and assembled. If the Writ be made void, All the Process is void also: that
House must needs fall where the Foundation is overthrown, Subla^o fundament^
opus cadit, the foundation being taken away the work falls, is both a Maxim in
Law and reason.

For some years past, there is no crime from treason to trespass, but they are
guilty of all treasons, Felonies, Robberies, Tresspasses are c^ntra pacem,
coronam and dignitatem Regis, against the Peace Crown and Dignity of the King;
as appears by all Indictments in all Ages. Pax Regis, the Kings peace, Corona
Regis, the Kings crown, Dignitas Regis, the Kings dignity, are all trod under
foot, and made nothing; Pax Regis, the peace of the King is become a War
against the King, his Dignity put into Prison, and, the Crown put upon their
own heads.

All the Judges of England have resolved, that Noble Men committing Treason
have forfeited their office and Dignity; Nevils case 7. part 34.2. Iac.
their office is to council the King in time of Peace, to defend him in time
of War, and therefore those men against the duty and end of their Dignity
taking not only council, but Arms also to destroy him, and being thereof
attaint by due course of Law, By a tacit condition annexed to the estate of
their dignity, have forfited the same, they are the words of the law, and
therefore they have made themselves incapable to be Members of the upper House.

The Oppressions of the People.
Briberies, Extortions, Monopolies, ought to be inquired after by the House of
Commons, and complained of to the King and Lords, What have they done?

The House of Commons cannot by the Law commit any man to prison who is not of
the said House, for Treason, Murder, or Felony, o^ any thing but for the
disturbance of the public peace, by the privilege of the whole Body.

They have no power by the Writ which the King issues to elect and return
Members of that house, so to do. For the Writ for them is only ad faciendum
and consentiendum, to those things, where of his Majesty shall consult and treat
with his Prelates and Nobles, and d^ communi consilio regni shall be there
ordained, as appears by the Writ. Here is no separate power given over the
Kings people to them but only ad faciendum and ^onsentiendum and in all times
this ^^th been expounded and restrained to that which concerned their own
Members in relation to the public Service, 4. pars inst. 23, 24, 25.
as they are Members of the corporate Body of the Parliament, where of the King
is the Head.

But that the House of Commons have committed any man for Treason, Murder or
Felony, or for any offense that had no relation to a Member of the House of
Commons, as it is against Law and reason, so no instance can be given till this
Parliament.

All Questions and Trials where witness are examined, 19. H. 6.43.22. E:
4.22.5. H. 4. c. 8.3. H. 6.46.
the Examination is upon Oath by the Law, by all our Books, Statutes, every
days practice. Examination without an Oath is but a loose discourse, therefore
the House of Commons not claiming power to give Oath have no power to examine
any man.

No man shall be imprisoned by the King or his Council, 25. E. 3. c, 4.
Petition of Right. 3 Car.
unles it be by indictment, presentment of his good and lawful Neighbors
where such deeds be done, in due manner, or by process made by Writ original at
the Common Law; this Statute rehearses Magna Charta, p. 29. and expounds Lex
terrae, the Law of the Land there mentioned: this Law binde^ all men, and the
House of Commons (for they say they are of the Kings Council) in all points,
but only against the disturbers of the service of the Parliament; and therefore
the Imprison meant of several persons who are not their Members, and for no
disturbance to their Members, is utterly against the Law of the Land, and the
Franchise of the Freemen of this Realm.

Cui non licet quod minus, non licet quod Majus; he who may not do what is
less, may not do what is greater; they cannot commit a man for murder or
Felony, much less for Treason.

No Court can fine and imprison, 8. pars, Cook 120 27. H. 6 8.
but a Court of record, the House of Commons is no Court of Record, the House
of the Lords where the King is in person, his Nobles and his Judges, and
Council at Law, the Masters of the Chancery assisting, is a Court of Record,
and that is the Court of Par^ament, where the Colloquium and tractatus is. The
House of Commons may present Grievances, grant or not grant Aides, consent or
not consent to new Laws; but for fining or imprisoning any but as aforesaid,
is but of a late date, and no ancient usage: They have no journall Book, but
sithence Edw. 21. E. 4. fol 46.
6. time 6. Hen. 8, cap. 15. does not prove the House of Commons to be a Court
of Record, it mentions only to be entered on Records in the Book of the Clerk
of the Parliament if any members depart into the Country. Commons in
Parliament ne sont Judges.
There is no Journal but sithence Edw. 6. time and that is a Remembrance or
memorial, as 12. H ^4.23.

The whole Parliament is one corporate Body, consilting of the Head and three
Estates: The Court is only there where the Consilium and tracta^us is, where
the consult and ^reaty is with the King, which is in then House of Lords only.

The House of Commons claim not to examine upon Oath any Man's no Court can be
without a power to give an Oath, Courts Baron, 14. H. 8.3.36. H. 8. Dier 60.4.
part, inst cap. 1
Court of Pipowders, County Court, may and do give Oath* no Court can be
without a power to try, no trial can be without Oath; and therefore the house
of Commons not claiming power to give an Oath, can bring no matter to trial,
and consequently can be no Court.

The behavior of the Commons at a Conference with the Lords (...) the Commons
are always uncovered, and standing, when the Lords fit with their hats on,
which shows they are not Colleagues in judgment: for fellow-judges owe no such
reverence to their Companions.

When was ever Fine imposed by the House of Comm^^s ^^^^ted in the 11. H. 4. c.
11.
Exchequer? The ejecting of a Member, who has sitten, is against the Law: for
they cannot remove a man out of the House unduly returned, much less a man
returned duly.

By these Laws it appears, 2. H. 4. c. d. 1. H. 5. c. 1. 8. H. 6. c. 7 23. H.
6. c. 15.
that if any undue return be made, the person returned is to continue a
Member, the Sheriffs punishment is 200. l. one to the King, another to the
party that is duly elected, Imprisonment for ^^year without Ball or Mainprise;
and that person who is unduly returned, shall serve at his own charge, and have
no benefit at the end of the Parliament by the Writ Desolutione feodorum
Militum, ^ivium and burgensium Parliament. And the trial of the ^alsity of the
return, is to be before the Justices of the Assizes in the proper County, or by
action of Debt in any Court of Record. 3 Ed. 4.20 5 Ed. 4.41
This condemns the Committee for undue Elections, which has been practiced
but of late times; for besides these Laws, it is against a Maxim in the
Common Law: an Averment is not receivable against the return of the Sheriff,
for his Return is upon Oath, which Oath is to be credited in that Suit wherein
the Return is made.

The said Statures condemn and make those Members no Members, which were not
resiant in the County and Boroughs, for which they were elected, at the time of
the test of the Writ of the summons of the Parliament, and any abusive
practice of late times to the contrary is against the Law, and ought not to be
allowed.

Assault upon Parliamen^ men.
If a Parliament Man, 5 H. 4. c. 6.11. H. 6. c. 11.
or his Meniall Servant be aslaulted, beaten, or wounded, in the Parliament
time, proclamation shall be made where the deed is done, that the Offender shall
render himself to the Kings Bench, within a quarter of a year after
proclamation made, and the offense there to be tried, for Default of appearance
the Offender is declared, attainted of the Misdeed, and it is accorded that
thereafter it be done likewise in the like case.

Serving of process upon a Lord of the Parliament punished in the Lords House.
Bogo de Clare 18. E. 3.4, pars inst. fol. 24 Io Thorn. sbyes case, Clerk of the
Parl. punished ibid. 10. E. 3


Serving of process upon Thornsby inquired of in the Chancery, and there the
Offenders were convicted.

The premises prove, that breaches of privilege of Parliament may be punished
else were then in Parliament.

Upon all this Discourse, it is easy to decerne what fruits may be expected
from this Parliament, continuing as long as the two Houses please, and that
there is no safty for this commonwealth, but by the observations of their
ancient Franchises, customs, and Laws.

Conclusion.
I Say again, that without and Act of Oblivion, a gracious general pardon
from his Majesty, the arrears of the Soldiers paid, a favorable regard had to
tender consciences, there will be neither Truth nor Peace in this Land, nor any
man secure of any thing he has:

AN APOLOGY FOR THE ARMY, Touching the eight Quaeres, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE ARMY.
THese Treasonable and insolent Quaeries make the Army the houses Subjects, and
not the Kings. Bracton, fol. 118. Stamford, fol. 2.
None by the Laws of this Land can in this Kingdom have an Army but his
Majesty.

It appears, the Army does now evidently perceive, that they were misled by
the specious pretenses of Salus populi, the maintenance of the Kings Honor,
and of the maintenance of the Laws of the Land, and Liberties of the Subject,
to take up Arms against their natural Liege Lord and Sovereign the King: the
people is the Body, the King is the Head; Mag. Chart. c. 1. and uit. All the
Act concerning the King, Church, and Churchmen. 25. Ed. 1. cap. 1.
Was the Body safe when the Head was distressed and imprisoned? For Laws and
Liberties, have not the prevailing party in the two. Houses destroyed above an
hundred Acts of Parliament, and in effect Magna Charta^, and Charta de
Forresta, which are the Common laws of the land? Does Excise, the Fifth and
Twentieth parts, Meal-money, and many more Burdens which this Land never heard
of before, maintain the Liberties of the people? You and that party of the two
Houses, made the Army by several Declarations before Engagement, believe that
you would preserve the Kings Honor and Greatness^ the Laws and Liberties of
the people: The Army and the whole Kingdom now facta vident, see your Actions,
and have no reason longer to believe your Oaths, Vows, and Declarations; and
since that party in the two Houses refuse to perform any thing according to
their said Oaths, Vows, And Declarations, the Army and the Kingdom may and
ought, both by your own principles, and the Laws of the Land, to pursue the
ends for which they were raised. And so your first Quare is resolved; whereby
it is manifest, that specious pretenses to carry on ambitious and pernicious
Designs, fix not upon the Army, but upon you, and the prevailing party in both
Houses. 3 par. Inst. f. 12.39. El. 1 Iac. ibi. 3, and 3. E. 6. c. 3 11. (...).
7. c. 1.


The solution of the second Quaere.

The Army, to their eternal honor, have freed the King from imprisonment at
Holmby. It was High Treason to imprison his Majesty: To free his Majesty from
that imprisonment was to deliver him out of Traiterous hands, which was the
Armies bounden duty by the Law of God and the Land. That party refused to
suffer his Majesty to have two of his Chaplains for the exercise of his
Conscience, who had not taken the Covenant; free access was not permitted;
does the Army use his Majesty so? all men see that access to him is free, and
such Chaplains as his Majesty desired are now attending on his Grace: Who are
the guilty persons, the Army, who in this action of delivering the King, act
according to Law, or the said par^y who acted Treasonably against the Law? Who
does observe the Protestation better, they who imprison their King, or they who
free him from prison?

That this Army was raised by the Parliament, is utterly false. The Army was
raised by the two Houses upon the specious pretenses of the Kings Honor,
common safety, and the preservation of Laws and Liberties; which how made
good, has been showed before, and all the people of the Kingdom do find by
woeful experience.

The two Houses are no more a Parliament, than a Body without a Head a Man. 14
H. 8, 3.36 H. 7, Dier 60, 4 pars Instit. p. 1, 3 12, 14.16 R. 2 c. 1^ 5 Eliz.
c. 2, 17. Carol. The Act for the continuance of this Parliament.
The two Houses can make no Court without the King; they are no Body Corporate
without the King; they all, Head and Members, make one Corporate Body. And this
is so clear a Truth, that in this Parliament, by the Act of 17. Caroli it is
declared, That the Parliament shall not be dissolved or prorogued but by Act of
Parliament: but the two Houses may respectively adjourne themselves. Two Houses
and a Parliament are several things, cuncta fidem vera faciunt; all
circumstances agree to prove this truth. Before the Norman conquest, and since
to this day, 4 par. Instit. p. 18.4. par Instit. p. 4, 9 5 Eliz c. i, 2
the King is holden Principium, caput, and Finis, that is, the beginning, Head,
and chief end of the Parliament, as appears by the Treatise of the manner of
holding of Parliaments made before the Norman Conquest; by the Writ of Summons
of Parliament whereby the Treaty and Parler in Parliament is to be had with the
King only, by the Common Law, by the Statute Law, by the Oath of Supremacy
taken at this, and every Parliament, it does manifestly appear, that without
the KING there can be no color of a Parliament.

How many Votes have they revoked in one Session, yea, and Bills? Was there
ever the like done? Nay, is not the constant course of Parliaments violated and
made nothing thereby? They are guarded by armed men, divide the public Money
among themselves, and that party endeavors to bring in a Foreign Power to
invade this Land again. If they be no Parliament, as clearly they are none
without his Majesty, they have no priv^ledges, but do exercise an Arbitrary,
Tyrannical and Treasonable power over the people.

By the Law of the Land, 7 E. 4, 20, 8 E. 4, 3 9 E. 4.27 4 H 7, 18 27 H 8, 23.
when Treason or Felony is committed, it is lawful for every Subject, who
suspects the Offender, to apprehend him, and to secure him so that Justice may
be done upon him according to the Law.

You say, the disobedience of the Army is a sad public president, like to
conjure up a spirit of universal disobedience. I pray object not that
conjuring up to the Army, whereof you and the prevailing party in the Houses
are guilty, who conjured up the spirit of universal disobedience against his
Majesty, your and our only Supreme Governor, but you, and that party in the
two Houses, and even then when the House of Commons were taking and did take
the said Oath of Supremacy? For the Covenant you mention, it is an Oath against
the Laws of the Land, against the petition of Right, devised in Scotland,
wherein the first Article is to maintain the Reformed Religion in the Church
of Scotland: And certainly there is no Subject of the English Nation does know
what the Scottish Religion is. 2 par. Coll. of Ord. page 803. 3 par. Inst. fol.
165. Petition of Right, 3. Car.^ pars. instit. 71^.
I believe the Army took not the Covenant. No man by the Law can give an Oath
in a new case without an Act of Parliament; and therefore the imposers thereof
are very blameable, and guilty of the highest Crime.

The Writer of these Quaeres seems to profess the Laws; Let him declare what
Act of Parliament does justify the tendering, giving, or taking of the said
Oath: he knows there is none, he knows that all the parts of it are
destructive of the Laws and Government to maintain which the Law of Nature,
and the Law of the Land has obliged them. The Oath of the Covenant makes the
Houses supreme Governors in causes Ecclesiastical; the Oath of Supremacy makes
the King so: and yet both taken by the same persons, at the same time. What
credit is to be given to persons who make nothing of Oaths, and contradict
themselves? How do the Covenant and the Oath of Supremacy agree? How do their
protestation and the Covenant agree? How do their Declarations and Oaths agree?
The Lord be merciful to this Land for these Oaths.

It is a sad thing to consider that so many Gentlemen who profess the Laws,
and so many worthy men in both Houses should be so transported as they are,
knowing that the Laws of the Land from time to time, and in all times, are
contrary to all their actions, and that they yet should amuse themselves and
the people with the word Parliament without the King and with the Covenant;
whereas they know they are no Parliament without His Majesty: And that English
men throwout the Kingdom should swear a Covenant to preserve the reformed
Religion of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, which
they do no more know than the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of
Prester John in Aethiopia; if they consider it, they cannot but discern that
this is a high desperate and impious madness.

Be wise in time: Without the King and the Laws, you will never have one hour
of safety for your Persons, Wives, Children or Estates. Be good to your selves
and to your posterities, apply your selves to be capable of an Act of Oblivion,
and of a general Pardon, and to be able and willing to pay the Soldiery, and
to allow a reasonable liberty for men's consciences; and God will bless your
endeavors: and the people (to whom you are now very hateful) will have you in
better estimation.

The third Quaere is thus answered.

You resemble the Army to Jack Cade and his accomplices, and you cite the Act of
Parliament of 31. Hen. 6. cap. 1. And that it may appear who acts the part of
Jack Cade, you and that party in the two. Houses, or the Army, I think it
necessary to set down the said Act in words at length as follows.

First, Whereas the most abominable Tyrant, horrible, odious and arrant false
Traitor John Cade calling and nameing himself sometime Mortimer, sometime Capt.
of Kent. which name, fame, acts and feats are to be removed out of the speech
and minds of every faithful Christian man perpetually, falsely and tralterously
purposing, and imagining the perpetual destruction of the Kings said Person,
and final subversion of this Realm, taking upon him Royal Power, and
gathering to him the Kings people in great numbers, by false subtle imagined
language, and seditiously making a stirring Rebellion and Insurrection, under
color of Justice, for Reformation of the Laws of the said King,, robbing,
stealing and spoiling great part of his faithful people. Our said Sovereign
Lord the King considering the premises, with many other which were more odious
to remember, by the advice and consent of the Lords aforesaid and at the
request of the said Commons, and by authority aforesaid, has Ordained and
established that the said John Cade, shall be reputed, had, named, and declared
a false Trayper to enr Sovereign Lord the King; and that all his tyranny,
acts, feats and false opinions shall be voyded, abated, nulled, destroyed, and
put out of remembrance for ever: and that all Indictments, and all things
depending thereof, had and made under to power of Tyranuy, shall be likewise
void, anuulled, abated, repealed, and holden for none: and that the blood of
none of them be thereof defiled nor corrupted, but by the Authority of the said
Parliament clearly declared for ever: and that all Indictments in times coming,
in like case under power of Tyranny, Rebellion and Stirring had, shall be of no
Record nor effect, but void in Law; and all the petitions delivered to the said
King in his last Parliament holden at Westminster. Nov* 6 in the 29. of his r^igne,
against his mind, by him not agreed, shall be taken and put in oblivion, out of
remembrance, undone, voided, a^ulled, and destroyed for ever, as a thing
purposed against God and Conscience, and against his Royal Estate and
preeminence, and also dishonorable and unreasonable.

Now we are to examine who has trod in the steps of Jack Cade, you and the
present prevailing party of both Houses took upon them, and do take all the
Royal power in all things; so did Jack Cade; as appears by the said Act; the
Army do not so: They who imprison the King purpose to destroy his person (our
imprisoned Kings aswaies Edward 1. Henry 6 Richard 2.
fared so) Jack Cade did likewise so purpose; The said party in the two Houses
made a stirring under color of Instice for reformation of the Laws: so did
Iac Cade; The Army do not so but desire that the Laws should be observed: lack
Cade levied war against the King, The Army preserves Him: Jack Cade dyed a
Declared Traitor to his Sovereign Lord the King; this army might have lived to
have the glorious true Honor of being restorers of their King.

Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury was murdered by Jack Straw William
Laud Archbishop of Canterbury was likewise murdered by that party of the two
Houses, 25 Ed. 3, 4.28. Ed. 3.3: Petition of Right.
for that an Ordinance hy Law cannot take away any man's life, and his life was
taken away by an Ordinance of the two Houses, the army had no hand in it. Many
misted by Jack Straw, perceiving his Traiterous purposes, fell from him: and as
that was lawful, just, and honorable, so it is for this Army to adhere to
their natural King, and so endeavor to settle the Kingdom again in the just
Laws and Liberties thereof: London did then right worthily adhere to the King,
and the Laws, and not to Jack Straw and his specious pretenses, and it is hoped
they will now so do; By this it appears, that the Gentleman's Discourse
touching Jack Cade, fastens altogether on his party, and clears the Army.

To the IV. which is resolved thus.
The Arreares of the Army (howbeit it is the least thing they look after) yet
being not paid them, it is by the Law of the Land a sufficient cause to leave
and desert that party in the Houses: a person who serves in any kind, and is
not paid his Wages, the desertion of that service is warrantable by the Laws
of the Land: You say, the Houses will reform all things when the Army does
disband. Fitz. N, B 159 9 Ed. 4, 20.38 H. 6, 27 23* Eliz. Dier, 369.
Who will believe it? Will any believe that the settling of the Presbytery will
do it? Will any believe that his Majesty will pass the propositions sent to
Him to Newcastle? Will any man believe that this Kingdom will ever be quiet
without his Majesty and the ancient and just Laws? Can the Members of the Army
conceive any of them to be safe in any thing without a pardon from his Majesty?
Have they not seen some of their fellows hanged before their eyes, for actions
done as Soldiers? Shall the Kingdom have no acount of the many Millions
received of the public Money, Will the Members of the Houses accuse
themselves? Shall private and public Debts be never paid? Shall the Kingdom
lie ever under burdens of oppression and Tyranny? There is no visible way to
remedy all these Enormities but the power of the Army.

To the V. which is solved thus.
The Kingdom has better assurance of Reformation from the Army, than from the
Houses, for that in their Military way they have been just faithful and
honorable, they have kept their words; That party of the Houses have been
constant to nothing but in dividing the public Treasure among themselves, and
in laying Burdens upon the people, and in breaking all the Oaths, Vows, and
promises they ever made; As the Army has power, 2 and 3 E 6. c. 2. 11 H 7, c.
1. Calvin's case, 7. pars, Cook, fol. 11
so now adhering to the King, all the Laws, of God, Nature, and Man, are for
them, their Armies are just, and blessed; and the King is bound in justice to
reward his Deliverers with honor, profit, and mere Liberty of conscience.

To the VI. Quaere.
All the sixth Quaere contains calumnies cast upon the Army; the new Elections
are against all the Laws mentioned in the Margin, and are against the Ejection
of the old Members, and by this it may be judged, 11 M 4, c. 1 1-h, 5, 0, 1.8.
h, 6, c. 7 23, h. 6, c. 15.
what a House of Commons we have, By the said Laws it appears, that if any
undue return be made, the person returned is to continue a Member, the
Sheriffs punishment is two hundred pounds, one to the King, and the other to
the party that is duly elected; Imprisonment for a year without Bail or
mainprize, and that person who is unduly returned shall serve at his own
charge, and have no benefit at the end of the Parliament, by the Writ De
solutione Militum, Civium, and Burgensium Parliament. And the trial of the
falsity of the return, is to be before the Justices of Assizes in the proper
county: or by action of Debt in any Court of Record. This condemns the
Committee for undue Elections, 3. Ed. 4.20.5. Ed. 4.42.
which has been practiced but of late times, for besides these Laws, it is
a-Maxime of the Common Law, art Averment is not receivable against the return
of the Sheriff, for his Return is upon Oath, which Oath is to be credited in
that Suit wherein the Return is made.

The said Statutes condemn Elections of such men who were not res^ant and
dwelt in the County or Boroughs for which they were returned; and any abusive
practice of late times to the contrary, is against the Law, and ought not to be
allowed.

To the VII. Quaere.
The Quaerist says, that the Votes of the Independents in the Houses were
arbitrary, exorbitant, and irregular, and that they disposed and singred more
of the common Treasure than others; That whole Quare, I believe is false and
slande^ous; and the Author ought to make it good, or else to undergo the Law of
Talnio; 37. Ed. 5. c. 17.
which is to suffer such punishment failing of his poof as the accused should
in case of proof made

To the VIII. Quaere
This Quaere is all minatory and threatening, and the contrary of every part is
true, by the deliverance of the King and Kingdom from the bondage of that party
in the 2 Houses by the Army, their renown will be eversasting, they secure
themselves, they content and please the Kingdom, City, and Country, as
appears by their confluence to see his Majesty and the Army, and their
acclamations for his Majesty's safety and restitution, all which does evidence
to every one of the army, how acceptable the intentions of the Army are to the
people of this Land, who have been so long inthralled.

Sir Thomas Fairfa^, let your Worthiness remember your extraction and your
Ladies, by the grace and favor of the Prince, to be in the rank of Nobility*
Remember what honor and glory the present Age and all posterity will justly
give to the Restorer of the King to his Throne, of the Laws to their strength
and of the afflicted people of this Land to peace: Let the Colonels and
Commanders under You and likewise your Soldiery, rest assured, that they shall
not only share in the renown of this Action, but also shall have such
remuneration as their haughty Courage and so high a virtue does deserve. This
his Majesty can and will do, the Houses neither will nor can: and God bless
you all and prosper you.

I Conclude all, as I have always done. without an Act of Oblivion, a general
pardon, the arrears of the Soldiery paid, and a regard to Liberty of
conscience, this Kingdom will certainly be ruined.

Judge Ienkins PLEA delivered into the Earl of Manchester, and the Speaker of
the House of COMMONS, Sitting in the CHANCERY at WESTMINSTER, Which was read by
their Command in open Court, the 14th of Febr. 1647. And there avowed.

By DAVID IENKINS Prisoner in NEVVGATE.

LONDON, Printed In the Year, 1648.

Judge Jenkin's PLEA Delivered in to the Earl of Manchester, and the Speaker
of the House of COMMONS, sitting in the CHANCERY at WESTMINSTER.
I Have been required to appear in the Chancery the Twelfth of this instant
February, before Commissioners appointed by the two Houses for the keeping of
their Great Seal, and managing the Affairs of the Chancery.

I cannot, nor ought, nor will submit to this power; I am a Judge sworn to the
Laws. The Law is, First, that this Court is C^ram R^g^ in Cancellaria, 4 pars
instfol. 79 ^ E 4, fol 5 ^ E 4, f, 15
Secondly the Chancellor or Keeper of the great Seal is by delivery of the
Great Seal to him by the KING, and by taking of an Oath.

The Oath follows in these words.

1. 42 pars in^^. ^ 10 R 2 rot. Parlanum ^
Well and truly to serve our Sovcraigne Lord the King, and his people in that
Office.

2. To do right to all manner of people poor and rich, after the Laws and
usages of this Realm:

3. Truly to Counsel the King and his Coun cell to conceate and keep.

4. Not to suffer the hurt, or disheriting of the King, or that the rights of
the Crown be decreased by any means ^ ^farre as he may let it.

5. If he may not let it, be shall man it clearly and expressly to be known t^
the King with his advice and coun^ sell.

6. And that be shall do and purchase the Kings profit in all that he
reasonably may as God him help, and the contents of Gods book.

The said Commissioners among others have Imprisoned their King, Declar. 17
Ian. 1647
have declared to the Kingdom that they will make no Addresses or Applications
to him, nor receive any from him.

Have counterfeited a new great Seal, Articulisup. chartrs c. 5
and after destroyed the true old great Seal which belonged by the Law to the
Kings custody.

These Commissioners have had no Seal delivered to them by his Majesty, have
taken no such Oath, or full ill kept it, and for these evident reasons grounded
upon the sundamental Laws of this Land, these Commissioner, have neither
Court, Scale, or Commission, and therefore I ought not against ^he Laws,
against my knowledge, and against my conscience submit to their power.

To affir^e that they maintain the Kings power and authority in relation to
His Laws (as they often do) and restrain only his person is strange.

They must be remembered that the House of commons this Parliament gave in
charge to Mr. Solicitor upon the prosecution of the Bill of attainder against
the Earl of Strafford, M. Sol^^tor page 2^.
to declare the Law to be, that Machination of war against the Laws or
Kingdom, Mr. Pi^^ Pa. 16^^
is against the King, they cannot be severed.

Mr. Pym had in charge likewise upon the same prosecution to declare. That the
King and his people are obliged one to another in the nearest relatition, he is
a Father, and the child in law is called pars patris, he is the Husband of the
Common wealth, they have the same interests, they are inseparable in their
condition be it good or evil; he is the Head, they are the body, there is such
an incorporation as cannot be dissolved without the destruction of both. This
agrees with our Laws, 20. H. 7. fol. 7. 8. H. 7. fol. 12. 1 Ed. 5. fol. 3. 4.
Ed. 4. fol. 25. 5 Ed. 4. fol. 2^.
and the Law of this Land: In that argument of Mr. Solicitor, and discourse of
Mr. Pim, directed by the House of Commons are contained the true rights,
liberties and laws of the people deduced from our Ancestors in all ages, and
wherein there is no line or word but is agreeable to the Laws, and is a
necessary and useful book to be perused, and followed by all; which book was
published by Order of the House of Commons. If the doctrine of that book had
bin followed, we had not bin so miserable as we are; neither had these great
eville ensued, for the which the Land mourns.

In this Month of February, Collect, of Ordinances, 1 pars fol, 66 67 81
six years now past, the only Difference between his Majesty and the
prevailing party in both Houses was touching the power of the Militia, which in
plain English is, Power over Sea and Land: this was the sole quarrel: the King
and his Progenitors have had it in all Times, the Laws have fixed it upon
them, they have used it for the Weal of the people: none of the Subjects ever
had it or claimed it; the Laws deny it them; for the time they have had it,
our pressures have bin miserable.

His Majesty has a numerous Issue, and so has his Father: many great persons
of England, and Scotland are of the Blood Royal, and all the Kings of
Christendom are of the same Blood, so long as the Laws last, or any of the
said persons, or their Descendants be living, this people shall have neither
peace nor profit; but all the confusions that are imaginable will attend them.

And therefore (at length) be good to your selves, restore our King, receive
from Him an Act of Oblivion, a general pardon, Assurance for the Arreares of
the Soldiery, and meet satisfaction to tender consciences.

February 12. By David Jenkins, 1647. Prisoner in Newgate.

THE ANSWER OF Judge Ienkins, TO THE IMPVTATION PVT UPON HIS PLEA IN CHANCERY
Which was read in open Court the 14 of Febr. 1647. And avowed by David Ienkins
Prisoner in Newgate

Printed in the Year 1648.

THE ANSWER OF Judge Ienkins, TO THE IMPVTATION Put upon him in CHANCERY.
I Have no disposition, nor ever had, to be known by any public Writing:
these miserable Times, which fill many men's mouths, and most men's ears with
notorious Untruths, thereby to blast and destroy the Kings Sacred Majesty, his
Laws and Government, and to bring in a confusion; enforces me at this time
(who formerly have written nothing but for the public) to let the World know
how unjustly the Pamphleter of this Week, Licensed by our Reformers, has
traduced me touching a Suit commenced in their Court of Chancery against me, by
one M. Ernly a Willshire Gentleman, touching the Estate of one M. Thomas of
Glamorganshire: the Truth whereof is as follows.

M. Thomas, whose Father and my Grandfather were two Brothers, about seventeene
years past made his Will, and declared by the same his Son (being then of very
tender years) a Ward to his Majesty, and made him Executour, and my self
during his minority, (referring to his Wardship,) to Administer his Estate
personal and testamentary, and to be accountable to his Son when he came to
Age: And seventeene years sithence the Father died.

This Estate consists in a Stock of Sheep, so disposed by me as the number
are yet continued, and for the number and condition, they were at their
delivery back, to be made as good by those persons who had the charge of them,
as they were when they were received.

The rest of the Estate (for any considerable part) was in Mortgages of Land
forfeited in the life of my young Cousin Thomas for many of them, and many
absolutely purchased by me in his name in his life time, for the which I am not
yet paid.

The Land descended, and ought upon Sir Edward Thomas, my consirs Heir at
Common Law; so that Mr. Ernley, the Plaintiff in Chancery, has no color for
the Land: For my young Cousin dyed without issue about 17. years old, and
could not dispose of the Inheritance of any Land, by a pretended Will. The
stock of Sheep remains, if the Plaintiff and the Reformers have not
Plundered them, for the Money it came all to the Court, it was to satisfy the
King for the Marriage.

The color the Plaintiff has, is this; After the death of my old Kinsman M.
Thomas, by undue means the young Genrleman was married to M. Ernleys Daughter,
in a way of Ravishment, being both children, without one penny paid, or consent
of Friends or Kindered, For the which a Suit of Ravishment depended against M.
Erneley and others in the Court of Wards.

The young Gentleman dyed about 17. years of age, sithence these confusions
without issue; and some hour before my young Cousins death (who dyed of a
pestilent Fever) Mr. Erneley pretends a Will made by him, and that he made his
Wife (M. Erneleys Daughter) his Executrix: His said Wife dies soon after, and
is pretended to make a Nuncapative Will, and to make her Father (M. Ernley) her
Executor, and so pretends as Executor of an Executor of an Executor: which
pretended Wills, he says he has proved in the Courts of his Friends, the
Reformers.

Whether such wills were made or no, must receive an equal examination, and of
what validity they are, being pretended to be made by children in extremis if
made at all? And whether an Executor of an Executor of an Executor can
maintain an account by the Law of the Land? And whether (I being Executor
during the Minority, viz. the Wardship) my young Cousin could make such a Will
as is pretended, he being no Executor till his full age.

The age touching Wills, 37 H, 6 5, 21 E. 4, 24
the Law of this Land determins to be 21. years, and before that age at common
Law an use could not be devised. For Wills touching goods and chattels, our Law
for many ages has left the same to the decesion of the Civil and Canon Laws,
in the Bishops Courts: That Law, (as Justinian has it in the second Bood of
his Institutions, the 12. chap.) is, Impuberi non licet testari: this Pubertas
begins at 14. it is Plena pubertas at 18 years of age: The question is,
whether this jus testandi is in pubertate plena, or pubertate incepta. Pigots
Case, 5. part of Cooks Reports. the Doctors affirmed, that 17 years of age was
a full age as to an infant Executor to dispose of Goods: this opinion has been
by others sithence denied. Sir Edward Cook, 11 part, Inst. sect. 123. says, He
must be 10. which is the time of plena pubertas, 2. Hen. 4.12. an infant of 18.
years of age may be a deisseissour. Sir Jo. Doderigge in his book called, The
Office and Duty of Executors; which they say is his, and it is a learned and
laborious Treatise, fol. 347. delivers that this opinion of 17. years, for
that ability in an infant, has been reported otherwise. This latter opinion
comes nearer the Common Law, and the Statute Law of the Land; which Common Law,
and Statue Law, gives infants no power by Deed or Will to make any disposition
of any thing, they have, before they be 21 years of of age.

It seems also more reasonable, because infants at 18 years have by the
intendment of Law, as they grow in years, more use of reason, to discern what
is fit for them to do and act. And for a mere stranger to sue in a Court of
Conscience, who pretends by such Wills of infants (the infant Husband being
ravished) against the will of the Kindred of the deceased, who dyed six years
sithence without issue (being 17 years of age) and that any part of his part
of his estate should go that way by a course of Equity unless the Law be for
Mr. Erneley, who heyd not a penny with his Daughter, and who would have the
Husband of his daughter bring him a portion, by his pretended title of an
Executor of an Executor of an Execueor, viz. of an infant the Executor of
another infant, the Executor of a third person, seems very strange.

The said Licensed Historiographer of theirs, has published the 16 of this
present Month of February, 1647. that I out of a desire to keep the Estate
have in a suite in the Court of wards, in my Cousins life time, pleaded to the
Jurisdiction of that Court. It is true, I did so; for I conceived that the
Estate would be unsafe in Mr. Ernley's hands, and I was willing to preserve it
titl my young Cousin came to be of age, to dispose of it himself, according as
I was trusted.

The Law being, 32. H. 8. c. 46.4. pars inst. fol. 201.202.
that the Court of Wards had no jurisdiction over the personal estate (for
then the Marriage was paid for to the King, and all due to the King
ascertained.) It is true, that that was insisted upon as was just, for to
preserve the Estate from Mr. Erneley, who would have made what account he
pleased to my Cousin at his full age: And this is the truth of that business.

That I declined not the Jurisdiction of the Chancery, to keep an Estate in my
hand, appears, by my declining long sithence the power of the House of Commons
to examine me; and the Reformers have all my Estate: What would Mr. Ernley
have, when they [the Reformers] have all already; or can have from me, if he
had any color?

J desire the good people of this City to observe what notorious Untruths their
Licensed Historigraphers publish, to delude the people: In this particular case
they publish.

First, That the Suit against me, is in the behalf of an Orphan: M. Earnely
(who is Plaintiff in their Court) is a Wiltshire Gentleman, at the least of
50. years of age, there is their Orphan.

Secondly, That I made a speech to the people at the Hall door., that the
questioning of me for what I had done for the KING, was illegal; and that the
Judges had no power to t^y me, the KING being absent; Another notorious
untruth! For I protest to God, all that I said was only this, God preserve the
KING and the, Laws.

Thirdly, it is said that coming to the Bar, I stirred not my Hat; All the
Lawyers then at the Bar were uncovered; wherefore I held it a civility, to be
also uncovered; and so I was, as they all know.

Fourthly, That the E. of Manchester should say, I received a great estate in
money, of the Orphans estate; As there is no truth in it, so it is most untrue
that the said Lord so said (as all men present can testify.) The truth is,
they care not what they do, what they say, what they swear, nor what they
write; Witness the Declaration of a prevailing party of the H. of Commons, of
the 11 of this instant February* who contrary to the Oath of Allegiance, the
Oath of Supremacy, the Protestation, their solmne League and Covenant, their
Declarations to make His Majesty a glorious King, fearful to his enemies, and
beloved of his Subjects; and yet now, after 22. years, they would insinuate to
the people, that this King, whom they have so much magnified, has poisoned his
own Father.

Fifthly; it is a public notorious untruth. That the Parliament has published
a Declaration against the King, of the 11. of this instant Feb. whereas it is
well known to be the Declaration of the prevailing party of the House of
Commons only, without the Lords; and so they would make that prevailing party
only to be the Their licensed Historiographer who published this, is called
their Kingdoms weekly post, from Wednesday Feb. 7 to Wednesday the 16 of Feb.
1647
Par.liament.

Let the people of England believe their five senses; how it was with them
seven years ago, and before, during his Majesty's Reign; how this Kingdom
abounded then with Peace, Plenty, and Glory, to the admiration and envy of
other Nations; and now let them consider and judge by their Senses, sithence
those men (whom nothing would satisfy, but all Power both by Sea and Land,
which in truth is the regality and kingship, which they call the Militia) have
usurped the said Power Regal, whether they have not by Impostures and
Delusions, diffused among the people by themselves and their Agents, brought a
flourishing Kingdom to the most deplorable condition it now is in.

To the end that this Kingdom may not utterly be ruined, God incline their
hearts to restore his Majesty, and for their own and their Posterities sake to
receive from his Majesty an Act of Oblivion, a general Pardon, assurance for
the Arrears of the Souldierie, and meet satisfaction for tender Consciences.

DAVID JENKINS,

Judge Ienkin's Remonstrance TO THE LORDS AND COMMONS OF The two HOUSES of
PARLIAMENT at WESTMINSTER the 21. of February 1647.

By DAVID JENKINS Prisoner in Newgate.

Printed in the Year 1648.

Judge Jenkin's REMONSTRANCE TO THE LORDS and COMMONS AT WESTMINSTER
I Desire that the Lords and Commons of the two Houses, would be pleased to
remember, and that all the good people of England do take notice of an Order of
the House of Commons this Session, for publishing the Lord Cook his Books:
which Order they may find printed in the last Leaf of the second part of his
Institutes, in these words viz.

Die Mercurii 12. May 1641.
Upon Debate this Day in the Commons House of Parliament, the said House did
then desire and held it fit, that the heir of Sir Edward Cook should publish
in print the commentary upon Magna Charta, the pleas of the Crown, and the
jurisdiction of Courts, according to the intention of the said Sir Edward
Cook, and that none but the Heir of the said Sir Edward Cook, or he that
shall be authorized by him, do presume to publish in print any of the foresaid
Books, or any Copy thereof.

H. Elsynge Cler. Dom. Com:


And I do further desire them that they would read and peruse M. Solicitour
Saint-Iohn, and M. John Pym, their Books, published likewise this Session,
Whose Titles are as follows viz.

An Argument of Law concerning the ^ill of Attainder of High Treason of Thomas
Earl of Strafford.

At a Conference in the Committee of both houses of Parliament.

By M. Saint John his Majesty's Solicitor General.

Published by Order of the Commons House.

London, Printed by G. M. for Jo. Bartlet, At the Sign of the Guilt Cup near
S. Austins gate in Paul's Church yard. 1641.

And the Speech or Declaration of John Pym Esquire.

After the Recapitulation or Summoning up of the charge of High Treason against
Thomas Earl of Strafford, 12 April. 1641.

Published by the order of the Commons House.

London Printed for John Bartlet, 1641.

1. Nothing is delivered for Law in my Books but what the H. of Commons have
avowed to be Law in Books of Law published by their command this Session, and
agreeable to the Books of Law, and Statutes of this Realm in all former Times
and Ages.

2. The supposed offense charged on me is against the two Houses, and none
ought to be judges and parties, by the Law of this Land, in their own case.

3. I desire the benefit of Magna Charta, the Petition of right, and other good
Laws of this Land, which ordain that all men's Trials should be by the
established Laws, and not otherwise: they are the very words of the petition
of Right.

An Ordinance of both Houses is no Law of the Land, 1 Part. col. of Ordinances,
fol: 728: 2 Pars just fol 47, 48 157, 143 4 par instit: 23, 232, 298 4 H, 7, 18
by their own confession; and by the Books of the Lord Cook, published by
their Order as aforesaid, this Session in six several, places.

For Sedition* in my Books there is none, but such as they have authorized this
Session, to be published and printed. To publish the Law is no sedition. These
Positions following I do set down for the Law of the Land in my books, and
they themselves have justified, and avowed them as aforesaid, we agree the Law
to be, and to have been in all times in all the particulars following, as here
ensues. 3 Part instit. page: 12 M Solicitor Page 12 3 part instit page 9 M Pym,
p. 28 3 part instit. 3 10, 12, 16 3 part instit page 9 M Solicitor p, 0, 10,
136 M Solicitor page 9 M Solicitor page 9 M Solicitor page, 23 4 pars 4 inst^
p, 125 Justice Huttons argument, fol. 39, 40 4 part instit 2 part instit
articul. super chartas cap. 5



1. To imprison the King is high treason 2 To remove Councillors from the King
by force is High Treason. 3. To alter the established Laws in any part by force
is High Treason. 4. To usurp the Royal Power is High Treason. 5. To alter the
Religion established is High Treason. 6. To raise rumors and give out words to
alienate the peoples affections from the King, is High Treason. 7. To sesse
Soldiers upon the people of the Kingdom without their consent, is High
Treason. 8. The execution of paper orders by Soldiers in a military way, is
high Treason. 9 To coanterfeit the great Seal, is High Treason. 10. The
Commission of Array is in force and none other. 11. None can make Judges,
Justices, Sheriffs, etc. but the King; The King makes every Court. 12. The
great Seal belongs to the Kings Custody, or to whom he shall appoint, and
none other. 13. 1 part. Coll. of Ordin and Cook ut^ supra. 4 part^ inst. 25.
Ordinances of one or both Houses are noe laws to bind the people. 14. No
privilege of Parliament, holds for Treason, Felony, or br^ach of the Peace,
not for 20. Parliament Men forty, nor three hundred. 15. M. Solicitor page
8.70. M. Solicitor page 12.27. M. Solicitor page 26. M. Solicitor page 35.
To subvert the fundamental laws is High Treason. 16 To levey War against the
person of the King is High Treason. 17. To persuade Forreiners to levey war
within this Kingdom is High Treason. 18 To impose unlawful Taxes, to impose
new Oaths, M. Pym, p. 8.
is High Treason. 19. The King can do no wrong. 20. M. Pym, p. ^7.
It is a pernicious Doctrine to teach Subjects, they may be discharged from the
oath of Allegience. M. Pym, p. 24.
Then what means the Doctrine of both Houses of the Votes 11 of Feb. 1647. 21. A
necessity of a man's own making does not excuse him. 3. parr. inst. page 9
The requiring and forcing of the Militia, brought the necessity of arming upon
the Houses. 22. None can leavy war within this realm without authority from
the King, for to him only it belongs to levy war, by the common law of the
land to do otherwise is high Treason by the said Common law. The only quarrel
was and is the Militia: for which so much blood has been spent, M. Solicitor
70.71. 4. part. inst. page 1.3.4. 4. pars. inst. 41.356.
and Treasure. 23. No Parliament without the King, he is Principium, caput and
finis. 24. Presentment or trial by Jury, is the bright-right of the Subject.
There is no doubt but that many in both Houses are free from this great sin,
and that most of the prevailing party, had at first no intentions to proceed so
far; but the madness of the People (who are very unstable, and so they will
find them) and the success of their Armies (having this great rich City to
supply them, with all accomodations) have so elated them, that the evil is come
to this height.

For my self, to put me to death in this cause, is the greatest honor I can
possibly receive in this World: Dulce and decorum est mori pro partia. And for
a Lawyer and a Judge of the Law, to die, dum sanctis patria legibus obsequitur,
for obedience to the Laws; will be deemed by the good men of this Time a sweet
smelling sacrifice; and by this and future Times, that I dyed full of years,
and had an honest and an honorable end; And posterity will take knowledge of
these Men who put some to death for subverting of the Laws, and others for
supporting of them, etc.

Yet mercy is above all the ^orkes of God. Bracton l, c. 9, p, 107 4 pars inst
342, 343 Stanford 99
The King is Gods V^car^on earth. In Bracton, who was a Judge in Henry 3. time,
you shall ^^nd the Kings oath; To show mercy is part of it: You are all his
children; say, and do what you will, you are all his Subjects, and He is your
King and parent. Pro magno peccato paululum supplicii satis est patri; and
therefore let not the prevailing party be obdurate, out of a desperation of
safety: That which is past is not revocable; Take to your thoughts your
parents, your wives, your children, your friends, your fortunes, your country;
wherein Foreigners write there is Mira aeris suavitas and rerum omnium
abundantia. Invite not them hither, the only way to be free of their company
will be* To restore his Majesty, and receive from Him an Act of Oblivion; a
general pardon, Assurance for the Arreares of the Soldiery and meet
satisfaction to tender consciences.

God preserve the King and the Laws.

DAVID JENKINS, Prisoner in Newgate.


