Exultationis Carmen TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY UPON HIS MOST Desired
Return.

By Rachel Jevon, Presented with her own Hand, Aug. 16th.

CAROLUS En rediit, redeunt Saturnia regna.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

London, Printed by John Macock. 1660.

TO THE MOST PIOUS and MOST SERENE OF KINGS, The Unworthiest of His MAJESTY'S
HANDMAIDS With all Humility Offers this Congratulatory Poem.
DRead Sovereign CHARLES! O King of Most Renown!
Your Countries Father; and Your Kingdoms Crown;
More Splendid made by dark Afflictions Night;
Live ever Monarch in Celestial Light:
Before Your Sacred Feet these Lines I lay,
Humbly imploring, That, with Gracious Ray,
You Will daign these first unworthy Fruits to view,
Of my dead Muse, which from her Urn You drew.
Though for my Sexes sake I should deny,
Yet EXULTATION makes the Verse, not I;
And shouting cries, Live Ever CHARLES, and Be
Most Dear unto Thy People, They to Thee.
WElcome Mild Caesar, born of Heavenly Race,
A Branch most Worthy of Your Stock and Place,
The Splendor of Your Ancestors, whose Star
Long since out-shin'd the golden Phoebus far;
The living Image of our Martyred King,
For us His People freely suffering;
Sprung from the Rose and Flower-de-luce most fair,
The Spacious World never boasted such an Heir.
Ye Pious Pens, plucked from a Seraphs Wing,
Or His high Fame, teach future Times to sing.
Ye lofty Muses of Parnassus Hill,
Auspicious be to my unlearned Quill,
Vouchsafing leave the Travels to recite
Of this Great Prince, long Banished from His Right;
Which Valiant He, did stoutly undertake
For His Religion, and His Countries sake.
After the murder of our CHARLEMAIN,
(Whose lasting Honor never shall know a Wane,
But to the Skies Tryumphantly ascend,
As His bright Soul did to Elysium tend,)
The Scors our CHARLES th'undoubted Heir recall,
And with His Grandsires Glory Him Install;
But after this (O cruel Fates!) betrayed
He was to the English, who with rage assayed
Him to accost, throughout this British Isle;
Could ever Rebels act a part so vile?
Hence, hence sad sorrows, and all past annoys,
Let naught approach You but tryumphant Joys;
And let us now remember with delight
Your strange escape from Worc'sters bloody fight,
Through Thundering Troops of armed foes, whose strife
Was to bereave You of Your sacred life.
Where many thousand Britains spilt their blood,
Weltring in gore, for King and Countries good:
How often have I Your cruel fates bewailed?
How often to Heaven have our Devotions sailed,
Through tides of briny tears, and blown with gales
Of mournful sighs, which daily filled the Sails?
That Heaven it is sacred Offspring would defend,
And to their sorrows put a joyful end.
Propitious were the Heavens to our just Prayer:
You on their Wings the blessed Angels bare
Through thousand dangers, which by Land You past,
Till suddenly into the Sea being cast,
The Deities of Pontus flowing Stream,
Did unto You than men far milder seem.
Great Aeolus himself hasts You to meet,
Prostrates the winds before Your Sacred Feet;
Then with his power commands the fiercer Gales,
Into their Den, lest they disturb Your Sails:
Neptune straight calms the raging of the Sea,
Before Your Stem the pleasant Dolphins play;
The surly Waves appeased, most gladly bore,
The happy Vessel to the happier Shore.
Then wandering through inhospitable Lands,
Still seeking rest, the world amazed stands
To see Him banished from every part
Of its great Orb, Yet from His Faith not start;
Nor to regain His Fathers Rights would He,
From the ancient Worship of His Fathers flee,
For every Kingdom He subdued by Charms,
Of Love and Piety, more strong then Arms.
France with her hair disheveled, torn and sad,
With bloody Robes of civil War beclad,
With joy receives this Deity of peace,
Who having caused those civil Wars to cease,
The barbarous Vine the Royal Oak refused,
To please the Tyrants, natures bands she loosed;
But He unmoved in faith their Lillies fled,
And to th'unstable Willows wandered.
Who most ungratefully did Him reject,
That them the rebel brambles might protect.
The Royal Oak by storms of leaves bereaved,
The generous Olive to its soil received;
Straight follows peace, its Deity being come,
Aside they lay their Arms, Sword, Pike and Drum;
The other Trees all shivering as a Reed,
To make a League with the Royal Oak agreed;
At length Druina ravished with love,
Humbly recalls Him to His native Grove,
In peace to triumph, and to Reign a Lord
Over hearts subdued by Love, not by the Sword.
His Native Country faint and languishing,
Humbly implores the presence of her King:
Lo how the late revolted Sea obeys,
How gladly it the Billows prostrate lays
Before Your Royal Navy, proud to bring
Three widdow'd Kingdoms their espoused King!
How do the winds contend, the spreading Sails
Of Your blessed Ships, to fill with prosperous Gales;
The Fates are kind; Conduct You to the Shore,
To welcome You the Thundering Canons roar;
Your ravished Subjects overjoyed do stand,
To see the stranger, (PEACE) with You to land,
With You to earth Astraea fair is come,
And Golden times in Iron ages room:
Much Honor has both Church and State adorned,
Since You, our Faiths Defender, are returned;
For of the Church the Honor and Renown,
Are unto Kings the strongest Tower and Crown:
Behold how Thames does smooth her silver Waves!
How gladly she, Your gilded Bark receives;
Mark how the courteous Stream her Arms does spread,
Proud to receive You to her watery Bed.
The old Metropolis by Tyrants torn,
Your presence does with beauteous youth adorn.
On You how do the ravished people gaze?
How do the thronging Troops all in a maze
Shout loud for joy, their King to entertain,
How do their Streets with Triumphs ring again.
GReat Charles, Terrestrial God, Offspring of Heaven,
You we adore, to us poor mortals given,
That You (Our Life) may quicken us again,
Who by our Royal MARTYRs death were slain;
For we on earth as ^^^^s inanimate lay,
Till You (Our Brea^) repaired our decay:
Lo how old Tellus courts Your Sacred Feet,
Arrayed with flowery Carpets peace to greet;
As Phoehus when with glorious Lamp he views,
Earth after Winter, tender grass renews;
So through the world Your radiant Virtues Shine,
Enlightening all to bring forth Fruits Divine:
Or as the drops distilled by April showrs,
Produce from dryest earth imprisoned flowers;
So Your sad Fates sprinkled with holy eyes,
Plunged in Your Kingly tears, have reached the skies,
And from the appeased Deity brought down;
T'adorn Your Sacred Temples many a Crown.
The first of glory which shall ever last,
In Heaven of Heavens, when all the rest are past;
The Second shines with Virtues richly wrought
Upon Your Soul, with Graces wholly fraught.
The Third resplendent with your peoples Loves,
Their Hearts by joy being knit like Turtle-Doves.
The Fourth's complete by Your high Charity,
Which has subdued and pardoned the enemy.
The Fifth shall shine with Gold and Jewels bright,
Upon Your Head, O Monarch! our Delight;
Where the Almighty grant it flourish may,
Until in Heaven You shine with Glorious Ray.
Who does not stand amazed thus to see
The spotless Turtle Dove Espoused to be
Unto a Bride whose Robes with blood are foul;
Lo Lovely CHARLEs with Dove-like Galless Soul,
(Coming to the Ark of His blood deluged Land,
With peaceful Olive in His Sacred Hand)
Espoused is to Albion died in gore
And to her Princely Beauty does r^^tore;
Then Celebrate the Espousals of our King,
With us let far and near all Nations Sing;
Let all the World shout loud perpetually,
LET CHARLES LIVE LOVED UNTO ETERNITY.
Rejoice ye Forests, your choice pleasures yield,
The Royal Hunter Crowns the verdant field:
And Leap for joy ye Beasts of every Plain,
Behold Your King (the Lion) comes to Reign.
Let shady Woods and Groves together dance
To see the Royal Oak to them advance,
Whilst Nymphs resound, O thrice, thrice happy they!
Who have the Honor, their faint Limbs to lay
Under the shadow of the Illustrious Oak
Expanded, to depell from Saints the Stroke
Of Tyrants tempests, and a Pillar (squared
By Crosses) for the Church of God prepared;
Where we may live to sing aloud His Praise,
With heart and voice, and Organs sweetest Lays,
Who has our David's Prayer not withstood,
But made his Offspring, CHARLEs the Great, and Good;
And banishing all sorrow from His Seed,
Highly Enthroned Him in His Fathers stead;
That He may shine a Splendid Star to damp
Throughout the world at noon bright Phoebus Lamp,
And trample down those Tyrants with His Might,
Who dare contemn His Universal Right;
At length Your rip'ned Years being Crowned with Glory,
Justice and Peace, unparalled by story:
Celestial CHARLEs Triumphantly Ascend
To Enjoy the Heavens in Bliss without all End.
GLORY TO GOD ALONE,
THRICE BLESSED THREE IN ONE.
FINIS.

