AN EXPOSITION Of the EPISTLE of JUDE, Together With many large and useful
DEDUCTIONS. Formerly Delivered In sundry LECTURES in Christ-Church LONDON. May
24th.

BY WILLIAM JENKYN, Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, AND PASTOR of the
Church at Black-friars, LONDON.

The SECOND PART.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Maxey, for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the golden BALL in
Paul's Churchyard, 1654.

TO My Dear FLOCK, and much honored Friends, The CHURCH of GOD, In the
Precinct of BLACK-FRYARS LONDON.
Christian and respected Friends,
IT cannot seem strange, that I who have lately given my self to the service
of your souls, should now dedicate my Book to you for that purpose. Nor can
any wonder, since you have lately imitated your Predecessors, in the loving and
unanimous Call of your (though now unworthy) Pastor; that he should endeavor
to follow the steps of those excellent servants of Christ your former
Ministers, who in their times both by Preaching and Printing bestowed their
labors upon you for your spiritual benefit.

I have frequently heard, that Black-fryars is one of those places in London,
commonly accounted and called by the name of Privileged, in respect of sundry
civil Immunities bestowed upon it. But what are all those Political, in
comparison of the Spiritual privileges which God has afforded to you of this
place? in regard whereof I much question, whether any Congregation in London (I
think I may take a far larger compass) has been equal to you in the privilege
of enjoying so long a continuance of an Able, Orthodox, Soul-saving Ministry.
Those two excellent and eminently faithful Servants of Christ, Mr. Egerton, and
Doctor Gouge (lately deceased) spent (as I am informed) about seventy years in
their Ministerial Labors among the people of Black-fryars.

The Gospel in your Congregation has continued (I think) beyond the
remembrance of the oldest, (the Lord grant that it may outlive the youngest)
now living among you. God has, as it were, made his Sun to stand still upon
your Gibeah, and his Moon upon your Ajalon, to give you light to overcome your
spiritual Enemies. How many learned, and pithy expositions, savoury
discourses, and excellent tractates have had their conception in your Parish,
and their birth in your pulpit! You have enjoyed the monthly administration of
the Lords Supper, (as your late reverend Pastor informed me) these five and
forty years, without any interruption. I mention not these things to occasion
your glorying in men, or any outward privileges, but only to put you upon
self-reflexion, and holy examination, how you have thriven in holiness under
all these enjoyments: Church privileges (I grant) are excellent mercies, in
their kind: Without the Ordinances, places are commonly as void of Civility as
Christianity; They are but magna latrocinia, dens of robbers, and places of
prey, dark places of the Earth filled with violence. Church Priviledges, (so
far forth as they are visibly owned) make men visible (saints in opposition to
the world; yea and in their due and holy use, real and true saints in
opposition to hypocrites. But notwithstanding all these, the means of grace,
without grace by those means, leave those who enjoy them, in the same
condition (in respect of any saving benefit) with those who want them. Jer.
9.25, 26. Is. 29.1. 2 Hag. 12.14. Romans 2.25.28, 29.
The Arc at Shiloh, the sacrifices devoured by Ariel, Circumcision in the
flesh, The temple of the Lord, The Rock and Mannah, The Lords Supper at
Corinth, etc. 1 Cor. 11.20. Jer. 7.12.
were privileges which did not savingly profit the enjoyers, who were not holy
by their holy things, but their holy things rather were made unholy by them.
Nay, bare outward privileges increase condemnation. The valley of vision has
the heavyest burden. The Israelites who had (not monthly but) daily sacraments,
eating and drinking them every meal, were most severely destroy^d. These were
but as Uriahs letters, which they carried to their own destruction. The higher
Corazin and Bethsaida's elevation was, the greater was their downfall. Justice
will pluck the unreformed, from the Altar of privileges. Sermons do but heat
hell, and Sacraments are but oil and pitch to make its flame scald and consume
the more painfully. The barren oak was not so near cursing, as the barren
fig tree. Nor are weeds on the dunghill so near plucking up, as those in the
Garden; by none is the name of God so much dishonored, mercy so much abused,
hypocrisy so odiously veiled, the power of godliness so bitterly hated, Joh.
8.33. Romans 1.27.
as by many who have most enjoyed Church privileges. Put not off your souls
therefore (dear Christians) with outward Privileges without inward grace by
those Privileges. What is it more to have a name to live, and to be
spiritually dead, to have titular sanctity and real impiety, then for a
starving man to be v^iced up for a plentiful housekeeper? When God had
bestowed upon Abram a new name, and changed it to Abraham he gave him also a
new blessing. The unprofitable under the means of grace, are therefore worse
then those who want those means, because they are not better, the more aship is
laden with gold, the deeper she sinks, the more you are laden with golden
privileges, the deeper (if you miscarry) will be your destruction Though the
Ministers industry without succe^ss, acquits him, yet it condemns his people.
He may be sincere, yet unsuccessfull; but then the people in the mean time, if
unprofitable, show themselves hypocritical. You never commend your Ministers but
by getting the saving impressions of what they preach upon your hearts. Christ
reproved the young man for calling him good Master, because (says Calvin) he
had never received any saving good from Christ. The sheep only praise the care
of the careful shepherd, by their wool, milk, fruitfulness and fatness. Let
it never be said, that God gives the food of life to you, (as a rich man gives
a nurse good diet for the benefit of his child) only for the thriving of
strangers. Be not as Indians, who go naked and beggarly in the midst of all
their heaps of gold. Let not sermons be as jewels only to hang in your ears,
but let them be locked up in the cabinets of your hearts. Consider, ordinances
are never yours, till you get the savor of them upon your spirits; Meat upon
the table may be taken away, but not when by eating, it is turned into a man's
substance. Books may be stolen out of a Scholars study, but a thousand thieves
can never take away the learning which he has gotten into his head, by
studying those Books. The grace of privileges is only safe. You shall be
stripped of these when you come to dye, but the grace of them will stick by you
for ever. Christ may say to those at the last day, depart, who have eat and
drunk with him, and cast out devils, but never will he say so, to those who
having eat and drunk with him, have also eat and drunk himself, who have cast
lust out of their souls, and gotten a broken heart for sin, or obtained the
least dram of sanctifying grace. Oh how much is a drop of inward holiness,
better then a sea of outward privileges!

This book with which I here present you, is the second part of my Exposition
upon the divine and excellent Epistle of Jude. The Apostles scope in writing
this Epistle was to stir up these Christians to oppose those who would have
seduced them to libertinism, and to contend for the faith, against those who
turned the grace of God into wantonness, who allowed themselves to live, or
rather (like beasts) to wallow in all filthiness, under pretense of advancing
free grace; and who labored to make the Saints by being Christians to become
Heathens, as the Apostles had made them of Heathens to become Christians. The
endeavor of satan was to drive people from one extreme to another, and since he
could not by keeping some under Judai^m, cause them to deny that Christ had
purchased for them any liberty at all, he most earnestly labored by driving
them to Atheism and looseness, to make them believe that n^w they had liberty
to be as had as they would, and that the worse they were, the better they were,
and the lower they were in sin, the higher in Christian perfection: And hence
it was that these later Epistles (one of the last whereof this of Jude was) are
principally spent in opposing a feigned, workless lifeless faith, and in
administering antidotes against those doctrines of profaneness and libertinism,
wherewith the times grew the more infested, as the doctrine of grace grew the
more to be cried up and advanced.

It is now a complete year since I began to put pen to paper for the preparing
this second Part for the press: And it might long since have been finished,
had not my many other employments hindered. It has cost me (I confess) some
studious hours; but the kind acceptance which my other Part has found from the
Church of God, encouraged me to look beyond the difficulty of the work, and
made me unwilling to leave this Commentary longer unfinished. I shall conclude
with my earnest and humble supplication to the Father of lights that this
endeavor (among others) may advance the spiritual progress of the Church, and
principally of you (my dear and beloved friends) so in grace here, that you may
be fitted for glory hereafter. So prays, Sirs,

Blackfriars, Feb. 22th. 1653. Your affectionate and faithful Servant, for
the good of your souls, WILL. JENKYN.

AN EXPOSITION of the EPISTLE of JUDE.
PART II.
VER. 8 Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion,
and speak evil of dignities.
THe second Argument brought by our Apostle to incite these Christians
earnestly to contend for the faith opposed by the Seducers, is taken from the
certainty of the destruction of those ungodly men. This argument he handles
from the fourth to the seventeenth verse. In the managing whereof, having first
mentioned sundry examples of Gods judgments which befell the great sinners of
former times, ver. 5, 6, 7. (of which largely I have spoken before) he now
secondly adds, that these seducers lived in the very same sins which God had
punished in those sinners of old; and this he prosecutes in the eighth, ninth
and tenth verses. And then thirdly, from v. 10. to 17. he infers and amplifies
this Conclusion, Woe to them, v. 11. q. d. Therefore these seducers shall
likewise perish.

This eighth verse then, being part of that second Branch, wherein the Apostle
shows that these seducers lived in the same sins which God had punished in
others, contains (as has been said page 612.) these two parts.

1. The faults wherewith these seducers were charged. 2. The fountain from
which these faults issued.
In the first, The faults wherewith, etc. I considered, 1 Their specification.
2 Their amplification.


1 Their specification; and their faults were of two sorts.

1 Carnal uncleanness: they defiled the flesh. 2 Opposing of Authority,
expressed in two Branches; 1 The despising of dominion: 2 The speaking evil of
dignities.

2 Their amplification in these words [Likewise also:] They sinned both as the
former sinners had done, and although they knew that they had been punished by
God for sinning.

The second part, viz. the fountain from which these their faults issued, was,
their spiritual sleeping and dreaming, contained in the word [dreamers.]

Concerning the first fault wherewith the seducers are charged; viz. defiling
the flesh, I have spoken page 613, 614. etc. of the former Part.

Of the second, viz. Opposing of Authority, I have also spoken at large in its
first branch, viz. the despising of dominion. I now proceed to speak of it in
the second branch, contained in these words, They speak evil of dignities.

EXPLICATION.
By way of Explication I shall enquire into these two particulars:

1 Why the Apostle calls Magistrates, Explicat. 1
or persons in authority, Dignities.

2 What was the sin of speaking evil of those dignities? Est vis quaedum per
quam Princeps sibi conciliat in hominum animis singularem quandam admirationem
ac veneratione^, et cum utraque conjunctum metum. Gerb. de Mag. Pol.


1 For the first: The Apostle calls them Dignities, in Gr. (...), glories,
because of that glory and excellency wherewith God is pleased eminently and
peculiarly to adorn them, whereby they raise in the minds of people a singular
admiration and veneration to themselves, joined with fear. To this purpose
speaks the Prophet concerning Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5.18. The most high God gave
Nebuchadnezzar majesty and glory: and for the majesty that he gave him, all
People, Nations and Languages trembled and feared before him.

And more particularly, this dignity or glory appears: 1 In those glorious
titles wherewith Magistrates are dignified and odorned above others: Luke 22.25
Matthew. 20 25 Romans 13.3. Luke 12.11. 2 Chr. 23.20. Jer. 14.3. Ezekiel. 31.5 1 Samuel
9.16 Psalm. 83.11. Psalm. 82.1, 6 Psalm. 89.7. Genesis 41.43.
and thus they are called Kings, Princes, great men, Rulers, Powers, Governors,
Nobles, mighty ones, Captains, children of the most high, the sons of the
mighty, Fathers, anointed, Saviors, and as the upshot of all, Gods, because
they are from God, and ought to be for God: they are appointed by him, and to
be employed for him; they stand in the place of God, and are his vicegerents
on earth, and have a particular charge and power of executing the judgments of
God among men. 2 Chronicles. 19.4. Ye judge not (says Jehoshaphat to his Judges) for
men, but for the Lord.

2 In those Endowments and qualifications wherewith God has adorned them for
the executing of their places* Mutavit ei cor, quod ante erat parvum and
servile, in cor regale. Abul. Altius and audacius cor habuit. Hug. Car. Cor
immutatum, habebat, quia qui asinas quaesierat, jam de regni dispositione
cogitabat. Greg.
God never bestowing employments without end^^^ents. Saul being chosen King, is
said to have another heart given him, 1 Samuel 10.9. He had those heroic gifts
and Kingly abilities of wisdom, valor, etc. infused into him, which enabled
him to discharge his place of Government. He who formerly sought asses, now
spent his thoughts about preserving his Kingdom. When David was anointed King
by Samuel, its said* that the spirit of God came upon him, 1 Samuel 16.13. which
furnished him with gifts, as of sanctification (wherewith though formerly he
were endowed, N^m. 11.17 2 King. 2.15 Exodus 18.21 Deuteronomy. 1.13.
yet possibly not in so great a measure as now;) so of Regiment and Government;
and it may be, of Prophecy and Poesy.

3 In that due respect or honor which is yielded to them: This is first,
Internal; consisting 1. in an honorable opinion and high estimation of them:
Despising and thinking evil with the heart, will make way for despising and
speaking evil with the tongue: The people thought David worth ten thousand of
them. Number. 16.3
It was Corahh's sin to think (for else he had not said as he did) that Moses
and Aaron were no more excellent then the rest of the people. 2. This internal
honor stands in a reverent and awful fear of them; a duty which we owe to our
Parents, either by nature or analogy, Lev. 19.3.

Secondly, External; as 1. To rise up when the person of the Magistrate is in
presence, Job. 29.8. 2 (as in most Countries) to uncover the head. 3 To bow the
body, 2 Samuel 24.20. the knee, Genesis 41.43. 4 To stand, Exodus 18.13. 2 King.
5.25. 5 To be silent when he speaks, and to attend, Job. 29.9, 10. 6. To use
words of submissivenesse, as Genesis 42.10. They call Joseph My Lord, and
themselves ( ver. 13.) his servants. 7 To obey, Josh. 1.6. though in the Lord,
Ephesians. 6.1. 8 To pray for the Magistrate, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.

4 Lawyers and Politicians mention sundry jura Majestatis, Vid. Bodin. de
Repub. l. 1. c. 10
or Rights belonging to Majesty: As 1. The giving of Laws. Arnisseum l. 2. de
jur. Majest. c. 1. n. 8.
2 The exercise of supreme Jurisdiction, beyond which there is no appeal. 3.
The power of the Militia. 4 Receiving Tribute of Lands, Cus^^me from the Sea,
Subsidy of Goods. 5 The liberty of Hunting. 6 A propriety in such things as
have no rightful owners to claim them. 7. The deriving of Honors. Genesis 41.41,
42
8 The coining of Money. To which may added that State or port suitable to their
places, in respect of Attendance, Diet, Apparel, Buildings, etc.

In the second Branch of Explication we are to enquire, speaking evil of
Dignities?

These words, speak evil] are in the Original one word, Idem valet quod (...)
alterius ^^mam laedere maledictis.
(...), they blaspheme: It signifies properly to hurt ones name by defamation,
or slander. And though it be now appropriated to a dishonor offered to Gods
name; yet it is frequently in Scripture spoken of defaming or evil speaking
against man, as 1 Cor 4.13. Being defamed, evil spoken of, ((...)) blasphemed,
we entreat: and 1 Pet. 4.4. Wherein they think it strange, that ye run not with
them to the same excess of riot, Tit. 3.2.
(...), blaspheming, or speaking evil of you. So Romans 3.8. (...), as we be
slanderously reported. And here in this place the word is spoken concerning the
defaming, or speaking evil of persons in authority: A sin with which the
Seducers are in this place charged; they being such, who, because they could
not by the power of their hand remove and displace Magistrates, would do their
utmost to blast and abuse them by the poison of their tongue.

This sin of speaking evil of Dignities, may be several ways committed:
Sometimes more secretly, by whispering only, or libelling, for fear of
censure: scandals of Governors have seldom any fathers; they kill, and make no
report; they steal away reputation. Sometimes more openly, and before any,
promiscuously: and both these ways of evil speaking may be in a way either of
murmuring, or of mutining. Of murmuring: When the people are in any distress,
Hominibus injuria affectis, aut pro merito minime evectis promptum est in viros
principes debacchari, and animi sui acerbitatem exspu^ri. Riv. in Exodus par. 2.
page 71. col. 2.
often the first stone of complaint is thrown against the Magistrate; The
Israelites want water, and they pray not to God, but murmur against Moses, as
if he had made the waters bitter, and the wilderness dry. Its a Kingly
condition to deserve well and hear ill. If men prosper never so much, they only
applaud themselves; if they suffer never so little; they murmur against their
Rulers. Of mutining: Sometimes men so speak evil Magistracy, as to raise up
evil against them. Murmurers offend out of impatiency, mutiners out of envy:
By the former Governors are taxed for not taking enough; Numb. 16.3.
by the later, for taking too much upon them: though Moses's command was a
burden to him, yet was it an ey-sore to others, Corah and his company. This sin
offends both by uttering against Rulers things false and evil: thus Absalom
unworthily traduceth his Fathers Government, 2 Samuel 15.3
by telling the Israelites that there was no man deputed of the King to hear
them; and Shimei cursed and reviled David, 2 Samuel 16.7
by calling him bloody man, and man of Belial: And things true and good, falsely
and evilly, as sometimes, though reporting, yet lessening, extenuating and
detracting from their good actions, or depraving them as done of bad intents,
for bad ends, or in hypocrisy; by uncovering their secret infirmities, by
amplifying and aggravating their faults; affirming that miscarriage to be
deliberately done, which was done rashly; or presumptuously, which was done
weakly, etc.

The sinfulness of this evil speaking appears several ways: See Part 1 page
130, 131. concerning the sin of despising dominion.
1. By its notorious thwarting and opposing the evident commands of Scripture,
Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people.
Eccles. 10.20. A Text cited by Paul himself, Acts 23.5. who there (as I humbly
conceive) apologizeth for himself for his sudden and unadvised expression, in
calling the high Priest a whited wall; the words (...) not signifying, I knew
not, absolutely; but I wist not, I considered not, I heeded not, I took not
sufficient notice how he was the high Priest; q.d. In my haste I termed him
whited wall, which term (I confess) might well have been spared; not because it
was false, but not fit nor consonant to that which is written, Honor the King,
1 Pet. 2.17. Render to all their dues, etc. Honor to whom honor, Romans 13.7.
The will of God against all pretexts imaginable, should be the end of all
strife. 2 Because the speaking evil of Dignities is the speaking evil of God
himself who ordained them. Pro. 17.5.
If he who mocketh the poor, then much more he who revileth the Ruler, Imaginem
Dei Rex gestat, idcirco colend^^ et amandus est; si non propter se, sal^^m
vocationis and functionis suae causa.
reproacheth his Maker. In the contempt of Magistrates God accounts himself
contemned: They have not (says God to Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.7) rejected thee, but
they have rejected me. And this was the true cause why God was so angry with
Miriam and Aaron, who spoke against Moses, Wherefore (says he) were ye not
afraid to speak against my servant Moses? Numb. 12.1, 8 Heb. 5.
To speak against him whom God appointed and set on work, is to speak against a
great one indeed. 3. By the punishments inflicted upon such revilers, which are
evident in the example of Miriam, Absalom, Corah, etc. And all Princes are not
like Titus (the delight of mankind) who said, None can reproach me, D^liciae
humani generis. Nemo me insequi contumelia potest, propterea quod nihil ago
quod reprehendi mereatur: ea vero quae false de me dicuntur, prorsus negligo.
Dio.
because I do nothing that can be reprehended; and those things which are
spoken of me falsely, I altogether neglect: for Tiberius, when Paconius had
scattered reproachful Verses against him, wrote to the Senate to appoint
severe punishment against him: and although many Princes have remitted the
injury as offered to their own persons; yet as prejudicial to the good of the
Commonwealth, they have, and that deservedly, punished them: and however
Princes themselves have spared such railers, yet God would not suffer them to
go unpunished, as in the case of Shimei, whom (though David spared, yet) God
spared not. 4 This speaking evil of Magistrates is a spreading evil, hurtful
to others: the reviler kills many with one shoot; himself, speaking wickedly;
the Ruler, whom he accuses unjustly; his hearer, who listens to him
credulously. A reproaching tongue, being though worst to himself, yet hurtful
to those who hear him: Lev. 19.16. a Talebearer. Rokel signifies a Trafficker
up and down.
and who knows how great a fire the tongue of one reviler may kindle? Seldom
does such a peddler open his pack of wares, but some or other will buy: No
music is so sweet to the most, as to hear well of themselves and ill of their
Rulers. Peoples hearts and ears are commonly tindar and touchwood, presently
taking fire when any spark of defamation, flies from the fire of a revilers
tongue; and how great a flame such a spark may kindle, we may see in the cases
of Absalom and Sheba.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Great is the audacious extravagancy of an unmortified tongue: Observe. 1
James (chap. 3.6.) calls it a fire; and here we see it aspires like fire,
(...). Jam 3.5.
and moves upward, and fastens upon such things as were much above it: Peter
says, These Seducers are not affaid to speak evil of Dignities, 2 Pet. 2.10.
the tongue set on fire by hell below, fires even upon those which are called
gods, and are in the hihgest and most eminent degree: the tongue speaks proud
things, Psalm. 12.3. In the mouth of the foolish is the rod of pride, Pro. 14.3.
In which place the fools tongue may either be termed a rod of pride, which for
proud speaking shall whip the fool himself; or else a rod which by the fools
proud speaking whips and lasheth any other. The Septuagint read it, The fools
tongue is (...), a rod of reproach: and some conceive in using the word rod,
Gr. (according to some)
(...), Solomon alludes to the custom of Magicians, who by their Rods were wont
to do their magical exploits and false miracles of transforming, Exodus 7.12.
metamorphosing and changing the shapes of things; as if these proud railers by
the rods of their tongues, Leviter volat sermo, sed graviter vulnerat; leviter
transit, sed graviter urit; leviter profertur, sed non leviter revocatur;
facile volat, atque adeo facile violat charitatem. Bern. Sermon. de trip. cust.
their revilings and slanderous reproaches, did labor to metamorphise and
transform men, making the honorable to appear base, the learned most
illiterate, the upright most dishonest, etc. The pride of the heart is most
frequently discovered by the tongue: Rabshakeh threatened he would make them eat
their own dung, and drink their own piss* the tongue threatens God himself,
Isa. 14.13. I will ascend into the heavens, I will exalt my throne above the
stars of God. Talk no more exceeding proudly (says Hannah) 1 Samuel 2.3. They
set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walks through the
earth. Psalm. 73.9. Our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.7.
The tongue, though small, opposes the greatest. It was a gracious care of
David, to take heed to his tongue, Psalm. 39.1. Man's glory, (his tongue) must
not be employed against Gods glory, or the Magistrates (here called Glories.)
The tongue, of which we had not the use, till we had the use of reason; was
never appointed to the used without reason, for pride and passion. He who made
the tongue soft and pliable, all flesh without a bone in it, teaches us that
it should not be harsh, rugged, and proud in its expressions: the double rail
or hedge of the teeth and lips, shows that this wild beast is very unruly, Jam.
3.8.
and that it ought to be kept in. The best way to keep the fire from breaking
out at the Chimney, (...).
is to quench the coals upon the hearth; a cool and humble heart will abate the
heat of the fiery tongue.

2. Dignities lie open to the lash of the tongue. Observat. 2


The more eminent the person, the more censured is his action: the highest
towers are most frequently blasted with lightning; nor power, nor innocence can
protect from imputations. The fire of the tongue dares touch even laurel Which
lightning (they say) never blasteth.
; the sword of the mouth will adventure even upon the mouth of the sword* When
Saul was chosen, and carried and lifted up with highest acclamations, the sons
of Belial despised him. 1 Samuel 10.27
It is a vain ambition to expect the good word of all. Its an equal weakness
to be proud of the applause, and impatient under the reproaches of the
multitude: the care of all especially of governors, should be rather to be
worthy of honor, then to receive honor; rather to be honorable, then honored;
and not so much to seek quiet abroad, as in themselves, and the conscience of
their upright and sincere endeavors. Its better to deserve well, and to hear
ill; then to deserve ill, and to hear well.

3. Observat. 3
Magistrates should take heed of blemishing their dignity and losing their
glory. The Apostle here calls them dignities or glories: And to maintain their
glory, it is not enough to be magnificent and outwardly pompous in their
attendance, apparel, diet buildings, etc. but let them show themselves
dignities, 1 In their entrance into their places: and 2. in their deportment
when they are entered. 1. For their entrance, let it not be sordid and unworthy,
in the way of suing by friends, money etc. Such should be preferred, not as would
have places, but such as places would have. Olives, Vines, Fig Trees refuse
their honors; brambles catch hold on preferment. Saul's modesty in hiding
himself when chosen King, detracted not from his dignity when he accepted it.
Cum omnia faceret ut imperare deberet, nihil faciebat ut imperaret.
It was an high commendation of Theod^sius the Emperor, that when he had done
all that could make him worthy to rule, he would do nothing that he might rule:
The worthiest to govern, are they often who think themselves unworthiest. Eo
dignior erat quo magis se clamabat indignum. Hier. in Epitaph. Nepot.
Let Christ herein be the pattern, who humbled himself, but he left his
exaltation to his Father. How is dignity debased, when they are advanced, not
who deserve best, but bid fairest? when money makes the Magistrate, and shall
provide preferment for him, who is not at all fit for that. What wonder is it
to see that they who buy their places deer, should afterward sell justice deer
also? 2 In their deportment when they are entered; let Magistrates keep up their
glory by wisdom and understanding; if no Christian, much less must a
Magistrate be a child in understanding: A fool cannot be harmless. A King in
our English expression imports as much as cunning, From the old Saxon word
koning.
or knowing. Wisdom makes a man's, especially a Magistrates face to shine:
Wisdom and Magistracy cast a reciprocal luster upon one another: Solomon's
wisdom made him more glorious and sought to, then his wealth. It was a notable
speech of our Henry the first, A King without Learning is but a crowned ass:
That creature is but contemptible under the richest ornaments. If a rulers
calling hinders him from the study of many commendable parts of Learning, yet
let it put him upon such studies as are necessarily requisite to the
understanding of government; Prove. 14.8.
The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way. 2 To preserve dignity, a
Magistrate in his place must carry himself courageously. Solomon's throne was
beset with Lions, not with Apes; they who oppose vice, had need of heroical
spirits; cowards are fitter to be slaves then rulers. A Magistrate in his own
cause, should be as flexible as a reed; in the cause of God, as stiff as an
oak; a timorous ruler is a Hare in a Lions skin: All dare meddle with him, who
dares meddle with none. And its just with God, that he should suffer by the
subjects, who dares not make their sins suffer by him. 3. Let dignity be upheld
by the hatred of covetousness, base and filthy lucre; how unseemly is it for a
golden spade to dig in a dunghill? for the robe of an Emperor to stop an oven?
Let not these who are called Gods, grovel in the earth; what is not cheap to
him, to whom money is dear? How unfit is it for a Magistrate to soar high in
respect of his place, and at the same time (like the kite) to have his eye
fixed upon the dunghill, or carrion! It Is the judgment of God against
covetousness, that they who follow gain as their God, shall yet account
another a base miser for doing so. It was a noble speech of Themistocles, who
seeing a precious stone upon the ground, bid another take it up; For thou (said
he) art not Themistocles. 4. To preserve dignity, let Magistrates carry
themselves usefully, industriously, for the public good. There Is a near
conjunction between dignity and duty: The shadow of honor attends upon the body
of service. It was a true speech of the wise old counselors to Rehoboam, 1
Kings 12.7. If thou will be a servant to this people etc. they will be thy
servants. The tree which is most deeply rooted, flourishes and spreads most,
and the person who is most deeply and lowly engaged in service, shall best
flourish and spread in renown. Empty are those Titles which are only obtained
by Birth, Retinue and Favor, etc. The Titles of Most Illustrious, Excellency,
Right Honorable, etc. bestowed upon an uprofitable Governor, are but nick
names and upbraidings for his not being what he should, and is said to be; and
as unduly given him, as the names of wholesome drugs are put upon empty boxes
in the Apothecaries shop. 5. Let Dignity be upheld with piety. Holiness is the
luster of all other accomplishments, and the most lasting foundation of honor:
They that honor me, will I honor. If Religion at the Bar make the profane
Magistrate to tremble, much more may Religion on the Bench dismay a profane
Offender: When the Lusts of wicked Subjects make them willingly to reproach
Religious Rulers, their consciences shall make them unwillingly to honor them.
Never did those Magistrates long preserve their own names, who suffered Gods
to be profaned. The greatest Potentate on earth cannot be loose and ungodly by
Authority; their place will not bear them out in it. Religion is no
disparagement to Magistracy. How needless, how unsuitable is it for great ones
to fear nothing more then to have a name to fear God?

4. Observe. 4.
How highly is God provoked, when he makes these Dignities and Glories
unglorious! It Is no small offense that puts the Lord upon pouring contempt upon
Princes; that makes him stain the pride of their glory, and cover it with
shameful spewing: When Manasseh shall be fetterd, Jehoiakim be a broken Idol,
buried with the burial of an Ass, Jer. 22.19, 24
and the Signet upon his right hand plucked thence, and thrown on the dunghill,
Nebuchadnezzar turned into a Beast, etc. when the Lord deals thus with Rulers;
they should look beyond a rebellious headstrong people: they have Neg^tium cum
Deo: Their work is to look inward and upward, to study what their sin has
been, which has incensed God to debase that which he commands all other to
honor. If the Lord suffer people to cast off the yoke of their obedience to
Princes; surely Princes did first cast off the yoke of obedience to God. 1 Samuel
2.30.
They who despise God shall be lightly esteemed. If it be the Lord who subdues
the people under Princes, Psalm. 18.47
it is he that subdues Princes under their people: Its God who stilleth the
noise of the seas, and the tumult of the people: Psalm. 65.7.
If he remove the banks and bounds of his protection, the proud waves both of
seas and popular tumults will overflow the highest mountains. If at any time
Princes are overborn by such an overflowing scourge, let them examine
themselves whether they have not transgressed the bounds of Gods Commandments;
whether if God deal with them as with Saul, Manasseh, Nebuchadnezar, Zedekiah,
Jehu, Jeroboam, they have not with them, been disobedient, idolatrous, proud,
oppressive, etc. The alterations of Governors and Governments, peculiarly
belong to Gods Prerogative Royal He rul^th in the kingdom of men, gives it to
whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of men. And the putting
of proud Princes and people, upon an holy and humble consideration hereof,
(which can never be, unless not only his bare permission, but even his positive
working, and such as flows from his effectual Ordination, be acknowledged) is
clearly intimated in Scripture, Dan. 4.17
to be one main end of the severe dispensations of providence, in the pulling
down of Governments and debasing of Dignities.

5. Observe 5.
Its lawful for Magistrates to preserve their Authority by a certain external,
though decent and moderate Pomp and Majesty. They may lawfully use and receive
titles of honor, and have Attendance, Apparel, Buildings, Diet suitable to
their Dignities; the Spirit of God here calls them Dignities, or Glories: Paul,
Act. 26.25 gave to Festus the title of Most Noble: God himself has cast upon
Rulers a beam of his Glory: Psalm. 21.5.
Honor and Majesty has God laid upon them: The most high God (says Daniel)
gave Nebuchadnezzar a Kingdom, Dan. 5 18, 19.
and Majesty, and Glory, and Honor. Faithful and godly Joseph, Genesis 41.
when advanced, was adorned with Pharaohs Ring, and a gold Chain, arraied in
Vestures of fine linen, riding in the second Chariot which Pharaoh had, they
crying before him, Bow the knee. Jude here puts Dominion and Dignities
together. Magistracy deek'd with Dignity, is often hated and envyed; and stripped
of Dignity, is always scorned and contemned: This the Fomenters of Anarchical
confussions well know, who endeavor to overthrow Dignities, that they may
thereby destroy Dominions: Nor yet ought Magistrates to please themselves with
Titles and Dignities, empty of that goodness and worth which should accompany
and adorn Greatness: They should not so affect the Title, as to neglect the
thing and work whereof their Titles admonish them. Glorious Titles and
Dignities, contradicted by a wicked and undue deportment, proclaim equally both
the sin and shame of those upon whom they are cast. Prohibiti sunt mated^ci,
non jussi sunt sacrificiis honorari. Aug. q. 86. in Exodus
To conclude, though Rulers should be honored, yet not adored: They should so
endure to be acknowledged the peoples Superiors, as to fear to be accounted
Gods Equals: Soon was Herod the food of worms, when he patiently endured to
have his voice cried up for the voice of God. Historians mention the
Sacrilegious impiety of D^mitian, who would be called by the people, Suet. in
vita Dom. cap. 13.
The Lord our God: To these may be added the proud usurpations of the Pope, who
exalts himself above all that is called God; who pretends to pardon sin, and to
be the head of the Church; and of those Princes that have taken the Title of
most Mighty, most Invincible, etc.

6. Observe. ult.
Its our duty to be cautioned against flattering of Governors. They are
Dignities and Glories, but should not dazzle our eyes into a sinful winking at
their sins. Though they are not to be reviled, yet neither soothed when they
offend God. What ill have Governors deserved at our hands, that we should in
stead of friends, Honor quo praediti sunt non est vitiorum integumentum.
be their flatterers? and that they only of all the men in the world should be
without friends, that is, reprovers? We must honor them in stead of, not
against God; Say unto the King and Queen, humble your selves; Jer. 13.18. 1 Samuel 15.29. 1 King. 18.18. Isai. 39 6.
More then once we read that Samuel reproved Saul; nor did Nathan spare David;
Eliah, Ahab; Isaiah, Hezekiah; the Buptist, Herod. The danger of flattering
Rulers, reaches beyond themselves. The soothing of such in sin is the casting
of a bag of poison into a common fountain, se^ving for the use of the whole
City. Nor yet ought the reprehending of public persons to be practiced without
much prudence; lest by it the disease be rather irritated then cured. Singular
was the wisdom of Nathan to draw the sentence of David against himself out of
his own mouth. 1 Samuel 2 1. 1 King, 20 39.
Nor do all sorts of faults require the same severity in reproving: some sins
are warts, others are ^^l^ers; some are secret, and then the plaster should
not be broader then the sore; the reprehension more open then the offense: Care
is to be had lest Reprehension degenerate into Sedition: Preachers for
Conversion should have another aim: In short, in every reproof, difference is
to be put between the person and Office of the Magistrate: The Dignity of the
Office should not suffer for the vices of the person; nor should the vices of
the person be spared for the Dignity of the Office.

This for the specification of the faults of these Seducers, which was the
first Branch in the first part of the Text: The second branch of this first
part of the Text follows, viz, the aggravation of these faults, in that the
Apostle says, that these Seducers sinned likewise also. In which two words the
Apostle expresses a twofold aggravation of their sins.

The first stands in the harmony or consent between the sins of these Seducers,
and the wickedness of those who went before them: they sinned likewise.

2. The second stands in the obstinacy of these sinners in their impieties,
Similiter tamen.
they sinning also, or (as Beza reads it) notwithstanding they knew the
forementioned severe judgments which had befallen the former sinners for their
impieties.

EXPILCATION.
I shall but briefly touch upon both these by way of Explication, the
difficulty not being great, although the matter contained in them profitable.

1. Explicat. 1.
The Harmony or consent of these Seducers with former sinners in their
wickedness, is expressed in this word (...), Likewise; a word importing as much
as did those words in the seventh verse, where the Apostle says, that the
Cities about Sodom and Gomorrha, did (...), In like manner give themselves,
etc. If it be demanded, Wherein that agreement or consent which was between
these Seducers and former sinners did consist? It is answered by some, That the
Apostle did not intend that these Seducers did walk precisely in the same
particular sins in which the forementioned sinners, the Israelites, Angels,
Sodomites had lived; or that they did trace them (...), step by step in every
several sort of wickedness, but only that they were in the general, very
grievous and heinous sinners, as those of old were, giving themselves with them
over to all manner of impiety.

But comparing the practices of these Seducers with the sins wherewith the
Israelites, Angels, Sodomites were charged, as also considering the word
[Likewise] most properly imports such a connection of this verse with the
former, as whereby is intended that these Seducers imitated those former
sinners in those very sins which were before by the Apostle mentioned; Ver. 5,
6, 7.
I conceive it may be best answered; that the agreement here mentioned by Jude,
between the former and latter sinners, was an agreement in the same sins for
sort and kind; and that he intends, as the Isralites and Angels proudly refused
to yield due obedience and subjection to God; the former rebelling against God
who governed them immedi^tely, Videtur Judas indicare Gnosticos Sodomitis
fuisse similes, quasi eo rum improbitatem imitarentur. Vid. Justinian. in loc.
the latter despising that government which he exercised over them by his
servant Moses: and as the Sodomites sinned by sensual filthiness and carnal
uncleanness; in like manner did these Seducers defile the flesh, and despise
dominions, etc. And yet I doubt not, but withal the Apostle in this word
[likewise] insinuates a further agreement between these former and and later
sinners; and that was in the same punishment which was likewise to fall upon
those who lived in the same sins, for which they of old were punished.

The second aggravation of the wickedness of these seducers, is taken from
their obstinacy in sinning, contained in this expression, (...), also, or
notwithstanding; noting, that these seducers sinned, although they well knew
what judgments of God had befallen the forementioned sinners, for the very same
sins whereof they were guilty. These Angels, Isralites, Sodomites had been
whipped (as it were) before their eyes; God had laid them before them for a (...)
(as Jude spoke before) an example to them who after should live ungodly. Ver. 7.
These judgments were as a buoy before the ankre, to prevent the dashing of
future generations against the same destruction. Yet these seducers sinned
notwithstanding these judgments of God upon those of old; Romans 1 32.
like a thief, so mad upon cutting a purse, that he commits that offense, even
under the gallows whereon one was newly hanged for the same fault.

OBSERVATIONS
1. Great is our proneness to follow corrupt example. Observat. 1
Of this before page 572 of the former part.

2. Observe. 2
There is a proneness to sin in every age of the world. Israelites, and
Sodomites before, and these seducers afterward provoke God. A doctrine that
puts the godly upon a holy both contention against, and contentation under the
iniquity of their times; they should be both patient, and zealous; patient, to
show their submission to Gods providence: Eccles. 7.10.
Zealous, to preserve their own purity; they must shine as lights in the midst
of a crooked generation. Even the godly are as ready to favor of the follies
of their generation, as waters to receive a tang from the earth, through which
they run. 1 Pet. 4.4.
Of this see more page 605 of the former part.

3. Observe. 3
The wicked agree in sinning; they run together into the same excess of riot.
Hand may join in hand against holiness: This unity is but conspiracy, it is
against unity, trin'unity. Gods people should be ashamed of their divisions
even by the example of sinners. Of this more page 571. Part 1.

4. Observe. 4
Greatest severities are in themselves insufficient to work upon sinners. These
Seducers sinned notwithanding the punishing of the same sins formerly. What a
calamitous catalogue of Judgments do we find mentioned by Amos chap. Amos 4.6,
7.8, etc.
4? and though all of them had been inflicted upon the people, yet did not the
punished return to the Lord. They turn not (says the Prophet, Isai. 9.13.) Isa
9.13. Lev. 26.39.
to him that smites, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. And Lev. 26.39.
it is not threatened only as a judgment, that the people should be carried into
their enemies land, but (which is far worse) that there they should pine away
in their iniquities, though their Liberties, estates, lives were consumed, yet
their sins outlived them, and remained: Their iniquities did not pine away in
them, but they in their iniquites. The Prophet Hosea, Hos. 13.13. Compares them
to a foolish child, that stays in the place of breaking forth of children; men
may be in troubles, and yet rather dye there, then seek by repentance to be
delivered; like as the Prophet in that place uses the comparison of a foolish
child, which though in a dark stifling womb, there continues, though to the
destruction of it self and mother. There Is an insufficiency in all outward
dispensations, to change the disposition of the heart; the back may be broken,
and yet the heart remain unbroken: Though devils be thrust down into, and
tormented in hell, yet they ever continue proud and unreformed. Ahaz trespassed
the more, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
the more he was distressed; judgments may irritate, not remove sin: They may
make us to fret and rage by stopping us in a way of sin; (as a dam makes the
torrent the more to rise and swell) but they cannot turn or dry up a stream of
corruption. Resistance occasions it to break forth afterward with the greater
violence: Great wounds cannot work in us good wills: unless grace does inwardly
renew us, as well as troubles outwardly restrain us, there will be no true
turning to God. The more God stopped Baalam in his way, the more mad he was to
be going on; a man who is stopped in the street with a cart, is not made thereby
out of love with his journie, but the more resolved to go on, the faster
afterward: It Is a singular mercy when an affliction is wrought into us; if God
has a mind to do us good, he will make us good by all our troubles. This is
the depth of misery, for God to say, let him that is filthy notwithstanding his
washing, continue so still: Consider in every trouble, thy work is with God,
and that not only to observe him sending of it, but to beg his blessing upon
it. Beseech him that no wind may go down, till it has blown thee nearer thy
haven; to take off no plaster till thy sores be healed; pray not so much with
Pharaoh, to have the frogs, as with David, to have thy sins taken away:
Calamities are then removed in mercy, when sanctified before they are removed;
Love me not Lord, (said Augustine) with that love wherewith thou put one
out of the way, Non quo extrudis de via, sed quo corrigis devium.
but reducest him that is wandering.

And this for the first part of this verse, viz. the faults wherewith these
seducers were charged, as they have been considered both in their specification
and aggravation; The second follows, The fountain from which these faults
issued, intended in this expression, Filthy dreamers.

EXPLICATION
In the explication hereof, I shall show in what sense the Apostle here gives
these seducers this title, and withal the sin and misery in being such as this
title imports.

The word here interpreted filthy dreamers, in the Greek is (...), (...) qui
videt in somnia.
signifying properly such who are dreaming in sleep. Beza renders the word
sopiti, such who are fast or sound asleep, in a deep dead sleep. Erasmus and
Vatablus, (...), Arist.
Delusi in somniis; such who are deluded in dreams. The Vulgar wholly omits the
translation of the word; but the word properly signifies such who in their
sleep are dreaming; and thus Joseph is called (...) a dreamer, and Acts 2.17.
It Is said, your old men (...), shall dream dreams (importing likewise thus to
dream in sleep.) And these of whom our Apostle here speaks, may be termed
dreamers in sleep, either 1. In a proper, or 2. In a metaphorical sense. If 1.
In a proper sense, then these seducers were dreamers in their natural and
bodily rest and sleep; Acts. 2.17. dreamed dreams in their natural sleep, and
thus Gagneius, Vatablus, Salmeron understand this place; as if the Apostle had
intended, Redundat effusior libido vsque ad nocturnas inter dormiendum
pollutiones Vatab.
that these impure seducers did put forth and express their filthy
lustfulnesse in their very dreams, when they were asleep. Thus likewise our own
learned interpreters understood this dreaming in sleep, as is plain by their
rendering the word (...), by filthy dreamers, as conceiving that these seducers
in their unclean dreams had defiled and polluted their bodies when they were in
their natural sleep; not that the word (...) admits of the interpretation of
(fil^hy dreams) by the force of its own signification, (it is Acts 2.17. used in
a good sense, namely of holy and pure dreaming) but the foresaid interpreters
were pleased so to refer this word to the following expression, viz. (defile
the flesh) that they interpreted it of that dreaming in sleep wherein these
seducers defiled their bodies by nocturnal pollutions; which uncleanness (as
some think) is the same with that of him mentioned, Lev. 15.16. Whose seed went
from him. A strong inducement hence may be gathered (that I may note it by the
way) for every one, as to hate that odious, and I fear, too common a sin of
self-pollution (which by some Casuists is accounted a greater sin then
adultery; and by others to have even murder in it) so to keep their hearts with
all diligence, from those impure thoughts in the daytime, which may otherwise
make them filthy dreamers in the night; and when they go to sleep, to beseech
God to keep the key of their fancy, that so it may not run out into dreaming
impurely.

But secondly, others (and those the most) better interpret this dreaming
whereof Jude speaks, metaphorically, or in a borrowed sense; conceiving that
the Apostle here in calling these seducers dreamers in sleep, does compare them
to such: and that, 1. In respect of sleeping. 2. Of dreaming in sleep.


1. In respect of sleeping, (...). Septuag.
these seducers may be compared to dreamers in sleep; they were spiritually
drowned, overwhelmed in a deep, sound sleep of sin; such a deep sleep as the
Prophet mentions, Isa. 29.10. Isa. 29.10
The Lord has poured upon you the spirit of a deep sleep, a dead and midnight
sleep. 1 These. 5.6. Let us not sleep as do others, Matthew. 25.5. while the
bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and slept, etc. This spiritual sleep in
sin is threefold, (as divines observe) 1. That natural sleep whereby every one
is overtaken, and is both unable and unwilling to move himself to the least
supernatural good, till God awake him by his spirit, and effectually say unto
him, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead. 2. That slumber, or
the remains of that natural sleep in the godly, continuing in them, even after
they are awakened out of their dead sleep of nature; they being hereby often
overtaken with spiritual slumber, by reason of the relics of sin still abiding
in them. This the Spouse acknowledges, Cant. 5.2. I sleep, but my heart
waketh. 3. The third is a judicial and penal increase of that natural sleep,
and that deadness of heart, by the custom and continuance in sin. This is
properly that forementioned deep sleep, Isa. 29.10. poured upon the impenitent
Jews; and this last is that which is here attributed to these seducers. And in
two respects may such sinners be compared to men in a deep sleep.

1. In regard of the causes. 2. The effects of sleep.

1 The causes of sleep. 1. The sleep of the body comes from obstruction and
binding up of the senses by vapors which arise out of the stomach, so the
spiritual fumes of worldly cares and desires obstruct the senses of the soul:
Luke 21.34.
therefore our Savior speaks of being oppressed, or overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness; Prosperity is a vapor, which if it overcome not, yet
weakneth the brain, as strong waters do. This was the cause of David's, and
Solomon's, and Asa's sleep.

2. Sleep arises from weariness and want of spirits; and there is a
weariness causing spiritual sleep, namely that which arises from too much
expense of the strength of the soul upon other matters, impertinencies that
concern not its true happiness and welfare.

3. Often sleep comes from want of exercise, and when there is a cessation from
spiritual exercises, Prayer, Hearing, Sacraments, Meditation; there follows
a spiritual sleep; these are the fuel of grace; and he that will not exercise
himself to godliness, Tim. 4 7.
shall never keep himself long awake.

4. Sleep may come from sleepy yawning, and sl^thfull company, the company of
spiritual sluggards causes spiritual sleep; cold formal persons cast a damp
upon the heat of others; Spirituale gelicidium. Ames.
frozen company derive a spiritual icinesse into the souls of those who
converse much with them.

5. Some are made to sleep by singing and music: and many by the flatteries
and sinful soothing of false doctrines, of Libertinism, or Arminianism etc. and
by the unfaithfulness of those who dare not reprove for, but sooth in sin, are
cast into a spiritual sleep.

2. Sinners may be compared to men in a deep sleep, in regard of the effects of
sleep, and that in respect 1 of their want of shame and bashfulnesse in sin;
they who are asleep, Jer. 8.12.
though their nakedness (with Noah's) be uncovered, yet they blush not; these
seducers proclaimed their sin like Sodom. See before Part 1. concerning the
word (...); they could not blush, says the Prophet; a blushing color is not
the color of such mpudent ones. 2. Of their unarmednesse, and liablenesse to
danger: in sleep, the preciousest thing men carry about them, may be taken away
without resistance; they suffer that to be loose which they held fast before,
be it never so rich a jewel. Sisera was slain in his sleep, and Ishbosheth upon
his bed, and in spiritual sleep, men suffer the precious jewel of truth, and
the profession thereof to be wrung from them, and may be robbed of all that good
which ever they had. There Is no tentation, sin, judgment, but a sleeping
Christian is exposed to, he is a field without a fence, a City without a watch,
he hinders no invader, he is ruined without resistance. In the approach of
judgments, he is naked; he makes not the name of the Lord his strong tower, he
cannot act faith to close up himself in the wounds of Jesus Christ: The people
of God in the midst of troubles are above them, whereas wicked men, though
without trials, are ever exposed to them; they fence their estates, families,
etc. not their souls. 3. In respect of unactivenesse, and being without motion;
men in a deep sleep are without sense and motion; wicked men act not, move not
holily; what they do, they do without delight; they are Summer-sluggards,
harvest-sleepers, though the work be great, there is no working A sleeping siner
works not out his salvation, he offers no violence to the kingdom of heaven, he
strives not to enter the strait gate, he wrestles not in prayer, he lives as if
he had nothing to do in the world; heaven is not his business: he is, but he
lives not; he is a spiritual drone, a mute, a cyphar, a nullity, a superfluity
in the world; Jer. 13.
like Jeremiahs rotten girdle, or bad figs; Ezekiel. 15.
or like Ezekiels Vine-branches, weak and unfruitful, good for nothing but the
fire, not fit to make beams or rafters of; such a kind of rest as this to a
Saint, would be his greatest unquietness, unserviceablenesse is a kind of hell
upon earth to a godly man. 4. In respect of unwillingness to be disturbed,
stird or disquieted men disposed to sleep, desire to be alone; they who are
spiritually sleepy, avoid such company as would rouse them from their sloth;
they compose themselves to rest, draw the curtains, put out the candle, are
afraid to be disquieted by the light, they are loath to do what they know, and
to know what either they do or should do. 1 Thessalonians. 5.^
They that sleep (says the Apostle) sleep in the night; they are angry with
the Word and Ministers, because they will not let them sleep quietly in sin:
Such as will let them alone in sin and never disturb them, are the quiet honest
men; (...), i.e. perinde stolidi ac rationis expertes; ac si omnes sensus
haberent penitus sopitos. B^za in loc.
they will not endure wholesome words, sound doctrine. 5. And especially, in
respect of insensiblenesse, stupidity, blockishnesse; men in a deep sleep feel
nothing that is done to them: This (I conceive) Jude principally aims at, for
likewise also (or notwithstanding) (says he) they knew the judgments of God
upon others, yet still they sinned, they slept: so senseless and stupid were
they! Sed et stupida impudentia denotari potest, ut non abstineant ab omni
foeditate, a qua etiam nequissimi abhorrent, nisi somnus pudorem et sensum
tollat. Lo^in. in loc. (...). 2 Timothy 4.2. Ephesians. 4.19. (...) Romans 11 8 (...).
their consciences were seared with an hot iron, past feeling, bound up by a
deep benummedness caused by custom in sin: this was that deep sleep poured
upon them by God, like that which befell Adam, whereby though a rib was taken
out of him, yet he perceived it not: like that also of Saul, Sisera and Jonah.
The Apostle expresses it by that significant word (...), Romans 11.8. we
translate it slumber: it signifies (say some) midnight sl^ep, which is the time
when men are most thoroughly asleep. But by this word (say others better) is
imported such a sleep as out of which all the pinching, wounding, pricking
cannot raise a man; or such a sleep as whereby a man is so fastened and nailed
down to his sloth, that he and his sloth cannot be parted; the word (...)
properly signifying pricking, or compunction, Act. 2.37. They were pricked.
etc. And so great is the spiritual stupidity and insensibleness of sinners in
their sleep of sin, (...). B^z^ He^^^. Toll. a (...), Compungo, punge^do
penetro, vet quia nullae agitationes, vel transpuncti ones possunt Jud^os e
^omno peccati excitare: sic Pareus, O^^and. Vel quia sunt quasi recerto loco
penitus clavo affixa, quae aegre potest avelli. Sic Chrysoft. Theophilact.
that 1 They are insensible of the greatest danger; these they prevent not, yea
foresee not: They go on and are punished; they fear nothing, feeling only
troubles them; and that too when it is too late; they are like drunken men on
the top of a mast. 2. They are insensibl of the l^udest noyses, severest
denuntiations, these do but deafen their ears; nor do voices lift up like a
trumpet, make them prepare for a battle. 3. They are insensible of the
stirrings and jogings given them in their spiritual sleep, the faithfullest
admonitions of friends: A rebuked scorner, hates both rebukes and rebuker;
though often reproved, he hardens his neck. 4. They are insensible in this their
sleep of being uncovered and stripped of their clothes; yea of being wounded and
maimed by Gods severer strokes and bloody stripes; though the water-pot and
spear be taken from the bolster, yet they stir not; like the hen which loses
now one, by and by another, then a third chicken, till the kite have almost
snatched away all her brood; and yet she follows her scraping and picking as
eagerly as ever. They regard not the works of God; when the hand of the Lord is
lifted up they will not see. Though gray hairs be upon them, they know it not.
1. They are insensible who wounds, they think not of the hand of God in the
miseries that befall them, they consider not they have negetium cum Deo, to do
with God, when men hurt them; all their study is how to avenge themselves upon,
or reconcile themselves to the instrument. 2. They are insensible why they are
wounded, of sin the deserving cause; they neither looking upward nor inward,
they are not driven by what they feel, to consider what they have done; no man
says, What have I done? They search not after the Jonah when any storm
arises: every thing shall be blamed sooner then sin, though there be many a
foot print of punishment upon them, they trace not the foot, the sin that made
it. 3. They are insensible of the way to cure their wounds, they turn not to
the Lord their God for all this; they are like a foolish child, Hos. 13.13.
that stays long in the place of breaking forth of children. They had rather
stifle themselves in the womb of sin and punishment, then come forth by
repentance; they turn not to him that smites: They use every way to remove
punishment but the right, so that they pine away in their iniquity, Lev. 26.39.
and though their books were torn, yet their lessons not learned.

2. dreamers in sleep, in regard of their dreaming; that is, their vain false,
empty imaginations, dotages, doctrines, which (in the end) like dreams deceived
themselves and their followers. A dream when a man sleeps, seems to have
truth and reality in it; but when he awaketh, it quite vanishes away: he who
utters his own foolish conceits and vain delusions, is in common speech said to
dream, and to speak his own dreams; and thus these seducers, in stead of the
truths of God, vented their own fables and groundless fictions, fancies, and
dreams. In this sense Epiphanius understands the Apostle Jude, (...). Epiphan.
adv. haer. cap. 26. p. 96.
when he call's these seducers dreamers; Jude speaks not (says he) of them who
dreamed in bodily sleep, but of such who utter their words like them who dream,
and not like those who speak with the sobriety of such who are awake. To the
same purpose speaks Irenaeus likewise, lib. 1 cap. 20. They put off (sath he)
their own dreams for divine oracles. And such have been the dreams of
Enthusiasts, and of the Anabaptists in Germany; one of whom (as Sleidan
reports) cut off his own brothers head in the presence of his parents,
pretending that he did it by an immediate revelation and command from God. The
false Prophets are in Scripture often called dreamers, because they delivered not
the truths of God, but the vain figments of their own deluding and deluded
fancies. As Deuteronomy. 13.3. Jer. 23.25. where the Prophet who says, I have
dreamed, I have dreamed; is by Jeremiah said to be a Prophet of the deceit of
his own heart. These seducers of whom Jude speaks, being asleep in sin,
Irenaeus vocat Gnosticos Oniro pompos, sua somnia quasi oracula Dei
ventilantes. lib. 1 cap. 20.
deceived themselves and hearers with d^ctrines, vain opinions, and especially
false hopes of pleasure and liberty in sin, though when their consciences
awaked, they found themselves miserably deluded by Satan, and their own sensual
hearts. Thus Zophar speaks, J^b ^0.8. that the hypocrite shall fly away as a
dream, that is, as the good dreamed of, or the joy of a dream which is short,
vanishing, and deceiving; so Psalm. 73 20. As a dream when one awaketh, so O
Lord, when thou awakest, shall thou despise their image; Isa. 29.8.
and thus the Prophet compares the temper of the people under all the judgments
of God, unto that of a deluded dreamer, who pleases himself with dreaming of
food and fullness, and when he awakes, in stead of a furnished table, and a
filled stomach, finds and feels himself more indigent and nearer famishing then
ever he was before. Thus the fond sinner is dreaming of a kingdom, when he is
going to execution; and when Jael's nail is nearer his temples then a crown: He
blessing himself in his heart, and saying that he shall have peace, though he
live in a way of warring against God. And sundry ways may sinners delude
themselves, like dreamers, by their vain and groundless conceits; as 1. in
dreaming of their persons, 2. of their actions. Of their Persons: 1. dreaming
that they are not so bad as others, because they abstain from gross, apparent
and notorious abominations; thus the Pharisee deluded himself, Luke 18.11. Some
dream that they have not such and such corruptions, because God restrains them
from the outward acts of sin; as if the rest and silence of corruption always
came from the renovation of the spirit; whereas it comes not from the want of a
mind disposed to sin, but of an object proposed to draw forth corruption:
Others dream that if they had lived in the days of Christ, the Prophets, and
Ma^tyrs; they would not have persecuted them: Though they bitterly oppose those
in whom the Image of Christ shines, (and they who cannot endure that spa^k of
holiness in a Saint, how could they have loved that flame which was in
Christ?) and hate those most in whom the piety and zeal of the holy Martyrs and
Saints of old is revived. 2. Sinners delude themselves in dreaming that they
are in a good and happy estate before God, Rev. 3.17. Gal. 6 3.
being indeed miserable and bad: Thus some dream that God loves them, Psalm.
69.22. Heb. 12.6.
because he gives them wordly prosperity, whereas the prosperity of the
wicked is their ruin; and God oftenest gives it in wrath, and denies it in
love: Some dream that their condition is happy, because they are civily honest
in the world; whereas their irreligious honesty is as bad as unhonest religion;
and except your righteousness exceed etc. Matthew. 5.20
Others dream they are happy, because they have been born in the Church, and
enjoy its privileges, 1 Cor. 10.5 Matthew. 7.22, 23
whereas a barren fig tree is nearer cursing then a bramble; and they who
received Sacraments every meal were destroyed in the wilderness: Some dream of
happiness, because they have some kind of Knowledge, Faith* Repentance,
Obedience; whereas their knowledge transforms them not, it is light without heat:
Their faith applies (in a sort) Christ to them; not themselves to Christ, but
to their lusts: their repentance respects the punishment of sin, not the sin to
be punished; they hate sin for hell, not as hell; and in their tears, sin is
rather bathed then drowned; their obed^^nce is not a serving of God, but of
themselves upon God, they serve God for by-respects; Hos. 1.4.
and in their obedience, they aim not at obedience.

2. Sinners delude themselves in dreaming concerning their actions, that they
are good, 2 Samuel 6 7.
because done with a go^diat^ntion; not considering that a work may be good in
a ma^s own eyes, P^ov. 16 25.
and the issues thereof the ways of death; or that they are warrantable
because of the example of the multitude, whereas the most are the worst and the
whole world lies in wickedness. Some dream that small sins are as none, as
vain thoughts, idle wo^ds; whereas the least sin, is the b^each of a great and
royoll Law, and an offense against a great God; and thoughts and words shall be
both brought into judgment. Some dream, that the outward works of the Law are
sufficient, whereas the Law in every command is spiritual, and binds the heart
as well as the hand; and they who made their Philacteries broad, made the
expositions of the Law too narrow. Some dream that their actions are good
because followed with success, whereas the goodness of the action is not to
be judged by the goodness of the success, but the goodness of the success
by the goodness of the action; plenty could not justify sacrificing to the
Queen of heaven. Jer. 44.11.
Some because of the corruption of their natures, dream of excusing their
actions; they are but men (say they;) whereas they deserve damnation both for
the corruption of nature, and the fruits thereof: also some dream thus because
of the faults of the godly mentioned in Scripture; they making that an argument
of boldness in sinning, which should be an argument of fear to sin: some because
they are ignorant and not Book-learn'd, whereas ignorance (though simple) only
somewhat extenuates, but it excuses not sin, and keeps not from hell, but only
from such a degree of torment, as that of unfruitful knowledge; and wilful (now
the common) ignorance, increases both sin and punishment, as showing that men
will willingly suffer the damage of ignorance, to enjoy the freedom of sinning.
Some dream that the employments of their callings may excuse them for the
neglect of holy duties, as if callings were made to call us away from God, or
as if eternity were to give way to trifles. Others fondly dream, that outward
tentations, the counsels or commands of others enticing them to sin, shall
sufficiently excuse them; whereas the outward tentation could do nothing,
without the compliance of the inward corruption; and the disobeying of God for
man's command, is a disobedience with a greater disparagement to God, then if
man had said nothing: Endless it would be to mention all those spiritual
dotages, and deluding dreams of sinners about their actions; as that they may
sin, because they dream some places of Scripture will give them allowance, or
that much good will ensue of their sin: that they may take liberty (though
excessive) in things, because lawful: that they may do evil, because they make
account to make amends for it afterward, or upon pretense that they do it only
for trial to learn the vanity of sin; or that the necessity of their living
urges them, or upon presumption of Gods mercy, or by the painting of sin with
the color of virtue. To these may be added a sinners dreaming that good duties
may be omitted, because they are difficult, or because of their many other
important occasions, or because there is a purpose of doing them hereafter; or in
regard of their troubles threatened, or because they have done enough good
already, or more then others, or by reasoning from predestination; as if being
ordained to salvation, though they live never so wickedly, it shall never
disadvantage them, etc. All which with many more, are the vain dreams and
delusions of sinners, whereby with these seducers they take liberty to offend
God, and thereby to overthrow themselves.

OBSERVATIONS
1. Spiritual judgments are the sorest. Observe. 1
Insensiblenesse in sin, and self-delusion, were judgments which made these
seducers miserable: They are judgments which seize upon the soul: No blessings
so sweet as soul-blessings, and no judgments so sore as soul-judgments: The
soul is the excellency of a man; the body is a body of vileness; the soul is
precious, excellent every way, but only as depraved with sin: Its noble in
regard of its original, functions, endowments. If all be well with the soul,
all is well with the man, though the body be never so miserable: If it go ill
with the soul, the man is wretched, let the body be never so happy. The
funeral of a noble man is much spoken of; when a Prince dies, all lay it to
heart; when his Page dies, it is never regarded: The body, the souls page, is
not to be lamented, from which the soul parts; but the soul, from which God
himself parts. And further, the distempers which befall the soul, are of all
others hardest to remove: There is no herb in the garden, no receipt from the
Physician, no medicine in the shop that can cure the soul; men are only parents
and physicians of the body; he that made the soul, can only mend it: the Father
of spirits is the only Physician of spirits. It Is omnipotent strength that
recovers a sin sick, and raises and rouzeth a sleeping soul; man can cast thee
into thy sinful sleep, only God can awaken thee: outward helps cannot cure the
inward man; he that sits in heaven, can only touch and teach the heart. And
further, the distempers of the soul uncur'd, are of all others the most deadly
and destructive. A scratch on the finger we call a slight wound, but a wound
that reaches to the heart is deadly; Whatever befalls the body is comparatively
slight and to be slighted. The worst things which befall the body, may be sent
in mercy; they part between us and contemptible enjoyments, yea, often they make
way for the enjoying of the best blessings; but they which befall the soul,
sever from him in whom all blessedness is laid up: spiritual comforts or
miseries are true, real; the temporal of either are but opinionative. Fear not
him, says Christ, that can kill the body, but fear him that can throw both
body and soul into hell. To conclude, Spiritual judgments are always inflicted
in displeasure, in the last place, as the forest of all, as a reckoning for all
other faults, when all other chastisements are despised: when God is showing
mercy, the last mercies are the best; and the further he goes in mercy, the
sweeter he is and when he is punishing, the last punishments are the forest;
and the further he goes, the bitterer he is: the judgment of pining away in
iniquity is the last of all that dismal catalogue, Lev. 26.39. The spirit of a
deep sleep is contiguous to hell it self: Rev. 22.11
he that is filthy, let him be filthy still, is the last judgment we read of
(befalling in this life) in all the new Testament; yea the more God inflicts
it, the more he is provoked to inflict it; outward punishments move God to
pity; but this being a sin as well as a punishment, the more it lies upon man,
the more it offends God.

2. Observe. 2
All the sinful sleepiness of Saints differs much from that of the wicked;
Cant. 5.2.
I sleep, but my heart awaketh (says the Spouse.) The godly have ever in them
a regenerate principle, that is waking when they seem to be most sleeping, and
that is contending against natural self. The godly (as one speaks) are more
pained and laborious in their sleep, Laboriosius dormiunt quam vigilare
potucrunt.
then in their waking; it more troubles them to be idle, then to do their Lords
work; their souls yield not to that slothfulness wherewith their senses are
overtaken. Sensual sinners sleep all at once, all in them, and of them sleeps,
but the Saint keeps his heart watchful. The very business of the wicked is but
vanity and dreams, but the sleeps of the godly are busy and vigilant; the
wicked sleeps and trifles, when he is most serious to work his wickedness; but
when the righteous sleeps, his heart rises and works upwards toward God,
in whom only he finds rest when thus employed. The wicked man sleeps and loves
to sleep, lays himself to sleep, shuts the door, draws the curtains, puts out
the candle, charge that none wake him; but a Saint is like a man overtaken
with sleep against his will, who is surprised with it, as with an armed man;
and being never so sound asleep, but he is between sleeping and waking, he
always even then fears he sleeps, and wishes he were awaked, and would be
glad, if any would take the pains to rouse him, though by making the loudest
noise, and giving him the most violent jog; yea will gladly accept of the
smartest blows, and the bloodyest stripes; that the Lord lays upon him, if by
all he may be awakened from his slothfulness. He complains of himself, and he
is sensible of his sleeping; I sleep (says the Spouse;) and so far as she
says she sleeps, she did not sleep. To conclude this, she wakes in her heart,
though the outward man sleep; but the heart of sinners sleeps (as we say of one
sometime, his heart is asleep) even when he is awake: Sometime a Christian
under a tentation may be so low brought, as that his spiritual life runs all
to the heart, and the outward man is left destitute; as in war, when the enemy
has won the field, the people run into the City; and if beaten out of the
City, they run into the Castle; the grace of God sometimes fails in the outward
action, the field, when yet it retireth to the heart, in which fort it is
impregnable: From all which I gather, that as the wicked should not flatter
himself, so neither should the godly be disheartened by spiritual sleeping; and
the reason is, because their sleeps are so unlike to one another.

3. Self-soothing, delusion, flattering, are very dangerous and destructive, as
being the foundation of the wickedness and woe of these seducers, these
dreamers; nothing against which we are more cautioned in Scripture: If a man
think himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives himself. Gal.
1.3. Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers, deceiving your own selves. Be
not deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 6.7. James speaks of those who by seeming
to be religious, deceived their own hearts. Jam. 1.26. Ephraim said, 1 Cor.
6.9. 1 Cor. 15.33. Obad. 3. Isa. 44.20. Job 15.31.
Yet am I become rich, I have found me out substance, in all my labors they
shall find no iniquity in me, that were sin, Hos. 12.8. Because he was
wealthy, he soothed himself in his sin. Laodicea flattered her self, that she
was rich, increased with goods, and had need of nothing, Rev. 3.17. He
flattereth himself in his own eyes, Psalm 36.2. 1 John 1.8. If we say that we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, etc. 1 Cor. 3 18. Let no man deceive
himself: Nothing can be so dangerous as when one so near as ones self becomes
false and flattering. When the Sentinels and Guards of a City are treacherous,
how great and unavoidable is the destruction thereof ^ when he who should be
his own preserver, becomes his own destroyer, how sore and sure a destruction
he does incur, and how great is the indignity hereof! There Is nothing under
which men are so impatient, and which they can less abide, then to be deceived
and circumvented by others; and yet how unworthily patient are men in being
deceived by themselves, or rather by the deceitfulness of sin; nothing is
accounted so great a disgrace, as to be deceived in those things, which ought
to be best known, and most familiar to a man: and what should be so well known
to thy self, as thy self? In nothing are men so fearful of being deceived, as
in matters of greatest moment; and what business in the world of so weighty
concernment, as the salvation of thy own soul? Nor does the dreafullest
judgment fall upon any so dreadfully, as upon the self-flatterer and deluder;
the same judgment which befalls him with others, makes him more miserable then
others, because he expected to be more happy then others. How woeful is that
Hell into which a sinner falls by presuming of Heaven! Its a Hell upon earth,
for sinners to dream that they are going to Heaven. An imaginary happiness in
sin occasions a doubled woe and misery for sin: when our natural dreams are
false, its better they should be of bad then good, of fearful things then of
joyful. Its better for a King to dream himself to be a beggar, then for a
beggar to dream that he is a King; for when the King waketh, his grief is gone,
and his joy is doubled, he then seeing the vanity of his dream; but when the
Beggar wakes, his former grief is increased, and returns the fiercer, by reason
of the false joy of his dream. And thus it is in the deceitful dreams and
dotages of the heart: far better is that deceit whereby a son of God thinks
himself a slave of Satan, then that whereby a slave of Satan dreams himself a
member of Christ. Better it is for Nebuchadnezzar being a man to think himself
a beast, then for a beast to think himself a man. A man's false conceit of
misery when indeed he is happy, does not make him miserable, but rather
occasions his happiness; but a man's false apprehension of happiness, he being
miserable, is so far from making him happy, that it makes him doubly miserable.
To conclude this, as nothing is so calamitous, as to dream of happiness when we
are in misery, so nothing is more common; Its natural for men to think too well
of themselves, to nullify others, and to deifie and omnifie themselves.
There Is nothing so easy as to be deceived, to dream of false delight, and to
neglect true danger; men are naturally witty in nothing but in deluding, and
thereby in damning their own souls; like a man who, being to pass over a narrow
Bridge, under which is a deep River, puts on a pair of Spectacles before his
eyes, whereby he adventuring upon a supposed and imaginary breadth, falls into
the water, and so is drowned.

To prevent then this self-flattery and delusion, 1. Be much in conversing with
that faithful discoverer, and friend, the Word of God. Let it be the man of thy
counsel, and dwell richly in thee. A man has many flatterers, and but this one
friend. This is an impartial glass that will represent to a King his, as well
as to a beggar his spots. Heb. 4.12.
It is quick and powerful, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, discerning the thoughts of the heart, and making manifest the intents
of the heart. When Ahab enquired of his false Prophets concerning his going up
to Ramoth Gilead, Jehoshaphat aks, whether there was not a Prophet of the Lord,
that they might enquire of him also. When thou hear the flatterings of thine
own false heart, rather fear then follow them; at least suspend thy belief till
thou have enquired of the Word of God. 2. Search thoroughly and diligently into
the grounds and reasons upon which thy heart would needs persuade thee of thy
happiness. He that has to do with Cheaters, will not easily believe all they
say; The simple believes every word; but the wise man, as he ponders his own
words before he utters them, so the words of another before he credits them.
Let not thy heart persuade thee of thy good condition, by laying before thee
common marks, which may agree even with hypocrites; as external profession, an
orthodox judgment, opposing of Error, or pleading for the Truth, attending upon
Ordinances, freedom from scandalous sins, some sweet and sudden motions of
heart in holy Duties; but ever build upon such marks as will necessarily infer
sincerity and a principle of saving grace in the heart; such as have some
singular excellency in them which an hypocrite cannot reach, a (...) (as Christ
speaks) something more then others ordinarily attain, things which always
accompany salvation, Heb. 6.9. 3 Possess thy heart with an apprehension of Gods
presence. Set thy self as in his eye: Consider though thou may baffle thy
conscience, yet not the eye of Gods Omnisciency. Never think thou art out of
the reach of his hand, or the view of his eye: Psalm 44.17.21.
Tell thy conscience (as the Church speaks) there is no dealing falsely, for
shall not God search it out, who knows the secrets of the heart? Would not a
Malefactor speak truly at the Bar, did he know the Judge had windows into his
breast? Vitia nostra, quia amamus, defendimus; and mal^mus excusare illa quam
excutere. Sen. Ep. 116.
4. Look not upon thy self through the spectacles of self-love. A man that is
in love with any thing, thinks the blemishes and deformities of the thing
beloved to be beauties and Ornaments. Self-love makes shadows to be
substances, and mole-hills to be mountains. Let not affection bribe or throw
dust into the eye of thy judgment. The more thou love thy self, the more thou will desire to appear amiable, and adorned with a specious and seeming
goodness. Joseph loved his bro her Benjamin, and he gave him five changes of
raiment. Till thou denyest thy self, and putest off the person of a friend,
thou will never put on the person of a just Judge. Study to know thy self as
thou art in thy self, not as thou art partially represented to thy self. Be not
like Limners, who so as thy can make a man's picture gay and gaudy, Luke 6.48.
care not to draw it so as to resemble him. The want of true humiliation and
denial of our selves, is the ground of all self-flattery and heart delusion:
Gold must be melted and dissolved, before it can be defecated and rid of the
dross. Bodies full of vicious humors must be emptied by purgation, before they
can come to an healthful state. Crooked things cannot be made strait without
the wringing and bowing of them by the hand. The greater our humiliation, the
greater our integrity.

4. Observe. 4.
Its our wisdom to take heed of spiritual sleeping in sin. For which purpose,

1 Make much of a stirring Ministry. Love that preaching most which is most
exciting. The Word preached is both light and noise, both which disquiet
sleepers. A still easy Minister, makes a sleepy drowzie people. Ministers must
stir those who sleep in sin, though they stir them up to rage. They must be
sins of Thunder against sinners, not sweet singers and pleasant Musicians: No
employment requires so much holy vehemence and fervor as the welfare of souls.
Cry aloud (says God to his Prophet) and lift up thy voice as a Trumpet: and
people should be so far from blaming the loudness of the sound of the Word,
that they should only blame the depth of their own slumber. They should ever
take part with the Word against their lusts, and entreat God that his word may
be an awakening, though it be a displeasing voice; as also, that he would cry
in the ears of the soul by the voice of his own Spirit, and to stir it in the
Ministry with his own arm for indeed otherwise Ministers shall rend their own
sides, before they rowze their peoples souls.

2. Labor for a fruitful improvement of sufferings. Beseech the Lord that no
affliction may blow over without benefit to thy soul. None sleep so soundly as
they who continue sleeping under the greatest joggings. Physic, if it works
not, is hurtful to the Patient. If thou art so close nailed to thy sin, that
afflictions cannot part it and thee, its a provocation to God to leave thee,
Isai. 1 5.
and an encouragement to Satan that he shall keep thee. God is never more
displeased then when he takes away judgments in judgment; then when he
punishes by delivering thee from thy trouble, and delivers thee up to thy own
heart. Oh beg earnestly of God, that the blessed opportunities of suffering
times, may never leave thee as bad as they found thee; for if so, they will
leave thee worse; and that no wind may go down till it have driven thee nearer
thy Haven.

3 Endeavor for a tender trembling heart at the very beginning of the
solicitations of sin. That which makes way for eternal, takes away spiritual
feeling. Men sleep by little and little, from slumber they fall to sleeping.
Every sin neglected, is a step downward to a deep sleep. A deluge of sin is
made up of several drops: Prove. 5.22.
Many knots tied one upon another will hardly be loosed. Every sin repeated,
and not repented of, binds down the soul in insensibleness and sloth. Dum
servitur libidini, facta est consuetudo; et dum consuctudini non resistatur,
facta est necessi^as. Aug. ^onf. l 8. c. 5.
Every sin suffered to defile the conscience, makes it the more regardless of
it self. Sin is of an incroaching nature; like a small River, it grows in
going; like a Gangreen, it creeps by degrees. The deceitful modesty of sin by
asking little at first, quickly enticeth us to more Small beginnings, usher
large proceedings: One bit draws down another. As every good work increases
our ability for obedience, so every sin leaves upon the soul a readiness for
further disobedience. The not resisting the first inclination to sin, makes way
to stupefaction by sin. He who dares not wade to the ancles, is in no danger of
being swallowed up.

4 Labor for faith in threatenings. Restrain not belief only to what God has
promised. Let faith comprehend all Truths in its vast bosom, and overcome all
the improbabilities that seem to keep away Judgment, as well as those that seem
to keep away Mercies. Noah was not drowned in a deep sleep of sin, and in a
deluge of waters with the old world; and the reason was, faith taught Noah to
fear, Hebr. 11.
and fear (that watchful Grace) prevented feeling. Faith makes a man solicitous
for a while, and safe to eternity. Natural^y we are more moved with fear, then
stirred with hopes.

5 Vigorously and constantly exercise thy self in Godliness. Never think thou
have done enough. Think not thy work is ended til thy life is ended. Take heed
of remisness in holy Duties: Fervency of spirit is by the Apostle joined with
serving of the Lord. Romans 12.11.
Let the Tempter ever find thee employed: The night comes when no man can work,
John 9.4.
but as long as the day lasts no man must loyter. As sleep causes idleness, so
idleness causes sleep. Strive to attain to the highest pitch of grace, and yet
ever be working, as if thou were at the very lowest, Phil 3.13.
Forget those things (as the Apostle speaks) which are behind. Take heed of
turning thy spur into a bridle, namely, of making that former practice of
holiness, which should be an inducement to thy further active progress, an
hinderance from proceeding therein. All the steps we have taken are lost, if we
give over before the race be run.

6 Keep company with waking Christians; such as neither dare sleep in sin
themselves, nor suffer any to sleep who are near them. In the sweating sickness
(they say) that they who were kept awake by those who were with them, escaped;
but their sickness was deadly if they were suffered to sleep. The keeping one
another awake is the best fruit of the communion of Saints. Heb. 10.24, 25
The Apostle speaks of provoking one another to love and good works, of
exhorting, or calling upon one another.

7 Watch over thy self in the use of such things as are in themselves lawful.
In lawful things there is least fear, and therefore most danger. More perish by
meat then by poison; because every man takes heed of the hurtfulness of the
latter, and fears not any harm by the former. Satan lies in ambush behind our
lawful enjoyments. Christ was once lost at a feast, and often since in worldly
abundance: Prosperity never waked any out of sin. It Is as hard to be full and
watchful, as to be empty and contented. Luke 21.34.
Sobriety and Vigilance are put together. Take heed lest the vapors of sensual
enjoyments overwhelm thee: Let the things of this life be thy Solatia, not thy
Negotia; thy refreshments, not thy employments; use them as the things, not for
which thou do live, but without which thou can not live. They who are
inclined to be gross in their bodies, should use much exercise; and they who
have abundance in the world, should take much pains with their hearts, lest
while they get the world, they lose their God.

VER. 9. Yet Michael the Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he disputed
about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but
said, The Lord rebuke thee.
THese words contain an aggravation of that heinous sin wherewith our Apostle
had charged these Seducers in the foregoing verse; their Crime was, their
speaking evil, or blaspheming of Dignities: the greatness of this sin, the
Apostle evidenceth and evinceth, by comparing of it with the contrary meek and
humble carriage of the Archangel, even toward the worst of creatures, the
Devil himself.

This comparison the Apostle first, Propounds, ver. 9 wherein he describes the
meek and humble carriage of the Archangel toward the Devil in his contending
with him.

2 He accommodates and applies it to these Seducers, ver. 10.

1 In the comparison propounded in ver. 9 there is intimated a threefold
amplification of the sin of these Seducers, by comparing it with the deportment
of the Archangel.

1 In respect of the persons compared; and this branch of the Comparison is
double. 1 Between a chief Angel and vile men. 2 Between Magistrates and the
Devil. 1 If Michael an Angel, an Archangel, durst not rail; how impudent and
proud are men, dust and ashes, to adventure to do so? 2 If he did forbear to
revile the Devil himself, the enemy of God and his Church, the worst of evil
ones, and one who was his inferior, how great was their sin, who would speak
evil of Magistrates, called Gods, and set up by him, as those to whom they
ought to be in subjection?

2 The second branch of the Comparison, whereby their sin is amplified, was
from the different cause about which the Angels and these Seducers were
employed. The cause for which the Archangel contended was good, clear, and
righteous; namely, the burial of the body of Moses; a work very good, whether
we consider the Authority of him who enjoined it, God himself; or the end of
the injunction, the preservation of the people from Id^latry: but the cause
which these Seducers had undertaken was wicked and sinful, considering that it
was the blaspheming of that Order which was instituted and ordained by God
himself, Tit. 3.1. Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.18.
and by his special command to be highly honored and esteemed.

The third branch of the comparison, whereby the Apostle heightens their sin,
was the different carriage and deportment of the Archangel toward the Devil,
from that of these Seducers toward Magistrates. 1 The Archangel reasons
humbly, and disputes; the Seducers peremptorily determine the question, pass
sentence and give judgment: The Angel commits his cause to God, and appeals to
him for redress and relief; the Seducers are Judges in their own cause, break
their bounds, detract from Gods Authority, and usurp his Throne. The Angel in
the fervor of contention, when most highly provoked, was patient and humble;
these provoked by none rage and revile. These are the particular branches of
the comparison, set down this verse.

If it were needful, before I come to the handling of these several parts of
the verse, to premise any thing by way of vindication of it, and the whole
Epistle from the Exception of those who alledg that the Epistle is not
Canonical, because the contention about the body of Moses is not mentioned in
Scripture, but was only a tradition. I might answer

1 With Learned Junius, the substance of this History is mentioned in
Scripture; Deuteronomy. 34 6.
therein we finding that the Lord buried Moses, and that none knows of his
Sepulcher unto this day; so that it is plain the body of dead Moses was buried
by God, i.e. either by his own immediate power, or by the instumrental power of
an Angel, (as seems from this place most probable) and also that the particular
place of his burial was altogether unknown to men and devils. It Is true, the
Scripture mentious not circumstances, either a contention of Michael with the
Devil, or the carriage and expressions of either party in that contention. But
therefore

2 Though these passages here set down by Jude be not expressed in the Sacred
Story, yet it is sufficient for us, that they are now by the Apostle, who was
led by the Spirit of God, inserted into holy Writ. Possibly (as Rivet notes)
this story was not delivered to the Apostle by tradition, but revealed to him
by the Holy Ghost. Some indeed say, (...), l 3. c. 2.
it was taken out of a certain (uncertain) book, called the Ascension of Moses,
and mentioned by Origin. Others, that it was handed by tradition from
generation to generation. But granting either of the two last. Is the Divine
authority, either of this passage, or of the Epistle, therefore to be doubted
of? by the same reason sundry other places of Scripture must be questioned:
frequently does the Spirit of God in the Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.8.
set down that as done in former stories, which was not at all there mentioned,
as Jannes and Jambres their withstanding of Moses; Heb. 11.21.
Jacobs worshipping on the top of his staff; Moses his saying that the sight
upon the Mount was so terrible, Heb. 11.21. Psalm. 105.18.
that I exceedingly fear and tremble; that Joseph's feet were hurt with fetters,
and that he was laid in Irons, etc. Yea how ordinary is it for the Penmen of
Scripture to make use of sentences taken out of Heathen Poets? as that of
Menander, 1 Cor. 15 33. Evil communication corrupts good manners. Of
Epimenides, Tit. 1.12. The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow
bellies. Of Aratus, Acts 17.28. In him we live, and move, and have our being.
The Spirit of God which could sanctify passages taken out of Heathens, and
make them Canonical, might do the like by this relation or tradition (if it
were so) of the Archangels contention with the Devil, and by putting of the
Apostle upon the inserting of it, give it the stamp of divine authority, and so
render it to us most certain and infallible; and by this we at once answer both
those who reject this Epistle, because Jude brings an example from tradition,
no where recorded in Scripture; as likewise the Papists, who offend in the
other extreme of excess, from hence pleading for a liberty in the Church to
join traditions with the Holy Scripture; whereas they can neither prove that
the Apostle had this story by tradition, (for why might not the Spirit of God
reveal to the Apostles what had been done before in ages past, as it did to the
Prophets what should be done afterward in ages to come?) nor that it is lawful
for us to do all that the Apostles might, who (as Rivet well notes) did many
things by a singular and peculiar right, Rivet. in Isai. p. 474. Apostoli
multis singulari jure usurparunt in quibus nemo debet aut etiam potest eos
imitari.
wherein none either ought or is able to imitate them. This premised briefly, I
come to the words of the Verse, wherein we have three parts considerable.

1. The Combatants: Michael the Archangel, and the Devil. 2. The Strife and
Contention it self; set down, 1. More generally; so its said, they contended.
2. More particularly; and so it was a disputation about the body of Moses.
3. The Carriage of the Archangel in this Contention, which was twofold: 1.
Inward, in respect of his disposition, set down Negatively; he durst not bring
a railing accusation. 2. Outward, in respect of his expression, set down
Affirmatively; He said, the Lord rebuke thee.

1. First, Of the parties contending, Michael the Archangel, and the Devil.

EXPLICATION.
In the Explication whereof, we shall consider, First, Michael the Archangel,
who is described two ways; or from a double Name, 1. Of his Person, and so he
is called Michael. 2. Of his Office and Place, and so he is called an Archangel.

The Name of his person is Michael. This Name signifies, who is as, or like, or
equal unto God. But who this person should be, learned men agree not: Some
conceive that the Son of God, the second Person of the Trinity is here called
Michael: Others, that an holy, and created Angel, is here by Jude intended by
the Name of Michael; and that as by the Name of Gabriel, so likewise of
Michael, a certain Angel is to be understood. And that this latter is the true
opinion, seems to me undeniable for these reasons. 1. Because Michael, (Dan.
10.13.) is called one of the chief Princes, that is of the chief Angels or
Archangels; but how this can fitly be spoken of Christ, I understand not, whom
we must not account one of the number of the Angels, but one without, or rather
infinitely above that number, or order, even the omnipotent Creator of Angels,
as well as men, Col. 1.16. 2. An Angel verse. 21. of the forenamed Chapter,
describing the difficulty of his work, tells Daniel, that there was none that
held with him, Inepta and filio Dei indigna oration. Gom. de Nom. Mich. Tom. 1.
p. 107. and Tom. 2. p. 217.
or strengthened him, but Michael: But this expression (as learned Gomarus
notes) seems to be unfitly applied unto Christ, because there can be no greater
strength named then that of Christ, whose power is infinite. To say, There Is
none with me but the Son of God, seems an harsh expression; he who has the Son
of God to stand by him wanting no other. 3. Jude call, this Michael an
Archangel: but as we never read in Scripture that Christ is called an
Archangel, or a chief, or the chief Angel; so 1 These. 4.16. we find that Christ
and the Archangel are manifestly distinguished, the Apostle saying, that The
Lord shall descend from heaven with the voice of an Archangel. 4. It seems also
to be very unmeet to say of Christ, that he durst not bring against the Devil,
a railing accusation, Christ being the Lord and Judge of Devils, and whom he
shall at the last day condemn to eternal punishment: yea we find Joh. 8.44.
that he passed judgment upon him, and pronounced him a murderer, one that has
no truth in him, a liar, and the father of a lie; a sentence, which the Angel
here disputing with the Devil (though he had just cause, yet) durst not utter,
he only saying, The Lord rebuke thee. 5. The Apostle Peter speaking of this
very matter, 2 Pet. 2.11.
and aggravating the sin of these seducers by this humble carriage of their
Superiors, plainly speaks not of Christ, but of the holy Angels, he saying
thus, whereas Angels which are greater in power and might, bring not a railing
accusation, etc. Nor does the Argument drawn from the signification of the name
Michael, prove, that by Michael we are here to understand the Son of God. This
word Michael, by Interpretation (say some) is, qui sicut Deus, (and according
to them) imports one that is as, or equal to God, a name which (say they)
cannot agree to any creature. But its answered, that the Particle (...) in the
Hebrew is not here to be taken relatively, as signifying one who; but
interrogatively, Who is? and it is ever in Scripture so taken, Psalm. 89.8.
Esai. 44.7. Jer. 49.19. and 50.44.
when used in expressions wherein the Name of God is celebrated, as Exodus
15.11. Who is like unto thee? etc. So Psalm. 35.10. all my bones shall say. Lord
who is like to thee? So Psalm. 71.19. And thus the giving of this name Michael
to the creature, is no dishonouring of God, by making it equal to God; Est
confessio majestatis Dei, non alienatio illius a Deo. Gomarus.
but rather an advancing of God by an humble Confession or acknowledgment of
the matchles majesty of that gloririous God, whom none can equalize. And hence
it is, that as the name Micaiah is imposed upon one who was an holy Prophet; so
this name Michael is in Scripture frequently found to be imposed by the people
of God on their children; Numb. 13.13. 1 Chronicles. 5.13. 2 Chronicles. 21 2. 2 Chronicles.
20.
Yea Jehoshaphat gave this name to one of his sons, happily in token of
thankfulness for that glorious victory which in his reign God bestowed upon
him and all Judah. Fieri potest ut ob divinae gloriae zelum, nomen id impositum
sit isti angelo. Lor.
And possibly for the zeal of this Angel in vindicating the glory of God, was
this name Michael given him.

2. This first party contending, is described by the name of his office and
place, and so he is called the Archangel. It Is here demanded, 1. Whether he
were the only Archangel, the chief of all the rest of the Angels, or only one
of the Archangels, or chief Angels? 2. Wherein this Principality and
Superiority stands? Questions, whereof the Scriptures (and therefore we ought
to) speak sparingly.

1. For the first. The Scripture speaks not any where of Archangels in the
Plural number, nor of more then one Archangel. 1 These. 4.16. The Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with the voice of the Archangel: some conceive, that
as there is one chief of the evil Angels, called the Prince of the Devils, who
are called his Angels, (Matthew. 25. the Devil and his Angels) so likewise that
there is one chief or principal among the good Angels, and that he is this
Michael; and thus they understand that place of Rev. 12. where Michael and his
Angels are mentioned, as fighting with the Devil and his Angels. And diverse of
the popish Schoolmen account this Michael the Archangel to be superior to all
those three Hierarchies, and nine orders of Angels; (one whereof, they say, is
that of Archangels) which they boldly affirm to be in heaven.

The second question, Wherein the superiority and pre-eminence of this
Archangel stands, is more difficultly resolved then the former. The Schoolmen
following Dionysius, Gregory, and others, groundlesly assert, that the Angels
are distributed into three ranks and Hierarchies; and that every one of these
three, contain three several orders apiece. The first of the three ranks and
Hierarchies, they say, comprehends Cherubims, Seraphims, and Thrones; The
second, Dominions, Principaleties, and Powers: The third, Mights, Archangels,
and Angels. Nor do they only show their boldness in ranking and dividing them
thus into these three Hierarchies and nine orders, (for how can they precisely
assert that they should be thus marshaled in rank and file, distributed and
divided after this manner, and that there are just so many and no more orders
of Angels?) but they presume to tell us the reasons of all these several
appellations, and to set down the several properties and offices which are
allotted to all these orders of Angels, whereby they are distinguished among
themselves. The Seraphims (they say) are so called, because they are inflamed,
and inflame others with extraordinary and ardent love to God. The Cherubims are
named from their excelling in the light of knowledge: The Thrones are such who
contemplate and adore the judiciary equity and righteous judgments of God; and
the Angels (say they) who are contained in this first classis or order, are
never sent forth (a bold assertion and contrary to Scripture; which says, they
are all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs
of salvation) upon any ministry or employment, Heb. 1 14.
but their work is only to wait immediately upon God. In the second rank and
hierarchy, they tell us, that Dominions are those that govern and order all the
offices of the other Angels; Principalities such as are set over People, and
Provinces, Nations, as their keepers and Princes. Powers, such as are to
restrain and keep under the powers of devils. For the third rank, they dictate,
that those upon whom they put the title of Or Might, (...), Ephesians. 1.21.
Mights, have the working of miracles for their employment; that Archangels are
messengers employed by God in matters of greater and weightier concernment, and
Angels in lesser business. How audacious the vanity of these assertions is,
how much without, yea against the warrant of Scripture, its evident by the
naming of them. Where find we in Scripture, that Seraphims are either a
certain, or the first order of Angels, and that they are so called from their
ardent love of God? There Is nothing attributed to these Seraphims in Jsaiah 6.
verse 2. where they are mentioned, which may not agree to all the rest of the
Angels; nor can it thence be proved, that they are called Seraphims from their
ardent love to God. The word Seraphim in the Hebrew signifies (...),
incensores, such who set on fire: Its a name given to the fiery Serpents Number.
21.6.8. and it is much more probable, that they are so called not from their
office or inward gifts, but from their external likeness wherein they
appeared. As Ezekiel cap 1.13. speaks of the living creatures, that their
appearance was like burning coals of fire, and like the appearance of Lamps.
Nor can it be proved from the signification of the word Cherubim, that they are
so called from their great knowledge; for though some (indeed) say, the word
Cherub signifies, From (...), sicut multitudo.
as a multitude (which yet must be far fetched, to import the abundance of
their knowledge); yet others more probably conceive, that it signifies as young
men, or intimates their appearance in a winged shape; and so indeed by the
command of God they were shadowed out, Exodus 25.18. Nor are they less mistaken
in making the overseeing and ruling of Provinces the work of Principalities;
for if any such thing belong to any Angels, it may be with more probability
attributed to the Archangel Michael, who (according to some learned men) is
said to be (under Christ) the Prince of the Jews. ( Dan. 10.21. it is said,
Michael your prince) It Is generally conceived by our more learned and modest
interpreters, that those several expressions of Thrones, Ephesians. 1.21. Col.
1.16. Ephesians. 3.10.
Dominions, Principalities, Powers; do not signify purely the same thing, but
diverse orders and ranks of Angels; and this they prove from the dis-junctive
particle, or, put between Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, as also
from that place of Dan. 10.13. where Michael is said to be one, or the first of
the chief Princes; likewise from the title of an Arch, or chief Angel. Lastly,
because there is an order among the Devils, which they lost not with their
integrity at there fall; but what and wherein this order among the Angels should
consist, and how they differ, they modestly profess they dare not determine;
that its curiosity to enquire into; and rashness to define this secret; that
this is a learned ignorance: and herein Augustine joins with them, who says,
Quid inter sc distant has vocabula dicant qui possunt, si tamen possunt probare
quod dicunt. Ego me ista ignorare confiteor. Enchirid. c. 58.
How those names of Angels differ, let them speak who are are able, if yet they
are able to prove what they speak; I profess my ignorance herein. And this by
way of Explication of the first Party here contending, Michael the Archangel:
It follows, that we speak of the second, who is here said to be the Devil.

2. Of the word Devil (in the Greek (...)) I meet with sundry Interpretations
among the learned. Some, as Gerson and Bonaventure say, that the word signifies
falling q. Deorsum fluens. Gerson Tr. in Magnificat. Bonavent. l. 2. Sent.
did. 5. q. 1. Dictus est Diabolus, quia deorsum fluxit, and ex hoc in sua
malitia firmatus est. Diabolus non valens conscendere, sed compulsus
descendere, odit Deum justum, and invidet excellentiae ejus.
and tending downward, and the Devil (say they) not being able to keep up in
his former height of glory and excellency, but compelled to descend from it, is
not to be moved from his malice. Others also with more wit then strength, say,
that the Word Diabolus comes from Dia (which they say, is as much as two,) and
Bolus, signifying a draught, taken up in a Fishers net, because when the Devil
draws man into his net, he makes of him (as it were) a double draught, by
destroying both body and soul: The ordinary and true derivation of the word is
from (...), to slander, calumniate, and falsely to accuse; and hence the
appellative name of Devil is often in Scripture used for any false accuser:
thus Judas is called Devil, Joh. 6.70 One of you (says Christ) is a devil. 1 Timothy 3.11. The wives of Deacons must not be (...), slanderers, and 2 Timothy 3.3.
The Apostle speaks of some who are treacherous, false accusers, or devils, etc.
So Tit. 2.3. concerning the aged women he says, that they must not be false
accusers, or Devils; in which sense some understand that command of Ephesians. 4.27.
Give not place to the Devil, or to any false accuser, or slanderer, who shall
come with slanderous reports against another; the Apostle giving that precept
as a direction to the observing of what went immediately before; namely, that
the Sun should not go down upon our wrath. False accusers being make-bates and
kindle-coals between persons, are to be opposed and resisted. More specially,
the word Devil is taken for an evil spirit, or Angel, Mat. 13.39. Luc. 8.12.
Acts 10.38. and 13.10. 1 Pet. 5.8. 2 Timothy 2.26, etc. and yet more specially the
term Devil is attributed to the chief or Prince of Devils, called so by way of
eminency. Mat. 4.1. he tempted Christ. Apoc. 12.7. he and his Angels fight with
Michael and his. See Mat. 25.41. Thus it is taken here. And clear reason there
is why Satan should thus be called a slanderer, or false accuser. Some say,
because of his accusing of God to man, and that principally by that first
accusation, falsehood, by saying, notwithstanding what God had threatened, that
they should not die: and of Envy, by telling them, that God knew that in the
day they did eat thereof, they should be like gods; And this is the opinion of
Justin Martyr, (...). Justin in Paraen. ad Graec. p. mihi 21.
in that excellent exhortation of his to the Greeks: The Scriptures (says he)
call that enemy of mankind, the Devil, from that first slander or calumny which
he brought to man; And thus he is still a slanderer, laying his accusations
sometimes against Gods Justice, persuading sinners that God allows them in
their sins, Sic Tert. 2. Cont. Marc. cap. 10. Deo imposuit prohibitionem esus
omnis ligni, mendacem comminationem mortis, invidiam cujusdamdivinitatis. Vide
Chrysostom. hom 2. in 2. Ep. ad Corinth.
so driving them to presume: sometimes laying them against his mercy,
persuading those who are humbled, that their sins are greater then can be
forgiven, so driving them to despair: sometime against his faithfulness,
omniscience, etc. frequently against his providence, making men believe that
God has no care of the ordering and governing of things in the world; the good
are miserable, and the wicked happy. When Christ was on Earth, he was accused
by the Devil to be an Impostor, that cast out Devils by the help of Beelzebub,
etc. Falsely did he accuse God to Christ, by clipping his word, and perverting
the Scripture to a pernicious sense.

2. He is (according to others) called an accuser, for accusing man to God.
This is the opinion of Lactantius. The Devil (says he) is called an accuser,
because for those very faults to which he tempts and allures us, Vid. Chrysostom.
ubi supra. Diabolum criminatorem vocamus, propterea quod crimina in quae ipse
allicit, ad Deum defert. Lact. lib. 2. Instit. cap. 8.
he accuses us, by laying them before God. The accuser of the brethren (Rev.
12) is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night. He objecteth
things before God for the disgrace and hurt of the godly. Thus he accused
Joshuah the High Priest, for his sins noted by filthy garments, Zech. 3.1, 3.
As also Joh, for self-seeking. Satan espies the least sins in them, these he
aggravates, and for them pleads their unworthiness of the least mercy, the sins
which in them are weaknesses, he represents as wickednesses; the sins which
they condemn in themselves, and for which they condemn themselves, he lays
before God to have him also condemn them for them claiming the justice of the
Law, and the execution of the curse against, and upon them. This accuser
diminishes, wresteth their best actions, as if performed to a wrong end, and
hypocritically; thus he accused Job of serving God only for wages, hereby
representing all his services to be void of sincerity. In nothing is the malice
of Satan so clearly discovered as in accusing the godly before God. For 1.
Hereby he shows his desire to do them the greatest hurt, which is to bring
them out of favor with God, to separate them from their only friend, by being
a talebearer and slanderer, Revel. 12. He accused them before our God. And 2.
Such is his malice, that he will endeavor that which he can but endeavor,
never effect; yea in the undertaking whereof he is sure to miscarry: Oppose
them he will, though hurt them he cannot, and is sure to hurt himself; putting
forth his poison, though he have no power; he accusing Saints before a God who
sees the falsness of his accusations, whose Power, Justice and Mercy ever makes
him rebuke the accusing Devil, Zech. 3.1, 2, 3.
and pity the accused Saints. And in respect of this accusing the Faithful to
God, I conceive that Satan is principally called, (1 Pet. 5.8.) Our Adversary:
in the Original, (...), a word that properly signifies an Adversary pleading or
contending against another before a Judge in judgment; in which sense its used
Matthew. 5.25. Lest thy adversary, (...), deliver thee to the Judge, etc. so Luke
12.58. When thou go with thine adversary, (...), to the Magistrate; so that
when the Apostle calls the Devil Our adversary, he intends that he is our
adversary by way of accusing us before the Judge of Heaven and earth. And very
fitly may this our Accuser be called an (...), or adversary in judgment,
because he who contends with another before a Judge, commonly labors to pervert
his cause by slanders and false accusation* which (as has been said) aptly
agrees to this our adversary; and hence it may be, 1 Chronicles. 21.1 Job 1, 6.
Z^ch. 3.^.
that when the Septuagint meet in the Old Testament with the Hebrew word Satan,
an adversary, they translate it by the Greek word (...), a false accuser.

Thirdly, Our enemy is here called the Devil, or false Accuser, because he
accuses one man to another; stirring up hereby strife and contention between
man and man: and as sometimes he accuses the Godly to one another, as plain
hearted Mephibosheth to David (his Divellish stratagem in these times;) so most
commonly he accuses the Godly to the wicked: Thus he accused Joseph of
Incontinency, David of Treason, Daniel of Disobedience, Elijah of troubling
Israel, Jeremy of revolting, Amos of preaching against the King; the Apostles
of Sedition, Rebellion, alteration of Laws; Paul was accused to be a pestilent
fellow, and one that taught against the Law of Moses; Christ himself was
accused of Gluttony, Sorcery, Sedition; and how skilful a Master he is in this
hellish Art of false accusation, appears in that he accuses the Faithful,
though never so innocent; devising what he cannot find, Jer. 18.18. nay, not
only though they are, but even because they are holy; for the matter of their
God, for Praying, Hearing, Fasting, keeping Sabbath, Preaching the Truth. He
accuses them often by those who are tied to them by dearest relations, David of
Injustice by Absalom. He accuses all the Godly for one man's offense, Thus they
are all, etc. nay, for a personal failing in one or two, he accuses the whole
Religion it self; railing against the Sun, because one has stumbled in the
Sunshine. He has an Art to accuse for that, whereof himself and his are most
guilty; thus he accused Joseph of Incontinency, Elijah of troubling Israel,
Christ of being an enemy to Caesar; yea, of that, to which the Accused are most
contrary, as in those instances appears, accusing even the Sun of darkness. And
God hereby makes their integrity more apparent, either here or hereafter:
Slanders are but as soap, which though it soyles for the present, yet it makes
way for whiteness: The Sun of their good fame shall break out gloriously from
under the cloud of slanders; God will bring forth their righteousness as the
light, Psalm. 37.6.
and their judgment as the noon day: yea, which is the greater advantage, the
smutchings of slanders shall brighten the Graces of Gods people, their
Humility, Peace, Watchfulness, Faith. The tongues of sinners are but as brushes
or rubbers to fetch off the dust which is but too ready to fall upon the graces
of Saints. The Devil is Satan, and therefore he is a Devil; he is an Adversary
to Christ, to Holiness: what will not malice say? Now Christ is gone beyond
Satan's reach, he throws the dirt of slanders upon his pictures, and on them
most, that are fairest and most resemble him; he loves to trouble them in their
way, whom he cannot hinder of the end. The Devil is a Serpent, and therefore he
is an Accuser; he has subtilty to invent, as well as malice to utter his
slanders. He is the god of the world, and has the tongues of wicked men at his
command: if he says to one, Go, it goes, etc. He has found the
successfulness of this Engine of accusation, he has murdered thousands with
it, and thereby ever brought Religion into suspicion and disgrace; he has many
receivers, he will therefore thieve away the names of Saints; his calumnies
easily enter, and hardly depart.

Fourthly, This adversary may here be called a Devil, an Accuser, because he
accuses a man to himself, and that in two respects: 1 He makes a man think
better of himself then he should; tells him he is going to Dothan, when he is
going to Samaria; that the way to Hell is the ready way to Heaven. As Absalom
told the people flatteringly, Thy cause is good; so he, Thy case is happy:
Strangling them often with a silken halter. 2 He makes men think their estate
worse then it is, by stretching the sins which he has drawn them to commit,
beyond all the measure of Mercy, and possibility of pardon, to bring the sinner
to despair. Thus he dealt with Cain and Judas. He who once told men, they might
repent when they would, and it would be time enough hereafter to call for
Mercy, now affrights them with apprehensions that the day of Grace is at an
end, and that it is too late to make their peace with God. He who was of late a
tempting, is now a tormenting Devil.

Hitherto of the Explication of this first part, the parties contending: the
Observations follow.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observe. 1.
The higher our Eminency is, the greater should be our humility. The more
glorious any one is for Endowments, the more humble should he be in the
beholding them. This Eminently glorious Angel, this Archangel has Humility
stamped upon his name: By it he does not ask, Know you not who I am? or Who is
so great as I? but Quis sicut Dominus, Who is like the Lord? The more thou art
above others in the height of place, the more should thou go beyond them in
the grace of humble-mindedness. Humility is an Angelical Grace. No Creature so
high as an Archangel; no Creature so humble as he, and the highest is the
humblest Angel. None so low as the Devil, and none so proud as he: The Devil
tempts Christ to worship him; the Archangel worships Christ. We must, though
high, take heed of high-mind edness. When we shine most with outward glory, we
must not know it; know it we must, so as to be thankful^ not so as to be proud.
What have we that we have not received? The more we have received, as the
greater shall be our account, so the greater should be our acknowledgment. They
who partake of most gifts do but proclaim' like beggars, that they have o^t^est
been at the door of mercy. When any great performance has been wrought by us,
we should ^ear to arrogate the praise thereof to our selves; herein imitating
Joab, who when he had as good as taken Rabbah the Royal City, 2 Samuel 12 27
sent messengers to David to come and complete the Conquest by taking it fully,
lest the City should be called after his name: He knew the jealousy of Kings
in point of Honor: he wisely might remember, that the attributing of more
thousands to Saul then to D^vid, though but by female sing^ers, had almost cost
David his life. God is jealous of his Honor, he will not give it to another,
nor might any one take it to himself, Of this largely in my former Part, Ver. 6
Page 486

2. The highest Dignity is to be much in duty. Observe. 2.
In this word Archangel, here is equally both comprised Superiority and
Service: an Archangel is in english but an high and supreme Messenger or
Waiter. The service of God is the glory of the highest Angel. How poor a
Creature would Michael have thought himself, had he not been a Messenger to
Christ! Its well observed by some that Angels are more frequently called by
their name of Office, then of Nature; oftener Angels, then Spirits; as if they
more delighted in their being dutiful, then in their very being. And a Saint is
as thankful that God will deign to be his Master, as a sinner is proud that he
can make men to be his own servants. The dosius the good Emperor, esteemed this
the highest of all his Titles, Vltimus Dei servus, The lowest servant of
Christ. A person is truly so honorable as he is useful. Paul's glory was not
that he had ruled and domineered, but labored more then they all; yea, in the
meanest services for Jesus Christ, not in planting of, and preaching to
Churches, or in governing them only, but in stripes, 2 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25
prisons, ^ourneyes, weariness, perils, hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness. The
meanest service about a King is honorable. Many think the glory of a Minister
^r Magistrate consists in Revenews, fat Benefices, large Incomes, shining
Retinue; but ask an Archangel, and he will say, it is in being a servant, a
messenger. How unglorious is a man in Scarlet, Purple, Gold, Crowns, nay, with
the most Eminent and Angelical parts, if he serve not Christ by all? He is at
best, but like a small letter in the midst of a great Gay; where there is,
though much flourish, little benefit, much hinderance to the Reader. Oh how
happy we, if among us every one in Eminency labored to join the Arch and the
Angel together! otherwise he who is most eminent in Dominion, may but prove an
arch Tyrant; eminent for Riches, an arch Usurer; eminent for Learning, an arch
Heretic.

3. Observe. 3
The sovereignty and dominion of God extends it self even to the highest of
created beings. Even from the lowest worm to the highest, the Archangel, all
are at the beck of the great God; as every soul must be subject to the higher
Power, so every soul and power must be subject to him who is the highest; he
who excepts himself, Qui se excipit, se decipit. Bern. ad Eugem.
deceives himself. The greatest are at Gods disposal; they must either be
voluntary servants or unvoluntary slaves. God is the God of the mountains, as
well as the valleys. He is indeed the God of the valleys to fill them, but the
God also of the mountains so as to be above them, to level and pull them down.
No proud Pharaoh must say, Who is the Lord, that I should let Israel go? Angels
are great and high, but God is greater. Angels excel us, but God even them in
strength, infinitely more then do they the lowest worm. If one Angel can slay
an hundred fourscore and five thousand; what can the God of Angels do? This
lessons both high and low; the higest adversary to take heed of opposing the
high God: Are they stronger then he? If he was a fool who thought himself wiser
then Daniel, much more is he such who thinks he is stronger then God. The
proudest Pharaohs, E^. k. 28 3.
Nebuchadnezzars must either break or bend; God will either be known of them,
or on them: The great design that God had in sending Nebuchadnezzar from his
Babel among the beasts, was, That he might learn this lesson* that the Lord
rules in the kingdom of men, Dan. 4.17
and gives it to whomsoever he will. This is his controversy with us still,
and never will it end, till he have prevailed over us, and be seen to have the
better of us. This subjection to God is that lesson which sooner or later every
one must learn. The true interest and wisdom of the greatest Potentates is to
learn it here in the way, lest they perish from it. It lessons also the poorest
Saints; as in all their privileges, God will yet be known to be their Lord, as
well as their friend, and therefore will be served with holy fear; so in all
their sufferings from their proud enemies, they may say with Solomon, There be
higher then they. Eccles 5.8.
The Lord on high is mightyer then the noise of many waters; yea, then the
mighty waves of the Sea. The great God is their good friend, he who has the
service of Angels, has goodness and protection for them. When the strongest
servant in the house beats and abuses them, the weakest child of God may say,
I Will tell my father: He can and will redress every Saints injury.

4. Great is the comeliness of order; Observe, 4
even Angels have and love it. There are Angels, and there is one (at least)
Archangel. In heaven, There must be a disparity among men, Unisons make no good
Music.
even among the creatures where God immediately manifests his presence, there
are Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers; what the difference^is, we know
not; that there is a difference, we know: Nay, the Devil, who is the great
enemy of order and government on earth, observes and upholds a kind of order
and rule in hell: Even there is a prince of Devils, and the Devil and his
Angels, (Though it is true, the most powerful devil is the most powerfully
wicked:) nor heaven, nor hell allow of a parity; though there be no good, yet
there is some order in hell; Holy Angels are no friends to levelling. They are
mistaken, phanatick spirits, who think it a point of perfection to be without
Superiors; would they be more perfect then the glorious Angels? The truth is,
they cry out for this liberty, that they may be in slavery to their lusts
(which government curbs;) and not so much for that they hate government (the
love whereof is implanted in all by the light of nature) as because they hate
those hands in which it is, they would fain get it into their own; and could
they once do so, tho none could govern so ill, yet none would govern so much as
themselves who most cry down ruling. They who most ^ppose Government in others,
most desire the Government over others* Evil angels, who will not be subject to
God, are most tyrannical over me^^ Satan, who would not continue in the
worshipping of God, tempted Christ to worship him. Order is the beauty and
safety of places. They who are weary of it, are weary of their own happiness.
But of this more before in Part 1. page 638

5. Observe. 5.
The devil is an hurtful spirit. His work is to do mischief; his name Devil
speaks him a Destroyer, and wounder of names; and all his names import
mischievousness. He and his angels are called Cacodaemons, Evil Angels,
frequently in Scripture, Evil Spirits; not evil only in regard of the bad which
is in them, but also of the hurt which is done by them. The Devil is Abadd^n,
Rev. 9 11.
Perdition; he is perdition or destruction it self; not only Passively, but
even Actively also; and as we call a wicked man, scelus, wickedness, for most
wicked; so is the Devil called perdition or destruction it self, because he is
the chief, Rev. 9 11.
cruel, skilful, industrious Destroyer, seeking whom he may devour; compassing
the earth, as a Fouler does the tree where the bird sits; or as Besiegers do a
City, to plant murdering Engines: He seeks not whom to scratch bite, or wound;
but whom to destroy, devour, swallow up ((...)) 1 Pet. 5.8. To Abaddon is added
his name in the Greek, whereby he is also noted to be acrue destroyer,
Apollyon: He is in Scripture called a murderer, an old bloody one, such from
the beginning. Compared also to a Lion, a Serpent, R^v. 12.3.
a Dragon, a red bloody, fiery ((...)) Dragon. He is bloody in being thirsty
after, and imbrued in blood, in all the blood of the Saints since the beginning
of the world: His Works prove him more hurtful then his Names. Hurtful he is to
the bodies of men; These he has often possessed, counting the tormenting of
them all his pleasure, and ejection out of them his torment: These he has
thrown into fi^e and water; cutting also and wounding them; rending them when
compelled to leave them; H^m^ mal^^ ^elam D^ab^^.
by his instruments (wicked men his weapons) mart^ring, mangling, and murdering
them, from Abel till now; afflicting them with no^som and destructive diseases
Hurtful to the Estates of men, by tempests, winds, fires, as appears by his
dealing with J^b, whom he made both in body and estate, his very anvil, upon
which he laid all his angry and cruel strokes. Hurtful he is to the souls of
men, either tempting to, corrupting in, or else tormenting or afrighting them
for sin. Hurtful to the name he is; by slanders and false accusations. They who
are freed from consuming by the former, shall not escape totally from sindging
by this latter Where he cannot devour with the mouth of the sword, he will
wound by the sword of the mouth* Where he cannot strike with his hand, he will
spit with his mouth, and bite with his teeth. And lastly, the properties of his
hurtfulness show it more then its workings; for he is anciently hurtful; he
began many thousand years ago with the first man: How hurtful do we account
that thief and murderer who has been mischievous for some few years! No
Muderer so old an one, as Satan. He is maliciously hurtful, not being so by
accident, or beside his intention, but aiming to be so. He kills none by
chance-medly, but all his Murders are wilful: it is his meat and drink, his
recreation, his only ease, if he could be said to have any. His hurtfulness is
incessant, his trade, his work, as well as his (...). He cannot give over this
Employment; it is his Element, nor can he any more live without it then a fi^h
out of the water. He is restless in sin; When he is not in places where he may
do much hurt, he is said to walk through dry places, a ba^re^, un-inhabitable
wilderness, and there he finds no rest; his only rest is an hurtful motion. A
sinner sleeps not till he sin; but the Devil always sins, and never s^eeps; he
is a vig^lant Dragon: He never rested one moment since the begin^^ng of the
world. As he never wanted, so he never would have rest: he has no Holy Days.
He gos up and down continually seeking whom he may devour: Upon the Sabbath as
much as, nay, more then other days; and he never does more hurt then when he
seems to do least; nay, when he seems to do most good. He is universally
hurtful in respect of the Object; he is hurtful (in intention at least) to all
mankind; to good and bad, to his enemies, yea his friends: to the former,
because the less he can, the more he would do. The more God loves, the more he
hates, and labors to hurt (as in all the forementioned respects.) He had
rather find one Pearl then a thousand pibbles. Oh how sweet to him is the fall
of a Peter, a David, a Noah! the blood of a Stephen, a Paul, a Godly Minister.
He winnowes the best wheat most, and beats the tree most that bears the best
fruit: Our great Lord himself must not go without his marks. Nay, he is hurtful
to his own greatest friends. Those he hurts most, who serve him most: A cruel
Master, that wounds and starves all his slaves! wounds the conscience, wears
out the body. Sinners are his hackneys, whom he whips and spurs all the day of
Life, and at night he lodges them worse then in the day he used them. Never
suffers he them to feed upon one morsel of the bread of Life; gives nothing but
wind and wormwood, vanity and vexation. Lastly, he is skilfully hurtful, he is
skilful to destroy, and has an equal mixture of the Lion and the Serpent. He
has seven heads, Revel. 12.3. and many devices in them all: Elimas full of all
subtilty, and mischief, Acts 13.10 is aptly therefore called the child of the
Devil. Our worst enemy sometimes comes to us as our best friend. He disguiseth
his person, like the Gibeonites, that so he may get within us. He seemed to Eve
to be more friendly then God himself. He often seems to compassionate the sinner;
to the profane he propounds an easy loose Religion; to the Proud he suggests
the unfitness of suffering himself to be trampled on, etc. He never kisseth,
but it is to kill; and this Crocodile never sheds tears but it is to shed blood.
He chooses his fittest times for his tentations, as in time of conversing in
bad company, so he set upon Peter: in time of solitariness, so he set upon
Christ and Joseph. In times of trouble of conscience, then he suggests we are
hypocrites; like Simeon and Levi, who killed the Shechemites in their soreness.
In times of security and ease, so he set upon David: like enemies who fall upon
one another Quarters in their midnight sleep. If he cannot hinder from good,
he can blemish it by sinful means; an undue manner, a bad end. He can by a
thousand Arts disparage a holy Duty to those that behold it, if he does not mar
it in the performance This hurtfulness of the Devil shows whom they resemble,
that are never well themselves but when they are doing something that may make
others bad, or do them hurt. Whose only work is to pull down, and pluck up, to
tear and rend; to lay gins and snares, not for beasts, but men; to search out
iniquities, and to accomplish a diligent search: who are skilful to destroy,
but ignorant how to build up. How unlike are these to him who went up and down
continually doing good? It likewise discovers the goodness and power of God, in
stopping this hurtful Creature, in bounding him within his limits, in binding
him in chains of restraint; so that though he wills to do what (nay more then)
he can, yet he shall never do what he will, nor often what he can. It teaches
us to make him our friend who only has care and goodness to countervail the
Devils cruelty. O miserable they whose souls do, and shall ever dwell among
Lions, in a Godless, Christless, Shepherdless state. Lastly, it instructs, that
better is the suffering of him who is hurt, then the solace of him that is
hurtful; the former is conformed to Christ, the latter to the devil.

6 Observe. 6.
Saints must expect slanders, but (...) be afflicte^ with them. So long as
there are Devils, there will be false Accusers. We often say, upon hearing false
and infamous reports, we wonder who should ^aise them: But wonder not; there is
a Mint constantly going in hell, and there is a Mint master, whose w^rk it is
to coin calumnies; and though they be men who put them off for him yet this
Coin bears his Stamp. It Is a good sign thou please not Satan, when thou can
not have his good word. He does no more against thee, then he has done against
all thy Brethren, whose Accuser he has ever been; count not this Trial by his
fiery tongue strange; nay, count it strange when this tougne is not fired upon
thee The Son of God himself was in this fire before thee, nay, is in it with
thee. If the flame be hot, remember the company is comfortable and cooling. Had
it been enough to have been accused, there would never have been one innocent.
God indeed suffers this fire to bu^n thee, because thou art not pure enough;
but the Devil kindles it, because thou art not impure enough. Its a sign that
thy tongue vexes Satan, when his tongue vexes thee. Remember that thy name is
bright in Gods sight, and l^ke the Sun, glorious heavenward, when most clouded
earth-ward. God takes a greater care of his servants names then they do of
their own. Wherefore were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses,
Numb. 12 8.
says God to Aaron and Miriam? Besides the accidental good which slanderers do
thy soul or the present, by making thee humble, watchful, selfsearch^ng, there
will come a ti^e wherein they shall make rest^tutu^ (in specie) of all thy
st^ln reputation: They stole it from thee in se ret, Quisqui^ v^lens d^t^ab^
f^^mae m^ae, ist^ nobens add a mercedi me^ Aug.
but the^ shall restore ^t before men and Angels, and that with Interest. Thy
innocence may be hid, but not extinguished; and he that willingly detracts from
thy name, does (though) unwillingly add to thy reward.

7 Observe. 7.
To censure every ^ne that is accused, is to condemn the innocent. Its not
ground enough for thy censure, that they are accused; (for Satan may cause
that;) but, if called, thoroughly sift the accusation; John 7.24.
judge righteous judgment; and look not only upon the outside, but enter into
the bowels of the cause: Bare accusation makes no man guilty: commonly the
slanders of wicked men speak the person, and often the cause also good: Be slow
of belief: Hear both sides: Let both thy ears, like Balances, take in equal
weight. It Is true, 1 Cor. 13.7.
Charity believes all things, but they all are good things; it also hops all
things. There Is no harm in suspending thy belief till proof comes. If thou
shootest thine Arrow too soon, thou may happily hit a Jehoshaphat, dressed up by
Satan in an Ahabs attire. Its better to acquit many nocent, then to condemn one
innocent. In doubtful cases hope the best. God went down to see, when the cry
of Sodom came up to heaven; though he saw before he went down. Its good to be
forward in accusing thy self, and by that time that work is well done, thy
censorious credulity will be cooled when thou hear reports of others.

8. Obser. 8.
How harsh and cruel a Master does every wicked man serve! The Devil puts his
servants upon sin against God, and then accuses them for those sins to God,
themselves, and others: He that at the first allured Saul to disobey God, by
sparing of Amaleck; afterward drives him to despair, by representing his sin,
and Gods wrath, when he appeared in the shape of Samuel; the sins which his
tentations represent but as tricks and trifles, his accusations will aggravate,
even to a mountaynous proportion: He that in the former says, Thy sin is so
small, thou needst not fear it; nay, perhaps tells thee is a great good; will
afterward make it appear so great an evil, that thou can not bear it: Though
at the first he tells thee it is so small that God will not see it, yet at last
he suggests it so great, that God will not forgive it: The time thou now
spendest in hearing his accusations, would have been better spent in opposing
his tentations. Who would serve such a Master, who in stead of standing by his
servants for their diligent service, will stand up before God and man against
them? While they are serving him, he is quiet; when they have done, he pays
them with terrors, and persuasions that they are damned wretches: and yet this
is the Prince of the world, who has more servants then Jesus Christ; though
he, in stead of accusing for, covers sin. Oh that sinners were so wise, as in
time to look for a new service, and to stand astonished at this amazing folly,
that they should more delight to serve him who sheds their blood, then him who
shed his blood for them.

9 Great should be our care to prevent false accusations, Observe. 9.
to stop Satan's mouth, and the mouths of sinners, which are so ready to be
opened against us; to take heed that they speak not reproachfully and truly at
the same time.

1. It ought to be our care to make straight steps to our feet, Ephesians. 5.15.
seeing we shall be sure to hear of the least halting: we ought to walk
circumspectly. If wicked men will make faults, at their own peril be it; let
them not find them made to their hand: though we may account such or such an
error to be but small, yet the slanderous beholder will look upon it with an
old man's spectacles, and to him it will appear great. The sharp weapons of
slanders, must be blunted by innocence. Let the matter, manner, and end of
every action be good, and then God will justify, if Satan slander.

2. Never leave integrity to remove infamy: He that will part with a good
conscience, to get a great name, shall lose name and conscience too.

3. Defend and plead Gods cause against false accusation. If we be shields to
his, he will defend ours.

4. Let us be as careful of the names of others, as of our own. Let us not
receive, believe, laugh at the slanders cast upon others. Our name will be
entertained at our neighbors houses, as his is at ours. We must open our
mouths for the dumb, the absent, the innocent.

5. Be willing the godly should reprove thee: He who will not hear a just
admonition, may justly hear an unjust accusation; the smitings of friends will
prevent the stabbings of enemies, Godly rebuke embraced will preserve thee from
reproach, and being a byword.

6. Accuse thy self before God, humble thy soul for whatever thy self and
others can allege. Be more vile in thine own, then thou can be in the
thoughts or mouths of others; and thereby fly to Jesus Christ, who will answer
all accusations within or without thee; the clefts of that rock being the best
refuge against the pursuit of slanderous tongues. Oh how sweet is it to say in
the midst of slanders, Well yet, my soul, God has nothing to lay to thy charge.

10. False accusers imitate Satan, Observe. 10
they are the Devils first born, and bear his name. Their tongues are set on
fire of hell; but of the greatness of their sin, I shall have clearer occasion
to speak in the third and last part of this verse, as also of the helps
against it.

This for the first part of this verse, the parties contending; Michael the
Archangel, and the Devil. The second follows, the strife or contention it
self; Michael contending with the Devil, disputed about the body of Moses.

EXPLICATION.
In the explication of this second part, the contention it self, I shall speak
1. Of this combat, as it is set out more generally; so here it is said that
Michael contended. 2. As it is set out more particularly, in the particular case
and cause in which he contended; and so it is said, Michael disputed about the
body of Moses.

1. More generally: It is said that Michael contended, (...), Vox (...)
forensis est, et ad judicia spectat. Justinian. in loc.
the word (says Justinian) is borrowed from courts of judicature, and belongs
to judgments; (...), is to contend in judgment. The word in Scripture is used
several ways, and often it signifies to hesitate, and stagger, or doubt, Romans
14.23. Matthew. 21.21. Romans 4.20. And the word imports a doubting with a
contention: Qui haesitat, al tercantibus sententiis, secum quasi litigat et
disceptat. Bud. in comment.
He that doubts or hesitates in a business, being by different opinions drawn
several ways, finding a struggling and a contention (as Budeus notes) within
himself, as unresolved what course to take. Romans 14.1. The Apostle speaks of
doubtful, or contentious disputations; or (as the word signifies) contentions
of disputations. (...), altercationes disputationum. Beza.
Acts 11.2. They of the circumcision ((...)) contended with Peter.

It may here be demanded, What are those contentions between good and bad
Angels? Its answered, That they are either about things, 1. of temporal, or 2.
of spiritual concernment.

1. About Temporals, and so they contend, the good Angels for, and the bad
against the outward welfare of the people of God: Psalm. 34.7.
The good Angels (like Soldiers) pitch their tents about the godly, to protect
them, where Satan pitcheth his forces to destroy them. Evil Angels strive to
drive men into places of danger, the Devil would have had Christ to have leapt
from the top of the pinnacle: Mat. 6.4.
but the good Angels keep us in all our ways, and bear us up in their arms,
Psalm. 91.12. When Elisha was beset, the mountain was full of horses and
chariots, 1 King. 6.17. The Devil, who stirred up Daniels enemies to have
destroyed him by the Lions, was disappointed by that good Angel, Dan. 6.22
who shut the Lions mouths. The Angels of God defended Jacob from the fury of
his brother Esau, Genesis 32.2.
into whose heart Satan had put it to contrive Jacobs death. Satan endeavors
the destruction of people and countries; but good Angels fight for their
safety: When Satan prevailed with David to number the people, 2 Samuel 24.17.
he left him fewer to number by seventy thousand. Michael the chief of the
chief princes protected the Jews against the tyranny of the Persians, Dan.
10.13. 2 King. 19.35
And an Angel smote an hundred fourscore and five thousand which came to
destroy Judah: Exodus 14.19
An Angel went between the Israelites and the army of Egyptians. When Satan
stirred up Jezabel to seek and vow the death of Elijah, 1 King. 19.5
persecuted Elijah was fed and preserved by a good Angel. Devils labor to
destroy the families and estates of the godly; (as in the case of Job:) the
Angels of God are their guard (when it is for their good) to protect them, and
encamp about their persons and habitations.

2. The contentions of good and bad Angels are about Spiritual things. Jesus
Christ, who is the Spiritual head and husband of the Church, was by evil Angels
with deadly hatred opposed; good Angels admire, adore, advance him. When Christ
was in the womb, Satan would have had his mother suspected of uncleanness, so
that her husband was minded to put her away; but the good Angel affirms, that
what was conceived in her was of the Holy Ghost. The Devil sought to murder him
in his infancy; The good Angels appeared in multitudes praising God at his
nativity, and one directs Joseph to carry Jesus into Egypt for his preservation
from Herod's cruelty. The Devil tempts Christ, Matthew. 4.
and tosseth him from place to place: The good Angels, when he was afterward
faint and weary, came and ministered to him. The Devil, through the whole course
of his life, stirs up persecution and raises slanders against him, enters into
Judas to betray him, and into the Jews fasly to accuse and crucify him: but
as one good Angel appeared from heaven in his agony strengthening him, so would
more then twelve legions of such (had God but given a commission) have waited
upon him, and rescued him from his enemies. The Devils malice against Christ
dyed not with him; but to baffle the glory of his resurrection, he suggests the
aspersion of his Disciples, their stealing away his body by night: The good
Angels attest the glory of his resurrection to those who came to the Sepulcher
and afterward his Asrension, to those who looked toward heaven; assuring them
also of his return to judgment. Nor is the contention of good and bad Angels
less about the Church of Christ: The good Angels rejoice at the enlargment of
Christ kingdom, the conversion of one sinner; and it is a pleasure to them to
be present at the public ordinances, and to look into the mystery of the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 11.10* Ephesians. 3 10
As impossible it is, they should preach another Gospel, is to be accursed,
Gal. 1.8. They surther the Gospel, and preserve the true worship of God,
forbidding the worship of themselves. The Law was given by their ministry: Luke
2 9. Acts 10.10.
The Angel directs Cornelius to send for Peter: The Angel brought Philip to
instruct the Eunuch; invited the Apostle to come to Macedonia, and help souls
to heaven; delivered Peter out of prison to preach the Gospel; carried the soul
of Lazarus to heaven; resisted Balaam in the way wherein he came forth to curse
Israel, etc. Michael and his Angels, Rev. 12. fight for the defense of the
Church against all the injuries of the Devil. But the Devil is the grand
adversary of souls: Evil Angels labor to stop the passage of the Gospel; they
put forth their power in Jannes and Jambres; to resist Moses in his Ministry.
The Devil offers himself to be a lying spirit in the mouth of all Ahabs
Prophets. He stands at Joshuah's right hand to withstand him in his Office;
Zech 3 1. Matthew. 13. 1 Timothy 4 1. 1 The^. 2 18. Rev. 2.10.
he sows tares in the field, where the good seed of the word is sown: False
Doctrines are the Doctrines of Devils: Satan hindered Paul once or twice from
his journey to the Thessalonians to confi^m their faith; he raises persecution
against the Church; he cast some into prison: And where he cannot hinder
powerful preaching, he contends to make the word sundry ways ineffectual: some
he holds fast in unbelief and contumacy; from careless hearers he snatcheth the
word: Those who happly hear attentively, he hinders from practicing; and of
some kind of practisers he often makes Apostates.

The second thing to be explained, 2 Branch of Explicat.
is the strife and ^^mbate between Michael and the Devil, set forth more
particularly in the particular case and cause thereof, the Archangel disputed
about the body of Moses. And here, 1 What he did? he disputed. 2 About what he
d^d it; or the subject of that disputation? the body of Moses.


1. He disputed, (...), Contest by Argument and Reason; besides which manner or
strife, Justinian. in. loc.
there is no other (say some) after which spirits can strive and contend one
with another. I shall not dispute the truth of that assertion (the mos
Angelicus, Vid. Z^^ch. de Angelis p. 156
the manner of Angelical disputation being to us so dark:) nor shall I now
enquire how Angels represent their minds and apprehensions one t^ another in
their disputations; but sure I am, that as the Arguments which this holy
Archangel produced against the Devil to justify his action, were strong and
cogent (as being drawn from the revealed will of God) so the practice of
disputing for convincing the adversaries of the Truth, or stopping their
mouths by arguments grounded upon that foundation, Acts 17.17.18.4,
19.19.9.20.9.24.12, 15.
was frequently used by the Apostle Paul, and to be imitated by us; who, were
our words softer, and our Arguments stronger, might more convince the Adversary
against whom, and credit the cause for which we contend.

If it be here demanded, Why this Archangel would dispute with an incorrigible
adversary? Its answered, he disputed not with hopes to recover his Adversary:
But 1. To credit his cause. It was a righteous cause, and was worthy of a
strong Advocate: though the adversary against whom we reason deserves neglect,
yet the truth for which we argue, deserves our contention.

2. To apologize for himself: He might have been looked upon, as one who
resisted and opposed Satan, upon bare resolution and self-wil, and would effect
his desire by bare force, had he not disputed the equity of his proceedings
with the Devil.

3. To render the Devil the more inexcusable: Who now, though he were so far
from being bettered or amended by all the disputation and reasoning of Michael
with him, that he was the more enraged against the truth; yet must needs be
more clearly convinced, that he opposed the righteous and holy will of God.

2. subject of this disputation, it was (says Jude) about the body of Moses.
The principal doubt in this branch is, what should be the cause of this
contention and disputation between Michael and the Devil, about the body of
Moses. Sundry causes are by sundry Interpreters mentioned: I shall rehearse
some of the most probable, and cleave to that which I conceive to be the true
one: Some affirm that the body of Moses is here to be taken figuratively, not
for that body which was buried on Mount Nebo, but for that holy Priesthood
about which Satan resisted Joshuah, Zech. 3.1. because this Priesthood as a
shadow, was to be restored at the return of the Captivity, and to be in Christ
truly fulfilled, whom the Apostle calls the body, (Col. 2.17.) that answered the
shadows of the Law. Others also making this place of Jude to refer (though
after a different manner from the former) to that of Zech. 3.1. Opinio mystica
est, ut corpus Mosis fuerit Synagoga; ac Synagogam liberari prohibu^rit
Diabolus de Captivitate Babylonis. Lorin. in loc.
Conceive that by the body of Moses, we are here to understand the Synagogue,
or Church of the Jews; the delivery whereof from the Captivity of Babylon,
Satan (say they) opposed, and Michael contended for.

But besides the Arguments which have been brought already, to prove that this
Michael here mentioned by Jude, was not Jehovah; as was he who is mentioned
Zech. 3.1. It seems an harsh expression, and no where used, to call either the
Mosaical Priesthood as fulfilled by Christ, or the Synagogue and Church of the
Jews, the body of Moses. Some conceive that this contention about the body of
Moses, was from Michaels endeavoring, and the Devils opposing of the
honorable burial of Moses; to whom (say they) the Devil would have had burial
denied, in regard of his slaying of the Egyptian in his life time; and that
the Devil contended, that the body of a Murderer belonged to him to dispose of.
But this opinion seems false, both in regard of the great distance of time
which was between the slaying of the Egyptian and this contention; as also
that the Devil knew either that the slaying of the Egyptian was no true
murder, or if it were, that it was forgiven by God, who sundry times after it,
manifested tokens of signal love to his servant Moses. It is therefore lastly,
and most truly asserted by others, that Michael therefore contended with the
Devil about the body of Moses, because the Devil endeavoring (contrary to the
express will of God) that it might be buried in some open and well-known place,
that so the Israelites (who were always too prone to idolatay) might thereby
be drawn to give Moses Divine adoration; Deuteronomy. 34.6.
Michael in zeal to the honor, and obedience to the will of God, opposed the
Devil, and contended that the body of Moses should be buried in a seeret place,
Vid. Chrysostom. Hom. 5 in Mat. August. To. 3. p. 731. Ambr. 2 Offic. c. 7.
where no man might know of his Sepulcher. This last is the opinion of most, if
not of all Modern Writers both Protestant and Popish, and of sundry of the
Ancients.

The most think that Satan in his contention aimed at stirring up the people
idolatrously to worship the very dead body of Moses; and some affirm (though I
suppose without ground) that after his death his face retained its former
shining luster: and to prevent the idolizing of Moses his very Rod, they
conceive, that Moses took it away with him when he went to dye; it being that
Rod, whereby he had wrought so many Miracles, and which was called the Rod of
God. Others rather think that Satan intended to have put the Israelites upon
the idolatrous worshipping of Moses soul or Ghost, by the discovery of his
Sepulcher; this opinion seems to me very probable. I know not, that the
worshipping the relics of dead men's bodies, was an idolatry used in those
times. I suppose it will not be denied, but that it was the practice of the
Heathens to worship the ghosts or souls of the dead, who in their life time had
been eminent for their greatness and beneficence; hence Jupiter, Mercury,
Esculap. etc. were counted Deities after their deaths, for that good which
their survivers had received from them while living; and Heathens used this
their idolatry, by occasion of their having among them the Tombs and Sepulchers
of the deceased: Thus the Cretians worshipped Jupiter for their God, whose
Sepulcher they boasted that they had among them. And hence Lactantius holily
and wittily derides them, Quomodo potest Deus alibi esse vivus, alibi mortuus;
alibi babere Templum, alibi Sepulchrum? Lactant. l. 1. c. 11.
for honoring a God, who (as they thought) was in one place living, in another
place dead; who in one place had a Sepulcher, in another a Temple.

The Roman Emperors after their deaths, were Deifi'd at the burning of their
bodies; which being burnt, their souls were worshipped by the name of manes;
and upon their Sepulchers they engraved these words, To the gods, Dijs manibus.
the ghosts or souls of the departed; they blindly believing, that the souls of
the departed did reside about, or were present at the places, where their
bodies were buried; and these souls of the departed, Heathens were wont to
worship and consult with at their graves and Sepulchers; a practice which from
heathens was received by the Israelites also Hence we read, Isaiah 65.4. of the
idolatrous Jews, who remained among the graves, and lodged in the monuments,
namely, to consult with the spirits of the dead; as is clear from Isaiah 8.19.
where the Prophet reproves the people for consulting for the living with the
dead; i e. with the souls or ghosts of those who were dead and departed. And at
these graves and Sepulchers of the dead, were idolaters wont idolatrously to
Feast and Banquet with those sacrifices which they had offered to the honor of
the dead. Hence we read, Psalm 106.28. of the great idolatry of the Israelites,
in eating the sacrifices of the dead. And this idolatrous custom of seeking to
the dead at their Tombs or Sepulchers, the Devil invented, that these deluded
idolaters, who expected to consult with dead men, might indeed, and really
receive answers from, and so worship him: for though he persuaded his Vassals,
that they who were dead, gave them their answers; yet indeed, those answers
came from him. And to this practice the Devil might easily have brought these
Israelites, could he have obtained the discovery of Moses his Sepulcher; which,
containing the remains of so famous a Lawgiver, and one so eminent above all
the men in the world for acquaintance with God, would in probability upon all
exigencies, have drawn idolaters to it, for the adoration of, and consultation
with Moses: (especially considering the great and constant need of direction,
in which the Israelites stood wh^le they were in the Wilderness, for their
passage to Canaan;) though* indeed the name of Moses was to have been but a
stale or stirrup, to have advanced the adoration even of the Devil himself;
who, as he was the sole contriver of this idolatry, so would have been pleased
most with it, and honored only by it; it being as much beyond the power of
idolaters or Devils to deal with a true, since dead Moses, as it ever was
against the will of Moses, to have any such dealing with them. If it be here
objected, that the Israelites did not worship at the Sepulchers of Abraham,
Jacob, Joseph, and the other Patriarchs, and therefore that neither they would
have idolatrously worshipped Moses, if they had known the place of his burial.
Its answered, that there was far greater likelihood and danger of their
idolizing Moses, then any of the forementioned Patriarchs; and that both in
regard of the honor that Moses had received from God, and also of that good
which the Israelites had received by Moses. 1. In respect of the former, none
of the godly Ancestors of the Israelites were so illustrious as was Moses, for
working Miracles, and so many renowned performances, both in Egypt, and after
the Israelites came out of it; none by the testimony of truth it self, being
like Moses, whom God knew face to face; none who had the reputation of being so
frequently and long with God, and of being a Lawgiver to the people, and a
Mediator between God and them, to fetch them Laws from God, and to carry their
desires again to God; to be taken up (that he might converse with God) to the
top of a flaming Mount, the foot whereof no other person might touch upon pain
of death; to have a face so gloriously shining, (upon descent from God) as if
God had imparted to him a kind of ray of Divinity. In a word, To have God say
of him, as he did to, and of Moses, I have made thee a God (a speech (happily)
not yet forgotten by Israel) to (so great and puissant a Monarch as) Pharaoh.
2. In respect of the great benefits that God bestowed upon the Israelites by
Moses; never did they receive the like by any other Instrument in any age; who
ever was there besides Moses, by whom God sent so many miraculous plagues upon
their Enemies? by whom (at the holding up of a Rod) he divided the Sea, and
sent six hundred thousand men through it dry-shod, and afterward caused it to
return upon, and swallow up their Enemies; by whom he split the Rocks into
Cups, and gave them water in a scorching Wilderness, and fed them with
miraculous showers of bread from heaven, etc. Its therefore probable, that one
so eminently honored of God, and beneficial to Israel, as was Moses, had his
grave been known, would after his death have been idolatrously worshipped, and
perheps too, consulted with, as their guide in the Remainder of their journey
into the Land of Canaan. Yea, Haeres. 55.
Epiphanius reports, that in Arabia, Moses, for the Miracles wrought by him,
was accounted a God, and that there his Image was worshipped.

And whereas it may be said, that the Israelites could not be so blockish as to
have worshipped a dead Moses, his mortality being so pregnant a confutation of
their idolatry, and his Divinity. Its answered, Idolatry is a sottish sin;
Spiritual, as well as Carnal Whoredom, taking away the heart. Its just with
God, that they who lay by his rule, should also lay off their own reason. Nor
yet would the known Zeal of Moses (while living) against such a practice as
this, have, in probability, kept the Israelites from this idolatry, had Moses
his body been discovered: considering not only their proneness to that sin, and
their forgetfulness of holy instruction; but also, for that they might happily
impute the unwillingness of Moses to be worshipped in his life time, and while
he was among them, rather to his modesty and humility, then to his disallowing
of such a practice after his death, when he should be both absent in body, and
glorious in soul. In short, needs must that be bad, which that evil one is so
violent in contending to have effected; nor certainly, would Satan much have
regarded Moses his body, had it not been to do hurt to the Israelites souls;
and he who by his subtilty had once before with so much success drawn the
people to Idolatry, and almost to destruction, by the company of the
Midianitish women, was much more industrious and hopeful, by this means, which
had a face of greater plausibility, and would have proved far more hurtful, to
have effected the like again.

OBSERVATIONS
1 The opposition between sin and holiness is universal; Observe. 1.
they never meet but they fight. This enmity flies higher then men, it reaches
even to Angels also. Its in the heart, between a man and himself: outward
between men and men, between men and Angels, between God and both, between
Angels and Angels; Holiness and sin are irreconcilable. Their opposition is
reciprocal. Holiness can never tamely endure sin, nor sin quietly endure
holiness. These antipathies can never be reconciled. Such is the opposition
between them, that they cannot brook one another, notwithstanding all the
plausible and rarely excellent qualifications that may be mixed with either. A
Saint cannot love a sinner, nor a sinner a Saint, as such: though either be
never so beautiful, Affable, Noble, Learned. The Devil meeting with Holiness,
and Michael with sin, though both in an Angel, fight and contend with one
another. Its in this case as with the dressing of some meats, though the sauce,
the mixtures be never so pleasant, the dressing never so cleanly and skilful;
yet if such or such an ingredient be put in, the food will be loathsome to some
stomachs, and will not down. Such a one were a good man (says a wicked person)
were he not so precise, pure: And such a one were an excellent companion,
(says a Saint) were he holy and heavenly. Between the Wolf and the Lamb there
is an antipathy of natures. Sir Fr. Bacons N^^ Hist.
Their guts (say some) made into Lute-strings, will never sound harmoniously
together. If they live quietly (as is prophesied Isai. 11.6) its because the
nature of the one is changed. They who act from contrary principles, by
contrary rules for contrary ends, must needs thwart one another. The people of
God, may hence be both cautioned and comforted. Cautioned, not to expect to be
altogether quiet if they will be holy. Their Legacy left them is, in the world
to find hatred and trouble. Joh. 16. ult.
They must be men of contention, though Angels for their endowments. Cautioned
a so they should be, that they leave not their holiness; for then, though man's
contending with them should end, yet Gods would begin; and the worlds
friendship is bought at too dear a rate, when with the loss of Gods favor.
Cautioned lastly, Pax cum viris, bellum cum vi^iis.
not to hate the person of any under pretense of hating his sin; abhor not the
body, but the sore: Zeal must not be destroying, but refining fire. No man is
so good, as for all things to be beloved; no man so bad, as for any thing but
sin to be hated. The people of God may hence also be comforted; when they meet
with most contention from men, it is but what Angels have met with from Devils:
nay, what Christ has met with from men and devils. As Christ is our Captain,
so Angels, yea, Archangels are our fellow soldiers, nor shall we any more
miscarry, then either. The worlds bad word, is no bad sign. Two things much
speak a man; his company that he keeps, and his commendation which he receives.
Wicked men cannot speak well of them who cry down their sin: nor is their
discommendation any disgrace.

2 Satan is overmatch'd in his contentions. Observe. 2.
Michael an Archangel, a good Angel, contends with him. Although all the Angels
are equal by nature, Corpora crassiora and inferiora per subtiliora and
potentiora, quoda^ erdinereguntur; Omniacorpora per spiritum vitae; and
spiritus vitae irrationalis, per spiritum vitae rationalem; and spiritus vitae
rationalis desertor and peccator, per spiritum vitae rationalem and pium, and
justum, and ille per ipsum Deum. Aug. de trin. l. 3. c. 3.
and created with equal power, yet was the power of the fallen Angels much
impaired by, and for their Apostasy; and as the holy Angels exceeded them in
other qualifications, so likewise in this of power. Good Angels, though they
are not Omnipotent, yet had they not that chain put upon them, which was put
upon the bad, immediately after their fall, whereby they are both restrained
from what they would; and often, from what they can. This subjection of the bad
Angels is manifested by Angustine, from that order which God has placed among
the Creatures: The bodies (says he) which are more gross and inferior, are
ruled in a certain order by the more subtle and superior. All bodies are ruled
by a spirit of life, and the irrational spirit of life by the rational; and
that rational spirit of life which fell and sinned, by that rational spirit of
life which is holy and righteous; and this holy Spirit by God himself. Nor do
we ever in Scripture read of any contention between the good and evil Angels,
wherein the good had not the victory, Revel. 12.8. The Devil and his Angels
fought and prevailed not: Dan. 10.
and ver 9. He was cast out unto the earth. The Devil never fights, either
himself, or by his Instruments, but he is foyld, but he falls: Besides, the
good Angels ever contend for and by a great God, under a glorious and
victorious Head and Captain, Jesus Christ; against a cursed, yea, a captivated
enemy, who cannot lift up an hand further then the Captain of the good Angels,
pleases; in a good cause, for the honor of God, and the welfare of the
Church; should they ever be foyld, their Captain would lose the most glory. How
good is God, to order that the best Creatures should be the strongest! How
happy Saints, in that they have, though an invisible, yet an invincible
Lifeguard, an Army of Angels to pitch their tents about them, Psalm. 34.7.
whose safety thereby, can be no more then shadowed by mountains of full
horses, and Chariots of fire! If any thing do sometimes befall them afflictive
to their sense, yet nothing can befall them destructive, nay, not advantageous
to their souls. How great is our interest to continue our Guard! These holy
Spirits are driven away by our filthy conversation, like Doves that cannot
endure noysom places. They will protect none, whose protection draws not
allegiance to their great Lord and Master Jesus Christ. Oh give not the good
Angels cause to say of us, as David of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.21. Surely in vain have
we kept all that they have, etc. A man without Angels is not without Devils.
Miserable is it for the poor sinner to be like a Lamb in a large place, exposed
to the cruelty of the Wolf, in stead of being defended by the care of the
Shepherd. Miserable (lastly) is the condition of every enemy of Christ and his
Church, who joins with that Head, and fights under that Leader which is sure
to be foiled; that walks according to the Prince of the power of the air; that
wars against the Angels of God, yea, with him, the God of those Angels. And how
can they expect, who have fought for Satan against Michael in their life time,
that Michael should contend with Satan for their souls at their deaths?

3. Observe. 3.
In all contentions our care should be that our cause be good. Michael
contended in a righteous quarrel. Its commonly seen, the hottest contentions
are bestowed upon the unholiest causes. Idolaters cry out louder and longer for
Diana of the Ephesians, wicked men more strenuously strive for the promoting of
the Devils Kingdom, then the Saints do for the advancing of Christ's. How loud
did Baals Priests cry to their God for help, 1 King. 18 26, 28.
and how cruelly did they gash their bodies when the reputation of their dumb
and deaf Deity was hazarded! How eager were the men of Ophrah, Judge. 6.28.
that Gideon might be put to death for throwing down of the Altar of Baal! But
what a shame is it, that blind Zeal should be more eager and active then that
which is enlightened! The goodness of that for which we contend, only commends
the greatness of our fervor in contending for it. The more fiery and furious a
horse is which wants eyes, the more dangerous to himself, and others, is his
career. The higher and stronger the winds are which drive the Ship upon the
sands and Rocks, the more destructive and inevitable will be the wrack of the
Ship. We must first be sure we have a clear, a Scripture-way, and then how
sweet and suitable a connection is it to be fervent in spirit, when serving the
Lord? We should mistrust and fear our course is wrong, Romans 22.11.
when we find our hearts most eager and impetuous; and when we are sure our
course is right, we should be ashamed that we are so faint and sluggish.

4. Satan contends with the strongest, even with the strongest Angel. Observe. 4.
No Excellency can exempt any one from his onsets. He adventured upon Christ
himself. The most famous Worthies mentioned in Scripture, Job, Marth. 4.
David, Peter, etc. could not escape the Devils encounter. This Serpent set
upon our first parents in their innocence. He commonly singles out the Leaders
for combat: and they often meet with the sharpest assaults. That Christian
which is most Angelical shall find Satan most Diabolical. The Devils malice
being most against God, is most against them who have in them most of God: in
them he labors to be revenged on him: In the servants he strikes at the
Master. And God in Wisdom so orders it, that they who have most strength should
be most exercised, to make his graces the more manifested to all Beholders. God
was not delighted that Job should be assaulted and tempted, but that thereby
Satan should be overcome. And such is the Devils malice, that he will trouble
those most in the way, whom he knows he can least hinder of the end. He
contends, though he conquers not. Where he cannot destroy our grace, he will
labor to disquiet our peace. Satan's assaults are no sign of Gods hatred, nor
should they be any occasion of our censures. If we be not so fiercely set upon
as others, in stead of censuring them for having no grace at all, let us rather
think that they have more then our selves. They whom Satan least troubles,
commonly least trouble him. In short, what need have weaklings of watchfulness,
when the Devil fears not an Archangel? A weak Christian, when watchful, is in
less danger then the strongest when secure. He who sets upon an Angels
strength, will not fear humane weakness. If he comes upon those who have
nothing to help forward his Conquest, he will come with a courage upon those
who bring him weapons. In the best of us there is a strong party for Satan to
join with all.

5. Observe. 5.
The more God advances any in gifts and employments, the more Satan molests
them. If this Archangel were not (though some think he was) employed about the
burying of Moses's body, yet sure we are, he was here employed in contending
for God; and that he was a choice, if not the chiefest of all the servants that
God kept in this great family of the world; the great minister and messenger of
God to perform his masters pleasure in matters of highest concernment. Persons
of public employment are most fiercely assailed by Satan; they who are set
apart to offices, whereby God is most glorified and his Church relieved, are
set upon by Satan the enemy of both. We never read that Moses, David, Paul,
etc. were molested by the Devil, till they were appointed to be Gods
Archangels, (as it were) his Messengers, in delivering, governing, teaching the
Church. God never imployes any in service, but it is to oppose Satan's Kingdom;
and the higher their service is, the hotter is the opposition which they make;
and whosoever disturbs Satan, shall be sure to hear of him: the more watchful
any one is to do his duty, the more watchful is Satan to do him hurt,: commonly
God shows his servants in their entrance into duty, what they are like to meet
with in the continuance thereof; and thereby he gives them such proof of his
faithfulness in supporting them, that all the rage of hell afterward shall
only prevent security, not overthrow faith; awaken, not dishearken them: And
ever as the servants of God are afflicted, so are they fitted for his service;
God is but trayning them to a due expertness in high emploiments. The more any
one contends for God, the more let him expect to contend with Satan: They who
most stop the devils mouth, least stop his malice: Reckon upon Satan's wrath, if
thou go about Gods work; they deceive themselves who expect to be quiet and
serviceable at the same time, such groundless apprehensions are but the inlets
to apostasy, and make us to forsake our duty, because we cannot perform it with
our outward ease. To conclude; Satan's opposition should not discourage us from
duty, nay we should look upon it is an hopeful sign of the conscionable
discharge of our duty. Let us be sure that we are employed by God in his work;
and that we labor to perform it after his mind, and then let us account
opposition our encouragement and crown, as being that which almost only meets
us in a good Cause.

6 Decent burial belongs to the bodies of the departed. Observe. 6.
God himself buried Moses; nay (as most think) the grand Argument whereby Satan
disputed with the Archangel, Vid. Jun. in loc.
for the publickness of Moses his Sepulcher, was the known fitness of bestowing
a comely burial upon the bodies of Gods servants; nor did Michael at all
contend that Moses might not be buried, but that the Devil might not be at the
Funeral, or not have the interring of him. Genesis 23.
Nature it self teaches a decency of Burial. The very Heathens readily
entertained Abraham's motion to sell him a Burying place; yea, they had it in
their own practice; Ver. 6.
In the choice of our Sepulchers bury thy dead. And want of burial is so
hateful, that some have been more restrained by the fear of not being buried,
Genesis 25.9. Genesis 47.30 Genesis 50.25.
then of dying. Abraham was buried in the same cave with Sarah; after him,
Isaak, Jacob, Joseph; there also was Rebecca bestowed. And when the Kings and
Judges of Israel are recorded, their Burials with their places are also
mentioned; of which there are three ranks, 1 Some deserving ill, only buried in
the City of David (the upper part of Jerusalem, wherein was the Temple and
David's Palace) but not in the Sepulcher of their fathers; thus was Jehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21.19. Joash, who fell to Idolatry, 2 Chronicles. 24.16. and Ahaz, 2 Chronicles.
28.27. 2. Others who were good Kings, were buried in the City of David, and in
the Sepulchers of their fathers. And 3. Some of the highest Merit were buried
in the City of David, 2 King. 9.37.
in the Sepulchers of their fathers, and in the upper part of the Sepulchers of
the Sons of David; as Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.33. Nor was it a small judgment that
God inflicted upon Baasha and Jezabel, Jer. 22.19.
that they should be buried in the bellyes of d^gs, that Jehoiakim should be
buried with the burial of an Ass, dragged out by the heels, and cast into a
ditch; Isal. 14.20. Psalm. 63 11.
and that the King of Babylon should not be joined with the Kings in burial.
Neither was it a slight imprecation which fell from David, Let them be a
portion to Foxes; nor a small threatening, Jer. 14 16. That the bones of the
Kings, Priests and Prophets should be taken out of the grave, and laid open to
the Sun and Moon. 2 Samuel 2.5.
Hence David highly commended the burying of Saul (though a bad man) for a good
work. As of a sore judgment, does the Church complain, The dead bodies of thy
servants have they given to be meat to the fouls of the Heaven, etc. there was
none to bury them. Suitable it is, Psalm. 139.
that so choice and curious a piece of Gods work-manship as man's body, should
not be carelessly laid aside; yea, it has been repaired, redeemed, as well as
made by God; Gal. 4.4 5. Ephesians. 1.1.7. 1 Cor. 6.20.
partner in Redemption with the soul, and bought with the precious blood of
Christ. The body also God has sanctified, it is his Temple. The Ointment of
Sanctification rests not only upon the head (the soul) but diffuseth it self to
(the body) the skirts also. 1 Thessalonians 5.23
The chair where the King of Glory has sat, should not be abused. With the
bodies of our deceased friends, we had lately sweet commerce: The body of the
wife was lately entertained with dear embracement: The body of our child, a
piece of our selves: The body of a dear friend, what was it, but our self
divided with a several skin? The body of a faithful Minister, an earthen
Conduit-Pipe, whereby God conveyed Spiritual comforts to the soul. The body
when living, was a partner with the soul in all her actions; it was the souls
brother twin: what could the soul do without it? Whatever was in the
understanding, was conveyed by the sense. The soul sees by the bodies eyes,
hears by its ears, works by its hands, etc. yea, even now still there is an
indissoluble relation between the dust in the grave, and the glorious soul: as
the union of Christ's dead body to the deity, was not dissolved in the time of
its lying in the Sepulcher. Burying places were not (among the Jews) called
the houses of the dead, but of the living. The body is sown, not cast away; it
is not dead, but sleeps. The grave is a bed, and the Churchyards sleeping
places. In short, the glory of the bodies future estate, challenges the honor
of burial. All the precious Ointments bestowed upon the dead of old, had been
cast away, had it not been for the hope of a Resurrection. A great Heir that
shall hereafter have a rich Inheritance, is regarded, though he be for the
present in rags. And this decent burial of the dead, discovers the more then
heathenish barbarousness of Papists, who do not only deny, but recall the
granting of burial to the dead bodies of the Saints, Paulus Fagius Pet. Martyrs
Wife.
digging them up again, as they did at Oxford and Cambridg, in Queen Marye's
time. Herein worse then heathens, as testifies the greater humanity of allowing
Interment, in Alexander to the body of Darius; Hanibal, to that of Marcellus;
Caesar to Pompey. The comfort of Saints it is, that the happiness of their
s^uls, is not confined to the burial of their bodies. Precious in the sight of
the Lord is the death of his Saints; Psalm. 116.15. Psalm. 139.16.
who carefully keeps every one of their bones: and as he left not one out of
his book when he made them at first, so to be sure, neither shall one be
missing when he will remake them; their very bodies being the members of
Christ, and part of that lump whereof he was the first fruits. C^r. 15.20.
To conclude this, the care (yet) of a dead body should not be comparable to
that of a ^^ving soul. What profit is it for the body to be embalmed, and
entombed richly, and the soul to be tormented eternally? As great a folly is
the respecting of the vile body, joined with the neglecting of the precious
soul, as for a frantic mother only to lament the loss of the coat of her
drowned child. Nor lastly, ought this care of the bodies of the departed,
though formerly never so holy, amount to a superstitious reverencing of their
Relics. Some think that the prevention of this sin was the ground of Michaels
contention with the Devil. But sure we are, though the devil could not obtain a
license for this sin, of Michael, he has obtained command for it, Vid. Council.
Trident. S^ss. 24
from the Pope. It Is hard to name that martyred Saint, who has not left some
limb behind him to be adored: to name this folly is to confute it; for besides
its Idolatry and derogation from the merits of Christ; it is injurious to the
Saints themselves, giving their bodies only insepultam sepulturam, keeping them
from their honor of rest, Jer 8.1, 2.
and bringing them into the compass of a condition threatened as a curse. yea
Lastly, Isa 18.14, 16.
this popish foppery of adoring relics, is ridiculous. The very Popish
Historians tell us, that the bones of the worshipped have proved afterward to
be the relics of thieves and murderers; and common observation proves, that
the cross of Christ, the milk of the Virgin, and the relics of Saints are
increased to such a proportion as makes them more the objects of derision then
adoration. The best reverence we can give to the departed, is to respect their
spiritual relics, their holy lives and example.

7 Satan's aim in every contention, is to draw to sin: Obser. 7.
The body of Moses, Satan regarded not any further, then to hurt the souls of
the Israelites: All his contentions with Christ, were purposely to win him to
sin. If ever Satan desired any thing which was good, yet 'twas after an ill
manner, or to a wrong end: He would not contend against your estates, lives,
liberties, were it not to get advantage against your souls. As God in all his
contentions with us, aims at the advancing of our holiness; so Satan
propounds this as his end of every contention, the drawing us to wickedness.
He would not have contended against Jobs children, goods, body etc. had he not
aimed to drive him to distrust and impatience. He had not winnowed Job of
worldly comforts, but for the winnowing him of his grace; Luke 22, 31.
Satan (says Christ to Peter) has desired to have you, and winnow you as
wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail thee not. The drift of
the Devil, was to sift out Peter's faith: All the storms he raises against
godly Ministers and Christians, are not so much against their persons, as to
hinder from holy performances: When he casts some into prison, disgraceth,
impoverisheth, kills them, his aim in all this is, that he may hinder the doing
of good. He will allow all worldly enjoyments, if thereby he may the better
accomplish the end of drawing to sin: He is a Spiritual, and a malicious
enemy; spiritual, Gratia morsus Diaboli.
and therefore spiritual morsels are only suited to his pallat; Grace (like
that herb called morsus diaboli) is that which he nibbles at; throw him this
head over the wall, and with Joab, he will soon raise his siege. He is a
soul-adversary, and no blood is so sweet to him as the blood of souls. Give me
thy soul (says he) and keep thou (nay, I Will give thee) thy goods: Our enemies
are spiritual wickednesses (...), in heavenlies, Ephesians. 6.12.
i. e. heavenly things. He is a malicious enemy, and well he knows that the
greatest hurt he can do, is to take away the greatest good; as he most strikes
at the best men, so most at the best things in men; their grace: their soul, he
is truly a murderer that aims at the heart. God deals with his people in a way
of chastisement, the Devil deals with them for destruction; he contends not to
take away our gold, but our God: Its the most diabolical disposition, to
endeavor to put people upon sin, not to be willing to be miserable alone; nay
not only to be willing to follow, and go along with others to hell, but to make
them follow, or go with us; what a true born progeny of hell did those Papists
show themselves, who drew timorous Christians to recant, and then put them to
death, that so they might be murderers of soul and body at once? and who daily
by the Jesuits (Satan's factors) compass sea and land to make proselites; let
it be the greatest fear of every Christian, lest others should be so much as
occasioned by them to sin: grieve much when any sin; most, Psalm. 69.6.
when by thy means; Pray that none may be confounded for thy sake. Our greatest
contention should be to advance holiness; all the good which Satan does to the
body, is to hurt the soul; so all the hurt which any (in place) do to the
bodies of others, should be for the good of their souls; as Satan's lenitives
are poisonous, so our very Corrosives should be Salubrious.

8. Obser. 8.
Satan can bring colorable reason for the fowlest practices; even for that
which he intended should be the sin, and Idolatrous snare of Israel, he can
dispute, and that with an Archangel. It Is probable he here argued for the
fitness of burying Moses's body in a known place, from the eminency of the
man's piety and worth, while living; from the great unseemliness, that so
faithful and public a servant of God should be buried in hugger mugger; what?
Psalm. 112.6.
(might he say) shall not the just be had in everlasting remembrance? Is not an
obscure funeral the way to obscure all that ever Moses did, and at once to
make the people forget Gods works, with Moses's name? As the worst courses may
be colored over by specious pretenses, so there is none so skilful at this art
as Devil; he is an expert logician, and showed himself so in this disputation;
he can make, as the beautifullest grace, seem deformed, so the most deformed
sin, seem beautiful. He puts, as the color of sin upon grace, so the color of
grace upon sin. Never could the true Samuel have spoken better, then did this
counterfeit to Saul at Endor; In the deluding of Saul, he took the help of
Samuels prophecy. The Lord has done even as he spoke by mine hand. 1 Samuel
28.17.
He often kills men (as David Goliath) with their own sword; he winding himself
into them, and them into sin, by that which is the only preservative against
sin, the Scripture: He can allege something good, to hinder from any thing
good; he can overthrow duty by duty: he draws the fairest glove over the
blackest hand, and seems to make the worst cause without all danger or
absurdity: he had that to say, Mat. 4.6.
which the Son of God himself could not refuse; he disputed against him (though
fallaciously) with Scripture Arguments, Promissionem obj^^i^, conditio^^m
a^^^^it.
had he had a Psalter, he would have shown Christ the very place: nor is there
any sinner whom he cannot furnish with a Scripture to defend his lust; and such
a Scripture as the deluded novice has neither skill nor will to answer. The
truth which Satan speaks, ever tends to destroy truth. In alleging of
Scripture, he both colors himself and his motion, and frames himself,
according to the disposition of the Parties with whom he deals. He knows the
authority of Scripture always swayes in the School of the Church. Its our safest
course, to hold up against Scripture Light, all the plausible Reasons or
Scriptures, which Satan brings for any opinion or practice; to ponder, with
Prayer, and study, every allegation, and to consider whether in their scope and
end, they are not against other direct Scriptures, and the Principles of
Religion; for Gods Spirit never alleges Scripture, or propounds Arguments,
but to lead us into the knowledge, and practice of some truth. This was Moses
his rule, Deuteronomy. 13.1. to try a false Prophet by his scope. If any Scripture or
Reason, be alleged to put us upon sin, though the Text be Gods, yet the gloss
and allegation is the Devils.

9. Observe. 9.
In dealing with our greatest Adversaries, we must do nothing wilfully, but
with the guide of Reason. Michael did not (though he could have done it) here
shake off his opponent without answer, or a rational disputation, (though he
deserved none;) but to show, that he did not withstand Satan's motion, merely of
a wilful mind, but upon just ground, he answers him, and disputes the case with
him. Christ himself did not put off this very Adversary of Michael, Matthew. 4.
without an answer; and when he refused the most unreasonable request of the
sons of Zebedee, he gave a just Reason, Mark 10.40. It is not mine to give, but
it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared. Its good, though our
Adversaries are stubborn, yet to manifest the ground of all those opinions and
practices wherein we oppose them: our courses should be so good, as to deserve
to be justified; though our Adversary may so bad, as not to deserve to be
answered: and we shall hereby, though not recover him, yet both acquit and
quiet our selves, and possibly preserve others from being infected with that
sin, which rather our Reason then Resolution, is likely to prevent.

10. Observe. 10
Satan delights to put people upon giving that honor which is only due to God
to something else besides God. He here contends for the Servant against the
Master, and for the worship of Moses, against the worship of God.

Satan makes people give that honor to the creature, which is due to God, two
ways. 1. Inwardly, 2. Outwardly. 1 Inwardly. 1. By making people to put their
trust and confidence upon something besides God, to make flesh their arm, to
put confidence in man, Joh. 31.24. Psalm. 20.7. Prove. 3.5.
to trust in Horses and Chariots. 2. By making people to set their love and
delight upon other things more then God; to love their pleasures more then God,
2 Timothy 3.4. Phil. 3.19. Ephesians. 5 5.
to make gain their godliness, to be idolaters by covetousness, to set their
heart on that which was made to set their feet upon. 3. By making them to
bestow that fear upon the creature, which is only due to God; to fear man's
threats, more then Gods; and him who only can kill the body, Isa. 8.13. Isa.
7.2. Isa. 51.12 13. Hos. 5.11.
more then him who c^n throw both body and soul into hell: to walk willingly
after the (though wicked) Commandment.

2. Outwardly, Satan makes people give the honor to the creature, which is due
to God, two ways. 1. By the worshipping that for God, which is not; thus the
Heathen worship false gods, Mars, Jupiter, Diana, Dagon, Baal, M^loch, Mahomet;
and thus Papists give Divine worship to Relics, stocks, stones, a breaden
God. 2. By worshipping God by other means, and after another manner, than he
has appointed. That cannot be Gods worship, which is devised by another, the
manner prescribed by himself being refused: the worshipping of God according to
man's devises and traditions, shall be as far from acceptance, as ever it was
from his institution. He best knows what he loves best.

Nor is it a wonder, that Satan thus opposes Gods worship, not only in regard
he is an Adversary to God, and strives to break insunder those bands of
allegiance, whereby the creature is tied to the Creator, and to deprive God of
his homage; as also because an Adversary to man, whom he endeavors to draw
into Gods displeasure; but by the making men to worship thecreature in stead of
God, he aims to advance his own honor and worship, in the room of Gods. If
men come once to be children of disobedience, and sons of Belial, such as will
not submit to Gods will, and bear his yoke, Ephesians. 2.2. John 14.31. 2 Cor. 4.4.
Joh. 8.41. Acts 13.10.
they walk according to the Prince of the power of the air, he is their
Father, Prince, God; both in regard of his own usurpation, and their
acceptance. In all Divine worship, whatsoever is not performed to God, is
performed to the Devil, there being no mean between them in worship; God and
Satan divide the world of worshippers, for although in the intention of the
worshippers, the Devil be not worshipped, yet worshipped he is, in respect of
the invention of the worship, which was Satan's devise and appointment; and
hence it is, that we meet in Scripture, such frequent mention of the
worshipping of Devils. The Gentiles, 1 Cor. 10 20. yea, the Jews, Psalm.
106.37. Lev. 17.7.
sacrificed to Devils. And the truth is, Satan his contention that the people
might find the way to Moses's Sepulcher, was but that they might lose the way
to Gods service, and find the way to his own; as was more fully shown in the
Explication. Oh how lamentable is it, that so bad a Master should have so much
service! that he who sheds our blood, should be more willingly and frequently
served, then he who shed his own blood for us! To conclude, if holy Michael
here contended, that others might not worship any other than God, let us more
contend that we our selves may not do so. If Satan throw us down, yet let us
not cast our selves down. We have another, a better Master, his will let us
study; the voice of his Word and Spirit let us hear. Be above all those baits
where with Satan a lures to the adoring of any thing in stead of Christ. Know
nothing great or good but the service of Christ.

11. Observe. 11.
Satan's great design is to make the holiest persons the greatest occasions of
sin. He had much rather that a Moses, who had so zealously opposed Idolatry,
should be Idolized, then one who had himself been an Idolater. The Devil loves
to wound Religion in the house of her friend, and with her own hands and
weapons: to make Cromwell (a Protestant) to sentence a Godly Lambert to death.
Oh how it delights him to overcome Scripture by alleging, not of the Alcoran,
but the Scripture! And as he here dealt with the body, so he still deals with
the Books and Writings of Gods Moses's, the men of God: For as he fain would
have made him who was the greatest enemy in the world to Idolatry, while
living, to have been the greatest occasion of it, when dead; so still he
contends by Heretics, that they who have been the renowned opposers of Heresy
in their life time, should be accounted the greatest Patrons of it when dead.
Thus the Papists contend that the Fathers, Augustine, Ambrose etc. are theirs,
and for their opinions: Thus the Pelagians of our time, that Augustine, Bucer,
Vid. John Goodwin, Sion College vi. sited.
Ball, are for free will. But he much more contends, and had rather that a
living, then a dead Moses shoud be a stumbling block to others. If one who is
holy, may (thinks he) be useful to me by his dust and relics, how much more by
his falls, his scandals, his corrupt examples? Of all others, let those who
fear God, take most heed of giving advantage to Satan. When without their
knowledge or consent, they are by Satan, only made advantageous to him, it
should be their sorrow; but when they make themselves so, it is their great sin.

12. Observe. 12.
The worst persons are often compelled both to have, and express an high opinion
of Gods faithful servants. Even Moses, one who was a great opposer of, and
greatly opposed by the Devil, is yet secretly by this cursed enemy, greatly
honored. Yea, the people who in Moses his life time would have stoned him,
would (and Satan knew it too) after his death have Idolized him. Our blessed
Lord, when he was murdered by his enemies, was by some of them voiced a Just
man; Luke 18.18. Act. 24.25. Mat. 11.19.
the young man calls him Good Master; even bloody Herod reverenced the Baptist;
and Felix trembles at the preaching of Paul. Wisdom shall sometimes be
justified, not only by her children, but even by her sworn enemies. The father
of Lies, when he alleges Scripture to overthrow it, strongly argues that it
is the strongest weapon, and has greatest power over the conscience. God
delights to put a secret honor upon his Saints and ways, and to make even
those who love them not, to praise them. Many lewd livers, strictly enjoin
their children to be more Religious. Every Saint may be encouraged in Holiness.
God will often make its greatest opposers to exto^ it: and when in their words
they revile it, in their conferences they shall commend it. The praise of an
enemy, is equivalent to an universal good report. In short, Let sinners
seriously consider how they can answer this dilemma at the last day, If the
ways and people of God were bad, why did you so much as commend them? if good,
why did you not more, imitate them also? If Christ were not a good Master, why
did the young man call him so? if he were, why did he not follow him?

13. Observe. 13.
The greatest respect that wickedones manifest toward a Godly Moses, is when he
is dead. While Moses was living he was in danger of being destroyed; now dead,
of being adored by the Israelites. Joram when Elisha was living, opposed him;
but when dead, laments over him, in that pathetical speech, My father, 2 Kin^
13.14.
my father, the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. Saul disobeyes
and rejects Samuel when living, but when dead, he with great pains (though no
profit) endeavors to recall, to enquire of him. They build and garnish the
Sepulchers of the Prophets, when dead, Luke 11.47.
whom (living) their fathers (led by the same Spirit) destroyed. God often
makes the worth of his servants to be known by the want of them; and shows
when they are gone, that they who in their life time were accounted the plagues
and troublers, were indeed the Preservers and Peace makers of Israel. They
shall then know (says Ezekiel, Ezekiel 33.33.) that they have had a Prophet among
them. And its a work of little cost, and of much credit, to extol the dead. The
wicked are not troubled and molested in their ways of sin by departed Saints.
Samson could take honey out of that dead Lion, with which he fought when
living, and which he slew because it ror'd upon him. The living who rore and
lift up their voices against men's sins, and labor to rend them from their
corruptions, shall be persecuted; but when dead voiced up (to advance the
reputation of those who praise them) for sweet and blessed men of God. The
Papists and many common Protestants, who speak highly of Christ, and call him
their sweet Savior, had they lived in his days, and heard him preach against
their Lusts, would have hated him as much as, nay, more then now they hate
those who have but a drop of his fountain of holiness. And indeed, if a Moses,
a servant of God in his life time please wicked men, it is commonly because he
is too like a dead man, not so quick and lively against their Lusts as he
should. Its not the Idolizing, but the imitating of the Saints, that shows our
love either to God or them.

This for the second part of this verse, the strife or contention it self. The
third follows, viz. the carriage and deportment of the Archangel in this
combat. And first to speak thereof as it is set down Negatively, in respect of
his inward disposition, so it is said, that he durst not bring a railing
accusation.

EXPLICATION.
Two things are here to be considered in the Explication.

1. What it was which Michael did forbear; viz. to bring a railing accusation.

2 Why it was that he did forbear it? He durst not bring it.

1 (...) per Hebraismum idem valet apud Judam, quod apud Petrum (...). P^scat.
in Jud. Jud^cium maledicum. P^scat. Maledictionis judicium. Be^. Execrabile
judi^ium. Vulg. in Pet. Judicium blasphemiae. Vulg. in Jud.
For the first, The thing forborne is here said to be a railing accusation. The
Greek has (...), an accusation of blasphemy, of railing; and Peter, 2 Pet.
3.11. calls it, (...), a railing, or blasph mous judgment, or accusation; both
places are rendered by these words, railing accusation; a judgment or
accusation of railing, by an Hebraism, importing the same in Jude, which a
blasphemous judgment, ^r accusation does in Peter.

In the opening whereof,

1 I shall show you what is meant by this (...), here rendered accusation or
judgment?

2 What the Apostle intends by a railing accusation, or the railing of the
accusation?

3 Wherein consists the sinfulness of that railing accusation from which this
holy Angel did here abstain?

1. For the first, the word (...), here translated accusation, properly
signifies a sentence or judgment past upon a person, as appears by sundry
places of Scripture and therefore this accusation must needs be such a charging
of another with some heinous crime, as whereby we judge and sentence him to be
guilty of the Crime, and by reason thereof, of punishment: So that here, the
Archangel, notwithstanding Satan's person, cause, and carriage, were wicked, did
forbear to bring any charge against him, whereby he might appear to judge or
sentence him as guilty of punishment. Nor do we find in Scripture, (and here in
this place the contrary is clearly manifested) though holy Angels were often
employed as the Messengers and Ministers of God against the wicked, to
withstand them, and to execute upon them Gods judgments, that they at all
censured them, but ever they left the judging of them to God; a practice
suitable to a gracious person, and acceptable to God, who though he requires
public, yet forbids private judgment. When he calls and ordains any to judge
others, and to pass sentence upon them for their offenses, it is their duty to
perform his pleasure, though with the displeasing of any; but when he calls
them not, they must not judge others for the pleasing of themselves. Public
Judgment is required by God of Magistrates, for the suppression of Injustice,
and the protection of the innocent; but private judgment past upon others, it
being without any lawful call from God, merely out of private revenge and
personal hatred, is frequently in Scripture forbidden, and here by Michael
forborne. His work was a work of service, not of Judicature. He was fellow
creature with this (though evil) Angel, not a fellow Judge with God. Michael
and the Devil were now both pleaders before God, and God only was to pass
sentence. Michael opposed the practice and attempt of the Devil, and might
judge it evil; but he censured not his person, a work which he left to God:
though the Devil deserved to be judged for his sin, yet God deserved not to be
robbed of his glory; and Michael would not do a work, which God never
commissionated him to perform; nor would he to show his hatred to the Devil,
show himself disobedient to God. God wants not our wickedness to do his own
work, nor the beesom of our passion to sweep his house.

For the second, What the Apostle intends by a railing accusation or by this
railing here, with the accusation forborne. The word is (...), and signifies
properly, an hurting of ones name by evil speaking; and its used in Scripture,
either for evil speaking against God, or the Creature: the first is principally
called Blasphemy; which is committed three ways: 1 When that is attributed to
God, which is repugnant to his nature; as to say, that it is possible for God
to sin, or that he is corporeal. 2 When that is denied to God, which to his
nature and excellency belongs to him; as Omnipotency, Omniscience, etc. 3 When
that is attributed to the creature which is due to God; as to say that any
Creature is Omnipotent, created the world, or can forgive sin; a sin which God
commanded should be punished with death, Lev. 24.16, 23.

But its here (as in other places) used concerning the Creature, Qui maledicit
alteri, hoc ipso judicat eum and condemnat. Estius in loc. Quid aliud est
dicere, Iste est fornicator and usurarius, quam dicere, ipse debe^ esse
diaboli. Perald. p. 320.
and is most aptly added to the former word, Judgment, or accusation, because
both in sinful judgment there is a speaking evil, or a hurting the name of
another; and also; in evil speaking, there is a passing of judgment. He that
judges or sentenceth another, must needs do it for some evil which he lays to
his charge; and he who lays that evil to his charge, judges him thereby to
deserve punishment. And this sin of evil speaking is committed against man,
either in his absence, or in his presence.

1. In his absence, so its called detraction and backbiting; of this evil
speaking, some reckon six sorts, 1. The publishing of the secret faults of
others. 2. The relating of what evil we hear, with increasing and aggravating
it. 3. The accusing them of false crimes. 4. The denying of those good things
which we know either to be in others, or to be done by them in secret. 5. The
diminishing of that good which is manifest. 6. The perverting or turning of
good spoken by another, into evil. Others reduce all these to three heads: They
say the sin of backbiting or detraction is 1. By uttering things against
others, which are false and evil: and that first, when we speak evil of them by
accusing them for that which we know is false, and which they never did. Thus
Ziba spoke evil of Mephibosheth, by informing David, that he went not out to
meet David, 2 Samuel 16.3
but stayed at home expecting to be made King of Israel. 2 When we speak evil
of others upon bare suspicion, slight reports, or any insufficient ground. Thus
the Princes of Ammon charged David's servants with deceit, 2 Samuel 10.3.
and caused them to be abused upon suspicion that they were Spies.

2 (...) This sin of Evil speaking by detraction is committed by uttering
against others true things after a sinful and evil manner: and that several
ways: As 1 In the way of searching into, and blazing of secret infirmities;
uncovering that which ingenuous humanity would conceal, and making the house
top a pulpit to preach of what was done in the closet: A talebearer reveals
secrets, but a man of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter, Prove. 11.13. 2
When we amplify the offenses of others beyond their due proportion; when for
fifty we set down an hundred, and hold spectacles before faults of a small
print, to make them seem greater then they are, representing that as done
presumptuously, which was done weakly; or as done unconscionably, which was
done carelessly; or as done deliberately, which was done rashly. 3. When we
speak good of another, but either lessen or deprave it, as done with a bad
intention, in hypocrisy, for bad ends; and so relate the truth, but with
wicked, and false insinuations and collections of evil. Thus Doeg spoke the
truth to Saul concerning David, but falsely insinuated, that David and the
Priests conspired against him. 1 Samuel 22.9, 10
4. When in speaking of a thing truly, done or spoken, we destroy the sense,
and pervert the meaning, Thus the Jews spoke evil of Christ, when they
witnessed against him, that he said, He would destroy the Temple, and build it
up again in three days.

3 We may commit this sin of evil speaking against others by detraction, even
by others; and that both 1. By suborning those who will accuse and speak evil
of them; as Jezabel did against Naboth, and the Jews against Christ, Act. 6.11.
and Stephen. And 2. By receiving of evil reports against them from others,
when in stead of driving away a backbiting tongue with an angry countenance,
Prove. 25.23.
as the North wind drives away rain, we encourage and cherish evil speakers by
our receiving what defamations they bring us, still to steal from the good
names of others: when though we set not our neighbors name on fire, yet we
stand and gladly warm our hands by it, when we see it set on fire.

2 The sin of evil speaking may be in his presence, meeking or railing. 1
Mocking is when a disgraceful taunt or gird is given to another; (...).
as Genesis 37.19. the brethren of Joseph scoffingly called him Dreamer; the
children, 2 King. 2.23. called Elisha, Bald-pate; and so in Babylon, they mock
at the Israelites for their Hebrew songs, Psalm. 137 2. (...).
Railing is properly when any sin or wickedness is objected, as Murder,
Uncleanness, Sedition: Thus Shimei called David a bloody man, and a man of
Belial; and the Heathens called the Christians Incestuous enemies to the State,
etc.

The third particular in this first branch, viz. what Michael did forbear to
do, is the sinfulness of bringing this Judgment of railing or evil speaking.
And this appears,

1. In regard of God. Its a wickedness eminently injurious to him, its strictly
prohibited by him, Mat. 7.1. Lev. 19.16. Col. 3.8. Ephesians. 4.3. James 4.11.
Severely threatened and punished. 2 Kin 2.32. 2 Kings 2.23.
It audaciously invades the seat and room of God himself, taking his office out
of his hands, who is the Judge of heaven and earth: and from our standing
before the judgment seat of Christ, the Apostle argues strongly against the
judging of others, Romans 14.10 Judge nothing (says the Apostle) before the
time. 1 Cor. 4.5. And what has any man to do to judge another man's servant?
and when we speak evil a against any for his holiness, we most of all speak evil
against him who is the Author of that holiness: Yea, this sin of reviling and
evil-speaking, is contrary to the course and carriage of God, who approves of
the ways of his people, highly esteems of their graces, accepts and rewards
their weak endeavors; he pleads for his Saints, acquits them, answers
accusations brought against them, and pronounces a righteous sentence upon
them: he calls Nathaneel, a true Israelite; Paul, an Elect vessel, etc.

2. In regard of those who hear these evil speakings. Hearers commonly do both
willingly and hurtfully hear others defamed. It damps and destroys in them the
love of their Brethren: Its a draught, though of sweet, yet of deadly poison,
given in at the ear: It lays a stumbling block before the blind, by abusing,
and falsely, or unduly informing the ignorant, to whom the defamation is
reported. It has separated chief friends.

3. In regard of the Party who is guilty of evil-speaking: This sin, speaks his
madness and folly: so as he may destroy his Neighbors name, he adventures to
damn his own soul: so as he may make others think ill of him whom he hat^s, he
cares not how deeply he himself incurs the wrath of God: so as he may but kill
one by defaming hm, he cares not, though in the doing thereof, he destroys
thousands by infecting them. He is like one, who will blow in a heap of dust,
though thereby he puts out his own eyes: truly said Solomon, Prove. 10.18. He
that utters slander is a fool. True Religion cannot consist with such a
course. If any man seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, that man's
Religion is vain. Jam. 1.26. A good man cannot be an evil speaker.

This sin. of evil-speaking, is the disgrace of the evilspeaker. Its a practice
of the Old man, unbeseeming and to be laid off by Christians (that profess new
life) as sordid rags, Col. 3.8. An evil-speaker is the Devils eldest son, he
bears his name; his mouth is the Devils vessel, which he fills with the water of
cursing; he is the Devils tooth (dens Diaboli) to bite men; he is a Pedlar,
furnished with wares by the Devil, to vend and put off in the world for him; he
scatters perfumes to delight him; Detrectore, Diabolo thurisicant. Pera. d. p.
320.
he tells tales to make him merry; he more defiles his own heart and tongue,
then his Neighbors name; he is by some not unfitly compared to a Butchers Dog,
taught by his Master not to touch the good and choice pieces of flesh in the
shop, but the filthy offal, or any putrified pieces, he greedily and eagerly
devours: by others, to Swine, who if, they come into a Garden, in one part
whereof, grow a thousand sweetly fragrant flowers, and in a corner whereof, is
laid an heap of dung, delight more to be grovelling in the dung, then smelling
on the flowers; or who go not to the flowers to smell, but to root them up. They
rake in the faults and infirmities of others, their graces they abhor as much
to observe, as they do to imitate; like Owls, in the dark they see, in the
sunshine they are blind.

This evil speaking is a soul-disquieting sin: it wears out, whets out the
heart with vexation. Envy the mother of calumny is the saw of the soul: an
evil speaker is his own scourge. Invidia animae scrra.
Miserable is his life, who places his content in another unhappiness, in
stead of his own happiness.

To conclude, it is a God-provoking sin: punished frequently in this life by
defamations, (a payment in its own coin) troubles, law-contentious, loss of
estate, and often life; as appears in the death of the 42 children, 2 King. 2.23
of Shimei, the leprosy of Miriam etc. He who casts up the stones of
reproaches, will crack his own crown. But certainly (without repentance)
destructive eternally, excluding from the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10. God
will reprove in his wrath, if we reproach with our words. Psalm. 50.19, 20. when
we have done with our speech, our speech has not done with us.

4. In respect of him who is spoken against; evil speaking is a sin of the
greatest cruelty; it takes away that which is better then honor, riches, yea
life; and such a good which being stolen away, cannot be recompensed, because
its worth cannot be estimated: Evil speaking buries the dear and precious name
(the throat of the evil speaker being herein an open sepulcher.) At the best,
it deals with men as the Ammonites with David's servants, it takes away half
their names, cuts their reputation off at the midst; and commonly, they who are
defamed in some one respect, are suspected and slighted upon every occasion;
one fly marres the whole pot of ointment. And one defamation will be sooner
believed, though reported but by one never so unworthy of credit, then a
commendation, though confirmed by the joint suffrages of an hundred faithful
witnesses. The reviler lives upon man's flesh and blood, as his meat and drink;
nay upon something better, the name being better then life. By a good name many
have done good after their deaths; by the loss of it, many have been rendered
useless while they lived. The former have lived when they were dead; the
latter have been dead while they lived. Evil speaking is more cruel then hell,
for hell only devoures the bad, but the hell of the tongue the good and bad too.

This for the explication of the first branch, namely what the Archangel did
forbear, viz to bring a railing accusation. The second follows to be explained,
namely why he did forbear it, he durst not bring it. Wherein, two things are to
be opened.

1. What is meant by his not daring. 2. Why he was not daring.

1 For the first, The words are (...) in the Original, and the word (...) here
expounded by daring, has a double signification in Scripture; sometimes it
signifies to endure, bear, sustain, or to be able and fit to undertake,
undergo such or such a difficulty; and thus it is taken Romans (...), Mori
sustineat. Beza.
5.7. one dare or will endure to dye for a good man: and so the, sense will be
this, Michael durst not; that is, could not endure, was not able to give a
railing accusation. But it more frequently signifies to be bold, or to dare to
do, or to adventure upon a business, as not being dismayed with any dangers.
Thus it is taken, Phil. 1.14. Mark. 15.43. John 21.12. And thus it is to be
understood in this place, Jude intending that the Archangel durst not be so
bold, or was holily afraid to bring against the Devil a railing accusation.
And thus the difference between the seducers and the Archangel (by whose
contrary practice, the Apostle aggravates the sin of the seducers) will appear
more clear and evident. The Apostle telling us, 2 Pet. 2.10. that these bold
libertines were presumptuous, and not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. But
the Archangel durst not etc.

2. Why was the Archangel thus far from daring and adventuring? There are three
grounds of fear to adventure upon any way, or course propounded to us. 1. A
natural desire of our own preservation, causing a dread of any thing which may
endanger it: This in it self is no sin, it having been, not only in the
holiest men, but in Jesus Christ himself, who prayed, that if it were possible,
the Cup of death might pass from him. 2. That corruption of nature, whereby the
creature fears nothing but the smart of punishment, and shuns it only as it
is afflictive to sense, not at all as it is offensive to God; the Party thus
fearing, having an heart only filled with guilt, and self-accusation, and
empty of that faith which works by love: Thus the Devils believe and tremble.

3. That Principle of grace, whereby persons fear sin as its opposite, and
displeasing to God, whom they dare not offend; not only because he sets
himself against sin, but principally, and in the first place, because sin sets
it self against God: This was the holy fear of David, Psalm 119.12. My flesh
trembles because of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. First he feared
God, and then he stood in awe of his judgments. This is indeed to fear sin as
Hell, and not only to fear it for Hell This is that fear commended by Solomon,
Prove. 16.6.
for causing us to depart from evil; a fear, that proceeds more from sense of
duty enjoined, then of danger threatened; and whereby we more respect Gods will,
then our own woe: In a word, a fear which therefore is regardful of Gods wrath,
because it proceeds from a faith which reposeth it self on his mercy.

OBSERVATIONS
1. Obser. 1.
Purity of affection should accompany Angelical illumination. Michael had the
holiness, as well as the wisdom of an Angel: he had not only ability to
dispute, but care to keep from sin in disputing. An head full of knowledge,
with a heart forward to sin, agree indeed to an Angel, but it is an Angel of
darkness. An Archangel given over to wickedness is an Arch-divel. Great
knowledge, without holiness, is but a great tentation; Si velles intelligere ut
Angelus, quod non potes, cur non vis velle ut Deus, quod potes? Nieremb. de
ador. in sp. and ver.
knowledge (says the Apostle) puffs up. Sanctity in a Child, is better then
all the understanding of Devils. A clean heart, is better then a clear head. If
thou desire (says one well) to understand like an Angel, why art thou not
more desirous to will as does God. The great Diana of worship in the world, is
brain-knowledge, and estimation for an accute and reaching apprehension;
whereas holiness is esteemed but as a dull contemptible qualification: but the
glory of Michael here in the Text, was to keep himself from sin. Its pity that
a good head, and a good heart, should not ever be companions; or that the
notional perception of truth, should at any time go along with the practical
refusal thereof. Wicked Angels, (or Ministers) who by their Doctrine teach
people how to be saved, do by their lives teach God how to damn themselves. If
the Lord has given thee integrity of heart, though thy parts be but mean,
bless him, he has truly shown thee the more excellent way, afforded thee an
angelical excellency.

2. Observe. 2.
Its an high commendation then to shun sin, when we are necessitated to
converse with sinners. Michael disputes with the Devil, but yet holily, and
Angelically. He got no infection from his divellish carriage. The Devil sets
upon our blessed Savior more then once, yet Christ gathered no soil from this
unclean spirit. Its a sign of a good constitution, to continue healthful in a
bad and infectious air. The truth of grace should show it self, in its care
not only to avoid the company of sinners, but the contagion by sinners:
Perhaps we cannot shun the former, yet we should, and by holy watchfulness may,
escape the other. If we cannot do the wicked good by conversing with them, we
must take heed lest they do us hurt. Its a justly suspected goodness, which can
only hold up in good company: He, who will then be bad, rather overtakes sin,
then is overtaken by it; but he who keeps the spark of holiness alive, in the
midst of damps, and quench-coals, Psalm. 120.5.
though he may with holy David bewail his condition in respect of bad company,
yet may he withal rejoice, in the hopes of his own integrity.

3. Observe. 3.
Its our duty to learn this Angelical Lesson, of forbearing to bring railing
accusations. To this end, 1. Be much and serious in accusing thy sinful self.
In this duty it is hard to be severe enough: Put not thy eyes into thy pocket,
when thou art alone at home: Its a sign, that they who desire to sacrifice
their brethrens names, are (as Pharaoh charged the Israelites) but too idle; I
mean, they labor not about their own hearts: every Enemy, by how much the
nearer, by so much the more hateful is he to us; our own sins are our nearest,
and should be our hatefullest Enemies. 2. Envy not the worth of any: the very
word (invidia) envy, may either be derived from looking into, or not looking
upon another at all: the envious are guilty of both, they will not look at all
upon what is truly excellent; they love to look through and through, when they
think they have found any thing culpable; in both respects they are occasioned
to be evilspeakers. When they only are on the dark side of the cloud, its no
marvel that they stumble into slanders. 3. Look upon every action of another,
with the spectacles of love. The Apostle tells us, that love thinks, and it is
as true, that it speaks no evil: Malice (we say) never spoke well; it ever
makes, if it finds not faults, 1 Cor. 13.5.
and puts a false gloss, and a wrested interpretation upon the Text of every
action; love covers a multitude of faults where they are, malice creates them
where they are not. 4. Keep a watch before thy mouth: Pray that thou may^st
have Gods aid. Resolve with David, before thou entrest into any company, not to
offend with thy tongue: Check thy self, when thou perceivest thy proneness to
offend: Return not evil for evil: Being defamed, entreat: Bless, and curse not:
Romans 12.14. 1 Cor. 4.13. Lock the door of thy lips so fast, that the strongest
provocation may never be able to pull it open: Strike not the second blow: Let
the Ball of contention go down on thine end: In stead of reviling revilers,
commit thy cause to him that judges righteously: Herein thou followest Christ.
When thou hear another reviled, be as a Stone-wall, when thou hear thy
self reviled, be as a soft Mud-wall; in the former respect, show thy
opposition, in the latter thy patience; in the former carry not the Devil in
thine ear; in the latter, carry him not in thy tongue. 5. Deal with another
good name, as thou would have him deal with thine, if it comes in his way;
they who handle the names of others most rudely, are most delicate when they
themselves come to be touched. But nothing is more just with God, then to
suffer others to open their mouths against those, who will open their own
against their neighbors.

4. Observe. 4.
There is no cowardice in not daring to sin. The lowest of all the holy Angels,
has more magnanimity, then all the presumptuous sinners on earth; yet lo here
the chiefest (as some suppose) of all, that heavenly host durst not sin in
reviling. True valor stands in the opposing, not in the stooping to sin. It Is
not magnanimity but madness, to damn thy soul, and to fight with the Lord of
hosts: Men of greatest courage in Scripture, have ever been most fearful of
sin. David, who had shed the blood of so many thousands, yet waters his bed
with tears for his sin: He who had overthrown so many Armies, is himself laid
flat by one poor Prophet. Josiah was stout-hearted, and yet tender hearted
also. The greatest cowardice, is to yield thy self a captive to any lust: The
audacious swearer is the coward, not he who fears an oath. The world does
ridiculously voice for valorous, even the great pretenders to valor; I mean,
bloody duellists, or single combatants: of all sorts of sinners in the world,
these are the truest dastards, in being so excessively fearful of reproaches,
who, suspecting they shall be pursued by the report of cowardice, fly, they
know not whither; even as far as hell, before they dare look back. They who
fight with others, are overcome of their own lusts: They who dare not fight
with an enemy, either with tongue or hand, for fear of displeasing God,
overcome their lust, which is a greater discovery of valor then to vanquish a
city. It is not courage, but fool-hardinesse, to go boldly to hell, proceeding
from an ignorance of danger; sinners therein being like Americans, who press
upon the mouth of the Musket, because they know not its force.

5. The fear of God is the bridle of sin. Observe. 5
The not daring to sin, is a preservation against sin. This fear stopped the
Archangel from giving the Devil, a railing accusation. This holy fear, made him
contemn Satan's reproaches, and will make any to despise all the difficulties of
shame and sorrow, which may be met with, in the way of holiness. The greater
fear, expels the less; the fearing of him, who can destroy the soul, abolisheth
the fear of them, who can only touch the body. If God be our fear, we shall not
fear man's fear; he who fears God, Isa. 8 13.
fears nothing but him; he had rather be mocked for holiness, then damned for
sin; he is not like children, that fear an ugly vizard which cannot hurt them,
but fear not the fire that may consume them: he is not such a fool, as to be
laughed out of his happiness, and to hazard the loss of his soul, because he
will not be mocked. Abraham thought, if the fear of God had been in that place,
Genesis 20.11. that they would not have slain him for his wives sake. How (says
Joseph) shall I do this great evil, Genesis 39.9.
and sin against God! The fear of God (says Solomon) is, to hate evil: Prove.
8.13.
it causing us, not only outwardly to abstain from sin, but inwardly to abhor
it; not only binding the hand, but also changing the heart: the fear of man
will make us hide, the fear of God even hate sin also. Fear is the daughter of
faith, Heb. 11.7.
and faith assents to the truth of the word, as promising, and commanding, so
threatening. The worth of Gods fear, will be known to eternity: That which keeps
from sin, keeps from the only evil; they who fear the word, shall not feel the
rod. 1 trembled (says Habakuk) in my self, Hab. 3.16.
that I might rest in the day of trouble. If we would not fear with a servile
distrustful fear hereafter, Timeamus prudenter, ne timeamus inaniter. Aug.
we must fear with an awful child-like fear for the present. If we fear wisely,
we shall not fear vainly. In short, we hence learn the true reason of all the
wickedness and woe in the world: Had the fear of God been here, sin had not been
here, and punishment had been prevented; that which is now woe, had then been
watchfulness.

Thus far in this third part of this verse, of the first (the Negative) branch
thereof. Durst not bring against him a railing accusation. The second (the
Positive) follows, in these words, But said, The Lord rebuke thee.

EXPLICATION.
Two things for the explaining of this second Branch of the third part,

1. What Michael here intends by the Lords rebuking of Satan?

2. Why he uses this imprecation, and desires the Lord would rebuke him?

1. (...), Increpo interminor. Significat increpare cum potestat^. and
objurgatione im perare, and ab in cepto deterrere. Justinian. in Jud.
Increpando imperare and impe rando increpare. Lap. in 3. Zec. Interdicere, and
imperare additis minis. Lor. in loc. Divinum imperium efficax.
For the first, The word Rebuke, in the Original is (...), the Vulgar renders
it imperet, the Lord rule thee. Beza and Erasmus, increpet, the Lord chide or
rebuke thee, and the word signifies both to charge or command, by way of
severe commination, or threatening, to prevent disobedience in the commanded; as
also (and most properly) to chide or reprehend, so as a servant is rebuked by
his Master, who both by his charging with threats, and chiding or rebuking,
shows, as his Authority to command, so his strength and ability to punish, in
case the party whom he threats and chides be not deterred from going on in his
begun Enterprise. And because the commands, threats, and rebukes of God are not
verbal, but efficaciously put forth in their effects; this word (...), here
used by Jude, is used by the Evangelist to express the Authority and Power of
Christ, in stilling and calming the winds of the sea Matthew. 8.26. (...), he
rebuked the wind: and in casting the Devil out of the possessed, (...), etc.
Mark 9.25. He rebuked the foul spirit; and in healing Simous wives mother of
the Fever, Luke 4.39. (...), He rebuked the fever. So that this imprecation
here used by the Archangel, of rebuking Satan, 1 Presupposes Satan's bold
readiness to oppose, and resolution to overthrow the pleasure of God, unless he
were hindered by the force of Gods threats and rebukes, and the slavishness of
Satan's fear, who forbears and gives over any wicked attempt, merely for fear of
punishment, and by a powerful restraint from God. And 2. It more properly
intends the Sovereign Authority of God over the highest of wicked creatures,
and his power, whereby without any pains, easily, even as by the uttering of a
rebuking word, he quels the Devil; yea, the putting forth of his Authority and
Power in the curbing and restraining of that his impudent Malignancy, whereby
he resisted the will and pleasure of God concerning the body of Moses.

To the second, why Michael in this hot contestation with the Devil, interposed
this imprecation, or desire of Gods rebuking him. I answer, hereby he expressed 1
his confidence in, 2. Zeal for, 3. Submissiveness to God.

1. Hereby he would show his confidence, that God was able to maintain that
righteous cause wherein he was now employed, viz. his opposing of Satan; the
holy Angel manifesting, that he whose will and pleasure it was that the
Sepulcher should be concealed, could easily curb and restrain this evil spirit
from accomplishing, though he suffered him to attempt the discovery thereof.
His carriage herein agrees to his name; for as his name Michael signified, Who
is like, or equal to the Lord; so by saying, The Lord rebuke thee, he expressed
that Satan's contestations against so great a God, were all but in vain, he
being a great and powerful Lord, and the Devil though a wicked and rebellious,
yet a weak and timorous slave and underling, the Lord being able to chide all
the Devils undertakings and contentions into nothing, even with one word or
rebuke of his mouth.

2. Hereby Michael discovered his Zeal for God. Though this holy Angel was not
so sinfully hot as to revile Satan, yet was he so holily zealous, as to plead,
yea, to imprecate for God. He who was holily patient in his own, was holily
impatient in Gods cause and quarrel. He prays not here in his own, but in Gods
behalf, that the foul mouth which had disputed against, and blasphemed the holy
God, might by that God be stopped. Angels are zealous for Gods glory. Some think
that the name of Seraphim, is therefore given to some of them, for their
burning zeal. As God takes the dishonor offered to any of his Angels and
Messengers, as offered to himself, so should they more sadly resent the
dishonor offered to God, then if it had befaln themselves. Deuteronomy. 32.35.
Michael here, seeing the Devils carriage impudently derogating from Gods
glory, could no longer refrain, but zealously prays, The Lord rebuke thee.

3. Hereby he shows his holy and humble submissiveness to God, and forbearance
to be his own, or his Adversaries Judge; he remits, and refers revenge to God,
desiring that God would take up the controversy: The Lord (says he) rebuke
thee. The holy Angel beseeched God to be Mediator between him and the Devil in
this disputation: he knew well that vengeance belonged to God. and therefore he
desires that God would deal with him, as seemed best to himself: he repayes not
evil for evil, neither in affection, or expression and speech; God being the
righteous Judge, he expects the sentence only from him; who best knew what
punishment the Devil deserved, and how to vindicate the glory of his own Name,
and from whose hand the Archangel well knew, that the Devil was not able to
make an escape. In short, the Devils sinful opposing of Michael, yea, of Gods
glory, by contending for the discovery of M^ses Sepulcher, was no warrant for
Michael to offend God by expressing any undue desire of revenge; he therefore
remits the matter to Gods determination, The Lord (says he) rebuk^ thee.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Satan's forbearance of, Observe. 1
or desisting from any way of wickedness, is purely from Gods threatening
rebuke, and h^^ powerful chiding him. The Archangel says not, The Lord mend,
change, reform thee; but, The Lord hinder, stop, and by his power, effectually
rebuke thee. Satan may be driven away from some act of sin, by Gods power, not
drawn by Gods love; like a Dog, he fears the whip, not leathing that which he
is compelled to leave. The Devil is held in an everlasting bond of sin; he is
wedged and wedded to sin; He sins (as its said, 1 John 3.8) from the
beginning; since he began, he never did, nor shall cease from the love,
although he may be forced to forbear the outward act of sin: there is in him an
utter impotency to any good, nor can he lay down his unholy inclination; he may
be curbed, he shall never be changed: Its ever a torment to him, not a delight,
to forbear any wickedness; when he besought Christ not to torment him, Luke 8
28. the torment against which he prayed, was that his ejection out of the
possessed, whereby he was hindered from doing that hurt which he desired; it
being immediately added by the Evangelist, For he (Christ) had commanded the
unclean spirit to come out of the man. Satan came to tempt Christ of his own
inclination, but he went away by Christ's powerful command. He ceased to molest
Job, when he had vexed him, as much as he could obtain leave to do: when he
gives over any enterprise, he changes not his nature, but constrainedly
leaves his exercise: he goes, but it is when he can stay no longer, when his
Cummission is expired. Every commanded performance or forbearance, is not a
sign of grace. That which is incident to the Devil, argues no grace in man.
Balaam was forbidden to curse the people of God, and he forbears, but forcedly,
against his will. Let not men content themselves with the Devils obedience. To
leave sin for fear of hell, may go along with the love of it more then heaven.
When Moses's Parents exposed him to the waters, they loved him as much as (or
more then) ever. To leave sin for want of a body to commit it, is not to leave
our affection to it; the leaving of sin at our deathbeds, is seldom true;
ever suspicious. God loves a living Christian: any one will be a Christian
dying. Duties without, must flow from a gracious forwardness within. Join that
in thy obedience, which the Devil has divorced; inward subjection, to outward
services. Its one thing to be hindered from, another thing to hate sin. The
rebukes of our Superiors, may cause the former, a Principle of inward
renovation, can only produce the later. More of this in my former part, p.
491, 492, 497.

2. Observe. 2.
Gods power limits Satan's. Though the will of Satan shall never be changed, yet
his power is by God often curbed, when he is most violently running on in any
way of opposition to God or man, God can stop, and chide him back; of this also
par. 1.442, 447. With what an holy fearlesness may the godly go on in duty! The
wicked are willingly serviceable to a Master, who cannot protect them from Gods
wrath: Oh let us serve him cheerfully, who is able and willing to keep us from
the Devils rage; we see likewise to whom we owe our preservation, only to him,
who rebukes Devils.

3. Observe. 3.
How easily does God prevail over his greatest Enemies! It Is but (as it were) a
chiding, and rebuking them, and even in their greatest fury, they are mute, and
dare not, cannot quetch: what more easy, then for a Master to give a word of
rebuke? a word of Gods mouth, is enough to make the Devils tremble; they are
all underlings to God, they are before him as nothing: the greatest mountain of
worldly strength and opposition, shall be before God but a mountain of chaff.
If God do but ari^e, Psalm 68.1 Psalm 2.4.
his Enemies are scattered; yea, he who sits in heaven, shall have them in
derision; he derides them sitting: the fire does not so easily consume the
stubble, the wind dissipate the smoke, the Rod of iron break in pieces a
Potters vessel, as God overthrowes his Enemies. With a word did God make the
creature, with a word he moves it, with a word he stops it, with a word he
destroys it; in all these, Psalm. 142.15.
his word (as the Psalmist speaks) runs very swiftly. How vain are they who
think that worldly greatness, their wealth, their strength, their youth, can
shield them from the stroke of Gods power, whetted with his wrath! The sith
can get as well through the green grass, as the dry stubble: He who has but
faith enough to believe himself a creature, may be cautioned against Security
in sin: The most glistring Monarch, is but a gilded potsherd; in nothing so
mad, as to think it self safe, in contending with its maker; nor is it a less
excusable folly, to be swallowed up of fear, by reason of the worldly greatness
of any of Gods Enemies. Who art thou that art afraid of man that shall dye, and
the Son of man, that shall be made as grass, Isa. 51.12.
and forgettest the Lord thy Maker? At the rebuke of God, his, and our Enemies
shall flee and fall. How great is that folly, whereby men slight the great
God, and fear a silly worm! All the peace and forbearance that God expresses
toward his Enemies, proceeds not from his want of power, but from the
greatness of his patience; a strong inducement to us, who are weak worms, to be
patient under injuries, which we cannot repel; since God is so full of
forbearance, who is both infinitely provoked by, and infinitely powerful to be
avenged of his strongest Enemies.

4. The holiest persons, Observe. 4.
are most offended with practices that oppose Gods glory. When Satan dishonours
God, the holy Angel cannot refrain from praying that God would rebuke him.
Michael does not only dispute for God, but he desires God to plead for
himself: It would have been below Michael, to have been affected with any thing
a creature should have said or done, unless the honor of God had been
concerned; nothing is little, whereby Gods Name, or man's soul suffers. The more
any one knows the excellencies in God, or has tasted of the love of God, the
less can he endure any thing either done or said against God. Angels, who
continually behold the beauty of Gods face, do most abhor that which does
blemish, disparage it. These sons of God, endure not any thing whereby the
honor of their Father suffers. Heaven it self would be no heaven to those
glorious Spirits, should they be constrained to behold Gods name polluted. No
mere man ever had on earth, so clear a glympse of Gods glory as had Moses; nor
was ever any so holily impatient, when he apprehended a blemish to be cast upon
it. The broken Tables, the Israelites, which this meekest of men caused to be
put to the sword, yea, his request that himself might be blotted out of the
book of life, rather then any blot should be cast upon Gods honor,
sufficiently prove, that he who touched it, touched the apple of his eye. How
unlike to Angels are they who put up no injuries with such a tame
contentedness, as those which are offered to Gods name! who never say to any,
The Lord rebuke you, but to those who dishonor themselves? yea, are ready to
rebuke themselves, whenever they stumble upon any act of Zeal. Surely, the
fire of such men's Zeal is not Angelical and heavenly; but culinary and smoaky.
What likelihood that they shall ever inhabit the place, that are such strangers
to the disposition of Angels?

5. Observe. 5.
Its unsuitable to a gracious temper to recompense evil for evil. Michael here
commits his cause, and remits revenge to God; suitable to whose carriage is the
command of Scripture against private revenge, Prove. 20.22. Say not thou, I will
recompense evil; and Prove. 24.29. Say not, I will do so to him as he has done
to me; I will render to the man according to his work: And Romans 12.17.
Recompense to no man evil for evil: and ver. 19. Avenge not your selves, but
rather give place to wrath. Revenge opposes the mind of God; and it both
disturbs and expels the Spirit which would abide in the soul, and is the Spirit
of Peace and Dove-like Meekness; and lets in, and gives place to the Devil, who
is the father and furtherer of War and revenge. It divesteth God of his Office;
God alone knows how to punish our enemies without passion and inequality: It
makes him, in stead of a Judge, only an Executioner: It takes the sword out of
Gods hand, and drives him from his dominion. What difference makes it between
the party pr^voking and provoked, save that the last is last in the offense
against God? both are equally displeasing to him, whose Law is by both broken;
and supposing that our enemy has deserved to be hated, why has God deserved
to be disobeyed? Nor does revenge less oppose our own welfare, then Gods
pleasure. The Devil by this sin bereaves a man of his reason, and (like a bird
of prey, which seizing upon a dead Carcass, first pecks out its eyes) he blinds
his understanding, and then leads him into what wickedness he pleases. By
revenge we lose all that good which we might get, even by injuries. Holy
patience turns every injury thrown at us, into a precious stone, and makes it
an addition to our Crown. Qui injuriam patitur, magis dolere debet de peccato
injuriantis, quam de injuria sibi allata.
He who has received an injury, if wise to improve it, has received a favor,
a reward; and its against the rule of Justice to return evil for good. What
madness is it, because our enemy has done us wrong, to do our selves more?
because he has hurt our bodies, to damn our souls? that we may kill our
enemies Ass (his body) to kill our selves? that we may tear his garment^ to
lose our own lives? What unmanly folly is it to hate those in their sickness,
or madness, whom we love in their health? to hate those wronging us, whom we
would love when they do us good? When our enemies are most unkind, they show
more distemper in themselves, then they do hatred to us; and therefore deserve
more pity, then opposition. What greater cruelty then to cut and wound one who
is dead, I mean Spiritually? What more ridiculous, then because one has taken
a way something from us, therefore to throw away all that is left behind?
because he has stolen away our Cloak, or twenty Pounds, therefore to throw our
coat, or whole Inheritance into the sea? When one has taken from us the cloak
of our good name, Ridiculum est, odio nocentis innocentiam perdere. Senec.
or a little of our worldly estate, how wild a folly is it therefore to throw
away by revenge, the beautiful garment of our Innocence; yea, the inheritance
of Heaven? Its ridiculous, for the hatred of him that hurt us, to cast away
that which never hurt, will always be helpful to us; and because we are
bereaved of something which we had, our goods, therefore to throw away all we
are, our souls. What madness comparable to that, whereby in our prayers, we
daily power forth curses against, in stead of requests for our selves? Who
would not think him weary of his life, who being struck by one whom he knows
to be full of Leprosy and Plague sores, will spend his time in grapling and
contending with him again? None can avenge himself upon another without
Spiritual defilement and Infection; and (which is most inexcusable) that malice
for which he is so much enraged against another, he loves in himself. The
empty, transitory, though reproachful expression of his brother, he lays to
heart; but the sword of revenge, with which the Devil endeavors to kill him,
he contemns and disregards. In a word, what temper is more childish then that
of revenge, whereby like children, men desire and delight to strike that thing
which hurt them? Its folly to beat the Instrument which wounded us; our wisdom
it is, to labor that the wound which is given us may be healed and sanctified:
Yea, there is more of brutishness then manliness, when we are kicked to kick
again. Nothing more honors a man then the overcoming of revenge. He who can
master his own revengeful heart, has a spirit truly noble, and fit to govern
others. Upon David's sparing of Saul, wisely did Saul say thus to David, The
Lord has delivered me into thy hands, 1 Samuel 24.18, 20
and thou killedst me not: And now, behold, I know well that thou shall be
King. He only has something supernatural in Charity, who requites evil with
good, who loves his enemies, does good to them that hate him, wearyeth them
with patience, and writes after a heavenly Copy, Matthew. 5.14. More of this Part
1. page 131, 132.

6. Observe. ult.
The consideration of our having a God to whom we may commit our cause, is the
best means to make us patient under wrongs. Michael was a servant to a great
Lord, and to him he appeals, and lays the controversy before him: The Lord
rebuke thee. There would be more bearing in the world, were there more
believing. Did we look more upon him that is Invisible, we should less regard
the evils which we see and feel: Walk before me, (says God to Abraham) and be
perfect. Nothing, either of pleasure or pain, will seem great to him, in whose
eye there is this great Lord. The greatest prop in opposition is to have a God
to fly unto. The greatest loss for him, shall be made up (again) by him. When
David considered that God was his portion, Psalm. 16.4, 5.
he abhorred to go to other Subterfuges. They who believe they have a God to
right them, will not wrong themselves so much as to revenge their own wrongs.
God (they know) will do it, as more equally, so more beneficially: And the true
reason, why there is no more willingness either to forbear any sin, or to bear
any sorrow, is because we think not of this great Lord, so as either to fear,
or trust him. They who can call God Father, may with Christ pray concerning
their enemies, Forgive them. They who can see heaven opened, and Christ at the
right hand, pleading for them, may with Steven, ^ead for their enemies, and
pray, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.

VER. 10. But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what
they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.
IN this verse, our Apostle accommodates and applies the comparison of Michael
the Archangel; or further shows wherein the holy and humble carriage of
Michael, did make the sin of these Seducers appear more sinful and abomnable.
The Angel was a Creature, not only of the greatest created Might and Power, but
also of Wisdom and Understanding, and knew what the Devil was, name^y, a wicked
Creature, and destined by God to eternal perdition; accurately also he
understood, that the cause wherein he contended with the Devil, was Just and
righteous; he knowing the pleasure and will of God concerning the hiding of
Moses his Sepulcher; but these (says he) speak evil of what (persons and
things) they know not; are outrageous though ignorant* active, though blind.
And this want of due wisdom and understanding, in not knowing what they spoke
against, the Apostle illustrates, by showing what that kind of knowledge was
which was left in these Seducers; namely, such as was merely brutish and
sensual, and such as whereby they corrupted themselves: so that, as they sinned
in what they hated and opposed, because they knew it not; so likewise they
sinned in what they embraced and loved, because they knew it, but after a
natural, beastly manner; viz. for the fatisfying of their sensitive appetites:
and our Apostle does with admirable Artifice subjoyn this second, their natural
brutish knowledge, to the former, their ignorance; because thereby he amplifies
most wisely both those sins mentioned in ver. 8. viz. their defiling the flesh,
and despising of dominions: though (as Junius notes) by a hysteron proteron, he
amplifies the latter, their despising of dominion, in the first place.

The words contain principally these two parts: 1. The malicious ignorance of
these seducers, in speaking evil of what they knew not. 2. Their sensual
knowledge, in corrupting themselves in those things which (like bruit beasts)
they knew. In the former they showed themselves no Christians, in the latter
scarce men.

1. Their malicious ignorance, in these words, These speak evil of those things
which they know not. Wherein I consider, 1. Their act, (...), They speak evil,
or blaspheme. 2. The object of which they speak evil, and which they blaspheme:
Those things which they know not. To the first of these I have before on verse
8, and verse 9, spoken. Of the latter now.

EXPLICATION.
Three things here are to be opened.

1. What the things are which these seducers are here said not to know.

2. What kind of ignorance, or not knowing of those things it was* wherewith
they are here charged.

3. Wherein appears this sin of speaking evil of those things which they knew
not.

For the first of these. Some conceive (as Oecumenius and others) that the
things of which these seducers were ignorant, and spoke evil, were sundry
Doctrines, and points of faith, and mysteries of Christian Religion. The
Doctrines of Christianity surpassed their Reason, nor could they be perceived
by the power of nature. These seducers were such, as were ever learning, 1 Timothy
3.7. 1 Timothy 1.7. Mat. 15.14. Mat. 22.24.
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth: and having swerved from
the faith, turned aside to vain jangling, and desiring to be Teachers of the
Law, understood not what they said, nor whereof they affirmed. They were blind
leaders of the blind, not knowing the Scriptures. In a word, They consented not
to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.
and to the Doctrine which is according to godliness, but were proud, knowing
nothing, but doting about questions and strife of words, etc. And particularly,
they were ignorant of that main fundamental Gospel truth, viz: that the grace
of God teaches us to deny ungodliness; they holding, that they were by that
grace, freed from all holiness of life, and that all were thereby left at
liberty to live as they pleased; so that their lusts (like the dust) put out
the eyes of their understanding.

2. Others conceive more probably, that though the Apostle here uses an
indefinite expression, in saying (...), those things, yet that he here intends
principally, that these seducers were ignorant of the nature, institution, and
end of that dominion, those dignities which they so much despised and reviled,
verse 8. that they knew not, that Magistracy was appointed by God, and that to
continue, even in the time of the Gospel, notwithstanding the liberty which
Christ has purchased for us: In short, that they were ignorant of the great
utility and beneficialness of Civil Government, in, and to the world; that it
defends justice, opposes vice, preserves public peace, relieves the
oppressed, and is that Tree, under the shadow whereof we quietly, and safely
sit, and are sheltered.

2. second, What kind of ignorance it was, with which the Apostle here charge
the Seducers. There are three sorts of ignorance. 1. An happy and profitable
ignorance, viz. not to know those things, the knowledge whereof proves hurtful;
thus it had been good for Adam, not to have known evil experimentally. It had
been good for the Jews, if they had never known the corrupt and idolatrous
fashions of the Heathens; and in some respect, 2 Pet. 2.21.
it had been good for Apostates, if they had never known the way of
righteousness. 2. There is a knowledge of mere and simple negation; as Christ
knew not the day of judgment, and as illiterate Mechanics, know not sundry
Arts and Sciences, as Physic, Astronomy, and this is without sin. 3. There is
an ignorance of evil dosposition, and this is twofold. 1. Of frailty, when we
are ignorant, and naturally indisposed to the knowledge of those things which
we ought to know; but yet we are holily sorrowful for it, mourn under it, and
pray against it. Thus even the godly are ignorant. 2. Ignorance of evil
disposition may be supine, gross, or affected; when men like themselves well
enough in their ignorance, and their ignorance in in themselves; and this is
not only non profligata, an ignorance not fought against and opposed, but also
affectata, affected and loved, by men who refuse instruction, that so they may
sin the more freely, and prosecute evil the more without controlement. This
sort of ignorance, is not barely nescire, a nescience, Non est consequens, ut
continuo erret, quisquis aliquid nescit; sed quisquis se existimat scire quod
nescit. Aug. c. 17. Enchir. Psalm. 82.5. Isa. 44.18.
and not knowing either of the things which we are enjoined and bound to know;
but a nolle soire, a conceited, contracted, contented ignorance, which thinks
it knows what it knows not, and desires to unlearn what it knows; the former is
the cause of sin, but of the latter, sin is the cause; that ignorance, whereby
men desire not the knowledge of the ways of God, know not (as the Psalmist
speaks) nor will understand, but walk on in darkness. In brief, this ignorance
wherewith our Apostle charge these seducers, is not only that qua nesciunt,
whereby they discern not; but qua respuunt, whereby they despise things needful
to be known; approve not the things that are excellent, delight in error,
quarrel with, and resist the truth, and (as Peter speaks of this very sort of
men) are willingly ignorant. Romans 1.28. 2 Pet. 3.5.
the Heathen are said not to like to acknowledge God; their blindness was
natural, and they did also voluntarily choose their superstition, before the
knowledge of God.

3. Briefly for the third,

1. Its a sin discovering the grossest folly. Not to understand, is a man's
infirmity, but to speak what, and evilly of what he understands not, is his
folly. If folly be discovered in speaking much, even of what we know; more is
it manifested in speaking any thing of what we know not. If an ignorant
speaker, much more is an ignorant reviler his own Enemy; he shoots up arrows,
which for ought he knows, may fall upon his own pate; he speaks that in his
fury, which he cannot unsay, and for which he may be undone in his sobriety: He
that answers a matter before he hears it, Prove. 18.13. Prove. 16.23.
it is a folly and a shame unto him. The heart of the wise teaches his mouth.

2. To speak evil of what we know not, is greatest injustice. If he speaks
unjustly, who utters what is good and just, in a cause which he knows not,
because its more by hap (as they say) then by honesty; how much greater is his
injustice, who speaks that which is evil and unjust, of what he knows not. Its
unjust to speak evil of any, (without a call) though we do know it; much more
when we do not know it. How unequal is it, that another should suffer for my
ignorance, much more from my self! its the happiness of him who suffers, but
the sin of him who offers the injury, that the former has no fault, but the
ignorance of the latter. Though David will ever be reckoned among good men, yet
his act of ignorant censuring Mophibosheth, (unheard Mephibosheth!) will ever
be reckoned among his unjust actions. The like may be said of Potiphars doing
evil to Joseph, before he knew his cause; and Elie's censuring of Hanna for
drunkenness, before he heard her.

3. To speak evil of what we know not, argues the height of malice; he may be
malicious, who speaks the evil he knows; much more he, who utters that which he
knows not. Its from want of love, to discover the sin we find in another, but
its the excess of malice, to make that sin, which we could not find. If love
makes us believe that good, 1 Cor. 13.7
which we know not in another; then must it be malice, which makes us believe
and report that evil, of which we are ignorant. To conclude, Its a malicious
rejoicing in evil, to delight in uttering an evil, 1 Cor. 13.6.
which we really behold in another: But how great a pleasure does he take in
another evil, who rejoices in his very fancying, and imagining of that evil
against another, which he frames in his own thoughts!

4. To speak evil of what we know not, discovers impudency in wickedness, and a
sinful immodesty, as well as maliciousness: such an evil speaking, argues that
a man has sinned away shame, as well as love: What greater impudency, then for
a man to outface at once the common observation of hearers, who happily can
contradict foolish slander, and also the danger that false accusation incurs
among men; yea, conscience checking, and representing God himself, both
observing and threatening ignorant and evil speaking.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. None are so ready to speak as the ignorant. Observe. 1.
They who know least, speak most, and oftenest. In multiloquinm, stultiloquium
Eceles. 10.14. and 5.3.
A fool is hardly discerned, when silent; his picture is best taken, when he is
speaking; If he holds his peace, he is accounted wise; he is (by Solomon)
called, a prating fool: A sool, says he, is full of words, and is known
thereby; empty vessels sound. A wise man has something to do before he speaks,
and besides speaking; namely, to consider, and let down the Bucket of his
tongue, into the Well of his reason, before he pour forth words. A fools work
is only to speak, no wonder then if he does it with greater speed then a wiser
person; and if he (like Jacob, in his hasty providing of meat for his father)
more suddenly presents the Hearer with a kid of the Goats, then another shall
with Venison; and more easily brings what comes next hand, and is at the
tongues end, then another does that for which he has labored: and yet deluded
Hearers, to whom such a Present of empty words is tendered, commonly (like blind
Isaac) bless, and applaud the bringers thereof, sooner, and more then those,
whose words are more weighty, and prepared with greater pains. Their
backwardness to learn of others, has made them so forward to teach others; and
because they were fruitless Scholars, they are forward, and fruitless Teachers:
And yet these empty speakers, so as they may be commended by the ignorant for
knowing, Ja^. 1.19. 2 Samuel 18.22. (...). Inter proverbia Nazianani. In dolio
discere fig^^inam. 1 Tun. 3.2. 1 Timothy 4 13.
care not though they be condemned by those who are knowing, for ignorant. Its
good counsel of the Apostle, to be slow to speak, and to take heed of coveting
(with Ahimaas) to be Messengers, before we have tidings ready; and with the
empty and ambitious Bramble, of desiring to be erected over others, as their
instructers, when, having never been instructed, we can administer nothing to
the Hearer, but fruitless words, empty leaves, and unsavory discourses. The
faulty in this kind, may well give good measure, for they give but had weight,
and may sell that cheap, which costs them nothing. Its inverted order, to be
Teachers before we are Scholars. The Apostle commands that a Bishop be not
(...) only, a Teacher; but (...), fit, or meet, or apt to teach; and that he
attend to reading, as well as speaking. As without the blessing of God, no
means are prevalent; so without the use of means, no blessing can be expected.
Its only suitable, that his tongue should be the pen of a ready writer, whose
heart has first been enditing a good matter. Psalm 45.1.
Nor should the Hearer be less careful to discern, then the Speaker is to
indite a good matter. How few Hearers have we, that can yet difference between
matter and words; it suffices the most, if the hour be filled up with an empty
noise, without any solid instruction; how rare is it to find (though we run to
and fro in the streets of London) a man (I mean) in understanding. Prove. 18.15.


2. Observe. 2.
Ignorance is the cause of opposing the ways of God. [ They speak evil (says
the Apostle) of those things which they know not.] The opposing and crucifying
of Christ himself, proceeded from ignorance: Had they known, (says the
Apostle) they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. 1 Cor. 2 8. I wot
that through ignorance (says Peter to the Jews) ye did it, speaking
concerning the killing the Prince of Life, Acts 3.15, 17. Christ himself
testifies of his Murderers, that they knew not what they did. And these things
(says Christ, speaking of the unkindness and cruelties of sinners against his
servants) will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor
me, John 16.3. John 4.10.
If thou knew (says Christ to that pore Samaritane) the gift of God, and
who it is that says to thee, give me drink, then would thou have asked of
him, and he would have given thee living water. The reason why those profane
ones refused Gods service, Job 21.14, 15. and asked what profit, they should
have if they prayed to him, is plainly employed to be their ignorance; they
desired not the knowledge of his ways, and Who (say they) is the Almighty?
etc. The reason why the Heathen did not call upon God, Psalm 79.6. is said to
be this, they knew him not. Romans 3.11. There is none that understands, that
seeks after God. Ignorance made the Gentiles strangers from the life of God,
Ephesians. 4.18. Its a sin which never went single, it ever walks in company, and is
an inlet to all impiety. Although the prayer of Christ for his ignorant
Enemies, showed that God might take occasion from their ignorance to forgive
them; yet does it also plainly imply, that the sin to be forgiven them, took
its rise from their ignorance, their doing, was from their not knowing what
they did. An unregenerate man's practice is, Insipientes in peccato
intelligentes in supplicio.
a fashioning himself according to lusts in his ignorance, 1 Pet. 1.14.

Did men either see the deformity of sin, or the beauty of holiness, they would
neither delight in the former, nor dislike the latter: when there is no
knowledge of God in the land, there is neither truth, nor mercy, Hos. 4 1.2.
but swearing, lying, killing, stealing, committing adultery, etc. The
foundation of obedience, must be laid in knowledge, which (in a sort) is the
root of other graces, 2 Pet. 1, 2. Grace be multiplied unto you, through the
knowledge of God. See also ver. 3. The will and affections, are led by the
understanding, which sits at the stern in the soul: all the sins of the people,
are called errors, Heb. 9 7. As Eve, so others since, are drawn to sin, by
being deceived, 1. Tim. 2.14.

The first work of grace, is to reform the understanding, Romans 12.2. Be ye
changed, by the renewing of your mind. And Col. 3.10. The new man is renewed in
knowledge. The imaginationsand thoughts of the mind, are by the Apostle called
(2 Cor. 10.4, 5.) those strong holds, and high things exalted against the
knowledge, and to be subdued to the obedience of Christ. How dangerous then is
ignorance! He who wants the right knowledge of God, is still under the
dominion of Satan, who is called, Ephesians. 6.12. the Ruler of the darkness of this
world. This Ruler of darkness, takes up his Throne in dark hearts; none are
turned off the Ladder, but such whom he first blinds. I send thee (says Christ
to Paul) to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God. Acts 26.18. Ignorance is the beaten path to hell, My people perish for
want of knowledge, Hos. 4.6. Whomsoever God will have to be saved, he will
bring to the knowledge of the truth. 1 Timothy 2.4. They who have not known Gods
ways, P^al. 95.10, 11
shall never (if we may believe God swearing) enter into his rest. Foolish are
they who boast of their good minds and meanings, Concerning Knowledge, s^e Part
1. p. 383, 384.
and yet continue ignorant; Without knowledge, the mind is not good. Prove.
19.2. Many cry up practice and good meaning, to cry down knowledge; ignorant
devotion, is but feet without eyes, which the farther and faster they carry us,
the greater is our deviation and danger.

To conclude this point: How excellent is every way of God, of which only
ignorant ones speak evil! besides the ignorant, heavenly learning has no
Enemy. Thre's none who know it, (as we say of some men) but love it: All the
children of wisdom justify her, Matthew. 11.19
nor was she ever condemned, but by those who never would hear what she could
say for her self. How patient should every Saint be under all the reproaches
which they meet with for holiness, from blind sinners, whose tongues are in
this no slander! A blind man cannot judge of colors. Much more deserve they our
pity and prayers for their want of eyes, then our wrath for their abusing their
tongues. Let all our revenge be, to labor to make them know and speak better.
He who strikes his friend in the dark, will be most offended with himself when
the light discovers his mistaken unkindness.

3. How great is the sin of speaking evil of those things, Observe. 3
the worth whereof we do know! If to speak ignorantly and evilly against what
is good, be a sin; then to speak knowingly and evilly against it, must needs be
a greater sin. If they may sin who think they do God service in speaking
against a person; how heinous is their sin, who know that they do God
dis-service, and the Devil service in such speaking? All sin against Light,
especially reviling against Light, borders upon the sin against the Holy Ghost,
and adventures to make too near an approach unto it. To speak evil even of what
is not good, may be bad; to speak evil of what is good, is worse; to speak evil
of what is good, though we know it to be so, is much worse, and within one step
of speaking evil against it, because we know it to be so. Such sins more
stupifie and benumb the conscience then do others, and keep it from
sensibleness; and therefore it will want a deeper wound (and possibly such an
one as shall never be cured) to make it sensible. How deservedly solicitous
therefore was holy David in his Prayer, Psalm. 19.13.
to be kept from sins of Contumacy and Presumption! sins, which as they are
more ordinarily committed in days of light and much knowledge, so can they not
be committed at so easy and cheap a rate, as may those which are caused by
ignorance.

4. Observe. 4.
We should speak against known evils, and for what we know to be good. If the
wicked fear not to speak evil of the good which they know not, how unsuitable is
it for Saints to be afraid to speak against those evils which they know to be
such? As it is a sinful forwardness to speak, at any time, of the things which
we know not; so its (often) sinful backwardness, not to speak the things which we
do know: Knowing (says the Apostle) the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11.
we persuade men. We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen,
says Christ, Joh. 3.11. Shall not sinners forbear to revile holiness, and
shall others refrain to withstand impiety? How inexcusable is it, that
ignorance should be more active in a wrong, then knowledge in a right way! When
men oppose holiness, they fight without eyes; and shall light produce
luke-warmness? What a shame is it, that Satan should have more Confessors and
Martyrs, then Jesus Christ! If sin and error fears no colors, and covets no
corners, should Grace and Truth do either? the fool hardiness of sinners, may
justly reprove the faintness of Saints. Its our duty to be valiant for the
Truth, and to give the glory of God reparations (as it were) by wiping off the
blemishes cast upon it by foolish and ignorant men. When we have upon grounded
deliberation chosen our Love, we should zealously express the love of our
choice. Sinners (as they say of young men's thoughts of old) think that Saints
are foolish, but Saints know that sinners are so. Let not their prosecution of
sin, be more zealous then thy reprehension of it* nor their opposition of any
way of God be more hot then thy contention for it: Let thy fire have more
purity then theirs, but let it not be inferior in its fervor. The Christians
Serpent must not devour his Dove. How good a Master do the godly serve, who
requires no duty but such as he warrants in, and rewards after the doing!
Satan's servants are scepticks, and he puts them upon such employments, in the
doing whereof they cannot know they do well; and afterward they shall know they
have done ill, and that to their cost.

5. Corrupt affections blear and darken the judgment. Observe. 3.
These Seducers hated the ways of God, and deilghted to oppose them; and
therefore they did not, would not know them. He who will be disobedient in
heart, shall soon have a dull head. They who love sin, will leave the Truth.
Lust opposes the entrance of the Light. Repentance makes men acknowledge the
Truth, 2 Timothy 2.25. Every one who does evil, hates the light, John 3.20. Men
love not to study such Truths as will hinder them (being known) from going on
in some gainful wickedness. Its from unrighteousness, that men imprison Truths.
They who thought the believing of the Resurrection would hinder their course in
sin, Prove. 28.5.
taught that the Resurrection was past, 2 Timothy 2.18. Lust perverts Light, and
makes men, in stead of bringing their hearts and lives to the Scripture, to
bring, to draw the Scripture, by carnal, and wittily wicked distinctions and
evasions, to both. Knowledge is the mother of Obedience, and Obedience the nurse
of Knowledge; (...).
the former breeds the latter, and the latter feeds the former. Of this largely
before Part 1. page 616, 617, etc. Observe. 6. Qui prius quam chord as
exploraverit, omnes simul inconcinne percutit, absonum et absurdum strepitum
reddit; sic judex qui singulas li^ga torum causas non pulsavis, nec audivit,
stultam plane and absurdam sententiam pronuntiet necesse est. Petrarc.


6. Its our duty to forbear speaking against any thing which we understand not.
He that answers a matter (says Solomon) before he hears it, it is folly
and shame to him, Prove. 18.13: As men are not to be commended, so neither to be
condemned before the knowledge of their cause. As he causes an harsh and
unmusical sound, who strikes and plays upon the strings of an Instrument
before he has tried and tuned them; so he must needs pass a foolish and absurd
Sentence upon any cause, who passes that Sentence, before he has seriously
heard and weighed the cause to which he speaks. Herein Eli manifested his fault
and folly, 1 Samuel 1.14. rashly and weakly charging Hanna with Drunkenness. Thus
also David discovered his folly in giving credit to the information of
flattering and false-hearted Ziba, against good Mephib^sheth, 2 Samuel 16.3, 4.
before he had heard what Mephib^sheth could alledg for himself. Potiphar
likewise showed himself as unjust, as his wife showed her self unchaste, by an
overhasty heeding of his wives false and forged accusation against righteous
Joseph. Genesis 39.19, 20
To these may be added, the ignorant censure of those Scoffers who derided the
Apostles, filled with the Holy Ghost, as if filled with new wine. Inter
tri^icum and lolium, quamd^u herba est and nondum ^u^mus venit ad sp^cam,
grandis similitudo eft, and in disceruendo, aut nulla, aut perdifficilis
distan^ia. Praemon^t ergo Dominus ne u^i quid ambignum est, cito sententiam
proferamus, sed Deo judici terminum reservemus. Hieron.

Ut nobis exemplum proponat ne m^la hominum, ante praesumamus credere, quam
probare, Gr. Mor. l. 19. c. 23.


Doubtful cases are to be exempted from our censure. [The wheat and courser
grain (says Hierom) are so like to one another, when newly come up, and before
the stalk comes to the ear, that there is no judging between them, and therefore
the Lord by commanding that both should be let alone till the Harvest,
admonishes as that we should not judge of doubtful things, but refer them to
the judgment of God.] Even God himself, who clearly discernes the secrets of
the heart, and needs not examine any cause for his own information, determines
not by sentence, till after examination, that so he might teach us by his
example the method of judging, Genesis 18.21. Which is to know, before we censure.
They who to make show of what they have not (a quick understanding, and nimble
apprehension) will take off a speaker in the midst of his relation, and make as
if they knew all the rest of his speech which is to follow; and others, who
though they will hear the whole speech out, yet not clearly understanding it,
scorn to have it repeated again, lest they might be thought slow of
apprehension; by their foolish and ill accommodated answers, do often grossly
bewray their ignorance and folly. And this speaking of any thing ignorantly,
should principally be avoided by Magistrates and Ministers. By Magistrates,
because their passing of a sudden and overhasty answer is accompanied with the
hurt of others, and withal, by so much the more should they take heed of this
folly, because when they have once passed (though a rash and unjust) sentence;
Vid. Cartw. in Prove. 18.13.
yet so great a regard must be had (forsooth) to their Honors (by themselves
already dishonored) that seldom or never will they be induced to retract or
recall any unrighteous censure, when once they have uttered it. Which sinful
distemper appeared not only in those Heathen Governors, In their censuring of
John and Christ.
Herod and Pilate, but in that holy man David in the case of Mephibosheth. By
Ministers likewise should this speaking ignorantly and doubtfully of anything,
be avoided, whose work being to direct souls, and that through greatest
dangers, to the obtaining of greatest happiness; they cannot be blind Leaders
and ignorant Teachers, without the infinite hazard of their followers. How
unlike are they, who will be Teachers, before they themselves have been taught,
and Affirmers of what they understand not, to him who spoke only what he knew,
Joh. 3.11.32.
and testified only what he saw and heard.

Thus of the first part of this verse, their malicious and unchristian
ignorance, They speak evil of what they know not. The second follows, their
sensual knowledge, What they know naturally, as brute Beasts, in those things
they corrupt themselves.

In which words two things are mainly considerable, 1. The sensuality of their
apprehensions. 2. Of their Conversations, Or 1. The kind or nature of their
knowledge, What they know naturally as brute Beasts. 2. The effect of that their
knowledge, In those things they corrupt themselves.



The first is 1. Propounded and specified; in these words, What they know
naturally.

2. Expounded by, and compared to the knowledge of the brute Beasts, as brute
Beasts.

EXPLICATION.
Three things here require Explication in this second part of the verse.

1 What the Apostle here intends by knowing naturally?

2 Why he compares them for this knowing naturally, to brute Beasts?

3. In what respect by this knowing naturally as brute beasts, Naturaliter
norunt; i.e. ipsa duce natura, nullo adhibito Magistro. Vt sunt ea quae sensu
percipiuntur tactu, viz. and gustu. Justinian. in loc. Naturaliter, solis
sensibus, absque judicio rationis, ac si essent bruta animalia, cognoscunt.
viz. quae pertinent ad appetitum sensitivum qualia sunt ^^tus, ^^bus, somnus,
veneris usus. Gerh. in ^et. (...). Oecum, Scire naturaliter, est scire non
consilio ullo, non ratione hu^nana, non Spiritus Divini luce, sed caeco naturae
impetu, and heliu^no more. Junius in loc.
they are said to corrupt themselves.

1. For the first. By this knowing naturally (in the Greek (...)) is to be
understood, a knowing only by the guidance of Nature, merely by their senses,
by touching, tasting, seeing, etc. a knowing whether a thing please sense, or
no, without any other Teaching, or any judgment and reason at all: and it
respects those things which belong to the sensitive appetite, as meat, drink,
sleep, etc. and hence it might possibly come to pass, that Gagneius
conjectured, though without ground, that (...), they know, is put for (...),
they desire, or have an appetite. This word [Naturally] is opposed to reason
and judgment; these sensual persons only knew things, as carried to their
outward senses. The force of nature only ruled them: reason never guided them.
O^cumenius expresses it very aptly; Whatever (says he) with natural force or
desire, without putting difference, as irrational creatures, they know, they
violently follow, as lustful horses or swine. Junius explains it thus, To know
naturally, is to know without counsel, humane reason, or the light of Gods
Spirit, and with the blind force of nature, and bestial motion, only following
natural appetite, and outward senses.

2. The Apostle does exegetically explain by an apt comparison, what he intends
by this knowing naturally; he says they know things as brute Beasts, in the
Greek (...) The word (...), brute, signifies either mute, or irrational and
brute, either without speech, Act. 25.27. (...), praeter rationem, sine
ratione. Animantia rationis expertia. Bez. Animalia muta Vulg. O mutis quoque
piscibus, donatura cygni si libeat sonum. Horat.
or without reason. There being no irrational Creature but is also mute; that
is, though not without a voice (so as fish are said more properly to be mute)
yet without speech, which none but man uses naturally. Now this knowledge which
belongs to brute Beasts, is that which arifeth from the instinct of nature,
consisting in the senses, and by the benefit of it, brute Beasts discern
between the food which is suitable, and that which is unfit, between that which
is beneficial, and that which is hurtful; unto which is joined a natural
appetite toward such things as tend to their preservation. Of this knowledge
speaks the Scripture, Isai. 1.3. The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his
Masters crib. And Psalm. 104.21. The young Lions roar after their Prey, and seek
their meat from God, etc. And ver. 27. They wait upon thee, that thou may
give them their meat in due season. That thou give them they gather, thou
openest thy hand and they are filled with good. And Job 29.8. The range of the
mountains is the pasture of the wild Ass, and he searches after every green
thing. And ver. 29. The Eagle abides on the rock, etc. and from thence she
sees the prey: And Chap. 40.15. Behemoth eats grass as an Ox: ver. 20. The
mountains bring him food: yea, Prove 30.25 The ants prepare their meat in the
summer.

And by this knowledge of irrational creatures is that of these sensuallists
here by Jude set forth, for sundry Reasons.

1. In their knowledge of things naturally; they desired sensual objects
violently and impetuously. They labored not for them with an holy
submissivenesse to, and dependence upon God; but followed them with a brutish
fierceness: They were like the Lion roaring after his prey; when they see what
they love, there is no holding them in, with the reins either of Reason or
Religion: they ran greedily after reward, subverted whole houses, and taught
any error for filthy lucres sake. Tit. 1.11. They were greedy dogs.

2 They received no enjoyments thankfully, not considering the giver; they
drank of the river, taking no notice of the fountain; filling their vessel with
it, and then turning their backs upon it. They received gifts, but regarded not
the hand which bestowed them. Their bellies were filled with treasures (to
them) hidden. Like swine feeding on acorns, which though they fall upon their
heads, never make them look up to the tree from which they come: When God
opened his hand, they shut their hearts; denying the tribute of praises which
God expects for all his blessings.

3 They pleased themselves with the gifts solely, never regarding the love of
the giver. Beasts care not with what affection any thing is given to them, so
as they have the thing which they want. These sensuallists desired not that the
gifts which they enjoyed might be turned into mercies: not considering that the
love of God is the fullness of every enjoyment: in this, worse then some
beasts, who suspect a snare when provision is plentifullest. These never caring
whether the heart of God were toward them or no, so as his hand were opened;
and using the gifts of a Creator, not regarding the affection of a Father; not
questioning whether their provisions were bestowed upon them as children, with
love; or whether as condemned prisoners, to keep life in them against the day
of execution: and in short (like beasts) as the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 2.12.
they were made to be destroyed: they so knew these sensitive objects, as not
knowing whether they were fatted by them for slaughter.

4 They knew these things so brutishly, as not to know how to improve them:
they cared not to be fitted by them for service. Brute beasts only live to
eat: and so these made their sensual pleasures the end of their living, never
referring them to glory-ends; not making them vehicula, chariets, to carry them
faster, and to raise them up higher to God in a way of love and duty; but
vincula, bonds, to keep and bind them down to the satisfaction of sense. They
used not their comforts as wings, to make their thoughts and affections mount
up to heaven; but as bird-lime to their wings, and hindrances from all
heavenly both desires and services.

5 They knew no measure in the using of these things: They (like swine)
wallowed over head and ears in the mud of sensual enjoyments, being themselves
gulphs of them, and ingulphing themselves in them; and not tasting them, but
even bursting with them. Like some horses, they had rather break their wind,
then their draught: Their hearts were overcharged with surfeiting, Luke 21.34.
They ran to excess of riot. In stead of cheering, they clogged nature, turning
Christianity into Epicurism; they made their belly their God, and they served
it, Romans 16.18. Phil. 3.19. Their sensual appetites were boundless and
unlimited; they rather pampered, then fed themselves.

6. They so brutishly knew these things, as not to know instruction or any
restraint: growing untamed and impatient of the yoke, like a backsliding
heifer; they would not endure admonition: And he (says Solomon) who hates
reproof, is brutish. Like Jesurun, Prove. 9.8 Deuteronomy. 32.15
they waxed fat and kicked. Hence they despised and opposed all dominion and
government, like the wild ass, J^r 2.24. Hos. 8.9.
which snuffing up the wind, is not to be catched. A brute beast fed to the full
endures not to be beaten; these seducers resisted the truth which opposed
their lusts, 2 Timothy 3.8. and quarrelled with the word of life: like brute
beasts, which though never so sick, will strike at those who let them blood, or
give them the wholsomest drink. It was as easy to catch an hare with a tabret,
as to make them hear reproof in their sensual enjoyments. They who are in an
harvest of worldly pleasures, commonly have harvest-eares, not at leisure to
hear what may regulate them in their sensual prosecutions.

7 They knew these things so brutishly, as never to consider of a removal of
them, or the approach of the hatchet: they were sensually secure, like the
beast, feeding themselves without fear; they mocked at the denunciations of
judgment, as Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 3. drinking away sorrow; like the old world,
eating and drinking, though the flood were approaching, and never considering
that their wine was soon to be turned into water.

8. They so brutishly knew these things, as not to know how to part with them:
A beast knows no other woe, but want of provender; nor sensuallists any other
penalty, but the parting with sensual objects: These never learn with Paul, how
to want, and how to abound; or with Job, to bless God when taking away, as
well as giving. They so addict themselves to sensitive delights, that they
cannot be without them; and so are they fastened to them, and their heart so
set upon them, that the pulling them away, is the pulling off their very flesh.
When they enjoy them, they are so secure, as if God could never remove them:
when they want them, they are so impatient, as if God could never restore them.

For the Third branch of Explication, Branch 3 of Explicat.
viz. In what respect by their knowing naturally, they are here said to corrupt
themselves. The words [corrupt themselves] are contained in that one word in
the Original, (...), which signifies properly so to spoil and deprave or mar a
thing, as that it loses its former worth and excellency, or is unfit for that
use to which it should be employed: And among profane Writers its often used
to note the violating and abusing of the body by unchastity; and so its
commonly said, that a Virgin, or her Virginity is corrupted or violated. And
thus Epiphanius understands it in this place, who says, Juvenis corruptor,
Virgo corrupta.
that the Spirit of God by Jude shows these Seducers to be (...), corrupted,
and corrupters, in respect of their lasciviousness. But the Scriptures use the
word to express any other kind of violation or abuse of a thing. So 1 Cor.
15.33. Evil words corrupt good manners. And Ephesians. 4.22. the old man is said to
be corrupted, according to deceitful lusts. And 2 Cor. 11.3. the Apostle uses
it to express the corruption of the mind, etc. And in this more large sense I
take it in this place; as noting not only bodily, but even spiritual, and
eternal corruption. And the word (...) includes that other word, themselves; it
being not altogether of the passive form, but of the active and passive
together, answering to the Hebrew Conjugation Hithpael, which notes the action
of any one toward, or upon himself. And this the Apostle Peter plainly
expresses 2 Pet. 2.12. when he says, that they utterly perish in their own
corruption; they rush into their own ruin, and go of themselves headlong to
destruction, as the Fish or Mouse (seeing the bait) into the net or trap, Vide
Junium in loc.
and then more and more by sin intwisting and entangling themselves to an utter
overthrow and perdition.

And more particularly, by their sensual knowledge of carnal objects, they
incurred a fourfold corruption:

1. They corrupted themselves with a natural corruption; in bringing upon their
bodies sundry kinds of Diseases, by their Luxury and intemperance, making
themselves old before their time, and hastening their death. As Vermin and Mice
haunt those places where there is much food; Immodicis brevis est aetas. et
rara senectus.
so Diseases abound in those bodies which are used, or rather abused to excess
of Riot. More (says one) are drowned in the cup then in the sea: and Gluttons
are said to dig their graves with their teeth.

2. They corrupted themselves with a civil corruption. Overthrowing their
Families, and wasting their substance to the maintaining of their intemperance,
bringing themselves to a morsel of bread. Sensual and intemperate persons,
swallow their estates down their throats; The Drunkand and the Glutton shall
come to poverty. Prove. 23.21.
Diogenes once said of a Drunkard, whose house was to be sold, I thought he
would ere long vomit up his house, alluding to his vomiting in Drunkenness. The
Prodigal wasted his portion upon harlots. These corrupters are worse then
Infidels, nay beasts, who by the light of nature provide for their young.

3. They corrupted themselves inwardly and Spiritually. And that, 1. By
clouding their reason and understanding; Drunkenness being (as one wittily
says) an interregnum of the mind; which for the present loses the use of
reason, whereby a man should be governed. Many have drunk away their wit and
wealth too. When Wine gets in, wit (we say) goes out. Wise men are seldom
excessive. Anima sicca, anima sapientissima.
Hos. 4.11. Wine and women take away the heart. 2. By hindering the Spiritual,
and Heavenly, and Supernatural actings of the soul, making it unfit for holy
Services, Prayer, Hearing, Meditation, etc. Hence the Apostle opposes the
being drunk with Wine, to the being filled with the Holy Ghost. Excess in
sensual, hinders Spiritual pleasures. Hence it was a good rule of Ambrose, So
to rise from Table, as to be fit for Prayer. How can he have his heart in
Heaven, who (as they say of the fish called the (...), or the Ass fish) has it
in his belly. Grace is starved, while the flesh is pampered. Meat is to be used
as our Medicine. Feasting days are soul-starving days, and Easting days are
soul fatting days.

4. They corrupted themselves eternally. Destroying themselves soul and body,
by the loss of those Pleasures at Gods right hand, Psalm. 16. ult.
to which here in this life they preferred the pleasures of sin for a season.
Sweetly bitter pleasures! sweet in the pallat, bitter in the stomach; bitter to
soul and body for ever! How will a fatted Glutton fry in Hell! How dismal a
retribution will a River of brimstone be for a cup of Wine! 1 Cor. 6.10.
Drunkards are in the catalogue of the excluded from the Kingdom of God. They
who are here drowned in profuseness, shall hereafter be drowned in Perdition;
yea, here they begin to be so.

OBSERVATIONS
1. Observe. 1. Cognitio sui intellectue, licet praestantior sit, qua vis
cognitione brutorum, referunt eam ad exercitium operum sensualium. Ut
satisfaciant appetitionibus carnalibus. Lor. in loc.
How great a confusion and disorder has sin made in this little world, man! He
whose reason was once wholly subjugated to God, and whose appetite was guided
by, and submissive to his reason, has now an understanding which has cast off
the Government of God, and an appetite which has cast off the guidance of his
understanding. In the state of Innocence, the sensitive appetite of man, was
ruled by the Golden Scepter of Reason; the sensitive Powers were not factious,
but were willingly subject to the Higher Powers, to the intectuals. The first
bublings of the soul (as one says) were pure and Crystaline, and streamed out
freely, without any murmuring or foaming; but now, alas! the soul is full of
insurrections. The Master waits, and the servant is Master. The knowledge of the
understanding is made a Vassal to this natural knowledge. That leading faculty
in a man, his understanding, is now a Page to wait upon the sensual appetite,
or the knowledge of the senses; and all the contrivances and inventions of the
former, are referred to the service of the latter. The Master does not now lead
his horse, but the horse drags and hurries the Master, even as a beast
sometimes draws a condemned Malefactor to the place of Execution. All the
confusions we see in the world, are but derivations from this. Reason easts off
Religion, and then Sense and carnal appetite casts off Reason. All the Errors
in Doctrine, proceed from the former, and the irregularities of Practice flow
from the latter. The servant casts off the Master in the state, because it has
first cast him off in the soul.

2. Observe. 2 Quia nolunt intelligere quae sunt gratiae, amittunt sapere quae
sunt naturae.
They who oppose Spiritual Knowledge, justly lose even that which is
reasonable, They grow, with these Seducers, mere Sensualists; not admitting the
former, deservedly, they part with the latter. These Seducers opposing the
Truth of the Gospel, denying the Lord Jesus Christ, and becoming enemies to
Supernatural knowledge; now what they knew, they knew but naturally, and only
with the knowledge of the outward senses. They would not be real Saints, and
they came to be not so much as visible. They would not be Saints, and at length
they ceased to be men. Romans 1.21, 24 26, 28.
The Heathens by opposing even the faint light of nature, were by God given up
to Uncleanness, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves, to vile
affections, and a reprobate mind. Seducers grow worse and worse
He who will put out light revealed, shall justly extingnish light implanted.
Its righteous with God to leave them to Sense, who will not be guided by Grace.
From him who has not, shall be taken away, even what he HAS: Even appearances
of goodness shall be taken away. Brass but Silvered over, will at length
plainly appear to be but Brass. A face only beautiful with paint, shall, when
wrinkles grow deep, be destitute not only of complexional, but even fictitious
beauty also. How exquisitely do these days of ours comment upon this Truth! Oh
that we could not say, that hundreds, whose eyes have seemed to be fixed upon
the Stars, themselves pretending to a Seraphical pitch of knowledge have yet
fallen into a ditch of beastly sensuality. None so shamefully beggarly, as he who
breaks after much trading, Of this more, Part 1 page 310
and trusting. Christians, beg of God that your grace may be true and
supernatural, and then it will be growing: but if it be only appearing, and not
arsiing to true Sanctity, it may soon arrive at sensual Beastiality.

3. Observe. 3.
The light of reason is too weak to contend with sensual appetite. When these
Seducers had bid adieu to Spiritual light, notwithstanding their rational
light, they grew sensual and brutish. Should the Sky be furnished with
millions of Torches, they all could not (as does one Sun) bestow those
influences upon the earth, whereby it could be made green and fruitful. The
light of Grace, is only influential upon the heart and life; That of Reason
produces no fruit truly favoury. That which it does draw forth, is but like
the fruit, which requiring a hotter soil and Sunshine, (when men sometimes plant
it in our colder Countries) never comes to perfection, and has hardly half
heat enough to concoct it. The greatest (if mere) Scholar in the world, knows
nothing as he ought to know, and therefore loves nothing as he ought to love.
He sees not (without renewed light) in any way of God, that prevailing
transcendent Excellency, which outbids the bravery of every other Object. The
light of Reason, in the most knowing Heathen that ever was in the world, was
but a candle light, notwithstanding which he was yet in the night: It scattered
not the works of Darkness; nor did he (as one says well) warm his hands at
this candle: Notwithstanding this, famous Moralists have been cold in their
Devotions, and dissolute in their Practices. The wisest Heathens, ( Romans 1.)
how sensual and impure were they, notwithstanding their most refined Reason!
and like to Indians, Observe. 4. Quatuor imperia ostensa sunt Danieli, sub
similitudine bestiarum, non hominum quia non insurrexerunt per viam rationis,
sed impetu sensualitatis. Durand. de Orig. jurisd.
which notwithstanding all their Gold and Jewels, are yet wont to go naked.

4. Outward Enjoyments make no man excellent. He may, yea, (unless he be more
then a man) he will become a beast by the using of them. The four Monarchies of
the world, were represented to Daniel under the similitudes of Beasts; not of
men, because they were neither erected, nor exercised in a way of Reason, but
of Brutish Sensuality. A m^^ may be laden with Gold, and yet be as a Brute. His
being changed from Poor to Rich, is but a poor change, unless he be changed
from Natural to Spiritual; from an old, to a new man. Even the Wealthy ( Psalm.
49.10) is called a Fool, and a brutish person: and ver. 12. Man being in honor
abides not, he is like the Beast that perishes. Nero was a Lion, Herod a Fox,
The Princes of Israel Wolves, Kine of Bashan, notwithstanding worldly glory.
Outward Ornaments make no inward alteration. Hence see what is the true
standard of Honor. Lust is the souls degradation even in all earthly
abundance, only Grace makes us excellent; it destroys not, but elevates
nature. Sensual objects do not elevate, but corrupt us.

5. Observe. 3.
Sensual appetite is deceitful. When these Seducers knew things naturally, with
sensual knowledge, they were led to corruption. An ignis fatuus leads men into
bogs and precipices. Natural knowledge carries men (like filly beasts) into a
snare; If the blind lead the blind, both must fall into the ditch. The Lusts of
the sensitive appetite are foolish, 1 Timothy 6.9. and therefore foolish, because
they make men fools, who are led by them: and Ephesians. 4.22. the old man is said
to be corrupt according to decitful lusts, (...). As man shows his infection
with original pollution, principally by his Lusts; so those Lusts principally
discover themselves in their Deceitfulness. When they tempt a man to sin, they
promise pleasure and contentment; they perform nothing less, but leave the poor
seduced sinner spoiled of his happiness, and corrupted both inwardly,
outwardly, and eternally. Sensual delights strangle with a silken halter,
Latrones quasi laterones; viatoribus ami^e se quasi (...) ^djungunt, ut
incautos co facilius grassentur.
kill a man in the embracing him, and like Thieves, will ride friendly and
pleasantly with the Passenger, that so unawares they may the more easily
destroy him. Saint James says, a man is drawn away of his own Lusts, and
(...), enticed. They bait over every hook. Oh that when a man says, How can I
forbear the bait (...) he would ask himself, How can I endure the book? Oh,
will the comfort countervail the corruption; the spoiling, not only of my body
of my Goods; but the loss of my Soul, my Grace, my Heaven, my God, my All.
Consider the bitter farewell of al sinfully sweet morsels; view them with a
Scripture Prospective; look upon them as going away, as well as coming. Behold
their back, their black side; they are venenatae deliciae, Poisoned Pleasures.
It Is easier to pass by, then get out of the snare. If thou be a man of appetite,
Prove. 23.2.
put a knife to thy throat. Lust betrays with a kiss: Al carnal delights go
out in a stink, and commonly it is that of Brimstone. As we cannor walk in this
life by sight in respect of Glory, so should we not in respect of Sensuality.
As we are absent from heaven in regard of Sense, and present there in regard of
Love; so though we are present among earthly enjoyments in respect of Sense,
yet should we be absent in regard of affection. To conclude this, consider the
difference betwixt Spiritual and Sensual pleasures; The former are good in
Harvest, the latter only in Seeds-time: (They who sow to the flesh, shall of
the flesh reap corruption. Gal. 4.6.
They who sow to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.) The
former are bitterly sweet; the latter sweetly bitter. The former turn water
into wine, as the latter do Wine into water. In that which a man knows
Spiritually, and to which he is led by the guidance of the Spirit, in that he
preserves himself: And its observable how the Apostle opposes the deceitful
Lusts in ver. 22. of Ephesians. 4. to the Truth in Jesus, ver. 21. Christ is Truth,
Lust is vanity and deception. Christ gives true happiness, and more then was
ever expected. Lust deludes, disappoints, corrupts.

To end this needful Point, In all worldly pleasures, wisely draw off thy soul,
by comparing such sordid puddles with the crystal rivers of eternal joys. Let
Moderation, and heavenly Discourse be two dishes at every Banquet. A Soldier
supping with Plato, who had provided nothing but green herbs, said, He who sups
with Plato, shall be better the next day. Tertullian said of the Primitive
Christians, that they did not, Tam coenam coenare, quam disciplinam. One would
have thought they had been at a Sermon, not at a Supper. Oh that Spiriritual
delights were more tasted! He who lives at the Table of a King, despises
scraps; and such are all worldly pleasures esteemed, by him who has tasted how
sweet the Lord is. The more pleasant any thing is to us, the more suspected let
it be by us. Satan lies in ambush behind our lawful enjoyments; as the body is
the temple of the Holy Ghost, so is Christian temperance the aedituus,
Tertullian.
or Keeper of that Temple.

VER. 11. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily
after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.
AT this verse, and so on to the seventeenth, our Apostle prosecutes the third
part of that second Argument, whereby he puts the Christians upon contending
for the faith against Seducers.

That second Argument was taken from the certainty of the destruction of those
Seducers; and its prosecuted from the fourth to the seventeenth verse of this
Epistle. Page 1. Part 2.
In the managing whereof (as has been said before) the Apostle having first
set down several examples of Gods wrath upon others in former times, for their
sins, from the fourth to the eighth verse. And secondly, Having declared that
these Seducers lived in the same sins which God had formerly punished in
others, from the eight to this eleventh verse.

3. He now thirdly concludes; that these practicing their impieties, shall
partake of their plagues. And this conclusion he prosecutes throughout this
eleventh verse, and forward unto the seventeenth. In the handling of which
Conclusion, the Apostle concludes the destruction of these, 1. By propounding,
2. By expounding it. Or 1. By a Denunciation thereof. 2. By a Delineation
thereof.



1. By propounding and denouncing thereof, in those words of this eleventh
verse, Woe unto them.

2. By an expounding or delineating thereof in the following expressions of
this and the other verses, unto the seventeenth; and he expounds it by a mixed
description of their sin and misery; And he mixedly describes their sin, and
miseries (the effects of their sins) three ways: Nominat hos tres prae aliis,
quia hi tres fuere Dei, fidei, and sanctitatis hosts, ac fideles seducere, and
Ecclesiam perdere voluerunt; unde fuerunt Simonis, Gnosticorum, and
haereticorum typi and prodromi. Cor. Lapide in loc.
1. From the suitable examples of Cain, Balaam, Core,
in this eleventh verse, whom he rather mentions then any others, in regard of
their great hurtfulness to the Church by cruelty, seduction and sedition, they
being the types and forerunners of these Seducers. 2. From sundry elegant
comparisons, ver. 12, 13 3. From the certain and infallible Prophecy of Enoch,
propounded and amplified ver. 14, 15, 16.


This eleventh verse then, consists of these two parts.

1. A Denunciation of Woe and Judgment. 2. An Amplification thereof, from the
three forementioned examples of Cain, Balaam, Core.


1. The Denunciation of Judgment, in these words, Woe unto them.

EXPLICATION.
It may be demanded, In what sense the words, Woe unto them, are here used, and
how to be understood?

The uttering of this word, Woe, denoting in Scripture grievous calamities and
miseries, either present or approaching; is used three ways:

1. Vae condolentis, imprecantis, praedicentis.
There is vae dolentis, and condolentis; when woe is used as an Exclamation of
grief, pity, and commiseration; and then it imports as much as if the Apostle
had said, Alas, how am I grieved, (in consideration of their approaching ruin)
for these wretched sinners, that are running to their own destruction! and thus
the word woe is often taken in Scripture: as Mich. 7.1. where the Church
resenting the general corruption of the times, and her small number, cries out,
Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the Summer fruits, as the
gleanings of the Vintage. The good man is perished out of the earth, and there
is none upright among men. Thus also the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 24.16. laying to
heart the wickedness of the people, and the Judgments which were to follow,
expresses his holy sympathy in these words, Woe unto me, the treacherous
dealers have dealt treacherously, etc. Thus the same Prophet again, chap. 6.5.
Then said I, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips,
etc. for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts, etc. So Jer. 4.41.
and 6.4. Jer. 13.27. and 45.3. Lam. 5.16. Now though it cannot be denied, but
that the faithful do, and ought with holy commiseration to lay to heart the
miseries of others; yet I understand not this expression of woe in this place,
in this sense; for besides that Jude knew, that these Seducers were ungodly
men, and appointed to this condemnation; his scope was not to express his
sorrow for them, but to warn the Church of them, by discovering the Judgments
of God against them.

2. There is vae imprecantis, a woe of cursing and imprecation, used sometimes
by Godly men, against the implacable, and irrecoverable enemies of God. Thus
the Prophet Habakkuk utters it against the Caldean, who wasted the Church, Hab.
2.6, 9, 12, 15, 19. Psalm. 40, 14, 15 59.14.
Thus David Psalm. 109.6, 7, 8, 9, etc. prays for the destruction of his
enemies. That the Apostles had this power of cursing the incurable enemy, of
the Church, whose destruction the Lord had extraordinarily revealed to the ^^nd
that they used it, is very evident; Paul prays (...) 2 Timothy 4.14.) that the
Lord would reward Alexander the Copper-smith according to his work: And its
hard to deny, Non dicit Apostolus (...), reddet; sol (...), reddat: Sunt vota
imprceantis, non verba praedicentis. Rivet. in Psalm. 40.
that Jude in this place does put forth that power against these Seducers: Sure
I am, Paul, Gal. 5.12. prays, that the false Teachers might be cut off, who
troubled the Church; and he who enabled the Apostles to foreknow the ruin of
Seducers certainly, without error, might help them to desire it holily without
revenge. And never did either Christ or his Apostles, express so much heavenly
vehemence against any, as against those who hindered the eternal salvation of
souls; witness the woes eight times repeated by Christ against the Scribes and
Pharisees, Matt. 23. As also Paul's carriage toward Elimas the Sorcerer, Acts
13. Some (indeed) of this impious rabble, who were not so obstinate, malicious,
and subtle as others, Jude might spare; he desiring the Christians afterward,
that on some they should have compassion, putting a difference.

And if it be here demanded, How the Apostle could lawfully say, Woe unto them?

I answer, 1. He expresses not this woe unto them in respect of his own cause,
but the cause of God; not as they were his, but Gods enemies.

2. He directs not his imprecations against persons curable, but incurable; and
he might know them to be so by some extraordinary inspiration.

3. His affections herein were not carnal, but Divine and Spiritual, stirred up
purly by Zeal to Gods glory, and the safety of the Church. In a word, If this
woe here pronounced by Jude, were a woe of imprecation, he was carried to the
uttering thereof by the same Spirit, by which he penned the Epistle.

3. There is a vae praedicentis, a Woe of prediction and denunciation, whereby
imminent and impendent evils are foretold and denounced against others; and in
this sense its ^^^monly used and uttered in Scripture, Eccles. 4.10. Eccles.
10.16. Isai. 3.9.11. 28.1. 30.1. 31.1. Hos. 9.12.24 Matthew. 24.19,
and most commonly by the Prophets: Isai. 3.11. Woe unto the wicked, for it
shall be ill with them: Isai. 5.8. Woe unto them that join house to house, etc.
And ver. 11. Woe to them that rise early in the morning, that they may follow
strong drink. Matthew. 24.19. Woe to them that be with child, and give suck in
those days, etc. And this sense (though some Learned men exclude not that
which was last mentioned) we may safely admit in this place: our Apostle
concluding, that undoubtedly they who were as bad as the worst of former
sinners in respect of sin, should be as miserable as they were in regard of
punishment.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Spiritual and eternal woes, Obser. 1.
are the true woes. To be woeful indeed, is to be under the wrath of God. This
is the woe here by Jude denounced against, and by God inflicted upon these
Seducers. Whatever woe comes without Gods wrath, may have more of weal in it,
then of woe. Other woes touch the skin, these the soul. Other woes part between
us and our Estates, names, worldly comforts; but these between us and God, in
whom is laid up all happiness. How foolish is every sinner to fear the name,
the shadow, and not to tremble at the thing, the reality of woe, like the
beast, who is more affrighted with the flash of the fire, and the noise of the
report which is made in shooting off the Gun, then with the fear of the bullet.
Eternal woes come with less noise, and therefore with more neglect then others:
They kill, though they do not affright. The fear which Christ commands is of
him who kills the soul. Of this more, Part 1 p. 282.
What proportion of misery is there between the souls leaving the body, and
Gods leaving the soul? Bodily miseries are but opinionative and appearing.
There is not a drop of true woe, in a deluge of outward troubles which befall a
Saint.

2 Wickedness ends in woe. Observe. 2
Sinners may see nothing but wealth in the commission, but they shall find
nothing but woe in the conclusion of sin. Every Lust, though it kisseth, yet
betrays. Romans 6.21.
The end (as the Apostle speaks) is death. Its the truest wisdom to consider,
whether, when we find it difficult to overcome the present tentation, it be not
more difficult to undergo the following woe. Oh, could we but look upon the
blackness of the back of sin, how little should we be allured with the fairness
of its face! How far from wisdom will it be for the deluded sinner hereafter to
say, I did not think it would have been thus with me, that hell was so hot,
that Gods wrath was so heavy! The mirth of every secure sinner, that goes
dancing to hell, Amara sint omnia gaudia quibus respondent aeterna supplicia
is no better then madness. How bitter should that drop of pleasure be to us,
which is answered and overtaken with a sea of pains! There Is no judging of our
future, either woe or happiness, by what appears at present. The portion of Gods
peoples cup, is to have the best, and of the wickeds, to have the bitterest at
the bottom; and yet the top of the cup seems to promise the contrary to both.

3. Scripture imprecations and cursings, Observe. 3.
must not be drawn to be our examples. We may indeed pray against the wicked
practices of others, that God would stop and hinder them; with David, that God
would turn the wisdom of Achitophel into foolishness. 2. Its lawful for us to
pray for temporal afflictions to befall the wicked, to the end that they being
sensible of Gods anger against sin, may be brought to repentance, and so to
salvation. But 3. Prayers for the eternal confusion of others, are not
absolutely to be put up to God. They who will imitate the Scripture in
imprecations against others, must be sure they imitate those holy men who
uttered them, in being led by the same Spirit, both of infallibility, in
discerning of men's persons and Estates; and also of purity, or freedom from
those corrupt affections wherewith our zeal for Gods glory is ever too much
mixed, and therefore to be suspected. This counsel Christ gave his Disciples,
Luke 9.55. Matthew. 5.44.
who asking whether (after the example of Elijah) they should pray that fire
might come down from heaven to consume the Samaritanes? q.d. Yours is motion
not of zeal, but revenge. Ideo Deum a se expellit, qui illum a proximo avertit;
and facit Deo injuriam, quia seipsum judicem constituit, et Deum tortorem. Aug.
Ser. 4. de Sanc.
were answered by Christ, that they knew not what spirit they were of. Our
Masters precept was, Bless them that curse you; yea, bless and curse not: and
his pattern left us is 1 Pet. 2.23. set down in these words, When he was
reviled, he reviled not again. The time of Prayer (says Chrysostom] is the
time of meekness. And he (says Augustine) drives away God from himself, who
would turn him away from others; he being injurious to God, in making him the
Executioner, and himself the Judge.

4. Observe. 4.
God warnes of woe, before he sends woe. He takes not sinners at the advantage
(as he might) in the act of sin, but he foretells the woe before he inflicts it.
He usually cutteth men down by the mouth of his Ministers, Genesis 15.16. Matthew.
23.37
before he cuts them off by the hand of Executioners; by the sword of his
mouth, before he does it by the mouth of the sword. Gods method is to give
premonition, before he inflicts punishment. The two destructions of Jerusalem
by the Caldeans and Romans, came not till foretold by the Prophets and Christ:
Of the two general destructions of the world; Ge^ 6.3. 2 Pet. 3.
the past by water, and the suture by fire, sufficient warning has been given:
God hereby speaks himself gracious, and the wicked inexcusable. He threatens
that he may not smite; and he smites that he may not slay; and he slays some
sometimes temporally, R^v 2.21.
that they may not be destroyed eternally. God foretells ruin, that it may be
prevented. Jonah's prophesying of Niniveh's overthrow, Venturum se praedicat,
ut cum venerit, quos damnet non inveniat. Greg
was (as Chrysostom says) a kind of overthrow of the Prophecy. And hereby the
wicked are proclaimed inexcusable. They cannot say in their greatest suffering,
but that they had premonition. Even the enemies of God shall justify him when
he condemns them. They cannot but excuse God from desire of revenge, the
desirers whereof are not wont to give warning. Professa perdu t^dia vindictae
locum. Sen. Medea.
Christians, take heed of turning the denunciations of woe into wantonness. Its
neither for want of sin in man, nor strength in God, that in stead of wounding
he only warns. His hand is not weakened that it cannot strike; nor his arm
shortened that it cannot reach us: He has not lost his power, but he execiseth
his patience, and he exercises his patience in expecting our repentance. Non
ille potentiam perdidit, sed patientiam exercet. Patientiam exercet suam, dum
poenitentiam expectat, tuam. Aug.
Let us prepare to meet our God, even when he is coming toward us, before he
come at us. Let us dispatch the Messengers of Prayer and Reformation, to meet
him, and make peace with him, while he is vet in the way, and afar off. Though
Gods patience lasts long, it will not last ever. If we will sin,
notwithstanding a woe threatened; we shall be punished notwithstanding a mercy
promised. He who is long a striking, strikes heavy. The longer the child is in
the womb, the bigger it is when it comes forth. The longer it is ere woe comes,
the bigger will it be when it comes. No metal so cold as Lead before it is
melted, but none more scalding afterward.

5. Ministers must denounce woes against the wicked. Observe. 5.
Jude describes the fierceness of Seducers, and exhorts the Christians to
compassion; and yet his meekness abolisheth not his zeal. The regard of Gods
glory, and the souls of the Saints, draws forth this severe denunciation
against the Enemies of both. He is as bold to foretell their woe, as they to
proclaim their wickedness. The like spirit we may behold in the holy men before
him: Causam populi apud Deum precibus; causam Dei apud populum gladiis
allegavit. Greg. Exodus 32.27.
Moses so meek, that, when he was with God, though he pleaded the cause of the
people with prayers, yet when he was with the people, he pleaded the cause of
God with the sword. The Prophets after him, Samuel, Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
were cold and calm in their own, but full of heavenly heat in Gods cause. Their
denunciations of woes (like lightning which smites the highest Towers) spared
not the greatest, if Enemies to God. Prophetical zeal, struck at sin where ever
it found it; witness all those numerous threatenings scattered in every leaf of
their Prophecies. The Apostles had their rod, as well as the spirit of
meekness, and did partake of that spirit which was represented as well by fiery
tongues, as the shape of a Dove. Paul strikes Elimas blind, and cursed
Alexander. Christ himself, whose mouth ( Matthew. 5.) was so full of Beatitudes,
no less then eight several times, denounces woes against the Enemies of God.
Its the disposition of Saints, to be holily impatient, when Gods glory suffers;
and (though never else) then to esteem anger seemly: disgraces against their
father, they cannot put up, these injuries they cannot concoct. Their
Commission likewise requires this temper, Isaiah 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not,
lift up thy voice like a trumpet, show my people their transgressions, and the
house of Jacob their sins. Jer. 1.7.8. Whatsoever I command thee, that thou
shall speak, be not afraid of their faces. A dumb Dog is good for nothing but
the Halter. Though the Children in the house must not be bitten, yet the Thief
either without or within, Chrysostom.
must not be spared; sinful silence and flattery, most oppose a Ministers
function. If sinners will be bold, let not Ministers be bashful: The most
zealous Ministers, have lived in the worst times; and they who are most hated
for their holy vehemence, can better endure the hatred of people for the
discharge of duty, then the wrath of God for the neglect thereof: He that
reproves, shall have favor at the last both of God and man. And even here a
zealous Reprover is honored, when he is hated; and the cause (says one) why
God makes the world so bitter to the Ministers by sufferings, is because they
are no more bitter^ to the world by Reprehensions. To conclude this, let none,
no not the greatest, be angry with Ministers for their faithfulness in
reproving: If there were Physicians, or Chyrurgians only provided for the
poor, and not for the rich, the rich would be accounted of all the most
miserable; and truly they were much more miserable for their souls, Crudelis
est eorum mollities, quibus molesta est nostra vehementia. Calv. in Mat. 13.
if they only were debarred from reproofs, the Physic of the soul. There is no
greater sign of a gracious heart, then to be both holily patient in the taking,
and wisely zealous in the giving of a reproof.

2. Thus of the first part of this verse, the denunciation of judgment, Woe
unto them. The second follows, the amplification thereof, from three examples,
of Cain, Balaam, and Core; and first that of Cain, in these words, They have
gone in the way of Cain.

EXPLICATION:
Four things here are to be touched by way of Explanation.

1. Who this Cain was. 2. What his way was. 3. Why its called a way. 4. How
Seducers are said to go in his way.
1. For the first, the holy story relates (besides the other particulars which
I shall note in the second, his way:) 1. His Birth. 2. The imposition of his
name.


1. His Birth is described, Genesis 4.1. where its said, that Adam knew Eve his
wife, and that she conceived and bare Cain. This Cain was the firstborn of the
first Parents in the world, and so Elder brother to all the sons of men; and
Moses to show the common and constant way of the multiplication of mankind,
fully declares his generation; Creavit ex terra procreavit ex legitimo
conjugio. Pareus. Musc.
hereby manifesting, that Cain was neither formed out of the earth, as was
Adam; nor of the rib of the man, as was Eve: that he came not of Adam alone,
without Eve, nor of Eve alone without Adam; but that there was a conjunction of
both: that Adam knowing his wife (a modest expression) she conceived and bare
Cain. And withal, in this relation of the Birth of Cain, Moses discovers, that
generation (to continue to the worlds end) derives the corruption of our first
Parents to all their Posterity, (though generation it self be not culpable, but
natural, and by God appointed:) So that whosoever is now naturally begotten,
and conceived, has not a holy and pure nature, (as had our first Parents
before they sinned) but a nature depraved and corrupted, as they had after they
had sinned: and particularly in relation to Cain, he shows that Adam, a
sinner, and of a corrupt nature, knowing Eve, who was infected also with sin,
and she conceiving and bringing forth Cain; its no wonder that this their
firstborn was of so wicked and corrupted a disposition, since he was conceived
and born of the seed of sinful flesh: nor is it to be thought, that Abel an
holy man, had his holiness derived to him from his Parents, as if he had not
with Cain been conceived in sin; but that by the mere and singular grace of
God, he had that integrity bestowed upon him, of which Gain was destitute.

2. For the imposition of Cains name. The word Cain, is derived of Cana, which
signifies a possession; for his Mother Eve giving him that name, said she had
gotten, obtained, or possessed a man from the Lord. Its here disputed by
learned men, what Eve intends, by saying I have gotten a man (ETH. JEHOVAH, (as
we render it) from the Lord: Sundry conceive (in regard the Preposition ETH is
commonly a note of the Accusative case) that Eves words are thus to be read,
Acquisivi virum Jehovam, I have gotten a man that is the Lord; as if she had
thought that this her firstborn was that promised seed, the Messiah, which God
had promised should break the head of the Serpent, and redeem mankind from sin
and misery: but the Preposition ETH, (...) Certum est particulam E^h, ut.
plurimum esse ^otam Accusativi casus, quem verba transitiva regunt; sed tamen
acc^pi non raro pro a, ex, de, cum, Praepositionibus: and exempla adfe runt ex
scriptura Grammatici, ubi particula illa juncta verbo intransitivo aut
Hithpael, accipitur pro (...), cum Genesis 5.22. Exodus 1.1. pro (...), vel abs.
Genesis 44 4. Riv. in Genesis Jun. Trem. Rivet. Mercer.
is often in the Scripture, a note of the Ablative, and imports as much as from,
with, by, etc. as Genesis 5.22. Enoch walked, ETH ELOHIM, with God. Exodus 1.1. The
Children of Israel who came [ETH] with Jacob into Egypt. Genesis 44.4. When they
were gone [ETH HAIR] out of, or from the City, etc. Some there are who take
[ETH] here for the note of the Dative (...), and then the meaning of the words
is, I have gotten a man to the Lord; that is, who after our death shall (though
herein she was mistaken) in our stead, serve and worship the Lord. But the best
expound [ETH] (as I said) by with, from, by, etc. and so the meaning is, I have
gotten a man (...), that is, by the favor, help, and blessing of the Lord, as
his gift, by ratifying his blessing of multiplication, Chap. 1.28. and that
both blessing my conception of a Child, and also my Childbirth, without the
assistance of a Midwife: This may well be the meaning of the place, and Eves
thankful acknowledging Gods bounty in giving her a son; as its suitable to those
expressions of Scripture, Gen 33.5. Psalm 127.3. where Children are said to be
an heritage, and gift of the Lord: so is it agreeable to the carriage of holy
persons in other times, who thus have praised the Lord for their Children:
though Eve (besides the common apprehension and acknowledgement of Gods
blessing and bounty herein) probably did expect some extraordinary comfort and
relief by this her son, to sweeten that afflicted estate into which they had
brought themselves, and particularly, she her husband, and self by sin.

2. For the second, What Jude here intends by the way of Cain?

The word way in Scripture, is frequently mentioned, and is often used as a
Metaphorical expression of a man's course and manner of living, carriage, or
conversation in the world, whether good or bad.

1. Good, called the way of the Righteous, Psalm. 1.6. The Lord knows the way
of the Righteous. Prove. 2.20. That thou may walk in the way of good men. 2 Chronicles. 11.17. and 17.3, 20. and 20.32. and 21.12, and 27.6.
1 Samuel 8.3. Samuels sons walked not in the ways of their-father. So verse 5.
2 Kin. 22.2. Josiah walked in the way of his father David. The good way; Samuel
(1 Samuel 12.23.) says, that he would teach the people the good way. So Jer.
6.16. Nec prece, nec pretio, nec gratia, nec periculo nec simultate, a via
recta deduci oportet. Cicer. Rhet. l. 3.
Ask for the old paths, where is the good way. Job 22.3. Psalm 101.2.6. The
right way. 1 Samuel 12.23. And of these Seducers its said, 2 Pet. 2.15. That they
have forsaken the right way. Also its called the narrow way, Mat. 7.14. because
grievous and unpleasing to the flesh. Also the way of understanding, Prove.
21.16. and Prove. 9.6. Isaiah 40.14. The way of wisdom, Prove. 4.11. The way of
peace, Romans 3.17. The way of Righteousness, Prove. 16.31. Mat. 21.32. The way of
light, Job 21.13. The way of holiness, Isa. 35.8. The way of truth, Psalm. 119
30. 2 Pet. 2.2. The way of salvation, Acts 16.17.

2. Bad, called The way of the wicked, Psalm. 1.6. The way of the ungodly shall
perish, Prove. 2.12. Prove. 1.15. Prove. 4.14. 1 Kings 8.32. 1 Kin. 15.26. 2 Kin.
8.18.
Psalm. 146.9. The way of the wicked he turns upside down, Prove. 4.19. The way
of the wicked is as darkness. Prove. 13.15. The way of the transgressors is
hard. The way of the Heathen, Jer. 10.2. Acts 14.16. The way of ones own heart,
Eccles. 11.9. Isaiah 57.17. An unequal way, Ezekiel. 18.35, 29. and 33.17. A way
that is not good, Psalm. 36.5. Prove 16.29. An evil way, Prove. 28.10. Prove. 8.13.
The way of a fool, Prove. 12.15. Of the froward, Prove. 22.5. A way of pain or
grief, Psalm 139.24. A stubborn way, Judges 2.19. A broad way, Mat. 7.13. A way
of darkness, Prove. 2.13. A way not cast up, Jer. 18.15. Under this evil and
wicked way, falls the way of Cain, here mentioned by Jude, which is not so
largely to be taken, as for the whole sinful course and carriage of Cain,
throughout his life, but for some particular course of his, for which in
Scripture he is most condemned and punished by God, and in which he was by
these Seducers most imitated; Abel obtulit praestantius sacrificium, non id
intelligi debet ratione materiae aut quantitatis, sed animi offerentis and
fidei. Rivet. in Genesis 4. Ex fide ^btuli^ non s^lum ex mandato Dei, sed etiam
fiducia promissio ni^; ^erto statuens non opere o perato ^u^us ^^tus, se
aliquid mercri, s^d prop^er victimum M^ssi^e signfic^tt^m hac victi ma, se
recipi^^ gratiam Dei. Pareus in G^n.
and that way might be made up of three principal parts:

1. The way of hypocrisy. Cain indeed offered a sacrifice to the Lord, and
perhaps (though some deny it) every way as good and costly (in respect of the
outside thereof) as was that of Abel; yet he sacrificed in a faithless
hypocritical manner, as is clear from the reason why Abels sacrifice was
better, and better accepted with God then Cains; and that reason rendered by
the Apostle, Heb. 11. was because Abel offered in faith; by which faith, he
offering a better sacrifice, and better accepted, its plain that Cain
sacrificed not in faith, he performed a good work, but with a rotten and
hypocritical heart; not inspirit and truth worshipping God. The faith of Abel
in offering his sacrifice, stood principally in two things: 1. In eying the
rule and command of God obediently, who had enjoined it. 2. In expecting
acceptance from God for the Merit, not of his work, but of Christ, who was
signified by his sacrifice. Of both these, Cain though sacrificing, was
destitute, neither offering because he believed the Command of God was to be
obeyed, nor in offering, looking to find acceptance for his Person and
performance through Christ; but profanely, customarily, and proudly doing the
thing which God commanded, but disregarding the manner commanded in doing it.

2. A second way of Cain, and that principally (as I conceive) here intended by
our Apostle, was the hatred and murder of his brother, (...). 1. He slew a man,
herein sinning against the common nature of mankind. 2. He slew one that was
his subject, and obedient to him, whom he ought therefore to have defended
against all injury and violence. 3. He destroyed not a slave, and a vulgar
subject, but his own brother; (and some think that Cain and Abel were twins.)
Hoc nomine non simplicite^ homicida, aut servicida, fed fratricida.
4. A just and good man, did not slay an unjust and wicked man; but a wicked
and ungodly, slew a just and innocent man. 5. He did not slay him for any fault
of his, but for his holy and sincere worshipping o^ the true God. 6. He slew
him not stirred up by any sudden rage, heat or commotion of mind, or by
imprudence; but out of settled hatred and in a way of study to take away his
life. 7. This murder was committed by Cain, after God had admonished him to
take heed of that sin. 8. And after he had made a show of friendship and
reconciliation to his brother, Genesis 4.8. Cain talked (viz friendly and
familiarly) with his brother, and then he slew him. Hence this inhumane murder,
is that sin for which by the Apostle John, Cain is said to be of that wicked
One, 1 John 3.12. In short, First he inwardly hated and envyed his brother,
because his sacrifice was better accepted than his own; and then he expressed
this hatred, by his cruelty in killing him. His hatred, was murder begun; and
his murder, was hatred perfected. He, who cared not how he served God, regarded
not how he used his brother. Cain begins with sacrifice, and ends with murder.
There were in the whole world but two brothers and the one was a Butcher of the
other; Abel was the first Martyr, and Cain the first Murderer: And the same
cause, that moved Satan to tempt the first man to destroy himself and his
Posterity, moves the second man to destroy the third. Groundless envy! what
hurt did Gods accepting of Abel do to Cain? what help against God, rejecting of
Cain, could be brought by Abel? It should have been Cains joy to have seen his
brother accepted; it should have been his sorrow to have seen that himself
deserved a rejection. Could Abel have stayed Gods fire from descending, or
should he if he could, reject Gods acceptance, to content a brother? Cain was
envious, because God or Abel is not less good: He envied that good in his
Brother, which he neglected in himself. In short, Cains envy made him bloody;
and indeed (as one aptly expresses it) such is this fin, that if it eats not
another, heart it will eat our own.

A third way of Cain, was manifested in the complaining of his Curse: Genesis 4.13
My punishment (says he) is greater then I can bear. The words in the Original
admit of a double reading: Some understand them to be words of despair of
mercy, and read them thus, Major est iniquitas mea quam parcere (so Arias,) My
sin is greater then that I should ever obtain pardon. Others think they are
words aggravating his punishment, and complaining of its severity; and they
read them thus, Major est punitio mea quam ut feram, My punishment is greater
then I can undergo. And this Interpretation seems to be most favored by the
following words, Behold, thou have driven me out this day from the face of the
earth, and from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive, etc
According to this Interpretation, he does not so much confess the greatness of
his sin, as complain of the grievousness of his punishment; and seems not to be
so solicitous of reconciliation with God, as of preservation of his life. (...)
Iniquitas, poena iniquitatis. (...) Far, remittere: Verbum Nasa frequens est
in significatione portandi: fed quia far and tolerare, etiam apud Latinos,
significationem habent parcendi ideo est in voce ambiguitas. R^ve^. in Genesis p.
218.
But nothing hinders us from taking the words properly, as words of despair of
pardon; for those which follow, may be an exaggeration of his calamity, as if
he had said, I am not only (wretch that I am) without hope of pardon from God,
but banished also from my dear Parents, and compelled to wander about in the
world. And these different Interpretations were occasioned by the different
significations of the two words in the Original, Avoni, and Minnese. The former
imports both iniquity and the punishment of iniquity. The latter, both taking
away or remitting, and also bearing and sustaining. There is no danger in
reading the words either way; for as the words allow either reading, so his
impatience and despair imply each other; his despair of the taking away of his
sin being the true cause of his accounting his punishment greater then could be
born (for its sin only that makes punishment heavy:) and the complaining of the
intolerableness of the punishment, a true sign of his despair of the pardon of
his sin; so that it matters not much which way we take. Its plain, that as he
rather accused God of cruelty against himself, then himself of cruelty against
his brother; so that he added to the taking away of his brothers life, the
denying of Gods nature, in making his own sin greater then Gods Mercy; (horrid,
heinous either to speak or think!) In short, hereby Cain showed that he could
keep no mean; From security in sin, he fell into despair after sin.

3. 3 Branch of Explicat.
The third thing to be explained is, Why this course of Cain is here called a
way? Take it in these following considerations.

1. A way is that wherein there are sundry Passengers. Out of a way Passengers
or Travelers are not to be expected, but in a way persons ordinarily pass to
and fro. There Is no way of sin, though it be even Cains, but some, yea many
traverse it. The worst courses find most imitation. Wide is the gate, and broad
is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat,
Matthew. 7.13. The way of sin is most trodden and beaten. Sinners go to hell in
multitudes; and its as much against their nature to go to hell alone, as to go
in the way to heaven at all: They encourage one another in an evil way. They
wonder at those who go not with them, and reproach them, thinking them mad for
going out of the way, 1 Pet. 4.4. Wherein they think it strange that you run
not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you.

2. This sinful course is a way, in respect of the expertness of those who walk
in it. When men are out of the way, they often understand not where they are
and whither they are going; but in a w^y which they have often beaten, they go
on skilfully and expertly: Hence every one is esteemed expert, and believed in
his way. He who has been long used to a way, will undertake to go it
blindfold; he knows every turning, Town, Mark, Miles end. The wicked are witty
in sin, Mattr. 7.22.
they are workers of iniquity, (...), Curious contrivers of wickedness, wise to
do evil; Though to do good they understand not, but are sottish children: When
in sin, they are in their Element, and wiser in their generation then the
children of light. Put them out of their way, and they are presently at a loss.
How left handed are they in holy duties! how untowardly do they discourse of,
and act for God! they are children in understanding.

3. In respect of progressiveness. When a man is in a way, he stands not still,
and takes not only one or two, but many steps, goes on step by step. Wicked men
proceed in sin; they grow worse and worse; they know where they began, but not
where they shall end. Cain proceeded from formality in Gods service, to hatred
against his brother; from hatred, to dissimulation; from thence to murder; from
thence to despair, etc. His way was made up of several stages. Every step he
took left a stronger engagement to go on. The child of God, by the frailty of
the flesh, may slip, step into sin; but he does not stand, go on, keep a course
in that way: They are the wicked who stand in the way of sinners. Psalm. 1.1.
They make a trade of sin. A sinner falls into sin as the fish, the Saint, as a
child does into the water. In the latter sin is, but the former is in sin.

4. In respect of its period and term. The longest way has an end. The longest
course of sin, though of a thousand years continuance, terminates in
destruction. The full point of every sinful way is damnation; the end, though
not of the worker, yet of the work, is death; that is the wages of sin. The way
of sin is broad in the entrance, but its narrow in the conclusion: Prove.
5.5.7.25.
Its the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death. Foolish sinners, in
good duties separate the means from the end, accounting exactness needless: in
sinful ways they separate the end from the means, thinking torments fabulous:
although Scripture equally prescribes the former, and foretells the latter. Gods
method is first to bring into a Wilderness, and then to Canaan; Satan
contrarily leads from Canaan into a Wilderness. Gods way is right, and may seem
rugged; Satan's smooth, but false. Cain never left traveling in his way of
Hyprocrisie, Envy, Murder, till it ended in Despair.

4. Branch 4 of Explicat.
Fourthly, By way of Explication, we are to enquire; How these Seducers went in
this way of Cain?

1. They went in this way of Cain's formality and hypocrisy. They sacrificed
(I mean) partook of the same Ordinances and Privileges with true Saints; in
name, in the skin they were Christians, in the heart, at the core they were
unholy; they pretended to the highest pitch of Religion; but all this while (as
the Apostle calls them) they were but ungodly men. While they sacrificed
outwardly with Cain, they had inwardly the spirits of Cains; like those of whom
Saint John speaks, who went out from, but never were truly of us. Their impure
life, was a practical confutation of their verbal profession. In words they
professed Christ, but in their deeds they denied him, though the only Lord.

2. They went in the way of Cain, in respect of their hatred and malice against
the faithful. None so much envyed and opposed faithful Pastors and Teachers as
they did. False Teachers were Paul's standing Antagonists; they were like Jannes
and Jambres, who withstood Moses. The Scribes and Pharisees of all others most
hated Christ. Pilate knew that for envy they had delivered him. Seducers hate
those most, who hurt them most. The faithful Minister, that shines with the
light of pure Doctrine, these Thieves most strike at. The Leaders of Gods Army
they principally fight against. The Magistrate whom God appointed for the
restraining of sin, they bitterly hated and envyed; and it was not for want of
poison, but power, that they did not destroy and pluck up Magistracy by the
very roots. These Seducers were likewise murderers with Cain, the worst of
Murderers, soul-murderers. Their work was to draw men into perdition. They were
deceived and deceiving, blindly leading their blind followers into the ditch of
destruction. They denied him who is the Way, the Truth, the Life. Their
sacrificing was with a murderous intent; and though with Cain, who spoke most
kindly to his brother when he was inwardly most cruel, they utter fair and
sweet expressions, yet all was but to deceive the hearts of the simple. Under
every bait of good words, there lay the hook of Error and Heresy. They gave
their poison in a gilded cup, and ever came with an hammer and a nail, when
they presented butter in a Lordly dish; nor ever were they so much the
Ministers of Satan, as when they transformed themselves into Angels of light.

3 They went in the way of Cain, in regard of his complaint and despair. They
who walked in Cains wickedness, could not escape Cains woe. Jude here
denounces it against them, and tells us, they were before of old ordained to
this condemnation; they were beasts, made to be taken; they corrupted
themselves; they languish'd and pined away in their filthiness. There was a
ditch followed their blind-leading: and though the grace of God was turned into
lasciviousness by them, and abused as an occasion to sin, yet how glad would
they have been in the end, for one drop of those streams of grace, which once
they padled in, and trampled under feet? They who formerly taught, that by
reason of Grace men might sin; afteward felt, that for want of Grace they and
their seduced followers were sure to smart. They who once preached nothing but
grace, afterward felt nothing but wrath; a just recompense, since with Cain
they account the greatest sin in the commission so small, Obser. 1. Abeli nomen
inditum fuit a vanitate, ut significaretur humanam conditionem meram esse
vanitatem; ideoque Hebraei, Hebel appellant or is ha^t^um qui cito evanes^it.
Riv. in Genesis Exerc. 42. Qui clarus erat nativitate carnis, and charus
existimatione Parentum, respuitur a Deo; and qui habebatur ab^e^tus and null
lius momenti, re spic^tur and probatur. Respait igitur Deus primogenitos and
omnes eos qui chari sunt parentibus? non colligimus istam consequentiam, sod id
annotamus, non morari Deum hasce carnis praerogativas, vel quamcunque aliam
excellentiam secularem mag is quam spiritulem. Musc. in Genesis
that they need not to fear it; in their after-despairing confession, to find
it so great, that they are not able to undergo it; and besides all this, with
Cain, to be marked with infamy and dishonor to all posterity.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Privileges of nature commend us not to God. We find not seldom in
Scripture, that the eldest child, proves the unholiest. Abel, the younger, was
a Saint; Cain, the elder, was a Murderer: Cain excelled Abel in the dignity of
Primogeniture, and further, in the expectation of his Parents. Cain, if he were
not (as some think) deemed by them to be the promised seed of the woman, and
their Savior; is yet called a possession obtained of God, as one by whom they
expected to reap much good and comfort; Abel, according to his name, is deemed
unprofitable and vai. And yet he who was so eminent, both for his Birth, and
his Parents estimation, is rejected and he who was (says Musculus) accounted
as vain, and nothing worth, and unprofitable, is accepted by God; who though he
refuses not, yet neither receives any, for outward Prerogatives: he is no
respecter of persons. Jacob the younger was a godly man; and beloved; Esau, the
elder, a profane person, and hated of God. David, the youngest of Jesses sons,
was he, who of them all, we find to be according to Gods own heart. Ruben, the
eldest son of Jacob, was incestuous, Simeon and Levi cruel and bloody, Judah
adulterous; Joseph one of the youngest, only eminent for sanctity among them
all. If the privileges of nature had been any thing worth, the firstborn of
the sons of men, had not been a Reprobate; but God will have his grace known to
be free: he neither sees nor loves as man does, because he finds a lovely
object; but he of his own free bounty makes a person lovely, and then loves
him: with God, the first are often the last, and the last, first. When the Lots
were given forth for the choosing of an Apostle, though Joseph called Barsabas,
who was surnamed Justus, was the Brother or near Kinsman of Christ, Ut
intelligamus cum qui humano judicio praefertur esse inferiorem apud Deum.
Lorin. c. 1.
yet the Lot fell upon Matthias. Not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many Noble are called; but God has chosen the foolish things of
the world, to confound the wise; and weak things of the world, to confound the
things that are mighty, etc. 1 Cor. 1.27. Thou have hid these things (says
Christ to his Father) from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
babes; for so it seemed good in thy sight. How groundlesly do any conclude that
God loves them, from worldly preheminences!

It Is not any gift without us, but something of peculiar grace wrought within
us, that can evidence the favor of God toward us: not the first born, but the
new born; not the eldest, but the holiest, that may say, I know Lord that thou
love me. To conclude, Its the duty of those, who have received more favor
from God then others, as to acknowledge that God has done more for them, then
for others; so that it was only his mere love, that he did not more for others
then them; and to cry up free grace with heart, tongue, pen, life.

2. Though grace may be repaired in our selves, Observe. 2
yet is sin propaga^ed to ours. The clearest grain being sown, sends forth that
chaff from which it was fanned. Cain was too like his father in that, wherein
both were unlike God. Adam might see his own sinful nature in Cain, not that
grace whereby he had laid hold upon the promised seed* nor the fruit of his
care in training up his Children in Religion. Before Adam fell, holiness was
natural, and sin would have been adventitious; but now since the fall, sin was
natural, and holiness adventitious. The corruption of nature, is that Legacy
which Adam leaves to every one of his sons: grace is not native, but donative;
not by generation, but Regeneration.

After sin, corrupt, mortal Adam, begets a corrupt mortal Cain; for although
Adam through the grace of God were renewed by ^aith and repentance, yet his son
naturally begotten of him, was such as his father became by sin. That which is
born (says Christ John 3.6.) of the flesh, is flesh: where the Begetter, and
Bearer, Psalm 14.3. Romans 3.12 Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
are a lump of corruption, the birth is no whit better. When God looked down
upon Adams sons, they were all corrupt, not one who in himself was of a more
pure refined condition, or free from a depravedness, and disorder of the whole
man. Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? Adam begets a son in his
own likeness, Genesis 5.3. That which is required to conveying Original sin, is,
that a man by true generation do descend from Adam. God at the first set Adam
as a public person, representing the person of all mankind, with this
condition, that if he retained his integrity, the blessing of multiplication
once given, should be sanctified to him for the bringing forth of a Posterity,
righteous, and holy like himself; but if he fell away from his obedience, that
the blessing should be turned into a ^^rse, and should be a means of
multiplying a corrupt and sinful generation. He, who conveyed his nature to his
Posterity, conveyed also the pollution thereof. In the first man the person
corrupted the nature; in every other man, nature corrupts the person: whosoever
is a man by the propagation of Adams nature, is also a sinner by the derivation
of Adams corruption. Before we can partake of renovation by grace, we must know
our pollution by nature: pride caused, and humility should sollow our
degenerate estate: the ancient House, the many Descents, the Coat, the Crest of
a born Leaper, should not make him proud: happy we, if the corruption derived
from the first, drive us to the second Adam: this latter also has a posterity
who bear his Image. The Church comes out of Christ's side, in the sleep of his
death: Let us labor to be ingrafted into him, to draw from him a Spiritual
life, 1 Cor. 15.49. Romans 5.12, 14
to bear the image of the heavenly, as we have born that of the earthly.
Whatsoever the first Adam brought into the world by sin, the second carries out
by righteousness. In a word, How due, and suitable a recompense is it for every
Parent, to labor to bring their Children into a state of grace by education,
whom they have made sinners by propagation!

3. Our expectations in earthly blessings, Observe. 3.
often disappoint us. Eve names her eldest son, Cain, a possession, Fallitur
auguri^ spes bona saept su^.
and her second son, Abel, which signifies vain or unprofitable: she showed
(as some think) hereby the preposterousness of her affection, and that she
esteemed most of the worst: Her Cain (she was not herein unlike carnal Parents
among us) was her jewel; her Abel was vain and unprofitable in her thoughts:
She who mistook (says one) the fruit of the Garden, mistook also the fruit of
her own Body; her hope deceived her in both. God often crosses us in those
comforts, from which we look for most contentment. He whom Eve called a
possession, destroys the best part of her possession. Absolo^, called the
fathers peace, proved his greatest disturber. If thou make any earthly
enjoyment thy possession, God may make it thy murderer; and that thy trouble,
which thou expectest, should be thy rest. If the Lord loves us, he will not
suffer us to love any thing more then himself; and its our wisdom, to set our
hearts upon nothing, but that which is above the reach of danger and
disappointment; and to love nothing much, but what we cannot love excessively.

4. Its the duty of Parents, to be thankful (with Eve) for their children.
Children are an heritage of the Lord, Observe. 4. Clavis coeli, sepulch^i,
cordis, and matricis in ma^u Dei.
and the fruit of the womb is his reward, Psalm 127.3. God will be known to
have the Prerogative of opening the heavens, the grave, the heart, and the
womb. These are the children (says Jacob) which God has given me. Its vile
ingratitude to murmur at the numerousness of our offspring; to rejoice when our
Cattle multiply, and repine when our children increase: and to despise a
Present of Gods preparing and sending, so curious a piece of workmanship, Psalm.
139.15.
wrought with that incomparable and stupendous Artifice in the lower parts of
the earth. Its Heathenish distrustfulness to fear that he who has provided
children for us, will not provide necessaries for them. He who has given
mouths, will give bread, and often provides better for the poor children, then
for the repining parents. The Israelites in the wilderness who with sinful
solicitousness, cried out, that their little ones should be starved for want of
food, were themselves destroyed in the wilderness for want of faith, their
children mean while being reserved for Canaan. Numb. 14.31
Nor yet is it enough to take our children cheerfully at the hand of God, but
to dedicate them to him thankfully, and to part with them contentedly. Men are
not born into the world only that the world should not be empty, but that the
Church should be increased, and God more served. Prove. 3.9. Genesis 18.19.
If we ought to honor God with our dead, much more with our living substance,
and to take care that a generation may serve the Lord when we are gone; that as
we live (as it were) after our deaths in the persons, so Gods glory may live in
the services of our children. Adam instructed his sons, both in the works of
their Calling, and in the Worship of God. And for parting with our children; he
who gave, or rather lent, or rather put them to nurse to us, may peaceably be
permitted to require them again when he pleases; and he should never lose a
friend of any of us, for calling for his own.

5. Observe. 5.
Cains please not God in the performance of holy services. Prove. 28.9. Isai.
1.11, 12, 13, 14.
To Cain and his Offering God had not respect. He was in his way of sin, even
when he was sacrificing. The Prayer of the wicked is an abomination: God
delights not in their services; he demands, Amos 5.21. Isai. 66.3.
Who has required them? he cannot away with them, his soul hates them; they
are a trouble to him; he is weary of them, despises them; he will not accept,
nor smell their Offerings; He that kills an Ox is as if he slew a man; he
that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck; he that offers an
Oblation, as if he offered swines blood; he that burns Incense, as if he
blessed an Idol. The wicked perform holy services from an unholy heart. The
Spicing and Embalming of a dead Carcass, can put no beauty or value upon it;
They who are in the flesh, cannot please God: Romans 8.8. Matthew. 7.18
All the fruit of an evil tree, is evil fruit. The works of natural men, want
an holy principle, the Spirit of Christ, the Law of the Spirit of Life. A beast
cannot act the things of reason; nor can a man, unless sanctified by the Spirit
of God, do any good work. Till a man be ingrafted into Christ, and partake of
his fatness, he is but a wild Olive. All the works of unregenerate men, are sin
as they come from them: Without the Holy Spirit there is no holiness. Zacheus
was too low of himsef to see Jesus, he was fain to go up into a tree: We are
too short to reach to any good work; it is above our reach til the Spirit of God
lift us up. All the services of a natural man, are but the works of nature. He
does every Spiritual work carnally. John 15.4. Without me (says Christ) ye can
do nothing. All the works of a Christless person, are like the children of a
woman never married, spurious and illegitimate; they are not done through a
power received from Christ.

Wicked men perform no duty to a right end. Phil. 1.11.
Their fruits are not fruits to God, Romans 7.4. As they are not from him, so
neither for him. He is neither their principle, nor their end. Zech. 7.5.
Vainglory is the worm that breeds in the best fruit of the wicked. The flame
of Jehu's Zeal was but Kitchen fire, and therefore his Reformation but Murder
in the sight of God, Hos. 1.4. The Godly (says a Learned man) in doing good
works, are like the Silkworm, which hides her self, and is all covered over
while she works, within the curious Silk which she works. Her Motto, Operitur
dum operatur.
At the day of Judgment they know not the good works which they did.

The wickeds outward acts of obedience, are works of disobedience: He does not
what he does, because God enjoynes it, Cum intuitu voluntatis Divinae. His
Sanctification (such as it is) is not endeavored like that 1 These. 4.3. This
is the will of God (says the Apostle) your Sanctification. He proves not what
is the good and acceptable will of God, Romans 12.2. One may do a good work in
obedience to his Lusts, and that which God bids him do, because his lust bids
him do it. Where there is no Law, there is no transgression; and where no
respect to the Law, no obedience.

The best performances of the wicked, are but the gifts of enemies, proceeding
not from Love, which is the sauce of every service (making it delightful both
to the servant and the Master) and the principle of the Saints obedience. Gal.
5.6. By nature we are enemies, doing our works, not with the affection of a
child, but out of bondage. None have been greater enemies to Christ, and his
Servants and Service, then many who have been most exact in outside
performances; as Paul, who in the midst of his Zeal was a Persecuter.

Lastly, The wicked neither have the guilt of sin taken away from their
persons, by the merit of Christ, nor the pollution of it, from their services,
by the Intercession of Christ. Ephesians. 2 8.
Till faith have fastened us to Christ, neither persons nor performances can be
acceptable. Good works go not before, but follow Justification. We are not
justified by doing good works, but being justified we then do good. Abels
person was accepted before his Sacrifice. Works are rather justified by the
person of a man, then his person by the works. And its a vain thing to look for
Justification from that which thou must first justify. A man till justified,
is a Leper, and every thing he touches he makes unclean to himself. As a small
thing which the righteous has, is better then the great possessions; so a small
thing that the righteous does, is better then the greatest performances of the
wicked. Till a man takes Christ by faith, his Sacrifices have no golden Censer
to perfume them, no Altar to sanctify them, nothing but his own evil heart to
consecrate them upon: Upon which considerations, though a wicked man may do
what is good morally in the sight of men, by way of example, or by way
Edification to others, etc. yet not Divinely in relation to Religion, or in
order to God, so as to please him. And though God sometimes be pleased to
reward the works of wicked men, yet do not those works please him. The works of
Nebuchadnezzar, Jehu, Ahab, etc. he did (I confess) reward temporally; but
alas, it was but temporally. They give him services which please not him, and
he Benefits which profit not them. They give him services, but not with their
heart; and he them blessings, but not with his heart: and that little he
bestows upon them is not to recompense hypocritical, but to encourage sincere
obedience. on Jer. 35.19.
God often (as Calvin says) rewarding the shadow, to show how the substance of
virtue would please him. Wicked men are hence, 1. Cautioned, not to leave holy
duties undone. The certainty of their sinning in performing them, must not,
Simon Magus was commanded to pray, Acts 8.22
cannot abrogate the Law of God, which enjoynes them. Nor is our duty impaired
with our power to serve the Lord. When a thing done is evil, not in its
substance, and because it is done, but because of our irregular manner of
performing of it, we ought still to do it, notwithstanding the defects cleaving
to it. 2 They should likewise hereby be made willing to go out of themselves to
Jesus Christ for his spirit and merit. Till Paul saw all that he could do to be
but dung and dogs meat, he never could duly esteem the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ. Till we account our own righteousness to be but filthy
rags, we shall never esteem Christ's to be a beautiful robe.

6. Observe. 6.
Envy is a pernicious, and yet a groundless and foolish wickedness. It was the
entrance of Cains way, and the inlet of his murder. It Is a sin that breaks
both Tables at once; the first by discontent with God, the latter by
injuriousness to man. Who is able to stand before Envy? Cant. 8 6. Calamitas
sine remedio est, odis se foelicem. Cypr. lib. de Zelo and Livore Adhuc divitem
malicia non descrit, quem jam possidet poena, qui non se ad Lazarum duci
postulat, sed ad se Lazarum ^ult deduci. Chrysel. Ser. 122.
It Is (as jealousy) cruel as the grave: it is a Calamity without a Remedy. Some
understand that request of the rich Glutton, that Lazarus might be sent to him
with water to cool his tongue, to proceed from Envy, he desiring rather that
Lazarus should be tormented with him, then himself eased by Lazarus; and he
craving not that he should be carried to Lazarus, but that Lazarus should be
sent to him. It was the cruelty of Envy that sold innocent Joseph, and that
sought the destruction of good David: From Envy it was that the Devil overthrew
our first Parents; and by it he puts Cain upon killing his innocent Brother,
and the Jews upon murdering the holiest person in the world. Plainly also does
this Envy of Cain discover the groundlesness of this sin. The fault of Abel was
not that he had hurt Cain, Nusquiam melius invidos torqucre poteritis, quam
virtutibus and gloriae serviendo. Aug. Ser. 18. ad frat. in Erem.
but that God accepted Abel. Truly is Envy therefore said to be worse then
Covetousness: The Covetous is only unwilling to distribute his own goods, but
he loves to see others communicate theirs; but the Envious neither will do good
himself, nor is willing that others should do so: he is angry that God is so
bountiful. Its worse then hatred and anger; for these in desiring the hurt of
another, have their rise from the Offense which is offered by him; but Envy
has its rise merely from its own malignity. Risus abest omnis nisi quem fecere
dolores; Successus hominum, carpitque et carpitur una. Supplic^umque suum est.
--
And in some respect it is the worst of all sins; for when the Devil tempts to
them, he draws men by the bait of some delight; but the Envious he catches
without a bait; for Envy is made up of bitterness and vexation. Other men's
welfare is the envious man's wound. To him the Vine brings forth Thorns, and the
Fig Tree, Thistles. De melioratione deterioran^^r, sola miseria invidia caret.
Nothing but misery pleases him, nor is any thing but misery spared by him.
Every smile of another, fetches a sigh from him. To him bitter things are
sweet, and sweet bitter. And whereas the enjoyment of good is unpleasant
without a companion, Nuliius rei possessio jucunda sine socio. Senec. One
seeing an envious man very sad, said, I know not whether this man has received
some hurt, or another some good.
the Envious had rather want any good then that another should share with him.
A certain Prince (they say) promised an Envious and a Covetous man, that he
would give them whatsoever they desired of him, upon this condition, that he
who asked last should have twice so much as he who asked first: when both were
unwilling therefore to ask first, the Prince commands the Envious man to ask in
the first place, and his request was, that one of his own eyes might be put
out, that so both the other man's eyes might be put out also. Superbia mihi
aufert-Deum; invidia pr^ximum, ira meipsum. Hug. de S. Vict. August. in loc.
Non illos malos faciendo, sed istis bona quibus mali facillime pessent
invidere, largiendo, incitasse dicitur ad odium.
How contrary is Envy to Charity! which without my labor makes all the
happiness of another mine own: Hence Envy is said to take away from every man
his Neighbor. Its said, Psalm. 105.25 that God turned the heart of the
Egyptians to hate his people: which God did (as Augustine interprets it) not by
making the Egyptians evil, but by bestowing upon the Israelites those good
things for which the wicked were ready to envy them.

To conclude, envy is its own punishment; a saw, a scourge, not so much to him
upon whom it is set, as to him in whom it is. It Is a moth which breeds in us,
and corrupts us. It Is a natural sin, The spirit that dwells in us lusts to
envy. Saints have been overtaken with it; Peter, Joh. 21.20, 21. Joshuah, Numb.
11.29. Qui faucibus invidiae carere desiderat, illam haereditatem appetat, quam
numerus possidentium non angustat. Greg.
Let us labor against it. To help us herein, let us love such good things
which one, yea many may have, without the detriment of others; which may be
enjoyed by, and be distributed to every one without diminution: and withal,
beat down the love of our selves, and the apprehension of our own Excellency.
Could we understand our own baseness and unworthiness, we should not envy
those who are above us, but wonder that any should be below us.

7 There is no measuring of Gods love by outward events. Observe. 7.
Wicked Cain stands over bleeding Abel, whose Sacrifice was first accepted, and
now himself sacrificed. Death was denounced as a curse for sin, yet behold it
first lights upon a Saint. No man knows love or hatred by any thing which
befalls the outward man We cannot read or understand Gods heart by any thing he
dispenses outwardly with his hand. Eccles. 9.1.
He often suffers an Abel to be killed, in love, and a Cain to survive, in
hatred. Prosperity and impunity often slay the sinner, when slaying and death
shall benefit the Saint. Worldly enjoyments are given us, that we by them
should testify our love to God; not by them to got assurance of Gods love to
us. Oh how slender an evidence of heaven, is that with which, so ordinarily men
go to hell! Thou can only understand that the heart of God is set upon thee,
by finding that thine is set upon him. The least dram of Grace is an earnest of
heaven. The greatest sum of outward enjoyments amounts not to the least part of
payment, or pledge of happiness.

8. Observe. 8.
They who are corrupt in their judgment, go in the way of cruelty. Not to
intimate what some have said of cruel Cain, that he was the first Heretic;
sure I am, he was after the Devil, the first Murderer; and these Seducers were
as full of hatred, as they were of Error; They went in the way of Cain. They
were cruel to souls, which by their Errors they poisoned and destroyed: cruel
to the names and dignities of their Superiors, of whom they speak evil. They
were (as the Apostle speaks afterward) (...), fierce and raging waves, ver. 13
such as uttered hard speeches, ver. 15. against the Godly, especially
Ministers, who opposed them in their way of sin. Not to speak of the cruelty of
Idolaters recorded in the Old Testament, as of Pharaoh, H^man, Ahab, Jezabel,
Manasseh (not yet converted,) Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus; nor of the Heathenish
Emperors, within the first 300 years after Christ (by which Tyrants the
Apostles suffered violent death, and whosoever made profession of their
Doctrine were cruelly murdered) of Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Antonius Verus,
Hadrian, who crucified Ten thousand Christians in one Mount; of the last of the
Ten Persecutions, wherein, in the space of one Month, were slain seventeen
thousand Martyrs. I say, to pass by these, What lively Expositions upon this
Text, and the cruelty of Cain, have the bloody actions of those been, who would
have been counted of the Church, nay, the only Church, and friends, and
brethren to the members thereof, as Cain was brother to Abel!

I might here relate what Ecclesiastical History mentions concerning the
cruelty of the Arian Heretics, Theod. l. 1. c. 29.
their banishing and false accusing of Meletius and Eustatius Bishops of
Antioch, and Athanasius of Alexandria: the latter of whom hardly escaped with
his life; l. 5. c. 21. Socrat. l. 2. c. 7.16
for the cruel Arians, finding that they could not destroy him by false
witness, purposed by violence to tear him in pieces: the banishing and
desposing Paulus from Constantinople, by the Arrian Emperor Constantius: and at
last, Socrat. l. 4. c. 22 Theod. l. 4. c. 21. Sozom. l 6. c. 19 Vid. Centur.
Magd. p. 79. Cent 4. (...) Epist. ad Solit.
the cruel murdering of him by the bloody Arians: not to mention with these,
the vast number of examples of Arian cruelty, recorded in Ecclesiastical
History; Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen, etc. consent in this, that the Arians
banished, imprisoned, cruelly whipped, mocked, tore with nails, burnt, and
exercised the cruellest punishments against the Orthodox; and that they were
more cruel against them then the Heathens who Tyrannized in those times.
Athanasius says, The inhumanity of the Arians exceeded all expression.

I might likewise mention what Augustine in sundry Epistles relates of the
Cain-like cruelty of the Donatists of his time, who pretended to so much
Purity, as that they held, that the Church was no where in the world to be
found, Epist 50. Quis non Dominus servum suum timere compulsus est: Quis quem
libet poterat exigere debitorem! Quorundam oculi extincti sunt. Cujusdam
Episcopi manus and lingua praecisa est; taceo crudelissimas coedes. Epist. 68.
Conclericos nostros plagis immanissimis quassaverunt. Quendam immaniter coesum,
and gurgite coenoso volutatum. etc. Nos fustibus quassant ferroque concidunt.
In oculos extinguendos, calcem mixto accto incredibili excogitatione sceseris
mittunt Epist. 166.159. Lacerati sunt viri, tractae sunt Matronae, Infantes
necati, abacti sunt partus, nulli licuit securum esse in possessionibus suis.
Optat. cont. Parl. l. 23.
but in that corner of Afric, wherein themselves dwelt. In his fiftieth
Epistle he tells us, that the Masters stood in fear of their servants that
were gone over to the Donatists; that no man durst demand the money which his
Debtors owed him, for fear of clubs and fire; the houses of any that offended
them, were burnt or pulled down; and they pulled out the eyes of the Ministers,
and put them out with Chalk and Vinegar, cut off their hands, pulled out their
tougues, cruelly whipped and slew them; and then tumbled them in the mud, and
then carried them about afterward in derision. And though these Sectaries
pleaded frequently for toleration and liberty of conscience, yet when under
Julian the Apostate, they had gotten power, Who can declare (says Augustine)
what slaughter they made of the Orthodox* All Africa was filled with blood and
desolation; men were rent, Matrons dragged, Infants slaughtered, women with
child miscarryed, none were secure in their houses.

But if ever the spirit of Cain breathed in any since his time, or if ever any
wrote after Cains copy in letters of blood, certainly they have been those of
the Papacy: how deservedly may their Head and Father the Pope be called a Cain
in chief; and is he called the Son of Perdition! as being not only appointed to
perdition, but the Author of Perdition and destruction. How evidently is his
Antichristian cruelty set forth by being Drunk with the blood of the Saints,
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus! Rev. 17.6. Its said by some that
There is no day in the year which might not be dedicated to an hundred several
Martyrs, whose blood has been shed by the Papal power. 1. Papal cruelty
spares not, pitieth not any degrees, sex, order, age, condition of men
opposing their Religion. Act. and Mon. p. 814. 751 874 710 766
Alphonsus Diazius (another Cain) barbarously killed his own brother John
Diazius because he was a Protestant. With what inhumane cruelty have
Protestants been compelled to discover for slaughter, their dearest relations,
parents, children, brethren, wives, to carry faggots to burn their godly and
painful Pastors! and (which might surpass belief among Heathens) children have
been constrained to set fire to their own fathers. And Thuanus reports, That a
certain woman, having fled to a secret place to shun the rage of her enemies,
being drawn out of it by them, was in the sight of her husband shamefully
defiled, and then was forced by some of them who ordered her hand, to give her
husband his deaths wound with a drawn sword. Horrid was that spectacle, of the
child which sprang out of the womb of a woman, burnt at Gernsey, which being
saved out of the fire, was by the bloody Executioner cast in again, p. 1864.
1879
because it was a young Heretic. A child of eight years old, was by them
scourged to death for Religion, and a boy under twelve years condemned for the
six Articles: yea, Popish cruelty forbears not either to bury the quick, p. 816.
(as one Marion was condemned to be buried alive) or to unbury the dead, by
violating of their graves, digging out the bodies and burning them; thus they
dealt with the bodies of Bucer, Fagius, Wickliff, etc. How frequently has
Papal power made Kings and Princes Wolves and Tigers one against another! and
sent forth Cutthroats and Villains with pardons, to stab and poison the Kings
and Potentates of the earth! their lives by any Art (they hold) may be taken
away, if the Pope hold them excommunicate. Emanuel Sa affirms it lawful for one
to kill a King, Lata sententia quisque potest fieri executor. In Aphor. de Rege
and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 6.
if the Pope have sentenced him to death, though he be his lawful Prince. But
Mariana gives direction how it may be done with the best convenience; He thinks
Poison to be the best way; but yet for the more secrecy, Quod si evaserint,
instar magnorum Heroum in omni vita suscipiendi: si vero secus accidat, gratam
hominibus, gratam superis hostiam cadere, nobili conatu ad omnem posteritatis
memoriam illustratos judicamus. Marian. l. 1. de reg. c. 7.
that it be cast upon the Saddles, Garments, Chaires of the Prince. And he
further tells us, that if they who kill such Kings shall escape, they ought to
be looked upon, and received as long as they live, as great and noble Worthies;
but if it fall out otherwise, that they lose their lives in the undertaking,
that then they are a sweet smelling Sacrifice to God and man, and that their
names shall be illustrious to all posterity.

This book of Mariana was approved by the gravest and learned of the Jesuits
Order, and so with a special Commission from Claudius Aquaviva their General,
with their approbations, and other solemn privileges, it was printed at Toledo
and Mentz, and lastly, inserted into the Catalogues of the books of their
Order. Its not lawful (says Bellarmine) for Christians to tolerate an
Heretical King, Nonlicet Christianis tolerare regem haereticum, si conetur
pertrahere subditos ad suam haresim. B^llar. l. 5. de Romans Pont. c. 7. Potestas
spiritualis debet coercere temporalem omni modo and via. Id. l. 5. c. 6
if he labors to draw his subjects to his Heresy; and (says he) its lawful
for the Spiritual power to restrain the Temporal by all means and ways; and
when the Pope has passed sentence upon a King, then after this public
sentence, they generally affirm it lawful for any to kill a King. So
Bellarmine, Gregory de Valentia, Tolet, Suarez, Molina, Lessius, etc.

Nor 2 does Popish cruelty less discover it self in the numbers, then in the
ranks and degrees of those whom they destroy for Religion. These Popish Cains
destroy multitudes of Abels. Infamous is the cruelty of that savage Minerius
the Popes Champion, in his bloody Enterprise against the Merindolians; he
destroyed twenty and two Towns, and murdered the Inhabitants, whether they
resisted or not; and when the men of Merindol flying from his Army, left behind
them their tender wives and children, this Popish blood-hound practiced all
manner of Villainy and Cruelty upon them. The Town of Cabriers, upon condition
that he would use no violence against them, was yielded into his hands, but he
falsified his promise, hewing thirty men in pieces in one place; putting forty
feeble women, some with child, into a barn full of straw, caused it to be set
on fire at the four corners, and such who got out, he caused to be cut in
pieces. In this one Town, were thus mercilesly murdered, above a thousand
Protestants. To these I might add, the cruel murdering of about eight hundred
Protestants in two Towns in Calabria, fourscore whereof had their throats cut
one by one, white, way to the Church, Digr. 50.
yet so as that every one was left but half dead by the Excutioner: And the
French Massacre, wherein in thirty days were thirty thousand slain; Farnesius
vowed to ride his horse to the saddle in the blood of Lutherans.
not to speak of that incredible effusion of blood which the Spaniards have
made among the poor Indians, under pretense of converting them to the faith;
they having in the space of forty years slain Seven and thirty millions of
people; famishing in three Months seven thousand children; at one time
massacring two thousand Gentlemen; and murdering with such cruelty, that to
avoid it, poor men would hang themselves, with their wives and children.
Lastly, and principally, this bloody disposition of Cain discovers it self in
the cruel and savage manner of murdering. Minerius (forementioned) cut off the
paps of the poor mothers of sucking children, and the children looking for suck
from their dead mothers, were starved to death. It has been their practice to
hold men in death so long as they could, Moriatur, ut sentiat se mori.
inflicting (as it were) a thousand deaths in one, and making them so to dye,
as to perceive themselves to die. Acts Monum. p. 869 805 860
What should I speak of their burning men by piecemeal, and that with
Brimstone, pitch, and tar, etc. with barrels of pitch and tar dropping upon
their heads? Joannes de Roma, a Monk, having got a commission to examine the
Lutherans, used this torment to force them to accuse themselves; He filled
boots with boiling grease, and put them upon the legs of those whom he
suspected; and tying them backward to a form with their legs hanging down over
a soft fire, he examined them.

To this Cain-like cruelty of the erroneous Papists, I might add that of the
Anabaptists in Germany, who were as bitter and bloody enemies to the Reformed
party, as were the Papists; and more opposed God and Orthodox Christians, then
they did the Papists themselves; they always voicing Luther to be worse then the
Pope. I shall not mention the bloody uproars made by Munzer, John Mathias, John
Becold, Knipperdolling, John Geles, Henry Goethlit, James of Kemp, etc. with
their followers, at Worms, Ausburg, Bazil, Shafhuse, Berne, Munster,
Amsterdam, etc. filling all places with blood and slaughter; murdering their
own natural brethren, yea, their wives, and pursuing the doctrine of the
Gospel, and the professors thereof, especially the godly Ministers, with cruel
fury. It will be more then sufficient to set down the words of one concerning
this savage crew, See Sleidan. Bullinger, Heresbachius, Hortensius, etc. Mr.
Bailey.
who has taken much pains in examining their Doctrines and practices; his
words are these, The spirit of Mahomet, was not so hellish in making an open
trade of bloodshed, robbery, confusion, and Catholic oppression, through the
whole earth, as the spirit of Anabaptism.

Nor need we think it strange concerning the fiery cruelty of those who embrace
and follow false Doctrines. The erroneous in their judgment, may be left of God
to apprehend so much truth, and weight, and worth in their errors, that even
that thing ( conscience I mean) which by its light and tenderness, hinders
others from sin by discovering it to them, and troubling them for it, may,
being depraved by error, put people upon sinful injuriousness to others, and to
think that they do God the best service, when they are most cruel to his best
servants. And (as its commonly observed) no feuds are so deadly, no contentions
so bitter, as those upon which conscience puts men; conscience urging more
strongly then interest: and as a good conscience is a thousand witnesses to
comfort and excuse for what good we have done; so may an erroneous conseience
be a thousand weights to induce us to what evil we have not done.

And farther, such is man's natural enmity against the way of Truth, which
opposes his Lust and advances Gods will, that if the white horse go forth,
the red horse will follow him at the heels; and they who carry the light of the
Truth, shall be sure to be maligned, puffed at, pursued. Acts 19.
Hence the idolatrous Ephesians cried out with maddest rage, Great is Diana.

And as the tide of man's inclination, so likewise is the wind of all Satan's
endeavors set against the Truth. He who is an old Serpent, is also a red
Dragon; yea therefore a Dragon red and cruel, because a Serpent false and
deceitful. He did not abide in, nor can he abide the Truth. As a Serpent he
made, and was the Father of Lies; as a Dragon he shields, and is the Defender
of Lies.

To conclude: The Wisdom and Power of God, is in nothing more manifested, then
in overthrowing Error by the weight of its own cruelty and rage; and in making
the Professors thereof to increase by dying; in making every Martyr a stone to
break the teeth of those maddogs who bite them, and to overcom by being
overcome. The professors of T^ruth (then) have as little cause to be secure, as
the patrons of Error have of being cruel. Never did the light shine, but the
wicked barked. at it. If righteous Abel was murdered when there was but one
Cain, what may he expect, when Cains do so abound both in wrath and numbers!
Martyrdom came into the world early: The first man that dyed, dyed for
Religion. And how careful should Christians be, that they leave not the Truth
of God, to avoid the wrath of men! Its better to dye fighting for it, then
flying from it. How much sorer an enemy is the great God, then a silly worm!
And they who leave the love of Truth, will soon leave their love to the
Professors thereof. Every Apostate is in the high way to become a Persecuter.

Lastly, It may be a word of Comfort as well as Caution to all persecuted
Abels. Cains do not so much strike at them, as at Truth in them, and professed
by them. Joh. 17 14.
I have given them thy Word (says Christ) and the world have hated them. God
will vindicate his own cause. Though the enemies are red with the blood of
Truths Champions, yet their great Captain will one day appear in garments made
red with the blood of their enemies, whom he will tread in the wine press of
his wrath; and the blood of every Abel cries with a loud voice for vengeance,
which will never give rest to the righteous Judge, till all those who will not
become the friends of his Truth, become his footstool for rising up against it.

9. Observe. 9.
Great is the difference between the sinning of the Godly and wicked. The sin
of the wicked is his way; he delights, proceeds, is skilful in it; sin is a
sport to him; he is a curious Artificer and cunning worker of iniquity; he goes
on, and proceeds from one degree of wickedness to another. When he performs
any good duty, it is not his way; he rather steps into it, or stumbles upon it,
then chooses it, walks in it. Cains Sacrifice to God, is not here called his
way, but his Sacrificing of his brother. God accounts of men by the constant
tenor and bent of their hearts and lives. The Godly may fall into sin, but he
lives not, rests not in sin; He may (like the sheep) be thrown into the mire,
but he does not (like the Swine) tumble, and wallow, and delightfully snort
therein. Of this more before p. 32, 33 etc. Part 2
He sins not with full consent; there are some contrary votes in his soul
against every sinful suggestion; He sleeps, but his heart wakes. Holiness is
his way, and whenever he is drawn out of it by some deceitful lust, or by
some seducing tentation, he cries out with David, Psalm. 119.176. I have gone
astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant. He never leaves calling and
enquiring, till he has got into the right way again; and when he is so, he
walks more humbly, watchfully, evenly, and mends his pace; he gains ground by
his stumbling; he does not (as wicked men) wickedly depart from God. A Saint
falls, 2 Samuel 22.22.
and cries, I fall, as a child that falls into the fire. A sinner falls, and
loves to fall, and is like a stone that falls to the center. As there is much
difference between the suffering, so between the sinning of the good and bad:
As sufferings are on the Saints, and not on them; so sin is in them, and not in
them. The sufferings of the Godly are on them as afflictive to sense, not on
them as penal for sin, so as to sink and destroy them; but the wrath of God
abides on the wicked, and falls upon them as upon its proper place, to remain
and dwell upon them: so when the Godly sin, they are not swallowed up of sin,
grace works them out again; but the wicked lie soaking in their sin, and (as
God speaks Lev. 26) pine away in their iniquity; and if God should give them to
live in the world to eternity, they would live it in sin. A Godly man is like a
pure Fountain, into which dirt is thrown, though it be thick and muddy for the
present, yet at length it works it out; whereas a sinner is like a standing
water, into which when dirt is thrown at the best, it does but settle and fall
to the bottom; and when it appears clearest, the dirt is not wrought out, but
there abides, and upon every stirring discovers it self. A Saint lives not,
walks not in sin; wickedness is not his way: Whenever he sins, he looks upon
himself as in his wandering, not as in his way. If thou would try thy
sincerity, examine the bent of thy heart, and whether sin be thy delight, thy
way; or thy trouble, thy disallowed aberration.

10 Despair is the period of Presumption. Observe. 10.
The contempt of Grace ends in the despair of Grace. God graciously warned
Cain, he sins, and despairs having sinned. These Seducers live in sin,
notwithstanding Grace, and are overwhelmed in woe, and deprived of Grace. Of
this before page 334. part 1
No poison is so deadly as that which is extracted out of Grace. Abused mercy
pleads against a sinner most perswasively. Oh that they who are so fearless
when they sin, would consider how fearful they shall be when they have sinned:
They who when they are tempted, fear no wrath, no death; after ward will be
ready to say with Cain, Every one who meets us will kill us. The way to be bold
when the wicked shall be afraid, is to be afraid when the wicked are bold. He
who is afraid of sin, shall not feel punishment.

11. Observe. 11.
They who most plead for liberty, exercise most cruelty. None would rule so
much, and so bloodily, as they who deny others to rule altogether. These
Seducers who despised Dominions, and spoke evil of Dignities, for all that,
walked in the way of Cain. They who would have all others to be ciphers, to do
nothing, would themselves be Cains, to do too much. Their little finger was
heavier then the Magistrates loins. They who shall peruse the Writings of
Austin concerning the Donatists, and among them the Circumcellious; as also the
relations of others concerning the Anabaptists of Germany, shall find both
these Sects to be bloody Commentators upon this Truth. They who abrogate the
Law of God, will endure no Law but that of their own making: Though they have
cried out of persecution, and complained of restraint, when they have been
under the power of others; yet they have most tyrannized over the Spiritual and
Civil Liberties of others, when they have gotten the power into their own
hands. And its impossible that they should rule gently and meekly, who are
themselves ruled and ordered by Satan, that cruel one. They who are not
delivered from the hand of this enemy, will neither serve God in righteousness
and holiness themselves, nor suffer others to do so: Nor will any be so
unwilling, that others should have liberty in holiness, as they who most love
and allow liberty in sin.

This for the amplification of the wickedness and woe of these Seducers from
this first example; viz. of Cain.

2. I come to speak thereof, as set forth by that of Balaam; in these words,
And ran greedily after the Error of Balaam for a reward.

EXPLICATION.
Three things are here to be opened.

1. Their guide: Balaam.

2. The example he set before them: Erring for Reward.

3. The manner of their following this Example, set forth in their running
greedily after the same.

1. For the first; Their Guide was Balaam. Concerning his practice and
punishment; it will be more proper to speak in the following part. Touching his
Country, Parentage, and Office, I shall speak briefly in this.

1. For his Country; We read, Deuteronomy. 23.4. That it was Mesopotamia, and that the
Town or particular place of Mesopotamia where he resided, was Pethor; and of
himself he says, Numb. 23.7. Balac the King of Moab has brought me from Aram,
out of the Mountains of the East. This Mesopotamia, and Aram (or Syria) are
used indifferently, sometimes the one for the other: Non solum ^ quod aliqua
tan. tum Syriae particula sit, quae ^ dicitur Mesopotamia pr^prie dicta, sed,
quod maxima Syriae pars, tota sit Mesopotamia, and inter amnis, viz. inter
Euphratem and Tygrim. Pined. in Job. 23
and not only because some small part of Syria is Mesopotamia, properly so
called; but because the greatest part of Syria is called Mesopotamia, or the
Region lying between those two great Rivers, Tygris and Euphrates: Some there
are who have thought that this Balaam was a Midianite; and their reason is,
because Numb. 31.8. and Josh. 13.22. its said, that he was slain with the
Midianites, when the Israelites destroyed them. Of this opinion is Masius, one
of the Learned among the Pontifician Expositors. Pineda in his Comment upon
Job seeming also inclinable to it: for though the Scripture tells us, that he
was of Aram or Mesopotamia, yet (say they) under the name of Aram or
Mesopotamia (largely taken) is contained so large a tract of Countries, as
takes in Midian; and some conceive, that he speaks himself to be of Aram, to
gain the more honor and credit to himself, because the Aramites and Caldeans
were in those days most famous for Divining and Astrology. But whether his
abode among the Midianites, was by reason that Midian was his Country; or
whether he took the Midianites in his way homeward from the King of Moab, to
give them counsel to draw Israel to sin; or whether he returned to them again
from his Country of Aram or Mesopotamia to receive his wages, I determine not;
sure I am, it was a most just retribution of providence, that he should be
among the Midianites when they were destroyed; Numb. 31.16.
their Counselor in sin, deserving to be their copartner in punishment. Numb.
22.5. Mich. 6.5. Quia Graece dicitur (...), significatur Bal^am faisse silium
B^sor; lic^t Number. 22. dicatur filius Beor, et aut hic positus est vox Bosor pro
Beor, aut utroque nomine vocabatur. Salmer. Genesis 26 34. Genesis 36.2. Josh. 7.1. 1 Chronicles. 2.5. 1 Chronicles. 8.31, 33. Judge. 6.32. 2 Samuel 11.21


2. For the Parentage of Balaam, the Scripture tells us, that he was the son of
Beor; and 2 Pet. 2.15. he is called Balaam the son of Bosor. How could both be
true? The Vulgar Translation renders the place, Balaam ex Bosor, Balaam of
Bosor, as if Bosor were the name of a place where Balaam lived. But the words
in the Original, (...) (not (...), but) (...), will not bear that
interpretation, but must necessarily denote, not the place, but parent of
Balaam, as some of the Papists themselves, notwithstanding their Zeal for their
Translation, are forced to grant. And whereas the father of Balaam is Numb.
22.5. Mich. 6.5. called Beor, not Bosor, its conceived by some, that he was
(...), had two names, viz. Beor and Bosor, this bestowing of two names on one
man being frequent in Scripture; thus the wife of Esau is called both
Bathshemath and Adah. the son of Zerah is called both Zimri and Zabdi;
Mephibosheth is called Merib-baal; Ishbosheth is called Esh-Baal; Jerubbaal,
Jerubesheth. Others answer, That the word Beor is here put for Bosor, 2 King.
15.29. 1 Chronicles. 5.6. 1 Chronicles. 2.9. Ma^th. 1.3. Josh. 24.30. Judge. 2.9.
which mutations of proper names are frequent: so Tiglath Pileser is called
Tilgath Pilneser; Ram is called Aram; the place where Josh^ah was buried, is
called both Timnath here is, and Timnath serah, etc.

3. For the Office of Balaam; he is called both a Prophet, and a Sooth-sayer or
Diviner. A Prophet he is expressly called by Peter, 2 Pet. 2.16. and in the
story of Balaam set down by Moses, there is frequent mention of his receiving
messages and answers from Jehovah, Numb. 22.8. I will bring you word (says he
to Balacs Messengers) as the Lord shall speak to me; and ver. 13. The Lord
refuses to let me go with you; and ver. 18. I cannot go beyond the word of the
Lord my God; Number 23 5, 16.
and Moses says, that the Lord put a word in Balaams mouth; he uttered a
Prophecy concerning Christ by Divine inspiration; There shall come a Star out
of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel. Numb. 24.17. to which
Prophecy he prefixeth this solemn Preface, He has said, which heard the words
of God, and knew the knowledge of the most High, Vid. Aug. Trac. 49. in Joh.
which saw the Vision of the Almighty. Even the worst men (as here Balaam) have
sometimes foretold future things by a Spirit of Prophecy: God inspi^ed Pharaoh
with a Prophetical Dream: God has showed unto Pharaoh (said Joseph) what he is
about to do, Genesis 41.1, 25. The like may be said of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.47.
Some of the wicked who shall be sentenced to depart from Christ at the day of
Judgment, shall be able to say, Have we not Prophesied in thy name? Matthew. 7
22. Caiaphas the High Priest, a bloody unrighteous man, Prophesied ( Joh.
11.51) that Christ should dye for that Nation. Possibly Balaam uttered not his
Prophesies, as understanding their force or genuine sense; to be sure, his
heart was not holily affected with what his tongue uttered: which some conceive
to be intimated in that expression, of putting a word into Balaams mouth, a
phrase never used concerning the inspiring any of the holy Prophets. And
whereas, Josh. 13.22. Balaam is called a Sooth-sayer or Diviner; the word which
we translate Sooth-sayer is a word of a middle signification; (...) Dent. 18.10.
for in Scripture it is not only taken in the worst sense, for one that uses
Divination, or is a Sooth-sayer; but in a good construction, for one that
prophesies or foretells things to come, Mich. 3 11. Sept. (...), Vatem
reddiderunt.
as Mich. 3.11. And some there are, who think that Balaam is here called a
Sooth-sayer, only in regard of his ambition and covetousness; and of his ends
and aims in all he did, which were not Gods glory, or the love of the Truth
revealed to him, See English Annot^on Josh. 13
or of his people whom he blessed, but his own advancement, and the wages and
reward of Divination, according to the manner of wicked Soothsayers. But I
rather conceive, that Balaam out of desire of gain, made use of Divellish Arts
and unlawful Divinations for the cursing of Israel. Its said, Numb. 24.1. that
he went not, Annot. in Numb. 24.
as at other times, to seek for Enchantments. Whereby it may be evidently
collected (says Ainsworth) that all his former Altars, Sacrifices and
consultations with the Lord, were by the wicked Art of Enchantment, or
observing of Fortunes, such as the Prophets and Diviners of the Nations used,
Deuteronomy. 18.10, 14. which he now left, as seeing them not available for his
purpose. His serving of God, Vid. Ames. in 2 Pet. p. 272.
was mixed with his old Superstition, in the number of Altars and Sacrifices, in
their site or posture toward the points of Heaven, in his Gestures and set
form of words, etc.

2. first particular, viz. whom these Seducers followed, or their Guide: The
second follows, viz in what way they followed him, or the example which he set
before them; viz. his [ Balaams] Error for reward. In the Greek the words are
(...).

Two things are here to be opened.

1. What that Error was which they followed?

2 How it was for reward?

For the first, The word (...), (...), Hinc Planeta, A Planet or wandering Star.
2 Pet. 2.15.
here translated Error, properly signifies an Aberration, or wandering from a
right path or course wherein a Traveller should walk; and therefore more fully
Peter explains this Error of Balaam, and these Seducers who followed him, to be
a going astray, and forsaking the right way; But more particularly, the Error
whereof the Apostle here speaks, is differently expounded. 1. Some Learned men
conceive it to be that whereby both Balaam, and these Seducers, were deceived
in their expectation of reward and wages, honor, pleasure, profit, etc. by
their sinful endeavors; and no doubt, but in this respect their way might
fitly be called Error or deceit, for Balaam in propounding to himself the wages
and reward, which Balac promised to him, in case he would curse the Israelites,
was himself clearly deceived; he being not only disappointed of what he looked
for, viz. honor and gain, but also bringing upon himself that which he looked
not for, a violent death by the Sword, and (most likely) the eternal
destruction of his soul: in stead of receiving his reward from Balac, he
received it from God, Numb. 31.8. Josh. 13.22. As also did these Seducers draw
to themselves, in stead of worldly advantages, which they aimed at, swift
destruction and condemnation (as the Apostles speak) both of soul and body.
Others (as I conceceive) more sutably to the scope of the Apostle, and to the
construction of the other words, immediately going before and following,
understand this Error to be the swerving, wandering or deviation of Balaam
(imitated by the Seducers) from the way of Gods will and commandment, both in
regard of their practice, and (especially) their Doctrine, or what they taught
others, whereby they made them to err and wander from the right way: For
Balaams practice it was an erring and wandering from the plain and express
precept of God, in that he went to Balac, and that with a defire to curse the
people. His way was perverse before the Lord, Numb. 22.32
he was out of Gods way when he was in the way of his journey. For his teaching
of others, he taught Balac to err, in counselling him to build Altars and offer
Sacrifices for Enchantments, and to entice the Israelites to Adultery and
Idolatry by the company of the daughters of Moab; and it is as plain that he
made the Israelites to err from the way of righteousness; by teaching Balac to
cast a stumbling block before them, Rev. 2.14.
to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication; that thus they
sinning, might be afterward destroyed.

As touching these Seducers, it is most evident that they in their own practice
wandered from the way of righteousness, and left the way of Truth in their
Doctrines; that they were ringleaders to Error; blind guides, who made many to
follow them into the ditch; Deceivers, 2 Pet. 2.
false Prophets, bringing in damnable Heresies, many following their pernicious
ways: And that hereby (as Peter speaks) They went astray, and forsook the
right way, viz. the way of Truth. A great sin, 1. because Error is a deviating
from, and an opposing of the way and Word of Truth. Errors (as Tertullian
speaks) arise caede Scripturarum, by the fall of Scripture. The Erroneous
resist the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.8. The least Error disposes the heart to reject the
greatest Truth: And as in nature, darkness destroys light, blindness puts out
sight, sickness removes health; so Errors undermine and destroy Truth. None are
such enemies to Scripture, as the lovers of Error; they ever oppose it, either
by denying it, or perverting it. 2 Errors are deviations from holiness; they
oppose Grace as well as Truth. They everthrow the says of people, and also eat
up Godliness. An Erroneous head, and a godly heart will not meet. 2 Timothy 3.5.
Error makes men deny the power of Godliness, and its an inlet to profaneness.
Every Text in Judes Epistle, is a Comment on this Truth: The Apostle calls
false Teachers evil workers, Phil. 3.2. They whose minds are defiled, are
reprobate to every good work. Tit. 1.15, 16. 2 These. 2.3.
Truth reforms as well as informs. Antichrist is called the man of sin. The
corrupting of the judgment, is the casting poison into the spring. 3. Error is
catching and diffusive. The Erroneous have many followers; nor do they go to
hell alone. Every Error meets with a complying party in our natures. Truth is
hardly entertained; Error readily admitted. And seldom is any one erroneous,
but withal he endeavors to propagate his Opinion, and that violently, and
subtly. 4. Error, by departing from Truth and Holiness, opposes the peace of
the Church. From men's not consenting to wholesome words, come envy, strife, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. Gal. 5.12.
and reviling. I would they were cut off (says Paul) that trouble you. Error
turns men into devouring Dogs, Phil. 3.2. grievous wolves, Acts 20.29. Witness
Arians, Donatists, Papists, Anabaptists. To conclude, Error is pernicious,
damnable, a shipwreck, a Gangreen, creeping from joint to joint till it eats
out heart and life, and destroys all Truth, Grace, Peace, Salvation.

2. For the second thing, viz. Error for reward. The word in the Greek is
(...). Our Learned Divines observe against the Papists, that though (...),
sometime signifies a reward due and deserved, or hire due to a workman for his
work; yet it is at other times, Mercedis nomen passim in sacris Scripturis
accipitur pro constituto quidem prae min, sed eo tamen gratuito. B^z. in Mat.
6. Matthew. 20.8.14.15.
a word of a middle signification, nothing a free and gratuitous, as well as a
due and deserved reward; and plainly does it signify Rom 4.4. a reward of mere
grace, not an hire or wages; and the force of the word does imply only a reward
due by the Covenant of him who gives it, unto him to whom it is given, whether
the work which he does deserves it or no. The penny given to those who had
wrought but only one hour, and that in the cool of the day, is as well called
by this word of reward, as the penny given to them who had born the heat and
burden of the whole day. In this place it denotes the wages or recompense which
Balaam and these Seducers aimed at, and expected for their Error; for I read
not (...) reward, as relating to the word (...), Error, (as some Learned men
do) thus, They ran greedily after the Error or deceit of the reward or wages of
Balaam: Deceptione merced is qua de ceptus fuit Balaam, effusi sunt Beza,
Erasmus. Vatablus, Pagnin.

Errore Balaam mercede, effusi sunt. Vulg. Montan. Melior sensus, quod effusi
sunt propter mercedem, seu mercedis gratia, ita ut in (...), supplcatur (...).
Sic Occumenius. (...) Errantes sicut ille, lucri and quaestus gratia, dogmata
prava annunciaverunt. Lorin.

Praepositio (...), quae est in (...) posoit Genitivum. Lapid. in loc. Nonnulli
perperam reddunt deceptione mercedis qua deceptus, etc. Multo elegantius,
aptiusque vocem (...), Graecanica scholia ad subsequentia refert, ut sensus
sit, Gnosticos, Balaami errorem secutos esse mercedis cupiditate, ut
subandienda sit vox (...), etc. Justinian. in loc.


but I rather refer the word (...), Reward (as others better) to the word (...)
(ran greedily) thus, They ran greedily for reward after Balaams Error; that is,
as Balaam toiled, journeyed, took pains, went from place to place, from Altar
to Altar, etc. to speak perversely, to curse Israel, and give wicked and
pernicious counsel; and all this for filthy lucre or base gain, and to get
reward from Balac; so these Seducers care not what Heresies they utter, what
pernicious and damnable Doctrines they preach, or Errors they broach, so as
they may but gain reward and wages from poor deluded people. And our last
English Translation intends this sense. Thus likewise Oecumenius, Mo^tanus,
Justinian, with sundry others. And as this Interpretation of their running
greedily for reward after Error, is most apt and elegant, and seems best (say
some) to answer the Original word (...), in regard of its composition; so is it
most agreeable to those other places of Scripture which mention the end which
falfe Teachers propound to themselves, in venting their Errors, and which tell
us, that they serve their own belly, Romans 16.18. that their gain is godliness,
1 Timothy 6.5. that they err from the faith while they covet after money, 1 Timothy
6.10. that they teach things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake, Tit.
1.11. that through covetousness they make Merchandise of people, with feigned
words, 2 Pet. 2.3. that they have an heart exercised with covetous practices, 2
Pet. 2.14. Cyprian writing of Novatus, that mischievous Heretic, says that he
was Avaritiae inexplebili rapacitate furibundus, Beyond measure, Avaritiaest
plerumque Haeresium comes, fomes, matter, nutrix, etc, Ames. in 2 Pet.
and even to madness covetous. The covetousness of Heretics, is the companion,
fuel, mother, nurse (says Amesius) of their Heresies.

Now the sinfulness of following Error for reward, appears in two things
especially

1. In its profaneness: What more profane and godless course imaginable, then
for an Instructor of souls to be a Vassal to dung! Covetousness is iniquity in
all men, but blasphemy in a Teacher of souls. His Titles, Master, Office,
Doctrine, are all heavenly; how insufferable is it then for him to be earthly!
How shall he take off men's affections from the world, when as he follows that
as most precious, which he tells others is most superfluous? The birds of the
air which fly next heaven, neither sow, nor reap, nor carry into the barn; and
how unsuitable is it, that they who by their vocation are next heaven, should
yet in their deportment be furthest from it! That they should be like Foxes,
dissuading the beasts from that booty which they intend to make their own; and
that they bidding men look upward, should cast their own eyes only downward!
Thou, O man of God (says Paul, speaking of coveteousness, 1 Timothy 6.11
to Timothy) fly these things: A man of God must not be a man of the world, a
slave to Mammon, a mere muck-worm, or rather a moving muck-heap. A Star of
heaven, nay, an Angel, must not degenerate into a clod of earth. What likewise
more profane then to barter away precious souls, heaven, Christ, God himself,
for base pelf, filthy lucre? to make Merchandise for a piece of earth, of
Christians and Christianity? How unsu^able and disproportionable a prize is
Silver, when for it that soul is sold for which Christ died! In short, How
impious is it to sell that Truth for dung, which we ought to buy with our
bloods!

2 In its Hypocrisy and dissimulation. Who ever broached or taught an Error
professedly for gain, nay without a pretense of advancing Truth, and of aiming
at Gods glory, and the good of souls? What cozenage so vile, as that which
seems pious? All deceit is abominable, and that most which shrouds it self
under the wing of Religion; for gain to be the meaning, and Godliness the
cloak? Is not this as bad as for Jacobs sons to hide their cruelty against
Shechem with Circumcision? for Abner to cover his revenge against Ishbosheth
with the Divine Oracle? Quaerunt discipulos quos petuniis emunge^e possunt, non
qu^d salutem animarum procurare curabaut. Mont. App. Sec. 28.
Absalom his Treason with a Religious Vow? Jezabel her murder with a Fast? This
odious dissimulation of these Seducers, made them like the Kite, to be eying
the prey on the dunghill, gain, when they seemed to sore up to the clouds in
their instructing of souls. Its most unsuitable for Satan's servants, and Mammons
Drudges to be cloaked with Christ's Livery, to deliver Doctrines for gain, and
yet to pretend Conscience, Religion.

The third particular to be opened is, After what manner they followed the
Error of Balaam for reward. 3 Branch of Explication.
Jude says, (...), They ran greedily after it. The word properly signifies,
they poured out themselves, it being a resemblance taken from the pouring out
of water. And according to this Resemblance, taken from the pouring forth of
water, the word may note either,

1. A pouring forth in point of Destruction, dissolution, and overthrow; such
as whereby in regard of their total and irrecoverable ruin and perdition, these
Seducers (with Balaam) became utterly lost, as water poured out. Thus the
Psalmist, as a Type of Christ, describing his extreme debilitation, and
approaching dissolution, complains Psalm. 22.14, that he was as water poured
out. So the woman of Tekoah, setting forth a desperately lost estate, says, we
must needs dye, and are as water spilt on the ground. In this sense its said,
Josh. 7.5 when the Israelites were smitten before the men of Ai, Qui roborc
excellens eras, aut esse debueras, factus es debilis and attenuatus, viribus
omnibus destitutus. Ita aptissimequa. drat oppositio. Qui eras principium robor
is mei, effusus es sicut aqua, liquefactus es, exhaustus viribus, ita ut nihil
a te deinceps sit expectandum magni and heroici. Rivet in Genesis 49.
that the hearts of the people melted, and became as water; and thus also I
understand that expression of Jacob concerning Reuben, Genesis 49.4. whom, though
in respect of what he might have been by the right of primogeniture, he calls
his might, the beginning of his strength, the excellency of dignity, and the
excellency of power; yet in regard of what he was to be in the loss of this
power and dignity; Jacob says, that he was unstable, or poured forth as water,
that is, was to be weak, brought low, and so emptied of strength, that nothing
great and heroic was to be expected from him. How fitly this dissolution and
lost estate agreed to Balaam and these seducers, that sought to heighten and
strengthen their condition by error and unrighteousness, who sees not? their
sin could not be a stable and solid foundation of greatness, but it made them
vanish and perish like water poured forth; they perished in their names,
estates, bodies, souls. And therefore the Arabic renders this place, in
mercede exaruerunt, in their reward they dried up or decayed, as after the
pouring forth of water there follows dryness in that thing out of which the
water is poured.

2. Or this pouring forth as water (according to others better) may import a
pouring forth in respect of the forwardness, force, violence, Acts 2.17.18.33.
So Acts 10.45 Sic dicimas effundere se in li bidine, in questus, lacbrym^^,
vota; effundere furorem, iram, minas, querelas, rabiem, vires, vocem, honores
in mortuum. Lor. in loc.
and impetuousness of these wicked men, in the sinful prosecution of their
lusts; and thus this resemblance, of pouring forth as water, is ordinarily used
in Scripture; as Hos. 5.10. I will pour out my wrath upon them like water, Amos
5.24. Let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.
Jude then here intends, that these Seducers put forth themselves, in the
prosecution of their lust, like water poured out. As a forcible swelling stream
breaks down the banks, and violently bears down all before it, so these were so
mad upon their gain, that they could not be restrained, but violently broke
down all the banks and bounds which were set to keep them in. And probably the
Apostle may here refer (in his setting down the violent eagerness of these
seducers upon their reward) to that furious march, and impetuous progress of
Balaam, when he journeyed to Moab, upon promise of wages, whom neither Gods
prohibition before he began his journey, nor the crushing of his foot, nor the
speaking of the Ass, nor the drawn sword of the Angel in his journey, nor the
ineffectualness of all his enchantments afterward, could hinder from pursuing
his covetous design; but early in the morning, up he gets, breaks the bounds of
Gods command, begins his journey, furiously strikes, madly answers his Ass,
wildly lays about him, breaks through all difficulties, at length comes to
Balac; and then runs from Altar to Altar with enchantments; and in a word,
would not give over till the sword which he saw drawn before his eyes, was
sheathed in his bowels.

And this violent impetuousness put forth by Balaam, these seducers, and other
wicked men; this running greedily in the prosecution of their lusts, is notably
set forth in Scripture, and that principally by these two considerations: 1.
The means used for the hindering and reclaiming them, have not stopped and hindered
them: like the man possessed with Devils, no chains are strong enough to hold
them. Hence it is that the prosecution of lust is sometimes compared to the
effusion, 1 Pet. 4.4. (...). Isa. 57.20. Jer. 2.23. Jer. 8.6. Hos. 4.19.
rushing out, foming or boiling of the Sea: Sometime to the swiftness of a
Dromedary traversing her way, sometime to the rushing of a Horse into the
battle: Also the back sliding of an heifer which will endure no yoke, not be
kept in any bounds: Hos. 8.9.
to the unbridled unruliness of the wild Ass, which is and will be alone by
himself, and will not endure any man to come near him, to bring him under
government. Who, says God, has sent out the wild Ass? etc. he scorneth the
multitude of the City, and regards not the crying of the driver, Job 39.5.
that is, who but I (God) has manumised or set free the wild Ass from all
service of men, and set, and kept him loose from those bands to which other
Cattle are subject, whereby they serve in the Cart, plow and under the saddle?
etc. If drivers should offer to urge him to work, as they do tame beasts, he
would scorn it, and show them a light pair of heels. If a whole City should
seek to scare him and bring him to work, he would not regard it; An exact
emblem of a man pursuing his lust, who will not endure to hear of a master,
but will be a stranger to discipline, knows no other law but his lust, will be
a son of Belial, without a yoke; yea the vehement impetuousness of the wicked
in prosecuting their lusts, Jer. 2.24. (...). Clem. Alexandr.
is set out by the violence of a wild Ass, winding the male, and running mad
after after him, in her occasion none being able to turn her away, or willing
to weary themselves therein; the wicked set sheir hearts on their iniquity,
Hos. 4.8. The heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil,
Eccles. 8.11. More particularly, 1. The Word and Will of God hinders not
sinners in their courses of lust; they break the yoke, Jer. 5.5.
and burst the bonds. They break bands asunder, and cast away cords from them.
Jesus qui potuit solemn sistere ne procederet, avaritiam bominum non potuit
sistere ne serperet: ad vocem ejus sol stetit, avaritia non stetit. Sole itaque
stante confecit Jesus triumphum, avaritia procedente pene amisit victoriam,
Ambr. l. 2. de offic. cap. 26.
When the Prophet had exhorted the people to turn from their evil ways, they
tell him plainly, Jer. 18.12. and 2.25. There is no hope; that is, it is to no
purpose to speak to us, there is no possibility of reclaiming us, we are
resolvedly bent upon our courses which we have pitched upon, and firmly fixed to
live as we list our selves. I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, and thou
would not hear, Jer. 22.22. Though Joshua stopped the Sun, that swiftly running
creature, in its course; yet by severest threats, and strictest prohibition, he
could not hinder Achan from his covetous attempt. Though Samuel told the
Israelites the manner of their King that was to reign over them, and foretold
them their many and certain calamities which should thereby ensue, yet they
refused to hear Samuels voice, and said, Nay, but there shall be a King over
us. Neh. 9.16, 17.26.29. Fuit hoc gentilitium ac genuiuum vitium Judaeorum, ut
nihil minus crederent quam quod a Prophetis traderetur. Mendoz. in 1 Samuel 8.
Deuteronomy. 29.2. Matthew, 29 21 Genesis 5.31.7.6.
The Levites in their confession, acknowledge that their fathers hardened their
necks, dealt proudly, harkned not to Gods commandments, refused to obey, were
disobedient, rebelled against him, cast his Law behind their backs, sinned
against his Judgments, withdrew the shoulder, would not hearken.

So obstinate was Judas in his sin, that the admonishing of the Traitor, and
mentioning of the Treason, by Christ himself, could not work upon him. Though
Cain was forewarned of God to take heed of hurting his brother, yet would he
not be stopped from the Murder, Genesis 4.7. The preaching of Righteousness to the
old and obstinate world by Noah, who by the language of his tongue in speaking
to them, and hand also in building the Ark (a work wherein he spent an hundred
years) foretold them of their approaching Deluge, could not reclaim them from
their lusts; yea, the slow proceedings of God in raining upon the earth forty
days, could not work upon those obstinate sinners, but as they lived, so they
dyed in their contumacy. The like may be said of the Sodomites, Genesis 19.9.
who would not be dissuaded from their unclean persecutions by all the
Arguments that righteous Lot could use. The Jews would not, by the most clear
and convineing Miracles of Christ, be reclaimed or convinced.

Yea 2, So great is a sinners contumacy, that the greatest of Gods judgments
cannot reclaim him. Thou have stricken them (says the Prophet) but they have
not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction; they have made their faces harder then a rock, Jer. 5.3. And chap.
8.6. Every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. The
most visible and apparent threatenings of death cannot stop the horse from
running into the battle, nor a sinner from proceeding in his course of
wickedness. Such was the resolution of the Egyptians in pursuing the
Israelites, that they would rush into the sea, which they knew, could not be
divided for their sakes, and enter the jaws of death, rather then think of a
seasonable Retreat. Rather then sinners will not satisfy their unlawful Lusts,
they will spend, and profusely cast away their dearest enjoyments. Quod Aaron
jubet inaures demi, ab auribus uxorum, etc. non absurd intelligitur,
difficilia praecipere voluisse, ut hoc modo eos ab illa intention revocaret.
Aug. q. 141. in Exodus Abulens. q 10.
Some think that Aaron being required to make gods for the Israelites, demanded
of them their golden earrings, which were in the ears of their wives, their
sons and daughters, to try whether he could suppress that Idolatrous desire, by
calling for those things which were so dear and costly; and yet the people were
so obstinately bent upon Idolatry, that notwithstanding these difficulties,
they took Aaron at his word, and gave their most precious Ornaments for the
making of a Golden Idol; and Abulensis thinks, that these earrings were taken
away from the younger sort (their sons and daughters) against their wills, and
with such violence, that their ears were torn and bloody, before the Earrings
were pulled from them. Jeroboam, by the rending of the Altar, and the drying up
of his hand, was not reclaimed from Idolatry, 1 King. 13.33. Esau, rather then
he would not satisfy his sensual appetite, for a mess of pottage sold his
precious birthright. Verberari a Damone mallebat quam a Deo coronari. Illa
flagella adorabat, haec dona fastidiebat. Mall^t suh diabolicis plantis
crudeliter tundi, quam inter divinas ulnas molliter foveri. Mendoz in 1 Samuel
8.22
But that which is the most astonishing wonder of all, is, that the Idolaters
were so pertinaciously set upon their Idolatry, that they spared not their
dearest children, but offered the fruit of their loins and wombs to Idols, to
Devils. And who can sufficiently admire that sottish and sinful pertinacy of
Ahaz, who as he trespassed yet more against God in his distress, so he expressed
i^ by sacrificing to the gods of Damascus which smote him? being more desirous
in the worshipping of Devils to be scourged, then in serving the true God to be
crowned; and that he might satisfy his Lust, more willing to be trampled under
Satan's feet then to be taken into Gods embracements. See further for this Amos
4.6, 8, 9, 10. etc. the Prophets repeating Yet have ye not returned, etc. And
Isai. 9.13. The people turns not to him that smites. Nor can the vanity
insuccessfulness, and apparent ineffectualness of all the endeavors of
sinners, no nor yet their weariness, weakness, and inabilities, take them off
from their lusts. Hence God speaks concerning the Jews, in the pursuing of
their Idolatrous courses. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, yet
said thou not, There is no hope, Isai. 57.10. Though she was tired out with
the length of her journeys in sending to Idolaters, and saw that all her
toyling and tyring out her self was in vain, yet she would not give over, but
went on still desperately in that toylsome and chargeable course; though all
her endeavors were fruitless and unsatisfying, yet she never said, Jer. 2.36,
37. 7.8. 2.12. Isai. 30.5, 6. Hos. 8.7.
Why should I weary my self any longer? Though sinners observe that nothing
which they do profits them; that all their cisternes are broken, and will hold
no water; that they sow the wind, and reap the whirle wind; that their chariot
wheels are broken off, and all their bridges broken down; that whatever they
labor to lay hold on, flies away from them as did Joseph from his Mistress,
when she took hold of his coat: In short, Notwithstanding the ineffectualness
of all their labors, they yet are like those Sodomites, who though they were
smitten with blindness, yet wearied themselves in feeling for, and finding of
Lots door; and were as full of unclean rage as ever. Though the bodies of
sinners may grow weary, and thereby the services of their bodies fail and
languish, yet their Lusts are as vigorous and green as ever; like a furious
Rider, never wearyed by the length of his Journey, though the poor beast under
him be tired and worn out. The Carcass may be worn and wearyed out, but Lust is
never tired: Lust outlives its faculties, and never grows crazy in the oldest
body. If the faculty could, lust would still rise up early, lie down late,
pursue unclean objects, lade it self with thick clay.

2 Sinners, in stead of being stopped or hindered in the prosecution of their
lusts, by the means used to restrain them, become thereby the more violent and
outrageous in their courses. 1 King. 18.22.
The longer the Priests of Baal continued unanswered, and the more Elijah
derided them; the more they leaped, the louder they cried, and the more they
cut and gasht themselves. Why should ye (says the Prophet) be stricken any
more? Isai. 1.5.
ye will revolt more and more: Ahaz in his affliction trepassed yet more. The
Worshippers of Diana, when their Idolatry was opposed, cried out with the more
vehement rage, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Act. 19.28.
Jerusalem being called of God to weeping and mourning, in opposition to God,
fell to all expressions of Joy, in slaying of Oxen, and killing of sheep. The
rebellious Israelites, who when Caleb persuaded them to go up to Canaan,
refufed the undertaking; when Moses forbade them, desperately and obstinately,
to their own destruction, adventure upon it. The wicked in the Lana of
uprightness, Isai. 26.10.
where his wickedness is discovered and reproved, will deal the more unjustly.
When Christ had so clearly convinced the Jews of their sin and his own
innocence, that they could hold dispute no longer with him, they run from
arguments to stones and raylings, Joh. 8.28.
Thou art a Samaritan (said they) and have a Devil. When he had wrought a
miracle on the Sabbath day, and justified his action, they were the more filled
with madness. When Stephen had reproved the Jews of their hypocrisy and
cruelty, Luke 6.11. Cum coeli janua aperirentur, ipsas Judaei mentes
claudebant. Aug. Act. 7-54.57.
they were cut to the heart, gnashed upon him with their teeth, stopped their
ears, ran upon him and stoned him. When Peter (though a holy man) was charged
to be one of Christ's company, he denies it, with Cursings and Damnings of
himself. When the Prophet told Asa of his folly in making a league with the
Syrians, its said, that he was in a rage, and imprisoned the Prophet. (...).
Mat. 26.74. 1 Chro. 16.10 2 Chro. 36.16.
When God sent to the Israelites by his Prophets to make known to them their
sins, they mocked and misused them, and despised the word which they delivered
from God. As the Prophets ledled the Israelites, so they went from them, Hos.
11.2. They would have nothing to do with them or their Doctrine. When God would
have healed Israel by his Word, Mercies and Judgments; when he tried to cure
the sins of his people, their secret wickedness manifested it self; all the
means which he used, in stead of healing them, Hos. 7.1.
did but stir and provoke the evil humors, and being rubbed on their sores,
they kicked and raged the more. The rage of the mad dog is the more increased
by the chain; and the swelling of the stream, by the stopping thereof; and they
who are hindered in their passage in the street by carts, go on the faster
afterward. The more rubs and stops Balaam met with in his Journey, the more was
his fury and violence increased. Nor did the Sodomites ever rage so much, as
when they were opposed by the gentle admonition of Lot, and the suitable and
seasonable punishment of blindness.

Nor will this violence and fury seem strange, if we consider, that in the
prosecution of lust, wicked men are carried on, both in the way of their own
natural propensions, and inclinations; and also, by the strong and vehement
impulsions of that powerful and impure spirit the Devil. The violent and
propense motions of a person to any sin, are set out in Scripture by the word
Spirit, because they are naturally seated in the spirit, and furthered by a bad
spirit; stirred up in and by an unholy spirit; so we read of the spirit of a
deep sleep, Isai. 29.10 A perverse spirit, Isai. 19.14. The spirit of whoredom,
Hos. 4.12.

The natural propension alone, has very much in it to cause a vehemence and
swiftness in motion; but when seconded and set forward by the force of an
outward agent, the vehemence of that motion is much increased. A stone thrown
and hurryed downward, moves the swifter, because the natural weight thereof is
improved by an accessory impression: And the natural motion of a person in sin,
is made much more eager and impetuous, by the impulsions of Satan; sinners then
in the following their lusts are both carried down the tide of their own
nature, and withal vehemently driven by the winds of Satan's Instigations: and
how swift a passage must needs be made by both conjoined?

Besides, wicked men follow their lusts, and endeavor their satisfaction as
their chief end and good, and they have no other God; gain was Balaams God,
Quic quid proponitur tanquam fin, is quaeritur nulla adhibita mensura. Aquin.
and advantage was the godliness of these seducers. And whatsoever (says
Aquinas rightly) any one propounds to himself as his chief end, he seeks and
prosecutes without measure. Every man endeavoring to obtain, that, with his
best and greatest industry, which he apprehends as the best and greatest good.

To conclude, Lust knows no enough, no satisfaction, it always desiring more;
ever needy, and therefore ever greedy; ever empty, and therefore ever earnest;
lust can find no center or term, and therefore it will be eager in motion.
Sinners are said to drink iniquity like water, Job 15.16. not only in regard
of the easiness of drinking, (drink being more easily and speedily taken down
then meat) but in regard of the excessivenesse, men drink water without
measure, because without the bridle of fear to restrain them; fear of
drunkenness may restrain men from drinking much wine, but men care not how much
water they take in, they fearing no danger. The Apostle ( Ephesians. 4.19.) speaks of
working uncleanness (...), with greediness, or as the word properly signifies
with having more. There Is enough in the objects of lust to entice it, not
enough to content it; there are reserves of desires in the soul, fresh supplies
of lustings new raised, whenever the old are cloyed or foiled; no more is
lust satisfied with its objects, then the fire is with wood, then the grave
with carcases; the more we give it, the more it will demand; and if by lading
it with courtesies we think to oppress it, the more its thus oppressed (with
the Israelites in Egypt) the more it will grow.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observe. 1.
Satan makes use of the meetest and ablest Instruments to advance his designs.
Balaam a Prophet he deems of all other the fittest to curse Israel. He often
employs refined wits to defend Error, as Arius, Sabellius, Pelagius, Socinus,
Arminius: He carves his Mercury on the most promising pieces: He uses those to
pervert the world, who transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor.
11.13, 15.
and the Ministers of righteousness; he speaks by those who know how to use
fair speeches, wisdom of words, slight, cunning craftiness, and can lie in
wait to deceive: Ephesians. 4.14.
Satan knows that his cause is bad, and therefore he imploys those in the
mannaging thereof, who are able to make the best of a bad matter; rotten stuffs
want most watring, and wrinkled faces most painting; and error and impiety
skilfullest pretenses, subtillest evasions, fairest glosses, and most cunning
insinuations. Tertullus is fittest to plead against Paul: Soothsayers to oppose
Moses: A Simon Magus to deceive the whole City. Besides, Satan is most hurtful
to the Church when he opposes it by subtilty and seduction. Balaam did more
hurt to the Israelites by his counsel, then the Moabites could by their
courage; the daughters of Moah by tempting to Adultery and Idolatry, destroyed
24000; the sons of Moab could not overcome one: they whom God has furnished
with the best weapons of arts and parts, have often given his Church the deepest
wounds. Men of great ability, should labor to be men of good abilities, and
great integrity. There Is no eminency either of outward power, or inward parts,
but the Devil labors to make useful and subservient to his own ends, and
interest, and a stirrup to lift him up into the saddle. How great a pity is it
that a good, a clear head, should be accompanied with a bad, an unclean heart!
Tremble to think that any of thy accomplishments should be ornaments to
beautify the Devil. Diabolus cupit abs te ornari.
That thy voice should make him Music, that thy wit, eloquence, strength,
authority, should be weapons to fight for him against thy Lord, and their
Donor. Oh let not Satan drink the wine of that vineyard which he never planted,
or draw out of that Well which he never dug, inhabit that house which he
never built. Oh let all thy endowments be Engines employed for the Giver. Thy
abilities never have their due improvements, but when they advance Christ.
Never had the Ass so rich, so precious a burden, as when Christ sat upon it.

2. Observe. 2.
God often gives excellent endowments to wicked persons. Balaam, famous for his
prophesies, was in famous for his profaneness; they who are workers of
iniquity, may prophecy in Christ's Name, work miracles, Matthew 7.
and cast out Devils; both Judas and Caiphas prove this point. God is a very
bountiful Master, some bones and crumbs he lets fall even to dogs; Gods bounty
is so full a Cup, that though it be filled for his children, some drops run
over upon the wicked. And by the endowments of the worst of men, God often does
good to his Church; gifts are ministrantia, not sanctificantia, beneficial to
others, not to the owners; for edifying, not sanctifying; they are (as it were)
Gods shipping, to convey his treasury of grace upon the shore of his people,
souls. God often gives men excellent parts and abilities to benefit others, as
some rich or noble man, who causes the Nurse to fare daintily, for the good of
his child, to which she gives suck; not out of love to her self. The Israelites
were enriched even by gold that was Egyptian; they who preach Christ out of
envy, may yet preach Christ to the benefit of hearers. A Raven brought Elijah
food, and wicked men may sometimes profitably dispense the food of life; the
dull whetstone may sharpen the knife; the deaf bell may give a found to the
ears of others; a sweetly sounding Lute, not it self delighted with the Music,
may yet recreate, yea almost ravish others. An unskilful Serving-man may open
the gate for his Master, and let it shut to again before he himself can get
through. Balaams mouth uttered an excellent prophecy of Christ and his Church,
for the good of others, his own heart (mean while) being untoucht, untaught;
God put the word of prophecy but into his mouth. And further God will have a
tribute of glory even from his enemies. Balaam in the midst of his rage and
covetousness, praised God: he can extract water out of the rock, and raise
children out of stones; it is not so much glory for God to take away wicked
men, as to use their evil to his own holy purposes; as the heart of Balaam
cursed against his tongue, so his tongue blessed against his heart: God makes
wicked men to serve him, when they think most to resist him; and that which is
not, nay is contrary to the end of the worker, he makes the end of the work.
Lastly, God will render wicked men inexcufable, even by their own carriage;
they who preach and praise the ways of God to others, can have no apology for
their own not practicing them; let none then please himself with parts and
gifts of edification without the power of godliness; these are but like Vriahs
letters, which cut the throat of him that carried them. A drop of grace, is
worth a sea of gifts; he that can shed one tear of godly sorrow, presents a
more acceptable gift to God, then all the silver and gold of Solomon's Temple.
Light may make a good head, only heat can make a good heart. The Devil knows
more, and can speak as good a Sermon as any man, and yet he is still a Devil.
Rejoice not therefore in gifts without grace; not (as Christ said) that the
Devils are subject unto you; but in this, that your names are written in
heaven. Labor for that which never was, nor can be bestowed upon an enemy; the
Spirit may be assisting, where it never is inhabiting; God may speak to an
enemy, he only speaks peace to a friend. Grace is the proper and genuine effect
of the Spirit, gifts are but (as it were) the outward artificial effects
thereof; and as much difference is there in the Spirits production of these
two, as between a man's begetting of his child, and making of an house: Gifts
are (as it were) dead graces, but graces are living gifts. The greatest
ministering gifts, expel no lust, mortify no inordinate affection, cleanse no
heart; when gifts are in their eminency, sin may be in its prevalency. In that
man who is the fullest of them, there may be as much room for the Devil to
dwell, as ever. A man may be a great Scholar, and yet a great sinner; yea
(unless sanctified by grace) the greater scholar, the greater sinner, and enemy
to God; and so the more gifts, the more condemnation: as it is with a sinking
ship, the more its laden with gold, the deeper it sinks, so the more a man is
laden with gifts, (without graces) the deeper he sinks into hell: Indeed gifts
may beautify grace, but grace only sanctifies gifts; as the Gold beautified
the Temple, but the Temple sanctified the gold. To conclude, as there may be a
gracious heart, who never had these gifts, so they who have them are not
certain always to enjoy them; the least drop of saving grace, shall grow to a
river; but the greatest flood of gifts may decay to less then a drop. There Is
nothing that God bestows upon us, but he may repent of the giving thereof,
unless it be grace.

3. Obs. 3.
Its great both impiety and ignominy to be a ringleader in sin, with Balaam to
mislead others. The greatest Seducer who has a double portion of wit to teach
others error and heresy, an Haeresiarch obtains no more by all this, then to
become primogenitus Diaboli, Satan's eldest Son. Its honorable to lead others to
Heaven, to teach men the way to happiness, to be an Abraham, a Joshua, a David,
to instruct our families to bring our house with our selves to serve the Lord,
to teach sinners in the way, but to be a Jeroboam, an Elymas, a Balaam, how
disgraceful, how destructive is it! Have not men sins enough of their own,
unless they make the sins of others their own also? How deeply shall they be
plunged into hell, Quid proderit non puniri suo, qui alieno puniendus est
peccato?
who are crushed both with their own, and their other men's sins also! By every
one whom thou have made wicked, shall thou (without repentance) hereafter be
made woeful. Some think that the reason why the rich Glutton desired that his
brethren might not come into that place of torment with him, was, because the
coming of those whom he had put upon sin, would have been an addition to his
torment. Seldom will Princes pardon the ringleaders of a Rebellion: And
rarely is it seen, but that the Teachers of others to sin, have been eminent
either for repentance or ruin. Corah, Dathan, etc. who were ringleaders in the
rebellion, smarted accordingly. And think, though God peradventure should at
any time give thee repentance, how many fresh bleedings, and renewed troubles
of soul will, nay, should be stirred up in thee by the recollection of thy
former putting those upon sin, who, though sinning with thee, (it may be) never
repented with thee, and so were either by thy counsel or example, sent to hell!
It was not, the least part of Paul's aggravation of his sin, nor of his trouble,
even when he was converted, that he had formerly compelled men to Blaspheme. If
thou have led others to Hell, God will not, without deep repentance, bring thee
to Heaven. And upon none lies there so strong an engagement as upon thee, of
doing good to others souls for time to come. Paul converted, was as earnest to
draw men to Christ, as formerly he was industrious to drive them from Christ.
Of a Wolf he became a Shepherd.


4. Observe. 4.
Love of Lust makes men Erroneous. Balaams love to reward, made him say any
thing. Of this largely in the former part, page 615.

5 Observe. 5.
Desire of gain will carry a man upon any wickedness. It neither fears, nor
forbears any sinful course for the attaining its end: They that will be rich,
fall into tentation and a snare, and many foolish and hurtful Lusts, Avaritia
est plus velle quam sat est. Aug. de lib. arb. l. 3. c. 17. Hom. 13. in Act.
1 Timothy 6.9. They meet with many enticements unto sin, and they will not fear
to embrace any enticement: They are (as Chrysostom expresses it) as a City
without walls, on every side beset with Besiegers, and unable to resist any
assault. The love of money (says the Apostle) is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy
6.10. Take this away (says Chrysostom) and thou take away all wickedness,
Fraud, Rapine, War, Heresy, Thest, Lying, Contention, etc. A covetous man
(says he) knows no friend, nay, no God. Dicitur radix omnium malorum, ad
fimilitudinem radicis arboris, quae alimentum praestat toti arbori. Aquin. part
2. q. 84. Art 1. Ex part intentionis, superbia, quae est appestitus
excellentiae, est initium omnis peccati; sed ex part executionis, est primum
id quod praebet opportunitatem adimplendi omnia desideria peccaii, and ex haec
part avaritia, etc. Art. 2. ubi supra. Dolus in Idolo. Deos quisque sibi
utiles cudit. Pro ar is quia pro focis.
The love of money gives nourishment to every sin, as the root does to the
whole tree. And Aquinas conceives, that though pride, in respect of intention,
be the root of sin, as its the scope and end which the sinner looks at, in his
sinning; the end of obtaining all Temporal good things being (as he says) that
a man thereby may get a kind of singular perfection and excellency to himself;
yet that covetousness is the root and beginning of sin, in respect of
execution, as its that which furnishes a man with matter to act and commit
sin, and gives opportunity to fulfill all the desires of sin. Agreeable to this
is that of Solomon, Prove. 28.20. He that makes haste to be rich, shall not be
innocent: and chap. 23.4. Labor not to be rich. He that desires more then
enough, will not know where to stop, will break all bounds. To desire beyond
the bounds of sufficiency, is to seek for more then man may pray for. No sooner
does a man, step over this hedge, but he is presently in the wide, wild, and
boundless Champain of Covetousness, and being once there, he has no limits to
keep him in. Achans taking of the accursed thing; Ahabs violent and injurious
snatching away of Nabohs Vineyard; Judah his selling of his Master; Gehezie's,
and Ananias's and Saphyrah's lying, Demetrius's contention for Idol- Diana;
Readiness disobeying of God in sparing the cattle; and Jehu's halt in Reformation,
sufficiently prove this Truth. The covetousness of the Scribes, Luke 20.47.
made them devour widows houses; for it the Priests made the Temple a Den of
Thieves, by admitting of Money Changers, etc. They cared not with what
corruption they filled the Temple, so as they might fill their own Treasuries.
Popery has hewn the principal Pillars of her Superstition out of this Rock of
Covetousness. Its a Religion wholly compacted and contrived for gain, not only
gotten from the living, by Pardons, Masses, Confessions, Offerings,
Pilgrimages, Worshipping of Saints, Indulgences; Multo aequanimius december
millium animarum ferunt jacturam quam december solidorum. Nicol. Clemangis de
Pontif. Magis aurum suspiciunt quam Coelum. Neh. 13.16. Amos 8.
by making of a Money-matter of the most crying Abominations; of Witchcraft;
of Murder of Father, Mother, Child, Wife; of Incest, Sodomy, Beastiality, etc.
But also from the Dead, who pay large Tributes by means of their Purgatory; a
toy which they cry not up at all for Truth, but merely for Traffic. Silver is
in the sacks mouth of every Popish Error. Covetousness swallows down any
equivocation, oath, lie, perjury. It Is this sin that makes the Sabbath,
Sabbatum Tyri and Bacchi, a Marketting and Junketting, a selling and swilling
day; that stupifies the bowels of nature, and makes men without natural
affection toward dearest relations, desiring their deaths, in stead of
preserving their lives. The thirst after gain, makes men thirsty after blood,
as Balaam, Ahab, and Judas were both covetous and bloody. If the hands be not
defiled with blood, its the Law, not conscience that keeps them clean. Its
Covetousness that licenseth the public Stews at Rome, and those sties of
Curtezans. Many have violated their matrimonial faith and chastity, and the
Covenant of their God, allured more with the Adulterers purse, Jer. 6.13.
then his person. And what are all the Thefts, False-dealings, Oppressions,
Usury, but the issues of this sin! Judas was covetous, and therefore a Thief.
Theft and Covetousness are joined together, 1 Cor. 6.10. Whence come
false-accusing, pleading for an unrighteous cause, the making the conscience a
very hackney, the flattering of men in sin, and the having of their persons in
admiration, but from love of advantage? Covetousness damps holiness, as the
damp of the earth puts out a candle. A covetous heart, like places where most
Gold is, is most barren. Christians, think not to be free of any one, if you
will embrace this one sin.

To overcome it, 1. Overcome the unbelief of thy heart; the root of this root
of all evil, is distrust of Gods promise and providence. Sinful care comes from
small faith; Heb. 13.5
Let your conversation (says the Apostle) be without Covetousness; for he has
said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. He who has God for his, in him
finds his Gold, and all things else. The Lord is my Shepherd, (says David) I
shall not want. Psalm. 23.1. Job 22.23. If thou return to the Almighty, etc.
then shall thou lay up Gold as dust, etc. yea, the Almighty shall be thy
defense, or Gold, Aurum lectissimum. Jun. ver. 25
or choice Gold (as Junius reads it.) He that by Faith makes God his Gold,
shall never through covetousness make Gold his God.

2. Rectify thy opinion of Riches. The earth is the lowest of Creatures, and
made to be trampled under our feet; and the Primitive Christians laid the price
of their possessions at the feet of the Apostles. Act 4. ult.
Gold and Silver are fitter to set our feet, then our hearts upon. It would be
against nature, for earth and heaven to join together: when an incongruity is
it then, for our souls, purer then the heavens, to be glued to the clods? To
have much, is not to be rich. God is called Rich in Scripture, not for Money,
but for Mercy. Romans 10.12.
True Riches, stand more in doing, then in receiving good. Nec vera, nec vestra.
Worldly enjoyments have but the name, the show of Riches. There Is nothing but
opinion that makes them excellent. The common names given to Riches, are
bestowed but abusively. They are not gain; by them, for them, men often lose
their souls. Not goods; they neither make us good, nor are they signs of
goodness. They are not substance, they are but shadows, nor can they so much
as shadow the Excellency of those which are true. They are not means conducing
to the chief end, happiness; indeed they are means to damn and undo many a
soul: they are nothing; Solomon says, they are not; i. e. in point of
Duration, Satisfaction, efficacy, and usefulness when we are in distress.

To conclude this. 3. To overcom Covetousness, study the Excellency of Riches
indeed, true Riches, of being rich to God, 1 Timothy 6.11 Math. 6 19. Quodam
cordis itinere divitias tuas sequere. Sequatur totum nostrum, quo praecesserit
aliquid nostrum. Aug.
rich in faith, rich in Heavenly Treasures. Look upon him that is Invisible;
view the Sun, and then thy eyes will be so dazzled, that in other things thou will behold no beauty. Consider thy Crown, and contemn the Dunghill. Our Head
is in Heaven, let head and heart be together. Let thy soul take a journey every
day by Faith to thy Country, thy Treasure, thy Christ. Largely of this, see
Part 1. page 372

6. Observe. 6.
Much is the power and goodness of God seen, in the turning of the violent
propensions of the heart, from any way of sin, toward himself. His power; for
what but the power of Grace can turn the tide and stream of Nature? Humane
Laws can curb us from the act and exercise of sin, but only the Law written in
the heart, can command and change the heart, and destroy in it, the love and
propension to sin. Here is clearly applicable that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 114 5
What ailed thee, Oh thousea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou were
driven back? ye mountains, that ye skipped like Rams, and ye little hills like
Lambs? The answer is, Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord. Who but
God can stop the Sun in its career, and make it go backward? Who but he can
stop a Saul in his Journey, and make him go back as well in heart as in body,
and become more earnest in praying then ever now he was in persecuting? The
Church complaing that she was as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, Jer. 31.18.
aptly adds, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. The giving of a clean heart
is a work of Creation, Create it in me, says David. Nor is the Goodness of
God herein less observable then his Power. How great is that love which does us
good against our wills, and turned us when we were running greedily to our own
destruction! when we regarded the persuasions of men no more then does the wild
Ass (as Job speaks) the cry of the Driver! When all the means which friends,
parents, Job 39.7.
Ministers could use to reclaim us, were lost upon us; nay, we much worse (as
was the woman in the Gospel by going to the Physician!) then what love was it,
(nay, was it not) for Christ to teach, to touch the heart, and to turn us, when
we had run even to Hell gates! Nor was the smartest dispensation, the most
unpleasing stop, the most pricking thorny hedge any other then an unspeakable
mercy, that hindered thee from finding thy way to Hell, and running greedily to
thine own damnation. How much better was it to be diverted, then damned?

7. They who strive to hinder sinners in their course, Observe. 7.
are like to meet with unkind returns of opposition. Till God turns their
hearts, how angry are men with stops, and vexed that bridges are broken down,
when they are running greedily, and marching furiously! All the hatred which
Ministers meet with, is because they would stop sinners in their way to hell,
and will not suffer them to be at peace, when they are going on to eternal
pains. Never did any meet with so many cruel and bloody contradictions from
sinners, as he who in his life, and Doctrine, and death did most oppose sin; Am
I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? says Paul. He who
was sent to turn people from Satan to God, had all the rage of people and Satan
turned against him. Hatred (says Luther) is the Genius of the Gospel. Saul's
Javelin, followed David's Music. Its very likely, that he who is quiet among
sinners, suffers them to be quiet in sin. We should pity sinners, though, nay
because they oppose us; if we turn them, they will love and thank us, and
whenever they come to be their own friends, they will be ours. However, the
Lord will reward even unsuccessful faithfulness; and to be sure, we can much
better bear hatred from the wicked for doing, then from God for neglecting our
duty.

8. Observe. 8.
The best way by which to try our sin cerity, is willingness to be stopped in any
way, in which our lusts would make us run most greedily. If sinners run
greedily and violently after their Lusts, then none but Saints can rejoice when
they are stopped in the prosecution of them, and bless God (as David did for
Abigails counsel) when they are hindered in any sinful career. God promises to
his Elect a thorny hedge, Hos. 2.6.
if they will be gadding; and they look upon it as a singular mercy: they being
thereby turned back to their first husband. Only the people of God love that
preaching which most opposes their Lusts; and that Angel most (or Messenger of
God) which stands with the drawn Sword of the Word to hinder them in their
unlawful journey. Exangue and nobile quoddam Martyrii genus
The patient and thankful enduring of stops and strokes when we are sinning, is
a very Noble, though a bloodless Martyrdom; a true note of true grace.

9 Observe. 9.
Men have most cause to suspect their courses are is bad, when swift. When they
run greedily, that they run wickedly; when they run fast, that they run wrong.
When we are in any way of God, commonly we do but go, or rather creep; but in
the way of sin, after the Error of Balaam, we are ready to run, and that
greedily too; we are here carried with wind and tide, our own inclinations, and
Satan's impulsions: the Jews cried out against Christ, they not so much as
whispering against Barabbas. It was misguided Zeal, when the Disciples desired
that fire might come down from heaven. When ever we are furious in any March,
we should fear that we are in Balaams Journey; I mean, we ought to suspect the
goodness of that undertaking, wherein we are most violent; and to doubt that we
are sailing to a wrong Port, when with a full gale and a strong tide. A smooth,
if a false way, should not delight us; nor should a rugged, if a right way,
dishearten us. Its no sign thou please God, or speak the Truth, because
men do not oppose thee in what thou do or say. We must be wiser then
either Christ or his Apostles, if we have got the skill to please the most, in
doing that which is best. The peaceableness of sinners, is but impiety not
opposed. Rather should I hope that what I do is right, when wicked men most
rage and roar against me for doing it. When the Devil roars (says Luther) its
a sign I have struck him right: that is good which Satan hates.

To conclude this. Embrace no opinion, because it is maintained with multitudes
and violence. Fire and faggot of old, were but weak arguments to prove the
truth of Transubstantiation. As strong passions destroy a good, so do they not
seldom discover a bad cause. 1 Cor. 4.19. Non vociferatio, sed ratio.
Paul resolved to know not the speech, but the power of them who were puffed
up. The worship of Diana is cried up with more rage, then that of the true God
is advanced with Zeal.

10 Observe. 10.
Little do they who run down the hill know where they shall stop. These
Seducers poured forth themselves to the utmost. Who knows in what a sad
agreement the very Parley and Treaty with any Lust may end. The more modest
motions which it makes at first, may end in an excessive immoderate pouring
forth, and a profuse spending of what we have and are, our time, estates, yea
strength of body and soul, and all which is in our power to bestow upon it. Men
foolishly may think, that when they have gone thus or thus far, they will go no
further, and stop at their pleasure; and that their Lusts will grow dry, as he
in the Fable, who having a mind to go over a river dry-shod, and seeing it run
with a fierce stream, hoped that within a little space it would run it self
quite dry; Expect at dum defluat amnis at ille, -- Labitur and labetur.
but after all his waiting and expecting, the River ran with as full a stream
as ever: And so though men think that their Lusts will at last grow dry, and
that they shall easily step over them unto God, yet the sinful desires of the
heart, will grow stronger and stronger. They are like to be safest, who kill
Lust in the cradle. He who gives way to it now, may justly be given over to it
hereafter. He who will, against Gods command, step up to the ankles, justly
may, beyond his own expectation, wade till he be over head and ears, and so
swallowed up. And hence (to conclude) we may gather the desirable safety of
those ways, wherein there can be no immoderateness, and which cannot be loved
excessively, though never so earnestly.

11. Observe. 11.
It Is from a Divine hand that wicked men are hindered from greatest outrages.
Balaams running was so greedy, and his march so furious, that he had cursed the
people, had not God stopped him. Its an arm of Omnipotency that pulls the wicked
baek from those courses which their heart stands to. Its no thank to them that
their worst undertakings are not successful. Whence is it that the world is not
overrun with evil, but from this, That men cannot do so ill as they would?
When we consider the impure propensions of nature, we ought to be thankful that
every man is not a Devil to his neighbor. Psalm. 76.10. (...)
It is God that puts a stop to the sinner, as well as to the sea. Whatever rage
of his enemies it is that breaks not forth, is bridled, in by God. It is not
for want of poison in the hearts, but power in the hands of the wicked, that
the people of God are not both cursed and crushed at once. How should we both
admire the power, and praise the goodness of that God, who hinders the sell and
fierce nature of wicked men from venting it self upon the poor unarmed Church?
who bridles up, and sets bounds to that proud sea of sinners rage, which is so
much higher then the poor humble earth, the Church in her low estate? and to
sing after all our deliverances, in the tune of the thankful Psalmist, If it
had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us, Psalm.
124.2, 3.
then they had swallowed us up quick? etc. Then the waters had overwhelmed us,
the stream had gone over our soul; then the proud waves had gone over our soul.
The floods lifted up their voice, the floods lifted up their waves; Psalm. 93.3,
4
the Lord on high is Mightier then the noise of many waters, yea then the
mighty waves of the sea.

12. God is never more offended with men, Observe. 12.
then when he gives them most scope and liberty in sin, that they may run
greedily. Balaam and these Seducers were appointed to destruction, and God lets
them run greedily in the way that leads to it. The after permission which God
gave Balaam to go to Balac, was worse then the former denial. God suffers some
things with an indignation, not for that he gives allowance to the Act, but
that he gives a man over to his sin in the act. Its one thing to like, another
thing to suffer. God never liked Balaams journey, yet he displeasedly gives way
to it: as if he had said, Well, since thou art so hot on thy journey, be gone;
and thus Balaam took it: else, when God after professed his displeasure for the
journey, it had been a ready answer, Thou command me: But herein his silence
argues his guilt. Balaams suit and Isreal's Quails had one fashion of Grant, in
anger. How much better is it to have gracious denyals, then angry yeildings! to
have our way in sin stopped up with thorns, then strewed with Roses! God is
never more angry, then when he is not angry. Never are men in such likelihood
of snaring, and strangling themselves as when God gives the greatest length of
line. Seldom does God suffer men to be their own Carvers, but they cut their
own fingers. God in granting sinful desires, hates; and in denying them, loves
the Petitioners. I had rather (said Augustine) have that mercy whereby I am
whipped into the right way, then suffered to wander out of it.

13. Observe. 13.
How shameful is it to be sluggish in our race toward the eternal reward!
Balaam runs greedily toward a false, we remissly toward a sure reward; he rose
up early, Illi ^crius ad pernicicm, quam nos ad salutem.
and sadled his Ass: The night seemed long to his forwardness: he needed
neither Clock nor Bell to awake him, his desires made him restless. Where is
the Christian that deserves not to be condemned even by the very Damned! Who
presses toward the mark for the prize of the high calling, Phil. 3.14.
etc? Who offers that holy violence to the Kingdom of Heaven? knocks, seeks,
asks, with half that industry for Spiritual Blessings, for Heaven, for Life,
which wicked men put forth in laboring for their own destruction? I have heard
of a Philosopher, who living near a Blacksmith, and hearing him up every
morning at his Hammer and his Anvil, before he could get out of his bed to his
Book, professed himself ashamed, that such an ignoble Employment as that Smith
followed, should be more diligently attended then his more serious and
excellent studies. Blush (O Christian) when thou see wicked men to sweat in
their worldly, and thy self to grow cold in Heavenly Employments. Surely, were
the Sweetness, the honourableness, the vastness, the profitableness of Gods
service seriously considered, holy Duties would find hotter affections in us.
What a shame is it, that worldlings should be more laboriously busied about
rattles and triffles, then we about the Kingdom of Heaven and Eternity!

This for the amplification of the sin and woe of these Seducers from the second
Example; viz. of Balaam.

3. The third follows; viz. that of Core, in these words, And perished in the
gainsaying of Core.

EXPLICATION.
Two things here are principally considerable, and to be explained.

1 Whom they followed, Corah.

2 Wherein they followed him. 1 In his gainsaying, 2 In perishing therein.

1 Whom they followed. Corah. Here it may be inquired, Who this Corah was?

Besides his sin and punishment (whereof anon) the Scripture mentions 1. his
Pedigree, 2. Employment, and 3 Posterity. Exodus 6 18. 1 Chronicles. 6.1


1 For his Pedigree: He was of the Tribe of Levi; his fathers name was Izhar,
the brother of Amram, who was father to Moses; so that Corah, and Moses whom he
opposed, were brothers children, or Cozens Germane: the nearness of this
relation, could not hinder him from attempting the downfall of those who better
deserved to keep, then he to get the Government.

2 His Employment (with that of the rest of the Levites) is mentioned Numb.
16.9. to be honorable, Numb. 3.12.16.8, 9.
they being separated by God from the congregation of Israel to be brought near
to himself to do the service of the Tabernacle, and to stand before the
congregation to minister unto them. The Levites were brought nearer to God,
then the other Tribes, though not so near as the Priests. Numb. 18.3. 1 Chronicles
6.46, 49
Aarons sons, the Priests, served in the Sanctuary in praying for the people,
and offering Incense and Sacrifice; but the rest of the Tribe of Levi were not
to come nigh the Altar upon pain of death, Numb. 3.9.1.50.3.6, 7, 8.4.3,
4.7.5.18.6. Deuteronomy. 10 8. 1 Chronicles. 6.48.9.28, 29 2 Chro. 26.18 1 Chro. 23.28, 29.
but served in Offices inferior to theirs. Their work was 1, To attend the
service of the Sanctuary, according to the command of the Priests. When the
Tabernacle was moveable, they were appointed to take it down, carry, set it up,
and to keep all the Instruments thereof, and also with the Priests to carry the
Ark of the Lord, To wait upon the sons of Aaron in the service of the house of
the Lord, in the courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all holy
things. Their work was to watch about the Tabernacle, and afterward the Temple,
to defend it, 1 Chronicles. 9.27. They also were to have the over sight of the
Shewbread, Meat Offerings, unleavened cakes, and of all manner of measure and
size; they being to see, that all measures, both of dry and moist things, which
were used in Gods service, might have their just proportion, and that there
might be a due length and breadth of all things, that used to be measured by
the mete-yard. All manner of just measures for the things belonging to the
House of God, were to be tried by the measures and sizes which the Levites
kept, and these were called the measures of the Sanctuary; whether the Levites
had the ordering of civil measures and sizes or no, is uncertain. 1 Chro.
16.4.23.30 2 Chronicles. 8.14.20.19, 30.21.31.2. Nehem. 9.5.
2. The work of the Levites was to sing praises to God, and they praised him
both by singing holy Songs and Hymns, and also by Musical Instruments. 3. The
Levites were to teach the people the Law; according to the good word of the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30.22. and 35.3. and this Employment was common both to the
Priests and Levites, Deuteronomy. 31.10. 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9. and 31.4. Ezra 7.10, 11.
Nehem. 8.7, 8. and 9.4, 5. 4. To the Levites it also belonged with the Priests
to take cognizance, and to judge in causes about Holy things, 2 Chronicles 19.8, 10,
11. So that the Priests and Levites were the two Ecclesiastical Orders in
Israel employed about holy things, the Levites making the lesser, the Priests,
the greater and higher Order, and yet both called Brethren, Numb. 18.6. And in
process of time, by the appointment of God, when the Worship of God was to be
stationary and fixed in one place, David divided the Levites into sundry Orders
and Ranks, according to their Families, for the discharging of their several
functions and Ministeries, they having their several courses of waiting and
charges allotted to them. See 1 Chronicles. 28.13. and 23. per tot. and 25, etc, 2 Chronicles. 8.14. 2 Chronicles. 35.4, 5, 10. The reason of the separating of the Levites
to the worship of God, is plainly mentioned in Scripture; Numb. 3.12. So Number.
8.16.
I have (says God) taken the Levites from among the children of Israel, in
stead of all the firstborn, because the firstborn are mine; for on the day
that I smote all the firstborn of the Land of Egypt, Exodus 12 23
I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel. The firstborn then were Gods
by a particular right of Redemption, as well as Creation, and therefore were in
especial manner to serve him. (In other Creatures, the first born were to be
sacrificed to him, if they were clean beasts; and if they were not; to be
ransomed at a price for the maintenance of the Tabernacle.) Now instead of
taking the first born of mankind to his service, he appointed that the Levites
should be peculiarly set apart for it: And he chose to be served by one Tribe,
rather then by a number of first born taken out of many Tribes (as Learned
Interpreters conceive) for prevention of confusion, discord and division in
holy Services: and by the Tribe of Levi, rather then any other, for their Zeal
of his Glory, in revenging the indignity done unto him, in the worshipping the
Golden Calf, Exodus 32.26, 28. To conclude this Distourse; As Israel was
separated from all other people to be the Lords peculiar, Lev. 20.26. so were
the Levites separated from the sons of Israel, to be the Lords, Numb. 8.14. And
the employment of the Levites (of which this Corah was a chief, and among whom
he was famous) was (though inferior to the Priests, who were nearer to God in
their attendances) very honorable. And therefore from the high honor thereof,
does Moses argue against the ambition of this rebellious Corah, whose desire it
was to invade the Priestly Dignity also: Seems it (says he) a small thing
unto you, that the God of Israel has separated you from the Congregation of
Israel to bring you near to himself, Numb. 16.9.
to do the work of the Tabernacle? etc. If it be an honor for the greatest
Subject to have the meanest Employment about the body of an earthly Prince, how
much greater is the advancement of the highest sons of men, to have the lowest
degree of peculiar service to God; and truly David, though a King, went not an
inch below his state in not disdaining the Office of a doorkeeper in the house
of the Lord, and in putting on a linen Ephod.

3. For the Posterity of this Rebel Corah, we find in Scripture, that they were
1 Spared and exempted from this destruction of their father. 2 Afterward that
they were employed by God in his service, which some of them did holily
discharge.

1 That they were spared, is expressed Number. 26.11. The children of Corah died
not, neither did the fire from heaven, nor the opening of the earth hurt them.
Whether they were in their fathers rebellion, and were spared by the
Prerogative of free mercy, or for Gods care of his Ministry; or whether they
consented not to the sin of their father (as it is most likely;) or whether
they repented upon the warning given by Moses, Numb. 16.5. I determine not, the
Scripture being silent. Nor will it be needful here to relate that fabulous
invention of the Jews, by whose relation God wrought as great a miracle in the
saving of Corahs children, as he did in the destroying of Corah himself; for
they write, That when the earth opened and swallowed up the father, the
children were taken up in the air, and there remained hanging, till the earth
closed up again. What way they were saved, it matters not, spared they were;
and their names were Assir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph. God is so just, as to be
feared in the midst of his smiles; and so merciful, as to be beloved in the
midst of his frowns: his goodness makes him to remember Mercy in the midst of
Judgment; although our sins sometimes stir him up to remember Judgment in the
midst of Mercy.

2. Its evident, that afterward they were employed by God as Levites, in
several Services: They were Keepers of the gates of the Tabernacle, 1 Chronicles
9.19. Their Fathers had been over the host of the Lord; namely, 1 Chronicles 9.19
Number. 1.50.2.17.
those Levites, who encamped about the Tabernacle, the host of Israel
compassing it like the Kings Tent. Some of this Family were for the outward
business over Israel, 1 Chro. 26.29. namely, such things as in the country were
to be done, gathered, and prepared for the House of God, and for the Service
thereof, as all manner of provision, fuel, oil, Wine, Tithes, first fruits,
etc. Some were (possibly) Teachers in the Law, and Judges in Causes
Ecclesiastical and Civil; for the Israelites being governed by the Judicial
Laws, Deuteronomy. 16.18. 2 Chro. 19.8.
and the Levites being best exercised therein, they were sent abroad among the
several Tribes to be Judges. But that eminent Employment to which they of
Corahs family were designed, 2 Chronicles. 17.8
was singing in the House of the Lord: they were set over the service of the
Song in the House of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 6.31. and verse 32. They ministered with
singing. And Heman a Corahite, who is said, 1 Chronicles. 25.5. to be the Kings
Seer, and to lift up the horn: (that is, (say some) a Musical Instrument) was
the chief Musician, 1 Chronicles. 6.39 44. and had his fourteen sons under him, for
Song in the House of the Lord, with Cymbals, 1 Chro. 25.6, 7
Psalteries and Harps: and they are said (with their fellows) to be instructed
in the Songs of the Lord, and to be cunning, Many Psalms (as the 42, 44, 45,
46.) have in their Title, For the Sons of Corah; and some conceive that some of
the Psalms were penned by them; particularly that the forty sixth was their
thanksgiving for their escape at their fathers destruction: the Title saying,
Of, or for ths sons of Corah, to which mention of the Sons of Corah, the
Chaldee Paraphrast adds, By their hand was it spoken in Prophecy, at what
time their father was hidden from them, but they were delivered, and said this
Song; a conjecture which was occasioned by those words in the second verse, We
will not fear though the earth be removed, etc. I rather conceive, that the
Psalm might be indicted by David, and that it was appointed for them to set a
tune to it; and its generally held, that the 88th Psalm was penned by the
forementioned Heman; 1 Chronicles. 6.33.37.
if so, it speaks him a very humble, godly son, (though) of a wicked rebellious
forefather; and how free God is in despersing his Grace, and how gracious he
was in preserving Corahs posterity, is much more manifested in that Samuel,
ver. 27, 28, 33.
a man so eminent for being a holy man, Gods favorite, and Isreal's Judge and
happy Preserver, was one of Corahs offspring.

Thus, by way of Explication, we have seen whom these Seducers followed, Corah.

2. 2 Branch of Explicat.
But* secondly, Wherein did they follow him: Jude says, 1. In Gainsaying. 2.
In perishing therein.


1. In this gainsaying: 1. I shall show wherein it stood. 2. How Great the sin
of it was?

1. For the first, The word in the Greek, (...), Contradiction, or Gainsaying,
signifies these, either verbal or real.

Verbal, Heb. 7.7. Without all contradiction, (...), the less is blessed, etc.
and the Sadduces are called (...), those who deny that there is any
Resurrection.

In some places (secondly) the word principally imports, real contradiction
or opposition (though not excluding the verbal.) Thus I take it, Heb. 12.3.
where it is said of Christ, that he endured the contradiction ((...)) of
sinners; and I understand it in this place, to be a contradiction, as by words
so (chiefly) by works. More particularly, this contention, opposition or
contradiction, which Corah expressed and is at large described, Numb. 16.1. was
that insurrection and Sedition which he enterprized against Moses, whom he
gainsayed, and against whom he stood up, to throw Aaron out of, and to gain to
himself (he being of the Tribe of Levi) the Office of Priesthood, wherein
Aaron was placed by Divine appointment. This Real was accompanied and colored
over with that verbal gainsaying, wherein Corah charged Moses and Aaron with
usurpation and ambition, in taking too much upon the^. That this gaining of the
Priesthood
was the design, is plain from the words of Moses, ver. 9.10 where he thus
expostulates, Seems it a small thing to you that the God of Israel has
separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himsel?
etc. And seek you the Priesthood also? For which cause both thou, and all thy
company are gathered together against the Lord: and what is Aaron, that ye
murmur against him? For the accomplishing of this rebellious Design, he does
not only join to himself a great company of the chief Levites to throw Aaron
out of his Office, but incites Dathan and Abiram, who were of the Tribe of
Reuben, in regard of their primogeniture before Moses (they being of the eldest
Tribe) to depose Moses from, and to assume to themselves, the civil Government,
at the same time; in this work he also joining with them; he well knowing, that
if Moses continued to enjoy the Government of the Commonwealth, he should never
be able to carry on his Design of getting to himself the Priesthood.

As for these Seducers, against whom our Apostle here writes, I dare not
peremptorily assert, that the Apostle only intends that they imitated Corah in
disturbing the order and rule of the Church; I doubt not but ^orah opposed both
Civil and Ecclesiastical Order: (its plainly expressed, Numb. 16.3. that he with
Dathan and Abiram, and their followers, gathered themselves together, both
against Moses, and against Aaron). And supposing that Corah only had opposed
Aaron, Potest boc exemplum accommodari ad propositum Apostoli, etidmsi objecta
peccatorum sint diversa. Gerb. in 2 Pet. p. 257.
by laboring to invade the Priesthood; yet (as Gerard well notes) this example
of Corah in opposing Church Order, might well be accommodated to Judes purpose,
were his purpose only to show, that these Seducers were enemies to Civil Order
and Superiority; for although the sin of Corah and these Seducers had different
objects, yet they both agree, in resisting of Superiors. But its most probable
that Jude intends that these Seducers, (by comparing them to Corah) did oppose
all order and superiority in Church and State, they not only despising and
speaking evil of Civil Dignities and Dominions (as we have formerly showed at
large) but opposing and disturbing the state of all Ecclesiastical Order. None
were such bitter enemies to the faithful Apostles and Ministers of Christ, who
were the Shepherds, Guides, Governors, Beda vocat Diotrephem haeresiarcham. 3 John 10.
and Overseers, by Christ set over the flock and family of his Church. None
labored so much to pour contempt upon them and their Doctrine, prating against
them (as John speaks of Diotrephes) with malicious words; and all, that they
themselves (with Corah) might have the preheminency, and be looked upon (as
Simon Magus, their Master) to be the only great ones, Act 8.10. 2 Cor.
10.13.11.18
they commending themselves, boasting of things without their measure, glorying
after the flesh, drawing Disciples after them; and laboring by winding into
the Church, to work the faithful Ministers out: Cum Core pereunt, propterea
quod ficus ille, docendi Auctoritatem fibi prae^ ripuerunt. Oecum. Hoe est
negotium baereticorum, non Ethnicos convertendi, sed nostra evertendi nostra
suffodiunt ut sua aedificent. Tert. de praescrip. Haereticus est qui alicujus
temporalis commodi, and maxim gloriae principatusque gratia, falsas and novas
opiniones gignit vel sequitur. Cont. Ep. Pa^m. c. 3.
In a word (as Oecumenius speaks) though they were never so unfit, though
uncalled, yet their main study was, to snatch all authority of Teaching to
themselves. And (as Tertullian speaks of Heretics) Their work was not to
convert Heathens, but to overturn the labors of faithful Teachers; and to pull
down them to build up themselves* And Augustine defines an Heretic to be one
who for any worldly benefit, especially for glory and pre-eminence, either
frames or follows new opinions. Of this more page 269 Part 1.

2 The great sinfulness of this gainsaying, appears sundry ways. It was made
up of

1 Contempt of Gods Ordination. Moses and Aaron were both placed in their
Governments by Gods appointment, both immediate and express. Prove. 8.15. Rom
13.1.
God was more opposed then these his Servants; and therefore truly does Moses
tell them, that this their gathering together was against the Lord. Number. 16.11.
Though Dathan and Abiram (Reubenites) had the right of natural primogeniture,
yet do they vainly challenge Pre-eminence where God has subjected them. If all
Civil Honor flow from the King, how much more from the God of Kings! His hand
exalts the poor, and casts down the Mighty from their Throne. How unsufferable
a presumption is it for dust and ashes to go about to mend his work, and to
subject his Ordination to their own humor!

2. Regardlesness of the Public. They cared not what ruin and woe they brought
upon the whole company of Israel, by the loss of their lawful, godly, and able
Governors, so as they might accomplish their own private Designs. They were
desirous to raise themselves upon the destruction of thousands: and their
endeavor was, to remove away Isreal's Shelters, and Shields; their Saviors,
Shepherds, and Pillars; yea, and at one blow to behead Six hundred thousand
men; to turn Gods Garden, into a Wilderness; Gods well governed Family, into a
Den of Thieves; and to hasten the death of their Political Parents, though
thousands of children would have celebrated their Funerals with tears.

3. Hypocrisy and falshoood. The Rebels pretend that all the Congregation was
holy, and that Moses and Aaron lifted up themselves: Every word was a falsehood.
Numb. 16.3.
So was Israel holy, as Moses and Aaron were ambitious: God lifted them up over
Israel, and they dejected themselves; and what Holiness was there in so much
Infidelity, Idolatry, Mutiny? What could make them unclean, if this were
Holiness? The Israelites had scarce wiped their mouth since their last
obstinacy, but these Pickthanks tax their Governors, and flatter the people;
and yet all this not out of love to these fond and flattered people, of whom
they intended to make no other use, but to be stirrups to advance themselves
into the saddle of Government. They pretend, that all the people (in regard of
their holiness) might make as near approaches to God as their Governors; but
their Design was hereby to appropriate all Administrations into their own
hands, and to wipe the poor people of that which now they labored to take away
from their Governors; namely, all Power.

4 Discontentedness with their present condition. While they looked upon the
f^w Rulers that were above them, they never thought of the many thousands of
people who were below them. They did so discontentedly look upon the difference
between the Levites and the Priests, that they considered not the difference
between the Levites and the people; and their thankfulness that they were above
so many, was drowned in coffeehouse, that one or two are above them.

5 Envy at, and repining against the due advancement of their faithful
Governors. They envied Moses in the camp, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord,
Psalm. 106.16. Had Moses and Aaron been but fellows with the Rebels, none had
been better beloved; but now they are advanced, the malice of these Rebels is
not inferior to the Honor of their Governors; their fault was, that God had
set them up, not that they had ever opposed God, or hurt Israel: so that the
trouble of the Rebels was not the badness of their Governors, but the goodness
of God. The cursed humor of plain downright Envy, which is not troubled that
things in the world go ill, either in point of sin or sorrow, but that they go
so well, or no worse.

6 Pride and ambition. Quotics hominibus desidero praeesse, toties Deo meo
praeire contendo. Aug. in Psalm. 1.
They aspired to a Dignity in which God had placed others, and for, and to
which they were neither called nor fitted. Their ambition to be above the
people, made them desirous to be likewise above God, who had put others into
that Dignity: They who were not fit for the Ore, Cum indignus essem poni ad
romum, positus sum ad gubernaculum. Aug. Si ille qui virtutibus pollet, invitus
debet accedere, quid de illo qui vitiis sordet! Perald. Non honorantur ex
dignitate sed potius dignitas exhonoratur ab ipsis. Id.
desire to sit at the Stern. Though the thing they desired was good, yet their
desiring thereof out of Gods way, was wicked. If they who are fittest to govern
should not accept of rule unless they be drawn, then they who are unfit, should
not run to take it. Should ambitious Corahs get Power by running, they would
not be honored by their great place; but their place dishonored by them.

7 In infection and contagion dispersed to others. Corah draws in Two hundred
and fifty into the Conspiracy, famous in the Congregation, and men of renown.
The Plague Sore in this one Corah, infects a great part of Israel. The
contagion was worse then the Act; his wickedness was diffusive. He would
neither be alone in woe nor wickedness. His abode was so near to the Reubenites,
that he soon infuseth his poison into Dathan and Abiram: he errs not without
many followers. Surely his sin and woe had been sufficient, though he had not
drawn in partakers in both; but its the constant guise of sinners, as to
forbear the laboring after happiness themselves, and to hinder others; so to
run into ruin themselves, and to carry others with them; though they shall
dearly find hereafter that it is not in this case, the more the merryer, every
sinner being but a bundle of fuel to make the fire of wrath burn the hotter
against any who led him into sin.

8. Great ingratitude to God and their Governors, for all that care and cost
which they laid out upon them. How unkind a requital was this to God and his
Servants, for the many miraculous protections, directions, provisions, which
primarily from him, and secondarily from them, they had received! What did
Moses gain, by the troublesome Government, but danger and despite? Who but
Moses, would not have wished himself rather with the Sheep of Jethro, then these
Wolves of Israel? How full of care was Moses, and all that these Rebels might
be secure! Magistracy is like an upper garment, which a man puts on when he
rides in wet and dirty weather; though Magistracy be uppermost, yet all the
dirt and dashes fall upon it; the under garments are mean while kept dry and
clean.

9 Boldness and obstinacy in sin. What a presumptuous wickedness was it for
Corah and his accomplices to take the Censers and offer Incense. Had they had the
least drop of Gods fear, their hands would have shaken, and the Censers would
have fallen out of them. Though Corah had lately seen the judgment of God upon
Nadab and Abihu, yet his Contumacy would not be checked. The mentioning of the
holy Censers and Incense, Si qua fuisset residua in illis, gutta timoris Dei,
repent e manibus excedissent acerrae. Se vulgi favore munire tentat contra
Deums Ac si objecto fumo vellet solis luccm extingucre. Si ambitiosis applaudit
mundus inebriantur, exitiali fiducia, ut in nubes ipsas conspuant. Calvin, in
Numb. 16.
should have made him dread his own destruction, by intermedling beyond his
Calling: but as Calvin well notes, by the favor of the people he banished the
fear of God, and so opposes God, as if he would have put out the Sun with
smoke.

The second thing, wherein they followed Corah; was in Perdition; noted in
these words, and perish, or perished (Greek (...)) in the gainsaying, etc. The
time both past and present, is often put for the future; to import and signify
the great and undoubted certainty that a thing shall come to pass; that its as
sure to be, as if it were already accomplished: And thus the Apostle is to be
understood, in saying, that these Seducers perish, or perished in Corahs
gainsaying. The Greek word [(...)] notes not only a bare dying (for so it does
in its best signification) but a dying by some miserable means; as by hunger,
Luke 15.17. Sometime a destruction by hell, 2 These. 1.9. In which respect Judas
is called the son of Perdition and Destruction. Joh. 17.12 and the Devil is
called ( Rev. 9.11) A Destroyer: And Paul calls the man of sin (2 Thessalonians.
2.3.) the Son of Perdition, he being such both Actively and Passively. The word
(says Gerard) is used to note Temporal, Gerb. Harmon.
Spiritual, and Eternal destruction. The Simple word (...), signifies to
destroy; but the Compound (and such is this here used by Jude) is not without a
further Emphasis.

Concerning the destruction of Corah, we read at large Numb. 16. It is much
controverted by Learned men, what kind of Destruction this of Corah was. Some
think that he was swallowed up in the earth with Dathan and Abiram, they
referring the words of Moses. Number. 16.30. ( If the Lord make a new thing, and
the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, etc.) to all three, viz. Corah,
Dathan and Abiram; and it being said, Numb. 26.10. the earth opened her mouth
and swallowed them up (meaning Dathan and Abiram) together with Corah, when
that company dyed; what time the fire devoured Two hundred and fifty men. And
that Corah also was swallowed up, Ambrose, Richelius, Lorinus, with some others
conceive. Others (probably) think that Corah was not swallowed up with the
rest; that though all his substance and Tents were destroyed by that
punishment, and also all that appertained to him (his children only excepted)
yet they think that Corah himself was consumed with fire from Heaven with the
Two hundred and fifty men that offered Incense, ver. 35 Of this opinion are
Cajetan, Oleaster, Haimo, Perkins, Tremelius, Diodate. And their Reasons are,

1 Because it seems by several passages in the History, Vid. Number. 16.25, 27,
28, 29, 30.
that Moses spoke concerning Dathan and Abiram only, and those which belonged
to them, when he said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord has sent me, etc. if
the earth open her mouth and swallow them up, etc.

2 When Dathan and Abiram, are expressly said to be swallowed up, there is
mention made, ver. 32. only (in relation to Corah) that all the men that
pertained to Corah, and all their goods, were swallowed up: Corah himself being
not named, as are the other two.

3 They say, that when in other places this destruction is rehearsed, as Deuteronomy.
11.6. Psalm. 106.17. there is mention made only of the swallowing up of Dathan
and Abiram, with theirs, not of Corah at all.

4 Some are much confirmed in this apprehension, from that command of God, ver.
38.39, 40
that the brazen Censers of those who were burnt, should be made broad plates
to cover the Altar, for a memorial that no stranger come near to offer Incense
before the Lord, that he be not as Corah, and his company. From which command
they conceive, that Corah was with the rest, burnt with fire. 1. Because he
joined with the rest of the company in offering Incense (as is plain, because
others were to take warning by his punishment, not to offer Incense; and ver.
6. Moses says, Take you Censers, both Corah, and all his company; and ver. 17.
(says Moses to Korah) Bring every man his Censer, thou also and Aaron, etc,)
Now say they, its probable, Korah sinning by fire, was also punished by fire,
and joining in the same sin, and being present Korach ipse cum ill is ducentis
quinquaginta era^, quos ignis Coelestis consumpsit. Number. 16.25. Tremel
when the fire devoured the rest (which was immediately after their offering
Incense) that he was also joined in the same punishment. 2. When Moses speaks
here of the offenders, he joins them together in the punishment, he calls them
Corah and his company, in these words, That he be not as Corah and his company.
3. The Censers which were to be Plates for the Altar, are called, the Censors
of those which were BURNT: now Corahs Censer was among those which were Plates
for the Altar; because the reason why they were to be Plates for the Altar, was
their offering them before the Lord, and their being hallowed, ver. 38. which
agree to Corahs Censer, as well as to the Censer of any other. 4. Gods command
to make Plates of the Censers of those who were burnt, being followed with this
reason, that others be not as Corah and his company, seems to import, that
others by looking upon the Censers of those who were burnt, should take heed of
being as Corah and his company, namely, burnt as they were. And whereas its
said, Numb. 26.12. that the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up,
together with Corah, etc. Some understand that place not of Corahs person, but
his Substance, Goods, and Retinue; and therefore Tre^melius reads it, Absorpsit
eos, and quae erant Korachi* The earth swallowed them up, and those things
which appertained to Corah, as we find Numb. 16.32. Others conceive, That Corah
is joined here with the other who were swallowed up, Because he was a
Confederate in the same wickedness, and was punished by a miraculous death at
the same time. But to leave the further discussion hereof; sure we are, that
Corah was also destroyed: Jude here tells us, that he perished: and it has
been observed, that (most, if not) all those whom the Scripture mentions as
Opposers of Lawful Authority, have been punished by violent death, God not
vouchsafing them so much as a reprival to a Deathbed; several instances have I
set down in my former Part, page 631. God makes them marks of vengeance, who
remove the ancient Landmarks, set for Order and Propriety in a Nation; In
Psalm. 3.
and (as Chrysostom notes) they who durst open their mouths against Moses and
Aaron, making their threats an open Sepulcher to bury their Diguities, were
justly punished, when the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up such Rebels.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 The great misery and disgrace to be a ringleader in sin. Corah is here only
mentioned by Jude; Observe. 1.
he was the great wheel of the Rebellion: It Is thought that he exasperated
Dathan and Abiram, by the pretense of their primogeniture before Moses. It is
too much to follow in wickedness; but to lead, it is inexcusable, insufferable.
The Rebels that opposed Moses and Aaron, are called Corahs company, Numb. 27.3.
Number. 16.5, 6.
and the Rebellion it self, is called the matter of Corah, Numb. 16.49. He who
was higher then the rest in sin, is principally braned in Scripture story with
perpetual infamy. Of this more in Balaams example.

2 Bad parents may have good children. Observe. 2.
Jeroboam, Amon, Ahaz, and here Korah are pregnant proofs hereof. God is free
in his gifts of Grace. He disperseth them where and to whom he pleases. They
who have nothing in themselves or parents, to commend them to God, are received
by him, to show that the foundation of all Gods love, is in his own bosom, and
that the privileges of nature commend us not to him. God also will hereby show
the excellency of Graces Original; that it is not by Generation, but
Regeneration; not Native, but Donative; not by the first, but second Birth. The
bad parents of a godly child, proclaim that their child has a Heavenly Father,
and that good which they never bestowed upon it; as the wicked child of godly
parents proclaims, that they who contributed a Natural, could not afford a
Spiritual being. Yea further, hereby God will manifest the power of his Grace,
which in a sort gathers grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles, and can bring
pure water through a filthy and polluted channel; and that the power and poison
of natural and sinful example cannot hinder the irresistible strength of his
own spirit. How wisely (lastly) does God hereby beat Satan, and batter his
kingdom with his own weapons, and strike him through, with arrows taken out of
his own quiver! How should the consideration hereof engage the godly children
of godless parents, 1. To love, admire, and serve that God, who has
transplanted them out of Satan's Nursery into his own Orchard; who made white
paper of dunghill rags! If Thomas said, Lord, why will thou manifest thy self to
us, and not to the world? well may a Godly child say, Lord, why will thou
manifest thy self to me, and not to my father and mother? 2. To be humble in
considering of the Rock out of which they were hewn, and the Fountain from
which they flowed, and the poorness and impurity of their beginning, even when
they are in the midst of their highest proceedings in holiness. To pity
likewise, and to labor to do good by a Spiritual (...) (or natural affection
Spiritualized) to the souls of their poor unregenerate parents, that they may
study to requite them for being the causes of their natural being, Deo and
parenti non redditur aquivalens.
by procuring their parents Spiritual birth; and truly, no way but this can
that Maxim be confuted, The child can never recompense the parent.

3 Great is our proneness to follow corrupt example. Observe. 3.
Hundreds here run after one rebel. Of this before Part 1. page 572.

4 Corrupt Greatness is very influential upon, Observe. 4.
and into Inferiors. Let but an eminent Corah go before, and the rest will
follow. Great men seldom sin alone: witness Absalom, Jeroboam, Simon Magus. Of
this before, Part 1. prg. 573.

5. Ambition knows no bounds. Observe. 5.
An high condition seems but low to an high spirit. Corah was a Levite, and his
privilege and Dignity thereby was not small; ( Seems it a small thing to you
(says Moses) that the God of Israel has separated you from the Congregation
of Israel, to bring you near to himself?) yet his ambition made it seem
contemptible, because he had not the Priesthood also. Absalom, though a Kings
son, and his fathers beloved son, and newly taken into favor, yet because he
had not the Kingdom, could not be contented. Haman, though the greatest
Favorite of the greatest Monarch in the world, yet because he had not the
obeisance of poor Mordecai, accounted all his Preferments worth nothing. The
greatest Honors do but widen and enlarge the Ambitious man's desires; they do
but entice, not content a man. The Subjects whom Kings have advanced to highest
Dignities, have ever been forwardest to oppose and depose those who have
exalted them, and all because they have thought that they could never be high
enough; witness the Conspiracy of the Nobles, exalted to highest English
Honors in the Reign of William the First, and that famous example of the great
Stanly, Vid. D (...) History of William the I. p. 40 And Sr. Fran. Bacons of H.
7 No rewards can clear accounts with them that over value ^hei^ merits. Daniel
ub. supr.
in the Reign of Henry the Seventh, who though the greatest Peer in the Realm,
and laden with many Favors, and great Offices, yet was a man of that
exorbitant and unbounded Ambition, that nothing would please him but a
Preferment which used to go to the Kings Eldest Son. Though Peleon be laid
upon Ossa, and one Mountain of greatness upon another, yet will an ambitious
mind look upon them all, as too low. Kingdom added to Kingdom, and (could it be
so) world to world, would but be a drop to the belly of the Elephant, Ambition.
The best way to satisfy the thirst of one in a Fever, is in stead of giving
him drink, to cure his Distemper; and he who has the Itch, shall more wisely
take away the inward cause there of, then think to allay it by scratching. Lets
not think to satisfy our Lusts by making provision for them; its Christian
wisdom, rather to study to kill, then content inordinate desire; and more to
bring our hearts to our condition, then our condition to our hearts. Let us
look upon that station of life wherein God has set us, as the best for us. A
garment which fits us, is better for us, though it be plain, then one which is
gaudy and three or four handfuls too big. God best knows how to order our
Estates. Should we be our own carvers, we should often cut our fingers. Let us
also compare our Receipts with our deserts and our selves with our inseriors.
Observe. 6. Naturae bonitas nisi pietate confirmetur, facile illabescit. Cart.
Harm.
; and though the former seem small when they stand by themselves, yet if we set
them by the latter, they will appear of a large size, and a tall stature.

6. A mere man is firm and steady in no relation. Natural relations, unless
backed by grace, are very slippery and unstable foundations of friendship.
Corah, a wicked man, though a near kinsman to Moses, proves his greatest
Adversary. Abels brother, Joseph's brethren, David's son, could not be kept from
Murder and Treachery by the bond of nature. It is not the alliance, but the
renovation of nature, that can establish friendship. easily break the bonds of
nature, as Samson did his cords, till his locks (his Lusts) be cut off.
No natural man accounts his own brother that lay in the same womb with him so
near to him, as the lust that lodges in his heart. He provides friends most
wisely for himself, who either finds or makes them friends to God. An enemy to
God, will not long be a friend to thee. Natural love often ends in an unnatural
hatred. A bad man will not conscienciously be a good husband, son, brother.
Grace does not slay, but sanctify; not annihilate, but elevate nature; turns
water into Wine, and Spiritualizeth carnal affection. How just with God is it,
that he whom thou do not desire to make Gods friend, shall prove thy foe!
that thy child which is most cockered by thee in sin, should afterward prove
the greatest grief to thy heart! God suffering, to thy sorrow, him to rebel
against thee, whom thou have suffered and seen without sorrow, to rebel against
God.

7 Innocence is no shelter from opposition. Observe. 7.
The goodness of no person nor cause can exempt either from hatred; No man
meeker then Moses, none better beloved then Aaron, none more beneficial to
Israel then both; no cause more Righteous, then the holding a Government, to
which they were appointed by God himself; yet neither the persons nor their
cause could be free from the conspiracies and contestations of sinners. Jesus
Christ himself endured their contradictions, Heb. 12.3.
and gainsayings. Its no sign of a good man, to have few opposers; nor of a
good Cause, to have many abettors. He who is not opposed by the stream, goes
with it. The world will hate where God loves. So far is Holiness from exempting
the Godly from the ill will of sinners, that it draws it forth: Let other
qualifications of Learning, sweet nature, Birth, etc. never so much abound, yet
Grace marrs the taste of all these in a carnal palate. Antipathies can never be
smothered, reconciled. The meekest Moses, will he be a Moses, shall be
gainsayed, notwithstanding his meekness. The wicked rise up against the
Faithful, not for doing any evil against, but for not doing evil with them. If
in our keeping close to God we meet with unkindness from the wicked, let us not
wonder; if with love, let us be thankful; but yet withal, suspicious of our
selves that we do, or at least cautelous that we may not sinfully correspond
with them.

8. Instruments of public good, Observe. 8.
often meet with unkind requitals. Moses and Aaron, Isreal's deliverers and
defenders, were gainsayd by an unthankful people. Israel owed to these saithful
Governors (under God) their provision, peace, and protection; but for this, the
tribute which they paid was Conspiracy and Rebellion. Nothing is so easily
forgotten as the benefits we enjoy by Governors. The lightest injuries are
easily remembered, and are like feathers, that swim on the top of the water:
weighty favors, like a piece of lead, sink to the bottom, and are forgotten.
Gideon had been a famous Deliverer of Israel; Judge. 9.5.
but the benefits which that unthankful people enjoyed by him, are so neglected
that they slew his sons. 2 Chro. 24.21, 22
Though Jehoiada was the renowned Restorer of Isreal's Government and Peace, yet
was his son destroyed by them, who (next to God) owed all that was dear to them
to his Faithfulness and Wisdom. Its a Kingly honor, to meet with unthankful
returns from those to whom we do much good. The mothers breast, gives milk to
the froward Infant that strikes it. God would have all, especially Public
Officers, in all the good they do, to eye his Glory and command, and not the
applause of men. No opposition must discourage us in the Faithful discharging
of our places, nor chase us from the station wherein God has set us.

9 Excellency and Superiority are the marks of Envy. Observe. 9. Invidemus
inferiori, ne nobis aequetur; pari, quia nobis aequatu^; superiori quia ei nou
ae quamur.
Though Moses and Aaron cannot be opposed for their sin, yet they may be envyed
for their Power. As Equals are envyed because they are such, and Inferiors lest
they should be our Equals; so principally Superiors, because we are not equal
to them. Joseph was envyed, because he was higher then his brethren, in his
fathers favor, Nullae necessitudinis jura tam sancta et inviola^a quae su^^
invidiae stimulos non pariuntur; praescrtim cum quis inter cognatos ad impertum
promovetur. Mendez. in 1 Samuel 10.16 Paterna largitatis memor non est. qui est
fraternae immemor charitatis: haedum sibi datum negat, qui tantam substantiam
accepit. Chrysol. Ser 4. Senior dicitur eo quod cito aliquis per invidiam
consenes^^t. Ambr. in Luc. Haec est invidentium natura, ut malin^ propria mala
pati, quam aliena bona intueri. Mend in 1 Samuel 5. Quanto ille qui invidetur,
successu meliore profecerit, tanto invidus in majus incendium, livoris ignibus
inardescit. Cypr. lib. de Zel. and Live. Non illos malos faciendo, sed istis
bona quibus mali facillime possunt invidere. largiendo, incitesse dicitur ad
odium. August. in loc.
and dreamed that he should be higher then they, in his worldly condition; the
Israelites likewise were envied, because they increased more then Egyptians;
David by Saul, because the women ascribed more thousands to him then to Saul:
Moses by Miriam and Aaron, because by God advanced above them; and here Moses
and Aaron by Corah and his Accomplices, because of their Superiority. The object
of hatred, is often the sin of others; but of envy, always the Excellency of
others, either real or seeming, of body, mind, estate, fame, etc. the cause
thereof being pride, or an inordinate self-love; the Envious ever deeming his
own Excellency by another happiness, to be diminished and obscured. Thus the
elder brother, Luke 25. deemed himself wronged by the love which his father
showed to the younger, and by reason of Envy against his brothers, he forgets
his fathers bounty to himself; and he who had received all his fathers
inheritance, denies that ever his father had given him a kid. Of all sinners,
the Envious is most his own scourge and torment. He had rather suffer misery,
then see others in prosperity: as some have noted of the Philistims, who could
hardly be brought by the smart of their own distresses to send the Ark back to
Israel. Psalm. 105.25. its said, that God turned the heart of the Egyptians to
hate his people: But (as Augustine well notes, not by making the heart of the
Egyptians evil, but the Estate of the Israelites prosperous. What a moth to the
soul (says Cyprian) is Envy, Qualis est animi tinea, in malum proprium bona
aliena convertere, aliorum gloriam facere suam poeham and velut quosdam pectori
suo admo ere carnifices, etc. Cypr. de zel and live.
to turn another good into our own hurt; to make another glory, our own
punishment! The meditation of this cursed distemper of the Envious, may provoke
us to contentation in a low condition. They are high Towers, upon which the
lightnings of Envy falls. It^ oftentimes a mercy to be in misery. How many
righteous and well-deserving persons, have been made faulty and guilty, only
for their being wealthy and honorable! How abundantly does the sweet safety of
a retired life, recompense for all that obscurity which seems to debase it! How
often have I known those who have lived in envyed honor, to envy those who have
lived in safe obscurity!

10 Heretical Seducers, Observe. 10.
are commonly turbulent and seditious. They here followed Corah in his opposing
of Authority. They who deny the only Lord God (as these Seducers did) will make
nothing of despising Dominion. They who oppose Gods Dominion, will never regard
man's. Impious men, will not be obedient Subjects. The order of obedience
prescribed by the Apostle 1 Pet. 2.17. is first to fear God, Prove. 24.21.
Cunctus totius orbis clerus imperio Magistratus Civilis ex. emptus. L. 2.
decret. Tit. 2. Imperator quod habet, totum habeta nobis in potestate nostra
est, ut demu^ imperium cui volumus. Hadrian. in epist. ad Archiep. Treu.
Mogunt. and Colon.
and then to honor the King. My son (says Solomon) fear thou the Lord and the
King. The Romish off spring of Antichrist, who throw off, and deprave the Law
of God, will not submit to Civil Authority. They openly teach, that the Clergy
is exempted from the power of the Magistrate. So long as the Arch Heretic the
Pope lives, Corah and these Seducers will never dye. In one Pope are many
Corahs, Seducers, Rebels, Libertines. He usurps a Dominion over all the Princes
in the world: he makes himself the Sun, and from him as the fountain of light
he pretends that all Civil Governors, (as the Moon) borrow their light; to
himself he says, is given all power in heaven and in earth; and as profanely,
he applies that passage ( Psalm. 72.8) He shall have Dominion from Sea to Sea,
and from the River unto the ends of the earth. And that of Prove. 8 15. By me
Kings reign. And when he speaks concerning the distribution of Empires and
Kingdoms, he imitates his Father in these words, They are delivered to me, and
to whomsoever I will, I give them. It would be endless (and in some respect,
needless, as having touched upon this sad Subject before) to relate the many
bloody machinations, and murtherous enterprises of the Popes cutthroats and
Emissaries against the persons of Christian Princes. Under the wing of this
whore of Babylon, in the nest of the Popes chair, Page 179, 180, 181.
having been hacht those stabbings, poysonings, powder plots, and which is
worse, the defense of all these, by his Janissaries, (the Jesuits) in their
writings (in blood) which have filled the ears and hearts of true Christians,
with horror and amazement. Nor would it be unsuitable to the present Subject, to
mention the seditious turbulency of the Heretical crew of Anabaptists of late
years, who to all their other erroneous Tenets, add this, that before the day
of Judgment, Christ should have a worldly kingdom erected, where the Saints
only, were to have dominion, and Magistracy was to be rooted out; and with
what an inundation of blood, these idle, (and at first) neglected dreams and
opinions have filled Europe, the Histories of the last age have related to us,
and the Lord grant, that we who have read, and not been warned by them, may
never our selves become an History to the age which shall come after us. I say
no more. Of this more, page 638. Part 1.

11. Its a sin for those who are uncalled, Observe. 11.
to thrust themselves into the office of the Ministry. Hudson 137.
Corahs sin was his endeavor to invade the Priesthood; Seek ye the Priesthood
also? says Moses to him, ( Numb. 16.10.) And because all the Lords people were
holy, (as Corah alleges. verse. 3.) therefore he pretends that others had as
much right to discharge the office and function of Aaron, as Aaron himself had;
and that since the people had an holiness by vocation to grace, (whereby the
Israelites were distinguished from other Nations) there needed no holiness of
special consecration, to distinguish the Priest from other Israelites. Now that
this sin of Corah, which was an invasion of the Priests office, may still be
committed in the times of the New Testament, is clear, because the Apostle
reproves it in these seducers: And that it can be no other way committed, in
the times of the Gospel, but by intrusion of uncalled persons into the Ministry
of the Gospel, is (say See Mr. Ly fords judicious Discourse.
some) as plain, because there is no other office which these Seducers could
invade, answering to that of the Legal Priesthood, but this office of the
Evangelical Ministry. From all which it will unavoidably follow, that they who
shall enter into the office, of the Ministry, only upon the pretense of inward
abilities, without receiving a Commission and authority from God, and a
particular separation to that office, are guilty of sin against God, and that
no light and slight one, Corahs sin. The receiving then of a power by way of
authority, external mission, and commission, from those whom God has appointed
to confer it, Verbum quod proximis privati annunciant, authoritate specialis
officii, non constringit auditores ad obedientiam, sed virtute objecti seu
materiae, quae verbo isto continetur. Apol. de min. Ec. 1 These. 4.18.5.14. Heb.
3.13. 1 Pet. 3.1.
is requisite for those who will enter upon the Ministerial function; which no
man may undertake, but by power lawfully thus conferred. That private
Christians in a way of Christian charity, may, yea ought to confer with one
another, by way of information, admonition, consolation, etc. and so
communicate their gifts for their mutual edification, it is not denied or
envied, but granted, yea earnestly desired; Its yielded also, that in some
cases of urgent necessity befalling the Church, when it is as yet not fully
planted, formed, or when it is scattered and dispersed by persecution, and so
hindered from that ordinary and orderly course of ministration, which it enjoys
in times of peace and setledness, private Christians may publicly instruct
others: yet this cannot be alleged against the course, which the Scripture
has established for sending forth of Ministers, Romans 10.15. Heb. 5.4, 2 Timothy 1
6. 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Timothy 5.22
5. Acts 13.1, 2. and 14.22, 23. Tit. 1.5. 2 Timothy 2.2. As neither were the
great eminency and commonness of gifts, in the Church of Christ, in the times
of the Apostles, which were bestowed upon many who were not ordaind and set
apart for the Ministry, any hindrances from the conferring of Ministerial power
on them, by setting them apart for the Ministerial employment. Timothy was a
man of much holiness, and of excellent parts, and yet these hindered not his
after separation to his holy function by the Presbytery. The command of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.22.
that Timothy should lay hands suddenly on no man, clearly argues, that they on
whom he did lay hands, were before to be men gifted with internal
qualifications, (for the trial whereof, Timothy was forbidden to be too sudden
in ordaining.) And most clear is that of 2 Timothy 2.2. where for a succession of
teachers, Timothy is commanded to commit the things which he had heard of Paul
to faithful men, able to teach others: whereby its evident, that they were to
be able and faithful, before Timothy committed those things to them. There is
not only a meetness for, but an inauguration into, the office of the Ministry,
required of those who are to enter into it; and gifts are not sufficient to
make Ministers, without the ordinary call and Mission, settled in the Church by
Christ. Every Israelite, or Levite, able to offer Incense was not admitted to
offer; none but the Sons of Aaron, who were particularly set apart thereto, had
that honor; nor can any under the times of the Gospel, who has never so much
inward furniture of gifts, be a right Minister or Officer from Christ, where
there is not a right Commission, and Patent given in his Name by due
Ordination. As it is Treason for the ablest Statesman, or Lawyer, to undertake
the office of an Ambassador or Judge, before he be made such, by those, who
only can confer that power, so its an insufferable affront offered to Jesus
Christ, for any to pretnd the doing of that in his Name, which is done without
his declared will and consent. Of this more, page 10, 11. Part. 1.

12. How ready are men to be weary of enjoying those things, Observe. 12.
which they did most impatiently desire when they wanted them! What would not
these Rebels have given for a Moses and an Aaron, to deliver them out of their
Egyptian bondage! how welcome were the first tidings of Gods appointing them to
be the instruments of so great a mercy! And yet now they have a while enjoyed
them, and tasted the benefit of their government, how weary were they of both,
and therein of their own happiness! The people who with passionate, and sinful
earnestness cried out for a King, after the manner of other Nations; so soon as
God had gratified their desires therein were (a great part of them) weary of
what they so ardently wished, despised their King, brought him no presents, and
muttered their unthankful discontentedness in these words, Plerunque acci dit
hominibus, ut non habita desiderent, habita detestentur, A bulens. q. 24.
How shall this man save us? 1 Samuel 10.27 And long before that the same people
who would have been glad of the coursest pulse in a starving Wilderness,
murmured because they had no better commons then bread from heaven, Angels
food; herein in a sort resembling David, whose soul longed for the water of
Bethlehem, and yet when his three Worthies, with the endangering of their
lives, had brought of that water to him, he poured it out on the earth and
would not drink thereof, 2 Samuel 23.15, 16, 17. How righteous is God in denying
us many a comfort, notwithstanding our earnest and impetuous craving thereof he
knowing that when he gives it us, we shall either unthankfully despise it, or
rather profanely abuse it! How willingly should we justify God in all his
deferrings, and denyals of creature-enjoyments! for though we think that the
want of them, will undo us, yet he knows that the having of them, would both
hurt us, and dishonor him.

13. Observe. 13.
God opposes the opposers of lawful authority. They are enemies more to
themselves, then to those to whom they are enemies; Quid si princeps jubeat
quod non debes facere? Contemn potestatem, ti^endo potestatem Si aliquid
^usserit curator, nonne faciendum est, ita quidem; tamen si contra* Proconsulem
jusscrit, non utique contemnis potestatem, sed m^jori servire eligis: ^ursum si
aliquid proconsul jubeat and aliud jubeat Imperator, nunquid dubitatur i^o
contempto, isti serviendum; Ergo si aliud Imperator, aliud Deus quid judicat?
etc. Aug. de verb. D^m Se^m. 6. Nequaquam mores illorum consectari velis, qui
ordinem istum invertunt, and regi primum, deinde Deo deferendum esse honorem
existimant. Salaz in Prove. 24.
they perish in their gainsayings with this Corah. An evil man seeks only
rebellion, therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him. Prove. 24.2^.
My son, (says Solomon) Fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change, for their calamity shall arise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both? Some interpret this place of Solomon to be a
command, that fear and obedience should be yielded to the King in a way of
subordination and subjection to God; as if Solomon had said, Be sure thou fear
God in the first place, and the King only in the second; so that when the
commands of God and the King, seem to cross one another, let God rather be
obeyed then the King; q. d. Fear and obey the King in the Lord. And the next
words: Meddle not with them who are given to change, they understand of the
changing of that order of obeying God in the first place; q. d. meddle not with
them that would change, or invert that order, here enjoined by God; and would
persuade thee to obey the King in the first pla^e, and God after him. A very
pi^us, but I question whether a proper Interpretation. Others therefore better
understand this rule of Solomon, of obedience to Kings for God, q. d. show thy
fearing of God, by fearing the King; thy fearing of G^d, should put thee upon
fearing the King, who is the Minister of God, and in his stead. By those words
[which are given to change.] I conceive we are to understand a brief Character
of those that are seditious, who out of a desire of alterations and change in
Political government, shake off their due and former obedience to the
Magistrate. He adds, Their calamity shall arise suddenly, that is, their
conspiracies, and machinations shall speedily and unexpectedly be discovered,
and God and the King will both set themselves with their power against him. And
lastly, for those words, [ Who knows the ruin of them both? Some undestand
this [of them both] to be meant of God and the King: as if Solomon had said.
Who knows what that ruin or perdition is, which both God and the King will
bring upon the Rebellious? taking ruin here actively, of God and the Kings
ruining them. Others better, by the ruin of them both, understand, the ruin
which shall befall both the party given to change, and him who shall meddle with
him; that is, shall be (though) but a partaker, or accessory, or drawn in to
join with him. A Scripture, the Explication whereof, I have the more willingly
touched upon, because it is so clear a Comment upon the present Instruction.

It has been observed by some (as I have noted upon the eighth verse, in the
foregoing Part) That the calamity of no sinners ordinarily arises so suddenly,
unavoidably, and certainly, as that of the Seditious. We rarely, if at all,
meet with any in Scripture who opposed Authority, but have been punished
eminently in this life (to the observation of others:) and scarce do we read of
any Seditious person, who was not taken away by a violent death; witness the
Examples of Corah and his accomplices, Absalom, Shebah, Joah, Adonijah, Zimri,
Baasha, Athaliah. And its observable, that of these Seducers, Jude here says,
that they perished, to note the speediness, certainty, and irrecoverableness of
their destruction. I need not mention the numerous examples of Gods severity
against Seditious persons, recorded in our own Histories. They who have read of
Becket, Montford, Mortimer, the Piercies, Tyler, Warbeck, Wyat, the
Gun-powder-Traytors, Squire, Lopez, Campian, etc. will easily acknowledge the
severity of God against the Tribe of Traitors. Nor seems there to be so much
wrath put forth by God against them, without extraordinary cause. Opposing of
Lawful Authority, being both an open affronting and resisting the Ordinance of
God, and a pulling down and demolishing his very image and representation in
the world; (an indignity unsufferable, were it only offered to men) as also a
crossing of that merciful provision of God, whereby he will have humane
Society, and thereby his Church upheld and propagated in the world, Treasons
and Seditions being the pulling down of the pillars and the plucking up the
foundations (as it were) of the worlds Edifice: In a word, How just is it with
God, that they should restrain others from sin unwillingly, by being made
examples, who will take away those who should restrain others from sin
willingly, by their place and Office! and that they should be made marks of
Vengeance, who will attempt the removing of the ancient Landmarks, set by God
for Order and Propriety in Nations! How the consideration hereof should make us
thankful to God our Supreme Protector, and show us how deeply God is offended
with a people, when their alterations, Conspiracies, and Kingdome-quakes are
frequent: and engage Magistrates in duty and allegiance to God, who receive so
much protection from God: as also (lastly) make us loath and leave those Lusts
which are greatest enemies to Government, I have in sundry Observations,
mentioned in my former Part, page 632, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, etc.

14. How merciful is God even in judgment! Observe. 14.
God spared Korahs Posterity, when the father was destroyed. God in his
severity will be loved, and in his indulgence feared. He mixed his smartest
dispensations with sweetness: Mercy it was, that Corahs Posterity should be
preserved from death: more, that God should make so holy an offspring to come
of so unholy a parent; most of all, that one who had been rebellious against
God, should have a seed so eminently serviceable to God. In the destructions of
the parents in the Wilderness, he spared the children. He cut off some
luxuriant branches, but did not cut down the tree. God lays up Mannah with
the rod: He ever shows that mercy pleases him, though sometimes he be put
upon judgment. How should this goodness of God teach us both thankfulness and
imitation! Thankfulness in his severest dispensations; we may in the midst of
them say, He has not dealt with us after our sins: Even in our greatest
Rebellions we may see him indulgently, and undeservedly sparing us, or ours. If
he have suffered our forefathers to be covered with the darkness of
Superstition and ignorance, he has dealt more graciously with us, their
Posterity, who live to praise him, like Corahs children, for that goodness
which we no more deserved then our forefathers did. If the fire of his
displeasure burn against us, who knows but our children may live to have
better hearts, and to see better times, and to be the more humble and holy seed
of Rebellious parents! Hence we learn imitation likewise; when we are employed
in works of greatest severity, we should not throw off tender-heartedness. We
should remember that gentleness becomes us in punishing the worst, who has
ever something to draw out our pity; and to be sure, less to draw out our
severity to them, then we had to deserve Gods toward us.

VER. 12. These are spots in your Feasts of Charity, when they feast with you,
feeding themselves without fear; clouds they are without water, carried about
of winds; trees whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by
the roots.
THe Apostle having amplified the sin and misery of these Seducers, from sundry
Examples, Hanc conclusionem, duobus comparationis gener ibus exornat, unum est
in exemplis rerum ante gestarum positum: alterum in exemplis elegantissimis
rerum naturalium Exempla 1. Historica. 2. Physica. Jun. in loc.
now further illustrates the same by sundry apt and elegant comparisons, in
this and the following verse. Three of these similitudes (whereby he describes
their estate) are set down in this verse, and two in the next, in both five.

In this verse, they are compared, 1. To spots; These are spots, etc. 2 To
clouds without water, carried, etc. 3 To decayed trees; Trees whose fruit
withers.


1. To spots; in these words, These are spots in your feasts of Charity, when
they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear.

EXPLICATION.
Four things are here to be explained.

1. What these Seducers are her called, or the name affixed to them, Spots.

2. Where they conversed, or to what company these spots cleaved. In your
Feasts of Charity.

3 What they did there? 1. They Feast: 2 They feed themselves.

4. How they feasted and fed? viz. without fear.

1 For the first. They are called spots, in the Greek, (...). The word has a
double signification, very congruous to the present scope and drift of the
Apostle.

1. The word (...), (here interpretend Spots) signifies Rocks, Quemadmodum
scopuli, navigantibus infesti sunt ac perniciosi, cum inopinato occurrunt sic
isti, coepulan. tibus, insperatam perniciem inferunt. Oecum. (...), non solum
est glarea, id est, terrae species quae maculas facile relinquit, sed etiam
concavum saxum, in litore maris, seu lacuum ac fluminum in quam concavitatem,
tanquam in commune receptaculum, sordes aquarum confluunt. Aret. Confragosa in
mart saxa, and cavernosae rupes Gagn. (...) apud prophanos Authors, usurpatur
primo pro macula in vest e vi no vel unguine ei inhaerens, quae eam decolorat:
secundo pro naevo in facie. Gerh. in 2 Pet. 2.13. Derivatur a (...), a trahendo
coeno; quasi denotentur spurcissimi haeretici, cognominati etiam (...), quod
coenum and lutum significat, Borborita, five Borboriani. Lorin. in loc. Est
metaphora a panno: vel vestibus, in quibus ex gutta vini, olei, alteriusue rei,
contrahitur alius color quam sit nativus Aret. in Ephesians. (...) proprie
significat vituperium, a verbo (...) vituperare. 2 Cor. 6.3 and 8 20. LXX.
ustrpant pro (...), quod generaliter significat aliquid in corpore, vel action
vitae, quod incurrit reprehensionem. Gerh. in 2 Pet.
such as in the sea (not being by Mariners discerned and shunned) may easily
cause Shipwreck. And in this sense Oecumenius understands the word in this
place; as if these Seducers in their meetings with the Christians, were as
pernicious to their souls, as are Rocks in the sea to those Ships, which by the
unwariness of the Mariner, unexpectedly dash against them. Others conceive,
that they are compared to Rocks near the shore, which being hollow, contract
and gather the filth and mud which the sea casts up into their holes; as if the
Apostle would note them to be a colluvies, sink, or common receptacle of all
filth and wickedness. But 2. I conceive the word is here more fitly rendered
spots, then rocks; for the word spots, (...), 2 Pet. 2.13. is of the same
derivation and signification, and used upon the very same occasion with this;
and there it is joined with the word (...), which imports blemishes, or any
thing in the body or Actions which may render either liable to disgrace and
reproach. They are (says Peter) (...) ( Labes and maculae, Bez.
Coinquinationes, et maculae, Vulg.) spots and defilements, or blemishes. And
the words (...), and (...), a spot, among profane Writers, betoken defilement
and deformity, and are used either to signify any speck, mole, or wrinkle on
the face, or any stain on the garment, by the dropping of wine or oil upon it
(very often done in Feasting); (which notion (says Lorinus) is most agreeable
to the Apostles purpose of speaking concerning their being spots in Feasts);
Tritum est; nominibus abstractis improbissimum quemque appellare, facem,
pestem, perniciem, scelus. Lorin. In abstracto est magna Emphasis, ut enim
hominem insigniter sceleratum vocamus scelus; sic Apostolus falsos doctores,
utpote insigniter maculatos and inquinatos vocat maculas, and inquinamenta.
Gerh. in 2 Pet. Non vitiosus homo es, Zoile, sed vitium. Martial.
and by way of resemblance its used concerning the spots and stains of the
soul; namely, sins which render him who was made after Gods Image, defiled and
deformed: Hence the Apostle speaks of the Church (washed and cleansed by Christ)
as not having ( spot, (...)) or wrinkle, but as being holy, and (...), without
blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. Nor is it without a singular Emphasis, that the Apostle
expresses them (who were themselves so defiled, and ready to spot and defile
the Christians) by a word in the abstract, calling them not such as do defile
and bespot, but even very spots and defilements; and thus abstractly speaks the
Spirit of God, in other Scriptures, when it would increase and intend the
signification. We have found this man a pest, a very plague, Acts 24.5. Ephesians.
5.8. Once were ye darkness, but now are ye light. And most deservedly are
these impure Seducers called spots, both in regard 1. Of their deformity, and
2. Defilement. 1. Of their deformity; 1. They (like spots) cast a deformity,
disgrace, or blemish upon their Christian profession: What Heathen, who never
heard of Christ, but would have thought Christ (seeing these beastly Epicures,)
a Bacchus, and these Love Feasts, (as profaned by these) Bacchus's feasts?
Aestimari a cultoribus potest ille qui colitur, Salu. Ezekiel. 36.20. Eezk. 43.8.
the worship and worshipped, being judged of according to the Worshippers. They
have profaned (says God to the Jews in captivity) mine holy Name, (among the
Heathen) when they said, These are the people of the Lord, and are gone forth
out of his land.

2. They were spots of deformity to the meetings wherinto they came; they were
blemishes to the faces of the Christian assemblies. As one or two
brass-shillings in a sum of money, make all the rest suspected; so by the
unholiness of some, the rest suffered. Wicked men look upon spots among, and
upon Saints, with a multiplying glass, and as with old men's Spectacles, making
a great letter in a small print: Heathens seeing these among Christians, might
say, such are they all, never a barrel better Herring. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Qui and ipsi ad detrectationem divini nominis and Ecclesiae, a Satana praemissi
sunt, uti secundum alium modum, quae sunt illoru^ audientes homines, and
putantes omnes nos tales esse, avertant aures suas a praeconio verita. it is.
Iren. l. 1. cap. 24. p. 30. (...). 2 Pet. 2. ult. Epiph. lib. 1. tom. 2. cap.
26. page mihi 86. (...). Refert Clemens Alexandrinus, illis verbis, Luc. 6.30.
Omni petenti te tribue, ad impurissimae libidinis defensionem abusos. Ad epulas
solemni die coeunt cum omnibus liberis, sororibus, matribus, sexus omnis
homines and omnis atatis. Illic post multas epulas ubi convivium caluit, and
incestae libidinis fervor exarsit, canis, qui candclabro nexus est* jactu
offusae, extra spatium lineae qua vinctus est, ad impetum and saltum
provocatur, sic everso atque extincto conscio lumine, impudentibus tenebris
nexus infandae cupiditatis involvunt. Minut. Fell. in Octavio.
Hence it was that Irenaeus writes concerning the Carpoeratians, that they were
men sent by Satan to defame the Name of God, and the Church: that men observing
their wickedness, and thinking that we all were such, might turn away their
ears from the preaching of the truth. To the same purpose likewise speaks
Epiphanius, These men (says he) were sent forth by Satan to be a disgrace to
the Church, they putting upon themselves the name of Christians; that for their
sakes, the Nations might abhor to get any good by the Church of God, reject
truth preached, and think that all who are in the Church, are like to them, and
for the wickedness of a few, reproach all the rest; and therefore wherever
any of them come, the Gentiles will have nothing to do with us.

3. They were spots of deformity to themselves, they disgraced not only their
professions, but their very persons, and blemished even humane nature it self;
they turned themselves into beasts, and caused in themselves an interregnum of
reason, making reason (the Prince) to be a Lacquey, and sense (the servant) to
ride, and be exalted; if ever any deserved to be called brute beasts, dogs
turned to their vomit, or sows wallowing in mire, they were these impure
Borborites.

2. They were spots of defilement: 1. Carnally, they defiled themselves, their
own bodies, their flesh, (these defile the flesh, verse. 8.) by drunkenness, and
especially by uncleanness. I tremble to English what Epiphanius reports, of
these impurities, among the Gnostics; and Clemens Alexandrinus, and Minutius
Felix, among the Carpocratians at their meetings. That sins of unchastity are
peculiarly defiling, has been shown before, Part. 1. page 614, 615.

2. They defiled one another spiritually, they were pitch, and it was hard to
touch them, and not to be defiled; they were leaven, plague-sores, gangrenes,
lepers, diffusive of sin, infectious to others; the Devil conveyed his puddles
through these pipes. The contagion of these, infected the sound, but the
soundness of the healthful recovered not the infected. That Christian had need
be of a very hail constitution indeed, who conversing with such Pestilential
persons, contracts not their sickness. Every sin (as we say of some diseases)
is catching. Any root of bitteruess springing up may defile many, Hebr. 12.15.

Thus we see the first thing opened, viz The Name which the Apostle affixeth to
them; he calls them Spots*

2. For the second, Erasmum qui charitates vertit, Gagneus reprehendit quia
nunquam vel raro pro dilectine, sumitur (...) in plurati. Lorin. Si dicuntur
(...), impiis istis vindicaretur quod totius ecclesiae erat, neque enim (...)
istorum hominum erant propriae, ac proinde (...) addi non potuit, cum
communesessent Ecclesiae to^ius. Gerh. in 2. p.
The places where these spots did cleave and stick, or the meetings and
companies which these Seducers frequented, are expressed in these words, Your
feasts of charity, (...); though the word (...) in the singular number,
signifies love, or charity, yet the word (...) being in the plural, is
seldom or never taken in that sense, but for Feasts, or Banquets of love;
whence it is that Erasmus is by some reprehended, for turning these words,
(...), in charitatibus in your charities; and as deservedly do Beza and Gerard
correct the Vulgar Translation, which reads this place in epulis suis, in their
feasts, viz. of love, as if the Apostle intended that these Seducers were spots
in their own feasts; whereas these love feasts, were the brotherly meetings of
the Church, into which these sensual Epicures intruded, and unto which, like
spots they cleaved. And therefore our Apostle (in this word (...) to which some
Copies add, (...),) tells the Christians, that these impure companions did
feast with them, by that occasion they manifesting their lewdness; The
Institution of these love feasts, was founded on the custom of the Church,
which immediately before the celebration of the Lords Supper, used to have a
feast, Long probabilius est, morem fuisse. ut prius haberetur convivium illud
commune, postea fieret participatio sacrae Eucharistiae. Estius in 1 Cor.
11.20. Videatur quoque Aug. Ep. 118. ad Januar. Tert. cap. 39. A polog. Coena
nostra, de nomine, rationem suam ostendit; vocatur (...), id quod dilectio
penes Graecos est; quantiscunque sumptibus constet, lucrum est, pictatis nomine
facere sumptum; siquidem inopes quosque refrigerio isto juvamus, etc. non prius
discumbitur quam oration ad Deum praegustetur; editur quantum esurientes
capiunt, bibitur quantum pudicis est utile; ita saturantur, ut qui meminerint,
etiam per noctem, adorandum Deum sibi esse; ita fabulantur, ut qui sciant
Dominum audire. Post aquam manualem, and lumina, ut quisque de Scripturis
sanctis, vel de proprio ingenio potest, provocatur in medium Deo canere, hinc
probatur quomodo biberit, aeque oration convivium dirimit; inde disceditur non
in catervas caesionum, neque in classes discursationum, nec in eruptiones
lasciviarum, sed ad eandem curam modestiae and pudicitiae, ut qui non tam
coenam coenaverint quam disciplinam.
to testify, continue, and increase, brotherly love among themselves; as also
to the poor, who hereby were releived; whence they had their name (...),
charities, as if they were so intended for love, that there could not be so fit
a name by which to call them, as Love it self. Of these Feasts speaks the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.21. when he says, That every one takes before other,
(...), his own supper, as also 2 Pet. 2.13. where he speaks concerning the
feasting of these Seducers with the Christians; and frequent mention is made of
these Feasts among the Ancients. Of whom Tertullian speaks the most fully in
his 39th Chapt. of his Apolog. where he tells us, That the name of those feasts
manifested their nature, they being called by a Name which signifies love. In
them (says he) our spiritual gains, countervail for all our worldly costs; we
remember the poor; we ever begin with prayer. In eating and drinking we relieve
hunger, but show no excess. In our feeding at Supper, we remember that we are
to pray in the night: In our discourse, we consider that God hears us. As soon
as water for our hands, and lights are brought in, any one sings either out of
the Scriptures, or (as he is able) some meditation of his own, and by this, he
shows how temperate he was at Supper-time. Prayer is the first and last dish of
the Feast, with this it began, and with this it ends; and when we depart, our
behavior is so religious and modest, that one would have thought, we had
rather been at a Sermon then a Supper. And Tertullian writing to the Martyrs in
Prison, relates how they were relieved, Per curiam Ecclesiae, and agapen
fratrum; by the care of the Church, and the Charity of the brethren at their
Love Feasts. Of these also speaks Cyprian, Cypr. l. 3. ad Qurrinum. Agapen and
dilectionem fraternam, Religiese and firmiter exercendam, etc.
in his third book to Quirinus, where he says, that these Feasts of Charity,
and brotherly love, are Religiously and firmly to be exercised: so that the
ground of those ancient Love Feasts, was provision for the poor brethren, the
preserving of mutual love among themselves, and the expressing by both, their
thankfulness to God for bestowing his Son upon them; in which respect they
thought it most sit to celebrate them immediately before their receiving of the
Lords Supper; Justin. Mart. pro. Christian. Apol. 2.
though in a short time (in the Church of Corinth) these Feasts of Charity grew
to be corrupted and abused by divisions, the excluding of the poor Christians
from them, as also by Riot and Luxury, 1 Cor. 11.21.

Some conceive that these Feasts of Charity were by the Christians (converted
from Gentilisme) brought into the Church, to retain some thing like the
customs of the Heathens, who were wont at the time of their sacrificing to
their Gods, to have public Feasts of Joy, which Feasts, Paul (1 Cor. 10.21.)
calls, the Cup of Devils, and the Table of Devils. Others think, they were
introduced in imitation of the Jews, who by Gods appointment, were wont to
join Feasting, to their offering of their Eucharistical Sacrifices, and their
Peace Offering; as Deuteronomy. 27.7. Thou shall offer Peace Offerings, and shall eat
there, and rejoice before the Lord thy God. So Exodus 18.12. Jethro having taken
Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices for God, Aaron came and all the Elders of
Israel, to eat bread with him before God. See likewise Deuteronomy. 14.23. and 12.7.
and 16.11. and Exodus 3.18. though God bids Moses ask Pharaoh that Israel might
go and Sacrifice in the Wilderness, yet chap. 5.1. Moses desires Pharaoh, that
they might hold a Feast unto God in the Wilderness. And Calvin thinks, that
this both Jewish and Heathenish custom of joining Sacrificing and Feasting
together, Nec dubito quin Sacrificio rum ritus, tam Judaels quam Gentibus
communes, causam praebuerint. Video enim Christianos sic vitia rituum fere
correxisse, ut simi^itudinem aliquam retinerent Calvin. in 1 Cor. 11. Ad
exemplum and quandam repraesentationem illius coenae, quam Christus ultimam
habuit cum suis discipulis, priusquam corporis and sanguinis sui Mysterium
institueret. Estius in locum.
was imitated by the Christians in these Feasts, they being almost ever wont
(says he) so to correct and reform the vitiousness of Superstitious Rites and
Customs, as yet to retain a resemblance to them. Estius (with sundry others)
think that these Love Feasts (being before the Sacrament) were used in
imitation of Christ, who instituted the holy Sacrament immediately after the
ordinary Supper. An opinion which seems most probable, both in regard of the
great likelihood, that the Christians would imitate their Master, rather then
Heathens, as also because the Jewish and Heathenish Feastings were after their
Sacrificing; whereas the Love Feasts of the Christians were before the
Sacrament, as the best Interpreters observe on 1 Cor. 12.23.

* Vid. Estium, Diodat. Cor. a La.
3. (...), una epulor, a (...) coepulantes, una epulantes, convivantes. Dicitur
de Nebuchadnezare, Judith 1.16. quod fuerit in Nineve (...), soluto animo
convivatus, seu luxuriosa convivia agitans.
The third thing to be explained, is, what these Seducers did in these meetings
of the Christians? Set down in these two expressions. 1 They feast with you. 2
They feed themselves.


1. They feast with you. Greek (...). The word (...) which signifies to Feast
or Banquet, though Eustathius derives from (...), which signifies food or
nourishment, yet Athenaeus rather thinks it to come of (...), because it is
said to be well with them, or they fare well, or live merrily, who are feasted
and entertained with Banquets. Hence Clemens Alexandrinus said that (...) the
true Feast or Banquet is only in heaven, (...)2 Paed. cap. 1. p. 142. Some
think the word signifies to feast or banquet publicly. which may aptly agree
to this place, the Love Feasts being public Meetings: And Peter speaks them
riotous in the day time, openly and in the light, they not seeking to shelter
their Luxury in darkness and corners. According to others, it notes a Feasting
or Banqueting, riotously and Luxuriously. Thus its taken in Lucian, who tells
us of one Gorgias, who being a hundred and eight years old, and being asked, by
what means he had lived to so great an age, answered, That he had reached those
years, because he never could be induced ((...)) to go about to any Feasts or
Banquets, to which by his friends he was invited. And this signification of
Riotous Banquets, is most suitable to this place, where these voluptuous
Epicures, are said to feed without fear, Ex suis Erroribus fructum plane
nullum, praeter usum deticiarum carpunt. Id enim spectant unum ut genio,
gulaeque indulgeant, seseque omnibus voluptatibus ingurgitent. Justinian. in 2
Pet. Quin etiam dum nobiscum epulantur non o^ caritatem, id faciunt, and ut
sal^^ and mensae communicatio nem ineant, sed ut occasionem, ad decipiend (...)
mulieres, nanc^s cantur. O^cum.
the bridle of excess; These served their belly, and made it their God. Peter
says, 2 Pet. 2.13. that they count it pleasure to riot, being given up to, and
swallowed up in Voluptuousness, Lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God.
Pleasure was the fruit which they expected by sowing all their Heresies.

And when the Apostle tells these Christians, not only of the riotous Feasting
of these Epicures; but of this their Feasting with them, they being not only
(...), but (...), that they had crept into their companies, and s^t among them,
he discovers to them their danger of being seduced by their company to their
Errors and Sensualities; he wisely insinuating that these Seducers did not come
charitably, into their Feasts of Charity, but to gain occasion to delude and
ensnare them by Error; and therefore Peter says, that while they feasted with
these Christians, they sported themselves with their own Deceivings.

2. The Apostle says, they were feeding themselves, (...). The word (...),
here translated feeding, is properly such a feeding as belongs to the office of
a Shepherd, or one who feeds Cattle. Some translate it ruling or governing: the
word indeed may bear that signification; it being not only applied to Teachers,
Act. 20.28.
1 Cor. 97. 1 Pet. 5.2. etc. but also to Kings, Mat. 2.6. A Governor, that
((...)) shall rule my people: and Rev. 19.15. (...), He shall rule them with a
rod of iron. Its used by the LXX. Psalm. 2 9 where we transtate it, Rule.
It comprehends besides feeding, other parts of a Shepherds office, as the
leading, seeking, reducing, defending, healing of his Sheep; though according
to the notation of the word, it imports as much as (...), to remain or
continue in the Pasture, viz where the Sheep are, which the Shepherd is to
attend. Of old, a King or Ruler was called (as particularly, Agamemnon by
Homer) (...), the Shepherd or Ruler of the people, it being his Office to
regard them as a Shepherd does his flock: And hence it is, that the Arabic
turns this place; gubernant seipsos sua virtute, as if they would be under no
Government but their own; Pagnin, Erasmus, and Vatablus, suopte ductu
arbitrioque viventes: Ordering and guiding themselves, according to their own
will and pleasure. But (as our Learned Divines have noted concerning this word,
against the Papists, who interpret it to rule, for the establishing of the
Popes Rule) a word of a double signification is to be understood according to
the Subject matter spoken of; This being spoken of a Spiritual Pastor, cannot
be meant of Ruling as a King; and it being spoken (as in this place) of those
who were employed about feeding their bodies, Beza pascenies. Vulg. pascenies.

and feasting, and (as Peter has it) who counted it pleasure to riot, and fare
diliciously) I conceive its better translated, Feeding. And some think, the
Apostle did make choice of this word, (...), which often signifies a Shepherds
feeding of his flock, to aggravate the fault of these Cormorants, and secretly
to tax their hypocrisy, who bragging and pretending to be the only eminent
Shepherds and feeders of the people, took no other care, but only to fill their
own bellies; and in stead of feeding their Sheep, did (...), feed themselves,
but did indeed flea and feed upon them, they neither feeding their souls nor
their bodies, but poisoning the former, and riotously wasting upon their own
sensual appetites, that which was appointed at the charge of the Church, for
the feeding of the latter. The Apostle (as some conceive) alluding to that
threatening, uttered against the Shepherds, Ezekiel. 34.2. Woe be to the Shepherds
of Israel, that do feed themselves; should not the Shepherds feed the flock?
For my part, I conceive the Apostle here uses the word (...), which often
signifies the feeding of Sheep, or other cattle in Pastures to note the brutish
and beastly Sensuality of these Epicures, who fed more like cattle in a fat
Pasture, then Christians at a Feast of holy sobriety, and where they should (as
Tertullian speaks) rather feast upon holy discourse, then full dishes. So that
when the Apostle says, these Seducers were (...), and (...); he notes;

1 They feasted and fed immeasurably, beyond the bounds of Christian
moderation, more like Beasts then either Saints or men: Their hearts were
oppressed with surfeiting, their souls were lodged like bright candles, in the
filthy greasy Lanthorns of their bodies, and by eating made so dull and
sluggish, that they were unfit for holy Services; like the Sodomites, 2 Pet.
2.13.
they offended in the fullness of bread, they were drowned in delights.

2 The Apostle notes by these expressions, that they feasted and fed upon
delicates; they loved to fare very well, to feed high and deliciously; plain
dishes would not serve the turn: Like the Israelites, Manna without Quails
would not content them. The sin likewise of Elies sons, who not content with
what portion God had allowed them; viz. the shoulder, the breast, the tongue,
nor to eat the flesh sod, according to the Law; catched at what came to hand; 1 Samuel 2.13, 14
and they would have it raw, that they might cook it to please their licorous
taste.

3 The Apostle notes, they fed greedily, and earnestly; so intent and eager
they were upon their feeding, that they never thought of giving thanks, either
before or after. Their eyes were upon the Table, like those of Swine upon the
Acorns, so that they never looked up to the hand that shaked down their Plenty:
like the people, Exodus 32.6. They sat down to eat and drink: They rather did
raven and devour, then eat or feed. They resolved all the powers of their mind
upon their meat. This was Esau's sin, who was so greedy after Meat, that he had
no regard of his Birthright. They went to their food with the violence and
eagerness of Bruits, that cannot be kept off.

4 It may also be intended, that they feasted and fed injuriously, both with,
and upon the Christians; not only forgetting the poor Christians, whom they
suffered to fast, when they were feasting: but mis-spending and wasting the
contribution belonging to the mainterance of the poor, and (as some conceive)
of the Ministry; and if so, they feasted and fed Sacrilegiously also. The
sursetting of these Gluttons was accompanied with the starving of Lazarus.

5 They feasted and fed impurely, and lustfully; making the plenty which God
bestowed upon them, but fodder and fuel to nourish their Lusts of Uncleanness,
Like fed horses, they neighed after their neighbors wives. Elies sons were
Gluttons and Adulterers; Esau was sensual in feeding land also a Fornicator.

4 feeding of themselves, was (...), without fear. These words, without fear,
may be referred either to the word (...), Feasting with you, or (...), feeding
themselves. Oecumenius seems doubtful which of these to embrace; but (as
Lorinus says) Ad rem nostram nihil interest, Eodem res redit. e Lap.
it matters not, which way we take, both aiming at the same scope, Absque ulla
Dei hominumque reverentia Lo^in.
which is to show the security and impudency of these Gluttons in their sensual
pleasures. And without fear, they may be said to feed themselves, either in
respect of God; or the Church, with whom they feasted; or of themselves; they
neither fearing God metu, convivantes sine timore, sive quia intrepide sese
fidelibus convivantious miscent, sive quia liberius gulae ac genio indulgent*
etc. Justin. in lcc
nor timore, neither fearing his wrath to punish them, nor reverentially
fearing to displease him by sin; they being likewise touched with no reverence
of that holy Society, with which they sat; nor yet at all with any mistrust or
jealousy of the Slipperiness and sensuality of their own hearts; and this
their fearlesness they showed two ways.

1 In their entrance into the meetings and Assemblies of the Church; they never
took any heed to their feet when they went into those places where the saints
assembled. With the same unholy, unprepared, unreverent disposition of heart,
Nec dicatis vos habere animos pudicos, and oculos impudicos, quia impudicus
oculus impudici cordis est nuncius. Etiam intactis ab immunda violati^ne
corporibus, fugit castitas ipsa de moribus August. in reg Monach. 109. They
showed themselves spots and blemishes, (...), in the Love Feasts, by sporting
themselves (...), in their Deceivings. 2 Pet. 2.13. Verbis virus pectoris
evomunt. Lap.
did they undertake these Religious, with which they were employed about
earthly businesses and Banquets: they feared not to go to these Feasts, and
after (as Augustine thinks) to the Eucharistical Banquet, without their Wedding
Garment of Holiness. They trembled not with unwashen hands, to touch those
tremenda Mysteria; those Mysteries which might have struck terror into the
hearts of any but such secure and impudent sinners.

2 They showed their fearlesness in their carriage when they were entered into
the Assembly. 1. They were not afraid of lascivious Gestures. Their eyes were
then Adulterous; for so the Apostle 2 Pet. 2.13, 14. to these words, while they
feast with you, presently adds, having eyes full of Adultery, or the
Adulteress. They were not afraid of unclean looks and glances. 2 In their
meetings (probably) they were not afraid to utter unseemly expressions and
erroneous conceits; whereby (as Peter goes on) they defiled and beguiled
unstable souls. They went into the Assemblies to fish for Proselites. There was
no way so likely for these to prove themselves spots ((...)) in these Feasts,
as by their words. The tongue (says James) is (...), bespotting and defiling,
not only our own body by engaging it to, and involving it in sin: but others
also by communicating, and suggesting evil to others, and a full belly at a
feast, Cum venture reficitur, lingua desrenatur.
is commonly (among those who are more modest then were these impure
Libertines) accompanied with an unbridled tongue. 3. (And especially) in these
Feasts of charity, Gurgites, and belluones, nati Veneri and Ventri.
they were not afraid of feeding excessively, and riotously. Peter tells us,
they counted it pleasure to riot; they engulf'd themselves into the waters of
fullness and excess, and never feared a drowning either of their souls or bodies
by their intemperance; Vide Clem. Alex. paed. l. 2 c. 1, 2.
they would observe no stakes set up in those waters, nor set any limits to
their lusts; they took no heed lest their hearts might be oppressed by
surfeiting, nor did they at all care how ill accommodated mansions their souls
lived in, by pampering of their bodies; nor how unfit they made themselves for
performing of holy duties. The impairing their health, the digging their graves
with their teeth, the being Felons of themselves, never troubled them; much
less did they fear lest they might (in stead of Kings) be Tyrants and
torturers of the creatures; they feared not the wronging of the poor, whose
goods they devoured; in short, they feared not that God would punish them with
want for this their wantonness, or with eternal pains for these their short and
sensual pleasures, but like beasts (to which they are compared, 2 Pet. 2.12.
and Jude 19.) when they were in the fat pastures of riot and sensuality, they
never feared the shambles or slaughterhouse, though they were made to be taken
and destroyed, and perished in their own corruption.

OBSERVATIONS.
These are spots.] Observe. 1.
1. Sinners are deformed creatures: As a spot, so sin is the deformity of a
person, yea it makes him to be, and become, a very deformity; sin is a blemish
cast upon Gods Image. The very angelical nature was by sin made deformed; by it
Angels became Devils. Though never so many other accomplishments of
spirituality, wisdom, strength, and immortality were left behind, yet upon
their fall, they lost their beauty. No endowments without holiness, can make
any person truly excellent. The greatest Potentates in the world (while living
in sin) are but (like Naaman) noble Lepers. Every wicked man is a naked person,
not only because without a shelter, but an ornament also. Sinners are both
shelterless and shameful. The people after their Idolatry were naked, for Aaron
had made them naked to their shame, Exodus 32.25. Holiness is both a souls and
Churches ornament. Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a Bride her attire, yet
my people have forgotten me, etc. Jer. 2.32. Holiness (as the ark was to
Israel) is the souls glory, and when the Philistines have taken it away, the
true glory is departed, it is but an Ichabod. The most golden Israelite
notwithstanding all his privileges, in Gods esteem, had but an Ethiopian
skin; a Jew, an Egyptian, an Edomite, an Ammonite, Jer. 9.26.
and a Moabite in Gods account are all one, if without the Circumcision of the
heart. Wicked men are in their best dress, but vile persons, the very blots
and blemishes of their societies. Sin is that, not only of which, the people of
God are (afterward) ashamed; but that of which even sinners themselves are
ashamed, when most they love it; and therefore even the worst of men, yea
Devils, have loved the appearance of holiness: the rottenest Sepulchers have
loved painting; the filthiest Harlot, a wiped mouth; the prophanest heart, a
dress of Religion; (the clothes of sin are better worth then its whole body.)
Even Satan delights to appear like an Angel of light, and is ashamed of his own
colors. All the performances of wicked men are but deformities; their prayers
an abomination; the calling of their assemblies is iniquity; when they spread
forth their hands, God hides his eyes, Isai. 1.13, 14, 15, How incompetent a
judge is a blind man of colors, Caecus de coloribus n^n judicat.
or a sinner of beauty! The Blackmoor (they say) thinks the blackest face
beautifullest, and wicked men voice wickedness to be the greatest comeliness.
Jesus Christ himself had no beauty, or comeliness in the eyes of unbeleeving
sinners, Isai. 53.2. Holiness is an inward, a hidden beauty, Psa. 45. a carnal
eye cannot either see it, or esteem it. If grace be (as with sinners it is) a
scar, it is a scar of honor, not uncomliness; riches and worldly dignities,
like glowworms, only shine in the dark night of the world; but there is nothing
will have a luster at the day of judgment, but holiness. The poorest saint is
a Prince, and the most glorious sinner, a beggar (both) in a disguise.
Holiness, though veiled with the most contemptible outside, carries with it a
silent Majesty, and sin even in highest dignity, bewrays a secret vileness.
That which is to be desired of a man is his goodness. The righteous is more
excellent then his neighbor. Prove. 12.26. 2 Cor. 8.23.
The poor Saints are called the glory of Christ; who presents them without spot
or wrinkle, or any such thing. Sinners are spots, Saints are stars and Jewels;
as Jewels, the stars of the earth; and as Stars, the Jewels of heaven. Though
Saints have not an Herald to emblazon their arms, yet the Scripture
sufficiently sets forth their dignity; the rottenest stuffs are oftnest watered,
and among men, sinners most glorious, but yet in Scripture, they are but spots.

2. Sinners are filthy and defiling. They are spots for defilement, as well as
deformity; sin and uncleanness are put together. The filthiest of beasts, are
scarce filthy enough to set forth the filthy nature of sinners: Swine, the Dog,
the Serpent, the Goat, the neighing Horse: the filthiest things are used in
Scripture to set forth sin, as dung, vomit, mire, menstruosities, leprosy,
scum, pitch, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
plague-sores, issues, ulcers, dead carcasses, the blood and pollution of a
newborn child; the noysom exhalations breathing from a Sepulcher, Romans 3.13.
spots. Rev. 21.27. a sinner is called that which defiles; Sinful gain is
filthy lucre. Unholy speech is filthy and rotten communication; whordome is
called uncleanness; gluttony turns the Temple of the Holy Ghost into a Kitchen,
an Hogstie; it makes men dunghils; and drunkenness common shores and sinks of
filthiness, the drunkard is a walking quagmire. The covetous wretch that loads
himself with thick clay, is but a moving muck-heap, a speaking dunghill; his
riches are but dung, good (as one well) when they are spread abroad by charity;
but stinking and useless when heaped. Pride is but a swelling botch. Sinners
are the children of the filthy and unclean spirit, they are of their father the
Devil, like Joabs posterity (therefore) all filthy and leprous; their natural
Parents were (naturally) all unclean; and who did ever bring a clean thing out
of filthiness? Job 14.4. John 3.6.
that which is born of the flesh is flesh. Their greatest hatred and enmity is
set upon purity and and holiness; clean and sweet objects are death to them,
as they say, that Roses kill the Horsefly; the Gospel is to them a savor of
death. And this filthiness and pollution of sin has two properties which may
render it very hateful. Isai. 1.13, 14, Tit. 1.15.
1. Its a spreading pollution: 1. Over all of a man, flesh and spirit, soul,
body, understanding, thoughts, conscience, memory, will, affections, eyes,
hands, tongue. 2. All done by a man, even the best things, the prayers of
polluted sinners, are abominations; their incense stinks, their sacrifices are
unclean, their mercies cruel, their profession of godliness a form, their
plausiblest performances, no better then embalmed carkases. 3. It spreads even
unto others, and infects them, by encouraging, teaching, seducing, constraining
them, to sin It often is diffused from the wicked, even to the godly themselves;
nothing more difficult then to be familiar with, and not to be infected by
sinners; the error of the wicked sometimes cleavs to them, and the example of
sinners entiseth them. Spirituale gelicidium. Ames. Cas. Consc.
The sons of God, saw the daughters of men, and were polluted. What an
insensible deadness of spirit and decay of grace does conversing with sinners
bring upon Saints! 4. Yea, this contagion of sin spreads even to the good
creatures of God about us, even into them it puts (as the Apostle speaks)
vanity, Number. 8.20, 21 2 Pet. 3.10, 11. Isai. 1.18. Jer. 17.1.
groaning, bondage, consumption, mourning; and at length it will bring
combustion and dissolution upon the whole frame of nature. 2. Its a deep and
indelible pollution, of a skarlet and crimson dye, compared also to an
Ethiopians blackness, a Leopards spots, not to be washed away with nitre and
much soap. Hell fire shall not be able (to eternity) to fetch away the stains
of the smallest sins from man's nature; yea the greatest measure of grace
received in this life, by the best of men, does not totally abolish this
defilement: the best have their sores, and stand in need of a curing, and a
daily cleansing: Who can say, I have made my heart clean? All the Legal
washings, purifyings, and cleansings of the filthiness of the flesh, were but
faint representations of our need of, and purity by being washed in the blood of
Christ. And oh, that sinners would be as unquiet, as they are unclean, till
they wash in that fountain, which is set open for sin and for uncleanness. Jer.
4.14. Rev. 7.14. 2 Cor. 6.11. Psalm. 150.
Its only the blood of God, which can wash away the filthiness of sin; no other
Laver can take away that spot. Not only look, but go into it, wash thy self
all over. Cry out (O sinner,) unclean, unclean; See thy spots in the glass of
the Law. Be weary of thy defilement, as well as thy deformity. Being washed,
keep thy self pure, take heed of spotting places and persons. Though upon a
conscience uncleansed, like an old spotted garment, a sinner cares not what
filth he suffers to drop, yet (O Saint) keep thy new clothes white, clean and
pure; sin like a mired dog, when it fawns upon thee, fouls thee. A spot will
easily be seen upon thee; trifles in thee are accounted blasphemies. Be not
troubled at the spots upon thy name, so as thou keep a pure conscience; not
that wicked men make them, so long as they do not find them. Wash thy self in
thine own tears, be troubled that thy Justification is so complete, and thy
Sanctification so imperfect; that thou art at once both without spot or
wrinckle, and yet so full of both. In short, Labor to be spotless, in a
spotting and spotted Generation; in foul streets to walk with clean garments.
Let not the Error of the wicked cleave to thee. If thou can not cleanse them
(which is most desirable) let not them defile thee.

[In your Feasts of Charity.]

3. The Lords Supper is a Love-Feast. Observe. 3.
The Reason why these Feasts of Charity (whereof Jude here speaks) were annexed
to the Lords Supper (1 Cor. 11.21, 22.) and also why those ancient Christians
did in these Feasts express so much love one to another, was because they were
about to celebrate that Sacrament, which expressed so great a token of Gods
love toward them, as deserved unfeigned and fervent affections in them toward
one another. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper (then) promotes and testifies,
confirms and contributes to the mutual love which ought to be among
Christians. The Passover (but a shadow of the Lords Supper) tended to increase
the love of the Receivers. 1. It was to be one whole Lamb. Exodus 12.2, 3, 6, 8,
15, 19, 46, 49.
2. Not one bone of it was to be broken. 3. It was a joint action, wherein
every one was to communicate; and therefore to be performed with joint
affection. 4. It was to be eaten in one house; to show that there was to be
among those who did eat, an unity and harmony of hearts and affections. One
house will not hold those who are at jars and dissensions, and divided in
affection. 5. The eating of the Passover, was to be done at one and the same
time, month, day, hour, and that in the Evenning, when they were all in their
cold blood, the injuries and offenses of the day forgotten and forgiven, (the
Sun being not to go down upon our wrath) when their affections were as calm and
quiet, as the evening. 6. The partakers of the Passover were all to be ordered
in the receiving thereof by one Law. There was but one Law for the Stranger and
the Home-born; both did unanimously submit to the same rule, and consent to the
same direction. 7. It was to be eaten without leaven, whereby (as the Apostle
expounds it) was noted the keeping the Feast without the leaven of
Maliciousness and Wickedness, 2 Chro. 30.12.
1 Cor. 5.7, 8. And when Hezekiah restored the Passover, its expressly said,
that to all Judah was, by the good hand of God, given one heart, and that they
met at one time, and in one place, and that they kept the Feast of the Passover
with great joy. But if we look from the Shadow to the Substance, Am^r
dignitatis nesciu^, dignationis dives.
we shall see this Love and Unity of the Faithful more clearly manifested.

1. Our Savior being to ordain this Sacrament, gave all his Disciples an
example of Christian and loving condesoension, Joh. 13.4, 34
even to the washing one another feet. After this institution, he presses
upon them the Commandment of Love, as the chief Commandment, and their
principal Duty, both by the president and precept of Love, showing that his
Supper was a Communion of Love.

2. Consider the appellations of this Sacrament. Its called the Communion; the
Table of the Lord; the Lords Supper; Coena (...).
a word not noting the time of, but fellowship in eating. Eating together was
ever held a token of friendship. Joseph's love to his brethren was testified by
feasting them. 2 Samuel 9.7.
David's love to Mephibosheth, by causing him to eat bread at his Table
continually: David calls his familiar friend, Stuck. Antiq. Conv. l. 1. c. 3.
one that did eat of his bread, Psalm. 41.9, The eating at one Rack, has bred
peace between the very savage Beasts. And that hatred which was between the
Jews and Egyptians, could no way be more fitly expressed, then by their mutual
abominating to eat bread one with another. Men by nature are directed to
express their loves and reconcilements, by Feasts and Invitations: and this
Communion which (by eating and drinking) the Faithful have one with another,
the Apostle tells us, comes from their partaking of one Christ. 1 Cor. 10.16.
The Cup of Blessing which we bless (says he) is it not the Communion of the
blood of Christ? and the Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the
Body of Christ? For we being many, are one Bread and one Body; for we are all
partakers of that one Bread: that is, we partaking of the same Christ, and
having Communion in his Merits, and Benefits, have thereby Communion also one
with another in the Lords Supper. And we all partaking of that one Bread,
broken and divided into diverse parts, are made one Body and one Bread, though
we be never so many. The Faithful then partaking all of one Christ, and every
one of them having Communion in his Body and Blood, have also communion among
themselves; nor can this but be a Communion of much dearness and nearness,
which arises from the partaking of this one Christ, and all his Benefits and
Merits; for hereby

1. They are all children of the same Father, Gal. 3.26. We are all the Sons of
God, by faith in Christ; and to as many as received him, he gave power to be
the Sons of God; and what nearer bond, then to be the children of the same
Father? In the Lords Supper the Faithful sit like Olive branches round about
their Fathers Table: Love as brethren (says the Apostle.) How good and
pleasant is it (says the Psalmist) for brethren to dwell together in unity!

2 By partaking of this one Christ, the Faithful are all Members of the same
Body, Ephesians. 4.15.
and they grow up into him who is the head, and from him receive life and
grace, being as Members animated with the same Spirit, (and therefore the
Apostle speaks of drinking into one Spirit, in the Lords Supper) incorporate
into his mystical Body; now what can more aptly express the near union, dear
affection, tender sympathy between Christian and Christian, then this, being
fellow members of one body. One member accounting the woe and welfare of
another ven as its own.

3. By partaking of one Christ in the Sacrament, they profess themselves to be
of the same Faith and Religion; Religio, a religando.
to expect life and happiness the same way, (for Christ is the way) and this
sameness of Religion has bound those who have been of false Religions very
strongly together. Now that by feeding together in the Lords Supper, there is
professed a Communion in the same Religion, the Apostle strongly proves (1 Cor.
10.18.) from the practice of Israel after the flesh (that is, the Jews who
descended from Jacob or Israel by carnal propagation) these carnal Israelites
who lived in his time, and denied Christ, were (says the Apostle) by eating of
the Sacrifices partakers of the Altar; that is, professed themselves to be of
the Jewish Religion and Worship, and to approve of the same.

4. By partaking of one Christ at the Lords Supper, the Faithful profess
themselves to be the servants of one Lord and Master. Fellow servants must not
fall out and beat one another. Luke 12.45. The servants of this one Lord,
should be of one mind. If Christ be not divided, his servants should shun
division.

5. Hereby they profess, that they are to be pardoned by the same blood, shed
for many, for the remission of sins, Matthew. 28.28. And what inducement stronger
to move us to forgive a few pence, who have been forgiven so many pounds! What
will quench hatred, if the blood of Christ will not!

6 Hereby they profess, as that they all live in the same Family here, where
they feed at the same Table, serve the same Master, own the same Father; so
that they shall live together in the same habitation for ever, they pattaking
of that meritorious blood, which is the parchase of the same Inheritance; they
having all thereby the same Key to open Paradise withal. They who receive
Christ (as Communicants profess to do) shall be received. One Saint may truly
say to another, You and I must be better acquainted. And what an Engagement to
love is this for us to consider, we shall for ever live and love together in
Heaven. Oh! how should Christians begin to do that here, which they shall never
be weary of doing to all eternity! If one house, then one Heaven calls for one
heart. Thus the appellations given to the Sacrament, the Table of the Lord, the
Lords Supper, the Communion, etc. show it to be a Love-Feast.

3. The outward Elements, Bread and Wine, used at the Supper, evince the same.
Separated and several grains and grapes, make one and the same Bread and Wine.
They who are severed and disjoined from one another, Vid. Cvpr. Ep. 76. ad
Magnum
not only by sea, habitation, trades, but in heart also, and affection, are by
the receiving of Christ in this Sacrament, reunited into one Spiritual Body,
as the Elements (though originally several) are into one artificial Mass. We
being many (says the Apostle) are one Bread. How necessary (then) is the Lords
Supper in these times, when Love does so much decay! If the Christians in their
Summer season, when Love was burning hot, did so lay on this fuel; what need
have we then to do so in this Winter Season, when the Love of most grows so
cold! Confident I am, that the withdrawing of this Sacrament that feeds and
foments Love, has much tended to the decay thereof among us. And further, this
discovers the great policy of Satan, not only in hindering from the Sacrament,
which was appointed to strengthen Love, but in breaking Love by this very
Sacrament. Who would ever have expected to have heard of a Sacramentary war!
How many valiant Champions lost their livs in this Land, in their Smithfield
fights, about the controversy of Transubstantiation! and how subtly has the
Murderer of souls, mixed his poison, with the Sacramental bread, and stolen away
the Cup in the Papacy! What fierce contestations have there been between
Calvinists and Lutherans, about consubstantiation! Who remembers not the
Prelaticall fury, in imposing superstitious for Sacramental gestures! and oh
that the flames of these unchristian quarrels about the Sacrament did not blaze
and spread even at this very day! Oh the unbrotherly breaches between Brethren
about the admission and qualification of Communicants! Consider, dear
Christians, whether Satan be not like to prevail, when he turns that Artillery
whereby we should batter his Forts, upon our selves, and makes his strongest
weapons o^ War, even of Olive Branches, Ensigns and Emblemes of Peace! and is
not Love in danger of death, when ^ts Food is daily poisoned! Who warms his
hands at these flames of Contention, but only our Adversary! Satan (as they say
of the Lawyer) will be the only gainer, when you fall out (like unkind
Brethren) about your Fathers will and Testament. The Lord humble us for all
those unworthy receivings which have made us so unkind and quarrelsome about
the receiving this Feast of Love, the Lords Supper; and he make us for the
future, in all our opinions about, and participations of it, to be men in
understanding, and children in malice. Part 1.
For the trials of Love, see page 144.145.146. etc.

4. Obs. 4.
Spotted and spotting sinners are unfit guests at holy feasts. The Apostle, by
saying these seducers were spots in the Feasts of Charity, notes the
unsutableness of such blemishes to Assemblies, that should be clean and
Christian; these spots casting an uncomliness upon those holy Meetings which
made those spots appear, and set off, with the more uglines and uncomlines. The
mixture of scandalous persons in Church Fellowship, is here by the Apostle
blamed: and if their meeting at these feasts of Charity, be reprehended here by
the Apostle; if at these Feasts, these spots appeared so black and deformed,
how much more reproveable was their meeting at the Lords Supper, which is an
Ordinance of Christ wherein approaches to him are more near, and ought to be
more holy then in those Feasts of Charity. Spots and blemishes (as Mr. Perkins
well spoke of his times) ought to be washed off by Ecclesiastical Discipline,
from the faces of holy Assemblies at the Lords Supper, because they pollute it.
True it is, that, first, there are two sorts of pollution of the Lords Supper,
the one that which makes the Sacrament no Sacrament, but a common or unhallowed
thing, to those that do receive it, as if it were given by those who are no
Ministers, or to those who are no Church, or without the blessing and breaking
of the Bread; the other sort of pollution of the Sacrament is, that which makes
the administration thereof to be sinful, and those who administer it to be
guilty, they doing that which is contrary to the revealed will of God. This
latter kind of pollution, is by admitting spotted and scandalous sinners. 2.
Its granted, that the mixture of the scandalous, pollutes not the Sacrament, to
those who have used all the lawful means against it, who have (being Officers)
discharged their duty by exercising Church Discipline, and being private
Christians, admonished the offenders, and petitioned those, who have the
authority for the restraining of them from the Sacrament: in that case, though
the scandalous partake of the Sacrament, Indisciplinata patientia. Aug.
yet officers and worthy Communicants partake not of their sin. But otherwise,
that the admission of scandalous persons to the Sacrament is a pollution of
that Ordinance, its evident. Give not (says Christ) that which is holy to
dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine. Mat. 7.6.
By that which is holy, I understand, though primarily, yet not solely the
Word; but consequently the Sacraments, Prayer, Christian admonition. Christ
does not speak of one holy thing only, nor does he say ( the pearl) but he
says, that which is holy, etc. and pearls. And by dogs and swine, are not
only to be understood Infidels, Heathens, and open Apostates, and persecuters,
which like dogs bite, bark, and contradict, but also such who like swine,
profane, trample these Pearls under their feet, and by an impure swinish life,
show how much they despise holy things. And needs must the Sacrament be
profaned, when in the use thereof, not grace, but sin is increased, because
hereby the main end of the Sacrament, which is to be food to nourish grace, and
poison to kill sin, is perverted: but no grace is nourished in any profane
impenitent sinner, he being spiritually dead, and so without the life of grace.
And further, his hand is strengthened in sin; for by his receiving the
Sacrament, he is much more difficultly converted, than such a sinner who has
been kept back from the Sacrament altogether, and by joining in the highest act
of Church Communion, an impenitent sinner intertains a good opinion of his
spiritual happiness, and so trusts in lying vanities. Haec enim Dei voluntas
non erit in aternum, ut Ecclesia christiana, alicui gratiam Christi and
remissionem peccatorum, annunciatione verbi divini deneget, and eidem
exhibitio^ne Sacramentorum spondeat? Ursin judicium de disc^pl. Ecclesiast.
Mat. 26.28. Luke 22.19, 20
And again, the giving of the Sacrament to those who are known to live in gross
sins without repentance, is a contradiction to, and a confutation of the Word,
which denounces condemnation against them that eat and drink unworthily, and
in the faithful delivery thereof, we pronounce the wrath of God to such as live
impenitent in sin; the word says, Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulte^ers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And do we not
by giving the Sacrament to these, give the ly to the Word? do we not in the
Sacrament, absolve those whom we condemn in the Word, and open the Kingdom of
Heaven in the Sacrament, to those against whom we shut in the Word? for is not
the Sacrament a Seal of the Covenant, the righteousness of Faith, and the
promises of the Gospel, as is evident by those Sacramental Phrases, This is my
body, this is my blood, which denote a spiritual obsignation and exhibition of
the Benefits of Christ's Body and Blood? and does not Christ say to those to
whom he delivered the Sacrament, This is my body which is given for you, and
this is my blood which is shed for you, and for many, for the Remission of
sins? Do not they, then, who consent to wicked and scandalous persons, their
taking of the Sacrament, acknowledge the children of the devil to be the
children of God, and the enemies of God to be in Covenant with him, and so
partake of the Benefits of the Covenant from him? Further, is it not a
profanation of the Sacrament of Baptism, to baptize a Jew or a Pagan
professing a resolution to turn Christian, who, yet, is an openly profane and
wicked liver, and continues under the power of visible and abominable sins,
although he be able to make a sound and Orthodox confession of Faith? And shall
a scandalous living in murder, adultery, swearing, lying, etc. keep a man from
entering into the visible Church, by the door of Baptism, and shall they not as
well hinder him, from being welcomed at the Table, in the house, as a child and
friend? Yet again, Is the Sacrament Profaned by admitting Infants and Idiots,
who can make no good use of it; and is it not as much, if not more polluted, by
admitting those to it, who will make a very bad use of it? also may not one man
by ignorance, drunkenness, defense of sin, heresy, etc. ly under a finfull
contracted dissability to examine himself, and so to be an unfit Communicant,
as another man may lie under a natural disability? and is not a man more
blameable for the former then the latter? Further, holy things under the
Leviticall Law were polluted and profaned by wicked and profane persons,
Ezekiel. Chap. 23.38.39. They have defiled my sanctuary, etc. For when they had
slain their children to their idols, they came the same day into my sanctuary
to profane it. And Psalm. 15.1. in that Question, Who shall abide in thy
Tabernacle? The Prophet shows by those offenses for which men were excluded
from the Sanctuary, what it was which should keep men from eternal Life; and
why that moral unholinesse (for of such he speaks) which made men unfit to go
into the Sanctuary (which had a sacramental signification of Christ) should
not as well excludethem, from the Sacrament, I understand not. Were not the
Sacrifices of old, polluted by the offering of them by profane and morally
unholy persons, Haggai 2.14. so (that is unclean) is this people before me, so
is every work of their hands, and that which they offer therein, unclean. Where
its plain, that the moral unholiness of the persons, defiled holy Ordinances;
the people and their works being evil, the Lord for that cause accounts their
Sacrifices to be unclean. If morally profane persons defiled the Sacrifices of
old, Psalm. 50.16.
they may surely be charged with defiling our Sacraments now.

5. Obs. 5. Luxuriantur de ^acultatibus vestris in sustentationem Ministerii,
and usum pauperum collatis. Gerh. in 2 Pet. 2.13. Sacrilegium dicatur q. sacri
Laedium; vel q. sacrae legis laesio. Committitur vel in personam, vel locum,
vel ^em. Altentstaig. Lexic. Levit. 5.16, 17 Levit. 22.14
Such things as are given for the Public benefit of the Church, are not to be
consumed in, or converted to any other uses. These Feasts of Charity which were
appointed for the relief of the poor Christians and Ministry, were profanely
wasted by these Seducers. This sin is commonly called sacriledg, which by some
is thought to be so called, q. sacrae legis, vel rei laesio, the hurting,
spoiling, or violation of an holy Law, or thing. Others better consider it, q.
sacra legere, to gather holy things, and they define it to be a taking away of
things consecrated and devoted to the Lord. This is mentioned in Scripture to
be done either ignorantly or knowingly; if ignorantly, it required according to
the Law, restitution of the Principal, with an addition of the fifth part over
and above, as a forfeiture for the offense, and a Caveat against the like in
future time. 2. Reconciliation or Atonement, the Priest being to make an
Atonement with the ram of the trepass offering; to note the greatness of the
offense against God. If this sin were committed of knowledge and wittingly, that
which was taken, and all that the taker had, was for the Lord as a Sacrifice,
for rest^tution; and he with his whole family stoned and burnt for purgation.
This judgment of God upon Achan for taking that to his own use which was
devoted to God, is largely related, Josh. 7. As also the punishment inflicted
upon The word (...), which we barely translate Kept back, properly signifies a
nimming, or purloining, and so is the word rendered, Ti^. 2.10 significat
surripere, suffurari aut clam subdu^ta in Commodum nostrum convertere. Sic
usurpatur a 70. in casu sacrilegii, Josh. 7.1. 2 Mac. 4.32. Graece (...)
dicitur, qui furtim aliquid decerpit, cum totam rem tollere non ausit. Estius
in loc. Dum ex eo quod promiserat partem subtraxit, sacrilegii condemnatur.
Aug. de verb. Ap Ser. 25. pa. mihi 378. Deo displicuit detrabere de pecunia,
quam voverat Deo. Id Ser. 10. de diversis page mihi 1570. Ideo condemnati quia
post votum, obtulerunt quasi sua, and non ejus cui semel ea voverant. Hieron.
Ep. 8. page mi. hi 55. Prove. 12.10. 1 Cor. 6.6. 2 Samuel 16.9.
Ananias, for changing that which was dedicated to an holy, to his private use.
It is a snare or destruction to the man (says Solomon, Prove. 20.25.) who
devoureth that which is holy, and after vows to make enquiry: That is, to apply
or take that to his own use, which was appointed to Gods, yea, to go about to
do it, by enquiring how the vow might be made void. For that may be called
holy, which is not such only by Creation, as Angels and the first man, but
also by dedication, and separation; and that whether this separation were by
Gods command; or by man's free and voluntary bestowing it. In the old Law,
Tithes, first Fruits, etc. were holy, and now in the times of the Gospel, those
things which are either appointed by Law, or bestowed by the Liberality of men,
for the maintaining of the worship and service of God, and Divine uses; and the
taking away of these is the devouring of holy things. A sin by so much the more
heinous in these times, by how much the more bounty has been exercised by
those who lived in times of blind Superstition, for the maintaining of
idolatry. How unseemly is it, that men should live, as if all their light
seemed to show them how to delude God; as if faith had banished all fidelity,
as if any worship, better deserved maintenance from men, then His, who gives
men their own, both maintenance and worship; yea, as if the more they saw into
Religion, the more they saw in it, which deserves starving and overthrow! This
sin, which some Divines make to be a breach of the eighth Commandment (Thou
shall not steal) must needs be of thefts the worst, because it is a robbing of
him who is the best, even GOD himself. Will a man rob GOD? yet ye have robbed
me, Malach. 3.8.

It is a sin to wrong our beast, yea our enemies beast; a greater to wrong man;
and if no injury may be offered to man, no not our enemy, much less to our
Brother, and if not to our Brother, much less to our Superior, to a King; and
if not to an earthly King, far less to the KING and LORD of Heaven, who is our
SUPERIOR in the highest deg^ee, who is our Father and Benefactor, our Maker,
and feeder and Father. When Joseph had feasted his Brethren, then to steal his
Cup, what greater injury! God forbid (say they) we should do this thing. Genesis
44.7.
And aptly does Solomon call the devouring of holy things a snare, in regard
its a sin, alluring us to overthrow; there is in it a bait to cover the hook,
and somewhat scattered to draw us into the net. To a foolish sinner, the gain
appears very beautiful and beneficial: The wedg of gold, and the Babylonish
garment, Psalm. 35.26. Joel. 3.4.
seemed to Achan at first, great enticements, but the garment clothed him with
shame and dishonor and the wedg of gold was a wedg to rive his soul and body
asunder. How severely does GOD threaten those of Tire and Sidon for their
Sacrilege, in ransacking the Temple, and in taking away the gold and silver
appointed for His Service, and carrying it into their idol-temples! If it were
not Lawful for None can alienate, but he that has the propriety, and is
owner; If therefore in that which is given to God he has the propriety, then
must they who go about to alienate it, dispose of that which is none of theirs.
Lev. 25.23. Ezekiel. 45.14.
Ananias and Saphirah having consecrated the whole price of their own land to
God, to keep away part thereof; then it is much more unlawful to keep away any
part thereof from the Church, which we never gave, it being the Churches
possession before we were born, such alienation, not being made in case of
extreme necessity, for the maintaining of the Commonwealth, and preserving of
life, or for the Churches greater benefit and convenience. Satan knows that the
outward Worship of GOD and Religion cannot be continued without a Ministry,
Syned Ancyr. circa ann. 308. Synod Arelateus. 2. ann. 326. Synod Antioch. ann.
344 Council. Carthag. 4. an. 401 Council. Tolet 2. ann. 529. Council. Syn. 9. ann.
658.
nor a Ministry without Ministers, nor Ministers without such goods as should
sustain them; and hence he instigates profane men to violate and steal
Church-goods, that thereby the Ministry, GODS Worship, and the Salvation of
Souls may be overthrown. The alienation of Church-goods has been prohibited by
the decrees of sundry ancient Councels. If our Forefathers by the injury of
their times, mistaking the truth, gave ought superstitiously to Romish Priests,
to Religious uses, it is fit their general purpose should be kept, with
amendment of their particular Error.

6. The godly in this world, Observe. 6.
are never totally freed from the company of the ungodly. It was the lot of
these Christians, to have these wicked men with them. The godly must never
love, but yet they will always have the company of the wicked; though they
should not feast together, yet they will always live together. They who will be
quite freed from the company of the wicked must (as Paul speaks, 1 Cor.
5.10.) needs go out of the world; our delight should only be in the godly, but
it will be our condition to be among the ungodly; and God thus disposes of the
outward estate and condition of his people for sundry causes. Hereby, they are
made more watchful over their hearts, and ways; the greater their danger is,
the less is their security; the more dirt and defilement they see, the more
they labor to keep their garments pure, and to gird up their loins; when
enemies approach our Cities, we double our watch. In times of infection, we
most mind our Preservatives. Save your selves from this untoward generation
(said Peter, to the new Converts, Acts 2.40.) he means not so much by leaving
the places, as by taking heed of the impurities wherein the wicked live. By
this abiding likewise among the wicked, the godly are more put upon loving and
cleaving to one another. Its noted Genesis 13.7. Upon the mention of the Canaanite
and Perizzite their being in the land, when the strife was between the herdmen
of Abram and Lot, that Abram desired there might be no strife between them.
Countrymen in a strange country, should beware of contention; the common foe
should make disagreeing brethren unite; dissension will be both their ruin and
their reproach, and will both disgrace and destroy them. If a Herod and a
Pilate could be made friends, should not Saints join together when Christ is
struck at; sometime God makes his people by the presence of the wicked, more
zealous against wickedness; the neernesse of contraries, strengthens their
opposition; the eye increases grief, and hatred: nor have any Saints so much
set themselves against sin, as they who have been most compelled to see sin:
the best men have often lived in the worst times; the hottest fire is in the
coldest winter, the brightest Stars in the darkest night. Phil. 2.15. In the
mids of a crooked and perverse nation, the godly shine as lights. Lots
righteous soul was vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked, and
David's eyes ran down with rivers of tears, when he saw Gods Law broken. What a
work of power is it, that a sea of ungodliness should in stead of damping,
redouble the heat of a Saints love to holiness! Aut inveniet sine crimine, aut
tollet sine patrocin^e. Aug.
Further, God will hereby either better the wicked, or render them inexcusable;
either their living among his people shall change, or condemn them; either the
holy conversation of Saints shall turn the hearts, or stop the mouths of
sinners; they shall not be able to plead ignorance of their duty, when they
have been instructed by the language of lip and life. Though Noah by preparing
the Ark, saved his own house, yet he condemned the world. Heb. 11.7.
To conclude, by the company of wicked men, God makes his people more prize
communion with himself, long for heaven, where there shall be neither sin nor
sinner to molest them, where they shall no longer sojourn in Meshech, Psalm. 120
5, 6.
nor dwell in the tents of Kedar; nor their souls with them which hate peace;
Heaven would not be sweet, if the world were not bitter; nor the company of
Saints in glory, be so desirable, were it not for the unkindness of, and
vexation by sinners on earth. Oh how sweet will that condition be, where all
the society shall be of one mind! How melodious that chore, which shall ever
sing without any jarring, any discord. Till which condition, let us, what ever
our times, where ever we abide, neither impatiently complain of God, nor
sinfully comply with the ungodly, but account it our duty to do the wicked what
good we can, if we cannot do them what good we would; to be careful that they
maynot, and comforted that they cannot, do us that harm they would; but
contrarily, both by their company, yea, and unkindnesses, that good they would
not.

7. Feasting is not ever unlawful. The Christians here are not blamed for their
cheer, Observe. 7.
but warned of their guests. The holiest men (in Scripture we read) have made
Feasts, as Abraham, Lot, Isaac, David, Solomon; Genesis 19.3. 21.8. 36.30.
Nehemiah also and Ezra ( Nehem. 8.10.) commanded the people to eat the fat,
and drink the sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing was prepared.
2 Samuel 3.20. Luke 5.29. John 2.1.8.
And more then once I read of our Saviors honoring of a feast with his
presence. God has provided not only for our necessity, but also lawful
delight; and his bounty reaches not only to our being, but honest solace; nor
does it only give us naked lives, but lives clothed with many comforts, that we
may more then live, even live cheerful. When Christ's mother told him, they had
no Wine, he turns Water into Wine, even to a very great proportion; he thought
it not enough that they should have water to quench their thirst, he gives them
also Wine to cheer their spirits; and it being at a feast, that quantity which
at another time had been superfluous, was now but necessary. A man may be angry
so he sin not, and take lawful delights so he surfeit not; why has God given
man such choice of earthly delights, but for his use? Some observe that God
has made more creatures serving for the delights of man, then for his
necessity; and certainly he has made nothing in vain. The whole Earth (full of
his goodness) is a well-furnisht table; if we altogether fast, we show our
selves but sullen guests; some, indeed have run from the world, and to avoid
the danger of pleasure, have changed places of plenty, for solitary and barren
mountains and deserts; but may not the world be in a desert? a boiling desire
in a neglected body? Did not Hierom find Rome in his heart, when only rocks
and bushes were in his eye? but God has appointed a better way then this; the
wiseman will be an Hermit at home; and its a much more Christian practice, to
turn the world out of our selves, then our selves out of the world; we may
distinguish between the love of pleasure, and the use of it; we may warm our
selves in the Sun, without worshipping it; we may be merry, without being mad;
and get crucified affections to our lawful and delightful comforts, and without
this inward mortification upon the heart, notwithstanding our leaving of
outward enjoyments, we shall be snared; as the Bird, which though getting loose
from the stone to which she was tied, yet flying with the string about her leg,
is in danger to be eutangled in every bough. But yet,

8. Observe. 8.
Gluttony is a great sin. It was here the sin of these Seducers, they fed
themselves though among men, yet not like men, but beasts; and all their food
was but fuel for their lusts: Peter joins their feasting, and their eyes full
of adultery together, 2 Pet. 2.13, 14. Several Schoolmen reduce them all to
five heads, Praepropere, laute, nimis, ardenter, studiose.
ways is the sin of Gluttony committed.

1. As first, when men offend in the quantity of what they eat; when they eat
and drink in too great abundance; its lawful sometimes to exceed in provision,
but never to exceed the bounds of moderation. We are forbidden Prove. 23.20. to
be among riotous eaters of flesh, the feasting of the Ancients, was called but
eating of bread; and Christ Luke 21.14. bids us take heed lest our hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. That proportion of meat, I
confess, surchargeth the stomachs of some, which perhaps is not enough to
satisfy the hunger of another; as that quantity of rain, will make a clay
ground drunk, which will scarce quench the thirst of a sandy country; but this
I fear not to assert, that we offend in the excessive quantity of our food,
when at any time we eat so much, as to be disabled to perform the service which
we owe to God, either in our general or particular Callings. Fullness of bread
was one of Sodoms sins. Moderate showers refresh the earth, immoderate drown
it. Nor yet are men only gluttons by overcharging their stomachs, but also by
overcharging their estates, spending that in superfluity, which they should use
for necessity.

2 When we offend in the quality of our food. Procul sint a conviviis tuis,
phasides aves, crassi turtures, attagen Ionicus, and omnes aves quibus
amplissima patrimonia avolant. Hier. Ep. 9. ad Salvinam Sufficit ut condimenta
fiant comestibilia, non concupiscibilia. Bern. Palatum tuum fames excitet non
sapores. Sen Satius est demere de prophano and addere ad Sacrum, quam demere de
Sacro and addere ad prophanum. Proverb. Judaic.
And that, 1. When our meat is too costly. What we eat is put into a Vessel
that corrupts it. Necessaries are fitter for the body (the souls servant) then
Delicacies. Manna had been better for the Israelites, then Quails, Numb 11. He
was a Glutton who fared Sumptuously. And here also is caution to be used, as
some men's stomachs and estates require more food; so others in both respects,
may have that which is more costly. 3. In quality of our food we offend, when
our meats are incentives to sin. Our enemy the flesh is too strong for us,
though we take away his Armor, and fight against him. We need not put Weapons
into his hand, and send him Ammunition. We need not, should not help the flesh;
the better part is much in danger of being overmatched, though we make not the
sensual part two to one, by affording it Auxiliaries. Our own corruption wants
the bridle, more then the spur. And some to these add 3. The unlawfulness of
eating such meat as is too young. And they say, the prohibition of eating that
which wants age, is contained in that command, Exodus 23.19. Thou shall not
sees a Kid in his Mothers milk. The Creatures are condemned to dye for us, and
they expect, though not our pardon, yet our reprieve.

3. When we offend in the manner of eating. As 1. Say some; when we eat too
soon, too hastily; namely, before the time of eating (without any necessary
cause) Woe to them that rise early in the morning, that they may follow strong
drink. Isai. 5.11. Eccles. 10.17.
Woe to the Land whose Princes eat in the morning; a time wherein the belly is
not to be filled, First seek the Kingdom of God.
but the heart ordered; and the mind fed with holy Meditations. The Tavern is a
place never very seemly for a Christian; but in the morning very unseemly. If
Princes should eat in due season, much more ordinary people. If a Master (as
Christ speaks) gives not his servant leave to sit down at meat, till he have
first waited upon him, we should not suffer the souls Page and servant (the
body) to feed, till it have first attended upon the soul in its Spiritual
Repasts of Prayer and Meditation. 2. When we eat Animalia ruminantia, ruminant
post sumptionem cibi, sed gulosm, ante. Perald. de Gula. Tanta accuratione, and
art coquorum, cuncta apparantur, quatenus quatuor, aut quinque ferculis
devoratis, prima non impediant novissima, nec satietas minuat appetitum Spretis
naturalibus quos Deus indidit rebus, quibusdam adulterinis gula provocatur
sapo^ibus. Quis dicere sufficit, quot modis sola ova versantur, and vexantur,
quanto studio evertuntur, nunc quidem frixa, nunc assa, nunc farsa, nunc mixta,
nunc sigillatim apponuntur. Ber. Apol. ad Gul. Non cibus sed appetitus est in
vitio. Amos 4.6.
studiously, making it our work to provide and prepare for the belly, to invent
and study pleasing dishes, strange meats, Foreign Sauces, when men live to
eat, meditating upon nothing but the Treacher. As some men by intemperance
overthrow the Nature of man; so others by this sinful studiousness, and
exactness in Feasting, overthrow the nature of their meat; when things are
prepared with so much Art, that the nature of the Creature is lost; and the
Eater knows not what he eats. Oh, how unworthy is it for a Christian to be
always plodding about, and contriving of his meats! to lock up his soul in the
Kitchen, which should be walking in Heaven. 3. When we eat with a vehement
appetite, and greedily: Thus men may be gluttonous, in feeding upon the
coursest fare. David, though he earnestly desired the water of Bethlehem, yet
in stead of drinking it greedily, poured it upon the ground. Gluttons rather
devour, then eat their meat, and rather indeed are eaten up with it. They drink
of the stream, and forget the fountain; their greediness swallows up their
thankfulness; and as soon as ever they have filled their bucket, they turn
their backs upon the well. 4. When we feast without any difference of times.
How unseasonable was it for Joseph's brethren to eat bread, when their brother
was in the pit! or for the Israelites to eat the Lambs of the flock, and the
Calves out of the midst of the stall, to drink Wine in bowls, etc. and not to
be grieved for the affliction of Joseph! To slay Oxen, kill sheep! etc. when
God called to weeping and mourning, etc. when the Church drinks blood and
tears, we should not drink Wine in bowls; we should rejoice with trembling;
and feast, as if we feasted not. Its Gods goodness that he calls us to feast
any day; our own Licentiousness, if we will feast every day. He who fared
sumptuously every day, shall be in eternal want of so much as one drop. 5 When
we feast uncharitably, feasting the Rich, never thinking upon the poor, Luke
14.12, 13. When thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy, etc. rich
neighbors, but call the poor, etc. Lazarus must not starve at the gate, we
must not be like Oaks, who with their Acornes only feed Swine. 6. When we feast
with too much expense of time in Feasting; when we dine all day, and sup all
night; when our supper shall tread upon the heels of our dinner. Woe to them
that continue until night, till wine inflame them. Isa. 5 11.
This expense of time is worse then our expense of meat and money. The former
may be regained, not the latter; and yet how frequently do men complain that
they have spent too much money; how rarely, that they have spent too much time
at Feasting! Prodigality of time is the worst.

If the opening of the nature of this sin, and showing what it is, do not
sufficiently discover the odiousness thereof, let us a little further look upon
it by other disswasive considerations.

1. Gluttony is an enemy to all holiness of life. Venture pinguis non gignit
tenuem sensum. Hieron. Mente recta uti non possunt, multo cibo and potu
replet^. Cicer. Tota chriorum vita insomnium quoddam, rationis naufragium.
It hinders a man from doing himself any Spiritual good. It blunts the
understanding with blockishness and stupidity. Whosoever is deceived by wine
(says Solomon, Prove. 20.1) is not wise. Wisdom is not found in the Land of the
Living, Job 28.13. The Vulgar reads it, in terra suaviter viventium, in the
Land of those who live in delights and pleasures. Whoredom, Wine, and new wine
(says the Prophet, Hos. 4.11) take away the heart. The four children, Dan.
1.16, 17. who lived upon a frugal Diet, were most eminent for Learning and
wisdom, Wine in Feasts, and the not considering of the operations of Gods
hands, are put together, Tabulas legis quas accepit abstinentia, conteri fecit
ebrietas Ambr. cap. 6. de Helia. and jejun. Sciebat Dei sermonem non posse
audire temulent^s. Hier. ^ 2. contr. Jov. Viscus Spiritualium pennarum. Non
currimus onerati. Animae adipidibus quasi luto involutae, nihil tenue, nihil
coe lest, sed semper de carnibus, and ructu, and ventris ingluvie cogitant.
Hier. l. 2. adv. Jov. Quanto corpus impletur, tanto anima minoratur. Greg.
Isai. 5.6. Hierom and Ambrose observe, that as Moses received the Tables of
the Law when he was much in fasting, so he broke the Tables when he saw that
the people had been eating and drinking; as thinking that after Feasting the
people were unfit to hear the Law. How can an impure Glutton lift up in Prayer,
pure hands? Surfeiting oppresses the heart, and suffers it not to lift up it
self toward heaven: Its the Birdlime of the souls wings. Its a weight which
presses us down in our Race; yea rather the ungirding of the loins of our
minds, our affections, which like long and loose Garments, being let down into
the mire of sensual pleasures, hinder and stop us in our Spiritual progress. Oh
how unfit a mansion, is a beastly Epicure for the holy Spirit to dwell in! The
being drunk with wine, is opposed to the being filled with the Spirit, Ephesians.
6.18. The Voluptuous Sensualist is only a Hog-Stie for Satan to lodge in. The
unclean spirit finds no rest in dry places, in those who are sober and
temperate in worldly enjoyments; but like the Swine, not delighting in such
dust, Loca arida sunt homines temperate viventes, in quibus Diabolus non
invenit requiem Parisiens.
he loves to wallow in a sensual and impure Glutton, as in a slough or
quagmire. Gluttony is the Sepulcher of the living, and a kind of Spiritual
drowning of a man.

2 This sin profanely denies God his Service, and opposes him, not only
notwithstanding, but even by his bounty turns the Temple of the Holy Ghost
into a Kitchen; and makes (as the Apostle speaks) a God even of the base,
filthy belly. How unseemly is it for a servant (as Solomon speaks, Prove. 14.10)
to have rule over Princes. The reigning of a servant, is reckoned to be the
first of the four things, which the earth cannot bear Prove. 31.22. Gluttony
makes the Prince (the soul) to serve the belly (of all the souls servants, viz.
the parts of the body) the basest and filthiest. The Apostle speaks of some who
serve their own belly. Romans 16.18. Multis servit, qui corpori servit. Sen.
Phil. 3.19.
Oh miserable servitude! besides the baseness of the serving of such a God of
dung; it is also very cruel, it makes a man a servant to all those meats and
drinks which serve the belly; its a slavery to a Master who is never pleased,
who will have the best provisions brought him, and having taken them, he
throws them all into the draught, and yet is presently calling for more; his
work is never done, he puts his servants upon their drudging for him as long as
they live; several times every day, making men to labor in the filling and
emptying of a Sink, sometimes three or four score years together, requiring and
exacting his supplies so imperiously and rigorously, that his servants often take
thought to the cutting of their hearts, Matthew. 6.25.
and take pains to the cracking of their sinews, for the getting of his
provisions; and yet when all is done, no service is so vain and unprofitable as
this belly-service; what is it but the dawbing and propping of a rotten
cottage, which will notwithstanding, in a short time crumble away, and tumble
down: the delicate feeding of a condemned Malefactor, who must dye, and whose
strength by all his provisions serves him but to go to Execution? yea, Carnem
impinguare, est vermibus escam praeparare.
what is it but the preparing a Banquet for the worms, for whom the leanest
carcass is even fat enough?

3. This sin of Gluttony most uses and abuses that part in its service, which
of all the rest is so noble, and should be most set on work for God, and filled
with his praises, the mouth.

4 Its a sin which does most unsuspectedly surprise us, (as lying in ambush
behind our lawful Enjoyments) and which is most like to catch us, Dum ad
quiet^msatre^atis ab indigentia tran situr, in ipso transitu, laqucus
concupiscentiae insidiatur.
as laying a snare in those ways wherein we most walk, and such an one whereby
even Adam in Innocence, was caught.

5 This one is an inlet to all sin. He who is overcome with this, is not able
to overcom any sin. It having possession of the gate of man, his mouth, lets
easily into him, the whole troop of Vices. It is the Devils bridle, which he
putting into the mouth of a sinner, turns him any way, at his pleasure. When
the iron is hot, the Smith can fashion it how he will. A gluttonous person is
Soil so tilled, manured, and moistened by Satan, that its fit to receive any
seed, that he shall cast into it; Cruelty, Uncleanness, Security, Profaneness,
etc. all grow in that Soil.

6 Gluttony is the Source and Nurse of all Diseases: It must needs be
unhealthful to carry a fen within one. Luke 12.45. Ille optimus medicus sibi,
qui modicus cibi. Immodicis brevis est atas, and rara senectus-Vbicunque quae
rit caro refectionem, invenit defectionem. Aug. Ab (...)
Temperance is the noblest Physic. The inordinate life, is not patient enough
to stay for sickness. Our food becomes, by Gluttony, in stead of a Plaster; a
wound. The Glutton digs his grave with his teeth, and is a self destroyer. They
who most follow, most fly from pleasure: Having taken their leave of an hours
pleasure, they often meet with a years pain. The temperate person only enjoyes
the sweetness of the Creature.

7 This sin, is the ruin and hazard of men's Estates. The very word (...),
Luxury, properly signifies the not preserving, or keeping of the good which we
enjoy. How many have swallowed their estates down their throats! Prove. 23.21.
The Drunkard and the Glutton (says Solomon) shall come to poverty. The
Philosopher asked of the fruga^ Citizen but a penny, but begged of the Prodigal
a Talent. Because he thought of the one he might beg often, of the other, who
spent so fast, he was like to receive but once.

8. Subtrabunt abore Dei, in suis membris, quod ponunt in ore Diaboli.
Parisiens.
Its a sin most injurious to the poor. The Gluttons superfluity causes, and
increases the poors scarci^y. As the spleen grows, so the other parts decay;
and as the Riotous abound, so the poor wants; and none ^re so willing to let
Lazarus starve at their gate, as they who fare sumptuously every day.

9 It makes way for eternal emptiness and scarcity. He who has here been,
unprofitably a gulf to devour Gods Blessings, shall hereafter be thrown into a
gulf of misery, wherein there is not a drop of Mercy. How poor is that plenty,
which makes way for eternal penuty. Oh woeful receipts, which are only in this
life, and not followed with being received! Sinful pleasures are by some
compared to those Locusts, Rev. 9.7. the Crowns upon whose heads, are said to
be only as it were such, or such in appearance, and like G^^d; but ver. 10. it
is said, there were (not as it were, but) stings in their tails. The pleasures
of sin are seeming and appearing; the pains true and real.

9. In feasting we are too prone to cast away holy fear. Observe. 9.
These Seducers fed themselves without fear. In doing those things which are
lawful, we are too ready to be fearless both of God and our selves. Job feared
that his sons had sinned, by this want of Gods fear in their Feasting, Job 1.5.
Its an easy matter to sin, when the thing we are about is not sinful. Our
lawful comforts, as Trading, Sleeping, Marrying, Feasting, are often occasions of
what is unlawful. Luk 17.27, 28
The old world was very fearless of sinning when they eat, drank, bought, sold;
so fearless, that nothing would awaken them but feeling. Most people are
drowned in the shallowes of lawful enjoyments. The meat and drink which in
themselves are wholesome, have killed a thousand times more than ever did
poison, because the form are not feared, (...) is the latter. Men startle at
evident and known sins, whereas in lawful and allowed delights, they are often
overtaken without suspicion. Besides, as Feasting is a lawful, so it is a full
condition. And when we have most fullness, we commonly have least fear. Men who
most abound in enjoyments, are most bold in wickedness. Jesurum waxed fat and
kicked, Deuteronomy. 32.15. When thou shall have eaten and be full, then beware lest
thou forget the Lord. Deu^. 6.12. Agnrs prayer was against Riches, Prove. 30.9.
upon this ground, lest being full he should forget God. In slippery paths we
are most ready to fall; and in a condition of greatest abundance, we soonest
are overturned. A full condition is commonly but fuel to lust; nor can our
sensual hearts easily feed upon pleasing objects, without surfeiting. Isai.
28.1.
The Drunkards of Ephraim, were on the head of the fat valleys. Its a rare
thing to see Religion flourish in a rich Soil. Where the Soil is Richest, there
the Inhabitants commonly are most Riotous. And if it be thus, then as worldly
abundance is a weak Argument to prove Gods love, and as we should be content to
want, yea, pray against, and shun those delights which will occasion us, being
full, to deny God; so should we (particularly) feast with holy fear, which will
keep us from sin in our Feasting, from falling in such a slippery path. This
fear of God and our selves, we shall show,

1 By propounding holy ends in our Feasting. As 1 The refreshing of our bodies,
we not living to eat, but eating to live, and to keep our frail cottages in
meet reparations. 2 We should aim at the glorifying of God, at the delighting
in the giver, by and above his gifts: the being more firmly tied to him with
every cord of love. A godly man has a heavenly end, in doing of every earthly
ployment; and though he does the same thing which he was wont to do, yet now he
does it for an higher end, and would account a Feast, to be but a dry morsel,
if thereby he might not see it come in love, and be enabled to return it again
to love.

2. By acknowledging Gods Attributes. In our feasts meditating, 1 On Gods
fullness and sufficiency, who with the opening of his hand fills every Creature,
and is the great house-holder of the whole world. 2 On his goodness, in causing
so many Creatures to dye for us, who deserved death most of all, and are less
then the least of all Gods mercies.

3 By observing Divine Rules. 1 That Rule of Piety. 1. In praying for a
blessing, and particularly for a heart to be thankful for the receiving, holy
in the using, and fruitful in the improving every gift. 2. In using holy
discourse: this Box of Ointment, we then should bring and break, like that good
woman, Luke 7.36. Bread and salt are necessary at every feast; our discourse
must both feed and season others. 2. The rule of Charity in remembering the
poor, whose wants our compassions should make us feel, though our conditions do
not, and to show that our bowels are not shut up, our hands should be open. 3.
The rule of Temperance, sometimes we should fast, never be gluttonous. If thou
be (says Solomon) a man of appetite, Prove 23.2.
put a knife to thy throat. Nature seems to dictate thus much, by giving to man
a smaller mouth, and a narrower throat, then any other creature of his bigness,
has: we should rise from the greatest feast, fit to pray.

This for the first Resemblance whereby the Apostle describes the estate of
these Seducers. second follows, wherein he compares them to clouds without
water, carried about of the winds.

EXPLICATION.
Two particulars are here to be explained.

1. From what sort of creatures, he draws the resemblance, viz. From clouds.

2. From what sort of clouds, viz. 1. From empty clouds. 2. From unstable
clouds.


In the first, From what sort of creatures the resemblance is drawn. Two things
are considerable.

1. What we are to understand by clouds.

2. Why the Apostle made choice of such a resemblance, taken from these clouds.

1. For the first, the word is (...), clouds, derived (as some think) from the
Hebrew word Nuph, which signifies to drop, or (as others) from Naphal to fall,
or descend. And a cloud (such as the word (...) properly imports) is a moist
vapor drawn up by the heat of the Sun, unto the middle Region of the air,
where being by the coldness of that place knit together, and congealed, it so
continues until (being dissolved and melted by the warmth of the Sun) it be
turned into rain; Zanch. de op. Dei l. 3. c. 6. p. 381. Nubes est vapor humidus
and crassus, qui ad mediam aere^ regionem, a sole elevatus, a frigore autem
regionis condensatus, tamdiu talis manens, donec calore solis liquefactus, in
pluviam convertitur. Psalm. 77.17. Isai. 5.7. 1 Kings 18. Illud hoc loco, tu^
plerisque aliis observari necesse est, scriptura^ no^ uti accuratione
Philosophorum, sed ratione populari in nominandis rebus, (...) distinctionis
ergo, a Philosophis nebulae appellantur, quae (...), sunt and (...) Arist. Met.
l. 1 c. 9. Jun. in Jude Hoc sane est ex mirabilibus naturae, quae consuetudinis
vitio, viluerunt. Pi^d. in Job 26.
So that the property and use of clouds, is to carry water and rain for the use
of the earth, they water the garden of the earth, like a Garden-pot; they are
the treasuries of rain, and (as one says) rain condensed or congealed, and
rain is a cloud dissolved. Or (as another) a cloud is the womb of rain, big
with it (often) as with its issue. And therefore (as the learned Junius on this
place notes) when our Apostle adds (...) to (...), saying, that these clouds
are without water, he rather uses ratione populari, a popular and Vulgar kind
of speech, then stands upon Philosophical accurateness; for those clouds which
are without water, Aristotle and other Philosophers call not (...), nubes, but
(...), nebulas, thin dispersed vapors which (indeed) obscure the face of the
heavens, but have within them, no rain for the thirsty earth at all; so
distinguishing them from (...), rainy clouds.

The Naturalists who write concerning watery Meteors, enquire, how it can be,
that a cloud should contain so vast a bulk and quantity of heavy waters, and
not violently and at once fall to the earth; heavy things naturally descending
or tending downward: Several causes are by them assigned, some say, that they
are kept up by their natural and inbred warmth, included in them, and by the
heat (without) of the Sun and Stars; others say, by their motion which they
have from the winds; others by reason of their spungy hollowness, which
receives and takes in the thin air; but Philosophers (in this) are like little
children, that cannot speak plain, (at least to my dullness,) the safest way
(according to the best Divines) is to resolve this, by the Scripture, which
represents the holding up of the clouds as the work of Gods power, and teaches
us that God has given his command in the creation, that the clouds fall not,
Prove. 8.28. He established the clouds above. Genesis 1.6. Let the firmament (that
is, Zanch. de op Dei, l. 2. c. 1. p. 277. Aer, sua media regione, dividit aquas
quae sursum evehuntur. ab iis quae infrae fluunt.
as Zanchy largely and strongly proves, the air, in respect of the middle
Region) divide the waters from the waters, namely those which are drawn up, and
made clouds for rain, from those which run below: And Job 26.8. Its expressly
said, that God binds up the waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud is not
rent under them: he has bound these waters in a (though weak, slight) garment,
Prove. 30.4. The waters above the Heavens, are recorded among the things which
God has estalisht for ever, and for which he has made a decree that they
shall not pass, Ps. 148.4, 6. Its his power that enables so weak a cobweb, to
hold (as it were) a strong man, prisoner; its that alone, which lays up even a
Sea of waters, in the thin sieve or searce of a cloud, which (till he pleases)
shall not let go one drop, Sunt nubes, ut spongia quaedam aquarum plena. Deus
autem mam^ suae proorovidentiae, spongiam bane comprimit, non totam simul, and
quantum potest, sed paulatim, ut molliter descendant aquae. Zanch. de op. Dei,
l. 3. c. 6. page 383.
and then rain shall come (as through a sieve, or strainer) not in floods, but
in drops. Or rather (as Zanchy that Divine Naturalist speaks) he makes his
clouds spunges; till he press and squeez them with the hand of his providence,
not a drop shall fall out of them; he presses these spunges not too hard, but
gently, that so they may moderately, and by little and little distill and drop
upon us, and not overwhelm us, as they did the old World, when he wrung these
spunges hard upon them. He whose word is a dam to hinder the proud waves from
flowing over the face of the earth, has a word likewise which (as a stopple)
shuts up the bottles of his clouds, and keeps them from running out. In a word,
he who hangs the earth upon nothing, is in the next words deservedly said, to
bind up the waters in his thick clouds.

For the second particular, viz. why the Apostle made choice of a resemblance
taken from these clouds. He says these Seducers were (...), clouds, which
according to the notation of the word, and common usage, signify such as have
in them, water for the refreshment of the earth: and I conceive that our
Apostle hereby intends either, 1, To show their duty, which was as the
Ministers of Christ to be watring clouds, to afford to people the sweet and
refreshing showers of wholesome Doctrines: Or rather, 2. Their great boastings,
hypocritical shows and appearances, they seeming and pretending to be clouds
full of water, as the holy Prophets and Apostles were; whereas indeed, they
were (though appearingly full, yet) really and truly empty; unprofitable and
waterless, like the boaster of a false gift, of whom Soloman speaks, Prove.
25.14. that he is as clouds without rain; though by reason of his great
promises, he seemed to be full of water, and beneficialness: As if the Apostle
had said, These Seducers are clouds full of water of holiness and heavenly
doctrine, if you will believe their own expressions and appearances; but if you
come to try or use them, you shall find no benefit, comfort, or refreshment
from them. And I conceive, that the Apostle by calling them clouds, intimates
their proud and hypocritical pretending to resemble the worthy and profitable
Instructers and Teachers of the people of old, who are often and elegantly in
Scripture compared to clouds, and whose doctrine is resembled to dropping, as
Isai. 5.7. where God (according to some) threatening to take away the Prophets
and their Ministry from the people, says, I will command the clouds that they
rain no rain: And frequently in Scripture is prophesying or teaching called a
dropping: (...) tum docens d^ctorve tum pluvia tempes^iva. 21.30.20. Joel. 2.23.
My doctrine (says Moses) Deuteronomy. 32.2. shall drop as the rain, Ezekiel. 21.2. Son
of man, drop toward, etc. And prophecy against the land of Israel. And Amos
7.16. Prophecy not against Israel, drop not thy word against the house of
Israel, Ezekiel. 20.46. Son of man, drop toward the South, and prophecy, etc. And
Micah 2.6. Prophecy (or drop) not, say they to them that prophecy. And in
ordinary speech we use to say, the clouds drop, and (when it begins to rain) it
drops, Prove. 3.20. His clouds drop down the dew. And clouds are a most lively
resemblance of faithful Ministers. Genesis 1.6. Prove. 8.28. Psalm. 147.8. Ephesians.
4.11. Psalm. 68.11.
1. In regard of the cause of both: the supreme highest cause is God; clouds
are frequently in Scripture called his clouds, Job 26.8. Psalm. 18.12. Prove.
3.20. Ministers are his, they are from him, for him, kept up by him, he gives
the word, and great shall be the company of those who publish it; he sends
forth laborers; the natural cause of clouds, is the Sun drawing up vapors;
Christ the Sun of righteousness, he calls, appoints, gives gifts to Ministers.
2. In regard of the condition of clouds; they are carried from place to place,
tossed too and fro with the winds; Ministers are often removed by God, from one
place (in anger for its unfruitfulness) to another, and tossed by the winds of
persecution, hither and thither, the Church nevertheless by their dispersion,
gaining moisture, and spiritual benefit. 3. In regard of their situation,
clouds are above us, Ministers are (dignified by God) over us in the Lord, and
they (as clouds) ought to be nearer heaven, and more having their conversation
there then others, Phil. 3.20. They are not clods, but clouds, yea stars, yea
angels. 4. Clouds they are in respect of sustentation, upheld by the powerful
Word of Gods providence; else (as clouds under their loads) they could never be
upheld, they are as dying, yet behold they live; stars in the right hand of
Christ. 5. In respect of fullness, usefulness, and beneficialness. A cloud is
both umbrifera and imbrifera, bringing shadow, and moisture to the earth; a
faithful Minister cools and refreshes a scorched conscience by preaching the
righteousness of Christ; he is a messenger; an Interpreter, one among a
thousand to show unto man his uprightness, Job 33.23. his feet are beautiful,
Romans 10.15. as welcome to a scorched conscience, as the rain to the parched
earth; these spiritual clouds drop down the fruitful showrs of heavenly
doctrine. 2 Timothy 2.24
Good Ministers are apt to teach. 6. Like clouds, they spend and consume
themselves in dropping on others; like salt and Torches, they melt themselves to
benefit others; like Silkworms, they weave out their own bowels to cover
others nakedness.

But secondly, Explicat. 2.
from what sort of Clouds does our Apostle draw a resemblance to suit with
these Seducers?

1. From empty Clouds, without water. 2. From unstable Clouds, carried about,
etc.
1. From empty Clouds, they are (...), Clouds without water. Here two things
ought to be explained.

1. What it was to be without Water. 2. When it was a sin to be so.
For the first, as in Scripture the Prophets and Ministers are compared to
Clouds, so their heavenly Doctrine, to Water or Rain showred down from those
Clouds: My Doctrine (says Moses) Deuteronomy. 32.2. shall drop as the rain, my speech
shall distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb. And Isa.
55.10, 11. As the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, etc. So
shall my word be, that goes out of my mouth, etc. And Heb. 6.7. The earth
drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs etc. 1
Kings 17.14 Job 5.10. Job 36.27 Psalm. 104.13 147.8. Psalm. 65.10. Prove. 19.12
Ier. 31.12. Deuteronomy. 28.12. Ier. 5.24. Isa. 44.3. Es. 30.23. 44.14.
And most fitly may the Word be compared to rain; 1. For its original; God
gives Rain, Jer. 15.22 Are there any among the vanities of the heathen that can
cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? Art not thou he, O LORD, etc.
Deuteronomy. 11.14. I will give you the rain of your land, Lev. 26.4. I will give you
the rain in due season. God can only give us a Word; Its called the Word of
the Lord. He appoints what Ministers should preach, and he teaches them how to
Preach; and he makes the Word effectual.

2. Rain is of a searching insinuating nature, soaking to the roots. The Word
searches the heart, Fontes fic^os ^os appeli^t: Font^s scilic^t quod
acceperint agnitionem domini Christi: siccos autem quia non congruenter vivunt.
Aug. de fid. and Op. c. 25. Vbi fons sine aqua* ibi lutum and errori^ and
peccati, n^c lavat sed Coinqunat. Glos, Irenaeus. l. 1. c. 33. haereticos vocat
fungos. Augustine. lib. de Haeres. Fabulones; Philologesnon Ph^losophos. Folia
dant, non fructus, verba non scientiam, sophismata, non solida argumenta;
jactant crepantque Scripturam, sed eam non intelligunt, imo pervertunt.
Aperiunt quasi ^ontes scientia, qui aquam non habent doctrinarum promittunt
imbrem, velut nubes Prophetica. Hiron. 2. contra Iov.
pricks the heart, and purges it, Act. 2.37. Heb. 4.12.

3. Rain cools and refreshes the earth, and plants; the Promises of the
Word, delight the soul, the chapt gasping thirsty soul. Isa. 44.3.

4. Rain softneth the earth, though hard like Iron. The Word makes the heart
tender, and pliable, obedient, Jer. 31.37. Ezekiel. 36.26. and fit to be molded
according to Gods mind.

5. Rain causes the earth to be fruitful; the Word makes us fruitful in
every grace and good work: Its an isntrumental cause of spiritual growth, 1
Pet. 2.2. Psalm. 1.3. 1 Pet. 3.16. So that these seducing teachers were Clouds:
1. Without the water of holiness and sanctification of heart, life, and
example; they made show to be the only sublime Saints, and Christians of the
first magnitude, and that others (in comparison of them) were but in the lowest
form of godliness, and Religion; yet these ungodly men had not in them a drop
of true Sanctity; they only had a form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. but denying
the power thereof; and these waterlesse wells (as Peter calls them) had nothing
in them, but the mud and filth of sin, not to cleanse, but pollute, and defile.

2 They were without the water of true Knowledge; they pretended to be the
only knowing Persons, that they only had two eyes, and all others but one.
They assumed to themselves, the title of Gnostici, for their great (pretended)
insight into the Doctrines of Faith; They looked upon others, as the Pharisees
upon the people, who (they said) knew not the Law, and were accursed; or as
Caiphas upon the other Priests, he telling them that they knew nothing, and yet
for all this they were empty, and without the water of saving Knowledge, and
Instruction. Their doctrines were but wind, chaff, and idle speculations, vain
janglings, contentions about words, not profiting them who are exercised
therein, improving no soul heavenward, making it after all their empty
discourses, no further admitted into communion with Christ, cleansed from sin,
in love with holiness, fitted for death: in a word, their verbal triflings
never made a Proselite to Jesus Christ, but only to an opinion. They had
perhaps the wisdom of Words, but not the words of wisdom. They left the
Scripture, and only regarded dreams, and fables. They were blind leaders of
the blind, and erred from the right way; Desiring to be teachers of the Law,
they understood neither what they said, nor whereof they affirmed. And in stead
of being Clouds that bedewed their hearers with the drops of heavenly
instruction, 1 Timothy 1.7.
they were clouds only to darken their mind with error, and to hide from them
the Sunshine of Truth (as Oecomenius glosseth.) 3. They were without the water
of Consolation and Refreshment, for those who expected benefit and relief from
them. Who so boasts himself of a false gift, is like clouds without rain,
(says Solomon) Prove. 25.14. All the glorious promises of peace and liberty
which they made to their misled followers, were empty and deceitful; While
they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruptiou. 2
Pet. 2.19. They pretended that they had found out a nearer way to heaven, then
any before them had done, and that people might without fetching such a
compass of Mortification and holiness, go straight on to Peace and
Blessedness: But their poor deceived Disciples found them herein, to be but
clouds without water, such who could not make good these promises, and that
there was no peace in impurity. 2 Pet. 2.17. Peter calls them wels without
water, elegantly describing their disappointing of those who expected relief
and refreshment for their souls from them, they being like the waters or wels
in an hot Summer, that Jer. 15.18. are said to lie or fail; or a brook that is
deceitful, Job. 6.15. disappointing the thirsty who go to them for
refreshment. They who trusted to what these seducers promised by their
Doctrines, being like to those little ones, who being sent to the Pits ( Jer.
14.3.) found no water, returning with their vessels empty, ashamed and
confounded, covering their heads.

2. For the second, Wherein it was a sin for these Seducers, to be as clouds
without water.

1. It argued profane, presumption; namely, in undertaking a holy Function,
for which they had no fitness; they had no worth, either of piety, or
sufficiency; they had lips, but not such as could preserve Knowledge; they
polluted the holy things of God with their unmeetness to manage them; had they
been persons of greatest abilities, the work of teaching and instructing souls,
would have deserved and taken them all up; 2 Cor. 2.16.
the shoulders of an Angel would have been weak enough for the weight of such a
service; Who is (says Paul) sufficient for these things? A mortal man would
have scorned to be put off with such performances as they thought good enough
for the great GOD. These cursed deceivers offered to God, not a male, but a
corrupt thing. The God who is the best and greatest, requires the best and
greatest of our abilities. But these offered that to God which cost them
nothing.

2. It argued the sin of unusefulnesse and unprofitablenesse; they could not
give what they had not; they had no worth, and they did no work. They had no
water, nor did they pour down any. They were wicked, and slothful; and
therefore wicked, because slothful, Mat. 25.26. These false teachers knew not
what labor meant. They were spent not with cutting, but rusting. They were
loyterers in the time of harvest. And they were neither faithful, nor
laborers. If they did sweat at all, it was not with working, but feeding. They
were not as Clouds, that spend themselves in watering the earth. They were not
impaired by service, but sensuality; If a private person must be a Public
good, then must not a Public person be a private good. They lived to
themselves, and cumbred their places to no purpose in the world When men went
secure to hell, they quietly suffered them to do so. Their cruelty was great,
because it was Soul-cruelty, they starved souls.

3. In their sin was delusion and hypocrisy; as they neither had worth nor did
good, so in both they opposed their profession. They voiced themselves to be
the only able Instructers; but as the waterlesse clouds delude the expecting
husbandman, so did these, their fond followers. They pretended to be
spiritual nurses, and (though they expected full payment*) they gave the
children but empty, windy breasts. Their deluded Disciples spent their money for
that which was not bread, and their labor for that which satisfied not: Had
these seducers appeared* to be what they were, empty, they had not been called
clouds; or had they been what they appeared to be, they had not been called
clouds without water. Under a glorious title, their lodged a base and unworthy
temper.

Its a great sin to be confutations of our Professions. Injustice is not so
inexcusable in any, as in a Judge; Blindness is not so blameable in any, as in a
guide; a seer, silence, in none is so hateful, as in a Preacher; dryness no
where so unexpected, as in a Well, a Cloud.

It was not the barren Oa^ or Elm, (from which fruit was never expected) but
the Figtree, whose kind, was fruitful, that Christ cursed for unfruitfulnesse
Nor did the damage of their hypocrisy only redound to themselves. A by
reason of their emptiness, they did good to none, so in regard of their
seeming fullness, they did hurt to many. How easily might their misguided
followers ^pend their time in a vain gaping after these empty clouds of error
and presumption, for the water of Life and happiness, and mean while neglect
the Rain of Heaven, a Soul-saving Ministry? these erroneous guides, though
hereby aggravating their own, yet not excusing their followers from damnation.

2. Our Apostle, to set forth the instability as well as the emptiness of these
seducers, draws a comparison, to suit these seducers, from clouds, as carried
about with the winds; he says, They are (...).

Two things I shall here touch, by way of Explication.

1. What the Apostle here intends by their being carried about.

2. What those winds were, by which they were carried about.

1. For the first, their being carried about is noted in this word, (...),
Carried about, driven this way and that way, not abiding or resting in any one
place, like any light matter, feathers, stubble, dust, etc. which are at the
courtesy of every blast and puff of wind; And hereby, is intended the
unstablenesse and unsetlednesse of these seducers, in their Christian course.
Expressed likewise by the same word, Ephesians. 4.14. Children tossed to and fro; and
(...), carried about with every wind of Doctrine: and Heb. 13.9. (...), Be not
carried about with diverse and strange doctrines. If one wind comes, the cloud
is carried this way; if another, that way; sometimes to one quarter of the
Heavens; at other times to a quite contrary: so was it with these unsettled
souls, who wanting the ballast and solidity of grace in their heart, were
unstable, unconfirmed in their opinions, affections and practices. For the
Apostle may hereby intend a threefold instability and unsetlednesse, or their
being carried about in three respects.

1. In respect (principally I conceive) of opinion and judgment; they were not
settled in the truths of Religion; like those 1 Kings 18.21. who halted between
two opinions. They continued not in the faith, grounded and settled, (as the
Apostle speaks Col. 1.23.) they were not placed upon a firm foundation, nor
were they seated as a man in a seat, from which he cannot easily be removed;
and it is frequently observed; that the erroneous are never firm either to the
truth or their own opinions. They forget what they have been, unsterstand not
what they are, and know not what they shall be. Augustine tells us how
frequently Pelagius altered his opinions concerning Grace, and Hilary reports
of Arius, that he had menstruam fidem, for every month a sundry faith, as if he
had swallowed Moons, that he was never consistent to, and with himself. before
the Council, he held for the Divinity of Christ; among his companions,
otherwise. Thus the Apostle complains of the Galatians, for their being so soon
removed unto another Gospel, 1 Gal. 6. and warnes his Ephesians chap. 4.14.
that they should not be carried about, etc. and Peter (2 Pet. 2.14.) mentions
unstable souls. Often from Brownism men wander to Anabaptism, from thence to
Arminianism, thence to Socinianisme and Arminianisme, and then they become
Seekers; or rather indeed, loosers of themselves, just nothing, as a thin
empty, cloud, they are tossed so long up and down by winds, that at length they
come to nothing at all. Their heads are like Inns, and their opinions like
Travelers, which often lodge not above one night in them; like wax, they take any
new impression. Its bard to say whether, they are pluralists or neutralists in
Religion, and as hard to please them in any opinion, as to make a Coat that
should constantly fit the Moon. They know they shall die, but in what faith they
know not. One error is ever a bridge to another. 2 Pet. 3.16. They are called
unlearned and unstable, and (therefore) such as wrest the Scriptures; whence
its plain, that by unstable, he means such as were not grounded in the Faith
and Learning of the Truth. Hymeneus and Philetus, who once held the Truth
concerning the Resurrection, afterward erred concerniag the Faith, saying, that
the Resurrection was past already, 2 Timothy 2.18.

2. They might be carried about, and unstable in respect of their affections,
the goodness whereof was only by fits and pangs, sometimes they were fire-hot
(perhaps) in Religion; soon after, stone-cold: their heat, like that in the fit
of an ague, is not from nature, but distemper, and therefore, though violent,
yet not permanent; they resemble the Mariners, Psalm. 107.26.
of whom the Psalmist speaks, that at one time they are mounted up to heaven,
and presently, fall down again into the depths; like David, who in his youth
was full of Spirits and vigor, but in his old age grew cold and chilly; these
who sometime seemed fervent in spirit, (...), now are cold in their affections,
and come to a state of indifferency and neutrality, and frame to themselves
such a moderation, as will just serve the scantling of the times. They were
(they say) forward and foolish in the heat of their youth, to oppose sin, but
now they see their error, and admire their present staidness, and the golden
mean which they have attained. Thus it was with those unsettled Galatians, who
at first could have pulled out their eyes for Paul, Gal. 4.16.
soon after counted him an eyesore, their enemy, fortelling them the truth.
The Church of Ephesus had left her first love, Rev. 2.4. Thus Alexander, who
(as some think) for his zeal against Diana, the Heathens Idol, Qui martyrio
propinquus erat, perfidum and sceleratum apostatam factum videmus. Call. in Ac.
19. formidabile exemplum.
or (as others) for his noted love toward Paul, was like to have been torn in
pieces as a Martyr; afterward (as Calvin thinks) became Paul's deadly
adversary, 2 Timothy 4.14. and would have martyred him. John's hearers rejoiced in
his light for a season. Affections raised upon no true grounds will soon fall;
and by so much the greater, will the fall be, by how much the higher the
building was. They who have been sometimes more then Christians in their fervor
for, afterward have proved worse then heathens, in fury against the truth.

3. They might be carried about and unstable in their practices: very strict
and precise in their carriage at the first: very loose and profane afterward:
Seducers grew from better to worse, or (as the Apostle speaks,) worse and
worse; 2 Timothy 3.13.
golden professors happily in their youth, silver in their middle age, leaden in
their old age. They set out well, but did not hold out at all; so appearingly
conscientious at the first, that the very appearances of sin were shunned; so
really wicked at last, that the greatest abominations are not scrupled, and
they are grown so strong, that their stomachs can digest those impieties, with
the very sight whereof, heretofore, they seemed to be sick. How frequently has
the glorious, the morning beginnings of Christian Profession been overcast with
the darkness and gloomy cloudinesse of profaneness, before the evening!
Many, who have been elevated to a high pitch of Profession, have fallen (like
clouds) into some dirty lane, or slough of uncleanness and loosnesse. Gal. 3.3.
They begin in the flesh, and end in the flesh; though they seemed to have
escapt the pollutions of the world, and to be washed from their filthiness, yet
they return with the dog to their vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22.
and with the sow to their wallowing in the mire.

2. Plurium conflictus ventorum. Lorin. Impetuosus turbo. Geth. Luke 8 23. Mar.
4.37. Hebr. 13.9. (...).
For the second, by what they were carried about and unsettled, viz. By the
winds, (...); the word (...) signifies any blast which blows in the air, but
Peter 2 Pet. 2.17. says, they are (...), carried with a tempest; the word
(...) properly signifying a whirlwind, not one wind, but a conflict of many
winds. Its used by the Evangelists in the describing the tempest miraculously
appeased and calmed by Christ. There were several sorts of winds and tempests
wherewith these Seducers were carried about.

1. The wind of strange doctrines; this is noted by the Apostle, Hebr. 13.9.
where he warns the Christians that they be not carried about with diverse and
strange doctrines. And Ephesians. 4.14. with every wind of doctrine: Every doctrine
which was new, was by them entertained as true. They had itching ears,
delighted with novelty, not obedient ears attentive to profitable truths;
whence it was that every new doctrine carried them a several way, and that they
meeting with several new Doctrines, were hurried round as in a whirlwind, and
knew not where to rest. The Devil pleased them (like children) with change of
toys. The true Gospel was neglected for another, as Paul speaks, Gal. 1.6.
they were of the same mind with him who taught them last; they were mere
movables in the Church; like the water, ever of the same figure with the
vessel into which its put; like a company of ciphers, which signify what it
pleases the Figure which is put before them.

2. Seducers are carried about with the wind of fear; to save their skins, they
cared not what they held, taught, did; they were impatient of persecution. Thus
speaks the Apostle of these seducers, Gal. 6.12. They constrain you to be
circumcised, lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ. That
which they entertained merely for fear, they present to others as a doctrine of
Faith. These are reeds that bow and hang, according to the standing of the
winds; such a reed shaken with the winds, was not John Baptist, but rather an
Oak, which will sooner be broken, then bend by the winds, by an holy
Antiperistasis, his zeal was doubled by opposition. These false Teachers were
like a man that goes to Sea for pleasure, not for Traffic; if a storm arise,
he will come back, or put to the next shore: Like that ship, Acts 27.15. they
bear not up into the wind, Jer. 9 3.
they are not valiant for the truth, Tit. 1.9.
nor hold they fast the faithful Word, but let it go, if enemies contend to
pull it away.

3. They were carried about with the wind of pride and ambition. They gaped
after the breath of applause; old truths are of no reputation among the giddy
sort; hence it was, that these were carried to teach that whereby they might be
voiced, and cried up for some rare men, dropped out of the clouds, and seeing
further then all the rest of their times. They could not tell how to get above
others, unless they taught something different from others; truth was counted
but a dull, stale business; and therefore they chose rather to be accounted
such as excelled by being erroneous, then such as were only equal to others,
Vento superbiae omnes haereses animantur.
by delivering the truth. The wind of Pride is the life and soul of Error, it
is the element wherein it moves and breaths; Seducers were puffed up (as Paul
speaks, Col. 2.18.) vainly by their fleshly minds; a humble soul will not
easily either teach, or follow an Error; It has ever been the property of
Seducers, to follow the peoples humor with Errors, that so the people might
follow them with applause.

4. They were carried about with the wind of earthly mindedness. They taught
any false doctrine for filthy lucres sake; 2 Pet. 2.
they would rarely be carried with any wind, but such as blew them some profit;
they steered their course by the compass of gain; their Religion began at their
purse strings: They served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies,
Romans 16.18. This was that wind which carried Balaam about from country to
country, from Altar to Altar; he and his followers loved to be of the Kings
Religion: Thus Erasmus said, that one poor Luther, made a great many rich
Abbots and Bishops; he meant, that by preaching against him, they were wont to
get their great livings and preferments; Demas forsook truth, to embrace the
present world.

OBSERVATIONS
1. The want of the showrs of a faithful Ministry (spiritual rain) is a
singular curse and calamity. Conscientious Ministers are clouds, and their
Doctrine rain. As no rain is so useful and profitable as the rain of the Word,
so neither is it so great a misery, to be deprived of any, as of this. God
often in Scripture promises Showers and Teachers as great Blessings, Deuteronomy.
28.12. The Lord shall open to thee his good treasure, the Heaven to give thee
rain, etc. Joel 2.23. Rejoice in the Lord your God, for etc. he will cause to
come down for you the Rain, etc. And for instructours, see Jer. 3.15. Jer. 23.4.
I will give you Pastors according to mine own heart, which shall feed you
with knowledge and understanding. Isai. 30.20. Though the Lord give you the
bread of Adversity, and the water of Affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be
removed into a corner any more. God also threatens the keeping away of rain,
and the taking away of Instructers, as dismal curses, Deuteronomy. 28.23. Jer.
3.3.14.4. Amos 4.7. Isai. 3.2. 1 Samuel 3.1. Hos. 4.5. Ezekiel. 3.26. Psalm. 57.9.
The Heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, thy rain shall be powder and
dust. Lev. 26.19. I will make your Heaven as iron, and your earth as brass.
Zach. 14.17. Upon them shall be no rain. Never was a greater plague on Israel,
then when in three years and a half, it rained not on the earth in Ahabs time.
And concerning the Prophets, the Lord says, Mich. 2.6. They shall not (Hebr.
drop) Prophecy; and Isai. 5*6. God threatens his Vineyard, that he will
commands, his clouds (his Prophets) that they shall rain no rain upon it. God
threatened a great judgment in great displeasure against the people Ezekiel. 3.26.
when he told Ezekiel, that he would make his tongue cleave to the roof of his
mouth; and that he should be dumh, and no reprover to them: and when he
threatened that he would remove away the candlestick of Ephesus, out of its
place, Rev. 2.5. The want of Spiritual, is a much greater woe then the want of
natural rain. The withholding of show^s from Heaven, can but produce a Famine
of bread; the want of a faithful Ministry, brings a Famine of the Word of the
Lord, Amos 8.11. And this famine of the Word of the Lord, is a Soul-famine. And

1 Opposes not Natural, but Spiritual life. The separation of the soul from
the body, is but the shadow of death: True death stands in the separation
between God and the soul. Where vision fails, people perish, Prove. 29.18. My
people perish for want of knowledge, Hos. 4 6. Salvation and Life eternal stand
in Knowledge, Joh. 17.3. 1 Timothy 2.4.

2. Bodily famine takes away our natural strength and vigor, whereby we perform
our ordinary and worldly actions; but a soul-Famine destroys that Spiritual
strength, whereby we are enabled to heavenly Employments, Praying, Repenting,
Believing, Holy-walking.

3 Bodily Famine makes the outward man look pale, deformed, lean, unpleasing;
soul-famine brings a leanness into the soul, deformity and profananess into the
face of our conversation. Who observes not in Congregations, whence the Word is
taken, the miserable change of men and manners! In Elies time, sin abounded,
and the reason is set down 1 Samuel 3.1. In those days the word of the Lord was
precious.

4 Bodily Famine, as other external judgments, may be a help to bring men to
God, by causing Repentance, and bettering Obedience, as in the Prodigal; but
the famine of the Word, puts men farther from God, and by it men grow more
obdurate in sin.

5. Bodily Famine may be recompensed and made up with Spiritual food. Isai.
30.20. Though the Lord give the bread of Adversity, yet he countervailes that
loss, by giving them to see their Teachers, whereas Spiritual famine cannot be
recompensed by having bodily food, because when God takes away the food of the
soul, he takes away himself, the tokens of his presence and Grace: and what can
be given in exchange for God himself?

6 Of bodily Famine people are sensible, they cry out thereof, and labor for a
supply; but the more soul famine rages, the more people disregard, their
misery, and slight their wretchedness; by fasting, forgetting, how to feed, and
with their food, losing (often) their stomachs too. How much then are they
mistaken who account Spiritual showers, their greatest plague, and complain of
these dewes of Grace, as if they were a deluge of woe; to whom the word of the
Lord is the greatest burden; who cry out, the Land cannot bear it! A Church
without a Preacher, is as a Ship sailing in a dark night, on a rough Sea,
without a Pilot. Never was Christ more moved in compassion toward the people,
then when he saw them scattered as sheep without a Shepherd. They who would be
rid of the Word, would also be without pardon, peace, holiness, happiness; it
being the Word of Faith, the Word which sanctifies, the Gospel of Peace, the
Word of life, the Power of God to salvation. Ministers are Saviors, Watch-m^n,
Laborers in the Harvest, Nurses, Guides, Builders, Sowers, Seers, Light, Salt,
Clouds, etc. What then a^e places destitute of saving instruction, but unsafe,
spoiled, starved, waste, blind, wandering, unsavory, barren? and yet how
commonly do many curse the preaching of the word, as the people who live under
the torrid Zone, do the rising of the Sun! To conclude, what apparent enemies
are they to the souls of people, who hinder the preaching of the Gospel! who
will not suffer it to run and be glorifi^d; who revile and abuse the faithful
Dispensers thereof! an act (no doubt) of greater unthankfulness, then to wrong
and abuse a man, who in a time of Famine should open his Garners for the relief
of a whole Country.

2 The greatest commendation of a Minister, Observe. 2
is industry for, and usefulness to the souls of others. Clouds are not
appointed for themselves, but to water the earth; and in doing so, they consume
themselves: like Silkworms, Ministers wear and weave out their own boweis. It Is
a sin for any, much more for a Minister, to be an unprofitable servant. He must
not go to Sea in his M^nisterial Calling for Pleasure, but Employment. He must
say (with Pompey) who being to sail over the Seas with Corn to relieve
distressed Rome, and being told by the Pilot, that it would prove a dangerous
Voyage; answered, (...).
It is not necessary we should live, but that we should sail. The Excellency of
the Sun is not so much in respect of its glory and splendour, as its influences
and beneficialness: and he who expects hereafter to shine like the Sun, must
here run like the Sun. They who preach the Sun of Righteousness, must be like
the Sun who comes forth of his chamber like a Bridegroom, and rejoiceth to run
his race. The clods of the earth, may be of a more dull and sad temper, rest
and lie still; but the clouds of Heaven, must be in a perpetual motion.
Ministers must, like the Cherubims, which give attendance in the presence of
God, have wings for expedition in the execution of his will. They are called
Laborers, and workmen; they labor in the Word and Doctrine. Paul's glory was
not, that he was more advanced, but that he labored more abundantly then they
all: As much as in me is (says he) I am ready to preach the Gospel. He made
Preaching his business; therein he was glad to spend, and to be spent, 2 Cor.
12.15. Knowledge without industry, speaks no man Excellent. None is accounted
good, for the good he has, but the good he does. A wooden key that opens the
door, is a better one, then a Golden one that cannot do it. Greatest industry
is always to be used about the salvation of souls. Impudent importunity is in no
case so commendable as in this Paul was an excellent Orator, and all his
Oratory was to persuade men to be saved. Never did Malefactor so plead to
obtain his own life, as did Paul beg of men to accept of life. He was an
importunate woer of souls, and he would take no denial. Ministers must rather
be worn with using then rusting. The sweat of a Minister (as it is reported of
Alexanders) casts a sweet smell; his Talents are not for the Napkin, but
Occupation; not to be laid up, but to be laid out. They who are full Clouds,
should be free in pouring out, returning as they have received. How unworthily
do they deal with God, who are all for taking in, and nothing for laying out!
How liitle is the age and place wherein they live, beholding to them! How just
is it with God, that they who will not give him the interest of their
abilities, by improving and acting them, should lose the principal, by ceasing
to have and retain them! 1 Cor. 12.7.
The manifestation of the Spirit, is given to every one to profit withal.
Standing water soon putrifies. Musical Instruments which are most used, sound
most melodiously. Eccles. 5.17.
If Solomon observed it to be a great vanity, that some men had Riches, who had
not power to use them; how much greater is the vanity of having great
intellectual abilities, and yet to have no power to make use of them, for the
good of others? In short therefore, Ministers must remember that they are not
appointed for sight, but service, and usefulness. We account not a Pillar to be
good because it is sightly, but strong. We should fear to sit under that
Structure, the Pillars whereof are, though curiously gilded and painted
outwardly, yet crazy and rotten within. Its better to be under a disgraced,
persecuted Paul, then under a silken Diotrephes, who is altogether for worldly
glory and pre-eminence, nothing for duty and performance.

3 Ministers of the Gospel must be full and watery clouds. Observe. 3
Able and apt to teach; gifted and enabled to their Ministry. As Ambassadors,
they must be sure to have their instructions with them; 2 Cor. 3.6. Ephesians. 4.2.
and to be able Ministers of the New Testament, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry. Able to impart Spiritual gifts, Match.
13.52. 2 Timothy 2.15.
bringing forth out of his treasure, things new and old being Workmen that need
not be shamed, rightly dividing: the Word of Truth.

1. Able they must be to open the Scriptures: They must have the water of
Knowledge, and be able to unlock the Cabinet of the Word, fit to feed the people
with understanding: to role away the stone from the mouth of the well, for the
watering of the flocks of Christ. He who calls for a reasonable Sacrifice, will
not be content with an unreasonable Sacrificer; Ministers must teach every one
in all wisdom, Col. 1.28.

2. They must have ability to convince gainsayers by sound Doctrine, Tit. 1.9.
A Ministers breast, should be a Spiritual Armory, furnished with Spiritual
Weapons, for overcoming of opposers. Apollos mightily convinced the Jews; so
Paul disputed against the adversaries of the Truth, Act. 9.29. and 17.17.

3 The Gift of working upon the affections, and quickening to duty. Ability, not
only to enlighten the understanding, but to warm the heart. I think it meet,
etc. 2 Pet. 1.13.
(says Peter) to stir you up. Paul knowing the terror of the Lord, persuaded
men. The Ministers lips, like Isaiahs, Isai. 6.6.
must be touched with a live coal, and he must partake of that Spirit, which
came down in the likeness of fiery tongues, to fire the affections of his
Hearers, and to make their hearts burn within them, with love to holy duties.
It was said of Basil, that he breathed as much fire as eloquence.

4. The gift of comforting the distressed conscience; of speaking a word in
season to him that is weary, Isai. 50.4 of declaring to man his uprightness: of
binding up the broken heart, and of pouring oil into its wounds; of dropping
the refreshing dewes of the Promises upon the parched Conscience: In a word, of
giving every one his Portion, like a Faithful and wise Steward.

5. Lastly, They must have the water of Grace and Sanctification. Of this their
hearts and life should both be full. If a Beast was not to come to the Mount,
where the Law was delivered, much less may he who is a beast deliver the Law.
The Doctrine of a Minister must credit his life, and his life adorn his
Doctrine. Dead Doctrine, not quickened with a holy life (like dead Amasa) lying
in the way, stops people, that they will not go on cheerfully in their
Spiritual warfare. Does God require that the Beast which is offered to him,
should be without blemishes; and can he take it well that the Priest who offers
it should be full of blemishes?

He then who will win souls (we see) must be able and wise. A Minister must be
thoroughly furnished (as Paul speaks.) There is some wisdom required to catch
Birds, 2 Timothy 3.17.
Fish, and Vermin; how much more to catch souls? The best Minister may blush
to consider how unfit he is for his Calling; and when he has gotten the
greatest abilities, he should beg pardon for his unableness, and pray and study
for a further increase of his gifts. They are none of Christ's Ministers, who
are not in some measure gifted for their work. He that sends (says Solomon)
a Message by the hand of a fool, cutteth off the feet, Prove. 26.6.
and drinks damage; he is sure to suffer for it, it being all one, as if he
should cut off a man's legs, and then bid him go on his Errand.

To conclude, how unworthy and profane are they who bestow such of their
children upon the Ministry, as are the dullest and most unfit of all their
number! who say, that when a child is good for nothing, be is good enough to
make a Preacher; whose children (as Doctor Stoughton speaks in allusion to his
speech who called Basil, the Gift of an Ague, he being preserved from the
violence of an Arian Emperor, (...)
because he recovered his son of a dangerous Ague) may be called the gift of
some lameness, infirmity, deformity; Offer it now to thy Governor, will he be
pleased with the^?

4. Ministers are sustained and upheld in their work by the mighty power of
God. It is much to be wondered, Mal. 1.8.
that the Natural, Observe. 4.
but more that the Spiritual clouds are kept from falling. Its God who binds
up the waters in the cloud; so that it is not rent under them, Job 26.8. He
that established and made a decree, which shall not pass, for the waters above
the Heavens. Psalm. 148.4, 6.
It was God who preserved Elijah when Jezabel had vowed his death; God
delivered Paul out of the mouth of the Lion; he kept Isaiah in his Ministry
during the Reign of four; and Hosea during the Reign of five Kings: he
continued Noah an hundred and twenty years, against the opposition of the old
world. Jeremy, notwithstanding all his enemies, was upheld in his work till the
Captivity. God promises the Church, that their Teachers should not be removed
into corners, but that their eyes should behold them. Isai. 30.20. Luke 13.32.
A Minister of Christ may say, as Christ of his working of miracles, I preach
the Word to day, and to morrow, and do the world what they can, they shall not
hinder me, till that day be come that Christ has appointed; The Ministers are
stars in Christ's hand So long as there is any one soul, which these Lights are to
guide to Heaven, all the blasts of Hell can never extinguish them. God sets
them, and God keeps them up; he erects, he upholds, he gave, and he continues
their commission, Durante beneplacito; they are Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20.
whom he calls home when he pleases. Let not (then) the servants of Christ,
fear man in the doing of the work of their Lord. He who hangs the earth upon
nothing, and keeps the clouds from being rent under the burden of the waters,
can uphold them under all their pressures. Their times are in Gods hand; they
are neither in their own, nor in their enemies. They shall fight against thee
(said God to Jeremy) but they shall not prevail against thee, Jer. 1.19.
for I am with thee. Let faithful Ministers, fear none but their Master, and
nothing but sin and unfaithfulness. Not outward evils, because he sleeps not
who preserves them; but inward evils, because he sleeps not who observes them.
Let Ministers undauntedly make their faces hard against the faces of the
wicked. In their own cause let them be as flexible as a reed; in Gods, as hard
as an Adamant; who can powerfully say to the strongest enemies of his
Ministers, Do my Prophet: no harm; and who will turn the greatest harm which
they receive for his sake, into good, and make even a fiery chariot to carry
his zealous Elijahs into heaven. Hence likewise, people are taught how to have
their faithful Ministers continued; namely, by making God their friend, who at
His pleasure removes and continues them. How careful were they of Tire and
Sidon to be at peace with Herod, because their Country was nourished by the
Kings Country? Acts 10.^0. It Is doubtless, greater wisdom to make God our
friend, by whose Care and Providence our Country is nourished spiritually, and
supplied with those who should break the Bread of Life unto us. If People would
keep their Ministers, let them keep and love no sin: Upon the repentance of the
Jews, God promised them, that his sanctuary should be in the midst of them for
evermore, Ezekiel. 37.26. Let them bring forth (likewise) the fruits of the
Gospel. The Husbandman lays his ground fallow, when he perceives it will not
quit Charges. The Kingdom of heaven (says Christ) shall be taken from you, and
given to a Nation which will bring forth the fruits thereof, Mat. 21.43.

Lastly, let them be importunate with God in Prayer, to uphold his Ministers.
Importunity held Christ with the Disciples, when he was going away, Luke 24.29.
Say, Lord, Thou shall not go till thou have blessea me, with more spiritual
blessings and grace by the means of grace. Oh! lay hold upon God, as
Galeacius's children hung about his legs, when their Father was going from,
them to live at Geneva. The Prophet complains, Isa. 64.7. that none stirred up
himself to take hold of GOD. Say, O thou the hope of Israel, why should thou
be as a stranger in the Land, and as a wayfaring man that turns aside to
tarry for a night? Jer. 14.8. When Peter was cast into prison, prayer was made
with out ceasing of the Church unto God for him; and their Prayer broke open
the prison-doors, and knocked off Peter's chains. When Paul was a prisoner at
Rome, Philem 22. He. 13.18, 19.
he tells Philemen, I trust that through your prayers, I shall be given unto you.

5. Obs. 5.
Ministers must not in this world, expect a settled quiet condition.

They are clouds, and they must look to be tossed, and hurried by the winds.
The faithfullest servants of Christ, have ever been opposed by when opposers of
the sinners and sins of the times wherein they lived. They are Light, and
therefore thieves and sore eyes cannot endure them. They are Soldiers, and if
they (like Ishmael) will draw their sword against every one, every ones sword
shall be against them. They are the salt of the earth, and therefore smart and
biting; fishers, and therefore they shall be tossed as upon the sea. Which of the
Prophets (says Steven) have not your fathers persecuted? Acts 7.52. Mat. 5.12.
Mat. 23.34. Luke 11.49
So persecuted they the Prophets, (says Christ) I send unto you Prophets, etc.
and some of them ye shall kill, etc. and persecute.

So long as Ministers will not suffer wicked men to be quiet in their lusts,
they will not suffer Ministers to have quiet lives. Satan does not so much
oppose any of the Soldiers in Christ's Army, as he does the Commanders; nor
does that wolf any way, so much endeavor the devouring of the Sheep, as by the
removing of the Mastives. By the persecuting likewise, and scattering of His
Ministers; God wisely provides for the relief of his Church: God waters the
several parts thereof, by dispersing these Clouds into several quarters. They
who were scattered abroad (says Luke) went every where preaching the word,
Acts 8.4. (...).
Act. 8.4. Unless the seed be scattered, there can be no crop expected. and the
scattering of the sowers, makes way for the scattering of the seed. The
scattering of Simeon and Levi in Israel, dispersed the knowledge of the Law. By
the carrying of the Jews into captivity, the Truth was made known among the
heathen. In the Primitive persecution, Persecutio veritatis, propagatio
veritatis.
the more were made Martyrs, the more Christians were made. By the irruption of
the Goths and Vandals, the persecuters themselves became Christians. The
persecution of the Truth, is the Propagation thereof. The sufferings that
happened to Paul, fell out to the furtherance of the Gospel.: Phil. 1.11.
A consideration which should sweeten the bitterness of a Ministers
persecution and unsetlement. God does not only thereby make them more pure,
but his Church more numerous; they ought to prefer service before safety, and
account that condition to make most for their good, whereby they may make most
to become good.

To conclude this, let Ministers take heed, In tantum Deo places in qu^n tum
hominibus displices. Ruat Coelum and terra potius quam aliquid Christo
discedat. Luth. Obs. 6.
lest they abate in their zeal and faithfulness for God, to gratify a sinful
world. If I please men (says Paul) I am not the servant of Christ; Its much
easier to bear the wrath of men, for the conscionable discharge, then the wrath
of God, for the unconscionable neglect of our duty.

6. People should sit under the ministry of the Word, as under the rain
distilling from the clouds; they should be as the dry and parched soil, not in
regard of barrenness under, but thirstinesse after heavenly Doctrine, and the
dews of Grace; like those of whom Job speaks, who waited for him as for the
rain, Job 29.23. Gasping after the Word, as the chapt earth opens its mouth,
Tot linguae, quot fissurae.
in its clests for the showers (every cleft whereof, is as it were, a tongue to
call to the clouds for Rain) People should be a thirst for God, yea the living
God, Psalm. 42.1.
panting after Christ in his Promises, as the Heart after the water brooks; Open
thy mouth wide (says God) and I will fill it: The reason why we come not to
the Word, drink not, relish not, digest not, is because we thirst not after it.
This thirst must be first, an inward, hearty sincere thirst; My soul follows
hard after thee; Psalm. 63.1.
my heart says, thy face will I seek. Isa. 26.8. The desire of our soul is to
thy Name. Our desires must not be (as they say of some spices) hot in the
mouth, cold in the stomach; not only the expression of the tongue, but
accompanied also with the sincerity of the heart. Christians must not be like
some hounds, which following the game, open very loud, with the rest for
company, when they have not the scent of that beast which they pursue. We must
thirst, Cant. 4.8. Psalm. 42.2.4 Psalm. ^ 19 17. 2. Cer. 7.11 Romans 12.11
with the inward savor of that good which is in the Word. Secondly, It must be a
vehement, ardent thirst, like that of David, Psalm. 119.20. My soul breaks for
the longing it has, etc. with the whole heart, verse. 10. Psalm. 119.81. My soul
faints for thy salvation; my soul longs, yea, even faints for the Courts
of the Lord. All the sweetness is put into the benefits of the Gospel, which
God could put into them, and all the desire must be set upon them, which thy
soul can set upon them: All the vehement propensions, wherewith things are
carried to their Centers, in their courses can no more then shadow out
spiritual desires. If a rock should fall from the Clouds, it would break any
interveening impediment; the Sun cannot be stopped in its course: Gun-pouder
bears all away, that would hinder its force. 3. Its a predominant thirst. No
power of nature, is so importunate and clamorous for satisfaction, as tasting;
a thirsty man, much more ardently desires water, then another does beautiful
prospects, sweet smells, melodious Music. These things being wanting, a man
can live; not so, without Water: Those a man would have, this (he says) he
must, he will have. A spiritually-thirsty soul, desires nothing much, but him
whom it cannot desire too much: A greater fire is made for the roasting of an
Ox, then of an Egg; and greater is the flame of desire after the great and vast
benefits of the Gospel, then after these curt and inconsiderable things, here
below; in comparison of Christ they are dung, dross, loss; a Christian will
step over them and kick them away, when God requires; lay them down as
sacrifices, There is none upon earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25.
or hate them as snares. Christ gives himself wholly to the soul, and so does a
soul deal with him. The greatest worth that it sees in any thing, beside
Christ, is this, that it may be be left for Christ. 4. It is an industrious
thirst, it is not a lazy veleity, but a desire which takes pains for the thing
desired; it suffers not a man to sit still, but makes him seek, knock, ask,
cry, call, sell all, wrestle, strive (all Scripture-expressions) it offers
violence to, and makes an holy riot upon heaven. Its like fire, that will not
be smothered: It says (as Elijah to Obadiah) As the Lord lives, I will show
my self; It stands not for any cost, it turns every stone: Like the arrow drawn
to the head, it flies apace. It Is not like the desire of the slothful, which
slayes him, because his hands refuse to labor, Prove. 21.25.

5. Its a resolved, waiting, permanent thirst: Genesis 49.19. Luke 2 25. Iratum
colit numen.
Hence we frequently read of waiting for the Lord, and his Salvation and
Consolation; It stays the Lords leisure, and will not away though the Lord
seems to deny. No waters of discouragement, shall quench it. It does not cast
off hope, because it cannot presently find comfort; It Is good (says the soul)
that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord,
Lam. 3.26. Like one who goes to an house, to speak with one much his Superior:
the spiritually thirsty soul, will tarry the Lords leisure for his coming to
it. 6. Its a thirst determined and limited to that One Thing upon which its
set: Nothing else will serve its turn, nor will it be bribed or put off with
any thing in stead thereof; Whom (says the Psalmist) have I in heaven but
thee? Psalm. 73.25. Psalm. 27.4.
and there is none upon the earth that I desire beside thee; One thing (says
David) I have desired of the Lord, that will I seek after. What have I (said
Abraham) so long as I go childlesse? and what have I, (says the soul) so long
as I go Christless? Land, riches, honors, children, etc. are good, but yet
they are not Christ! A bag of gold wilnot serve him who is perishing with
thirst, in stead of a cup of water. 7. Its a returning, progressive thirst;
it is never fully satisfied on this side Heaven, it puts upon craving and
seeking again, and again. The earth desires not rain once only in a year, but
a return of showers, the latter as well as the former rain: nor does
refreshment with drink to day, make a man regardless thereof to morrow. David's
desire was to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. The least degree of
spiritual relief, Psalm. 23.6 Psalm. 27.4.
satisfies and stays a Christians stomach to the world; but the greatest takes
not away its further desires of Christ. 8. Its a thank full thirst, it blesses
the Lord for every drop of grace, with the Psalmist, Psalm 63.5. My soul is
satisfied as with marrow, and fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with
joyful lips. Oh! says the soul; Lord, who shall praise thee if I do not? A
soul satisfied with mercy, Psalm. 103.3. Romans 7.25. 1 Timothy 1.17. Nibil leve, quo
anima reparatur.
is a spiritual Psalm sung out in the praises of God. Blessed be God, who has
blessed us, (says Paul) with spiritual Blessings; as soon as ever Paul had
said, Christ came into the world to save sinners, whereof he was chief, he
adds, his Doxology, Now to the King immontall, etc. What a delightful
fragrancy comes from, and what a face of freshness, greenness, cheerlinesse
is upon the face of the parched grass, and Plants, after a shower of Rain? Oh!
what a spiritual freshness of joy, is upon, what sweetly breathings of
praises issue from that soul which God has relieved with his spiritual
Showers of Love and favor. The souls greatest trouble is now, that it brings
not forth more fruits of new obedience, after those Showers, and its now as
boundless in duty, as heretofore it was in desires.

7. Obs. 7.
Seducers are wont to make great shows and appearances of worth in themselves
and their Doctrines. These Seducers seemed to be full, watery clouds, whose
wombs were big with the rain of instruction, and holiness, but (for all this)
the Apostle tells us, they were clouds without water. Heresy is compared to
leaven, Mar. 8.15. and among other reasons, for its puffing and raising the
dough. This spiritual Leaven puffs up men with an undue and excessive opinion
of their own parts and Graces; The Pharisees trusted in themselves, that they
were righteous, 2 Pet. 2.20.
and despised others, Luk 18.9. No doubt (think they) we are the people, and
Wisdom shall dye us with, Job 12.2. They are vainly puffed up by their fleshly
mind. Col. 2.18.
The Ministers of Satan desired to be accounted the Ministers of
righteousness. False Apostles (2 Cor. 10.12.) commended themselves, measured
themselves by themselves, and compared themselves among themselves. They
measured and esteemed themselves according to their own mind and judgment, and
not according to their real worth or excellency. Regnat luscus inter c^cos.
They (also) never considered the excellency of others, who were much beyond
them in worth, but only such who were of the same pitch with themselves or (as
some understand the place) they commend and receive praises from one another,
and among themselves. And whereas the Apostle says (verse. 13.) that he would
not boast of things without his measure; he intimates that these Seducers
boasted beyond all the bounds or measure of their gifts and calling: or
(according to some) that they boasted of their laboring in the Gospel, beyond
the measure and term of Paul's Labor. Theophilact and Oecumenius conceiving
that these Seducers falsely boasted that they had propagated the Gospel to the
ends of the earth, and that according to the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.
Their line was gone through all the earth, and their words to the end of the
world. Arius vainly gloried, that God had revealed something to him, that was
hid from the Apostles themselves. Vide Danaeum in descriptione arboris. Haeres.
(...). Epiph. Haer. 24.
Montanus boasted that he was the Paraclet or Comforter himself. Simon Magus,
the father of these heretical seducers, boasted that he was the mighty power
of GOD. Heretics boldly inintrude into things which they have not seen; they
profess knowledge falsely so called. The disciples of Basilides voyced
themselves only to be men, and all others to be swine and dogs, says
Epiphanius; and Nazianzen tells Eunomius, that he was (he means in his own
Conceit) a beholder of things which to all others are invisible, (...). Naz. in
Orat. 33.
an hearer of things which it is not lawful to ^tter; that he was taken up to
heaven as was Elias; that he had seen the face of God as had Moses; that he was
rapt up into the third heavens as was Paul. Thus the Papists style some of
their Schoolmen, Angelical, Seraphicall, irrefragable, most subtle,
illuminate. The consideration of all which should make us more wary of being
led away with the big words, and high expressions of these titular worthies:
Let us consider what the power is which goes along with their words: and in
stead of admiring the flourishing titles of every vain dogmatist, examine what
is the consonancy between the Scriptures and their opinions. Who honors a mere
titular nominal Prince? Let us not be taken with the glory of the doctor, but
search into the bowels of the Doctrine: Fools indeed, being to take money, will
be put off with brass coin, because it glisters; but a wary man tryes it by
the Touchstone. Try all your Doctors and Doctrines by the Word, and ever be
more ready to suspect then admire either.

8. Obs. 8.
Its a great and inexcusable sin to make show of that goodness, of which we
are wholly void, and to which we are opposite.

Sinful was the pretending of these Seducers, to be watering clouds, big and
black, accompanied with emptiness and dryness.

The sin of the Church of Sardis was, the resting in a bare and mere name and
show of holy life. A Christian must look after both name and thing. The Prophet
charge the Jews with swearing by the Name of the LORD, Isa. 48.1, 2.
and making mention of the GOD of Israel, but not in truth and righteousness,
with contenting themselves to be called of the holy City, etc. Nor will this
impiety seem small, if we consider either GOD, others, or our selves.

1. The sinfulness hereof appears in respect of God: It pollutes and prophanes
His Name. What greater profanation thereof imaginable, than to put it upon an
unholy, hellish heart: Is it not more insufferable, then to cloth a swine with
the Robes of a Prince, and to put the Crown and Scepter of a King upon the
head, and into the hand of a dunghil-raker? Is any disgrace to an Emperor
greater, then for a base-bornslave to voice himself his son, and heir to his
Crown? This is that pollution of GODS Name, with which GOD charged the people,
Ezekiel. 36.20.

2. In respect of others. It hardens the wicked, who when they see the mere
profession separated from the reality of holiness, applaud themselves, and
think their own estate very blessed, and that Religion is a mere notion and
nullity, deride also at it, as did the Heathens at those hypocritical
Israelites: These are (said they) the people of the Lord, and are gone forth of
his Land. q. d. These are your Saints, your Israelites, that came out of the
holy Land: And what more damps the goodness of young beginners, than the
falsenesse and emptiness of those who have made great shows of forwardness in
holiness? thereby, one Hypocrite more pulling them back, than an hundred
sincere ones can put them forward. At the best they set up, their staff before
they are gone half way, and are made like the people, who seeing the body of
Amasa lie dead by the way side, stood still. In short, what are these bare
pretenders to holiness, but deluders of others, gins, and pitfalls in
Religion, dunghils covered over with snow, reeds that run into the arms of
those who lean upon them, and such who do not only by their faithlesseness
(often) deceive and gull those who trust them with their estates and worldly
concernments, but also much more dangerously misguide and delude the souls of
those who follow their empty doctrines, and crooked lives?

But 3. The greatness of this sin appears, principally by considering them who
ve in it. For 1. All their glorious appearances are purely unprofitable unto
them. Thereport of a man's being wealthy, adds nothing to his estate, or that of
full feeding to one who is hungerstarved. God tells the hyocritical Jews, that
they trusted in lying words, Jer. 7.8.
when they only trusted to their outside shows, I will declare thy
righteousness, and thy works (said God to that false-hearted people) and they
shall not profit thee, Isa. 57.12. 2. Shows, without reality of holiness, are
very hurtful. 1. Appearing goodness makes men furthest from being and
becoming really good. Religion is a very serious, real business; yea, its
very reality, and called in Scripture, Truth it self: As the privileges, so
the practices of godliness are indeed and in Truth, and by nothing so much
opposed, as shadows and falsnesse. 2. They who please themselves with
appearances will never labor for the reality of holiness, nor truth in the
inward parts; they are seldom reproved by others, nor is it so easy to fasten
a reproof upon them, as upon those who are void of all shows of Religion; and
so they go on in a miserable quietness, and uninterruptednesse to their own
destruction. 3. They who barely appear holy, are of all others the most
impudent, not blushing to be accounted such as their own consciences tell them
they are far from being. Naomi was ashamed of her self, when the men of
Bethlehem said, Is not this Naomi? Call me not (said she) Naomi, call me Marah,
for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me. Ruth. 1.20. But these say,
call us Christians, though they are no better than heathens; call us Saints,
though they are inwardly but rotten Sepulchers: Account us to be in the highest
form of Religion, though they have not (as yet) stepped over the threshold of
Religon's School. Esteem us to be full, although we be altogether empty. True
saints are ashamed of commendation, though they be full of worth: hypocrites
glory in being commended, though they have nothing in them commendable. When
men have not the thing, its most unreasonable that they should have the name.
When God gave Abram the name of Abraham, he told him there was a reason why he
should be called by that name, Genesis 17.5.
Thy Name shall be called Abrabam, for a father of many Nations, have I made
thee. Abigail said concerning her Husband, As his name is, so is he, Nabal is
his name, and folly is with him; and if Christians be our name, true
Christianity should be with us. Lastly, such clouds without water, appearing
Professors, render themselves, of all others, most inexcusable. If Religion
were bad, why did they so much as profess it; if good, why did they not more,
even love it also? If they took upon themselves, the title and trade of Gods
servants, why would they not do his work? If God be a master, where is his
fear; if a father, where is his honor? If they would not be his servants, why
would they be called so? If they would be called his servants, why would they
not be so? how fearful should we then be, of putting our souls off, with
shadows of goodness! Labor for that truth in the inward parts, which all the
expressions of the outward man are not able to reach; and remember that
hereafter, all paint must fall off, which was not laid in the oil of
sincerity; and Hypocrites shall be discovered and unmasked both to their own
consciences, and the judgments of all others.

9. The empty are also unstable. Observe. 9.
These clouds without water, are by the Apostle said to be carried about of the
winds. The Apostle 2 Pet. 3.16. joins the unlearned and unstable together; and
Heb. 13.9. he mentions the establishment of the heart with grace. A heart
(then) empty of saving knowledge, and true holiness is soon unsettled; and needs
must it be so, being not firmly united to, and set into Christ by faith;
unbelief and distrust, make a man carried up and down like a Meteor. He who is
not built upon the Rock, can never stand: if a Reed be not tied to some
stronger thing, it can never be kept from bending and shaking; where grace the
fruit is not, there Christ the root is not; and where there is no root, there
is no stability. Further, where there is a total emptiness of holiness, there
is an emptiness of peace and contentment; there is no peace to the wicked. And
he who wants true contentment, will ever be looking out for it, (...).
where it is not to be had; without joy life is no life, and if it be not
gotten one way, another will be tried: Who will show us any good, is the
language of natural men? they have still hopes to be better; and like men in a
Fever, they toss from one side of the bad to the other, in hope to find
coolness and refreshment; but a soul that exercises it self in the ways of
holiness, tells every temptation. You would draw me away to my lose: 2 Cor.
7.32, 35 Cor non tutum, nisi totum. Scinditur in certum studia in contraria.
Yet again, a heart void of grace is divided in the service of God, and
therefore an unsettled heart; it is not united to fear Gods Name; it serves not
the Lord without distraction; all of its love, fear, joy, runs not one way, but
having inclinations not wholly bestowed upon God, and several ways of the
hearts out-going from God being allowed, its never safe and certain; when the
scales are even in weight, they tremble, and waver, sometime one is up,
sometime another; they who will serve two Masters, God and the creature, and
are double-minded, and will divide their hearts between them, will often be
wavering, and show themselves sometimes for Religion, sometime for the world;
grace fixes, and weighs down the heart for God and to God, and chooses him
only. Here Is the true Reason then (in the general) why men are so tossed and
carried away from the truth of the Gospel, they are empty of the truth of
grace; they go from us, because they were never of us; they are a Land-flood, a
Cistern only, receiving from without, and void of an inward living principle
and fountain.

10. Observe. 10.
Christians should beware of unstedfastness, of being carried away with any
winds, from their holy stedfastness in the truth. Continue in the things which
you have learned, 2 Timothy 3.14. Be not as children tossed to and fro with every
wind of doctrine. To this end, 1. Let the Word of Christ ballast your souls;
store them with the knowledge of saving Principles of Religion. Empty
Table-books are fit to have any thing written in them, and a soul empty of the
knowledge of wholesome truths, is a fit receptacle for any error. Do ye not err,
(says Christ) because ye know not the Scriptures, Mat. 22.29. Stones will
easily be removed, unless fixed upon a foundation. He who buys commodities
without either weighing or measuring them, may easily be deceived, the
Scripture is the measure and balance of every opinion. How easily may he be
cheated with Errors in stead of truth, who buys only in the dark? Ignoran^
Christians are like Infants which gape, and take in whatsoever the Nurse puts
to their mouths. 2. Labor to get your hearts fastened to the truth, by love, as
well as your heads filled with the truth, by light; he who never loved truth,
may easily be brought to leave truth, and to embrace error. He who embraced
truth he knew not why, will forsake it, he knows not how; the heart which has
continued deceitful under truth, may soon be deceived by error; a literal,
without an experimental knowledge of the truth, may quickly be drawn to error
from that wherein we find neither pleasure nor profit, we may easily be
enticed. But when once we feel the truth both enlightening and delighting,
unloading its treasures of glory into our souls quieting our consciences,
quelling our lusts, changing us into the Image of the Lord, quickening our
graces; Seducers will not be able to cheat us of this Jewel, because we know
they can bring us nothing in exchange, for which we should barter it away. 3.
Let there not be any one lust * (...). Theoph, in Romans 16.
allowed within thee, to loosen thee from the truth. They who are not sound in
the fear of God, may easily become unsound in the faith of God. A remiss heart
will close with remiss principles. The mystery of Faith must be held in a good
conscience, 1 Timothy 1.9.
which some (says the Apostle) having cast away, have made shipwreck of the
faith: he comparing conscience to a ship, and faith to a treasure therein
embarked, which must needs miscarry, if the ship be cast away; any corrupt
affection entertained, the soul like an unwalled, and unfenced City, lies open
to the rage and rapine of, and ruin by any enemy. If Seducers suit their bait
to the unmortified lust of a sinner, Prove. 25.8.
he is easily made their prey. Of this at large before. Particularly, beware of
Pride, the proud Christian, Page 615, 616 617, part 1.
like a light puffed bladder, will easily be puffed any way of Error; a Bird of a
very small carcass, and of many Feathers, is easily carried away with the wind;
Pride is the mother of Heresy; the proud man it is, who consents not to
wholesome Doctrine, but dotes about questions, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. Humility is the
best fence against Error; an humble man is so small, in his own eyes, that the
shot of Seducers cannot hit him; and lies so low, that all their Bullets fly
over him. God teaches the humble, but the proud person is Satan's Scholar. 2.
Fence thy soul against worldly mindedness; a worldly heart will be bought and
sold at every rate. The truth can never be safe in the closet of that heart,
which Error can open with a golden picklock. The covetous both make merchandise
of others, 2 Pet. 2.13, 14.
and will be made merchandise by others: The hook of error, is easily swallowed
down by a worldly heart, if it be baited with (though filthy) lucre. Take heed
of being a servant of truth, Fraus and malitia haereticorum vel dolend a est
tanquam hominum, vel cavenda est, tanquam haereticorum, vel irridenda tanquam
imperitorum. Aug.
for gain, for (if so) thou will soon be a slave unto error, for more gain. 3.
Keep out of the wind of seducing Doctors, and their Doctrines. Mark them who
cause divisions, and avoid them, Romans 16.17. If it be dangerous to be tempted
by, what is it then to be tempters of the Devil. Turn away from such as creep
into houses, and lead souls captives 2. Tim. 3.5, 6. Eat not of the banquets of
him who has been found out, to mix poison in his dishes; let holy Zeal (in
this respect) hinder Civility. Vt fallacius incautis ovibus obrepant, manente
luporum ferocia, deponunt lupinam speciem sese divinae legis sententiis velut
quibusdam velleribus obvolvunt, ut cum quisque lan^rum mollitiem persenserit,
nequaquam acul^os dent^um pertimescat. Vinc. Lyr. cap. 36. Polycarpus Marcioni
aliquando occurrenti sibi, and dicenti, cognosce nos; respondit, cognosco te
primogenitum Satanae. Tantum Apostoli and horum Discipuli babuerunt timorem, ut
neque verbo tenu^ communicarent alicui ^crum, qui adulteraverant veritatem.
Iren. l. 3. c. 3. page mihi 171.
If these Seducers come to you, yet neither teceive them into your houses, nor
bid them God speed. Shun the meeting places of Error as the Schools of impiety.
Beware of false Prophets, who put on a sheepskin-profession over a woolvish
purpose, Deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13. The Devil never deceives in his own likeness. Feed not
like silly sheep upon rotten grass, because its sweet and lussious. Polycarp
would entertain no acquaintance with Marcion, but termed him the first born of
the Devil; and (as Irenaeus tells the Apostles and their Disciples) were so
full of holy fear, that they would not communicate with Heretics in the world,
who had adulterated the word. Let not Satan take us among his own, lest he make
us of his own. Of these things see more, page 266, 267. Part 1.

Thus much for that second comparison, whereby the Apostle describes the sin
and misery of these Seducers; viz, Clouds without water, etc. The third
follows in these words, Trees whose fruit withers; without fruitt twice
dead, plucked up by the roots.

Two things, principally, are here considerable, in this Resemblance taken from
bad and corrupt trees.

Their badness in consideration 1. Of their fruits. 2. Of the trees themselves.

1 In consideration of their fruits; so our Apostle expresses.

1. The decay and withering of their fruits; whose fruit withers.

2 Their cessation from, and privation of their fruit; their fruit was none;
without fruit.

2 Their badness, in consideration of themselves, the trees, which 1 Were
irrecoverably dead; twice dead. 2. Deservedly therefore plucked up by the roots

EXPLICATION.
So that four particulars, we shall here explain in this similitude borrowed
from bad trees; the lost estate and the Spiritual misery of these Seducers
being set down by a fourfold gradation, or by four steps, each one arising up
to a further degree and height of wretchedness then the other; and the lower
making way for the higher.

1. When they seemed to have fruit, at the best, it was decaying, withering.

2 This withering fruit, proved no fruit; without fruit.

3 This ceasing from fruit, or this no fruit was joined with a total want of
life in the trees, ever to produce any more fruit; twice dead.

4 This total want of life made an easy way for the loss of place and ground
to continue in.

1. For the first, The Apostle says, that they were Trees whose fruit
withers. The word whereby he expresses it, is (...), which according to the
different apprehensions of Interpreters, has several interpretations affixed
to it. The Vulgar Latin renders it Autumnales, Autumn-trees, or trees of
Autumn; from (...), which (sometimes) signifies Autumn; and such trees (say
some) the Apostle calls these Seducers, because when trees at that time of the
year, begin to put forth, and make show of bearing fruit, they bring not their
fruit to perfect maturity (it being too late in the year) and men judge it to be
a sign that the trees themselves also are withering, and shortly after will
dye. Others (rather explaining then opposing this Interpretation) conceive that
these words, (...), intend Arbores ultimi, finientis, extremi, senescentis
Autumni, trees of the latter end of Autumn, or that part which is next to
Winter, because (...) properly signifies, the ending, far spent Autumn, it
being called so, (...), a finiente Autumno, from the going out, or wasting away
of Autumn; and this (say they) may be the meaning of the Apostle, that as at
the end of Autumn (toward the beginning of November) the fruit and leaves of
trees fall off, and the trees themselves seem to wither and dye; so these
Seducers (what show soever they made formerly) were at last empty and
destitute, not only of Fruit, all true worth and goodness; but also even of all
shows, shadows, and appearances thereof; but this seems rather to be intended
in the last branch, Plucked up by the roots. Others think, that by (...), the
Apostle means, Arbores frugiperdas, such as spoil and destroy fruit ((...),
which they make to be the same with (...)) as if the Apostle had intended that
these Seducers aimed by all they did and brought forth, only to corrupt and
spoil the Church, even as fruit being rotten and putrified, easily corrupts and
infects that fruit which lies near it: but this seems not to be an apt
beginning to that following gradation, of their being without fruit; it being
worse to hurt others, then not to be good our selves. Others conceive that the
word (...), respects not (here) that time of the year which we call Autumn, but
only the nature of the fruit, which these trees brought forth; namely, such as
are withered, and altogether unprofitable, as if these trees were called,
(...), or (...), as bringing forth no fruit, but what was corrupt and withered;
the Apostle hereby intending, that though these Seducers seem to promise and
make a show of good and whosom fruit, yet they wanting that vitalis succus, the
vital moisture, and inward vigor of faith, could bring nothing forth to
maturity and perfection, but all their fruits were withered and corrupt. This
Interpretation of the withering and corruptness of their fruit, I conceive most
genuine and suitable to the scope of the Apostle; though he should (as many
Learned men think he does) compare these Seducers to Autumn*trees, the fruit of
such trees being (mostly) but withered and immature, and not coming to its
perfection.

More particularly, two things are here further to be opened.

1. What that fruit was, which these Seducers might have; and what kind of
fruits these Trees might bear.

2 What was the withering of that fruit.

1. For the First. That fruit which they might bear.

There are three sorts of Metaphorical fruits, mentioned in Scripture, which
men compared to trees, are said to yield.

1. The fruits of the Sanctifying Spirit of God (Graces and Works) brought
forth in the hearts and lives of the Saints; called fruits, because they come
from the Spirit of God, as fruit from the tree, and are as pleasing to him as
the pleasantest fruit is to us. Thus we read of the fruits of the Spirit, Gal.
5.22. and Fruits of Righteousness, Phil. 1.11. Fruits meet for Repentance,
Matthew. 3.8. All comprehended by Paul, Ephesians. 5.9. where he says, The fruit of
the Spirit is in all Goodness, Righteousness, Truth. Goodness, being that
quality, contrary to Malice or naughtiness, whereby a sinner is evil in
himself, Righteousness opposed to Injustice, whereby one is hurtful and
injurious to others. Truth opposed to Errors, Heresies, Hypocrisy, etc.

3 There are fruits which in themselves and their own nature, are bitter,
corrupt, poysonful, put forth not only by a corrupt tree, but by it, as such,
evil propter fieri in themselves and their own nature; such fruits by which the
false Prophets were known, and whereby men may be known to be wicked men,
Grapes of Gall and bitter clusters, Deuteronomy. 32.32. Such works of the flesh as
Paul mentions, Gal. 5.19. Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Laesciviousness,
Idolatry, Witcheraft, Hatred, etc.

3 There are other fruits which are not evil in themselves, unlawful or
intrinsecally evil in their own substance and nature, propter esse and fieri,
because they are, or are done: but because they grow upon such trees, by reason
whereof, something which should make the production of them good, is omitted,
and sundry deffects cleave unto them, and they have evil cast upon them by the
agent.

And sundry fruits of this sort and rank there may be upon such trees as Jude
speaks of. As

1 The Fruits of gifts, parts, and abilities in matters of Religion, as
preaching, praying, utterance; of these speaks Christ, Matthew. 7.22. Many shall
say in that day, Lord, have we not Prophesied etc. And 1 Cor. 12.1. they are
called Spiritual Gifts, wrought by the Spirit; but are not Sanctificantia, but
Ministrantia; not so sanctifying him in whom; but helping those for whom they
are; as a rich man may bestow good and dainty diet upon a poor woman that
nurseth his child, not for her own sake, but that his child may suck good milk
from her; such fruits as these (indeed) may beautify Grace, but yet Grace must
sanctify them. These may make us profitable to men, not acceptable to God:

2 The second sort of these fruits, which these trees might bear, is a
temporary faith, O^thodox, or sound judgment, assent to that which is the very
Truth of Gods Word; that there is a God, infinite in all his glorious
Perfections; that there are three Persons; that Christ was God and man etc. and
that all who believe in him shall be saved. Thus some unconverted are said to
believe for a while, Luke 8.13. thus Simon Magus, and Demas believed; these
fruits are good in their kind, and without them there can be no holiness of
life, nor happiness after death, and yet they are not good enough, they not
purifying the heart, but only perfecting the understanding; they being poured
only on the head, not running down like Aarons ointment to the heart and other
parts: though making a man Protestant in doctrine, yet leaving him to be a
recusant in his life, carrying him out to believe the word as faithful, but not
to embrace it as worthy of all acceptance, to shine with light, but not to
burn with, or work by love.

3. A third sort of these fruits might be some heated affections, sweet
motions, receiving the word with joy. a finding some sweetness in the
ordinances: Matthew. 13.20, John 5.35. Matthew. 27.3. 1 Kings 21. Ezekiel. 33.32.
Ezekiel was to his hearers, as a lovely song of one that has a pleasant
voice. They who shall be cast into utter darkness, may for a season rejoice in
the light, and may have sorrow and grief about sin. The Israelites were often
deep in their humiliations; Psalm. 78.4 7.
they sought God and returned, enquired early after God: Ahab humbled himself.
And yet these fruits are not the best, they may spring up from a root not good;
the pleasantness or sadness of the matter of any doctrine, may cause suitable
affections of joy or sorrow; the novelty or rarity of a doctrine, may much
delight; or the dexterity and ability of the deliverer, the sutablenesss of a
clearly discovered truth to a hearers understanding; the apprehension of the
goodness of spiritual things, may stir up some flashing desires; thus they
cried out, Lord, give us ever more this bread; thus Balaam desires to die the
death of the righteous, yea (as some have observed) corrupt lusts in men, such
as pride and selfseeking, may produce great affections in holy duties: The
desire of applause may make men in public administrations enlarged in their
affections. The more excellent a Prayer or Sermon is, the more carnal the heart
of the performer may be; the stronger the invention is, the weaker the grace
may be; and as ground full of mines of Gold, is often barren of grass, so a
heart full of grace may, it may be barren of the ornaments of words and
expressions.

4. A fourth sort of fruits born even by these (afterward) apostates, might be
external appearances of conformity to the Law of God, in avoiding of all open
and scandalous courses, and in performing the visible and outside acts of
obedience: Thus the Pharisee was not an Extortioner, unjust, an Adulterer.
Paul, Matthew, 18.11. Phil. 3.
touching the law, was blameless: the young man professed he had kept the Law
(in the letter of it) from his youth. The Pharisees paid Tithes exactly,
abhorred idolatry, made long prayers and frequent, were strict in the outward
observation of the Sabbath, professed chastity, temperance etc. Thus it is said
of these very Apostates, that they had escaped the pollutions of the world, 2
Pet. 2.20. and 22. that they had been washed: And these fruits of outward
conformity to the Law of God, are highly commendable; sincerity of grace can
neither be, nor be known without them: by them it resolves (as Elijah said) to
show it self; they are commanded by God, 1 King. 18.15.
who (though he commands not the godly to fulfill the Law perfectly, yet)
permits them not to break it wilfully: and though by the presence of external
obedience, we cannot conclude salvation, yet by the absence thereof we may
conclude damnation to follow; these honor God, benefit others. Though our
righteousness satisfies not justice, yet in our unrighteousness we cannot be
saved without injustice; nor is any man called a good man for the good which he
has, but the good which he does: outward obedience strengthens true grace
where it is, and is necessary to preserve a justified estate, though not as
deserving it, yet as removing that which would destroy it. And yet all these
fruits, the acts of external obedience, are not the best; they may be a shape
without a soul: appearances without an inward principle of life, they might be
with a despising of the righteousness of Christ; they might be performed only
for want of tentations to the contrary: Gods glory might never be aimed at, in
the performing them, as their end, nor his Word eyed as their Rule. These
things commanded by God, might be done in obedience to lust.

Briefly for the second, what was the withering of their fruits.

1. deformity and unpleasantnesse to the eye, and their sowrnesse, and
unsavourinesse to the taste of God. The fruits of righteousness are only
pleasant fruits, and the trees of righteousness only pleasant plants. A
withered Apple is not sweet and delightful: The best performances which grow
upon a wicked man, are not acceptable as they come from him: goodness of being
is before that of working. The tree must be good, before the fruit can be
pleasant; Vid. ante part. 2. page.
They who are in the flesh cannot please God. The meanest duty of a saint is
more amiable than the most gilded performance of a sinner: The stammering of a
child is more pleasing to a Parent, then the best Oratory of a beggar. Deuteronomy.
32.32.
If the vine be a vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrha, the grapes will
be grapes of gall, and the Clusters bitter.

2. This fruit might be said be to withered fruit, for ceasing to grow bigger,
and not proceeding to perfection.

Withering fruit grows not, and these stood at a stay, their fruit found no new
degrees; their faith went not from Assent to Adherence, and from thence to
Assurance; They brought not forth fruit to perfection, Luke 8.14.

They added nothing to that which was lacking; they did not abound more and
more in the Work of the LORD. Ephesians. 6.18. Rev. 2.9.
Their last Works were not more then their first. They soon knew an enough in
Christianity. They did not press forward toward the mark; nor were they like
the Sun, rejoicing to run its course, Phil. 3.13.
and increasing more and more to the perfect day. They went not from strength
to strength, Psalm. 84.
nor studied exactness in Christianity. Most love to excel in every thing,
more than in that which is true excellency, though they think that abundance of
wealth is but a little, yet they live as if a little Godliness were enough.
They have their maximum quod sic, beyond which they move not, and say of
spiritual good things, as Dives of his temporalls, Soul take thine ease, thou
have much goods laid up for many years. They desire not to have more cubits
added to their stature. He who has only a form of godliness, and is but the
picture of a Christian, not having the life thereof, will never grow; he is
still upon the same hinges where he was; he goes on in a Circle of duties,
prays, hears, etc. as he did of old.

3. Their fruit might be called withering, as it decayed, languisht, and grew
less and less.

They were so far from obtaining that grace which they wanted, that they did
not retain that grace which they had, they lost their first love, and grew
worse and worse; they were so far from getting more that they kept not what
they had already gotten. They did not so much stand at a stay as go b^ckward;
the bitterest of their life was in the bottom thereof. The sap of abilities
which once they had, now decayed: All life in holy duties and speeches was
withdrawn; yea, their leaves fell off; they could not speak of holy things with
so much holy savor as they were wont. God withdrew his Spirit from them: Thus
the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and all his gifts vanished: And
indeed, this follows upon the former, where there is no increasing; there is
some decaying; while we neglect to gain, we spend upon the stock. The Boat
which is going up a river, that runs with a strong current, falls down the
stream, if the Oars rest but never so little: Decays in spirituals deserve
most of our pity. It Is not so uncomfortable to see a man decay in his health or
estate, as in his grace, and to lose heavenward, to lose his first love, to
decline from God.

4. (As the cause of all the former) Their fruit was like withered fruit, as it
wanted spiritual life, juice and nourishment from the tree to feed and supply
it: They had not spiritual life, and therefore had not spiritual growth, and
had spiritual decays. Only to them who have, is more given. There is no
growing where there is not a living. If a snow-ball be rolled up and down, and
thereby made bigger, yet it does not grow, John. 15.5.
because it is by extra-addition, not by intrareception. A vital Principle is
the foundation of growth, either natural or spiritual: He that abides in me
and I in him, (says Christ) the same brings forth much fruit; for without
me, (or severed from me) ye can do nothing. The picture of a child will never
come up to be a man, because in it there is no life. They who only have a name
of Christianity, and receive not efficacy and power from Christ, Ephesians. 2.10.
are as withered fruit, without union to, and life from him, there being no
Christian increase. We are Gods Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good
works. Till the Spirit of God be put into us, there is no walking, or proceeding
in his ways, Ezekiel. 36.27.

This for the opening of the first gradation, whereby the Appostle sets forth
the loss of these Seducers, they were trees whose fruit withered.

The second is contained in this word, 2 Branch of Explicat.
(...), without fruit.

But how can the Apostle say here, that they were without fruit, when in the
foregoing words he had said, that they had withering fruit?

1. Possibly, he may here in these words represent them, as having cast and
lost their withering fruit. We know, fruit that withers, quickly and easily
falls off, from the tree; trees which have withering fruit, will soon be
without fruit. We wanting that which only can make us good for the kind, a
good root, and a renewed Principle of life, must needs want that which should
make us good for continuance, namely internalness and sincerity. Out of Christ
there can be no perseverance, only union to him makes us permanently holy: And
its most just with God, that they who would not bear better then, should not
bear so much as withering fruit, that they should cast off the very appearances
of fruit, and even their outside-profession; that they who never regarded the
truth and reality of holiness, should from hypocrisy fall to profaneness,
and from a bare form of godliness to ungodliness; and from paint to
deformity. But this open and plain discovery of their hypocrisy, I rather
conceive is contained in the last branch of the verse, in these Words, plucked
up by the roots.

2 Therefore I understand, with Reverend Mr. Perkins, and others, that these
words, without fruit, are (as it were) a correction of the former, as if the
Apostle had said, they are trees whose fruit withers, or rather without fruit
altogether, the fruit which they bear, not deserving so much as the name of
fruit; as trees that bear no other then withering fruit, are esteemed no better
then unfruitful trees; and thus notwithstanding their withering fruit, they
may be said to be without fruit in sundry respects.

1. They were without fruit, in regard that all their forementioned fruits,
were not produced by the inward life and vigor of the spirit of sanctification
in their souls; Their fruit grew upon a corrupt tree, and proceeded from an
unclean bitter root: They were not the issues of a pure heart, and faith
unfaigned, but the streams of an unclean fountain. The fruitfulness only of
slow-bushes, Crab-trees, and brambles, cannot make the year be accounted a
fruitful year. A corrupt tree (says Christ) cannot bring forth good fruit,
Mat. 7.18. How can ye that are evil speak good things? Mar. 12.24
Their best fruits were but fruits of nature, coming from an unregenerated
heart. That fruit which before his conversion Paul accounted as precious as
gold, he after esteemed as base as dung.

2. They were without fruit, in regard their fruits were not brought forth to a
Divine end; they were directed to no higher an end then selves. Riv. in loc.
Israel (says God) is an empty Vine, though bringing forth fruit; for (it
follows) he brings forth fruit to himself.

I am not ignorant, that some Interpreters expound not that Text concerning the
fruit of works, though yet they grant, the place may be by consequence drawn to
take in them, likewise. As these fruits were not fruits of righteousness,
Phil. 1.11.
so neither were they to the praise of his glory.

If thou will return, O Israel (says God) return to me Jer. 4.1. They
returned, (says the Psalmist) but not to the most high. The pipe cannot convey
the water higher than is the fountain head from whence it comes, and these
fruits being not from God, were not directed to him.

Fruits brought forth to our selves, are rotten at the core; they are not for
his taste who both looks into, and tries the heart.

3. They might be without fruit, as not producing works in obedience to the
Rule. The doing of the thing commanded may possibly be an act of disobedience.
God looks upon all our works as nothing, unless we do the thing commanded,
because it is commanded. This only is to serve him for conscience sake. A man
may do a good work out of his obedience to his lust As its possible for a man
to believe, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18
not because of Divine Revelation, so is it possible for a man to work and not
upon the ground of Divine injunction. Be not unwise, but understand (says the
Apostle) what is the will of God, Ephesians. 5.17. Man's wisdom is to understand and
follow Gods will.

4. Without fruit as to their own benefit, comfort, and salvation. The works of
Hypocrites are not ordained by God to have heaven follow them; at the last day
all they had, or did, will appear to be nothing; and when the Sun shall arise,
then the works which here have shined like glowworms, shall appear unglorious
and unbeautiful; of all that has been sown to the flesh, shall nothing be
reaped but corruption; God crowns no works but his own; nor will Christ own any
works, but those which have been brought forth by the power of his own Spirit.

5. Lastly, Without the fruit of any goodness in Gods account, because without
love to God. 1 Cor. 13.
Love is the sweetness of our services. If I have not love (says Paul) I am
nothing: and as true is it, without it I can do nothing; the gift of an enemy,
is a gift, and no gift. As love from God is the top of our happiness, so love
to God is the sum of our duty. There is nothing beside love, but an Hypocrite
may give to God, with Gods people: it is the kernel of every performance; God
regards nothing we give him, unless we give our selves also; Its love which
makes a service, please both the master and servant. Now wicked men in all they
bring forth, though they may have bounty in the hand, yet have no love in the
heart, they have not a drop of love, in a Sea of service.

This for the Explication of the second aggravation, or gradation, of the sin
and misery of these Seducers: they were without fruit. third follows, in these
words; twice dead.

These words, I take to express a further degree of their spiritual
wretchedness, under the continued Metaphor of Trees. 'Twas bad to have
withering fruit, worse to have no fruit at all; worse yet, to be not only
without all fruit, but even altogether without life; twice dead.

Two things are here to be explained.

1. In what respect these trees may be said to be dead. 2. How to be twice
dead.
For the first. Death is 1. Temporal, and Corporal; that which is a privation
of life, by the departure of the soul from the body.

2. Spiritual, befalling either the godly, or the wicked. 1. The godly are said
to be dead spiritually, three ways. 1. Dead to sin, Romans 6.2. 1 Pet. 2.24. the
corruption of their natures being by the Spirit of Christ subdued and
destroyed. 2. Dead in respect of the Law Ceremonial, Col. 2.20. (dead with
Christ from the rudiments of the world.) Moral, Gal. 2.19. So Paul says, he
was dead to the Law, and Romans 7.4. Ye are dead to the Law, it being not able to
make them guilty who are in Christ, nor to terrify their consciences, nor to
irritate them to sin. 3. Dead to the world, Gal. 6.4. so Paul was crucified to
the world, either because the World contemned and despised him as a dead man;
or else, because the world had no more power, to entice and allure him from
Christ, then the objects of the senses have to work upon a dead man. 2.
Spiritual death befalls the wicked and unregenerate, they being without the
Spirit of Christ to animate and quicken them, which Spirit enlivens the soul
supernaturally, as the soul does the body naturally; hence they are said to be
dead in sins, Ephesians. 2.1.5. Col. 2.13. and dead, Mat. 8.22. Luke 9.60. Romans 6.13.
Joh. 5.25. and to remain in death. 1 John 3.14. Their works (hence) are said to
be dead, Hebr. 9.14. As the immortality of the damned, is no life, but an
eternal death; so the conjunction of the souls and bodies of wicked men, is
not properly life, but umbratilis vita, a shadow of life, or rather a very
death, they being without spiritual feeding, growth, working, all vital
operations, and lying under the deformity, loathsomness, insensibleness, (in a
spiritual sense) of such as are dead; or (according to the resemblance here
used by our Apostle, which is, that of trees dead) they are spiritually dead,
because without, and severed from that root of every good tree, the Lord
Christ. The old Adam is the root upon which they still stand, and therefore
they are without all spiritual and supernatural life; as from the root flows
life into all the branches of the tree, so from Christ, all who are united to
him by the Spirit through Faith, have (by those means) the life of holiness
derived unto them; as in Adam, the first root who has now lost the moisture
and vigor of holiness, and is become a dried root, all die; so in Christ shall
all (and only) they who are really united to him live. Hence it is, that as
they are without the root, and therefore without life, so without all spiritual
growth and fruitfulness; the inward principle of life being wanting, needs must
the effects that flow from that principle (all vital operations) be wanting
likewise; for though abiding, John 15.5.
and living by Christ, we bring forth much fruit; yet severed from him, we can
do nothing. It is true, that as the wicked have something from Christ like the
Spirit of life, Heb. 6.4. 1 Cor. 12.6, 7.
so thereby they bring forth something like to good and spiritual fruits; I
mean, those forementioned fruits of gifts, assent to the truth, sweet
affections, acts of external obedience: but though in the producing of these,
the Spirit helps them, yet it never changes the nature of the trees, but they
still retain the natural sowrness of their roots; and though God gives them the
Spirit to edify others, yet not to sanctify themselves; though Saul had
another spirit; and sundry ( Matthew. 7.) did prophecy, and cast out Devils; yet
all these were but works of ministration, not renovation; though the Spirit
works as an outward efficient cause, breathing on them; and is in them as in
Organis, Instruments, and Ministers, yet not as in domiciliis, as in
habitations and Members; for as the soul works not as a form to any part, that
is not united to the body; so neither does the Spirit of Christ work savingly,
but in the body of Christ. In the wicked it may be spiritus movens, a moving
spirit: in the godly, it is only spiritus inhabitans, an inhabiting, indwelling
Spirit. The Spirit of God in an Hypocrire, is like an Angel appearing in some
outward shape; of which he is only an assisting, not an informing form; for
which cause, his assumed body has neither life, nor nourishment; but the
Spirit of God in the godly, is like the soul in the body, not only assisting,
but informing, and working in them spiritually vital, and supernatural
operations. And notwithstanding the best workings of the Spirit of God in the
wicked, they are often left, more fleshly, self-confident, less poor in Spirit,
and sensible of their want of Christ then before. And thus these Seducers were
spiritually dead. Or 3. Death is eternal, the effect of the former: which
eternal death is that most miserable condition of the Reprobate after death;
wherein they are deprived of all the blessedness and glory of heaven, standing
in the enjoyment and unitive vision of God; Visi^ unitiv^.
It Is (indeed) the spiritual death continued and perfected. As in heaven, or
eternal life, in the enjoyment of God by Christ, is begun in this life, and
completedin the next; so is hell or eternal death in the loss of God, begun in
this, and consummate in the next world. The presence of God is the heaven of
heaven, the joy of heaven, the life of heaven, and of all who shall come
thither.

2. second, In what respect these Seducers may be said to be twice dead.

The word twice ( Gr. (...),) is taken two ways; sometimes indefinitly, or as
a definite put for an indefinite, a certain for an uncertain number. (...), as
Job 33.14.
Thus Job 33.14. God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not. That
is, God does by his gracious ways and means sufficiently, abundantly, and
frequently acquaint man with his will, although man be so stupid and senseless,
as not to understand what the meaning of God is therein. So Psalm. 62.11. God
has spoken once, twice have I heard this, that power belongs to God; that
is, God has abundantly, often, several times, or sundry ways by his Word, and
works asserted, and discovered, that he is eminently and transcendently
powerful. Thus the Apostle commands, That the Elders that rule well, 1 Timothy
1.17.
should be accounted worthy duplici, that is, multiplici honor, double, much,
manifold honor: So the Prophet prays, Jer. 17.18. that his enemies may be
destroyed with a double destruction, i. e. with a severe, through, total
destruction; so 2 Kings 2.9. Elisha desired that a double portion, that is, a
large, abundant portion of the Spirit might be upon him. Thus some take the
word (twice) in this place, as if by the signification of the very word, the
Apostle intended, that these dead trees were finally dead, and past all hopes
of recovery, such as could never be bettered by all the pains and cost,
digging, dunging, etc. that could be laid out upon them. That our Apostle here
intends, that these Seducers were like Trees irrecoverably, and totally dead, I
easily grant; but withal because trees may be said to be twice dead, in
respect of their very dying twice, or a second time; this word twice, seems to
import in this place, a definite certain number, and to intend a double or
twofold death of these Seducers; who are here compared to trees in their dying
twice, as well as in all the other three respects, viz. Their having withered
fruit; their being without fruit; and being plucked up by the roots.

Trees then, are said to be twice dead, thus; the first time, a tree is said be
dead, when in the former spring it decays, fades, withers in its leaves,
blossoms, or newly formed fruit: from this decaying or dying (for a dying it
is, as to leaves and fruit) a tree is often by pruning and dressing recovered;
but if in autumn or the later spring, which is the critical or climacterial
time of Trees to discover whether their disease be mortal or not, the tree
fades again; if then the leaves, or what ever it bears, wither, the rine grow
dry, and it be (as they say) sick, the fault is then ab intra, the root is
rotten, and the very substance of the tree is inwardly corrupt and putrified,
no more labor or cost is now bestowed upon it, its now dead twice, or the
second time, and therefore totally and irrecoverably; and (as I have understood
from those who are exactly skilled in the nature of trees) it has been often
known, that trees which have seemed to die in the former spring, have afterward
been recovered; but never did they know that any languishing in the former
spring; and then after some overtures of reviving in the later spring, fading
and decaying again, ever were recovered and restored afterward. In like manner,
these seducers of whom Jude speaks, had a double death, or were twice dead,
first they were dead in respect of their natural condition, by being (as are
others) born in sin, and so (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2.1) dead in sin;
from this they were so far recovered, as that they seemed to live and (as Peter
speaks, 2 Pet. 2.20.) to have escaped the pollutions, of the world; and by
visible profession to flourish, and to give fair hopes of bearing good fruit:
notwithstanding this first death, they were not given over as irrecoverable,
but their later death which was by Apostasy from the faith of Christ, by
reintangling themselves in the pollutions of the world, and returning to their
vomit and wallowing in the mire, brought them into such a hopeless deplorable
condition, that our Apostle no more expected their recovery, then the restoring
of a tree dead twice, or the second time.

Indeed there is an Apostasy of impotency of affection, and prevalency of lust,
a recidivation or relapse into a former sinful condition, out of
forgetfulness and falsenesse of heart, for want of the fear of God, to
balance the conscience, and to fix and unite the heart to him. This was the
frequent sin of Israel in breaking their Covenants, Psalm. 106.7, 8 9, 12, 13.
and this falling from our first love, and returning again to folly, though it
be exceeding dangerous, yet God is pleased sometimes to forgive and heal it, as
he promises to some, Hos. 14.3. But there is another kind of Apostasy, which
is proud, wilful, stubborn, malicious; and whereby after the taste of the good
word of God, and the powers of the world to come. Men set themselves to hate
and oppose godliness, to do despite to the spirit of grace, to rage against
the word, to trample upon the blood of the Covenant, and when they know the
spiritualness and holiness of Gods ways, the innocence and piety of his
servants, they do yet set themselves against them for that very reason (though
under other pretenses:) This speaking against the Spirit, this opposing,
persecuting the doctrine, worship, ways, servants of Christ; so, as that the
formal motive of malice against them, is the luster and holiness of that
spirit which appears in them; and the formal principle of it, neither
ignorance, nor self ends, but very wilfulness and immediate malignity, is that
daring height of enmity against godliness, which shall never be forgiven in
this world, nor in the world to come; i. e. say some, Matthew. 12.32.
neither in this life by justification, nor in the world to come by public
judiciary absolution; or rather (as others) shall be plagued and punished in
this life, and in that which is to come; In the former spiritually, in the
other eternally; and God leads those who thus offend, forth, with the workers
of iniquity; as cattle are led to slaughter, or malefacters to execution. And
hence it was that Peter, Epist 2 2 20. said, their later end is worse then
their beginning, and that it had been better for them not to have known the way
of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandments delivered to them. Nor is the irrecoverablenesse of such
backsliders any wonder. 1. This their Apostasy in the formal nature of it, is
qu^t^ contrary to faith and repentance: John 6.37.
by faith we come to Christ, cleave to him, prize Christ as infinitely precious
but by this apostasy, we draw back, depart from him, let him go, vilify, set
him at naught, and after covenant entered into with God, fling up the bargain,
and deal with our sins, as the Israelites did with their servants, dismiss
them, and then take them again; and (in a word) so repent of our former, that
our heart is incurably hardened against future repentance: Luke 12.47.
2. And further, such of all sinners most provoke God to beat them with many
stripes; a much sorer punishment do they deserve, then did those who died
without mercy: they sin wittingly and willingly, not out of ignorance, but
against knowledge; not only against light, but love also; and they trampling
upon the blood, and spurning against the bowels of Christ, even mercy it self
becoms their enemy, and pardoning grace frequently tendered, Ex perversa
voluntate facta libido: Dum servitur libidini, facta consuetudo; Dum
consuetudini non resistitur* facta necessitas. Aug. l. 8. Conf c. 5.
and seemingly received, but truly rejected, now condemns them; so that they
cannot sin at so cheap a rate, as they who never had the knowledge of Christ. 3.
Besides, their foreheads are now steeld, and they are made impudent in sin. The
oftener a thief is imprisoned, the less he blusheth: Custom in sin makes the
heart brawny, insensible, and seared as with an hot Iron; lust causes custom,
and custom contracts necessity, and every return to sin, makes the sinner more
unable to resist it. When a disease first meets with a strong constitution, it
finds an enemy to grapple with; as it weakens the body, so the body weakens it,
both their forces spend together one upon another, and they fight upon some
terms of equality. But suppose the body gets the victory, Debilitas ad
resurgendum, in recidivante augmentatur.
and the disease departs, yet if a new adversary, a new sickness soon sets
upon it again, here is great odds; the one is fresh, the other quite out of
heart: it is not now strong enough to bear the means of recovery, but
altogether lies at the diseases mercy. In the first estate of sin, the soul
perhaps did grapple with sin; and if it were foiled, yet, not without
reluctance, it could endure reproof, and suffer the word of exhortation; but
sin returning upon it again, the soul is so weakened, that it makes no
resistance, sin entering as an enemy upon a weakened and depopulated Country.
When Satan returns to his house (says Christ) he finds it empty, that is,
empty of the Spirit of God, and the power thereof, Matthew. 12 44.
which might oppose him; as well as swept and garnished, i. e. adorned with all
those unbeautiful and deformed beauties which please him. All the former
profession of an apostate, serves but to make him take the deeper die in sin;
and no color is so lasting, as when profaneness is laid upon appearing
holiness.

Lastly, Satan's reentry is with more fierceness and resolution, then was at
the first his Entry; when he returns to his house from whence he came out, as
he finds the house empty and swept, etc. so he brings seven spirits with him
worse then himself. After he was compelled to go out of the man, he found no
rest (says the text:) yea, all the while he was banished out of him, he was as
a man living in a dry and desert wilderness, Quamdiu domicilium in hominibus
non inveniat, omnia loca, vel cultissima, squalidas solitudines existimat.
Cartw. harm.
(for such is every habitation to Satan in comparison of man's soul:) now then,
how great must his resolution needs be the second time, both to assail and hold
his former possession! If ever the Jailer catch the Prisoner, who through
indulgence showed him, broke prison, he will be sure to lay him fast enough: he
that before had no shackle, shall be bound with two chains for failing; before
he was in libera custodia, had the liberty of the prison; now he is in arcta
custodia, cast into the Dungeon; before he had but one keeper, now he has
seven worse to captivate and enthral him. They who have escaped in profession
the servitude of Satan, and seem to cleave to a new, a better master, should
they again revolt from Christ, and be reapprehended by their old Jailer; how
irrecoverably will he make them his own, how watchful will he be, to keep them
in hold, and his hold in them; by hardening their hearts, searing their
consciences, following them with temptations, and even hindering them from all
the very appearances of holiness? And that brings me to the last Branch of
explication.

This for the explication of the third gradation of these seducers misery; they
were twice dead. The fourth and last follows, plucked up by the roots.

It was bad for these trees to wither, to be without fruit, to be dead, twice
dead, though having still the place and appearance of trees; but to be without
growth, fruit, life, and place also, makes the loss and woe complete.

Plucked up by the roots, Gr. (...); rooted up as plants, they might be said to
be in two respects.

1. In respect of removal from their former place wherein they stood.

2. In respect of the discovery of the rottenness and unsoundnesse of the
root, by that removal, the manifesting what was at the bottom of the tree, the
turning of the inside, outward.

1. In the former sense, the Apostle must speak by way of prediction, for
according to it, they were plucked up by the roots, either 1. out of the soil
of the Church, by being removed at first out of the affections and prayers of
the Church, and afterward by excommunication quite cast out of the Church; it
being denied to such unsound trees, any longer to stand in such a garden. Or 2.
Plucked up by the roots, out of the soil of the world; and out of the land of
the living; and this plucking up was by death, which plucks up not only the
withered, dead, but even the most green, flourishing deeply, and strongly
rooted tree in the world.

But I understand the Apostle to speak of a plucking up, in point of discovery
of all that unsoundness or secret rottenn^ss which was at the root of these
trees, and the manifestation of them by their abominable errors and
profaneness, to be such as never had any vital influence from Christ. Trees
may have withered fruit, be without fruit, and quite (twice) dead, and yet he
who passes by them, and beholds them among the rest of trees, may possibly be
ignorant, (especially at that time of the year, when other trees also are
without leaves and fruits,) that these trees are utterly and irrecoverably
dead; but when he sees them plucked up by the roots, then their voidness and
privation of life is made evident and manifest to every one: happily most thought
they were dead before, but now all know they are dead. Other trees which yet
stand, perhaps they may suspect to be dead, but these which are plucked up by
the roots, they evidently and certainly behold to be so. Nor is it any wonder
that these dead trees should also lose their place, and plainly appear to be
altogether dead; if we consider, 1. How unable dead roots were long to bear and
hold up the trees; and 2. How just it was with the owner to pluck up those
trees.

For the first, How could that tree stand constantly, which wanted a living
root to supply and feed it? a dead root bears not a steady tree; as without a
vigorous and living root, the tree cannot be kept from withering in its fruit,
so neither from its ceasing to stand; out of Christ there can be no
perseverance. He who sets us up, only keeps us up: he who labored to make his
Picture stand alone, quickly saw the vanity of his endeavor, when he
considered (as he said) that something (life he meant) was wanting within. As
the hope, so the holiness of the Hypocrite is like the Spiders web; Union by
pro^^ssion will not serve the turn to make us persevere. N^, to that, there
must be added union by real implantation. If the heart be not set right, the
Spirit will not be steadfast with God, Psalm. 78.8. They who stand loose from
Christ will never stand long; an Hypocrite and his very profession, will part
in a temptation; He who believes not, will never be established.

For the second, Most j^st was it w^^h God, to pluck up these trees by the
roots for the punishing of their hypocrisy. These Seducers (of whom Jude
speak^) who would never endure to be more than, are now suffered not to be so
much as Hypocrites; In cord, funus occulte prius suo putore sentitur, quam
moribus nostra cogitationc prospicitur. Aug. Ep. 227.
they never cared to be better then visible, and now they are not so good as
visible Professors; they who would not have the life of trees, shall not now
have the room and place of trees; they who were inwardly corrupt, are now
openly profane; they regarded not the reality, and they retain not the
appearances of sanctity; they who formerly feared not to appear unholy in the
sight of God, are afterward discovered justly to be unholy in the sight of man.
Heretofore they disdained to be Scholars of Truth, and they now are left to be
Masters of Error. In a word, they who once were deemed to be something, when
they were nothing, now neither are, nor appear to be any thing; and (as Christ
said) From them who had not, even that which they seemed to have, is taken
away. 2. Justly does God pluck up these trees by the root, to punish them for
their unfruitfulnesse: as a fruitless soil, so a fruitless tree is nigh to
cursing. Hebr. 6.
If Solomon (a Type of Christ) have a vineyard, he must have a thousand pieces
of silver, Cant. 8.
and the keepers thereof, (but) two hundred; the chief gain was to come to
Solomon: he that planteth a vineyard, should eat of the fruit of it; and there
is no plant in Gods vineyard, but God will either have gloty from it, by its
bearing fruit, or glory on it; by its burning in the fire.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observe. 1.
Even corrupt trees bear some fruit. These trees had fruit, though it were but
withered fruit; most men go to Hell in the way of religious appearances; they
who shall be excluded out of heaven, will pretend many good works; prophesying,
miracles, Mat. 7.23. Outside services are cheap, and cost but little: good
words (we say) are good cheap, they may procure much credit, though they ask
but little cost. Besides, natural conscience will not be put off with a total
laying aside of duty; and if Satan can cheat poor souls, with putting a Pibble
in stead of a Pearl into their hands, he thinks it as much cunning as if he put
nothing into their hands at all; nothing does so dangerously hinder men from
happiness, as the putting off themselves with shadows and appearances of that
which is really and truly good. He who is altogether naked, may be sooner
brought to look after the getting a garment, then he who pleases himself with
his own rags, wherewith he is already clad. A man who is smoothly civil, and
morally honest, is in greatest danger of being suffered to go to Hell without
disturbance; he snorts not in his sinful sleep to the disturbing of others, and
he is seldom jogged and disquieted, nay perhaps he is highly commended.
Christians, please not your selves in the bare profession and appearances of
Christianity; that which is highly esteemed among men, may be abominable before
the Lord; let not the quid, but the quale, not the work done, but the manner of
doing it, be principally regarded; examine your selves also concerning the
principle whence your actions flow, the righteousness whereby they are to be
accepted, the rule by which they are regulated, the end to which they tend; and
(as the Apostle speaks) Let every one examine his own work, and consider
whether his duty be such as will endure the Scripture Touchstone.

2. Withering and decaying in holiness, Observe. 2.
is a distemper very unsuitable, and should be very hateful to every Christian.
It was the great sin and woe of these seducers, and should be looked upon as
such by us, and that upon these following considerations.

1. In respect of God; Decays in our Christian course, oppose his nature in
whom is no shadow of change. Mal. 3.6. Psalm. 102.24.
I am the Lord (says he) I change not. He is eternally, I am, and ever the
same; his years are throughout all generations: And what has inconstancy to do
with immutability? how unlike to the Rock of ages, are chafe and stubble? no
wonder that his soul takes no pleasure in those who draw back, and that they
only are his house, who hold fast the confidence and rejoicing of the hope,
Hebr. 10 38. Hebr. 6.6.
firm to the end. If a frail weak man will not take a house, out of which he
shall be turned within a few years; how unpleasing must it be to God to be so
dealt with? 2. Spiritual decays and witherings are unsuitable to the works of
God. His work is perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4. he completed the work of Creation, he
did it not by halves. Genesis 2.1. The heavens and the earth were finished, and
all the host of them. God finished the building of his house before he left.
His works of providence, whether general or special, are all perfect; he never
cease to provide for, and sustain the creatures; the doing hereof one year,
is no hinderance to him from doing the like another, and another; nay the day,
week, month, Psalm. 23. Psalm. 71.17, 18 Christus perseveravit pro te, ergo tu
pro illo perseveres, Bern. de temp. 56. Ibi tu figas cursus tui metam, ubi
Christus posuit suam. Idem Ep. 254. Obtulerunt ci Judaei si de cruce
descenderet, quod crederent in illum: Christus vero, pro tanto munere sibi
oblato, noluit opus redempti^nis humanae inchoatum, relinquere inconsummatum.
Perald. p. 216.
year, generation, end; but Gods providentiall care still goes on, he upholds
every creature, nor is the shore of providence in danger of breaking; he feeds,
heals, delivers, clothes us unweariedly; goodness and mercy follow us all the
days of our lives; he regards us from our youth, and forsakes us not when we
are grayheaded. Most perfect are his works of special providence: Redemption is
a perfect work; Christ held out in his sufferings, till all was finished: Though
the Jews offered to believe in him if he would come down from the Cross, yet
would he not leave the work of man's Redemption inconsummate. He finished the
work which was given him to do; he saves to the utmost, delivers out of the
hands of all enemies; nor does he leave these half destroyed, they are thrown
into the bottom of the Sea; he has not only touched, taken up, but quite taken
away the sin of the world. Nor will he leave the work in the soul imperfect: he
is the author and finisher of our Faith. His whole work shall be done upon
Mount Sion: he will carry on his work of grace, till it be perfected in glory,
where the spirits of just men shall be made perfect, and the Saints come unto a
perfect man. 3. Spiritual witherings and decayings are opposite to the Word of
God. 1. The Word commands Spiritual progressiveness; Be thou faithful unto the
death, Rev 2 10. Let us not be weary of well doing, Gal. 6.9. Look to your
selves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought, John E^p. 2. v. 8.
Let us go on to perfection, Hebr. 6.1. Perfecting holiness in the fear of God,
2 Cor. 7.1. Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief,
in departing from the living God, Hebr. 3.12. 2. The Word threatens spiritual
decays. If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for
of vengeance, and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Hebr. 10.26, 27, 31. I
have something against thee, because thou have left thy first love, Rev. 2.4.
If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Hebr. 10.38. 3. In
aternum se divino mancipat familatui. Ob hoc inflexibilis and obstinatae
mentis* punitur aeternaliter malum licet temporaliter perpetratum, quia quod
breve fuit tempore vel opere, longum esse constat in pertinaci voluntate, ita
ut si nunquam more^etur, nunquam v^lle pec^are d^sineret; ita and ^ndefessum
presi icu^^ stud ^m p^o^profectione reputatur. Perald. ubi supra,
The Word encourages proceeding in holiness; I will give thee a crown of life,
Rev. 2.10. Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry, Hebr. 10.37. Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, Rev. 22
12. He that endures to the end shall be saved. Nor need it seem strange, that
the proceeding of a godly man in holiness for a few years, is rewarded with
eternity; for as the sin of the wicked is punished eternally, because they being
obstinate and inflexible, would sin eternally, should they always live; so the
sincere desire and endeavor of the godly to proceed in holiness is crowned
eternally, because should they always live, they would always, and
progressively be holy. 4. Spiritual witherings and decays are opposite to the
honor and worship of God. None can honor God, who divides his service,
between him and other things. He accounts himself not served at all, unless
always served Who will think that employment vast and large; which a man takes
up and lays down at his pleasure? What proportion bears slight and short
obedience to the Majesty of him, who is the best and the greatest? how can that
work be deemed by any beholder sweet and delightful, of which men are as soon
weary, as of some grievous burden? who will account that service profitable and
advantageous, or its wages to eternity, any other than a notion, when they who
have entered into it, think an hour long enough to continue in it? or will any
think, that God gives strength to his servants to perform it, who give it over
before they have well begun? or that he delights in that holiness, which his
seeming friends take such frequent liberty to forsake at their pleasure?

2. The sinfulness of witherings and decays appear in respect of our selves.
Prove. 17.17. (...). Arist Rhet. l. 2 c. 11.
1. Whatever professions have been made, is's certain there never was
sincerity. Vnstedfastness is a sure note of unsoundness; he never was, who ever
cease to be a friend; for a friend loves at all times. He who leaves Christ,
never loved him. They set not their heart aright, and their spirit was not
steadfast with God. Psalm. 78.8. 2. Spiritual withering renders all former
profession unprofitable, and in vain: He who continues not in, had as good
never have entered into the ways of God; nothing is held done, as long as ought
thereof remains to be done; we shall be judged according to what we are, not
have been: Judas, not according to his Apostleship whrein he lived, John 2.8.
Gal. 3 4.
but according to his treachery and despair wherein he died; our beginning in
the spirit, followed with ending in the spirit, advantageth not; that is only
well, which ends well: it is not the contention, but the conquest which crowns:
they win the prize, not who set out first, but continue last. 3. Spiritual
withering makes our former profession and progress therein to do us hurt. It
had not only been as well, but better never to have known the way of
righteousness: He who licks up his vomit, never casts it up again: the house
reentred by Satan is more delightfully and strongly possessed by the impure
spirit; the water cooled after heating, is now colder then ever; the seeming
breach between sin and the soul, being made up again, is like a dis-joynted
bone well set; the union is stronger then ever; and it is more easy once to go
on, then often to begin. And as there was nothing Satan did so much endeavor
as thy leaving of God; so nothing will he so much hinder, as thy returning again
to God; yea, and it may be, by this time, God is justly provoked to leave that
person to Satan, who would needs leave God for Satan. To conclude, none will be
so inexcusable before God, as they who leave the ways of holiness; for if
those ways were bad, why did they enter into them? if good, why did they not
continue in them?

3. The sinfulness of spiritual withering appears in respect of others. 1.
They who remain strong and stable, do not yet remain joyful, but are much
sadded by the decays of any; though they fall not with them, yet they are cast
down for them; yea, they should sin if they should not be sad: and how great a
sin is it, to make it necessary for them to mourn, whom to rejoice is thy duty!
Now we live (says Paul 1 These. 3.8.) if ye stand fast in the Lord. Their
apostasy then, would have been his death. 2. The weak are much endangered to be
carried away with others for company; seldom does any leave God singly: the
worst, yea the weakest shall have too many followers. Although these seducers
were carried away by reason of their emptiness, yet all that Jude could do,
all the diligence he could use, was little enough to keep the Christians from
being carried away with them. It is easier for a weak seducer to carry souls
away, then for a strong Christian to keep them back. 3. The wicked are both
confirmed in that their sin, into which the decayed Christian is fallen, and also
much deride and reproach that way of truth and holiness, which the unstedfast
have forsaken; they are confirmed in their sin, because their own way has now
the addition of a proselite, and the commendation of an Enemy; now numbers are
a great encouragement, and a strong argument to a sinner in any wickedness,
and the commendation of an enemy, is equiv^lent to an universal good report;
sinners will deride likewise and blaspheme the way of truth, as if either
Christians had formerly embraced it for by-ends, or else, as if it had not
worth and excellency in it, to deserve a steadfast persevering in it; and the
dispraising of holiness by the seeming friends thereof, will appear to its
enemies to be equivalent to an universal ill report.

3. Obs. 3.
It is the duty of Christians, to endeavor after spiritual fruitfulness. The
Apostle mentions unfruitfulness likewise, Luke 3.8. Can^. 6.11.
as the sin and woe of these corrupt trees, seducers: This duty of bearing and
bringing forth much fruit, is frequently noted in Scripture, Mat 3.8. bring
forth fruit meet for repentance, 2 Cor. 9.10. Now he that ministers seed to
the sower, etc, increase the fruits of your righteousness; Phil. 1.11. Being
filled with the fruits of righteousness, Col. 1.6. Matthew. 21.34.41.44. John.
3.8.
which are by Jesus Christ, etc. Jam. 3.17. The wisdom from above is full of
good fruits. Every branch in me that bears fruit, he purges, that it may
bring forth more fruit. John 15.2. He that abides in me and I in him, brings
forth much fruit; I have chosen you that ye should bring forth fruit, ver. 16.
Being fruitful in every good work, Col. 1.10. As touching the nature and
cordition of these fruits, Phil. 1.27. Ephesians. 5.3, 4. 1 Cor. 12 ult
1. They must be fruits of a right kind; good and piritual fruits of the same
nature with the good se^d that has been sown in us; when wheat is sown, tares
must not come up; nor cockle, when baily is cast into the ground. Our fruit
must be such as becomes the Gospel, not fruits of the flesh. Nor 2. fruits
merely of gifts parts, abilities of utterance, knowledge, nor only of civil
righteousness, just dealing toward men, freedom^ from scandal; not fruits only
of external profession of religion, in prayer, hearing, etc. but such as are
suitable and proper to a supernatural root and principle, fruits worthy of
amendment of life, Mat. 3. Love out of a pure heart. 1 Timothy 1.5. Spiritual
fruits, fruits brought forth to a spiritual end; they must give a sweet and
delightful relish, though possibly they be not very bulkie. Our ends must be
raised up to aim at God, and to sanctify him in all our duties: Our obedience
must proceed more out of thankfulness, and less out of constraint of
conscience; such fruits they must be as are reckoned, Gal. 5.22.23. Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Faith, etc. Thy fruit must be of a singularly excellent
nature: A tree of righteousness, a branch of the true vine, must not bring
forth grapes and thistles. If fornication, uncleanness, covetousness, etc.
must not be once named among us (as becomes Saints) then not be brought forth
and owned. Muddy water is not a suitable stream to a Crystal Fountain.
Brambles and briers are more fit for a wild common, then a garden knot. Of the
sinful actions committed by a Saint, the wicked will say to God, as Jacobs
sons did to their father of Joseph's Coat, See whether this be thy sons coat or
no.

2. They must be fruits in point of production, apparency and bringing forth.
Fruits are not in, but upon the tree. Our goodness must not only appear, but
yet it must appear: If it be, it must and will be seen. Men must see our good
works, that God may be glorified. Phil. 1.11.
If they see them not, it must not be because we will not show them, but
because they will or cannot see them. The Fountain which is full must also
overflow. The hand must be filled as well as the heart, with the fruits of
righteousness. Its not the having of good in, but the doing of good by us, for
which we are called good. Our profiting in holiness must appear to all men. 1 Timothy 4.15.
We must shine as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation.
Our fruits must feed many.

3. They must be fruits suitable to the helps and furtherances bestowed upon us
for the producing of them If the soil be very fat, the watering very frequent,
the cost and care very great, we look the fruit should be very abundant.
Indifferent hearts and lives are not good enough, where God has bestowed
excellent means. He is not a fruitful Christian who has but an ordinary
growth under rich opportunities. Our returning must be proportionable to our
receiving. They who enjoy much from God, and yet are no better then those who
enjoy less, are therefore worse, because they are not better; Whenas for the
time, (says the Apostle) you should have been teachers of others, Heb. 5.12.
etc. Luke 12.48. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required.

4. It must be fruitfulness in bringing forth all the fruits of
righteousness. Fruits of the first and second Table; of Religion toward God,
and of righteousness toward man. Fruits inward, good thoughts, desires,
purposes, longings after God, good affections, holy joy, love, fear, sorrow.
Fruits outward; good works, holy words: Whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, Phil.
4.8. Observe the Apostles repetition of whatsoever; we must not pick and choose,
and do whatsoever we please. Whatsoever the Lord commands we must do. Exodus
9.8.24 3.7.
Not examining what the service is, which is commanded; but who the Master is,
who commands: Growing up in Christ in all things; not preferring one thing
before another. Being fruitful (as the Apostle expresses it, Col. 1.10.) in
every good work, having respect to all the Commandments, Psalm. 119.6.128.
esteeming every precept concerning all things to be right; Not doing with
Herod many things, but all things: Thoroughly furnished to all good works: Our
feet must endure to walk in a stony, as well as in a sandy path. As a man who
is to plant an Ortyard will get of every good fruit, some; so we must get every
good fruit which we hear of, and set our hearts with it. The pulse of a
gracious person beats evenly; and he is neither a maimed person to want any
limb, nor a Monster to have one limb so big, that others want their due
proportion.

5. They must be fruits, as of every good kind, so of every kind abundantly,
not brought forth in a penurious scanty measure. Imperfection must be our
trouble, as well as our pollution: The soil of a Christians soul, like the land
of Egypt in the seven plenteous years, must bring forth by handfuls. We must
set no stints and limits to our Christian fruitfulness. We must know no enough.
The degrees of a Christians grace must be like numbers, the highest whereof
being numbered, Phil. 3.13.
an higher than that may be named. We must look upon every grace like the Faith
of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
to have some thing lacking to it. Perfection is our Pattern, and Proficiency is
ever our duty. We are never gotten far enough, till we are gotten home. He
that thinks himself rich enough is nothing worth, and he that desires not to
bear much fruit, John 15.1, 2.
is no part of Gods husbandry.

6. They must be fruits brought forth when the trees grow old. They must be
born constantly. Trees of Righteousness bring forth most fruit in their old
age, Psalm. 92.14.
in this unlike to other trees, who grow barren in their old age. They must
ever be green and flourishing. The bitter fruit of Apostasy cannot be brought
forth by a good tree. It had been better never to have been planted that we
might bear fruit, and that we never had begun to bear fruit, then afterward to
be plucked up for ceasing to bear fruit. The good ground brings forth fruit
with patience; and glory and immortality is the portion only of those who are
patient, and continuing in well-doing.

7. They must be fruits in point of maturity; not only buds and blossoms, but
brought forth to perfection. Its not enough for Christians only to have good
motions and purposes, but their resolutions must also be brought to execution,
and not perish like an abortive birth. Many make their purposes (as one says)
like our Eves, and their performances like our Holidays: Servants work hard
upon the one, that they may play upon the other; so do they labor hard upon
their purposes, but they are idle and play upon their performances. What pity
is it, that many a fair blossom is nipt in the head?

8. Psalm. 1.3.
They must be fruits in regard of seasonablenesse. We must bring forth fruit in
due season. Fruits are only acceptable in their season: Pleasant fruits are
brought forth in their months, Ezekiel. 41. Words spoken, and works done in
season, are as apples of gold in pictures of silver. We must have our senses
exercised to know fit seasons for all we do. Good duties must be done in a good
and suitable time, and that adds much to the goodness of the Action; we must
order in this respect, our conversation aright. If our corn should not ear till
harvest were past, nor our trees bud till after midsummer, men would look but
for poor store of fruit, and a slender Crop. It Is true, Repentance, Faith,
seeking reconciliation with God, are continual Acts to be performed at all
times, (though even for these, some times are more seasonable then others, as
the time of health, strength, and youth.) But hearing, reading singing, solemn
Prayer, etc. may be unseasonably performed. Praying is not seasonably performed
in the time of Preaching, nor Reading in the time of Prayer. Its Satan's policy
to mar duties, good for the matter, with an unseasonable manner of performing
them. Seasonablenesse is the grace of our fruits.

9. Lastly, They must be fruits in respect of the propriety of them. They must
be our own; not performed by a Deputy, or an Attorney. The Godly is compared
to a tree that brings forth his fruit, Psalm. 1.3. It must not be borrowed: If
our own Lamps be without Oil, we cannot borrow of our neighbors; the Saints
and Angels have little enough for themselves. Papists in this respect build
their confidence upon a sandy foundation. Another man's feeding or clothing
himself, cannot nourish or warm me: Nor can another man's beleiving or working
save me. The just must be saved by his own faith. People must not think to go
to heaven by the goodness of their Ministers, nor children by the holiness of
their Parents. Gal. 6.4.
Thy rejoicing (as the Apostle speaks) must be in thy self, not another. If thy
Friend, thy Pastor, thy Parent, thy Master be holy for himself, and thee too,
he shall go to heaven for himself and thee too.

To conclude this Point, with some directions how to become fruitful trees.

1. We must be removed off from our natural root and stock, and set upon and
ingrafted into a new, another. Mat. 12.33.


We must be transplanted from the first to the second Adam. The tree must be
good before the fruit can be so. Men gather not grapes of thorns, nor figs of
thistles. Mat. 7.16.18
Till we be in Christ, our best works are but corrupt fruits. According to our
union with Christ, such is our communion with him and fruitfulness. John 15.
Some are united to him only by the external tie of visible Ordinances and
Profession; knit to him by that Obligation made in Baptism, no otherwise than
many grafts are, that do not thrive or live in their stock, but only stand as
bound about by a thread; and their communion with Christ is only external,
without any spiritual sap or inward influence derived from him to them; and
therefore their fruit is no other, then may grow in the wilderness of
heathenisme, which natural honesty and conscience bring forth. Our union to
Christ must be real, supernatural. Without me (says he) ye can do nothing:
John 15.4, 5 6
We must abide in him, fetch all from him, depend upon him. The fruits of
righteousness are by Jesus Christ, to the praise of God. We are to honor the
husbandman, by making him our Lord, and by doing all for him; and the Root, by
doing all in him and from him; we must be nothing in our selves, either in
regard of self times, or self-abilities: From him is our fruit found. First, A
good tree, and then a fruit-bearing tree.

2. Shelter thy fruits from the blasting winds of pride. Walk humbly with thy
God. The Valleys men commonly build and plant in, and they are called the
fruitful valleys. The lowly heart is the fruitful heart. God gives grace to the
humble: Men look up to the hills, but they dwell in the valleys: Superbia ventue
exiccans fluenta divinae gratiae.
Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect to the lowly, Psalm. 138.6. God
and humility mutually delight in one another; God is always delighted in giving,
humility in receiving; it being the poorest, and yet the richest grace. Should
God pour grace upon a proud heart, it would be as the pouring of Liquor upon
the unequal side of a vessel. He has filled the hungry with good things, and
sends the rich empty away.

3. Luke 1.53.
Let no secret lust lie at the root of the tree. Grace is that flower, at which
sin and Satan always labor to be nibling, The best Plant may be spoiled with
a worm at the root. Any one lust retained with love, will blast the whole crop
of thy graces. Beware of every root of bitterness. The Spirit of God is a
tender delicate Thing; nor will it endure so harsh a companion as any one lust.
If grace kill not sin, sin will kill grace. They can never be made friends.
Pity to any one sin, is cruelty to all thy graces: the sparing of the former,
is the spilling of the latter. The of growth grace cannot consist with the love
of poison. The least sin is terrible to the greatest Saint.

4. Psalm. 1.3.
Plant thy self by the rivers of water; partake of those waters which flow from
under the threshold of the Sanctuary. Ezekiel. 47.12
The inundation of Nilus made Egypt fruitful. Delight in a powerful Ministry.
Verbum Dei, and nasci and pasci nostrum.
Its as possible at the same time to grow in fruitfulness, and to decay in
love to Ordinances, as to increase the fire by taking away the fuel. Apostles,
Pastors, Teachers, etc. are given by Christ for our growth up to the fullness
of the measure of the stature of Christ. As a Christian abates in appetite,
Ephesians. 4.13.
he will decay in strength.

5. Pray for the showers and dewes of Gods blessing. Thy planting and watering
will not help, without God give the increase. He who will have grace in plenty,
will have prayer in forvency. Grace ever puts the soul upon begging for grace.
The richest Christian has been oftnest begging for the alms of mercy. Jam.
1.5. and 3 17
That wisdom which is fullest of good fruits, must be begged from God.

4. Obs. 4.
The greatest flowrishes and appearances of hypocrisy, cannot reach the
excellency of the least dram or drop of sincerity. All an Hypocrite can do,
amounts not to fruit. These seducers were trees without fruit. If Solomon in
all his glory was not arrayed like a poor Lilly of the field, much less is an
Hypocrite in all his glory beautified like the poorest real Saint: The
resplendent and beautiful body of the Sun cannot in respect of life, match the
little Ant upon the Molehill. All the improvements of nature, let it be never
so tilled, rackt, manut'd, adorned, cannot reach to the excellency of one dram
of Grace. A curious Painter may go very far by his Art in imitating of Nature,
but he can never reach by all his skill, to the drawing or painting of life;
It Is easy to act a King upon the Stage, it is not so easy to be a King in the
Throne. There is an Emphasis in true Sanctity, which the learned hypocrite
cannot translate. The note of sincerity is too high for any but a Saint to
reach. Till the nature of the tree be changed, and of bad made good, the fruits
are as none. How should this humble the proudest hypocrite! Could he bring to
God all the gold and silver in Solomon's Temple, it were (brought by him)
nothing; incomparably below one broken hearted groan for sin, and fiduciall
breathing after Jesus Christ. All his truly good works (...) be summed up with
a Cipher; and though they glister here, glow-worm-like in the dark night of
this world, yet in the bright disquisition of the day of judgment, they shall
all vanish, and disappear. Oh! how great will the shame and disappointment of
hypocrites be, who at that day shall see, that all their days they have been
doing nothing? To close this, what a comfort may this be to the poorest child
of God, that God (in the midst of all his wants of these common blessings) has
yet bestowed one upon him, which is distinguishing! God bestows those
blessings upon others, which a Saint (as such) needs not have, and that
blessing upon him, which the wicked (as such) cannot have: And how may a child
of God improve this for comfort in the weakness, smallness, deficiencies (if
they be his trouble) of his grace, considering it is fruit, true fruit; and its
more (though it be but one little basket full, nay but one small cluster of
grapes) than all the hypocrites in the world can show; and the least cluster as
truly shows that is a vine which bears it, as does the plentifullest increase
that ever any Vine brought forth.

5. Obs. 5.
Incorrigibleness in sin, is a dismal condition. These Seducers were trees
twice dead; the Apostle despaired of their future living and becoming fruitful,
and this was an estate that argued them extremely miserable. Its a woe to have a
bad heart: but its the depth of woe to have an heart that shall never be better.
Sickness is an affliction, but sickness past recovery; a desperate sickness,
is a desperate evil. How did it fetch tears from the eyes of Christ, that the
things belonging to Jerusalems peace were not only formerly unknown, but that
now they were utterly hid from their eyes! O Ephraim, (says God) what shall I
do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I d^ unto ^hee? If ye will not hear (says
Jeremy) to the incor^igible Jews, mine eyes shall weep in secret places for
your ^ride, and mi^e eyes shall weep sore, etc. Jer. 13 17. Ra^hel wept for her
children, and would not be comforted, not because they were ill or sick, but
were not. This incorrigiblenesse in sin, which frustrates and disappoints all
the means of grace, provokes God to a total and angry removal of them; and
makes him say, I Will take no more pains with this desperate sinner. Rev. 22.11.
Prophet ando non optando.
He that is filthy let him be filthy still. Its that which (as the Prophet
speaks) wearies God. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more
and more. Isa. 1.5. I will not punish your daughters when they commit
whoredom. Hos. 4.14. Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone. v. 17 When a
tree is utterly dead, Pertinax sterilitas.
when it is pertinaciously barren, the hedge and wall shall be taken away, and
broken down (if it will be fruitless, it shall be fencelesse) it shall neither
be pruned nor dig'd, the clouds shall be forbidden to rain, Isa. 5.6. When the
Physician of souls sees men rend in pieces his Prescripts, and pull off his
Plasters, and throw away those wholesome Potions which he ministers to purge
them, he gives them over, and suffers them to perish in their sins. Punish them
he will, chasten them he will not. Cut them off he will, cure them he will not,
Jer. 6.29. When in stead of being refined in the fire, the metal will after
all the hotest fires, and the constant blowing of the bellows, continue
inseparable from its dross, when the bellows are burnt in the fire, and the
founder melts in vain, reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord
has rejected them, Jer. 6.29.30. What is it but hell upon earth, for sinners
to go to hell without control; to be given up to their hearts lusts, to
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath; and in a word, to be as bad as they
will? Oh woeful recompense of spiritual pertinacy! The earth, which under all
the drinking in of rain, bears thorns and briars, is rejected, and is nigh
unto cursing, Heb. 6.8. This double death, and irrecoverablenesse in sin, is a
kind of fore-taste of the second death; As perseverance in holiness crowns, so
pertinacy in sin condemns; he who is obstinate in sin unto the end, shall
undoubtedly receive the curse of eternal death: How sore a judgment is it, so
to be past feeling, that nothing cooler then Hellfire, and lighter then the
loins of an infinite God, can make us sensible, though too late? Oh! let us
beware of the modest beginnings of sin, which certainly make way for immodest
proceedings therein; every commission of sin is a strong engagement to a
following act of wickedness; be who begins to go down to the chambers of
death, knows not where he shall stop: In short, let no help to Holiness leave
thee as bad, for if so, it will leave thee worse then it found thee, and
present unreformednesse, will make away for incorrigiblenesse under the means.

6. Obs. 6.
Its our greatest wisdom, and ought to be our chiefest care to be
preserved-from Apostasy. Take heed of being twice dead, i. e. Of adding a death
by Apostasy, to the death by Original corruption.

To this end, Let us, 1. Be sure to have the truth of spiritual life in us,
(...).
not only the external appearances of life, the shows and leaves of Religion,
the form of godliness, and a name to live; he that would not die twice, must
be sure he truly lives once; hypocrisy will end in apostasy; where the truth
is not truly loved, it will be truly left. A tree that is unsound at the root,
will soon cease from its faint puttings forth: the hollow heart will not hold
out; the outward form without the inward power of godliness, continues not in
times of temptation. Labor for a faith of real reception, and please not thy
self with that of mere illumination; the bellows of persecution which blow the
sparks of sincerity into a flame, blow the blaze of hypocrisy into nothing. 2.
Forecast the worst that can befall thee, and the best that can be laid before
thee, to take thee off from the love, and ways of holiness; reckon upon
opposition in every way of God; he who meets not with the hatred of a man, may
justly suspect his love to the truth; and he who expects not that hatred, will
hardly cantinue his love to truth; when thou enterest upon Religion, think not
that thou go to sea upon pleasure, but employment; not for recreation but
traffic; lest in stead of holding out to thy intended Port, thou presently
make to the next shore, upon the rising of the least storm. Though Christ
requires thee not actually (as yet) to forsake all for him, Luke 14.28, 29.30,
33. Et aequissimum sperae and ad iniquissimum te paerae. Vide page 372, 373,
374.
yet he will have thee habitually prepared to do so: Sever all worldly comforts
from Christ in thy thoughts, and try how thou can love him by, and for
himself; for his own beauty without his clothes, and external ornaments. 3.
Take heed of the smallest decay, or a beginning to remit of thy holiness. And
to this end, 1 Tremble at those sins which are seemingly but small; what ever
has the nature of sin, must be the object of hatred, the least enemy (to be
sure of the soul) must not be despised. Though some sins may seem small
comparatively, yet there is none but must be accounted great, considered in it
self; the least sin herein resembling the Earth; which though it be but a point
to the Heavens, yet is a vast and immeasurable body of it self. There is
nothing little, which offends a great God, or hurts an immortal soul: Poison
and death are lodged in the least sin; and as unfaithfulness to God is
discovered in a smaller, as well as a greater sin (as toward men in a
trifling, as well as a weighty thing) so commonly does it proceed from showing
it self in sins accounted slight, to manifest it self in courses notoriously
and hainously sinful; the decay of a tree first appears in its washy boughs
and twigs, but by little and little it goes on further, into the bigger arms,
and from them to the main body; and decay of grace is first seen in smaller
matters, petty oaths, slight omissions. 2. And therefore secondly, oppose sin
in its bud and beginnings, in its first motions, overtures, solicitations: the
greatest deludge begins with a drop; every sin defiling the conscience, makes a
man the more careless of it. He who dares not wade to the ankles is in no
danger of having the water reach as high as his neck. Sinners increase to more
ungodliness; when they once descend, they know not where to stop; the
beginnings of sin are modest, the progress adventurous, the conclusion may be
impudent, in open apostasy. A drop of water may quench that spark, which if
neglected till it grow to a flame, may violently destroy a whole town^; the
greatest Crocodile, did at first lie in a little Egg. Yea thirdly, Be afraid of
the occasions of sin; the sparks in a flint let alone, are quiet; but beat it
with a steel, they come out, Non avis utiliter viscatis effugit alis. Ovid.
Genesis 6.2. Psalm. 119.37. Job 31.1.
and kindle a great fire; let not occasions of sin beat upon thy heart; its
easier to pass by the snare, then to wind ones self out of it; if thou would
not like, long for, eat, and impart, the forbidden fruit, gaze not on it; a
Christians charity it is, not to be, and his prudence not to behold, a
provocation to sin: God will preserve us in our ways, not in our wanderings 4.
Never look upon thy self as perfect, or thy progress in holiness as sufficient;
4. More viatorum nequaquam debemus aspicere quantum jam iter egimus, sed
quantum superest ut peragamus ut paulisper sia^ praeteritum, quod timide adhuc
attenditur futurum. Gr. Mor. l. 22. c. 7 Phil. 4 14.
he who thinks he has enough, will soon come to have nothing; that we have
will be gone, unless we strive to get more; look not backward in thy Christian
race, to see how many thou have outstript; but look forward on those who have
gotten ground of thee: consider not so much how far thou have gone, and how
many come short of thee; as how far thou art to go, and how far thou come
short of commanded perfection; our greatest perfection in this life, is to
contend after perfection; we must never cease growing, till we be grown into
heaven; Christianity knows no enough: he who has the least grace, has enough
to be thankful; he who has the most, has not enough to be either proud or
idle. He will be stark naught, who labors not to be as good as the best. In
rowing up a River that runs with a strong stream, if we rest our oats, we fall
down the stream; while we neglect to gain, we spend on the stock; he who hid
his Talent, lost it. 5. Presume not upon thine own strength, and power to
stand; thou bear not the root, but it bears thee; Qui operaturut accedamus,
idem operatur ne discedamus. Aug. de bon. pers. cap. 7. Praesumptio firmitatis
impedit firmitatem.
Gods power only is our support, by it we are kept through faith to salvation:
they who call not upon God, go aside from God, Psalm. 14.3, 4. He who first sets
us up, must also shore, and keep us up; he who has brought us to himself, must
also hold us, that we depart not from himself; we are poor weak reeds, but tied
to the strong pillar of Gods power, we shall stand; he who relyeth upon
himself, has a reed for his upholder; we cannot put too much confidence in
God, or too little in our selves: Peter's over-ventrousness tript up his heels.
Mat. 26.33.
Let us not be like sick men, who when they have had a good day or two, think
themselves presently well again, and so putting off their warmer clothes, put
on thinner garments, and adventure into the fresh air, whereupon follow
irrecoverable relapses. Its the fear of God in the heart, which keeps us from
departing from him: Prove. 3.5.
let us fear always, if we would fall never: Be not high-minded, but fear; Lean
not (says Solomon) to thine own understanding; he who is his own Teacher, has
a fool to his Master.

7. God at length discovers unsound, empty, Obs. 7.
and decaying Christians to be what they are. These fruitless, dead trees, are
at length plucked up by the roots; their inside is turned outward. They who
going among the drove of Professors, are but like sheep, shall be detected
either here, or hereafter, to be but goats; thus Cain, at the first a
Sacrificer, (yet being an Hypocrite) was given up to be a Murderer, and was
cast out of the sight of the Lord, out of his Fathers family, from the
Ordinances. Doeg, detained before the Lord, 1 Samuel 21.7. about religious
offices, afterward discovers his unsoundness of heart by his cruelty, and more
afterward did God lay him open, when at his destruction, it was seen and said,
that This is the man that made not God his strength, etc. Psalm. 52.1. The like
may be said of Judas (of whom Doeg was a Type) his discovery by his treachery;
and of Saul's also, by that horrid act of murdering the Priests, and going to
the Witch, God also taking away his Spirit from him; they who are not of us,
will at length be suffered to go out from us. God leads those who secretly turn
aside to crooked ways, with the workers of iniquity; though they did not seem
to be workers of iniquity; yet God discovers them to be such, by leading them
forth with them. There are none who so much dishonor Christ, as they who
profess to be rooted in him, and yet are unfruitful and dead Christians. Christ
is a fruitful soil full of strength; and for any to be barren and decay,
appearing to be in him, is a great disparagement to him; every one will be
ready to blame him, for all their defects: therefore that they may dishonor
him no more, they are plucked up from that soil unto which they did but seem to
belong, for they were there only by a visible profession, not by a real
rooting, as a liveless stake is put into the ground; and in the Civil Law,
till a tree has taken root, it does not belong to the soil on which it is
planted; and then it appears that they never were rooted in Christ: Please not
(then) your selves with a mere outward empty profession of godliness, with your
standing among the trees of Christ in his Ortyard, merely in being accounted
trees of righteousness, or only with the having a name to live. These things
will be so far from hindering, that they will further your eradication. A dead
barren Oak a man will happily suffer to stand in his wood, but not a dead Vine in
his vineyard; it was not a wild tree of the wood, which none ever looked should
bear fruit, that Christ cursed; but an empty fig tree, whose nature promised
fruit. Root your selves as much downward in inward holiness as you spread
upward in outward profession; otherwise God will at length make your hypocrisy
known, and will not suffer you always to abuse his own patience, the good
opinions of beholders, and the place of your own standing, and the longer the
lets you stand to deceive others, the greater shall you shame be, when you
shall be discovered.

This for the third Resemblance, whereby the Apostle describes the sin and
wickedness of these seducers, trees without fruit, whose fruit withers, etc.
The fourth and fifth follow.

VIR. 13. Raging waves of the sea, foming out their own shame: Wandering
stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.
THe fourth Resemblance, whereby both the impiety and misery of these Seducers
are described, as in these words: Raging waves of the sea, foming out their own
shame.

EXPLICATION.
Two things are here to be explan'd.

1. What they are said to be; Raging waves of the sea.

2. What they are said to get by being so; Shame: They fomed out their own
shame. Like the raging waves, which after their greatest unquietness, break
themselves to a little foam.

For the first, their title, or what they are said to be, in these words,
Raging waves of the sea, Gr. (...).

The word (...) here translated raging, signifies uncamed, wild waves, roaring
like the wild beasts of the wood. Hence the vulgar render this place fluctus
feri maris: Erasmus, Vndae efferae maris: And Beza Vndae maris efferatae.
Fluctus vehementes maris. Syriac. fluctus maris commoti Arab. (...)70. Gavisum
in fluctus aequora mota truces. Ovid. Latrantes undas. Virg. 7. Aeneid. Rapidas
aquas. Act. 27.41. Luke 21.25 Jer. 31.35. Jer. 5.22. Isa. 51.15. Psalm. 73.3.
Interpretations that betoken fierceness, wildness, turbulency. The same
expression is there in Wisd. 14.1. A man intending to pass thorough (...),
fierce, troublesome, boisterous, waves, One Poet calls the waves of the Seas
fluctus truces, cruel, terrible; And another calls the waters of the Sea,
Latrantes undas, the barking waves; as if they made a noise like a barking dog,
when they were stirred, and raised: and we frequently speak of angry roaring;
working, boisterous, rough, troublesome, Seas, and read in Scriptures, of
violent waves, Acts 27.41. The sea and waves roaring, Luke 21.25. The ship
tossed with waves, Mat. 14.24. The roaring of waves, Jer. 51.55. Jer. 31.35.
The tumult of the people, and the noise of the seas and waves are put together,
Psalm. 65.7. And therefore our Apostle in calling these Seducers raging waves,
does not so much intend their instability, variableness, and fluctuation in
mind and doctrine, their motion by every wind, and unstablenesse in the truth,
though waters are unstable even to a Proverb; nor only the pride and swelling
arrogance of these Seducers, though the waves are called proud waves, they often
lifting up themselves so high, as if they would kiss the Clouds, and making as
if by their fall, they would overspread the earth; but in calling them raging
waves, he rather intends (as I said) their troublesomenesse and unquietness:
and that in three respects.

1. In respect of themselves: Their consciences were unquiet, tossed and
troubled, without any inward tranquillity and calmnesse in the apprehension of
reconciliation with God. Isa. 57.20, 21. Isa. 65.14. Isa. 48.22. Job. 15.20,
21, 24.
Thus (says the Prophet) the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot
rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace says my God to the
wicked. Thus Eliphas speaks, Job 15.20. The wicked travelleth with pain all his
days; And to the same purpose, Zophar, Job 20.20. Surely he shall not feel
quietness in his belly. Inward Peace belongs only to the faithful. Its only
reported of them, Psalm. 119.165. Great peace have they who love thy Law. 1 Cor.
1.3. Col. 1.2. 2 These. 1.2.
Its only promised to them. He will speak Peace to his people, Psalm. 85.8. God
will reveal to them abundance of peace. Its only requested for them, even that
peace which passes understanding to keep their hearts; Peace from God being
never desired for men to live in a state of war against God. Romans 5.1.9.10 Ephesians.
2.14.
Only the Faithful have taken the right course to obtain it: They alone are
delivered from Gods wrath, and have an Interest in Christ who is our peace,
Gal. 5.22. Isa. 59.8.
and the Prince of Peace, and have that spirit which works it in us; and of
whom true Peace is a fruit and effect. The wicked have not known the way of
Peace. They may have it in the brow, not in the breast; in cortice; not in
cord; in the looks, not in the Conscience. Benumbed their consciences may be,
pacified they cannot be. The guilt of sin is an unseen scourge, a hidden sore.
He who has thorns run into the soals of his feet, wheresoever he goes, treads
upon thorns: Wicked men carry their furnace, their wrack, their woe, their
prison about them, wheresoever they go; nor can they any more lay these off,
then they can lay off themselves.

2. The Apostle may compare these Seducers to waves as they are unquiet,
troubled, and moved in regard of God, against and under whose will they were
impatient, fretfull and unsubmissive. They did not quietly content themselves
with their conditions. They were like chafe which flies into the face of him
who fanneth it, there were within them waves of unquietness, and impatiency,
raised by the winds of their pride. They were murmurers and complainers, both
against God and man. Of this unquietness the Apostle speaks afterward, verse.
16.

3. They were as the troublesome and raging waves of the sea in respect of
others: And this I conceive Jude principally intends in this place. The Sea
neither rests it self, nor does it suffer any thing to rest which is upon it;
it tosseth the ships, and tumbleth the Passengers therein from one side thereof
to another: who reel to and fro like a drunken man; and in its rage and fury it
often swallows up and devours, both ship and men: The lives of those who are
upon the sea, hang by a thread, they themselves being neither reckoned among the
dead, Mo^tude quies^n^^.
nor among the living: And thus these Seducers were so restless and turbulent,
that they found no rest but in their motions. Like those of whom Solomon
speaks, Prove. 4.16. Who sleep not unless they have done mischief; and their
sleep is taken away unless they cause someto fall. Merito h^retici fluctibus
maris similes esse dicuntur quod nu^quam quieti s^nt, nusquam consistant, nova
semper moliantur, surgia misceant, seditionem excitent, schismata pariant,
omnia denique perturbent ac pervertan^. Justinian. Vti fluctus fcri navim, ita
ipsi turbulenti and seditiosi Ecclesiam concutiunt. Lap.
And troublesome they were, 1. First to the bodily and outward welfare of
others; their names they tossed up and down by slanders, and reproaches; they
uttered many hard speeches against the Faithful. Their tongue set on fire of
hell, did set on fire the whole course of nature. What bittter, and
uncharitable censures have such fomented in all times against those who did not
join and hold with them! They are wont to lowre, brow beat, disdainfully frown,
and look sourly upon them, as Cain upon Abel. with a discontented and fallen
countenance; and what bitter enemies in all ages, Heretics (especially
Seducers) have been to the lives and safeties of the Godly and Orthodox, has
been before in part declared, and of old manifested by the Donatists and
Arians, and more lately by the Papists, and Anabaptists, who all by their
boisterous violence, and cruelties, showed themselves raging waves of the sea.
They were troublesome enemies to all Public Order: They were fierce, heady,
high-minded, traitors, enflaming and enraging men's spirits against all
Government and Rule in Church and State, putting all places into confusion and
combustion by strifes, seditions, schisms; They were not afraid to speak evil
of dignities; they set their mouth against the heaven, and their tongue walked
through the earth.

2. But secondly, Fluctus fert, sunt perversi doctores qui and in semet ipsis
inquieti semper, tumidi and amari sunt, and pacem Ecclesiae, firmitatemque
obicum semper impugnare non cessant. Beda. Quem ad modum fluctus maris saevitia
atque immanitate sua integra navigia hauriunt, aut ad scopulos allidunt, it a
Gnostici perversis suis dogmatibus plurimos ad interitum pertraehunt
sempiternum, Justinian. in loc. Ut fluctus maris intumescunt and attolluntur,
and ipsi quodam modo C^^lo minantur, non aliter isti in coelum ipsamque Divinam
naturam maledicta congerunt. Id. Ib.
these raging waves troubled and disquieted the spiritual welfare and peace of
those Christians into whose societies they had crept, whom they tossed to and fro
by the violent urging of their errors, and caused to fluctuate and waver in
their judgments, overturning their faith, swallowing them up, and drowning them
in perdition, by their erroneous and impious doctrines: Through the tossing and
fury of these waves, many souls suffered shipwreck, and lost the spiritual and
precious Merchandise of Faith and holiness; with these waves of false teachers,
and their doctrines, were the Galatians disquieted when the Apostle says,
There be some (...), who trouble you, or who muddy and stir you like water; and
cap. 5.12. I would they were even cut off, which trouble you.

This for the opening of the first Branch of this Resemblance: the second
follows, viz. What these raging waves of the sea are said to get, and bring
upon themselves by all their swelling and raging; and that was nothing but
shame and disgrace; Vulg. B^z. Despumantes. Nonnullidispumantes. Deseumare
proprie valet spumam auferre. Dispumare, spumam ejicere. Quandoque confundi
videntur. Syriace, qui in manu spumationis suae, indicant ignominiam. Arabice,
sicut fluctus maris commoti, ebulliunt in confusionibus, seu delictis suis.
Spu^^ea semifero subpectore murmurat unda. Virg.
Foming out their shame. Gr. (...).

The Apostle says not shame, but shames, (...), Confusiones. Vulg. Dedecora
Bez. (...).
to note how great that shame and disgrace was which they discovered. And he
says, they fomed out their shames, that is, that by all their forementioned
raging and troublesomenesse, they brought forth shame to themselves; as the
raging waves of the sea bring forth foam.

And most aptly and elegantly (in the prosecution of the Metaphor of raging
waves) does our Apostle say, Instar tumentium undarum, quanto altius se,
superbientes attollunt, tanto amplius confusi quasi in spumas dissolvuntur and
percunt. Bed. Per dedecora, intelliguntur peccata linguae ex immundo turbatoque
cord manantia, sed brevi, in nihilum instar spumae resoluta. Mera sonant
tonitrua. Nugas meras, and inanes voces effutiunt.
that by their raging and swelling they brought forth disgrace and shame to
themselves, as the raging waves of the Sea bring forth foam.

In these three respects did these raging Waves, of whom the Apostle speaks,
bring forth shame to themselves, as the waves of the Sea bring forth foam. 1.
Because that after all their troubling, and disquieting of the Church by their
erroneous, turbulent and soul-destroying opinions and practices, both were
found to have as much vanity, lightness, and emptiness as the foam of the Sea;
though in their swelling and proud elevation of themselves, and unquiet urging
of their doctrines they seemed like the huge waves (which threaten to touch and
wash the very clouds) to be raised far above others in knowledge and
spiritualness, and especially in enjoying of that liberty which they pretended
went along with their practices and opinions, and so to have climbed (as it
were) into the third heavens; Non minus quis confunditur ob ignorantiam quam ob
libidinem detectam. Congeries perstrepentium vocum quibus nihil subest
sententiae solidioris. Vid. Epiph. haer. 26. Nonnulli denotari volunt
fornicationes veterum illorum baereticorum, alii immunditiam gulae, and
luxuriae. quae veluti p^r spum ammanifestentue.
yet soon did all their glorious appearances, as a highly raised billow of the
sea, falling either upon a rock or the shore, end in mere froth and some,
emptiness and vanity. And indeed what are all the Doctrines and opinions
(opposed or not warranted by Scripture) whereby any pretend to benefit
themselves and others, but gay and gilded nothings (at the best?) what have
they in them but a form of knowledge, Romans 2.20. a show of wisdom, 2 Col. 23.
vain babbling; science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6.20. strifes of words, 2 Timothy
2.4. vain deceit, 2 Col. 8. froth and foam, swelling words of vanity? They
bring no real relief and sollid comfort to the soul. They are not bread, but
chaff; not milk, but wind to one who has a holy hunger. And their emptiness
does a humble and serious Christian commonly perceive as soon as their errors
are first broched and vented; and it will not be long ere the silly, both
seducer and seduced shall know it also, either by being changed to a love of
the truth, Non vacat probabilitate, per participium (...) insinuatam effraenem
venerem, cujus deam latin dictam venerem, Graci Gentiles appellaverunt (...) a
spuma quae dicitur (...), quod e maris spuma, orta videtur vel quod seminis
natura sit (...) spumosa, vel quod sit (...) stultitiae dea. Lor. in loc. In
medio quondam concreta profundo, spuma sui gratumque manet mihi nomen ab illa.
Ovid 4. Met. Per confusione sive dedecora, intelliguntur sordes ac immunditiae
quas fluctus and undae coagitatae ^ollisae spumantes in litus egerunt. Lor in
loc. Gnostici sua ipsorum dedecora despumant, in spumam post jactabundum
inmorem ex vita suae instabili, and dissolubili turpidine desinentes. O^cum.
Moles existunt aquarum quantoque tanquam montes, and lapsu suo, videntur
absorbere univers^m terram, sed litus, and arenam ubi attigerint, desiciunt,
nihil nisi spumam, paleas, limum, fimum, lutum, sordes, relinquunt. Una cum
ululatione and despumatione maledicta, calumnias, convitia, injurias,
blasphemias contra Deum, san^^^s, magestratus, Ecclesiam, omnes ordines
ejus^c^^e. Lorin. in loc. 2 Timothy 3.8, 9.
or by being punished for the love of error. Now what a shame was it for these
seducers after all their appearing bigness with some rarely featured and
beautiful truths, to swell with nothing but a tympany of pride and vanity; to
seem to travel with a mountain, and to bring forth a mouse; to appear to be
the only illuminate, accomplished doctors, (accounting others but babes)
pretending to be richly laden and fraught with the treasures of understanding,
peace, liberty, ability, of all which they seemed to have the monoply; and
when all comes to all, to discover nothing but beggary, vanity, and
disappointment of expectation, mere froth, and foam?

2. These raging waves, the seducers, brought forth shame to themselves, as the
raging waves of the sea bring forth foam; in respect of that impiety,
corruption, filthiness, and uncleanness, which they discovered by their
swelling rage; what does the sea after all its boiling and turbulence, cast up,
but mire and dirt, an unclean scum, a filthy froth? The more thick and muddy
the waters are, the more scum and some do they by their ebullitions and
agitations send forth; how aptly did this agree to these impure Seducers! Did
not all their swelling, proud, and unquiet contentions, end in profaneness, and
Libertinism, as well as emptiness and vanity? did they not turn the grace of
our God into lasciviousness? Did not they who were lifted up unto Heaven in
shows of spiritualness and piety, afterward fall as low as Hell into all carnal
and unclean practices, by luxury, gluttony and uncleanness? When they spoke
great swelling words of vanity; was it not to allure through the lusts of the
flesh, through much waentonness, th^se that were clean escaped from them who
live in error? when they seemed to be looking up to the Heavens by high
speculations, and thereby would needs appropriate to themselves, the name of
Gnostics, or the knowing men, (like that unwary Star-gazer) they tumbled into
the ditch of all filthiness and prodigious uncleanness. By their violent and
turbulent venting of, and contending for their opinions, whereby they tossed
and shipwrackt poor souls, what did they bring forth, but looseness and
profaneness, the casting off, reviling, and slandring of Magistracy, and all
restraint, sedition, tumults, rapine, the liberty of being as bad as they would
without control, the blaspheming of God? and in short, while they promised
liberty to others, they themselves were the servants of corruption. And was not
now the folly of these men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the
faith, made manifest to all men? and was there any shame in the world
comparable to this? for men not only to appear altogether empty of what good
they seemed to have, and love; but wholly filled with all that evil which they
seemed not to have, yea to loath? for this (the greatest) folly to be made
known to all men, and for all their deluded followers to see, that they who
pretended to be healers of others, should be the s^ckest of any; and that they
who were esteemed ghest in holiness, should be found to be lowest in
wickedness? Nothing is there of which a man should be so much ashamed, as of
sinning, and of no sinning so much, as of sinning after an appeaing height of,
and contention for holiness.

3. These Seducers brought forth shame to themselves, as the raging waves of
the Sea, bring forth foam, in respect of the destruction and everthrew both of
themselves, and their errors. The waves of the Sea cast forth their foam, by
being broken and dashed in pieces; they seemed indeed, when they were lifted up
to heaven in their height, and rage, to threaten the breaking or devouring of
the rocks or shore whenever they should fall; but when they fall, they only
break themselves (the rock or shore still continuing unbroken, and unhurt*) and
so they come to some: And how evidently do seducers bring forth their shame
(even as the dashed waves their some) by their own, and their errors
destructions? Errors have ever broken by beating upon the rock of truth, which
has in all ages, stood firm against, (in stead of being broken) by all the
rage of erroneous seducers. False doctrins, Sicus fluctus licet tumentes, litus
and saxa ver^erames ab iis repulsi resiliunt, abeuntque in spumas and
evanescunt, si^ and impetus fastus, ac furores har^ticorum verberantes
Ecclesiam, in s^ipsos dissiliunt and evanescunt. ^ap. in loc.
like the waves of the sea, may sometimes seem to cover the truth, but never
can they conquer it, no more then the stubble can overcome the flame, the cloud
the Sun, the wave the rock. Truth has ever got by losing, and prevailed by
being seemingly overcome; Error has ever lost by gaining, and been overcom by
seeming to conquer. By the advantages of time and Scripture discovery,
magnified errors come to be abhorred; and by heresies, as they who are
approved are made manifest, so truth it self comes to be both approved and
manifested. And as for heresiarchs and seducers themselves, they have been
broken in pieces by divisions, by disgrace and ignominy, by despair, though
armed, ever to conquer naked truth; by external judgments upon their bodies,
or else by the everlasting overthrow of their souls, they bringing upon
themselves swift destruction: and what greater shame can possibly be brought
forth, then that which comes by their own overthrow and destruction: and that
after; nay, by their own height and elevation?

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
There is no peace to the wicked when they are at the highest.

The highest waves are yet unquiet; notwithstanding a sinners outward swelling
and greatness, he (like a limb of the body pained, though swelled) has a
conscience inwardly vexations. He is like a man who has broken bones under a
beautiful suit of apparel; disjoynted fingers under a golden glove; like a
book of direful Tragedies, bound up with a gilded fair cover; or (as some body
once said) like Newgate, having a comely outside structure, but within nothing
but howling* chains, dungeons, and blackness. There Is no peace to the proudest,
richest, honourablest sinnner. Till the inward distemper of the heart be
removed, and that trouble-heart (sin) expelled, outward advancement can no more
help him, than scratching can cure a man of the itch, his blood being corrupt
an dinfected, and no inward means used to cleanse it. Besides, True peace comes
from the enjoying communion with God, and from the apprehension of the removal
of true woes and wretchedness; what true peace can appearing comforts bring to
that man, Fallacia bona, vera mala.
who remains under real wretchedness? Outward highness is but seeming and
fictitious, spiritual miseries are truly and really such. He who cannot see
that he is delivered from wrath to come, cannot be pacified with any enjoyments
that are present: He is all his life long subject to bondage; Heb. 2.
and but like a rich or noble prisoner, who, though he be plentifully fed,
respectively attended, and civily used by his Keeper, is yet in an hourly
expectation of condemnation. A child of God is more quiet upon the wrack, than
a sinner is upon a bed of down. His motto may well be, mediis traquillus in
undis. Though he be in troubles, yet troubles are not in him. So long as the
wind gets not into the bowels of the earth, there is no earthquake, though the
wind bluster never so boysterously about and without the earth. If the terrors
of Gods wrath and the guilt of sin be kept out of the conscience; outward
afflictions upon the body, cannot cause any true trouble. We call it a fair
day, if there be a clear sunshine, and a fair sky over head, though it be dirty
under foot; and if all be well upward, if God shine upon us with the light of
his Countenance, our condition is comfortable, though it be afflicted and
uncomfortable in earthly respects. A Saint has music in the house, when there
are storms without it, and when it rains upon the tiles. In a word, the godly
have quiet rest in their motion; but the wicked have unquiet motion in their
rest; how little are wicked men to be envied in their triumphs! how much better
is it to have peace with God in trials, then to be his enemies in triumph! Of
this see page 116 part 1. And also before and after, under the head of Peace,
very largely.

2. Obs. 2.
The erroneous are often as disquieting and troublesome where they live, as the
waves of the sea; Like the raging waves of the sea.

I have before largely spoken of their raging in point of bloudinesse and
cruelty, Verse. 11.
but they which are not gone so far as open persecution, are yet commonly men
very turbulent and unquiet. They trouble and disquiet peoples consciences,
tossing them with the winds of their doctrines, not suffering them to hold any
truth certainly, but with hesitancy and doubting, casting in many scruples into
their minds, with their doubtful disputations, wracking both the Scriptures,
and their hearers, by distracting their thoughts and apprehensions with what
may be said for and against the truth, never studying to ground and stablish
them in the knowledge thereof; leaving their Disciples hereby, like a cloud
tossed with contrary winds, and a ball bandy'd between two rackets. Their only
work indeed is to unsettle, and first to make people believe nothing, and to
unbelieve or at least to waver in their belief of what is true, that so they
may be brought to believe that which is false; they who are drunken with
error, will have the spiritual staggers; they are as pendulous and uncertain
as a meteor, they have no Center for their unsettled apprehensions: Schisms
rend the coat, heresy disquiets and cuts the heart. Nor do seducers only
disquiet and trouble others, by unsetling them from the truth, but also by
hurrying and driving people from one error to another. Sectaries rest not in
one, but often travel through all opinions. One error is a bridge to another.
Errors are like Circles in a pond, one begets another, a lesser makes way for
a greater; a lower is but a step or stair to help to an higher, like a
whirl-pool, which first sucks in one part, and then the other, and never
desists until it draws in the whole body. Heb. 13.9. Vide Danaei annotationes
in Lib. Angustini de haer^s.
Seducers grow worse and worse, and still increase to more ungodliness.
Heresy is a flood ever swelling, and a gangrene ever spreading. The Galathians
were soon removed to another Gospel. Nor are the erroneous less troublesome to
the outward temporal peace of persons, witness the divisions and factions which
they have made in families, between nearest relations, in Congregations,
Cities, Civil States. Heretics are commonly seditious and tumultuary. Novatus
was (as Cyprian calls him) a firebrand to kindle sedition: an Enemy to peace,
turning the world upside down. What raging outrageous waves wear the Donatists,
Fax et ignis ad conflanda seditionis inc^ndia, hostis quietis, tranquillitatis
adversarius, pacis ini micus. Cypr. 49. ad Cornel. August. epist. 50. ad Bonif.
Ep. 68. ad Januar.
Circumcelliones! Augustine in his Epistles tells us frequently of their
rapines, robberies; how near sundry States (in these later times) have been to
subversion by the Anabaptists, they who write their histories, have related at
large: nor will this unquietness of the erroneous seem strange, if we consider
by whose blowing these waves are raised. It is the breath of that Aeolus of
hell which stirs them up: he will toss and trouble, though he cannot swallow up
the ship of the Church. All heretics are Satan's Emissaries. He is the father
of lies, and liars, and a lying spirit in the mouth of every false Prophet, and
needs must they rage and run, whom he stirs up. Nor is any thing so impatient
of restraint as error. No heretics could ever patiently endure to be opposed:
whenever either the winds of Civil or ecclesiastical power, of sword or
word, have blown against the tide of heresies, presently they grow rugged and
boisterous. These seducers spoke evil of dignities. Covetousness and pride,
which oftnest put men upon error, are (both) impetuous lusts, and impatient of
resistance. The thirst after gold and glory has troubled all the world.
Seducers run greedily after their own gain, and compass sea and Land to make
proselytes. The Papists had never raged against Luther, if he had not struck at
the Popes Crown, and the Monks bellyes. And lastly, the truth is, when the
heretical rage, its much out of cowardice; for though they look highly, and
scornfully, yet they are so conscious of the crazmess of their cause, that they
cannot but be angry with every adversary. A sickly man cannot endure the sharp
air, nor a sickly opinion the sharpness of opposition. They who are orthodox,
and contend for truth, should hence be cautious: Let them take heed of learning
frowardnes of the froward. God wants not our passions to promote his truth. Let
the fury of the blind promote pity in those who have eyes; and let us break
the rage of the waves only by being rocks of constancy, resolution, and zealous
opposition. In short, let all those Magistrates who will be favorers of the
erroneous, consider whom they nourish, and withal whether it be not the
greatest imprudence to cherish their destroyers, and to destroy their
preservers; and whether they never heard of some who in opposition to
Church Government, have helped up those that in opposition to Civil Government,
have pulled down them.

3. It is the lot of the Church to be amongst raging waves; Obs. 3.
to be troubled and disquieted in the world. The faithful on this side heaven
are annoyed with the unquiet carriage of the wicked. Psalm. 69.15. Psalm. 32.6.
Is. 59.19. Psalm. 32.6.
The water-floods (often) are ready to overflow them: they are in the floods of
great waters. The floods of ungodly men (says David, Ps. 84.4.) made me
afraid. The people of God are often accounted the troublers, but they are indeed
the troubled of Israel. There Is no resting place for the feet of these doves, in
this deluge of sin and sorrow here below. they are tossed up and down in their
names, estates, bodies, souls, by their Enemies, as by raging waves. There is
no more likelihood that they should be at rest upon earth, than there is that a
man should be quiet upon the sea; nor is it (indeed) fit that it should be
otherwise. The winds of trouble and unquietness blow them profit, and working
waves work them much benefit. Hereby they are made to long for their haven, for
that rest which remains for the people of God. If the world were a place of
rest, they would be too ready, here, to set up their rest, and the thoughts of
heaven would be troublesome, and they would be ready to say and hope that they
should never be removed, and its good being here: The world is too sweet to
them, now 'its so bitter; they suck at its breasts heartily, even when the Lord
rubs them over with wormwood. Peregrinationes aerumnas non sentimus.
Oh what would they do, were the world altogether sweet! If they love so much
to smell to it, when it is full of thorns, what would they do were it
altogether roses? The more Noah's flood increased, the higher was the ark
raised; and the troubles of the world raise the thoughts and desires of the
faithful, the nearer to heaven. The fruitful over-flowings of Nilus would
hinder them from looking up to heaven for rain and refreshment. tossings in the
world, make the people of God to be in the world rather patiently, then
delightfully. Again, by the tossings of the world, they are put upon that holy
exercise of prayer. He that would learn to pray (says the Proverb) must go to
sea. Raging waves make the people of God call and cry for help. The Disciples
called to Christ when they were tossed; even the heathen Mariners in a storm
called every man upon his god. Jonah 1. (...) a (...).
The word storm in the Greek is derived from two words, which signify much
sacrificing; how earnestly did David and Hezekiah pray, when they were upon the
waves! Music (we say) sounds best upon the waters, and so do the prayers of
the Saints, upon the waters of worldly troubles. When he slew them, then they
sought him. Psalm. 73.34. In their affliction (says God) they will seek me
early. God oftentimes defers to deliver his people from trouble, though they
pray, that so the praying which he so much loves may still be continued. As we
use to deal with some Musicians, whom we will not presently reward for their
music, because we desire more of it. Again, were it not for these raging
waves, the Saints depending upon, and submissiveness to God could not be so
manifested. Every one will trust him in a calm; its only true faith that can
rest upon him in a restless condition, and see a haven through all the waves.
Nor does God use to teach his people patience, but by being passive;
tribulation (says Paul) works patience Romans 5.3. Trouble is esca patientiae,
food, without which patience would starve. Some say, the Saints never can learn
their lesson of patience but in the school of trouble. And further, the raging
of the waves makes the people of God to magnify their Pilot and preserver, for
his power, wisdom, love: His power which keeps the Church (like another
Mesopotamia) in the midst of the sea, and preserves it from being overturned;
though not from being tossed; and which bounds those proud waves, so that they
shall not overflow the Church, even when the Sea of the wicked world is so much
in power and policy about it. His power likewise is seen, in that in the floods
of great waters, they shall not come near to the godly; not to his soul, to
destroy its grace, and (often) not to disturb its peace: it hereby appearing,
that even when the floods lift up their voice, yet the Lord on high is mightier
than the noise of many waters. Psalm. 93.3, 4. To conclude, How plainly do the
wisdom and love of God discover themselves toward the faithful, when they are
tossed by the waves! his wisdom, in making the very rage of these waves to
praise him, and in stead of breaking his Church, only to cleanse it; and in
stead of drowning it, to carry it to its haven, where it shall never be tossed
more, and so skilfully to make it sail with every wind! His love, in that he
will not refuse to bear his people company when they go through the waters, and
to be their companion, yea Pilot in a storm, and then to give them a great calm
within: and in a word, to assure them, that they shall never be cast away with
the wicked, though they may be cast among them: Let us not censure the faithful
in their most tossed estate. There Is not a drop of wrath in a sea of a Saints
sufferings. Could you see how free his inside is, and his end shall be from
storms and tossings, you would rather envy then censure him; the waves which
Satan raises, show that he has a treasure, which that enemy would fain have
cast away; but yet should he so far prevail, it is a treasure which will swim to
shore with him. To conclude, let the faithful (of all people) most prepare for
storms, and waves; as it is best for them to be among raging waves, so its too
much for them, both to have a haven in their passage, and in the end of their
passage too: As long as the people of God are sailing to that port, the devil
will toss them; and this he will do though, nay, because he cannot destroy them.
Let them be sure, that by faith they get Christ into the ship, or rather into
their souls; that by obedience they undertake their voyage for him, that their
cause be good, and that by repentance they cast out every Jonah, and then let
them fear no waves.

4 The Church has most trouble from those within her. Obser. 4.
She has sometime (says Bernard) had peace from Heathens, Pax a Pagauis,
nunquam a filiis.
never (or but very rarely) from her own children. No adversaries were such
raging waves, as these, who were domestical. Of your selves (says Paul Acts
20.30.) shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after
them. Grievous wolves shall enter in among you, not sparing the flock. These
Seducers were not Heathens without, but Professors who had crept into the
Church. No evils are so great as those which come to the Church from within.
The inward intestine divisions, ruptures, heresies, schisms, have cost the
Church more lamentations, then ever did her persecution from without. The
heathen Emperors never were so vexatious to her as Arians, Donatists,
Anabaptists, Papists. Outward enemies scratch the face, they within, stab the
heart of the Church: From the former she suffered; by the latter she both
sinned and suffered: by the former she was under Persecution from men, by the
latter under Provocation against God; by the former she was but solicited to
tell where her great strength lay, by the latter she cut off her locks, threw
away her own weapons, and betrayed her strength; by her suffering from without,
the enemies labored to beat her off from continuing Christian; by her scandal
within, she beats them off from becoming Christians. Wonder not then that the
Devil has always used this homebred engine of evil against the Church;
namely, the ungodly carriage of those within her, and the stirring up troubles
in her own bowels; He knows, that there is no sword to this; and that they will
never adventure their lives for God and one another in war, who will neither
love God nor one another in peace. Oh, how should Christians labor to
disappoint and countermine this the Devils most destructive policy!
Christians, if we must die, let us die like men, by an unanimous holy
contention against the common Enemy; not like fools, by giving him our sword,
and destroying one another by heresies, schisms, profaneness in our own bowels.

5 Sin is a persons greatest shame: Observe. 5
That which should most make him ashamed and confounded in himself, and that
which shall make him a spectacle of shame, disgrace and infamy to others. O my
God (said Ezra, chap. 9.6.) I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my sace to thee,
for our iniquities are increased, etc. There is the shame that sin should make
in us: Thou have consulted shame to thine own house, Hab. 2.10.
by cutting off many people, and have sinned against thine own soul, Psalm.
40.14. Let them be brought to shame. So Nah. 3.5. I will show, etc. the
Kingdoms thy shame: there is the shame that sin brings upon us. In the former
respect sin should be shame; in the latter it shall be shame. Its sin only
which deprives a man of true glory and excellency, and is the degradation of
his nature. Men account that their shame, which to do or suffer, is much below
their port and rank. Oh how much goes that man below himself, who was created
Gods favorite and son, having his love fixed and image stamped upon him, the
Viceroy of the creation, a consort with Angels, whose nature is taken into the
union of the person of the son of God; whose purchase was no less then the
blood of God, whose soul is a little heaven for the great God to dwell in,
whose body is the Temple of the holy Ghost; whose habitation shall be the
Empyrean heaven, a City, a Kingdom purer, more glorious then a thousand Suns,
nay in comparison whereof a thousand Suns are but sackcloth: How much (I say)
goes this excellent creature below himself, in being a! thorow-fare, threshold,
footstool, vassal to unclean spirits! yea, in having his heaven-born soul a
very sink or common receptacle for that which is infinitely baser then all the
dung, offscouring, filth, excrements upon earth, or then any thing which has
a being! How much lower is this descending, then for a King to embrace
dung-hils, or for Nebuchadnezzar to be a companion for beasts! Romans 6.21.
Well might the Apostle say, that of this condition the Romans were now
ashamed. Indeed, there is nothing but sin which truly disgraceth a man: Nothing
but sin which disgraceth a man in Gods eye, whose estimate is the true Standard
of Honor: nothing but sin makes us unfit for that habitation of glory: nothing
shameful unless sinning, but befell the Lord of glory: Nothing but sin which
will make us unglorious at the last day, when Christ shall appear with ten
thousands of glorious Saints and Angels.

Oh how much are they mistaken who account sin their glory, who are ashamed
of their glory (holiness;) Pudor est medi. cina pudoris.
and glory in their shame, their sin! Are there not many who cannot blush in
the doing of that, Ephesians. 5.12. Jer. 8.12.
at the hearing whereof it is our duty to blush? They were not ashamed, neither
could they blush; they have sinned away shame, in stead of being ashamed of sin,
and will not (now) suffer nature to draw her vail of blushing before their
abominations. When the Colors and Ensigns of a battle are lost, we then give
the battle for lost; some have aptly called blushing the color of virtue
displaid by nature in the countenance: When Satan has taken away our colors,
and custom of sin has banished even sense of sin, and shame for sin, our case
seems to be desperate. Other evils which sin brings, are curable, the anguish
of conscience, the wrath of God, the breach of charity; but the shame of sin
can (nay must) never be got out: the more holy we are now, the more should we
be ashamed of our former sin. Oh that we could contemplate the shame of sin
more in its departure, and less its beauty in its coming, and labor to look
upon our old ways with new eyes, opened and enlightened by the spirit of
sanctification, and then it will be our greatest wonder that we should
heretofore openly do that which we are now ashamed to think of.

To conclude this, how blessed are they whose sins are covered, whose
transgressions are forgiven, Psalm. 32.1.
who have bought and put on that white raiment, whereby the shame of their
nakedness cannot appear! If ever the sins of the godly be manifested (as I
conceive they shall be) at the day of judgment, they shall be so far from
bringing shame and confusion to them, that they shall be glorious trophies of
Gods mercy, Christ's merit, the strength of faith and the truth of repentance.

6. Obs. 6.
The shame of seducers is at length laid open and discovered. The great
endeavor of these, was to be magnified, or rather omnified, to have all others
debased and nullified; to have themselves accounted the only men for knowledge,
piety, privileges; and their ways the only ways of peace and liberty; but at
length they lost and disgraced themselves, foamed out, and discovered their own
shame. 1. Sometime their shame is laid open, and foamed forth by the discovery
of the emptiness and mere frothy foame of their opinions, which are manifested
to have had nothing of truth or solidity in them. At length they fall upon the
shore, or dash upon the rock of the scripture, and then in stead of drowing the
shore or breaking the rock, they end in a little froth and emptiness and in
the breaking of themselves alone. Heresies are not permanent; the word of the
Lord only endures for ever, it being a lasting fountain never to be dried up:
but that which is against the Lord and his truth, is but a landflood: though
for the present it may swel and grow, yet it shall fall and sink, and in time
vanish quite away. Heresies which have for a time born all before them, (as
that of Arianism, which Augustine in grief and admiration tells us, had invaded
all the world) come by the advantages of time and scripture discovery, to be
contemned and neglected: Error, like the painted beauty of some harlot, seems
amiable when it walks in the dim twilight, where the orthodox preaching of the
word shines not; but bring it to scripture light (which it mainly shuns) and
the more we look upon it, the more we shall suspect, and at length abhor it:
the sun of scripture scatters the fogs and mists of error; ye err says
Christ, not knowing the Scripture. How glorious have those adulterate beauties
of the whore of Babylon, of image worship transubstantiation, merit etc.
appeared in this nation of old, when the candle of Scripture was hid under a
bushel! but afterward it being set upon a candlestick, and giving light to all
the house; how clearly did they all appear to be fictitious and adulterate! and
the hatred wherewith they are hated (I trust) of some, is (as it was said of
Ammons to Thamar) greater then that love wherewith they were loved. 2. Sometime
the shame of seducers is laid open and foamed forth by their loosnesse and
profaneness of life; Errors in doctrine producing commonly loosnesse in
conversation. Thus the Apostle speaks of some who should proceed no further,
for their folly should be made manifest to all men, who should increase to more
ungodliness, and grow worse and worse; hereby our Lord bids us discover them,
( by their fruits (says he) ye shall know them). The vine of truth never
produced the thistles and thorns of profaneness and loosnesse: A man of
error, is of^ left to be a man of sin. Thus these seducers disgraced themselves
by foaming out their uncleanness, cruelty, rebellion. Who will ever look upon
these deformed issues to have truth, beautiful truth for their mother? Well may
he be suspected, who every step stumbles into profaneness, to have either no
eyes or bad ones: Thus Papists, Anabaptists, Seekers, have been discovered by
their taking pleasure in unrighteousness, never to have believed the truth. 3.
Lastly, the Lord often discovers their shame by their own destruction and
disgraceful end, and by the judgments which he brings upon them. Arius his
bowels gushed out; Nestorius his tongue was consumed with worms, Cerinthus was
killed by the fall of an house. Montanus hanged himself. Manes had his skin
torn from his flesh, etc.
and rotted out of his head; examples of this kind might fill a volume. How many
seducers has God made pillars of salt by their deaths, who were unsavory salt
during their lifetime! how many of these stakes has God set up in the Church,
as in a pond to keep men from adventuring into gulfs and whirlpools of error!
Sometime the hand of justice has found them out; witness the deaths of many
Jesuits and Baals priests, of Anabaptists, and other blasphemous heretics. And
how often have they been infamous for their strange deaths, who labored to live
caede scripturarum, by the death and downfall of the scripture! Oh (then) how
much are they mistaken, who expect to get honor by being patrons of erroneous
opinions! While the pure lights of the Church have burnt sweetly, and shined
bright to after ages, living when they were dead; the other have rotted in
their names, faded in their honor, withered in their graces, and (in a word)
even died while they lived: and what is there left of all these false pretended
lights, to posterity, but the smoke of a stinking and unsavory snuff?

7. Obs. 7
The enemies of God cause their own shame and confusion; foaming out (says our
Apostle) their own shame. Hab. 2.10. they are said to consult shame to their
own house, i.e. their wisest consultations shall be turned into shame against
them, or they shall be as surely ashamed, as if they had consulted or taken
counsel to bring shame upon themselves. Though shame be not the end of the
worker, yet shall it be the end of every work of ungodliness: wicked men twist
their own halter, and by sin, curiously weave their own confusion; shame is the
natural production of every man's own sin: Basil^ de Ira. (...). Page mihi 440.
The wicked shall be snared in the work of his own hands, Psalm. 9.16. and held
with the cords of his own sins; Ps. 5.22. Be thy own friend, and none can be
thy foe; disgrace not thy self, and then all the world cannot do it. It Is not
any thing cast upon us from without, which is truly a shame, but something
which grows out of a man's self; it is not poverty, reproach, pains etc. that
dishonor us, but impatience, revenge, unreformedness under all these. Every
wicked man's dishonor is self-created. A sinner reaps no crop, but that of
which he himself was the sower; (its common equity that he who sowes should
reap) God will render to every one according to his own works. As grace is glory
in the bud, and glory nothing but grace blown out, so sin is seminally and
radically, eternal shame and ignominy, and that shame is nothing but sin
extended and displaied. So good is God, that he would not suffer sin, unless
thereby he were able to make it appear shameful; so much is God in love with
his own glory, that he would never endure any to oppose his, unless thereby he
intended to overthrow theirs; God never gave any of his enemies line, but to
strangle themselves: we read of no enemies of God, but they shamed themselves;
Infirmitas animositatis. Facites animos men's generosa capit. Tu licet extre mos
late dominare per Indos etc. si prava cupis si duceris ira, servitii patiere
jugum, tolerabis iniquas interius -- Claudian in paneg. Theodos. Non fortior
judicandus est quileonem, quam qui violentam in scipso inclusam feram superat
iracundiam aut qui rapacissi mas volucres dejicit quam qui cupiditates
avidissimas coercet aut qui Amazonem bellatricem, quam qui libidi^cm vincit
pudoris ac famae debellatricem. Cicer pro Marcel.
Pharaoh, Achitophel, Haman, Siserah, Senacherib, Julian, etc. How should this
comfort his people in the midst of all the height and glory of his enemies!
Though they cannot pull them down, yet they shall lay their own glory in the
dust: and how can God want weapons to beat his enemies, who can beat them with
their own?

8. Men by rage and fury, lay open and discover their shame; when these
seducers came to be raging waves, fierce and impetuous in their way, they soon
disgraced themselves, and foamed out their own shame; a weak spirit is by
nothing so much manifested as by wrath and passion: commonly men think that
anger is an effect of magnanimity, whereas indeed it proceeds from weakness;
an underling to passion, has a base low built disposition, to which children,
and women (therefore called the weaker sex) are more subject then men. The
Latins express all passion (anger especially) by the word impotentia,
impotency and weakness; and hence Solomon, Prove. 25.28. He that has no rule
over his own spirit, is like a City that is broken down ad without walls; what
so weak, and beggarly, and so much at the cruel courtesy of every invader, as
a City without all defense? Such a one is he whose raging passions sway him
without control; he who scorns to be a servant to man, is a slave to lust, a
base sensual brutish lust: The strong man (according to scripture censure) is
he who is slow to anger, nay (says Solomon) Prove. 16.32. He is better then the
mighty, and he that rules his spirit, then he that takes a City: had a man
conquered the world without him, and not his lust within him, he were but in a
splendid glistering servitude: well might he with Alexander sit down and weep,
but not because their is no other world to conquer, but because their is still
another, or rather, because there are so many, and every one so much stronger
than a world; I mean, unmortified passions: David in sparing of Saul, and
overcoming of himself, was stronger then David when he overcame Goliath; for
killing of Goliath, he was but promised to be Saul's son in law; but by subduing
his own passion, Saul deservedly conjectures that David should be his
successor; and now I know well (says Saul) that thou shall surely be King etc.
Saul seeing in David a power to govern his own affections, foresaw that David
was fit to rule a whole kingdom; but how unfit was Saul to be King of Israel,
who was not a King over, but a slave to his own passion! A swine in an Emperors
robe is most uncomly, and so is he who is a ruler over men without him, and a
vassal to beasts within him. Men account it the greatest disgrace to be looked
upon and called fools; but the spirit of God makes wrath and passion, the fools
coat or badge; frequently do we read of a fools wrath, Prove. 12.16. a fools
wrath is presently known: so Pro. 27.3. a fools wrath is mentioned for its
heaviness: and He that is hasty of spirit exalts folly. And anger rests in
the bosom of fools (says Solomon) Eccles. 7.9. its loved, cherished,
delighted in, as a thing laid in a man's bosom, and it rests there, it
departs not; a wise man uses anger as physic in its proper time, but a fool
uses it as his constant diet: Its an inmate to a fool, it is but a passenger
through the heart of a wise man, it does not lodge in it all night, Ephesians. 4.26.
Its a man's prudence to defer his anger, and his glory to pass over a
transgression, Prove. 19.11. and James calls it the meekness of wisdom, cap.
3.13. A governor of his passion is by some called angelus in carne, yea deus
terrestris: no lamb was ever so meek, as was he who was wisdom itself: He that
is slow to anger, is of great understanding, Prove. 14.29. Nor does the shame of
these slaves to passion only appear in their name, and estimate for folly, but
in the shameful effects of this rage, where it mastereth any; A stone is heavy
(says Solomon) and the sand is weighty, but a fools wrath is heavier than them
both. Prove. 27.3. A fool having no wisdom to moderate his passion, or to keep
it (as a wise man does) from falling with its full weight. Let a bear robbed of
her whelps, meet a man (says he) rather then a fool in his folly. This
cruellest of beasts shows not so much rage, as a man in his fury; how often has
rage whetted tongue, teeth, swords, prepared snares, poisons, fires, etc. for
destruction! How little does it distinguish twixt friends and foes, sweeping
away parents, children, brethren, with its torrent! it regards neither
venerable old age, nor the tenderness of age or sex, nor favors received, nor
virtue and piety. Its a short madness, and an inter-regnum and eclipse of
reason, forgetting even the ruin and destruction of the very party in whom it
swayeth, it making him neither to feel nor fear mutilations, wounds, deaths;
(...). Incomparabiliter salubriusest, etiam irae justae pulsanti non aperire
penetrale cordis, quam admittere non facile recessuram et perventuram. De
surculo ad ^^^bem etc. Aug. ^p. 149.
it makes a man to put off himself, changing him into a monster, and as if he
were to put on a vizar upon a stage (as Basil expresses it) it represents him
another from himself, with eyes flaming, mouth foaming, teeth grinding, color
distempered etc. Christians, as you love true honor, beware of being enslaved
to passion, especially this of wrath and troublesomenesse to others; stop its
entrance, take heed (as Augustine excellently) when just anger knocks at the
door, that the unjust crowd not in with it; from a twig, 'twil grow to a beam:
his advice is (rather then it should do so) to shut the door upon that anger
which is just: In the midst of all thy injuries, labor for a meek and a quiet
spirit. In sinful contentions, he who is the conqueror, is the slave; let not
thy adversary be thy teacher, nor be thou his looking glass, to show him his
shape in thy self; let him behold in thee a mind above, and deaf to, and
impenetrable by reproaches; let not judgment be trodden under foot. If thine
adversary deserve pity, why do thou rage against him? if punishment, why
do thou imitate him? To conclude this, (as Basil in that excellent discourse
of his concerning anger) Never think thy self worthy of estimation from others,
(...). Et infra, (...). Basil. de Ira.
or others unworthy of estimation from thee; study the due ordering of thy
irascible part, let it be at the command of grace, and then it will be helpful
to thee against sin. Oh how happy were we if all our anger and indignation were
set upon sin! we can never hate sin enough, unless we mix indignation with our
hatred; use thine anger like the dog, to spare those of the family, or the
flock; I mean men, and set it upon the thief, the wolf, thine own lusts: Let
not that which was given thee to be helpful to thee, be by thee made hurtful to
thee; let the sword of anger spare Isaak, and sacrifice the ram; be angry but
sin not; Anger should not be destroyed, but sanctified. Be angry with the
tempter the devil, who stirs up thy brother to wrong thee: and be not like the
furious dog, who bites the stone thrown, and meddles not with the hand that
threw it. The man is to be pitied, Satan threw this stone at thee, he
instigated thy brothers passion. In short, as the Unicorns horn, upon the
forehead of that fierce creature, is most hurtful and destructive, but in the
Apothecaries shop most useful and salubrious; so passion which men by nature
abuse, to the hurt of themselves and others, should by grace be made helpful
and beneficial to both.

9. Obs. 9
Its the inward corruption of the heart, which sends forth the foame of
shameful actions, These seducers (like the sea) had that foame and filth first
within them, which afterward they foamed out and sent forth. There could never
be an unclean foame sent forth, unless there were first filthiness in the
sea. All the unholinesse and irregularity of practice comes from the hearts
depravednesse: Evil things are brought forth from the evil treasure of the
heart; out of the heart (says Christ) come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries;
the heart is the womb of all sinful and impure issues; an unholy root sends
forth bitter and sinful fruits. All the prodigious abominations which are made
visible in the conversation, proceed from an unsanctified disposition; Who sees
not, then, at what door to lay all the deformed issues of men's practices? how
foolishly are men displeased with themselves for their outward transgressions
in their lives, while they tamely and quietly endure an unchanged and unrenewed
heart! why should any be displeased with that tree for bearing of fruit, whose
roots they will continue to dung and water? how vain and preposterous, are
those endeavors of reformation, which are without inward renovation! If the
tree continue bitter and corrupt, all the influences of heaven cannot make the
fruit good. If we would have an holy life, we must labor for a changed heart:
A Christians reformation begins at the wrong end, when it begins at his fingers
ends; as the heart first lives naturally, so spiritually; the foundation of
most men's mortification is too shallow, it is not hearty and inward enough; and
hence it is, that their religion (in these days) is like our buildings, more
slight, and less durable than of old: Its fond to think of drying up the
streams, when we nourish the fountain. David began at the right end, Psalm. 51.
when he desired the Lord to create in him a clean heart; til the heart be
healed, we only skin the sore, we root not out the core of the corrupt matter,
and hence the cure comes to be only cloaked. Christians, Curar palliativa.
would you heal the unwholesome water of your lives? you must first cast salt
into the spring; get thy sea first made pure within at the bottom, and then
thy foame, thy mire and dirt will not be cast up; purge thy stomach, if thou
would not have an unsavory breath; remove the inward dunghill, and then thou will be rid of outward steams; lay thy mine under the foundation, cleanse your
hands ye sinners (says James;) James 4.8.
but then the way prescribed is, purify your hearts ye double-minded. New
professions, expressions sewed to an old disposition, will but make the rent the
greater. And remember that,

10. The unrenewed heart, if stirred and moved, soon discovers its foame and
silthinesse. Isa. 47.20.
These seducers (like the sea) put forth their unclean mire and dirt when
disquieted and enraged. The waters which are dirtyest at the bottom, appear
fair and clear in a calm and serene day; but when the storms and winds arise,
they then show what is in them; til the heart be cleansed, any occasion or
tentation will draw forth its filthiness. If our lusts be not dead, but only
sleeping, every jog will soon stir them up: London-streets (inclinable of
themselves to be dirty) are (we say) by a small shower made foul. A wicked man
is but a chained Lion, or a tamed devil at the best. If he appear holy at any
time, it is not because he is a sea without mire, but without storms; when his
tide of nature is opposed by the winds, either of reprehension or chastisement,
he will show himself but dirty water: Acts 19 28.
we read not that the Ephesians foamed out their shame, til they apprehended
their Diana-worship struck at; nor that the Jews foamed out theirs, til Steven
had touched them for their hypocrisy; Acts 7.54.
nor that they railed and called Christ Samaritan, and one that had a devil,
John 8.28.
till he convinced them of their sin, and his own innocence; nor did the
Sodomites discover their shameful uncleanness so much, til Lot reproved them:
(oh with how gentle a gale was their sea of sin troubled!) Hos. 11.2.
Never did the secret sickness or wickedness of Ephraim so much show it self,
nor were the evil humors so much provoked and stirred, until God went about to
heal them; nor did the rage of Pharaohs heart against God, swel so
prodigiously, til Gods judgment lay upon him. We see then how best to try the
truth and strength of grace: O Christian, what art thou when stirred? do thou
not foame out dirt in a storm? art thou good when thou art pleased, calm when
the tide of thy nature, and the wind of word or providence go together? truly
this is no great matter; but observe thy self, when occasions of sin meet thee,
when winds cross thee, when reproofs and corrections would stop thee, and blow
in thy very teeth: will thy heart neither like the dunghill, stink when thou
meetest with the sunshine of an allurement; nor with the sea, foame when thou
meetest with the wind of opposition? can thou then be calm with David, and
say, Let the righteous smite me? and with Job, bless the Lord? and with the
Church, say, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, for I have sinned against
him? and with that holy Martyr, Lord I will bow, and thou shall beat? John Brown.
Can thou kiss the rod, lay thy hand upon thy murmuring mouth, and desire
that God would rather give thee submission to, then deliverance from the
stroke? can thou under smarest severities heartily beg of the Lord that he
would have his will of thee, by pulling down thy proud stomach, before he throws
away his smartest rod? And when the blasts of the word resist thy dearest
corruption, and oppose thee in thy sweetest ways of sin; when the faithful
Minister levels his darts, and sets the point of the drawn sword of the spirit,
most directly against thy bosome-lust, can thou then (I say) in stead of
rebelling, yield thy self an humble prisoner to Jesus Christ, fall down at his
feet, and say, Lord I submit, what will thou have me to do? Blessed be thy
strictest commands and threatenings against my sin, and blessed be the mouth of
thy servant which uttered them? This is an happy sign that God has begun to
cleanse thy heart from that filth, which one unrenewed, would have put forth
upon these occasions.

11. Obs. 11
The turbulent and unquiet temper of a wicked man, makes him much to differ
from a Saint. The godly are endued with that wisdom from above which is
peaceable; they offer no wrongs, they return no revenge; their peace from God
inclines their heart to peaceableness toward men: a quiet conscience never
produced an unquiet conversation. The peace of God makes those who have offered
wrong to others, willing to make satisfaction; and those who have suffered
wrong from others, readyto afford remission. If the great God, who is offended,
speaks peace to man, should not poor man, when an offender, offer peace much
more to man? If God be pacified toward man, upon his free grace; should not man
be pacified to man, it being a commanded duty? The more God quiets us, the
less shall we sinfully disquiet others: Its the portion of Saints, to find
trouble in the world, not their property to cause trouble in the world. The
reason why Gods people are accounted unpeaceable in the world, is, because they
disquiet men's lusts: Their will is for peace, but it is necessity which makes them
contend. Col. 3.15.
The peace of God rules in their hearts; and when the unquiet affections of
anger, hatred, revenge, arise in them, (like the judge or umpire of public
wrastlings) this peace of God does (...), rule by appeasing st^ifes, and ending
controversies. In short, the people of God are doves, sheep, not birds and
beasts of prey: Christ gave the Lamb; they will not have the Lion, or the Tiger
for their cognizance. The unpeaceablenesse of godly men is because they have no
more godliness: As the sons of God have a precept, so have they a property to
be harmless. Phil. 2.15.

The last resemblance whereby the Apostle describes the sin and misery of these
seducers, is contained in these words: Wandering stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever.

EXPLICATION.
Two parts are here to be explained.

1. Their title. Wandering stars. 2. Their estate. To whom is reserved etc.
In the first, their title, two things are to be opened.

1. What the Apostle here terms these seducers. 2 Why he so terms them.
1. What he here terms them. viz. 1. Stars. and those 2. Wandering Stars. (...)
secundum aliqu^s derivatur ab (...) quod a stra (...) putent esse, id est,
ignea, unde et ignes et fla^^ m^ pr^ stellis etc. sidus quia sidat, insidat,
codemque loco stet, Varro vocatum vult. Alii deducunt a (...) et (...),
scribendo cum y, sydus. q. sit signum in quo simul stella conspiciantur. Lorin.
in loc.


1. Stars, (...). Not to enquire whither the word (...) be derived from the
Hebrew (...), signifying fire, because stars appear fiery, by poets called
fires and flames; or (...), because of its coruscation and shining, or from the
word (...), because a star is never standing still, but always in motion: nor
to discourse of the magnitude, numbers, motions, influences of the stars. The
nature of a star properly so called, is the same with that of the heaven,
wherein its placed; the Scripture mentions no difference between their nature;
and the parts of simple bodies, (such are the heavens,) are of the same nature
with the whole. Besides, if the stars were not of the same nature with the
heavens, they should be of an elementary nature, and so their motion should be
direct and straight; whereas its ever circular. And yet a star is not so
transparent, subtle, and thin a body as is the other part of the heaven, for if
so, it could not shine, reflect, and cast forth light, more then does the orb
or heaven wherein it shines. A thin and diaphonous body, as the air, may
receive, but not reflect light. It has therefore more thickness and
condensation, then the other parts of the heaven, that so it may reflect and
cast forth those beams which are cast upon it by the sun; and in respect of
that compactnesse and thickness wherein the star exceeds the other part of
heaven, the orb or heaven in which the star shines, is not unfitly compared to
mere and pure water, but the star to water congealed or turned into ice, Ipsi
coeli quantum ad omnes parts in se quidem luminosi sunt, Lumine little
substantiam penetrante, non tamen nisi ratione astrorum, possunt lumen de se
refundere Ex hac sua densitate et Compactione, habent ut possint radios solares
ad se emissos reflectere. Titelm. phys. p. 98.
or (as some make the comparison) the heaven wherein the star is placed, is
like a broad and plain plank, or cloven board, but the star like the knot or
knurle in the board.

2. Wandering stars Gr. (...).

There are two sorts of wandering stars. 1. Such as are commonly and properly
called the seven planets, which are termed planets or wandering stars, not
because they wander more then other stars, or are rovingly and uncertainly
carried hither and thither, (for they have a most constant and regular motion,
which they duly fulfill in their set and definite times;) but they are called
wandering; or planets, because they proceed in their orb, by various and
different motions, keep not the same distance nor situation among themselves,
nor one place under the firmament; nor are always of one distance from any of
the fixed stars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna.
but move sometimes more swiftly, sometimes more flowly; and are sometimes
higher, sometimes lower, sometimes appearing with more light, sometimes with
less, yea sometimes not appearing at al, Unde Cicero planetas dictos existimat,
per antiphrasim: q. minime errantes.
according to their particular motions.

The other sort of wandering stars, are but appearingly such, and improperly
called such, and they are termed (...), (or according to Aristotle (...)) such
as dart, Stella discurrentes, transvolantes, trajicientes.
leap, and run hither and thither, and wander into several parts of the
heavens, and (often) fall down upon the earth, they being only hot and dry
exhalations gathered together in a round heap, and yet not compacted thoroughly,
elevated unto the highest part of the lower region, and there only kindled by
antiperistasis, Ovid 2. Metaph. De (...) lapsa sereno qu^ si non Cecidit,
possit cecidisse videri, s^pe etiam stellas vento impendente videbis precipites
Coel^ labi -- Virg. 1 Georg. Decidua sydera. Plin.
and seeking to ascend higher, by the sudden cold of the middle region are
beaten back, and so appear as though stars should slide and leap from place to
place. I conceive that Christ speaks of these stars, Matthew. 24.29. where he
says, the stars shall fall from heaven. Thus Aug. l. 2. de civ. dei cap. 24.
vid. Lud. Viv. Comment.

And that our Apostle speaks of these stars, as it is the opinion of Junius,
Perkins, Diodat, and also of sundry among the Papists, as Cajetan, Lapide,
Lorinus; so seems it very probable, considering that tho the 7 planets have
various and different motions in their orbs, yet their motions are so regular
and constant, that they are certainly known even before they have fulfilled
them, and also give clear direction to a man concerning times and seasons, and
the parts of the heavens and earth; and therefore it seems not probable, that
the Apostle would call these seducers wandering stars, or (as the Syriack)
seductrices, or (as the Arabic) caliginosas, by comparing them to the seven
planets: And besides, as the punishments contained in the former metaphors of
trees, clouds, waves, are the continuations of the three foresaid resemblances,
so the punishment which the Apostle subjoynes, [blackness of darknesse] seems a
continuation of the metaphor of wandering stars and is such as agrees not to the
seven planets, but to these meteors or transitory impressions or exhalations,
which though for a time they flame and blaze brightly, yet quickly go out and
end in soot, smoke, and black darkness.

2. Why does our Apostle here call these seducers stars, and wandering stars.

1. By giving them this title of stars, I conceive our Apostle intends either
first to show their duty, which was as Christians, especially as teachers of
others, to shine like stars before others, both by their doctrine and life, and
by both to be holily influential upon them: or 2. (rather) the Apostle by
calling them stars, would insinuate what they desired to be esteemed and
accounted among the people, namely the eminent and glorious lights of the
Church, such as were fixed in heaven in respect of their meditations and
affections, such as directed others in the way to heaven, afforded spiritual
heat and life and quickening to them; whereas indeed, they were but false
lights, wandering stars, such as led or rather misled people into the ways of
error and destruction. And both these reasons of the Apostles calling these
seducers stars, are made more then probable by that frequently used and elegant
comparison of scripture, wherein the Ministers of the Church are set forth by
stars. Dan. 8.10. Rev. 12.4. Rev. 1.16. Rev. 2.1.
Dan. 12.3. They who turn many unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars.
Apoc. 1.20. the seven stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, etc. and most
fitly may the Ministers of the Church be compared to stars. In regard 1. of
their nature: a star is of the same nature with the heavens, celestial, not
Elementary; Ministers should be pure, Job. 25.5. 1 Timothy 4.12. 2 Cor 6.6.
blameless, inoffensive; they should teach facienda et faciendo, voce et vita,
by lip and life, tongue and hand; their profession is holy, they are compared
to Angels, called holy Angels; the prophets were called holy Prophets: In their
heart they should experimentally find the work of holiness, and in their
conversations express it. 1 Cor. 3.5.6.7 Ephesians. 4.11.
2. It is the nature of a star to be receptive of light, and that from the Sun;
Ministers should abound in the light of knowledge. They are called lights; their
lips should preserve knowledge, they should be apt to teach: and as the stars
beams are borrowed from the sun; the calling, gifts, abilities of the Minister
are from Christ; he has set them in his Church, he is with them, without him
they can do nothing; he gives them work, strength, success, wages.

2. Stars in respect of their situation and position, they are high placed
above the earth; and thus Ministers should be stars advanced above others, as
in respect of their calling, which of all others is the most excellent and
honorable, and of their gifts of wisdom etc. so of that high regard, and
reverend esteem, double honor which the faithful should bestow upon them. As
they have the highest place in the Church, so walking worthy of their place,
they should have the highest place in the hearts of believers; but especially
they should be high and heavenly in their aims, affections, Conversations:
they should carry themselves as the Prophets and Ministers of the most high;
they should not undertake their high and glorious function for low and base
ends, for honor, wealth, Ease, but for the advancing of Christ, the bringing
of souls to heaven. Their affections must not be set upon these things which
are below: money and possessions should lie at their feet, not their heart. An
earthly minded minister resembles a clod, not a star; their Conversation should
be in heaven. A Star would give no light, if it were not in heaven. Instruction
is made profitable to the people by the heavenly carriage of the minister:
Stars are of a round sphericall figure, and an orb or boul touches the earth
not as a plane, but only in puncto. A little earth should seem enough to a
minister, 1 Timothy 6.8. And as the greatest stars, in regard of their distance
from the earth appear but small, so those ministers who in gifts, and graces
are most Eminent, 1 Cor. 4.9.13.
are yet in the opinions of men, small, vile, Contemptible, the offscouring of
the world, and basely esteemed: this is their lot, but withal, Mat. 20.26.
it should be their Care to be little in their own esteem, though never so
higly advanced above others, considering that as Gods free love gave them their
place, and glory, so their own pride may quickly take away both from them.

3. Stars in respect of the different degrees of their glory. One star differs
(says the Apostle) from another star in glory. 1 Cor. 15.41.
There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon. In Christ Jesus is the
fullness of light and knowledge, and to his Ministers he variously and
differently dispenses his gifts, there are difference of administrations,
diversities of gifts, diversities of operations, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5.6.
though the same Spirit, Lord, God. To one is given by the spirit the word of
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, etc. the self same spirit dividing
to every man severally as he will. Ministers have gifts differing according to
the grace that is given them. There are several notes in Music, yet all make
up one harmony; and there are sundry and different qualifications in Ministers,
yet all tending to the Churches use and benefit. And therefore

4. Stars in respect of their usefulness and beneficialnesse to the Church.
Stars are not made to be useful to themselves but others. Ministers must not
seek their own, but others good. Stars give direction, light, influences, etc.
Its a great help to mariners, when they can see a star in a dark night. When
Paul and they sailed with him could see neither Sun, nor star for their
direction, they were without all hope of coming safe to Land, Act. 27.20. Many
poor souls are cast away for want of ministers to direct to Christ: they should
be like that star, which showed the Wisemen where to find Christ. And (as they
did, so) people should rejoice with exceeding joy when they see such a star.
Ministers (as stars) should give light to, and be the light of the world, both
in respect of Doctrine and Conversation. A minister must not hide his gifts and
put his candle under a bushel: nor should others extinguish these Lights,
either by withdrawing the oil of maintenance, or blowing them out with the
wind of persecution. These stars must shine though dogs bark, though men shut
their eyes, and in a night of persecution; yea then most brightly. Their light
should shine that God may be glorified. 1 Timothy 4.12.
They must be examples in word, Conversation, Charity. etc. 2 Tit. 7. 1 Pet.
5.3. 1 Cor. 4.16. 1 Cor. 11.1.
In all this showing themselves patterns of good works ensamples to the flock,
that others may follow them. In short, ministers (as stars) must be Common
goods, useful by their influences of warmth, moisture, to refresh and to make
fruitful the weary, the barren hearts of their hearers, to beget and increase
grace in them; and although they see not a desired success of their labors,
yet they must not refrain their influences, nor be discouraged with the earths
unfruitfulness,

God speaks of the Pleiades and Orion, Job. 38.31.
which are a company of stars in the heavenly Orb; Can thou bind the sweet
influences of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? When the Pleiades
arise, its Spring; they open the earth, they make herbs and flowers grow, the
trees to sprout, and the plants to wax green. Orion produces cold, the Winter
comes when that shows it self. Good Ministers (as the Pleiades) quicken the
heart, warm and make it fruitful in holiness. Bad Ministers (like the stars of
Orion) cool and dead peoples hearts to all goodness.

5. Stars in respect of their swift and Constant motion; they must be stars for
motion, as well as for promotion: It Is true, their motion should only be in
their Orb and Sphere; they should not so visit others Dioces, as to neglect
their own; nor be Busybodies in other men's matters, nor entangle themselves
in the affairs of this life, nor follow other vocations, lest they teach those
of other vocations to fall into theirs; they must not leap out of their own
element, nor forsake the employments of Prayer, Study, Preaching, etc. In
worldly affairs, they should be as fish out of the water; but yet in their own
Orb let them move: Loytering is unsuitable to a Harvest-man; they must be
Workmen that need not be ashamed; its better to be worn with using, then
rusting. Paul's glory was not, that he Lorded it, but that he labored more then
they all: they must never think their labor is ended, till their life be
ended: they must look upon their motion and work as circular, it must ever
return; and the end of one service, is to be the beginning of another: their
lives must be a succession of labors, praying, studying, preaching,
conversing; (yea (if God will) conflicting must be added) like the waves of the
Sea, overtaking one another: The wages will countervail for all.

6. Stars, in respect of their Duration and Continuance. They are set in a
Firmament: All the powers of Hell, shall never utterly remove Ministers. Till
we all meet in the unity of the faith, etc. We shall have Pastors and
Teachers. Jer. 31.36.
The Ordinances of the stars, are such, as shall not depart from before God:
They are established for ever: Jer. 33.25.
God has made a Covenant with the day and night, not to be broken: Till the
end of the world, there shall be stars in the Heaven, Ministers in the Church;
Christ will be with them, and therefore they must needs be to the end of the
world: Could they have been pulled down, that work had long ago been done. When
Satan the Dragon did his utmost, he left two parts of three behind; and that
third part which he swept down, were not fixed in their Orb, not faithful to
their trust, but wandering stars: but they who are in the right hand of Christ,
shall never be plucked away; Christ will have his number always. And they who
will go about to pull the stars out of his right hand, shall feel the strength
of his right hand. The destroying of the Ministry out of the Church, is but a
vain attempt; and yet, though these stars shall shine to the end of the World,
they shall shine no longer. When the night of sin and ignorance is at an end,
when the Sun of Righteousness shall arise, and the Lord Jesus himself shall
come, there will be no more use of these stars. When we come to drink out of
the Fountain, we shall no more need the Bottle: Prophesies shall fail, Tongues
shall cease, Knowledge shall vanish away: When that which is perfect is come, 1
Cor. 13.8, 10.
then that which is in part shall be done away. Christ shall both succeed, and
exceed them. All the stars in the Firmament, cannot make a Day; nor can all the
Teachers in the world convey that light, which Christ will afford in Heaven. Oh
how gloriously will our Sun shine, when all the (sometimes) glorious stars,
shall be swallowed up in his glory!

2. The Apostle calls these Seducers not simply stars, but wandering stars: And
why wandering stars? (understanding such as are sliding, gliding, shootting,
falling stars?)

1. In regard of the matter of these stars: They were but earthly exhalations,
when they seemed to shine in all their glory; they were not of that pure
Celestial nature, with those stars which they did so resemble; they had
Earthly, or as Austin speaks of the rich Glutton, they had animas triticeas,
wheaten hearts, they sought themselves; their belly was their God, they minded
earthly things: Earth and Slime was their food and fuel: and when the earthly
exhalation of Profit, Pleasure, and Honor was spent, these stars went out:
They were not like stars that shined to benefit the earth, but merely to be
fed, and by being fed by the earth. They were slimie, sensual, unclean
creatures, when they were most shining; servants of corruption: They taught
false Doctrines for filthy lucres sake, and steered their Course by the Compass
of Profit; so that though the world (had they been true stars) should have been
guided by them, they were guided by the world.

2. In respect of their outside shows and hypocrisy: Though they were but
slymie matter, yet they had a bright and shining appearance; They transformed
themselves into Angels of light. They had a glorious outside, and an inglorious
inside; like those false Teachers among the Galatians, they did only (...),
make a fair show outwardly. A wandering star, has nothing of a star but the
show; and these nothing of Ministers, but only the Title; they were
confutations of their professions, being without knowledge, vain janglers.
their science was falsely so called; though they might term themselves
Gnostics, and pretend to be the only knowing men in the Church, they left the
Scripture, and only regarded Fables. They were stars without influences, they
neither furthered the holiness, nor the peace of their Hearers; their Doctrines
tended to carnal liberty and uncleanness; and soon did their mistaken Admirers
find, that peace and true liberty could never be found in such ways.

3. In respect of their instability: A wandering star keeps no certain course:
the skilfullest Astrologer knows not which way it will move. They who leave the
truth, know not where they shall stop; the heart is only established with
grace: A soul without holiness, is a Ship without Ballast; it holds every
thing, and truly holds to nothing. These Seducers, like a skipping, dancing
star, wavered, doubted, were Scepticks in Religion, not settled in the Truths
thereof, halting between several opinions; not placed upon a firm Foundation,
nor partaking of the full assurance of understanding, neither firm to the
Truth, nor their own opinions; forgetting what they have been, not
understanding what they are, and not knowing what they shall be.

4. In respect of * (...), errare, Mat. 18.12, 13. and 22.29. Seducere; Mat.
24.4. Mark 13.5.6. Joh 7.12. inerrorem induci and seduci, Mat. 24.24. Luke
21.8. 1 Cor. 15.33. Errare and in errorem mittere, 2 Timothy 3.13. (...),
seductor, Mat. 27.63. 2 Cor. 68. 2 John 7. (...), spiritu^ erroris, five
errenei, 1 Timothy 4.1.
seduction, and misleading of others. A wandering star, is an unsafe guide: The
word (...), here translated wandering, comes from a word which signifies to err
or wander, as also to seduce, mislead, or make another to err; and is a word
borrowed from Travelers, who are wandering in a wrong way. The Syriack read
this place, stellae seductrices. The unwary Mariner, Per devia ducunt.
who sails by a wandering star, may as well dash upon a Rock or quicksands, as
hit upon his Haven. The Traveller, who follows a wandering star, must at best
wander, and is in danger of falling into a River, or Quagmire. The blind lead
the blind, and both fall into the ditch. The deceived Seducer, is also
deceiving. Many follow these false, these fools-fires, though into pernicious
ways. Seducers have most Disciples; and though the Leader shall be deepest in
damnation, yet the follower will be as comfortless, in falling with him, as
inexcusable in following of him.

5. Lastly, Wandering stars, in respect of their extinction, and being put out.
These wandering stars continue not. Seducers may flash, and blaze, and flourish
for a while, but they are not permanent: The true star, shall stand as long as
the Frmament; it may be eclipsed, and there may be an interposition of Clouds,
to hinder its appearing; but never shall there be a destruction of its light.
How frequently have we seen the Erroneous with their errors, like blazing
Meteors, go out in smoke and stink, when the sweetly influential stars, the
faithful Ministers of the word, have still increased in their pure luster!

Seducers, like transitory Meteors amd impression, end (as I said in the former
part of this verse) in the smoke of shame and dishonor here, when their
errors are discovered; and hereafter, when for their errors they are
punished: whereas he who is a real, fixed, influential star, continues to shine
both in the brightness of the truth which he holds forth, and in the glory of
that recompense which he shall enjoy: In respect of the former, the brightness
of truth, even dead, he lives; the truth which he preached, lives for ever:
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot of his heavenly Doctrine. Do
the Prophets (says God by Zachariah) live for ever? but my words, Zech. 1.5.
and my statutes which I commanded my servants the Prophets, did they not take
hold of your Fathers? the truth lives, though the man dies. The Ministers may
be bound, but the word of God (says Paul) is not bound, its influence cannot
be restrained. Heresy has often dyed with the Heretic, but truth survives
the Preacher. In respect of the latter, the glory of recompense, the true star,
the faithful Ministers, shall shine as the stars in the Firmament, with the
light of glory, who have conveyed to so many the light of grace: whereas,
should the wandering star not be extinguished, and end here in the darkness of
ignominy, and discovery of his black error, yet his end hereafter shall be the
blackness of darkness in hell. This for the opening of the first particular,
Their title, wandering stars. The second follows: Their estate; To whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

Three things here are briefly to be opened: 1. The horribleness and dismalness
of the punishment it self: blackness of darkness: 2. The certainty and
unavoidableness thereof: Its reserved for them. 3. Its durableness and
continuance: it is for ever.


For the first: (...) ab (...), retineo quia per ten^bras gradum sistere
cogimur.
The dismalness of their misery is set out by blackness of darkness.

As darkness is properly taken for the negation, defect, and privation of
light; and according to the notation of the word, for such a want of light, as
hinders a man from walking; like that Egyptian darkness, by which people were
constrained to sit still, Caligo tenebrarum, Bez. Perfectio tenebrarum, Arab.
and not to rise out of their place for three days: So the addition of this
word (...), blackness, notes a further increase of this darkness, such (as is
spoken concerning that in Egypt) as may be felt; Darkness seems to be black.
and thereby the same thing is imported with that of utter darkness, (Mat.
8.12. and 21.13. and 25.30.) i. e. such as is outmost and furthest removed from
the region of light; for this Phrase blackness of darkness, Caligo
Caliginosissima. Isa. 60.2. Gross darkness.
intends as much, as most black, thick darkness; it being a kind of Hebraical
Phrase, like unto that, Mat. 26.64. the right hand of Power; that is, a most
powerful right hand: So Romans 7.24. a body of death, is put for a mortal body:
And Ephesians. 4.24. holiness of truth, for true holiness.

This thick, black, gross darkness, is not to be understood Properly, for that
negation, Of this, see Part 1. p. 503. at large.
or privation of light by reason of the absence of the Sun, etc: but
Metaphorically, for great calamities and miseries. And in Scripture there is a
threefold misery set forth by darkness:

1. External misery, John 30.26. When I looked for good, evil came unto me, and
when I waited for light, there came darkness. So Isa. 5.30. If one look to the
Land, behold darkness and sorrow. So Isa. 8.22. Zech. 1 15. Joel 1.2. Amos 5.20.
They shall look unto the earth, and behold trouble and darkness. Isa. 47.5.
Get thee into darkness, O Daughter of the Caldeans, etc.

2. Internal, comprehending 1. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 These. 5.4. John 3.19.
Darkness and blindness of mind; the want of the saving knowledge of God and
his ways, Luke 1.79. To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the
shadow of death, etc. Ioh. 1.5. The light shines in darkness, etc. Ephesians. 5.8.
Ye were sometime darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord, etc. 2. Spiritual
dissertion, or the withdrawing of the light of Gods countenance; and thus Heman
complains, Psalm. 88.6. That God had laid him in darkness. And Isa. 50.10. Who
is there among you, that walks in darkness, and sees no light? etc.

3. Eternal darkness. The miserable condition of the damned in Hell, by reason
of their separation from God, called utter darkness, Mat. 22.13. and 8.12.
because farthest distanced from the light of Gods pleased countenance; and this
estate of misery is fitly compared to darkness, both in respect of the Cause
and the Effect of darkness: 1. The (though only deficient) Cause of darkness,
is the withdrawing of the light; so the separation from the favorable presence
of God, Matthew. 7.23. Matthew. 25.
is the greatest misery of the damned: the Hell of Hell, is to be without Gods
loving and gracious presence in Hell. 2. The Effect of darkness, is horror and
affrightment, and trouble. There Is no joy but in Gods presence, in that there
is fullness of joy, The misery of this condition, see described, Part 1. p. 505.
Aeternis tenebris damnari decet qui sese transfigurantes in Angelos lucis,
veram lucem non praedicarunt, sed suasmet magis tenebras and caligines
dilexerunt, and in meras errorum tenebras alies pracipitaverunt. Lorin. in loc.
Recte in tenebras tormentorum mittentur aeternas, qui in Ecclesiam Dei, sub
nomine lucis tenebras inducebant errorum. B^da.
Psalm 16. but without it, only weeping and wailing; blackness of darkness,
thick darkness, purae tenebrae, not the least glimpse and crevis of light, and
mixture of Joy. And most fitly is this punishment of blackness of darkness,
threatened against these Seducers, who transformed themselves into Angels of
Light, and yet held not forth the light of the Truth, but loved darkness more
then light, and lead others into the darkness of sin and Error: and how just
was it, that they should suffer by thick, true, perfect darkness, who deluded
the world with seeming and appearing light!

2. For the certainty and unavoidableness of this punishment. Jud. says, this
blackness of darkness is reserved for them (...). The word properly imports the
solicitous keeping and reserving of a thing, lest it be lost or taken away by
others; a keeping with Watch and Ward, most accurately and vigilantly, as a
Prisoner is kept. Hence it is that Act. 4.3. and 5.18. (...) is used to
signify a Prison. In this place therefore (as there is employed Gods present
forbearance to punish these Seducers with the blackness of darkness, it being
reserved and kept for them, not actually (as yet) inflicted upon them, so)
there is principally intended the certainty and unavoidableness of this
punishment, and the impossibility of the pertinacious sinners escaping thereof.
Nor is it any wonder that this estate should be thus certainly reserved for
them; Den^tat firmum and ratum divinae justitiae decretum de suppli^ie aeterno.
Lorin. in loc. (...). 1 Pet. 1.4.
the firm and irreversible decree (says Lorinus, in this place Orthodox) of
God to punish them for ever, or that ordaining them of old to condemnation,
mentioned ver. 4. is here denoted, so that as in Gods decree, Heaven is an
Heritance reserved for the Faithful; this misery is reserved for the wicked.
Needs likewise must this punishment be reserved for incorrigible sinners, if we
consider the Truth, Justice, Power, Omniscience* of God; His Truth, it being
impossible for him to lie; and who is as true in his threatenings against the
obstinate, as in his promises to the returning sinner. His Justice, whereby he
will not suffer sin always to go unpunished, Romans 2.5, 6.
and will render to every one according to his work: His Power, so great, that
none can deliver the wicked out of his hand; yea, so great, as that they can
neither be able to keep out, nor break out of Prison; his Omniscience whereby
none can escape, or hide himself from his eye. In short, needs must this
blackness of darkness be certainly reserved, if we consider the foolish
diligence even of sinners themselves; they daily hoarding up their own
Damnation, and treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath; like some precious
treasure which they keep so carefully, as if they were afraid that any should
bereave them of it.

3. For the durableness and continuance of this their misery; the Apostle says
it was for ever. The misery, Everlasting chains under darkness, ver. 6.
Everlasting fire ver. 7.
and yet the equity whereof, see Part 1. page 508.588. Eternity it is that
shall make their fire hot, their chains heavy, their darkness black and thick.
How long does a dark night seem in this world! but how dark will a (not long,
but) eternal night seem in the next world! How hideous is that woe, whereby the
wicked shall ever strive to part with that which they shall never lose, and
crave that which they shall never procure! If it be so great a misery for a
starving Prisoner to be kept without bread but for a day or two in a Prison;
and to see through his grate, Passengers laden with that plenty of provisions,
which he must not so much as touch, Oh what a woe will it be, for the Damned
ever to see the Faithful feasting themselves in the fruition of Gods presence,
and they to know that they shall eternally starve (and yet not dye) in the want
of the least drop, the smallest crumb of that full Banquet of Happiness, which
the Saints ever enjoy in Gods presence!

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Observe. 1.
The world, without the Word, lies in a condition of darkness. The Ministers of
the Word, are the stars, the light of the world; take them away, and every
place is full of darkness. The people to whom Christ preached, sat (before) in
darkness, in the region and shadow of death, Matthew. 4.16. The Ephesians,
sometime were darkness, (says the Apostle.) Before the Gospel is savingly
delivered, we are under the power of darkness; and darkness is that term from
which we are called when we are brought out of our natural estate. And in three
respects is the world without the Gospel, in darkness.

1. In respect of ignorance; 1. It knows not God. The Gentiles are said to be
such as knew not God: The Word only discovers him savingly, because it only
makes known God in Christ. The wisest of the Heathens, till this light came,
could not know him; The world by wisdom knew not God, they worship^ the unknown
God. 2. It knows not the will and ways of God: and this follows from the
former, for he who knows not what another is, cannot know what he loves. The
will of God is only laid down in the Word of God. There is no service pleases
him, but that which himself prescribes. The knowledge of the Heathen only serves
to render them inexcusable for not doing what they knew, not able sufficiently
to understand all they had to do.

2. The world is in darkness in respect of wickedness and unrighteousness. A
man in the dark sits still and forbears to walk, as he does who is in the
light. Wicked men are unprofitable, slothful servants, unactive in the ways of
God, ^zek. 15.45.
not those by whom God gains. They are like the branches of the Vine, in
building, good for nothing. He who is in the dark, wanders, stumbles, or falls
every step that he takes. Every wicked action, is a falling into a slough, and
down a precipice, a deviating from the way of Gods Commandments; and therefore
sin is in Scripture called a work of Darkness. Yea, they who are in the dark,
are not ashamed of the filthiest garments which they wear, or of the
uncomeliest actions they perform; and they who are without the light of the
Word, in a night of sin and ignorance, blush not in the doing of those things,
which he, who is Spiritually enlightened, is ashamed to hear, behold, or think
of. What profit (says the Apostle) have you in those things whereof you are
now ashamed?

3. The world is in darkness, in respect of fear, horror, and misery: Men in
the dark, tremble at the stirring of every twig: There were they (says David,
Psalm. 14.5.) in great fear: and it is called their fear; Fear not (says the
Prophet, Isai. 8.12.) their fear. It is only the light of Gods countenance
which scatters the clouds of fear. Till fury be taken out of God, fear can
never be removed out of men; but through the fear of death, they are all their
life time subject to bondage; Hebr. 2.15.
when any misery befalls them, they tremble, as did the Elders of Bethlehem at
Samuels coming, they not knowing whether it comes peaceably or no: nor is it
any wonder that the darkness of fear, should here seize upon those who expect
utter darkness hereafter in the everlasting separation from the light of Gods
countenance, wherein there is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore. We
see (then) the true cause, that the world has ever so much hated the word,
which discovers its deeds of darkness. I have given them thy word (says
Christ) and the world has hated them; Joh. 17.14.
and he who was the word Incarnate, was also hated by the world, because he
testified that the deeds thereof were evil. Hatred is the genius of the Gospel
(says Luther) the shadow which ever attended upon the Gospels sunshine. Though
Saints are blameless and harmless; the sons of God without rebuke; Phil. 2.15.
yet if they will shine as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation,
they must look for opposition; but how irrational and groundless is this
hatred of the world! for though the word manifests its deeds of darkness, yet
withal it discovers its destruction in eternal darkness; and were the light
thereof beheld and loved, it would prevent it and lead by the light of grace,
to that of glory.

2 Obs. 2
Great is the difference between the light which shines here, and that which we
shall behold hereafter. In the night of this world, we have stars to give us
light; we have a light which shines in a dark place; but when the sun shall
arise, 2 Pet. 2.
all these stars shall be put out: Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, are
given but til we all meet in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God. Ephesians. 4.13. and then prophesies and tongues shall cease, knowledge
shall vanish away: when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part
shall be done away, when we shall behold the light of the sun, we shall no more
want starlight, or candlelight; the immediate vision of God, shall abolish
these: the people of God shall be above Ordinances and Ministry, when they shall
be above sin and error: In heaven, all our difficulties and knots shall be
untied: though here we are doubtful of many truths, yet in heaven we shall
truly have cause to say, now Lord, thou speak plainly, and not in parables.
He who died in his child hood, in heaven knows more, then the wisest Solomon
ever did upon earth; and that little light or speak of joy which here the
Saints had, shall in heaven be blown into a flame, their bud of joy shall there
be a full blown flower; Psalm. 97.11.
here light is sown, but there shall be a harvest, a fullness of joy: Oh blessed
estate!

3. Obs. 3
People should labor to walk and work by the light of the Ministry. Yet a
little while (says Christ) is the light with you, walk while ye have the
light, John 12.35. let us walk decently (says the Apostle Romans 13.13) as in
the day. The light of the Gospel must put Christians upon a two fold manner of
walking and working.

1. Speedily. 2. Accurately.

1. Speedily. Our light is not lasting, our candle may soon be put out; the
most brightly shining Minister, shall ere long, be put under the bushel of the
grave, if he be not before blown out by the blast of Satan's rage, and the
worlds persecution; your fathers, where are they? and the Prophets, do they
live for ever? Zech. 1.5.
The light of life is but very short, but the light of the seasons of grace are
far shorter. A book which is not our own, but only lent us to read on, and that
but for a day or two, we make much have to read over. In the grave, there is no
more preaching, no more hearing of Sermons; The living, the living they only
praise God, and preach to men; short seasons require speedy services. Oh what a
shame is it that we should have torn so many books, worn out so many Ministers,
and yet have learned no more lessons I which of us can promise to our selves,
that our light shall shine half so long, as we have formerly abused it, and
wantond in the shining of it? Oh what would damned spirits give for one glympse
of ministerial light again! would they not (think we) might they have such a
favor, plie their work faster then ever they formerly did, or now we do? we
have scribled out much paper to no purpose, we are almost come to the end
thereof, and had we not then need behusband our time, and write the closer?

2. Let us walk and work accurately in the shining of ministerial light;
decently, precisely. Though our light be but starlight in comparison of what
it shall be in heaven, yet it is sun-light, compared with that which shined in
the time of the old Law, and since in the days of Popery; we are now neither
darkened with Jewish shadows, nor popish fogs; we live under the clearest
dispensation of the covenant of grace; we therefore live worse, than did they
in those times, because we live not better: How many Kings and Prophets would
have thought themselves happy, to have seen one of the days of the Son of man
which we enjoy! our great salvation neglected, will be damnation great and
heightened; what a shame is it for us, that many have done their masters work
better by dim moonlight, than do we by clear sun-light! How shameful is it for
us in the light of the Gospel, to show our selves in the filth and sordid rags
of sin and profaneness! Cast off the works of darkness in a Land of light.

4. Observe. 4.
Its an high degree of impiety for any, especially for those who pretend to be
inctructers of souls, to mislead and seduce others from the right way. The sin
of these Seducers, it was to be false Lights, and wandering and misguiding
Meteors, who pretended to be the eminent and true Teachers of souls, and to be
both influential and directing stars. Severely do we find Christ denouncing
woes against the Scribes and Pharisees; and with much holy acrimony does he
reprove them for being blind and mis-guiding Guides, calling them several times
fools and blind: Mat. 23.16.17, 19.
And verse 26. he names the Pharisee, Thou, blind Pharisee: And ( whosoever
(says Christ) shall break one of the least of these Commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: that is,
shall be contemned, and not counted worthy to be so much as a Member of the
Church of God in the New Testament. The Apostle Paul sharply expresses himself
against seducing Teachers, calling them the Ministers of Satan, 2 Cor. 11.15.
False Apostles, deceitful Workers, verse 13. Grievous Wolves, Dogs, Acts 20.29.
Phil. 3.2, etc. How sad a complaint is that of the Prophet! Isa. 3.12. They
which lead thee, cause thee to err. And Chap. 9.16. The Leaders of this
people, cause them to err, and they that are led of them, are destroyed. And
Jer. 23.13. I have seen folly in the Prophets of Samaria, they have caused my
people Israel to err. No sins are so eminently, and inexcusably sinful, as
those committed against men's callings and professions. What wickedness greater,
then for a Judge to be unjust, for a Physician to be a Murderer, for a Seer to
be blind, for a Guide to misguide? It Is not so heinously sinful for any, as for
a Teacher of souls, to be a deceiver of souls: Who shall show a soul the way to
heaven, if a Minister (like Elijah, who pretending to lead the blind Syrians to
Dothan, guided them to Samaria, where they were in the midst of their Enemies;)
shall lead them the way to Hell? Who should save life, if they who should break
the bread of life, give poison in stead of bread? Or if they whose lips should
feed many, only infect and poison many? And further, what seduction is so
destructive as soul-seduction? Is the misery of leading men's bodies into
Ditches and Quagmires by a fools fire, comparable to the woe of being led into
the pit of perdition, and the ditch of hell and damnation by an erroneous
Minister? he that is mis-guided into hell, can never be drawn out again: here
it is true, vestigia nulla retrorsum, no coming back. The cheating a man of his
money, though it be a loss, its a recoverable one; but he that's deceived of his
soul, guld out of his God, what has he more to lose, or what possibility has
he ever to repair his damage? There is no folly so great, as to be coggd and
enticed out of life eternal; nor any deceit so cruel, as to cheat the soul:
nothing can be light, wherewith the soul is hurt. Oh how deeply then is God
provoked, when he delivers up a people to the mis-guidings of Seducers! Its
better ten thousand times to have a tyrannical Prince over our bodies, then to
have a treacherous Pastor over our souls; and yet how do people groan and sigh
under the former, and how slightly do they regard the latter! Surely, if for
the sins of a people, their Magistrates are oppressive; for their sins it is,
that their Ministers are erroneous. How just is it with God, that they who will
not be Disciples to truth, should be Proselytes to error! that when none will
follow the seeing Guide, many should follow the pernicious ways of the blind
Guide! The true deserving cause of peoples seduction, is, (as the Prophet
speaks) The people love to have it so. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the
people love to have it so; Jer. 5.3. They will not endure sound Doctrine, they
will not suffer a Micaiah to instruct them, and therefore God sends them a
Zedekiah to seduce them. They who received not the love of the truth, had
strong delusions sent them from God, and upon them the deceivableness of
unrighteousness took hold, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. The Prophet is a fool, (says
Hosea, Chap. 9.7.) The spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thine
iniquity, and the great hatred. The instructers of Israel, were foolish, blind,
and erroneous; because the iniquity of the people in rebelling against the
light of truth, had stirred up God thus to show his great hatred against them.
God never sends darkness among a people, till they shut their eyes against the
light. If we will imprison truth, God may justly set Seducers loose. Oh labor
then to follow true, if you would not be misled by false lights; and to be
directed by fixed, if you would not be seduced by wandering stars. To conclude
this needful point (then) with caution both to Ministers and People: To the
former, I offer my humble thoughts in this hearty request, That they would
consider, the best of them have sins enough of their own to answer for, without
contracting more by the misleading of others. As inexcusable it is, for
Ministers to lead people in a wrong way, as for people not to follow Ministers
in a right way. If then we would not mislead any in this night of darkness and
sin, let us be sure to be fixed stars our selves: let us neither be Planets nor
Meteors, let us be fixed to our Scripture Principles, deliberately choosing what
we should love, but then steadfastly loving what we have chosen. They who are to
lift up their voice as a trumpet, If the stars and sea-marks should change
their places, and remove to and fro, the passengers, who look for constant
direction, are in danger of being carried and cast upon quicksands and socks.
must not give an uncertain sound. A Minister must be fixed in the Scripture
orb, not having a particular motion of his own, but being merely carried
according to the motion of that his Orb. In all the reproaches a Minister meets
with for turning and moving, let his evident adhering to the word, manifest
that it is not the Shore, but only the Boatman that moves; the times will at
length come up to a Minister, if he be steadfast; however, let him take this for
an invincible ground of encouragement, He shall be blessed in directing those
who will not be directed by him; Whosoever does, and teaches men to observe
the Commandments (says Christ) shall be blessed, Mat 5.19.
though he cannot prevail with men to observe them. Christ propounds not the
conversion of people, as a property of a faithful Minister, but the doing and
teaching the will of God. To people, I present the needfulnese of taking heed
that they be not misled; to beware of wandering stars, false Prophets, Seducers.
Its possible to follow a mis-leading Guide with a good intention, but not with
good success. It may be equally hurtful to receive the word of God, as the word
of man; and to receive the word of man, as the word of God. Hearers must take
nothing upon trust; they must love men for their Doctrines, but not embrace
Doctrines for men: They must try the spirits, examine all by the Word, and
suffer no opinion to travel, unless it can show the Scripture Pass, and
pronounce its Shiboleth. The Scripture (like a sword of Paradse) should keep
errors from entering into our hearts. We should not be like Children, to gape
at, and to swallow whatever any puts to our mouths. In understanding we should
be men, and every opinion which cannot endure the beams of Scripture sun, is to
be thrown down as spurious. Build your faith upon no emenency of man; ever be
more forward to examine, then to admire what you hear; call none Master but
Christ; the error of the Master, is always the tentation, often the destruction
of the Scholar.

5. Obs. 5.
Great is Gods forbearance toward sinners. Blackness of darkness is reserved
for them, not presently inflicted upon them. Frequently does the Scripture
proclaim Gods long-suffering, and his being slow to anger: The Apostle mentions
his forberance and long-suffering, Romans 2.4. He endured with much
long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, Romans 9.22. He gave
the old World an hundred and twenty years space of repentance. He endured the
manners of the Israelites forty years in the Wilderness, Acts 13.18. Four
hundred years he spared the Canaanites, Genesis 15.16. And sundry ways may this
greatness of Gods long-suffering be amplified. 1. He forbears punishing
sinners, though he see their sin, and be most sensible thereof; he sees all the
circumstances of sin, the most secret and retired wickednesses in the heart,
all are naked, ripped up, ransackt, anatomized before him; men forbear to punish
men, because they know not the secret machinations of mischief, which are
against-them but God, though he beholds all, yet he spares long. 2. He does not
only behold sin where it is, but lothes it wherever he beholds it; though he
sees it every where with an eye of observation, yet no where with an eye of
approbation. Sin is opposite to his very nature; man may love sin, and yet be
still a man; but if God should love sin, he should cease to be God: he is under
sin, as a cart pressed with sheaves, Amos 2.13. All the hatred that man bears
to all the things in the world, which are either hateful or hurtful to him, is
not comparable to Gods detestation of the least sin. 3. He is able to punish
sin, wherever he either looks upon it or loathes it. As the secretest sinner is
within the reach of his eye, so the strongest sinner is within the reach of his
arm: he is as able to throw a sinner into hell, as to tell him of hell; he in all
his forbearances, loses not his power, but exercises his patience; he can,
but will not punish. 4. He does not only forbear punishment, but seeks to
prevent it: He waits that he may be gracious. He is not willing that any should
perish: he strikes more gently for a while, that he may not strike eternally;
and he stays and warns so long, that he may not strike at all. 5. He not only
suffers sinners long, but all the while he puts forth mercy toward them,
upholds their beings, feeds, heals, helps them. Sinners all the while they
live, spend upon the stock of mercy; God is at much loss, and great charges, in
continuing those mercies, which they ravel and wanton away unprofitably. 6. He
forbears to punish, without expecting any benefit to himself by it: If his
long-suffering bring us to repentance, the good redounds to us: It is then (as
the Apostle speaks) salvation. He loses nothing, if we be lost; he has no
addition to his own happiness, if we be happy. 7. He is patient and
long-suffering to sinners, who is much, nay infinitely our superior, and more
excellent then are we. Here, a King, the King of kings waits for Beggars; our
Lord and Master stands without at the door and knocks: Oh infinite
condescension! How widely does Gods carriage toward man, differ from man's
toward man? We (poor worms) have short thoughts; man will presently upon every
affront or neglect, be ready to call fire from heaven; it is well for poor
sinning man, he has to do with a long-suffering God: His fellow creature could
not, would not be so patient. God truly shows himself a God, as well by
sparing, as by punishing: I am God and not man, and therefore (says he) the
seed of Jacob are not destroyed. We further may gather, that its no sign that
men are innocent, because they are not punished: It follows not, because they
are great, that therefore they are good; this follows only, God is good. Nor
does Gods forbearance prove a sinner pardoned, it only speaks him for a time
(though the Lord knows for how short a time) reprieved. Justice is not dead,
but sleeps. God is sometimes said to hold his peace, never to be dumb: though
he be long-suffering, yet he is not ever-suffering. Gods patience, shows not
that God will always spare us; but that we should now repent. It is not a
pillow for the presumptuous, but a cordial for the penitent. God will require
interest hereafter, for all his forbearance. The longer the Child is in the
womb, the bigger it will be when it comes forth. Judgment delayed, will be
increased, unless prevented. Justice comes surely, though slowly to the
impenitent; the blackness of darkness is reserved for them, who are
unprofitable under light: If Patience make thee not blush, Power shall make
thee bleed. O thou (though) forborne sinner, labor for faith in threatenings;
take heed of self love, and shunning the thoughts of that severity, the feeling
whereof, thou can not shun. Study the end of Gods forbearance, and the vanity
of all earthly refuges, and reliefs, against punishment rseerved for an
incorrigible sinner.

6. Observe. Vlt.
Things earthly should teach us things heavenly. Its our duty to make a
spiritual improvement of earthly objects. The Apostle makes use of clouds,
trees, stars, waves, to spiritual purposes. The world is a great school to
teach us the knowledge of God. (...).
Though we have a superior doctrine, yet we must not neglect this. The
Prophets, Apostles, and Christ were much in this kind of instruction, by
similendes taken from the creatures; every of which is a ladder made of many
steps to raise up to God. A pair of spectacles whereby we may read God, the
more clearly and plainly. Our meditation should be like a Limbeck, into which
flowers being put, sweet water drops from it; and out of every earthly object
put into our meditations; some heavenly considerations should be drawn and
drop. All the creatures in general, Agustine says, be more doubted whether he
had a soul in his body (the effects whereof were evident,) then whether there
were a God in the world. Solil^^ l. 31.
we should improve to the Learning, 1. of Gods nature, and 2. our duty. His
nature, The invisible things of God are discovered by the creatures, Romans 1.20.
His power, in making them of nothing, and upholding them (as he made them) all
with his word. His eternity, for he that made them, must needs be before them.
His wisdom is manifest in the beauty, variety and distinction, order and
subordination of one to another, the exquisite cunning in the frame of the
smallest creature. His bounty and goodness, in the endowments bestowed upon
every one in its kind, his large provision for them all.

We should likewise 2. improve all the creatures in general to the learning of
our own duty. As 1. to depend upon him for all necessaries, Act. 17.28. Rom
11.36. Psalm. 104.29. Deus mundum animat. Audimus Creaturam tribus vocibus,
nobis loquentem, prima vex dicit, accipe: secunda dicit, read: Tertia dicit,
fuge. Accipe beueficium, read debitum, fuge supplicium. Hug. de sanc. vic. l.
2. de Arc. mor. c. 4.
as they do for provisions, their eyes waiting upon him: we must knock at his
door, and go to his fountain, Cast our Care upon him; in him we live and move,
and have our beings. Of him, through him, and to him, are all things: he is the
great householder of the world. Jezreel cries to the corn, wine and oil, these
cry and call to the earth, this calls to the heavens, but these call to God,
upon whom they all depend: and shall not we do so? 2. All creatures teach us
to love him and serve him, they being love tokens, God loving us better then
them; and all being instruments of punishment, if we fail in our duty. They all
serve the Lord by a perpetual Law. The winds and the seas obey him; fire,
snow, hayl etc. Psalm. 148.8. All the creatures, even frogs, grasshoppers, lice,
are his soldiers. He is commander in chief, they are all at his beck. In
obedience to him they will run from themselves, and cease to be themselves; the
sun will stand still, go back, the sea will be a solid wall, the fire will not
burn, iron will swim. And they serve us all so constantly day and night: they
serve us with their sweetest and choycest gifts: the Sun with influence of heat
and light. Trees with delightful fruit, and beasts with fleece and life, to
their own wasting and destruction. Oh how should we serve him even to the loss
of the best things we have, and how should the constant standing of the
creatures in that station wherein God at the first set them, make us ashamed of
our apostasy from God and rebellion against God!

3. All the creatures in general teach us earnestly to expect a better
condition than that which we now enjoy. The earnest expectation of the Creature
(says Paul) waits for the manifestation of the sons of God. Romans 8.19.
If there be something in the Creatures ( groaning and traveling in pain
until now, tired out by man's sin, and made subject to vanity) like an earnest
expectation of, and waiting for this manifestation; should not man who is the
sinner, and has made the creature subject to vanity, who has also reason, and
who shall partake of more happiness by that manifestation, much more desire
and look forit? shall man (of all Creatures) rest in, and be contented with a
state of vanity? The very unreasonable, yea insensible Creatures, will teach us
to soar to a more heavenly pitch of spirit.

And as all the Creatures in general may (thus) be improved spiritually, so 2.
may every particular Creature severally, whether in heaven or on the earth. For
heavenly Creatures, the Psalmist tells us Ps. 19.1. The heavens declare the
glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work. Ps. 8.3. When I
consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which
thou have ordained, what is man? etc. The pure and excellent matter of the
heavens speaks the greater purity and excellency of the workman; how pure also
our hearts should be, which are his lesser heaven; and how pure they should be
who expect to live in those heavens, into which no impure thing must enter: how
hateful also sin is to God, who for man's sin will one day set this beautiful
house on fire. The height of the heavens, shows the infinite height, and
honor, and majesty of him whose standing house is above all the visible
heavens, whose palace, seat and pavillion is in heaven above. The circular,
round figure of the heavens teaches us the infiniteness and perfection of the
maker. The firmness and stability of the heavens, declares Gods truth and
unchangeableness, whose word is their pillar; the safety likewise of that place
to lay up our treasures in: their swift motion and revolution in 24. hours,
instructs us of the readiness and swiftness which we should express in duty.
The light of heaven (of so unknown a nature) shows us the incomprehensible
nature of God. The diffusiveness and Comfortableness of light, speaks what
Comfort is in the light of his face, which (as light) though imparted to
thousands, yet is not impaired or made less for the good of others. The purity
of light contracting no filthiness, though looking into it, teaches us his
holiness, who though he sees sin every where, yet loves it no where, and is
ever in an irreconcilable opposition against all the works of darkness. The
oneness, brightness, purity, greatness, influences, eclypses of the Sun, teach
us the sun of righteousness, the Lord Christ, is the only Savior, most swift
to help, the brightness of his fathers glory, holy, powerful, infinitely
useful and beneficial, the directer, enlivener, cherisher of his Church: and
all this though darkened (once,) eclipsed and clouded with a natural body and
sufferings. The moon her borrowing of light from the Sun, her changes, spots,
inferiority, governing of the night, disappearing at the arising of the Sun,
speaks the dependency of the Church upon Christ, her many changes and various
conditions in this life, her defects and deformities, subordination to Christ,
as also the uncertainty and variableness of every worldly condition, the
smalness and lownes, of all earthly enjoyments, their spotedness with many
cares, fears, wants, their usefulness only while we are in the night of this
world, their disappearing and vanishing when the sun of righteousness shall
come in glory. The stars, in respect of the constancy, continuance of their
Courses in their orbs, Communicativenesse of light, differing one from
another, their glistering, and influences, declare the stability of Gods
promises to his Church, which can never be broken; Jer. 31.35.
our duty to continue in our own sphere, to afford our help and light to them
who stand in need The different degrees likewise of grace and glory hereafter,
the clearest shining of grace in the night of affliction. Of the Clouds we have
spoken before. The air also by its invisibleness, ubiquity, preservation of
our life, should mind us, that God is, though he be not seen, that he is every
where, within me, without me, included in, excluded from no place; the
preserver also of our lives, in whom we live, move and have our beings. The
winds by their thinness, piercing, powerful motions, freedom, inconstancy,
teach us as Gods invisibility, his irresistible power in his works of nature
and grace, the free motion of the spirit, and the secret working thereof in the
heart; Job: 3.7. Motum scimus, nescimus modum. Job. 7.3.
so the vanity, and levity of man, and all humane things, the inability of any
Creature to withstand God, the misery of those who are not built upon Christ as
their rock and foundation, the unsetledness of the erroneous, tossed with every
wind of doctrine. Of the earth likewise with the creatures there, as well as
the heavens, should we make a spiritual improvement* Speak to the earth (says
Job. 12.18.) and it shall teach thee. How excellint (says David) is thy name
in all the earth? The earth (then) by its hanging on nothing, its stability,
plenty, lowness, the laboring about it, and its receiving of seed, instructs
us of the infinite power and strength of God, the ability of his word to
sustain the burdens of the soul, the riches of his throne, whose footstool is
so decked; Gods goodness to sinful man, in spreading and furnishing for him
such a table; his care for his people, he so clothing the grass of the field,
and providing for the very beasts; the unsutablenesse of pride to man, the
earth being his mother, whence he came and whither he goes; it teaches us
also wisdom, to get our hearts above these drossy, earthly objects, and to
have our conversation in heaven, the pains also which we ought to take to dig
deep for wisdom, which is more precious than gold, and to receive the seed of
the word into a prepared soil, a good and honest heart. The trees upon the
earth, in respect of their variety of sorts, growth, shelter, fruitfulness,
decay, teach us, that difference which is among men; some are wild trees of the
wood, and of the field, without the Church; others are planted in the garden
and ortyard of the Church: some have neither the fruits of holiness, nor the
leaves of profession; others have leaves, who are without fruit; others (trees
of righteousness) have both: some are as the taller Cedars, some as the lower
shrubs, some are rich and noble, some poor and contemptible in the world; but
when both are turned to ashes, then both alike; the ashes of a beggar are as
good as those of a King. Some men fall by old age and want of natural moisture,
others are before their time cut down in their green years with the ax of
death. There is no spiritual growth or continuance, unless we draw life from
Christ our root; the more pruning, watring, and heavenly influences God
bestows upon us, the more fruitful should we be; the more laden with fruit,
the more we should bow our selves down in humility and communicativenesse; the
very grass tells us we are withering creatures, and that the flourishing
condition of the wicked is much more withering: The corn dying and fructifying,
teaches us the resurrection. Ask now the beasts (says Job) and they shall
teach thee: They all teach us the greatness of his possessions and riches,
whose are the beasts upon a thousand hills: also the thankful knowing and owning
of God; the ox knows his owner, and the ass his Masters crib. The Lion
teaches us the strength of Christ, and the cruelty of Satan. In the horse and
mule, we see our untaught and refrectary nature: In the sheep our disposition
to wander, and our duty to hear and follow our shepherd, and our helplessness
without him; also his meekness and patience, Ut pastor docebat, ut ovis
sil^bat. Aug.
who as a sheep before the shearers was dumb, and opened not his mouth: In the
lamb likewise observe him who was brought as a lamb to the slaughter; who was a
lamb for innocence and gentleness, a sacrificed Lamb for spotlessenesse and
satisfaction. The dog and swine will mind us of the uncleanness of sinners, and
especially of the odiousness of Apostasy, which is a turning to the vomit, and
to the wallowing in the mire. The serpent teaches us wisdom to preserve our
selves: Psalm. 22. Job 12.7.
The very ant, providence and diligence to lay up for the future: The
despicable worm represents the lowness of him for our sin, who was a worm and
no man; the taking of beasts in a snare, should put us in mind of the snare of
sin. Ask likewise (says Job) of the fowls of the air and they shall tell
thee. These may support faith, and scatter our distracting cares, they being
fed though they neither sow nor reap; Their observing also of their several
seasons, The Stork in the heavens knowing her appointed times, and the Turtle,
Crane, and Swallow, observing the times of their coming, teach us to know the
judgment of the Lord, and the day of our visitation; what a lively pattern of
meknesse and simplicity is the dove! the early chirping and singing of the
birds in the morning, may teach man his duty to praise God as soon as he awakes
in the morning; as a godly man once said to a Bishop who was sleeping in bed
too long in the morning, surrexerunt passeres, et stertunt pontifices. How much
greater is the care of Christ in protecting his servants, than that of a hen
toward her chickens, in gathering them under her wings! Speak to the fishes of
the sea, (says Job) these have a speech though they are mute. The sea it self
by its rage, fury, and foaming, shows us the inconstancy and troublesomeness of
the world, the unquietness of wicked men, the power of him who stils it and
keeps it within its bounds: By its fullness notwithstanding the running of so
many floods and rivers out of it, it directs us to him who is an inexhaust
fountain of good, having never a whit the less for all he gives: the running
of the rivers into the sea whence they come, shows that as all is from him in
bounty, so all must be returned to him by duty: The fish themselves will teach
us the misery of want of government, Hab. 1.14. Prove. 10.23. Tit. 3.3. Joh.
ult. Luke 5.10. Matthew. 4.19.
when men are as the fishes of the sea, that have no ruler over them, but the
greater devoureth the less. Their sporting and skipping, speaks the disposition
of sinners, who sport in sin as their element before they are ^^^cht; and the
power of the gospel, whereby they are taken: The fewness of those which are
caught in comparison of those which are left, shows the small number of those
who are taken with that net, compared with those who are left: In the catching
(also) of the fish with a net or hook unawares, we are taught the folly of men
taken with the baits of sin, who think not of their time, but are taken as fish
in an evil net. In short, the whole creation is a scripture of God, Creati^
mundi scriptura DeiUniversus mundus Deus explicatus.
a book, and the heaven, the earth, the waters are three great leaves; the
creatures contained in these are so many lines by all which we may read a
Divinity-lecture. Though the creature is not able to lead us into a saving
knowledge of the mysteries of Christ, yet it gives us such advan tages to know
God, as willeave us inexcusable in our ignorance. How should this doctrine
humble us, who by our apostasy are become the scholars of the creatures!
Christians, who have both teason and grace, may learn from those who have not
so much as sense and life: Adams knowledge of God, led him to the knowledge of
the creatures, but now man by the creature, learns the knowledge of God; like
Balaams ass, the creatures now teach their Master, man is now sent to their
school, put back like an idle truant to the lowest form; How happy were man,
could he learn of the very ass, Oneramus asinum, et non curat quia asinus est,
at si in ignem impellere, si in foveam praecipitare velis, cavet quam um
potest, quia vitam amat, et mortem timet. Bern.
which (as Bernard observes) will bear any load because he is an ass; but if we
offer to thrust him down some steep hill, or drive him into the fire, he holds
back, and shuns it; whereas a blockish sinner has no fear of that which brings
eternal damnation? But (of all others) how justly reproveable are they who in
stead of furthering their salvation, hasten their destruction by the creatures,
in abusing them to excess, riot, gluttony?

To conclude this point, for the putting us upon making an holy use of created
objects, let us consider that there is a double use of every creature, natural
and spiritual. If we content our selves with the natural use without the
spiritual, we do not take the one half of that comfort in the creature which
God gave it for: and indeed, what do we more then the brute beast, which has a
carnal and natural use of the creature as well as we? These seducers for knowing
things only naturally (as we have heard) are compared to brute beasts; let us
not therefore as children, look only upon pictures and gaies in our books, and
gaze upon the gilded leaves and cover; but let us look to our lesson which we
should learn therein. And let us know, we never use the creatures as their
Lords, unless we see our Lord in them: a carnal man profits his body, a
spiritual man his soul also by them; Every creature may be a Preacher to him,
in whom the spirit first inwardly preaches. A man may be cast into such a
condition, as whereby he may be hindered from good actions; but what unless a
bad heart, can hinder him from good meditation? And as it is with Bees, though
they gather honey from a flower, they leave it as fragrant and fresh as they
found it; so we gathering spiritual thoughts from our worldly enjoyments and
employments, in stead of hurting and hindering them, we benefit and enrich our
selves, and advance them.

Ver. 14, 15. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam prophesied of these, saying,
Behold, The Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, (ver. 15.) to execute
judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all
their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.
THese two verses contain the third branch of the description of the lost
estate of these seducers in respect of their sin and misery, which in these
words are further set forth by the ancient and infallible prophecy of Enoch,
and that prophecy is 1. declared and propounded here in these two verses. 2.
Applied to these Seducers in the (16, the) following verse.

In the declaration and propounding thereof, I consider,

1. The Preface prefixed by Jude, before it.

2. The Prophecy it self.

1. The Preface, in these words, Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of
these. Wherein two particulars are considerable:

1. The Excellent person here mentioned, Enooh; described from his descent and
Pedigree, the seven^h from Adam.

2. His honorable performance, He prophesied of these.

1. In the Prophecy it self of the last judgment. I find,

1. A note of incitement, to cause a regard to the following description of the
judgment, in the word Behold.

2. That Description of the judgment, to the regard of which we are incited;
which description of the judgment has two parts: 1. The coming of the Judge
to judgment. 2. The Carriage of the Judge in judgment.


1. In His coming to judgment, I observe, 1. His Title, The Lord. 2. His
approach, Comes. 3. His Attendants, With ten thousands of Saints.


2. His Carriage in judgment is observable, 1. Toward the wicked, wherein I
consider, 1. The manner of his judging, which is to be by way of conviction: to
convince. 2. The Parties to be judged, all the godly: Which Parties are
considerable, 1 In their Nature, so they are ungodly. 2 In their Numbers and
extent, so they are said to be all the ungodly.



3. The Causes of the judgment, which are two:

1. Their Works, considerable in their general nature, said to be ungodly. 2.
In the particular manner how they were committed, which they have ungodly, or
ungodlily committed.

2. Their Words, where is to be noted,

1. What kind of speeches they uttered, hard speeches.

2. By whem they were uttered, ungodly sinners.

3. Against whom, against him.

2. In the second, viz: the Application of this Prophecy ( v. 16.) Jude
shows, that these Seducers were the ungodly which hereafter are to be judged;
and this their ungodliness, Jude there discovers by several signs:

1. Their discontentedness. 2. The following their lusts. 3. Their boasting. 4.
Their admiration of men's persons

1. I begin with the Preface, and in that, first with the consideration of the
Person here mentioned, Enoch, the seventh from Adam.

EXPLICATION.
Three things here I shall enquire into by way of Explication.

1. In what respect Enoch may be said to be the seventh from Adam.

2. Why the Spirit of God in Scripture, does exactly set down the genealogies
and successions of the Patriarchs, whereby it comes to be known, that Enoch was
the seventh from Adam.

3. Why Jude, choosing to allege the prophecy of Enoch, calls him the seventh
from Adam.

1. For the first, Enoch was so the seventh person from Adam, as that both Adam
and himself must be computed to be two of that number. Enoch was not so the
seventh from, as to be the seventh after, or the seventh that came of Adam. The
like expression is used Mat. 1.17. All the generations from Abraham to David,
are fourteen generations: into which Abraham and David themselves must be taken
to make them up fourteen. And thus the scripture frequently reckons Enoch the
seventh, as Luke 3.37, 38. 1 Chronicles. 1.1, 2, 3. Genesis 5.3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18. 2.
Enoch was not so the seventh person from Adam, as that there were no more then
seven persons begotten from the time of Adam to Enoch; for all those six
Patriarchs, mentioned before Enoch, are said to beget sons and daughters, and
of those sons and daughters there came likewise a great number; but Enoch is
called the seventh from Adam, because he was exactly the seventh in that
particular, direct line from Adam to him.

2. For the second. The Spirit of God so exactly mentions the succession of the
Patriarchs of old, for sundry reasons: As first, To discover his care to keep,
and uphold his Church, by showing where it was, in what families it continued,
and how it was by his goodness preserved and propagated in all, even the worst
and most corrupt ages of the world: The posterity of Cain was to be totally
destroyed by the flood, and God swept them away with the beesome of
destruction; to what end therefore, should they be so fully recorded? but the
seed of Seth, was to be preserved both in the deluge of waters, and of all
succeeding calamities; and therefore their descents and successions are
punctually recorded.

2. God hereby shows the great delight which he took in speaking of his Church
and Children, and their concernments, above all other people in the world. The
sacred history mentions the posterity of Cain, but occasionally, and by the
way, as the relation thereof had a necessary connection with the history of the
Church, and as making it more clear and complete; and therefore the scripture
relates not either the successions or actions of those without the Church in a
constant course or series of history, nor does it use that exactness and
industry in treating of them, which it uses in setting down the affairs of
the Church. Hence it is (as Rivet well notes) that those things which seem to
be of less moment and weight are so diligently described in Scripture story,
as Jacobs flocks, his pilled rods of poplar and hasel, the conceiving of the
flocks before them, and bringing forth cattle ringstraked, Vid. Riv. exercit.
page 630 631. i^ 30. Genesis
speckled, and spotted etc. when as the holy story passes over in neglective
silence, the beginnings and progress of the great Empires and Dominations of
the world, as of the Assyrians, Egyptians, Grecians, etc. (subjects, in
appearance, more worthy the mentioning;) the Lord herein (says the fore
mentioned Author) being like a Master of a family, Ut patri familias cura major
est liberorum et domesticorum quam latisundii; sic etiam apud Deum majoris sunt
m^menti familiae piorum quam quaevis aliae quae in toto orb dominationi ejus
subsunt. Ut parons liberorum et familiae ita curam gerit, ut suorum gestus,
sermones and actiones omnes observet, et quaecunque ipsis accidunt
diligentissime consideret: sic Deus in familiis piorum tamquam in domo su^
observat et numerat capillos illorum, actiones, studia, et gressus eorum
respicit etc. Riv. in Genesis page 632.
who does not with so much care and delight regard his grounds and fields
abroad, as he does his family and children with their carriage and
concernments at home in his house, where he diligently and delightfully
observes all the speeches, gestures, actions of his little ones, and whatever
befalls them, etc.

3. God by this exact delivering the successions and genealogies of the
Patriarchs, would show the excellency and antiquity of the scriptures, above
all other historical writings in the world, which are not able to afford us a
certain Cronologie concerning the times of the Patriarchs before the flood.

4. Especially by this recording the successions of the Patriarchs; the Lord
discovers who they were of whom the true Messiah came according to the flesh,
and this he does both for the honor of Christ as man, whose pedigree that it
might be perfect, was to be preserved and distinctly drawn as far as from Adam,
as also for the confirmation of our faith, touching his incarnation; the
Scripture mentioning the order, and names, of all his progenitors, even from
Adam; and thereby suffering us not to doubt of the truth of his humane nature,
unless we will imagine that all the names and successions of his progenitors
mentioned from the beginning of the world to his birth, were fabulous and
fictitious, and so make the continued line from Adam to Christ to be a
continued lie, which to imagine were not more blasphemous and antiscriptural,
then ridiculous and unreasonable. And the scripture by telling us that Christ
came of those ancient Patriarchs, Causa cur Lucas as^enderit ad Adamum usque,
1. Ut doceret beneficia Messiae, non saltem pertinere ad Abrahamum et eos qui
illum secuti, sed ad patres Abrabamo anteriores, imo ad ipsum Adamum. 2 Ut vin
dicaret Messiae gratiam, non sal^em sc extendere ad gentem Judaicam. and filios
Abra^ae, sed et ad multo, Ada filios extra Abrahami posteritatem, qui
benedictionis ejus debeant esse participes, Japheto adducto in tab^rnacula,
Semi. Spanhem. Dub Evang. 19. p. 91.
would teach us that the benefits of the Messiah were extended to those who
lived far, yea farthest before him, to the patriarchs before the flood, and
even to Adam himself, who by his sin gave occasion for a Savior to visit poor
man with mercy, and (as some note) by setting down the progenitors of Christ,
who lived before the flood, and so, long before Abraham, the Scripture would
teach that the grace of Christ extended it self not only to the Jews, and the
seed of Abraham, but also to many of the sons of Adam, who were not of the
posterity of Abraham; but were to be made partakers of the blessing by Christ,
when Japhet should be brought to dwell in the tabernacles of Shem.

3. Touching the third, viz. why Jude here terms Enoch the seventh from Adam.
Sundry reasons may be assigned. As,

1. To distinguish this Enoch from another of that name, who was the third from
Adam, and of the posterity, yea the immediate son of cursed Cain, mentioned
Genesis 4.17.

2. To show how holy and zealous Enoch was in sinful times. In a most dissolute
and profane age, he prophesies of, and foretells the destruction of sinners:
Though he perhaps did them but little good by his prophecy, yet they did him as
little hurt by their profaneness. This taper was not extinguished by the damps
of a sinful generation; this star shined brightly in a black night: Enoch the
seventh, as afterward Noah the tenth from Adam, walked with God in a corrupt
age, and did not only preserve his own holiness, but prophecy against others
unholiness.

3. He calls Enoch the seventh from Adam, to gain the more credit and esteem to
that prophecy, which he is about to mention, and the more to convince these
seducers of the truth thereof; in regard both 1. of the great antiquity, and 2.
the eminent piety of him who uttered this prophecy.

1. By the antiquity of a prophet who was the seventh from Adam, The Apostle
wisely insinuates not only that even from the beginning of the world, holy men
have prophesied of the end thereof; but that even then the miserable end of the
wicked was foretold; and that they who were farthest remote from these
seducers, and who therefore were most impartial, and could not be byast by
affection to any fides or parties, prophesied of their overthrow.

2. By the eminent and renowned piety of this Enoch, the seventh from Adam, who
walked so closely with God, and did so please God, that he accounted him too
good to live long upon earth, and would not stay for his company in heaven, til
he had finished the ordinary time of living, but took him to himself, before he
had lived to half the years either of his father, or of his son. I say, by this
admirable holiness of Enoch, Jude might stop the mouths of these seducers, and
render them either unable to resist the evidence of this prophecy, or
inexcusable in not submitting to it.

This eminent holiness of Enoch, is in Scripture expressed in these words, He
walked with God; words few in number, but great in weight; and which (upon this
apt occasion) I shall briefly explain.

By this walking with God, more generally, is rather intended, his giving up
himself to the worship and service of God, in the leading a hooy life, then a
peculiar Ministration, in the discharging the office of the priesthood; this
walking with God, being the same with his walking in the way of Gods
commandments; and his ordering the whole course and frame of his conversation
according to the will and commadment of God; and this metaphor of walking with
God, is taken from two friends, unanimously and willingly going the same course
and path together as companions. More particularly this his walking with God,
1. Intends a setting of God before his eyes, and a living always as in his
sight, and as being present with him, and thereby his humble reverencing of,
and fearing to offend God, and a studying to please him, and to approve himself
to him, ( walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1.) Gods presence with
us, being as certain and undoubted, as is his with whom we do after a sensible
manner and openly converse.

2. This walking with God, intends a friendly and familiar acquaintance and
conversing with God; (for can two walk together unless they be agreed?) God
did not pass by Enoch as a stranger, These words he walked with God, the 70
read (...) ben^placuit Deo* Unde Author Ep. ad Hebr. Cap. 11.5. (...).
nor use him as a page, only to go after him; but (as a friend and companion)
he walked with God: Thus Abraham is called Gods friend, and Christ calls his
disciples his friends; and his humble familiarity and acquaintance with God,
consisted 1. in his apprehension, of a propriety, and interest in God: without
this he would have stood far from God, as a foe, a fire, not walked with God as
a friend: another God cannot comfort us, a souls solace stands in this
pronoune my, my Lord, my God: when Enoch foresaw that God was coming to execute
judgment upon all the wicked, he then knew that God was his God and friend. 2.
Enochs familiar acquaintance with God, consisted in a friendly and mutual
speaking and discoursing between God and him; this was no silent walking, no
dumb show; God spoke to him by exciting of his graces, and putting into him
holy motions, and telling his soul, that he was his salvation, by directing him
in his doubts; he spoke to God, by daily meditation, ready acceptance of his
grace, by pouring forth all his cares by prayer into the bosom of his heavenly
father, by repromission of obedience, praying continually; see Psalm. 27.8. Psalm
119.164. taking his counsel in his doubts. Psalm. 119.24.3. This humble and holy
acquaintance appeared, in Enochs exercising his fiduciary relying and reposing
himself upon God, without anxiety and solicitousness, for the providing for him
in all his necessities; he cast all his care upon God, as a faithful friend,
who cared for him; he wholly committed himself and all his affairs to his God;
he did not wound himself with heart-cutting cares; he was not like the Lion
that roars after his prey, but like the sheep that depends upon the care of the
shepherd: Thus David, the Lord (says he) is my shepherd, I shall not want. 4.
En^chs humble and sweet acquaintance with God, stood in his enjoying of all his
comforts in God, and God in them; he so much esteemed communion with God, that
he accounted nothing sweet, but what he had with his love and smile; he was not
a slave to sense, delighting himself only in the good things themselves which
he enjoyed; he accounted every condition sweet or bitter, so far forth as God
did communicate himself in it, or withdraw himself from it; so that he was
neither unduly lifted up in his enjoyments, nor dejected in his losses; the God
of his delight being ever, and evenly the same: nothing was delightful to Enoch
by it self, but only God, other things only as they came with God, as though
water is only sweet, when something sweet is put into it; yet honey and sugar
are sweet alone by themselves.

3. This walking with God, notes, spiritual motion; there cannot be a walking
without a moving. Enoch neither stood by God, nor sat with God, but walked with
God; the commandments of God, were the way wherein he walked and moved; and
every act of obedience was a several step taken in that way: in all his
motions, he observed some duty enjoined, and eschewed some sin forbidden, so
that he praised God with the language of his conversation; he could not have
walked unless he had been as practical as he was speculative and professing;
only works speak, words are silent before God and man; nor did he only practice
this walking with God, when he was exercised in the duties of Gods immediate
worship, but also when employed in the works of his particular place and
calling. In the performing of the former, he was (as it were) in heaven; in the
doing of the latter, heaven was in him; the necessary employments of his
calling took him not off from conversing with God; they did not make him at all
renounce this: Paul when he was making of tents, did not cast off conversing
with God; neither does piety make us idle in our places, nor does moderate
diligence in our callings make us impious and profane: and indeed, we cannot
walk with God unless we serve him both in our general and particular callings.

To conclude this discourse of Enochs walking with God, with a touch of the
manner how he performed it; 1. He walked with God solely, he admitted no
intruders into, or disturbers of his heavenly converses with his God; the world
followed him as a servant, walked not with him as a companion: (this God cannot
abide) he rather used the world, than enjoyed it; or rather used it as if he
used it not: God cannot bear the the company of Mammon; the love of God and the
world cannot stand together. 2. He walked with God evenly, and in a direct
course; he halted not, like the Israelites, 1 King. 18.21. between two: he made
straight paths for his feet; he gave allowance to no wanderings, nor false
ways; they who will walk in bypaths, walk not with God, but alone; and
therefore Enoch walked in a straight path to heaven, and turned not aside to
crooked ways, not treading in the way of any known sin. 3. He walked
cheerfully, not unwillingly or constrainedly, or sadly, his walking being with
him who is the God of all comfort: and indeed, God takes no pleasure in that
man's company, who accounts not walking with him a pleasure; Enoch was not by
fear, or force, or restraint detained before the Lord, but he delighted himself
in him, looking upon holy duties as his privileges as well as his tasks: nor
indeed can any walk cheerfully, but when with God; his company makes the valley
of the shadow of death to be a pleasant way, a bitter condition sweet, and a
sweet condition sweeter. 4. He walked constantly, unweariedly with God, from
strength to strength, til he appeared before him in the heavenly Sion. Enochs
goodness was not by fits and starts, like that of some hypocrites; he did not
take a step or two, but walked with God: this his walking with God, lasted as
long as his continuing in the world; he did not set out well only in the
beginning, but held out well also, til the end of his race.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The faithful must be holy in unholy times. Enoch in a corrupt age walked
with God, Obs. 1.
and kept close to him when most left him; Saints must show that they are not
of the world, when they are in it; they must not be conformed to the world, nor
run with the world to the same excess of riot; 1 Pet. 4.4.
As their righteousness must exceed the righteousness of hypocrites, so must
it condemn the unrighteousness of the profane: the rest of their time, they
should not live to the lusts of men, but to the will of God; they are forbidden
to follow a multitude to do evil, to go in the way of evil men, Prove. 4.14.
to have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness: Elijah was zealous
for God, Ephesians. 5.11.
when he scarce could discern any to join with him: as Noah was saved by God,
when the earth was overwhelmed with an inundation of water, so did he walk with
God, when it was overspread with an inundation of wickedness; Psalm. 71 7. Isa.
8.18. Jer. 20.7.
when David was looked upon as a monster, Isaiah and the faithful as wonders,
yet they retained their integrity; when the wicked have almost made void the
law, even then, nay therefore must the godly love Gods Commandments, and esteem
all his precepts, Psalm. 119.126, 127, 128.
concerning all things to be right: God is a friend, a father; and as this
friend loves us in the day of our adversity, so should he be beloved, in the
day when his honor suffers. May not God say to those that temporise with his
enemies for fear, or hope, Is this your kindness to your friend? Is there any
time, wherein God has left or forsaken us; and should there be any wherein we
are weary of walking with God? Is God our father, and can we endure with a tame
patience to see him dishonored? Its reported of a Son, who though (before)
dumb yet seeing enemies about to kill his father, presently cried out, kill not
my father. The sons of God, must glorify their father, and shine as lights in
a crooked and perverse nation. Ephesians. 2.15. Nor can the truth, much less the
strength of grace, or the power of godliness, ever be manifested, unless it
appears in times of opposition; there is no power seen, where there are no
difficulties contended with; wherein does the life of grace, differ from death
in sin, if Christians shall be carried down the stream of their times
unholinesse? Grace will ever conflict with that sin, either in the soul or the
world, which it is not able to conquer; it will condemn it, though it cannot
execute it. And what more unreasonable (lastly) then for us to mete to God with
one measure, and to expect that he should mete to us with another! How can we
expect that he should love us in that day, wherein he will leave the most, if we
will not walk with him in this day when most forsake him! Study then (O Saints)
to give the name of God reparations for all the disgrace which wicked men cast
upon it: Discover the true nobleness of your Christian spirit, and of minds
spiritually generous, by gathering vigor, and growing invincible, from the
very oppositions of the wicked, and the impieties of your times.

2. It is a singular and blessed privilege to walk with God. Observe. 2.
It was the great happiness and ennoblement of Enoch, this seventh from Adam.
The happiness of walking with God, appears in these particulars. 1. It is a
persons greatest honor: it is honorable to follow, much more to walk with a
King; how great is the dignity then of walking with the King of Kings! Its Gods
lowest condescension to walk with us, and our highest advancement to walk with
him. The company of sin debaseth, and the walking with God dignifieth a man.
God with man, is the greatest with the least; Henoch was one of the greatest on
earth, he was royally descended, the seventh from Adam in the blessed line; he
had six such tutors and teachers, (viz the six first patriarchs) to make him
learned, as never man had; but that which is testified of him as his honor,
was this his walking with God. Oh unconceiveable dignity, conferred upon poor
impure dust and ashes, to walk with him who is attended with ten thousand times
ten thousand of glorious Saints and Angels for his followers! 2. In this
walking with God, is greatest delight and solace: solitariness is
uncomfortable, company sweet, but none so delightful as Gods; he who has not
God to bear him company is alone, though he has all the comforts of the world
to accompany him. Of all the creatures, there was not found a fit companion for
Adam, nor can any creature fitly suit the soul with its society; good company
is the life of our lives, the sweetness of our abodes on earth; but Gods
company is the truly good company; there is no melody in any consort to which
this delight is not added. A man is said to be alone, though he have many
beasts with him, if he be without the company of man; and a Christian is alone
notwithstanding all the world be with him, if God be absent. Whom (says the
Psalmist) have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. A sinner is the truly solitary, sad person: oh how
sweetly contentful is his life, who when all his outward comforts leave him,
can say (as did Christ when his disciples left him alone) yet I am not alone,
because the Father is with me. John 16.37. Quid timet homo in sinu Dei positus?
3. In walking with God, there is true safety; what need that man fear who lies
in the bosom, or walks by the side of such a father, though he walks in the
vale of the shadow of death? who dares offer that man any injury that walks
with a King? Of this largely before, part. 1. page 58.59, 60, etc. 63.
no evil is so insolent as to arrest us, when the King of Kings graciously
accompanies us. Fear not Abraham (says God) I am thy shield, Genesis 15.1. If God
be with us, who shall be against us; If he will help, what shall hurt us? his
society is our true safety; so long as God was with Samson, the Philistines
could not conquer him; but when the Lord was departed from him, Judge. 16.20
he soon becomes a prey to his enemies: Gods presence is a Saints lifeguard;
til God leave him, dangers are but trifles; He ever keeps those who walk with
him, either from the presence of every misery, or from the hurt and misery of
the misery. Lastly, In this walking with God, is the greatest gain and profit
to be found; what good thing can he deny us, Psalm. 8.4.
who denies us not himself? God is not only a shield, but an exceeding great
reward: How can he want who is with, and has him that is all things? God mine,
and all mine; he will fulfill the desire of all that fear him: no good thing
shall be wanting to them; nor will God deny them any blessing, which does not
oppose their blessedness; Psalm. 23.1.
nor any good, which hinders, not from enjoying the chiefest good; and if he
thinks it meet to keep away these externals, he will supply their absence with
himself. The Almighty will be thy gold, Job 22 25.

3. Even of the longest lived Patriarchs, there was a succession, not a
constant continuation. Adam the first, Seth the second, Eccles. 1.4.
Enosh the third, etc. Enoch the seventh; One generation goes, another comes:
The coming of new generations, shows the going and passing away of the old;
the later crowds the former out of the world; one goes away to make room for
another: The longest lived of these ancient Patriarchs, had in the world but
his time and turn, which at length ended. It has been observed by some, that
none of them lived (no not Methuselah) a thousand years; and some say the
reason thereof was, because God would by their dying before the end of a
thousand years, make good his threatening; Ratio valde diluta. Riv.
in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die; it being said that a thousand
years with God, are but as one day: but in this there seems to be more wit then
weight. A more solid reason of their dying within the foresaid term, seems to
be because thereby God would show, that the longest life of any of the sons of
men, in respect of God himself, is but very short, and not able to reach to
that space, which in respect of Gods eternity is not a day; Confer longissimam
nostram aetatem, cum aeternitate, in ea prope modum aetate qua illae bestiolae,
reperiemur. Cic. l. 1. Tusc.
for which cause Cicero* 1. Tusc. quaest. compares the longest life of man to
that of that beast brought forth by the river Hippanis, which lives not above
one day, and dying when the sun sets, dies then decrepit. Compare (says he)
our longest age with eternity, and we shall be found after a sort, in the same
age with that beast. It Is added to the relation of the long lives of every one
of the ancient Patriarchs, And he dyed. The repetition whereof, seems not to be
without great reason, which was not only to show the brittlenesse and srailty
of man's continuance (even as nothing in comparison of eternity,) but
principally to show the immovable certainty of that threatening of death
against the disobedience of our first parents, notwithstanding the vain and
deceitful promise of the devil; as also to manifest that the holiest men (whose
death was the wages of sin) were in this life without that perfect holiness,
required to the seeing of God, Per mortem defecantur, ut fomite pecati cum
corpere mortue ad immortaiitatemp; puri resurg^nt. Rivet in Ge^. exerc. 48.
prop. fin.
and therefore that they were to be cleansed by death, that with their body of
flesh, they laying off the corruption of their nature, might arise pure and
spotless to immortality. The consideration whereof, should put the strongest,
and those who are most likely to live, upon a constant and serious meditation
of death; and warn them not to expect immortality in this life, but daily to
wait for their certain and appointed change. That blessed saint now with God,
Mr. Richard Rogers (who was another Enoch in his age, Sometime of W^^hersfield
in Essex, my Dear and deceased Grandfather.
a man whose walking with God appeared by that incomparable directory of a
Christian life, his book called the Seven Treatises, woven out of Scripture and
his own experimental practice) sometime said in his life time, That he should
be sorry, if every day were not to him as his last day: Every morning we arise,
let us say, Art thou my last day, or do I look for another? Let us live as if
we were always dying, and yet as such as are ever to live. In short, the
successions and conclusions of generations, should put us upon holiness of
life; as for the preserving a sweet and precious remembrance of our selves in
that generation which follows, so especially, that we may by our holy example,
transmit holiness to posterity; that we (with Enoch) walking with God, the
Church of God, and a seed of Saints may be continued (as much as in us lies) in
our line. And truly, as otherwise we shall die while we live in the world, so
hereby, we shall live when we are taken out of the world, and be like Civet,
which when it is taken out of the box, leaves a sweet savor behind it.

4. Observe. 4.
All issue from Adam. As Enoch was, so all others were and are from Adam; from
him all descend by natural propagation: He was the root, all others but
branches; he the fountain, all others but streams. All were hewn out of this
rock; an observation which puts us upon sundry useful considerations. It
teaches us humility. As we were from Adam, so he was from the dust of the
earth, and that dust from nothing. Our father was Adam, our grandfather dust,
our great grandfather nothing. They who are proud that they can derive their
pedigree so far as Adam, may be humble if they would go a little farther:
Remember whence thou art, and consider whither thou shall go; nothing so
unsuteable as pride for a clod of the earth. A man can never have too low
thoughts of himself, but in the bowing down his nature to accompany with sin.
He who would not endure pride in the Angels of heaven, will not endure it in
dust and ashes; and such even great Abraham calls himself; a fitter style, then
most illustrious, high and mighty, invincible, etc. When thou art mounting up
in proud and self-admiring thoughts, remember thou art from Adam, earthen Adam.
Agathocles a potters son, when he came to be King, humbled himself with setting
earthen vessels on his cupboard. If dust be sprinkled upon the wings of Bees,
their noises, hummings, risings, will (they say) quickly cease; when thou
beginnest to grow proud, sprinkle thy thoughts with this remembrance, I am but
dust. Further, we may hence gather, the wonderful power of Gods blessing, that
of one, so many millions should come; from one root such multitudes of
branches: God can bless one into millions, and blast millions again into one,
into nothing; Gods powerful benediction multiplied Adams numerous offspring.
He whom God blesses, shall be blessed; he whom God curses, shall be cursed:
We see the way to thrive in any kind; the blessing of God makes rich, and
without it, thy own industrious endeavors will not help thee: he cursed the
fig tree, and it withered up at the roots. More particularly, we see from whom
to beg the increase of posterity. It is from God that Jacob expected and
desired in his blessing, that Ephraim and Manasseth should grow into a
multitude, Genesis 48.16. See also Ruth 4.11, 12. Hence also, we may observe the
goodness of God, in continuing the blessing of increase to Adam, even after
his fall; that sinful Adam should be the father of such a posterity: God might
have said, here is enough of one man, and too much; I Will suffer no more to be of
the kind. We destroy poysonful and hurtful creatures that they may not breed.
But mark further, that merciful power of God to cause a holy offspring, a
sanctified seed (though not such, as coming of; yet) to come of a sinful fallen
parent; that God should make white paper of dunghill rags: that any of Adams
unsanctified nature, should partake of the divine nature: in a word, that
Enochs should be from Adam. Truly, there was more mercy discovered in the
changing one Enoch, than there would have been justice put forth in condemning
a whole world. In a word, how should this our derivation from the first, put us
upon laboring to get into the second Adam; he who is but a man, a son of Adam,
is a miserable man, a child of wrath: How careful should we be to get off from
the old, dead, poysonful root and stock, and to be branches ingrafted into, and
growing upon the living life-giving stock, the Lord Christ! In Adam (says the
Apostle) all dye, and in Christ all are made alive; as we have born the image
of the earthly, so should we be restless til we bear that of the heavenly. 1
Cor. 15.49.

5. It is our duty, prudently to take our best advantages, for truths
advancement. Thus Jude alleges here the prophecy of such a person as might
in likelihood most draw respect and credit. Of this before, page 22. part 1. on
these words, the Brother of James.

Secondly in the preface here used by Jude before the prophecy, the
performance of Enoch is to be noted, and that was, his prophesying. Jude says
that he prophesied of these.

EXPLICATION.
Three things may be enquired into by way of explication.

1. What our Apostle intends in this place by prophesying.

2. How Jude came by, or whence he received the prophecy of Enoch.

3. why he alleges and instanceth in this particular prophecy.

1. For the first, prophecy is in Scripture taken five several ways.

1. See Diodats annotations on 1 Cor. 11.5.
Sometimes it signifies no more then to be present at the public Ministry, and
to partake of the doctrine thereof. Thus I understand it in that place, 1 Cor.
11.5. Every woman that prays or prophesies with her head uncovered,
dishonors her head; for otherwise women were not allowed to speak in the
Church.

2. Prophecy is taken for the written word. 2 Pet. 1.20.

3. Elsewhere to prophecy, signifies to expound, interpret, and apply the
Scriptures, to the edification of the Church. 1 These. 5.20. Despise not
prophesying, and 1 Cor. 14.3. He that prophesies, speaks unto men to
edification, and exhortation, and comfort. So verse 24.

4. Sometimes it signifies to know and to be able to declare things either
past or present, which a man either by nature or industry, is not able to know;
and so it signifies to divine; thus it is taken, Matthew. 26.68. Mark. 14.65.
etc. where they who had blinded Christ, bid him by way of derision, prophecy
who it was that smote him; to this purpose said the Pharisee, Luke 7.39. This
man, if he were a Prophet, would have known, etc.

5. Strictly and properly to prophecy, is to foreshew, or foretell things to
come, or that afterward shall be fulfilled. Thus it is taken Acts 21.9. Philip
had four daughters, Virgins, which did prophecy. Thus Ezekiel. 21.2. compared
with ver. 7. So Ezekiel. 29.2. 30.2. 34.2. 38.2. And thus it must necessarily be
taken in this place. Enoch prophesied of these by way of prediction, or he
foretold their punishment.

2. second, whence Jude received this prophecy or prediction of Enoch. To this
some say, that Jude took this prophecy out of an ancient book, written of old
by this Enoch the seventh from Adam. True it is, that in ancient times, there
were some writings dispersed abroad in the Church, under the name of Enoch,
Tertul^ de hab. mul. cap. 3.
and called by the name of Enochs book; and of these Origin makes mention in
his last Homily on Numbers. And Tertullian in his third chapter, de habitu
muliebri, affirms that the book of Enoch was preserved by Noah in the Ark, and
brought forth after the Flood, Non sunt scripta in Canone qui scrvabatur in
templo. Cur aut^m hoc nisi quia sus^ c^tae fidei etc. Illa quae sub Enochi
nomine proferuntur, continent fabulas. Recte a prudentibus judicantur non
ipsius esse credenda. Aug. l. 15. de civ. D. c. 23.
and he attributes the opinion of its want of authority, to the malice of the
Jews, who (says he) because some eminent testimonies concerning Christ may be
produced out of it, endeavored to suppress it. Augustine also mentions books
bearing Enochs name. That then there were such books called by the name of
Enochs, it is not denied; but that Enoch was indeed the Author of them, and that
Jude made use of them, none can either probably or soberly suppose. The books
(says Augustine) which under the name of Enoch are produced are to be
suspected for false, and none of his, because the Jews never accounted them
cononical, nor kept them in the temple as such; and they ahound with fables:
Among the rest, that fond and erroneous conceit, so contrary both to Scripture
and reason, that the Angels in their assumed bodies went in unto the daughters
of men, and so begat those Giants mentioned Genesis 6.4 (Though this fabulous
error (being entitled to so holy and ancient an author as Enoch) was embraced
by Justin Martyr, Cyprian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Libros Enochi plane
supposititios esse, ut mihi persu^deam, fa cit quod in Ecclesia Dei ante
Baby^enicam cap tivite^em in nullis prophetar um libris, fit meutio tam rari
thesauri, quem non credibile est si in rerum natura fuisset, Mosem latuisse,
qui etiam scriptorum Enochimeminisset, in hac historia si tunc extitisent.
Rivet. in exerc. in Genesis 49
and some others.) Besides, had there been any such true book or prophecy of
Enoch in writing, no doubt but it would have been very famous and highly set by
among the Jews, both for the antiquity and holiness of the Author, as also
for the preciousness of the matter, in regard whereof some mention would have
been made thereof by the holy Prophets, or by Philo and Josephus, who were
curious preservers, and writers of Jewish antiquities; who yet, did never
discover to us that rare treasure. And that Moses was the first of all the holy
writers, I think is the constant judgment of all learned divines, protestant
and popish; nor does Christ, Luke 24.27. acknowledge any holy writer to be more
ancient then Moses; for Luke 24.27. it is said, that beginning at Moses, he
expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself. Now if
Enoch had written a book, probable it is, that Christ would have begun at him,
(he being so long before Moses) to have explained the prophesies of his
humility and glory; the later whereof this prophecy of Enoch here mentioned by
Jude, does so clearly discover. Its therefore the opinion of some learned men,
that if there were in Judes time any writing which went under Enochs name, it
was written by some Jews, who mixed some things Good and true, (which
peradventure they received by tradition concerning the prophesies of Enoch)
with other things false and fabulous; which book of theirs might be more and
more in the progress of time corrupted, and was deservedly rejected as
Apocryphal. Possibly out of this Book Jude might take this passage. The penmen
of holy Scripture, have (not seldom) taken several passages which tended to
edification, out of profane Acts 17.28. 1 Cor. 15.33. Tit. 1.12.
Authors, and thereby sanctified them to the use of the Church; and yet (as
Rivet well notes) since Jude says that Enoch prophesied, it was necessary that
Jude should have a peculiar revelation from the holy Ghost, to assure him that
the prophecy recited by an apochryphal Author, did indeed come from Enoch: for
otherwise, should he only rely upon the Authority of an apochryphal book, the
prophecy related by Jude would no more be canonical, then it was as set down
by the apocryphal writer.

Others (Protestants and Papists) assert, Capta occasion e ex prophetia Henochi
commemorata a Juda, libros quasi antiquitus scriptos puublicarnt ^ Perer. in
G^n. Nieremberg de O^ig. sacscrip. pa. mihi 51.
that after the death of the Apostles, some impostors (taking occasion by Judes
alleging the prophecy of Enoch) did publish and set forth a book under the
name of Enoch, that so by its bearing the name of one so pious and ancient, it
might find the better acceptance. Of this opinion is the learned Gomarus, who
withal gives a parallel instance of the feigning of an epistle, (under Paul's
name) to be written to the Laodiceans, by occasion of that passage of Colos.
4.16. so that according to this opinion, some took occasion to write this
fictitious book of Enoch, by reading of Judes Epistle: not that Jude ever saw
any book under Enochs name extant, or took his prophecy out of it. Many
learned men therefore very probably conceive, that our Apostle received this
prophecy from common and undoubted tradition transmitted from the Patriarchs,
and so handed from generation to generation; til such time as it seemed good,
to the holy Ghost by the Apostle Jude, to make it a part of Scripture. And thus
the Apostle mentions the withstanding of Moses by Jannes, and Jambres; Jacobs
worshipping upon the top of his staff; Moses his saying that the sight upon
the mount was so terrible, that I exceedingly fear and quake. Thus it is said
that Joseph's feet were hurt with fetters, and that he was laid in irons; all
which passages, being no where mentioned in their proper stories, were received
by tradition from generation to generation; the Spirit of God nevertheless
sanctifying them, and giving them the stamp of divine authority, to be most
certain and infallible, by putting the penmen of holy writ to insert them into
the Scripture. And by this which has been said, we answer, those who argue
against the canonicalness of this Epistle, from Judes alleging (as they
conceive) an apocriphal Author, or his bringing in a tradition no where
recorded in Scripture, the If be did cite it out of any Author.
citing of these by our Apostle, being so far from making him apocryphal, that
he makes them (so far as he uses them) canonical: as also, we hereby answer
the Papists, who because the Apostles have sometimes transferred some things
from humane writings and tradition, into holy Scripture; take the boldness to
do the like also, and to join traditions with the holy Scripture; they not
considering that they want that spirit of discerning which the Apostles had,
who by making use of traditions, gave them divine authority. They were
immediately acted by the holy Ghost in all their writings; but we are not
endowed with the same measure of the Spirit, and therefore neither are able nor
ought to imitate them herein.

The third thing to be explained is, why the Apostle alleged and instanced in
this particular prophecy of Enoch.

The reasons why Jude made choice of this prophecy, may be reduced to these
two heads.

1. The first taken from the prophet.

2. The second from the prophecy it self.

And the consideration of the prophet Enoch, induced Jude to use the prophecy,
because the Prophet was 1. Eminent for his antiquity; he was the seventh from
Adam: This seems to put great respect upon the prophecy, as if Jude had said,
The sins of these seducers which had judgment threatened against them, almost
from the very beginning of the world, so many thousands of years before they
were committed, must needs be heinous and odious, now when these sinners are
acting them: and those sins which God has so anciently threatened, will at
length be most severely punished. 2. This prophet was famous both for his piety
and privileges (of the former of which before,) he was not only eminent for
his piety in walking with God, which was his own benefit, and for his public
usefulness, in warning and instructing that corrupt age in which he lived,
keeping up the name of God in the world, opposing the profaneness of his times;
but also for that glorious and (before) unheard of privilege of being taken to
God, who thereby proclaimed him to be fit for no company but his own, and one
for whom no place was good enough but heaven; a child, though sent abroad into
the world as the rest, yet whom his father so tenderly loved, that he would not
suffer him to stay half so long from home as his other children. One who had
done much work in a little time, and who having made a proficiency in that
heavenly art of holiness above all his fellows, had that high degree of heavenly
glory conferd upon him, long before the ordinary time.

2. Prophetia est mentis illuminatio ad res futuras cognoscendas, reveiante Dco.
In respect of the sutableness of the Prophecy it self to Judes present
occasion. And 1. it was most suitable in respect of its certainty, it was a
Prophecy. Enoch prophesied, he spoke from God, not uttering his own
inventions, but Gods inspirations; the foretelling of things to come being a
divine prerogative, and such which without revelation from God, the creature
cannot attain. Luc. 1.70.
And the scripture assures us that it was God who spoke by the mouth of his
holy Prophet which have been since the world began. How suitable was it to
produce a prophecy sure to be sulfild coming from God by the mouth of an holy
prophet against these fearlesse scorneful sinners, who mocked at the last
judgment! 2. Of its severity, what prophecy more fit for the secure scorners
then a prophecy of judgment, the last, universal, undvoidable, unsupportable,
eternal judgment? They might possibly slight the particular examples of Gods
judgments upon the Angels, the Sodomites, the Israelites; but the arrow of the
general judgment prophesied of by Enoch against all the ungodly, would not,
perhaps, be so easily shaken out of their sides. If any denunciation could
affect them, surely it would be that which was prophetical; and if any
prophetical denunciation, that of the last judgment. If the last judgment
has made heathens tremble, Qui male vivit judicandum se diffidit. Chrysol. s.
5.59.
when but discourst of before them, how should it dismay those who profess to
know God, when threatened against them! How bold in sin are they who will not
fear the judgment! Si unicum timendum scire quae in illo sunt punienda, non
ageret. Greg. in Job. 19.
How can he who believes judgment to be dreadful, but dread to do that which
shall be punished in that judgment! Even the devils at thel ^ight of their Judge,
trembled to think of their judgment, Mat. 8.29.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1. Honorandi propter imitationem, non ad^randi propter religionem.
Aug. de ver. rel. cap. 55. 1 Cor. 11.1. Adorantur Crucem, et vendunt Crucifixum.
The greatest honor to departed Saints is to imbrance their holy instructions.
Enochs person was not to be worshipped, but his prophecye to be believed. Saints
are to be honored by following of their doctrines, by imitation of their
practices, not by religious adoration. Its easy to commend their memories by
our words, and to reverence their relics; but the art of Christianity
appears, in praising them with the Language of our Conversations. The bark of a
tree may be carried upon a man's shoulder without any pain or difficulty, but
it requires strength and labor to carry away the body of the tree; the outside
or shell of superstitious, Popish adorations, men easily perform; the heart
and life of religion, which is that of the heart and life, men cannot away
with. The Pharisees, who painted the sepulchers of the deceased Prophets,
opposed their piety, as also those holy ones in their times, who were acted by
the same spirit of holiness which showed it self in those Prophets of old. The
Jews who boasted that they had Abraham for their father, did not the works of
their father Abraham, but of their father the Devil. Many are like Samson, that
took honey out of the dead lion, voice dead ancient saints to be sweet and holy
men; who, were they alive, to roar upon them for their lusts, would oppose and
hate them; the right way (then) to reverence the godly who are departed this
life, is to be led by that spirit whereby they were led while they lived.

2. Observe. 2.
Threatenings denounced by divine warrant should deter us from sin. If Enochs
prophecy (which was of divine authority) foretell judgments, they must not be
slighted. As divine promises should uphold and comfort us in our lowest and
weakest estate; so should divine threatenings make us tremble, and affright us
from sin, in our greatest strength and highness. The Ninevites by fearing
evils foretold by Jonah against them, prevented the feeling of them. Josiah
holily feared, and his heart was tender, and he humbled himself when he heard
what the Lord spoke against Jerusalem. 2 Kings 22.19. when Micah the Morashite,
prophesied in the days of Hezekiah King of Judah, saying, Zion shall be plowed
like a field, etc. Hezekiah feared, and besought the Lord. Jerem. 26.19. A
judgment denounced by God cannot be kept off by power: there is no might or
strength against the Lord. The hand of the Lord is not weakened, nor is his arm
shortened, when he minds to deal with his most potent adversaries. As God can
Create deliverances when he intends to show mercy, so can he create judgments
when he purposes to punish. The truth of a threatening will break through the
greatest improbabilities of its approaching: Though the Caldeans were all as
wounded men, if he threaten to punish by them, Jer. 37.10.
they shall be victorious against the unrepenting Jews. There Is no way of
flying from God, but by flying to him: the way to get out of the reach of
judgments threatened, is to repent by the threatening of them: nothing but our
repenting sincerely, can make God repent mercifully. Oh how foolish a madness
is it, by politic endeavors to imagine a prevention of judgments divinely
threatened; or by persecuting the prophet to think to overthrow the prophecy!
The Prophets, dee they live for ever? yet my words and my statutes which I
commanded my servants the Prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers?
Zech. 1.5. Paul suffered trouble even unto bonds, but the word of God (says
he) is not bound. 2 Timothy 2.9.

3. Obs. 3.
Sinners should look upon the threatenings denounced against others for sin, at
belonging to them, without repentance. The wicked against whom Enoch
immediately prophesied, were such as lived ungodlily in his time; and yet the
Apostle says, that he prophesied against these seducers: The reason is,
because these lived in the same sins with those wicked ones of old. As the
promises made to the godly who lived in former times, belong to those who
imitate them in succeeding ages, so the threatenings denounced against former
sinners, are denounced also against those who follow them in sin; and that by
the constant analogy and proportion of justice, unless these repent, they
shall likewise perish. Luke 13.3. Strong is the inference of the Apostle, Romans
11.21.
If God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not
thee. Threatenings denounced against and inflicted upon those who lived in
former times, manifest Gods equal dislike of those who shall live in the same
sins in succeeding ages; he showing thereby, that he is prepared (if they will
also sin) to do what he has done against those who lived before them. Though
Gods forbearance toward some, shows that sometime he can spare sinners; yet
his punishing of others, shows that he never loves sin. In all ages God is the
same, he abhors sin in all the ages of the world; Psalm. 7.12. Obs. 4. Psalm. 119
100 Mibi pro archivis est Jesus Cristus, Ignat.

Mos diabo licus est, ut per antiquitatis tra^ucem commendetur fallacia. Aug.
qu. 114 nov. et v^t. Test.


nor will he go out of his way to gratify men's lusts: changing is not Gods
property, but the sinners duty. If he turn not, he will whet his sword.

4. Doctrines of greatest antiquity are only to be embraced as they consent
with the testimonies which come from the infallible Spirit of God. Enoch,
though the seventh from Adam, and so very ancient, yet only is to be believed
in what he said, as speaking by prophecy, and receiving what he delivered from
divine revelation. Whatsoever doctrines proceed not from, or agree not to this,
are (notwithstanding all pretenses of antiquity) to be rejected as spurious.
The Papists who have no patronage from Scripture, have but a rotten support for
their opinions which pretend to greatest antiquity: Custom without truth is
but the antiquity of error. Cypr. Ep 74
The most proudly swelling allegations of the ancients, are but like a swollen
leg, which though it be big, is yet but weak, and unable to bear up the body:
Religion is auto ritas non est tem pore metienda. Arnob. Contr. Gen^. 2.
the authority of religion must not be measured by time. We reverence the
ancient fathers, and hold it our duty to rise up before the hoar head, and to
honor the person of the aged; but still with reservation of the respect we owe
to their father and ours, that Ancient of days, Non veritas antiquitatis, sed
antiquitas veritatis Ecclesiae authoritatem confert. Riv. contr. Q. 7. p. 224.
the hair of whose head is like the pure wool, Dan. 7.6. In opposition to him,
we must call no man father, Matthew. 23.9. Nor yet is this said, as if Papists
were able to produce better proof out of the testimony of the ancients for
their errors, then we can do for the truth; but to give the word of God its
due, which is that rock upon which alone we build our faith. The truth is,
Papists have removed the ancient landmark, which the Fathers set, that so they
may invade another possession: Christus veritatem non se consuetudinem
coguominavit. Tert. l. de. vel. virg. c. 1.
their traditions are new boundaries, their doctrines of Merits, Image Worship,
Equivocation, Transubstantiation, Denial of Priests marriage, Power of the
Pope, are new and upstart; not only to the Scripture, but even to the writings
of the Ancients.

This for the preface. The prophecy it self of the last Judgment follows. And
in that, first of the note of incitement, to cause regard to the following
description of the judgment, in the word, Behold.

EXPLICATION.
The word (Behold) is in Scripture used principally these two ways.

1. As a note of manifestation of the truth, reality, certainty of a thing to
be observed or believed. Thus its used Mat. 28.20. Behold I am with you to the
end of the world. Gen 1.29. Apoc. 3.8, 9, 11, 20. Psalm. 37.36. Zech. 9.9 Matthew.
28.20. Gal. 5.2.
Behold I have given every herb bearing fruit. Genesis 28.15. Behold I am with
thee and will keep thee. Apoc. 2.10. Behold the devil shall cast some of you
into prison. Apoc. 9.12. Behold there come two woes more. Mat. 26 45. Behold
the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed etc. Job. 5.17. Behold, 1.
Usurpatur ad indicandam rei praesentis exhibitionem.
happy is the man whom the Lord corrects. Psalm. 33.18. Behold, the eye of the
Lord is upon them that fear him.

2. As a note of admiration, 2. Ad excitandam ex rei mirandae praedicatione,
attentioonem.
or to stir up attention for the great and stupendous wonderfulness of some
thing that falls out. Thus it is taken 2 King. 6.17. Behold the mountain was
full of horses and Chariots of fire. Matthew. 27.51. Behold the vail of the
temple was rent in twain. And 28.2. Behold there was a great earthquake. Luke
1^ 16. Act. 1.10.7.56.12.7. Genesis 29.6.
Isa. 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive. 1 Cor. 15.51. Behold I show you a
mystery, etc. The word (behold) in this place may sutably to the subject in
hand, (the coming of Christ to judgment) be considered as denoting both these.

1. The certainty and truth thereof, it being a thing as sure, as if it were
before our eyes, and already accomplished: like that minatory prediction of the
prophet concerning the house of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.14. But what? even now. A
thing that ought to sink into the hearts of hearers, and that which they cannot
too firmly and fixedly believe. The infallible predictions of Scripture, which
must be fulfilled, the judgments of God already executed upon some sinners, the
fears of a natural conscience, Gods justice which will render to every one
according to his works; And lastly, Act 1.11. Matthew. 24 3^. 2 These. 1.7 and^
Act 17.32, 24, 25* Gen 18 25 1 These. 1.5. 2 Co^ 5 10. R^v 20.12
the fitness that the body shall have its due retribution as well as the soul;
all prove the certainty of the last judgment. The certainty of his coming, I
have spoken to before, part 1. p. 536.

2. The word (Behold) may be considered as a note of admiration, denoting a
most wonderful and strange thing, like that Behold, Hab. 1.5. Behold and wonder
marvellously, for I will work a work in your days which ye will not believe
though it be told you. And this coming of Christ is wonderful and strange, 1.
In respect of the wicked, to whom it is unexpected, they thereby being
unprepared for it; it comes as a snare upon them, in a day wherein they look
not for it, in an hour wherein they are not aware. Luke 12.46. as a thief in
the night. When they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction shall
come upon them, as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. 1
These. 5.2. 2. Its wonderful in respect of the astonishing glory of the coming
of Christ to judgment, together with the judgment it self: of which I have
largely spoken page 525, Part 1.
to 540. I must not repeat.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obser. 1.
Our thoughts only of those things which are truly great and glorious, should
be high and admiring. Behold (says Enoch) as noting the astonishing
wonderfulness of the last judgment. This truly great thing should be looked
upon as such. It is the folly of most men, to look upon small things as great,
and upon great things as small: Humane judgments affright and amaze them, the
last judgment they slight and neglect; these want that rectified judgment of
the Apostle, who calls the day of judgment the appearing of the great God; and
so preached of the judgment to come, that he made Felix tremble; whereas he
tells us, how little he past for man's judgment. 1 Cor. 4 3.
Thus likewise our Savior directs his disciples to contemn that which is small
and contemptible, (fear not him that kills the body;) and to dread that which is
truly great and formidable, fear him who can destroy both body and soul in hell,
Matthew. 10.28. When the disciples beheld with wonder, and showed to Christ the
beautiful buildings of the temple, he with an holy contempt of those outside
beauties tells them, there shall not be one stone of all those stately
structures, left upon another, that shall not be thrown down: and when Satan
showed and offered him all the Kingdoms of the world with their glory, he showed
his Contempt of the prospect and promotion, with a Get thee behind me, Satan;
but when he observed the faith of the Centurion, he wonders, and expresses his
admiration to the people. Luc. 7.9.


2. Observe. 2.
Great is our natural backwardness to mind^ and believe the coming of Christ
to judgment. E^^ch prefixeth a note of incitement to his prophecy. The wicked
take occasion to be secure and to cast off the thought of Christ's coming from
the procrastination and delaying thereof. Men scoff at the promise of the
Coming of Christ, 2 Pet. 3, 4,
because (say they) since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they
were from the beginning of the Creation. That servant, Luke 12.45. who said,
that his Lord delayed his Coming, in stead of minding and preparing for it, did
beat his fellow servants, and also did eat, drink, and was drunken. Hence it
is that men say, peace and safety, even when sudden destruction is coming upon
them. 1 These. 5.3. Men are naturally led by sense, what they see not, feel not,
they believe not. As Noah's flood was a type of the last judgment, so the
disposition of men when that deluge approcht, resembled that which shall be in
sinners at the coming of Christ. As in the days before the flood, there was
eating, drinking, marrying etc. so shall also the Coming of the son of man be.
Mat. 24.38, 39. And so great (likewise) is naturally every sinners self love,
that they love to shun the thoughts of every thing which they love not: they
are ready to say to themselves, as did Peter to Christ, Be it far from thee,
this shall not be to thee: they put far from them the last day, because they
look upon it as the evil day, nay the wo^st day: they love the world, and
their hearts grow to it, and therefore it is death to them, to think of an
unsettlement. Their Sodom they so much delight in, that (like Lots wife) they
cannot endure to think of a shoure of fire; herein resembling some, who are
therefore unwilling to make their wills, because they cannot away with the
thoughts of death. To rectify this distemper, as we should labor to find
this great day a good day, and the great Lord our good Lord, and to be such
that even out of this devouring lion we may take honey; so, consider that,

3. Obs. 3. Concerning the certaitnty of the judgment, see be fore.
The last judgment is to be looked upon as a matter of greatest certainty: not
as a fiction, but as a most real and undoubted thing. We should look upon it
to be as certain as if it were already with us. Its the policy of Satan to
make us diffident of that, which we should be confident of, and confident of
that of which we should be diffident. He presents his own lies as certainties,
and Gods truths, as lies, or at the best, as Conjecturall uncertainties: but
our faith must take into its vast comprehension Gods whole revealed will, part
whereof is this of the last judgment. The last and dreadful judgment will
never affright us from sin, if we look upon it in the devils dress of
uncertainty; for then we shall but sport with it, and make it our play-fellow
in stead of our monitor. Let us therefore labor to make it by prayer and
meditation to sink into our hearts, Si nunc omne peccatum, manifesta
plecter^tur poena, nihil ultimo judicio reservari crederetur: rursus si nullum
peccatum nunc puni ret aperte divinitas, nulla esse divina providentia
putaretur. Aug. de Civ. Dei cap 8.
and to believe it, though never so distant from, or opposite to sense; taking
heed lest the deferring thereof, and the present impunity of sinners, destroy
or damp our belief of Christ's coming to judgment; considering that if every
offender should now be openly punished, men would think that nothing would be
reserved to the last judgment; as on the contrary, if no offender should be
plagued, men would believe that there were no providence. And let us beware
lest we make that concealment of the last judgment to be an occasion of sin,
which God intends should be an incentive to repentance.

This briefly for the note of incitement etc. Behold. The description of the
judgment follows, Rev. 1. Jo. 5.27.
and in that, first of the first part. The coming of the judge to judgment, in
these words, The Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints.

EXPLICATION.
And here 1. the Title, 2. Approach, 3. Attendance of the Judge, are all worthy
of consideration by way of explication.

1. Tune manifest veniet judicaturus just, qui occulte venerat judicandus
injuste. Aug.
Of the title (Lord) I have spoken very largely before page 344 etc. p. 1. Of
the greatness of this Lord, the Judge, as he is God and man, I have also spoken
page 527, 528, 529. The reasons also why he shall even as man judge the world, I
have mentioned p. 525, 526, 528. and how he excludes not Father and holy Ghost.
Nor will it be needful here again to repeat the fitness of Christ for
judicature, Rev. 6.16. 1 Jo. 2.28. Rev. 5.9. Rev. 19.11. Psalm. 45.6. 2 Cor.
5.10. Rev. 1.14. 1 Cor. 4.5.
in respect of his advancement after his humiliation, the necessity that the
judicial proceeding should be visible, the great horror and amazement of his
enemies, the comfort of the Saints, the excellent qualifications of this judge
in regard of his righteousness, omniscience, strength and fortitude, etc.

2. For the second therefore, Act. 1.11.10.42.17.13. Aoristum secundum ponit
pro futuro.
the Approach of the Judge, in the word comes, Gr. (...), in which word Jude
puts the signification of the time past, for the time to come, after the manner
of the Prophets, who are wont to speak of those things which are to come, as if
they were already past; and this he does for two reasons: First to note the
certainty of Christ's coming to judgment, it being as sure as if it were
already. Concerning this certainty of the coming of Christ to judgment, I have
spoken already page 536, Part 1.
and in several pages before. 2. Secondly to show the nearness thereof, Christ's
coming is at hand; 1 Cor. 7*
the time is short (says Paul) its sails almost wound up. The Judge stands at
the doors. He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. If he were coming in
Enochs time, if in the first, what is he then in the last times (as these are
frequently called!) come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Behold I come quickly. Rev.
3.11. The Brides prayer and the Bridegrooms promise are both for speedy coming,
Rev. 1.7. Behold he comes with clouds etc. not shall come; he is as good as
come already. Christ comes to us either in spirit, or in person.

1. In Spirit he comes. 1. In the Ministry, to win and persuade us to come
unto him: thus he went and preached in Noah's time to the spirits now in prison,
1 Pet. 3.19. 2. In some special manifestation of his presence in mercy or
judgment: The former, when he meets us with comfort, strength, and increase of
grace. John 14.18.23. The later, in testification of displeasure. Rev. 2.16.
John 16.8.

2. In person he comes two ways. 1. in carnem. 2. in carne. 1. Into flesh, in
humility in his incarnation, to be judged. 2. In flesh, in glory at the last
day, to judge all flesh.

Where consider 1. Whence he comes. Where consider 2. Whither he comes. Where
consider 3. When he comes.
1. Whence he comes; from heaven. 1 These. 4.16. The Lord himself shall descend
from heaven; he shall come in the clouds of heaven; to heaven he ascended, and
from heaven will he descend. Acts 1.11. This Jesus which is taken from you into
heaven, shall so come, as ye have seen him go into heaven: And its necessary
that Christ should come from heaven to judge, because it is not meet that the
wicked should come thither to him, though to be judged; for into that holy
place, can no unclean thing enter.

2. Whither comes he? some think that the judgment seat shall be upon the
earth, that the sentence may be given where the faults have been committed, and
that in some place near Jerusalem, where the judge was formerly unjustly
condemned; and particularly some think it shall be in the valley of Jehoshaphat
(though that place Joel 3.12. contains but an allegorical or typical
prophecy.) The Apostle seems to intimate that the place of judgment shall be in
the air, 1 These. 4.17. where he mentions our being caught up to meet the Lord
in the air, it being probable that the judgment shall be in that place where we
shall meet the judge, in the clouds of the air, (and the Scripture says he
shall come in the clouds of heaven) and then the devils shall be conquered and
sentenced in the very place wherein they have ruled all this while as princes:
but over what place, it seems to me a rashness to determine.

3. When shall he come? In the end of the world; but the particular age, day, or
year, is not known to man or Angel, Mark 13.32. this secret the Spirit revealed
not to, nor taught the Apostles, who yet were led by him into all necessary
truths; and Christ must come as a thief in the night, and as in the days of
Noah, when men knew nothing. And we are commanded to watch, and to be ever
prepared, because we know not the hour: The childish curiosity of sundry in
their computation of a set year, wherein the day of judgment shall be, rather
deserves our caution, then confutation.

3. The third thing to be opened in this coming of the Judge, is his attendance,
in these words, ten thousands of his Saints. The words in the original are,
(...), word for word, with his holy ten thousands, or Myriads.

Four things may here offer themselves to be explained.

1. Their quantity, in respect of numbers, ten thousands. 2. Their quality,
they are holy ones, holy ten thousands. 3. Their relation. They are his, his,
holy ten thousands. 4. Their action or employment, they are to come with the
Lord.
1. For the first. The word (...) in the Greek, properly signifies ten
thousand. Thus Acts 19.19. where the Apostle mentions (...), five myriads; its
rendered fifty thousand, and Rev. 9.16. (...), Vulgar. et Erasm. vicies mil lies
dena millia.
two myriads of myriads; we translate twenty thousand times ten thousand.
(...), Rev. 5.11. and Dan. 7.10. ((...),) according to the Septuagint) we
render ten thousand times ten thousand. So Deuteronomy. 33.2. Psalm. 3.6. Dan. 11.12.
Luke 12.1. Acts 21.20.
And in those places where the word ten thousand is used (as here in Jude)
without the addition of a word of another number, it imports an uncertain, and
very great vast number, or an innumerable multitude; Heb. 12.22.
there being a certain number put for an uncertain.

2. For the second, their quality or property, noted in this word holy or
Saints.

These here called holy or saints (say some) are the angels, In millibus
sanctorum nun ciorum suorum. Cypr. ad Novarian. Hugo. Lyranus.
who in Scripture are often said to be such with whom Christ comes at the last
day, and also called holy: and not seldom is their coming with Christ, and
their holiness (as here) put together. Thus Luke 9.26. Christ is said to come
in the glory of the holy Angels, and Matthew. 25.31. the Son of man shall come,
and all the holy Angels with him, etc. Sometimes they are called mighty Angels,
2 These. 1.7. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
Angels. And Deuteronomy. 33.2. when God delivered the law upon mount Sinai, it is
said, he came with ten thousands of his Saints; where by Saints may be
understood Angels, who attended God in the delivering of the law, in which
respect it is said, that Israel received the law by the disposition of Angels,
Acts 7.53. and the law is said to be the word spoken by Angels, Heb. 2.2. But
others more rightly conceive, that by these holy Myriads or ten thousands in
this place, we are likewise to understand holy men, as well as the holy Angels;
even the Saints shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4. And more plainly, 1
These. 3.13. the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ is foretold to be with all his
Saints. And Mat. 13.43. The righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the
kingdom of their father; and these saints or righteous ones who are to attend
upon Christ, shall be not only those who before were with Christ in heaven, but
even those who shall be taken up in the clouds to meet Christ, and thereby shall
be made a part of his attendance, 1 These. 4.17. So that these myriads, this
innumerable company shall be made up of all the glorious Angels and Saints; it
shall be a general assembly; all the servants shall wait upon their Master the
Lord Jesus. We shall (says the Apostle) all meet, Ephesians. 4.13. there shall not
be one wanting: and if Christ bestows new liveries upon all his Saints, they
shall all, when adorned with them, yield their attendance to him, in them.

But in what respect does the Apostle call them Saints or Holy? Persons are
holy in two respects. 1. In respect of destination, separation, or being set
apart to holy services and employments. Thus the firstborn were holy, Exodus
13.2 12. Jer. 1.5.
Thus the Prophets and Apostles are often called holy: Jeremiah was sanctified
from the womb. In this respect these holy Angels and men may be called holy, as
being set apart to the peculiar work, and glorious employment of praising and
glorifying of God for ever. 2. Persons may be holy in respect of true inherent
holiness abiding in them; thus likewise these Angels and Saints here mentioned
may be called holy: for the Angels, they were from their very creation
perfectly holy, and afterward by the grace of confirmation made constant in
holiness: as for holy men, though they were formerly made holy of not holy,
privatively, that is, having lost their holiness, had holiness bestowed upon
them by regeneration; and though they were made holy of less holy, by having
increase and additions of holiness bestowed upon them in this life, yet at
this great day, they are with the Angels perfectly holy likewise, the spirits
of just men made perfect; in this life they were perficientes, perfecting; then
shall they be perfecti, having as much holiness as they can hold; as much as God
or themselves will desire, being without any mixtures of unholinesse in them,
all tears being wiped from their eyes, and all sins from their souls, and they
presented faultlesse before that presence of glory, not having spot or wrinkle
or any such thing, but being holy and without blemish. Ephesians. 5.27.

3. For the third, they are called his, his holy ten thousands; and his they
are in three respects. 1. In respect of Creation, he made them all, whether
Saints or Angels; as they are creatures, they are the works of his hands. 2. As
they are Saints, they are his also, Angels are his by being confirmed in their
sanctity: Holy men are his, because he was the deserving cause of their
holiness, the pattern or exemplary cause also thereof; and lastly, by his
spirit, the efficient cause of their holiness, he is made sanctification to us,
1 Cor. 1.30. he sanctifies and cleanses his Church with the washing of water
by the word. 3. They are his, in point of service and attendance; for being
sanctified, they wait upon him, and serve him in all holy employments here in
the kingdom of grace, and hereafter shall they attend upon, and come with him
as his servants in his kingdom of glory.

4. For the fourth, their coming with the Lord Jesus; these ten thousands of
his Saints, shall come with him.

1. For his own glory, he will come in the glory of his holy Angels, and he will
likewise come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all those that
believe in that day, 2 These. 1.10. How glorious these holy myriads or ten
thousands shall make Christ at the day of judgment, both in regard of their
excellencies and numbers. I have showed p. 529, 530, 531. etc. Part 1.
How will the beauty and multitudes of these subjects set forth the glory of the
King of glory, who shall have myriads of servants, every one shining like
myriads of suns, and every subject being indeed a King?

The first time he came as a servant to sinners, but the second time he shall
come as the Lord of Saints and Angels. Then his forerunner was John Baptist,
now he shall descend with the voice of the Archangel, 1 These. 4.16. then he was
attended with twelve poor contemptible men, but now with many millions of
glorious Angels; and the Angels (more particularly) shall by their attendance,
make Christ's coming glorious in regard of their service and ministry; for they
shall perform the work of the great day, in gathering together the Elect,
severing the tares from the wheat; (they are called reapers,) running at every
command of Christ: And this work they shall do, 1. Powerfully, they are the
Angels of his power; they are principalities and powers, and excel in power;
and at that day Christ's power shall be added to their own 2. They shall do the
work of Christ willingly; behold their readiness: the servants said, shall we
gather up the tares? M^tth. 13.28. They who desire commission aforehand will be
ready enough when they have it. 3. They shall perform it justly, holily,
faithfully; they shall mingle no corrupt passions with their executions, nor
corruptly respect any persons. Rev. 15.16. The seven Angels are clothed in pure
and white linen. 4. Diligently and perfectly, in most strict and exact manner;
though Angels compared with God are imperfect, yet in comparison of Gods law,
they have perfection, and no spot of sin cleaves to them; nor else could they
continue in their glorious state, if they should not be answerable to Gods law
in the purity of their nature, and perfection of their work.

2. Christ will come with these ten thousands for the glory of his Saints, and
confusion of the wicked; here Saints have glorified him, but then he will
glorify them; they who have here lien among the pots, shall shine with rays
of majesty. What glory comparable to that of appearing with Christ in glory, of
being privileged with the dignity of judging and condemning wicked men, 1 Cor.
6.3. Vid. 5 16. part 1 Matthew. 12.41, 42. Luke 11.31, 32.
yea Angels? and that not only 1. by having the practices of these Saints,
compared to those of the damned. Nor 2. only by their consenting to, and
approving of the sentence which Christ shall pass upon the wicked. But also 3.
In regard of that dignitas assessoria, that dignity whereby they shall be
advanced to an honorable assessorship with the Lord Christ, in sitting (as it
were) with him upon the throne of Judicature: As likewise 4. (they in that
Judgment being to appear with Christ, manifest victors over all their enemies)
by trampling upon all the pride, malice, and weakness of devils and wicked men,
and openly and holily insulting over them as vile, vanquished, and contemptible
enemies.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
Our greatest wisdom and truest interest, is to make Jesus Christ our friend
against the last day. The Lord comes. He now is, but then he will openly
declare himself to be the Lord. How happy will they be, who then put their
trust in him, who have chosen and taken him to be their Lord! 2 Cor. 5.9.
The service of Christ will then appear to be the only safety and dignity. The
wicked who here take no care to make him their Lord, will (at that day) call him
their Lord, Matthew. 7. to be sure, they shall find and feel him their Lord. How
unable will the enemies of Christ at the last day be to oppose him, the Lord
that comes from heaven! In regard of his very situation he will be above them,
and have the advantage of them. Against earthly power they might make their
party good; the Ministers of Christ they opposed, but this mighty Lord, who
shall come armed with an infinite power and dominion over all creatures, which
shall be acknowledged by them all; (the Angels shall observe and attend it; the
heavens, earth, and elements shall be dissolved by it; the dead bodies of men
shall be raised up out of the graves, the sea, the bellies of beasts, by it:) I
say, this mighty Lord will easily and unavoidably crush them. A careful
servant, that expects his masters return, will labor to have the work set him,
finished. If the Bridegroom be coming, let the Bride deck her self, like
Rebecca, espying Isaak afar off, Genesis 24.65. as Joshua exhorted Israel, chap.
3.5. Be sanctified, for to morrow the Lord will do wonders among you; (He means,
in leading them to Caanan:) so our Joshuah commands us to be sanctified,
because in the last day, the Lord will do wonders in leading us to the heavenly
Canaan. Let us part from sin; a malefactor cannot stand before the Judge; nor
shall the wicked stand in judgment. Our care should be, that we may be found of
him in peace; and no peace can any one have with Christ, who is not at war with
sin. And how much better and easier is it to bear the yoke of service here in
doing his will, than that of severity hereafter in the undergoing his wrath. Of
this see more, page 543. part 1.

2. Obs. 2.
The Saints have a strong ground for moderation in every condition. The Lord
comes, and they shall come with him: The Lords coming is the Apostles argument
to urge moderation, Phil. 4.5. How patient and full of forbearance should they
be in sustaining all their crosses and injuries! Contendly should they here be
accounted the refuse and offscouring of the world. Acts 3 19. Ephesians. 4 30. Luke.
21.28.
Their Lord is coming, and they shall come with him in glory; though men here
make them their footstool, yet Christ has allotted for every of them a
throne. In this world they are not accounted worthy of the society of men, Romans
8.23. 2 Timothy 4.8. 2 These. 1.6, 7.10. Jam. 5.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 4.4.
but then they shall be in the comp any of Angels, yea Christ himself. Now
Christ seems for a while to leave his family, every piece of household stuff
appears to be mis-placed, or all (as it were) to lie in a huddle or heap
together, beautifullest vessels to lie among the pots; but then the vessels of
honor shall be set up in their places, and the vessels of dishonor thrown into
theirs. It is not fit that our glory should appear, so long as Christ's glory is
hid. In the winter, all the sap, and life, and fruit, is hid in the root, and
then the tree appears not what it is; but the Summer coming, all that was
within, appears; so in this our winter, though we be the sons of God, yet it
appears not what we shall be, 1 John 1, 2.
but when Christ shall appear, we shall be like him.

3. Obs. 3.
How cheerfully may Saints think of the last judgment! This Lord is their
brother, their Savior and head; he it is who is coming: no wonder if the Bride
says, 2 Timothy 4.8.
Come. Rev. 22.17 And that the saints are caled such as love his appearance: A
loving wife, longs for the return of her husband from a far Country. At that
judgment day, the judge will condemn none but malefactors; they who here are
justified, shall then be declared to be so. It Is true, Christ the judge is (here)
called a Lord; but yet he is so the saints Lord, as that he is also their
husband. How great is the difference 'twixt a guilty malefactors calling the
Judge, my Lord, and a loyal wife her giving her husband that title! Who is it
that condemns, if the judge accept, acquit us? he it is that shall judge us, who
also died for our sins. The father has delivered all judgment to him, who
himself was delivered for our sins, and sent into the world, not to condemn
the world, but that the world should be saved by him: How shall he who was sent
into the world to save believers, condemn them? how shall he who comes to
condemn others for hurting them, hurt them himself? how shall he who the first
time came to be put to death for them, sentence them to die when he comes the
second time? How should he throw them away, who was made their head to gather
them together? As therefore the believers of the old Testament longed to see
the first coming of Christ, when he came in the form of a servant; so should
the believers of the new Testament desire the second coming of Christ in glory,
when he shall come as a Lord, the Lord comes. Of this before, part 1. page 545.
The nearer the day of Jubilee came, the more the joy of prisoners and debtors
was increased; the nearer the day of our redemption approaches, the more
should we lift up our heads.

4. Obs. 4.
Christ will be attended only by holy ones at the last day. Holy myriads. None
shall meet with him in peace, but they who first meet with him in purity: He will
profess to the workers of iniquity at the last day, that he knows them not:
How unsuitable to the dignity of Christ, will it be to be attended by those who
have no better raiment then the filthy rags of sin! If Achish an earthly King
had no need of mad men; what need will the King of glory have of unholy men! If
he commands us here to have no fellowship with the works of darkness; will he
himself in that day of light and glory, show any love to them? How shall
Christ at that day acquit those openly from the guilt of sin, who are not
before parted from the filth of sin? Men here in this world are often ashamed of
holiness, but at the last day, it will be the best ornament, the best defense;
without it no man shall see God: How shall Christ present unclean ones, without
spot before the presence of glory? They who will be ashamed of Christ here for
his holiness, shall deservedly hereafter find Christ ashamed of them for their
uncleanness.

5. How great is the patience and long-suffering of the Lord Jesus Christ; who
is contented so long to be hid, and not to show himself in glory to the end of
the world, suffering (mean while) his glory to be veiled, yea trampled on by
the wicked. The heavens are now as a curtain between our eyes and his glory: He
is out of sight, and (among the most) out of mind; his patience is despised,
and the promise of his coming derided; yea his very Saints do not so much
believe, love, admire him as they should, in regard of their sins, and his
hiding his face. He forbears to show forth his glory and power in judgment; not
constrainedly, but voluntarily; not because he cannot punish, but because he
would have sinners repent. And all this time of his forbearance, he sees all
the impieties committed against him, and indignities offered to him and his;
yea his hatred of all the sins which he beholds, is infinitely more keen and
intense, then that of all the Saints and Angels in the world. How unworthily
and disgracefully was this Lord of glory used, when he veiled and hid his glory
here upon earth! And yet (I say) with what patience and long suffering does he
forbear to manifest his majesty and greatness to the view of the world; we poor
worms have short thoughts and think a short time, long and tedious, ere our
enemies fall, and we rise; but Christ suffers very long. How patiently should we
endure to have our glory obscured, and injuries unrevenged, since our Lord our
master, the judge himself is the greatest sufferer, and yet voluntarily
unrevenged!

6. Obs. 6.
When Angels and Saints are in their greatest glory, obsequiousness, and
serviceableness to Christ becomes them. All the Saints and Angels of heaven
shall worship and advance Christ, when they appear in their highest dignity; of
him they will not be ashamed when they are in their best clothes, their robes of
most shining glory; when they lay off al their infirmities, they throw off no
love to Christ: as Saints are made glorious in their bodies, so are those
bodies joined to spirits, made perfect in holiness, and that holiness will show
it self in duty and obedience. How unlike to ten thousands of Saints* are they
who think they are too good to honor Christ, when they are in outward glory
and dignity! when they are in their rags, low and afflicted, they will then
stoop to do something for Christ; but when in their best apparel, set up,
advanced to any pitch of worldly eminency; they then think, they shall spoil
their clothes, and disgrace their dignities by attending upon Christ. Do Saints
and Angels wait upon him in their glory, and shall worms upon the dunghill think
it much to serve him! did he our Lord empty himself of glory, to save, yea
serve us; and shall not we his servants serve him when filled with glory! Of
this more, page 457. Part. 1.

Thus far of the first part of the description of the judgment, viz. the coming
of the Judge. The second follows, the carriage of the Judge in judgment, ver.
15. and in that, 1. His carriage toward all. 2. Particularly toward the wicked.

1. Toward all, in these words, To execute judgment upon all.

For this first. Two things here require explication.

1. What the Apostle here intends by execution of judgment. How judgment is
here to be taken, and wherein the execution of judgment at the last day does
consist, I have spoken at large before, page 511, 512, 513. Part 1.

2. How it is said that Jesus Christ shall execute judgment upon all, or
concerning the universality of this judgment, I have likewise spoken before,
page 532. Only as to this text, it is to be considered, that the word (...)
here fitly translated upon, though sometimes it signifies adversus, against,
cannot here be so rendered, in regard Jude speaks of all the whole company of
those who are to be judged, whom he distinguishes into good and bad in the
next words, to convince all that are ungodly among them; and some (namely the
godly) shall not have judgment executed against them, although there shall be a
judgment concerning, and upon them, to be sure in respect of an happy
sentencing. This word (then) (...), I take in that sense in which it is used,
(...)
2 Cor. 15.15. we have testified ((...),) of or concerning God, that he raised
up Christ, etc.

The Observations hence, follow likewise in the forementioned places.

In the second, the carriage of the judge toward the wicked, 1. The manner of
his judging them, is considerable; which is to be, by way of conviction. To
convince etc.

EXPLICATION.
The word in the Original (...), here translated to convince, imports more then
here is expressed, and indeed more then can be expressed in any one English
word: the simple word (...), (the signification whereof by its composition is
here increased and enlarged) is a word belonging to courts of judicature, and
signifies two things, 1 to prove. 2. to reprove.

1. To prove against one, or to accuse or convince one of a crime so clearly,
evidently, and unanswerably, by arguments, reasons, or testimony, that nothing
can be objected, alleged, or pretended against the proof, by him who is
accused, but he is thereby compelled to acknowledge the truth of the accusation.
And answerably to this signification, the word (...) is used Joh. 8.9. they
which heard it, (...), being convinced by their own conscience, went out etc.
so ver. 46. which of you (...), convinces me of sin. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. He is
convinced ((...)) etc. the secrets of his heart are made manifest, etc.

2. To reprove, or reprehend, or correct; and that verbally and by word, as
Luc. 3.19. Herod the tetrach (...), being reproved by him (John) for Heredias
etc. so Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather (...), reprove them. So Tit 2.15. (...), rebuke with all
authority etc. And really or by deed, as Heb. 12.5. Rev. 3. ver. 19. where
rebuking is expounded by chastning. The word (...) here used by Jude, may aptly
import either of these significations, and by its Composition, makes either the
more full and significant. For the first, at the last day, Christ shall bring
to the remembrance of sinners, those things which they have done, so set their
sins in order before them, and so evidently convince, irradiate, and dilate
their Consciences, that then, they shall bring in such full and impartial
evidence against them, as shall silence them, and stop their mouths, they
shall have nothing to object, but shall be compelled to acknowledge what they
have done, and do thereby deserve. And this inward Conviction of Conscience
they shall be no more able to shake off, then to shake off themselves and their
very being; they shall see this lightning, though they should labor to shut
their eyes: the witness, the guilty, the judge, Idem testis, reus judex,
tortor, flagellum.
the tormenter and scourge are all one. Sinners shall have a self Conviction,
an ineternal Conviction. They shall in that day take part with Christ against
themselves who have here taken part with their lusts against Christ. This is
that opening of the books, mentioned Rev. 20.12. Wicked men's consciences shall
in the last day be opened, though here they be sealed books. In this life they
were bribed, and gave in partial and imperfect evidence; but then they shall
bring in the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. That writing
which heretofore was almost imperceptible, shall, being held to the fire of
divine vengeance, be made legible: And then 2. As Christ shall convince them
evidently, so shall he reprove them severely, vex them in his sore displeasure,
the lamb will then be turned lion: he whose bowels heretofore made a noise,
shall now thunder in his indignation. This reproof shall be both verbal and
real: 1. Verbal and by word of mouth. Romans 2.15, 16. Rev. 20. Cuique opera in
memoriam rev^cantur et mentis intuitu mira celeritate cernuntur. Aug. l. 20. de
C. D cap. 14. Christus in voce evidens apparebit, qui prius cum venisset
occultus ante Judicem filuit. Aug. l. 20. de C. D. C. 24. Qui omnibus se
conspiciendum exhibebit in gloria majestatis, etiam omnibus ^^diendum, se
praebebit in voce judicis Estius. in sent. 4 did. 47. sec. 1.
That part of the judgment which stands in disquisition or examination
(according to the most) shall be transacted, not by voice, but in silence in
every ones Conscience, as the books which shall be opened at the last day, are
not material, but those of the Consciences. That part which stands in
denouncing sentence, at least in respect of the general sentence, which shall
be pronounced either for the Elect or against the reprobate, shall be dispacht
(I conceive) by pronouncing a verbal sentence. Thus most of the Schoolmen
think, encouraged thereto by Augustine, who says, Christ shall come openly
hereafter with a voice, who coming the first time in obscurity, was silent
before the judge: and they doubt not but that he who shall openly be seen in a
visible shape, shall openly be heard by an audible voice. Now how dreadful will
that definitive sentence of Loss and pain be, depart from me into everlasting
fire? words brim full of woe, and wherein is sum'd up the whole damneds
wretchedness. All the happiness of the Creature has but one neck, and that
cut in sunder by the one blow of a sentence of departure from God.

2. Real. The sentence shall be executed. The sentence shall not be a
thunderclap without a thunderbolt, nor a report without a bullet; but this word
shall be operative, efficacious, a working word, a fiery stream proceeding from
the throne of the Judge, and sweeping the condemned into hell, 2 These. 1.9.

OBSERVATION. Obs. Part. 1. See page 517.544.449. Labor to be convinced of sin
here. Condemnn thy self. Psalm. 50.21.

Its the greatest folly to shelter our sin with hopes of secrecy. As all things
are open and naked before the eyes of our Judge now, so will he make them
apparent before our own eyes hereafter. God is not mocked. Jer. 23.24. Can any
man hide himself in secret places that I should not see him? Though sinners
now think that God is such a one as themselves, yet will God hereafter reprove
them and set their sins in order before them. Every sin is fully and
clearly manifest before God, yea naked, unquartered, and ripped up before his
eyes, as when a man anatomizeth a body, whereby he curiously finds out every
little vein or muscle, though they be never so close and hidden. The ungodly
shall be convinced of the most concealed wickednesses, and their mouth shall be
shut so soon as ever Gods book is opened. We may delude men, we cannot deceive
God: they cannot convince, unless men be witnesses against thee; God will
convince thee by making thine own Conscience to witness for him against thee.
Yea, of those sins which are unknown to thee, shall thou be convinced by him
who knows all things. We should be (then) so far from sheltring those sins
which we know, that we ought to be humbled for such as we know not.

Thus of the first particular, in the carriage of the judge toward the wicked,
viz. the manner of his judging them, namely by way of conviction.

2. The parties to be judged, follow in the next place, who are here said for
their quality to be ungodly, and for their quantity, all the ungodly. Of this
before (at large)

Thirdly the causes of, and matters about which they shall be judged are next
co^siderable, and they are twofold:

The first, their ungodly deeds. In these words; their ungodly deeds which they
have ungodly committed.

Not to enlarge upon this first particular here considerable, Vide part. 1.
Page 302.303. etc.
viz. the general nature of their deeds, here said to be ungodly, as being
sufficiently known by the former Consideration of the parties who were called
ungodly. By which its manifest that ungodly deeds are primarily and properly
such as are committed immediately against God himself, and so against the
first table, in the profane opposing of Gods worship and honor, in which
respect ungodliness is distinguished from unrightousnesse, which properly
breaks the Commandments of the second table; And yet secondarily, and in a
more large Consideration, ungodliness here comprehends any sin committed
either against God or man, and so against any Commandment of the Law; for even
that sin which is directly against man, has in it a defect and a withdrawing
of some duty due to God. If it be enquired why the Apostle only here says
ungodly, and not unrighteous deeds also, Its answered, for three resons.

1. Because ungodliness and unrighteousness are inseparable: wheresoever
ungodliness is, there will be no Conscience made of unrighteousness: as the two
tables were given, so are they broken and embraced both together, and he who
breaks one, makes no Conscience of breaking the other, the authority of the
giver being the same.

2. Because ungodliness is the cause of unrightenesse: he who has a profane
godless heart, will not stick at any act of unjustice. It Is the fear of God
which is to depart from evil. As holiness puts a man upon righteousness, so
profaneness upon unrighteousness. Pharaoh knew not God, and therefore he
oppressed Israel.

3. Because these seducers flatterd themselves with pretenses of eminent
godliness and holiness; though they took a liberty to live in many vices and
unclean extravagancies: The Apostle several times in this Epistle, brands them
with the name of ungodly ones, and threatens judgment for their ungodliness.

2. For the second, the manner after which they were committed, and that was
ungodlily, which they have ungodlily committed.

EXPLICATION.
The words ungodlily committed, are contained in one word in the Original
(...), if it may be rendered by any one Latin word, it must be impiarunt; nor
can it be in any one English word properly expressed, but must be rendered
either to do or perform or live ungodlily. The same word is expressed but in
one place besides this in all the new Testament, and that place is 2 Pet. 2.6.
where it is rendered living ungodlily. In the opening hereof, I shall only show
what it is to commit an evil work ungodlily.

First, more generally it notes the proceeding of these nngodly deeds from an
ungodly, unsanctified prinple; an unholy unrepentant heart, a mind devoted and
addicted to ungodliness; this is not the fruit which grows upon a good tree,
nor the spot of Gods people, who though sometime they do that which is ungodly,
withdraw that duty which is due to God, and commit that evil which is against
the will of God, In optimis non nihil pessimi. Tert. de an. c. 23.
yet as the Psalmist speaks, they do not wickedly (as these did) depart from
God, Psalm. 18.21. the wicked are they who do wickedly against the covenant,
Dan. 10.32. and of the wicked it is said, Dan. 12.10. that they shall do
wickedly.

But 2. That which this doing ungodlily, does more particularly intend, is the
performing of wickedness after a wicked and ungodly manner, and that
principally these four several ways.

1. By purposing and intending of sin. The wicked is not overtaken with a
sudden fit of tentation, but resolves on sin long before; he makes provision
for his lust; he is like a man who lays himself to sleep, draws the curtains,
puts out the candle, and he intends, and in a sort overtakes his sleep in sin;
he sets himself in a way that is not good. Psalm. 36.

2. Ungodly deeds are performed after an ungodly manner, by devising and
contriving of ungodliness; the wicked devise mischief, Prove. 6.14. He that
devises to do evil, Psalm. 35.20. Prove. 16 30. Jer. 18.18. Psalm. 36.4. Vid.
Cartwr. in Pro. 6.14.
shall be called a mischievous person; the heart which devises wicked
imaginations is one of the seven things which the Lord hates, Prove. 6.16.18.
Against those who devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds, is a woe
denounced, Mich. 2.1. The wicked are workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7.22. They are
curious, cunning artificers in, and contrivers of sin; ungodliness is their
art, trade, and mystery; they are wise to do evil, and men in malice, though
children in understanding; they are skilful practioners in sin.

3. By a delighting and taking pleasure in the committing of sin: Wicked men
are willingly obedient to it; they yield themselves to execute its commands,
and they universally resign the whole consent of the will to the obedience of
it. Sin is as pleasant to sinners, as bread and wine; they eat the bread of
wickedness, and drink the cup of violence; they rejoice to do evil, and
delight in the frowardness of the wicked, Prove. 2.14. Wickedness is sweet in
their mouths, and they hide it under their tongues, Job. 20.12. as it is not
the doing of good, but the delighting in the doing it that makes it done well,
so neither is it simply the doing of evil, but the doing thereof delightfully,
that makes it done ungodlily. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief Prove.
10.30.

4. By continuing and persisting in sin. Wicked men grow worse and worse, their
ways increase to more ungodliness, they run on in them without repentance:
none say, what have I done? Its weakly done to fall, but it is wickedly done to
lie still; it is bad to stand in the way of sinners, much worse to sit in the
seat of the scornful.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The godly sin not as do the wicked. Obs. 1.
The sinful actions of the godly, proceed not from an heart altogether void of
a sanctified principle; there is in them the seed of God; the divine nature, a
renewed part, from which their wicked works never issue; in the committing of
the most ungodly of their actions, they themselves are not altogether ungodly;
and they are overtaken unawares with sin, they sin of infirmity and we^kness;
with the purpose of their hearts, Acts 11.23.
they cleave to the Lord, though by sin they be diverted from their holy
resolutions and turned out of the way; they overtake not sin, but are overtaken
by it; like a good marks-man, they aim and level right at the mark; though
Satan and their own unregenerate part, sometime jogging them (as it were) by
the elbow, make them in their performances, swerve and deviate from the fame:
Nor do the godly go about sin with the witty wickedness and skilfulness of the
ungodly; they are brought up to another trade, being thildren in malice, and
men in understanding; they are under the captivity of sin, which though it may
happily have a victory, and exercise tyranny over them as an usurper, does not
exercise a reign over them as a King; they are taken sometime in a tentation by
that which the Apostle calls (...), Romans 7.23. a captivating law, which as by
the point of the spear, or edg of the sword forcibly overcomes them, but it
does not bring their whole will to a complete consent and subjection to it; they
do what they hate, Romans 7.15. there is ever something in them which hates sin,
which though it do not always succeed to prevent sin, yet it does always supply
with repentance after the commission of sin; In discordia s caruis et spiritu
non facile obtinetur tam perfecta victoria, ut etiam quae sunt abrumpenda non
illigent, et quae sunt intersicienda, non vulne. rent. Leo d^ jejun, sep. men's
ser.
and though some kind of consent went before to conceive sin, yet it shall not
follow after to allow it being committed. Of these things more before.
concerning walking in the way of Cain.

Obs. 2. The wicked sin not of infirmity. They do not fall into, but follow
sin; they are not pulled into sin against their will, or unawares, but they
wallow in it: they are not surprised by sin, but they sell themselves to it; not
sinning frailely, but ungodlily; they are not, after purpose to walk in the
ways of Gods commandment, withdrawn unawares out of the way; but they please
themselves in wandering, and like the beggar, they are never out of their way,
or truly displease themselves for being so, when they are most so; let no
wicked man then flatter himself by preending such a sin is his infirmity; sins
of weakness are not committed wickedly, nor is there wanting so much strength
in any saint, as to strive against them, and to arise up from them.

3. The manner of committing sin, is that which shall condemn. Obs. 3.
As the manner of doing good is that which commends a good action, so the
manner of committing evil, is that which makes it most deformed in Gods sight.
There is no sin shall condemn, which is not committed wickedly; that which is
sincerely opposed and repented of, shall never destroy: (when the Virgin cried
out, she was not to dye.) In stead of destroying us for it, we shall be
delivered from it. Hence it is that sundry sins of the wicked (mentioned in
Scripture) were more severely punished, then those committed by the godly,
though (as to the nature of the sin it self) the later seemed much more
heinous. A child of God sins not, so neither shall he smart, as does the sinner.

This briefly for the first sort of causes or matters about which the wicked
shall he judged, their ungodly deeds which they have ungodlily committed. Non
nulli codices post (...) addunt (...). Lorin. Sed verba per verbum loquendi
satis intelliguntur. Jd.
The second follows, viz. their hard speeches spoken against him.

EXPLICATION.
The words (hard speeches) are comprised in this one word (in the Greek) (...),
hard; which one word (hard) must nevertheless be restrained to speeches, Vis
Graecae vocis (...), duritiem importat ex ariditate, quam ariditatem
spiritualiter habent hi quorum cor durum est, et quorum anima dici potest sine
aqua, quia humore grati^ destituutnur. Lorin. inloc. Ut ea quae dura sunt,
tactui resistunt, ita probra et maledicta Gnosticorum a rect a ratione maxim
ab^orrent. Justinian in loc. (...). 2 Samuel 3 39. 2 Samuel 2.17. Isa. 14.3. Isa.
21 2 chap. 27.8.48.4. Cant. 8.6.
in respect of the word which follows (namely spoken) This word (...) (hard,)
according to the force of its own signification, imports that hardness which
comes from the dryness of a thing, and which thereby is unpleasing, harsh,
rugged, and so hurtful to the touch; and works or words may be said to be hard,
when they are grievous, harsh, unpleasing, churlish, rough: Thus Exodus 1.14. it
is said that the Egyptians made the lives of the Israelites bitter (according
to the Septuagint) (...), with hard bondage, 1 Samuel 5.7. his (Gods) hand is
((...)) sore upon us, and upon Dagon our God. So it is said of Nabal, 1 Samuel
25.3. that he was (...), churlish and evil, etc. 1 Kings 12.4. is mentioned the
((...)) grievous service of Solomon. 1 Kings 12.13. The King answered the
people ((...)) roughly, or (as here in Jude) hard speeches. Joseph spoke (...))
roughly. Matthew. 25.24. I knew that thou art ((...)) an hard man.

By these hard speeches therefore Jude intends, though not such as were
afflictive, hurtful to Christ; (for as our good words cannot benefit him, so
neither can our bad ones harm him;) yet such as among men are accounted harsh,
grievous, and offensive; such as were spoken in opposition, contempt,
obstinacy, stubbornness against him: And thus two ways they spoke hard
speeches against Christ.

1. Directly; when they spoke falsely, blasphemously, and irreverently,
againsthis person, natures, or offices. And of this I have spoken largely
before, page 364, etc.

2. Indirectly they spoke against him, 1. In speaking against his word; and 2.
The persons whom he would have them reverence.

1. For his word, they deride and mock at its promises, which they voiced to be
encouragements to them to live as they list: The gospel of grace, they turn
into laciviousness, and profess that it gives them liberty to cast off all
obedience; and therefore all the precepts (they say) are antiquated, and of no
other use now, then to show from what they are delivered. The purity and
holiness required therein, they deride as needless niceness, as the fetching of
a wearisome compass, and the going the farthest way about in the journey and
course of Christianity. The threatenings of the word, they securely scoff at, as
if they were but empty sounds, reports without bullets, thunderclaps without
bolts; they scorn to be stopped in their carnal and sensual prosecutions (as
did they of old by the foretelling of a flood) by the denunciation of a day of
judgment: they scoffingly enquiring, where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet.
3. They look upon examples of judgment as fables, or nothing at all concerning
them: the examples of divine patien^e, they boldly turn into presumption, with
Lamech, Genesis 4.4. If Cain be to be avenged seven fold, surely Lamech seventy
and seven fold. Justinian. in loc.


2. They speak against him, in speaking against the persons of others; their
governors and superiors they reproach, and speak evil of dignities. Of which
largely, ver. 8. Though they allowed not the Magistrate to use the sword
against them, yet did they abuse that which was sharper then a sword against
him. Against private Christians, they spoke 1. boastingly and proudly. And thus
Psalm 31.18. David's enemies spoke hard things, proudly; and Psalm. 94.4. they
spoke hard things, and boast themselves, namely by threatening such things which
were grievous to be born, insufferable and insupportable; they herein
resembling the waves of the sea, which in their proud swelling seem to threaten
the swallowing up of ships and shore.

2. They speak hard things against Christians, by slandering and defaming
them, cassing undue aspersions upon them, 1 Pet. 4.4. because these could not
find, they made and minted many accusations against them; and that both by
uttering those things against them, which were false and evil, as also by
uttering true things after a false and sinful manner, as by blazing of secret
infirmities, amplifying offenses beyond their due proportion, lessning and
depraving the good which was in, or done by them; perverting and destroying the
sense and meaning of their words.

3. They speak hard things against Christians by censuring and judging them;
they uncharitably passed sentence against their persons and practices, voicing
the former to be hypocrites, because they would not be profane; and to have no
more then, because they had so much as the appearance of holiness: they judged
harshly of their future estate, and of those actions which to these censurers
were unknown; (for they spoke evil of what they knew not) they ever judged the
worst.

4. They spoke hard things by mocking and deriding the godly; the holy
strictness and preciseness of the Saints, occasioned their scorn: These
libertines derided them, as if they had made an idol of conscience, because
they durst not run wi^h them to the same excess of riot. They turned the glory
of holy men into shame; for that which made the godly more then men, they
abused them as children. Luke 23.11. (...)
As (in likelihood) those sturdy Giants in Enochs time, scoffed both at his
purity and predictions; so did these sensual monsters, mock at the Christians,
both for their being such manner of persons, and also for the motive of their
being so, the promise of the coming of Christ to judgment.

OBSERVATIONS. Obs. 1.

1. The excellency of any way or persons exempts them not from hard words. Even
Christ himself has hard words utterd against him; Christ endured, and
therefore he had the Contradiction of sinners. Where wicked men cannot find,
they will make a cause to speak against Christ, and rather then they will have
none at all, this shall be it, that they can find none. The good word of the
ungodly is no Commendation to the commended: what evil have I don (said one to
a wicked man) that thou should speak well of me? A man is much known by those
who accompany and commend him: the Commendation of sinners, since Christ had
their Contradiction, should rather make thee suspect then sooth thy self. If
thou will be like Christ in being holy, thou must be like him in being
disgraced. Expect not to have the good word of sinners, nor be troubled for
wanting it. In short, let us not think the worse of Christ or his ways,
because they meet with the unkind word of the world; rather let us be so
experimentally acquainted with the worth and goodness of both, that we may be
able to confute the hard words of the wicked; to say, we have found Christ
good, when others shall give him hard words; nay that we may be the more incited
to speak for Christ, the more ungodly men speak against him. To conclude, let
us be harsh to our lusts, and to our sinful natures, and be sensible of the
harshnesse and hurtfulnesse of sin, and then we shall both account Christ good;
and speak good, not hard words of him.

2. Obser. 2.
A wicked tongue is rugged, harsh grating. It speaks hard things. It is not
made of bone, nor is there a bone in it (as some observe) but yet it utters
words that are harder then bones, yea sharper than swords. It has made
incurable gashes in the name. the poison latent in and vented by the tongue, is
deadly. The mockings of the tongue are called cruel. Many men have adventurd
to lose their lives, rather than they would endure the rugged and unpleasing
expressions of the tongue. Reproaches are like the living Coals of Juniper
which burn hotest, and (some say) they may be kept a whole year. Psalm. 120.4.
The tongue (like fire) though it be a good servant, is a bad master. The
Unicorns horn is very salubrious and beneficial when the apothecary uses it
in his shop, but very hurtful when upon the head of that fierce and wild
creature. Hence we should be warned to take heed of having a tongue hurtful to
others, as also to labor to sh^eld our selves with innocence and patience
against this cruelly cutting instrument, and to find that the ruggedness and
harshnesse of others tongues may be only as a file or wisp, to take away the
rust and filth of our corruption; remembering that even the best Saints often want
the rubber of a sinners tongue to make them clean, and that they may make as
good an use of the reproaching tongue of an Enemy, as of the reproving or
comforting tongue of a friend; and that hereby the swords of the tongue shall
let out the corruption of their soars, and do them good against the will of
their Enemies.

3. Obs. 3.
For our words we are responsible before the tribunal of Christ. Words pass
away in respect of the sound, not in respect of the guilt and effect even of
idle words men shall give account. Matthew. 12.26. (...), worklesse words, which
benefit not, and administer no grace to the hearer; how much more then for
hurtful words! If a man may sin by silence, how much more by hurtful
speaking! The sins of the tongue much dishonor God. Of all creatures, man
alone had the glory of speech bestowd upon him (and indeed, to what end should
an irrational creature be furnished with language?) his tongue was to proclaim
his reason, and that by setting forth the glory of his Maker. Man was made to
glorify God, and the tongue is that instrument whereby he should principally
do it. To offend God then by the tongue, is to fight against him with his own
weapon, and to turn his own artillery upon himself. Further, the sinful
tongue of all other parts does most hurt to others, not only by vexing and
afflicting them with calumnies, reproaches, disgraces, but also infecting them,
and scattering its poison to tempt and draw to sin, and error. How great should
our care be to throw the salt of grace into the streams of our words, to
labor that our speech should be always gracious, Col. 4.6
and (as the Apostle speaks) seasond with salt! and that both by cleansing the
fountain the heart (for if the stomach be corrupt the breath will be unsavory)
as also by setting a watch before the door of our lips, and by giving entrance
to no expressions but such as can bring a pass from the scripture: adding to
that double guard the teeth and lips, with which nature has hedgd, in the
tongue, a third, namely the fear of God, which is the best keeper both of heart
and tongue; always remembering that though words seem to vanish, and to dye as
soon as we have spoken, yet that our words have not done with us when we have
done with them, but that even of our seemingly perished expressions, and
forgotten (if sinful) words, shall we at the last day be convinced. The arrows
of our words, shot so high that they seem to be lost and out of sight, will
afterward fall upon the heads of those who shot them up.

4. Obs. 4.
Christ accounts the words spoken against his, as utterd against himself. These
troublesome, ruggedtongued sectaries handled the names of others (as we have
heard) rudely; but at the last day, Christ will convince them of these hard
speeches: their foolish tongues shall recoyl upon themselves, and rebound like
an arrow shot against a brazen wall, from the reviled innocents, to the nocent
revilers. Jesus Christ will give his Saints more then treble damages, nay,
fourfold restitution, for all the reproaches which they have sustained; sinners
shall restore the stolen reputations of Saints, and that with interest. It is a
righteous thing with God to render tribulation to all, who even this way
trouble his people. Christ well knows that all the hard speeches against his
servants were uttered for his sake; because they did not run with the wicked to
the same excess of riot, they were therefore followed by them with excessive
reproaches. David said, it was for his sake, that Saul killed the Priests of
the Lord; he could not come at David, and therefore he destroyed his friends.
The wicked cannot reach the person, and therefore they tear the picture; but
Christ will hereafter suffer none to be losers by him, that have been losers for
him, the revilings uttered against Saints, will at the last appear to have been
spoken against the truly great ones, the favorites of the King of glory: Were
ye not afraid (says God to Aaron and Miriam) to speak against my servant
Moses? He speaks to them as slandering a great person.

Ver. 16. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts, and
their mouth speaks great swelling words; having men's persons in admiration
because of advantage.
IN this verse our Apostle excellently applies the forementioned prophecy of
the last judgment, unto these seducers, showing by sundry apt and pregnant
proofs, that these seducers were guilty of that ungodliness for which the
wicked at the last day were to be judged. And they discover their ungodliness
these four ways.

1. By being murmurers, complainers. 2. Their following their lusts. 3. Their
boasting: speaking great swelling words. 4. Their admiration of men's persons.
1. They discover their ungodliness, by showing themselves Murmurers,
Complainers.

EXPLICATION.
I shall herein show two things. 1. Who are here meant by murmurers,
complainers. 2. Why Jude expresses himself against them, or what is the
greatness or heinousness of this their sin, in being murmurers, complainers.

1. For the first, who are here meant by murmerers, complainers.

The first word (...), murmurers, imports an expressing of discontentednesse
against another in our words; and that not aloud with an high voice, but with a
voice somewhat low, muttering, and grumbling. The word (...), comes (say some)
from (...), grunnio, Suum more grunnire murmr, leuis aquae strepitus
denotatur, et a graeco verbo (...) descendere videtur.
to grunt as fat swine; and so imports secretly to speak against others (says
Gerard) with hatred and impatience. Thus Matthew. 20.11. They who received but a
penny for their work, thinking themselves wronged; (...), murmured against the
good man of the house; and the Scribes and Pharisees (...), murmurred against
Christ and his disciples for eating with publicans and sinners. And John 6.14.
the Jews murmurred ((...)) against him, because he said he was the bread of
life. Submissa voce mussitare.
So ver. 43.61. of the same chapter. So 1 Cor. 10.10. neither murmur ye, (...),
as some of them also murmured ((...)) and were destroyed of the destroyer;
though sometime (as Beza notes) the word is taken for any close secret
whispering of a matter without offense and indignation, as Joh. 7.12.32. yet
most frequently and properly it is used in the former signification. This
mumuring may be either against men, or against God himself; the word here used
by Jude, by its own force, signifies not one more then another. Against man
have men frequently murmured, as the Israelites against Moses and Aaron; nor is
any thing more usual, then for people to murmur (especially) against their
Governors, out of envy, impatience, or discontent; a sin questionless which
these seducers were deeply guilty of, who despised dominions, and spoke evil of
dignities; and yet because the Apostle had accused them for that sin before,
ver. 8. and also threatened destruction against them for it, ver. 11. Because
also the next word Complainers, wherein the Apostle shows the cause of their
murmuring, notes a complaining of that lot, portion, condition set out by God
for us, I rather conceive that this murmuring here, with which Jude charge
these seducers, was their muttering of impatient, discontented expressions
against God himself, with whom they were angry and displeased: a distemper
which (allowed) is an evident sign of an ungracious, ungodly heart (the thing
which also Jude here intends to prove) and contrary to that quiet and silent
submissiveness of the godly who (with Davd) are dumb and open not their mouth
because the Lord does it, Psalm. 39.9, who will be pleased with God, and with
whatever he does, when he is most angry with them who will justify him, when he
seems to condemn them. A sin likewise, is this murmuring against God, of which
the ungodly Israelites are frequently accused. As Deuteronomy. 1.27. Exodus 15.24. and
for which they were severely punished. Concerning those who by murmuring showed
themselves displeased with God, the Apostle tells us, that God was not well
pleased with them, for they were overthrown in the wilderness; their
displeasure was wicked and sinful, but yet weak and impotent; Gods was holy and
righteous, and withal potent and irresistible: Man has no ability with his
anger, he may hate God, but he cannot hurt him; nay, in stead thereof, he only
hurts himself; every arrow which he shoots up to God, falling down upon his own
pate.

2. The other expression whereby Jude sets forth their sin, is here (...),
translated, complainers, which does not (as indeed I think no one word can)
fully express the force of the word used by the Apostle, which signifies
complainers, blamers, or accusers of that part, portion, or alotment which was
set out for them in the world. The word being made up of two, the one (...),
which signifies blaming or complaining; the other (...), a lot portion, or
division. The Apostle then by this word (...), complainers of their lot and
portion, explaines the former, (...), murmurers; by it showing what it was at
which these people murmured, namely that their condition in the world was not
so rich, great, and honorable, as was that of some others; they murmured, as
if God had unequally distributed their estate and portion; because they had not
as much as others, they thought they had not enough, nay nothing. Happily they
were displeased that they were not the governors of the world, that any were
above them; and indeed this was the true reason why they speak evil of
dignities, and opposed Magistrates, not because they hated ruling, but because
they themselves were not the rulers. And this further clearing of their sin by
the Apostle, further proves them ungodly (the Apostles scope) for in
complaining of their lot and portion, what did they but accuse God either of
want of righteousness or wisdom in his distributions, and dispensations, as if
either he had defrauded them of their due, or not understood fitly to
proportion their estates. And what can be more contrary to godliness (which as
the Apostle speaks) is joynd with contentment, or self-sufficiency, 1 Timothy 6.6.
than discontentedly never to be sufficed with what God has laid out for us?
what more unlike that holy disposition of Saints, whereby they say with David,
the Lord is the portion of my inheritance, the lines are fallen to me in pleasant
places, yea, I have a goodly heritage? Psalm. 16.5, 6. Discontentednesse with
our times and estates is that which the holy Ghost deservedly charge with
sinful folly: Eccles. 7.10. Say not thou, what is the cause that the former
days were better then these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this.
q.d. do not by considering of the goodness of former times, complain
discontentedly of Gods providence in ordering thee to live in those which he
has alloted for thee.

For the second, or what is the heinousness considerable in this their sin? I
answer, our Apostle by charging them herewith (as I said) intends to prove them
ungodly men, and such bold sinners as utterd had speeches against God.

Now how much ungodliness lays open it self by this sin of murmuring
discontentednesse against Gods administrations, appears, by considering what
those sins are whereof this sin is made up and consists, and wherewith its ever
accompanied. First in this is contained that great sin of unbelief and
distrustfulness. He who complains of his portion, does not believe that God is
his portion and will supply him accordingly. He who believes that God is his
portion, needs not complain of his portion; no, he that can say with David, The
Lord is the portion of my inheritance, will undoubtedly add, the lines are fallen
to me in pleasant places, I have a goodly heritage. Psalm. 16.5, 6. That God who
is self-sufficient, is alsufficient: sufficient for the soul, fills every
corner thereof: the Be in the hive puts not forth its sting, nor does the
soul, when centred upon God, disquiet us. So that this murmuring discontednesse
clearly argues, that the soul departs from the living God, and looks not upon
him as a good able and willing to relieve it in its exigences, a sin
(doubtless) very heinous, and such as much dishonours Gods alsufficiency, and
that which God often punished in Israel, and which was the Companion, or rather
the cause of all their murmurings against him; as appears Ps. 78.19, 20. Can
God furnish a table in the wilderness? He smote the rock, but can he give bread
also, can he provide flesh for his people?

2. This sin discovers (as a fruit of the former) the going out of the heart
after some other portion besides God, nay more then God; which because it
cannot obtain in so large a measure as it desires, (like a child that cries
because its pincht in a strait coat much too little for it) a man becomes
unquiet and complaining. Now how great an impiety is it, to lament and
complain more for the want of trifles, then for the want of that great
soul-satisfying good, namely, that God who has all in him that may do or make
us good! like a foolish mother, who having many lovely children, will not look
upon them, but only regards and delights her self with babies, or puppets made
of clouts. How deservedly great is that complaint of God, they have forsaken me
the fountain of living waters, and have hewed them out Cisterns, broken
Cisterns that can hold no waters! How inexcusable a wickedness was it for the
King of Israel, in stead of seeking of God, to go to Baalzebub the God of
Ekron for the recovery of his health! What greater disloyalty then for a soul,
like Potiphars wife, to wrangle and rage because it cannot obtain its servant
(the Creature) to satisfy its unclean desires, and to despise the chaste and
truly comfortable imbracements of her Lord, to whom its married, and tied by
dearest and strictest bonds.

3. This murmuring discontentednesse discovers the great sin of
unthankfulness for what portion we enjoy. A murmurer cannot be thankful, nor
can he who is thankful for what he has, murmur for what he is without; but he
wonders that God should give him any thing, not frets because God does not give
him every thing; he says (with Jacob) I am less then the least of all thy
mercies; and does not mutter against God for not bestowing upon him greater.
This distemper of discontent (contrarily) causes men to think so much of what
they want, that they quite forget what they already have received: Thus the
Israelites discontentedly murmured for what they had not, and unthankfully
forgot what they had. Discontednesse makes heavy mercies to sink to the
bottom, and to be forgotten; and light wants and troubles to swim on the top;
and it makes men so fretful, in that a few are above them, that they are
utterly unthankful for their being above so many; and God loses a friend of
the discontented person, for but doing with his own as he pleases.

4. In this is manifested the sin of a proud conceit of our own worth and
deservings, a sinful self-justification, when Gods dispensations are severe and
afflictive. He who complains of Gods dealing, secretly applauds his own
deservings; he who murmurs against Gods hand, shows that he is not angry with
his own heart; he always says, see what have I lost, how many comforts do I
want; but he never says, what have I done? how many corruptions has my heart,
which make me unfit to enjoy a fuller portion in the world? All the fault is
laid upon God, nothing upon himself, as if his sin never threw one mite into
the treasury of his sufferings, he counts God a hard master, and himself a good
servant: and if it be a great sin in the courts of men to acquit the wicked,
and to condemn the innocent, how inexcusable a wickedness is it to condemn
God, and acquit our selves! A discontented camplainer says not with David, I
and my fathers house have sinned: these sheep, what have they don? Nor with the
humble soul, The Lord is righteous, and I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him; but flies in the face of God, in stead of
falling down at his feet. In one word; this discontent is a shield for sin, and
is a sword against God.

5. This sin unduly and sacrilegiously usurps Gods own seat and throne: what
does he who complains of Gods administrations, but in effect profess that he
would be in the room of God to order the world after his own mind, and that he
has more wisdom, care, justice, and therefore fitness to dispose of men and
to alot them their portions, than God himself? Interpretatively, he says like
Absalom, there is none that takes care to order men's affairs: O that I were
King of the world, then should things be better ordered then now they are: And
he says to God, as that master of the feast to his self-advancing guest, come
down, sit lower, and give way to thy betters to sit above thee! Whereas alas,
should such silly Phaetons as we but govern the world (as they fable he did the
chariot of the sun) for one day, we should set all things on fire: nay, should
we be left to cut out our own portions, and be our own carvers, how soon should
we cut our own fingars? And how can he whose will is the rule of rectitude, do
any thing unrighteously? man does a thing because its just, but therefore is a
thing just because God does it; far be it from God (says Elihu) that God
should do wickedness, J^b. 34.10.
and from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity: who can be more careful
then he who is more tender over his, than a mother is over her sucking child?
who so wise as the only wise God, whose eyes run to fro, throughout the whole
earth, nay who indeed is all eye to behold all the concernments of the sons of
men?

6. Lastly, This sin of discontentednesse with our own private alotments, takes
men off from minding the more public and weighty concernments of Gods Church;
making them to disregard and forget it in all her sufferings and hazards; what
does more then this sin, cause men to mind their own, and not the things of
Jesus Christ, and to lose the thoughts thereof in a crowd of discontented cares
for themselves? It is impossible for him that is overmuch in mourning for
himself, to be mindful of, or mournful for Zion. Now what an unworthy distemper
is this, for men to live as if God had made them only to mind their own private
conditions in the world, to regard only the painting of their own Cabbins,
though the ship be sinking? and so as it may be well with themselves to be
careless how it fares with the whole Church of Christ? We should rejoice that
God would set up a building of glory to himself, though upon our ruins, and
that Christ arises, though we fall; that his kingdom comes, though ours goes,
that he may be seen and honored, though we stand in a crowd, and be hidden.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. God has divided, Obs. 1.
set out for every one his portion here in the world. These seducers, in
complaining of their part and alotment, show that God appoints to every one his
dimensum or proportion that he thinks fittest for them. God is the great
householder of the world, and Master of that great family; and as it was the
custom of ancient times, to divide and give to every one his portion of meat
and drink, and his set allowance of either; (whence we read Psalm. 11.6. of the
portion of the wickeds cup) so God deals out to every one what estate he thinks
meetest. To some he gives a Benjamins portion in the world, five times so much
as to others: he is the sovereign disposer of us, and of all our concernments,
and he best knows what is best for us; and to his people, he ever gives them
that alotment, which best suits with their obtaining of the true good, himself,
and ever affords them, if not what they would, yet what they want. Oh how
should this consideration work us to a humble contentedness with all our
alotments, and make us bring our hearts to our condition, if we cannot bring
our condition to our hearts! In a word, when we see that the condition of
others is higher then ours; let us consider that it is better to wear a fit
garment, then one much too big, though golden.

2. Obs. 2.
No estate of outward fullness can quiet the heart, and still its complaints.
These seducers feasted sumptuously, fed themselves to the full, and fared high;
and yet for all that, they murmured and complained. The rich man in the Gospel
in the midst of all his abundance, cries out, What shall I do? Luke 12.17.
Neither the life, nor the comfort of the life consists in the abundance of the
things which we enjoy. None complain so much, as they who have the greatest
plenty. Though Nabal had in his house the feast of a King, yet soon after his
heart dyed in him, and he became like a stone, 1 Samuel 25.27. Nabals heart was
like the kidney of a beast, which though enclosed in fat, is it self lean.
Solomon in his glory, reads a lecture of the creatures vanity. Ahab and Haman
were as discontented in heart, as great in estate; vast is the disproportion
between the soul and all wordly objects, for they being but momentany and
vanishing, dead and inefficacious* earthy and drossie, are unsuitable to the
souls excellency and exigencies. It Is not the work of wordly abundance, to take
away covetousness, but of grace in the heart: the lesson of contentment must
be learned in a higher School than outward plenty.

3. Obs. 3.
They who deserve worst, complain and murmur most; And are most ready to
think that they are most hardly dealt with. None are so unthankful as the
unworthy: Israelites murmr. Absalom is discontented. Haman cries out, what
does all this avail me? etc. whereas Jacob tells God, that he was not worthy
of the least of all the mercies and truth which God had showed him, Genesis 32.10.
Job praised and submitted to God, taking from him as well as giving to him.
None see their unworthiness so little, as they who are fullest of
unworthiness: and til a man see himself deserving nothing, he will ever
complain of God when he abridgeth him of any thing. Besides, the wicked
mortify no lusts, and therefore they are angry when their lusts are not
fulfiled, when their itch is not scratched, because they take not away the
inward distemper which caused it; but especially they look not upon God as
their portion in Christ: and who can be content or praise God, that has no
spiritual blessings to bless him for? How readily ^hen (in stead of being
angry with Gods dispensations) should we chide our own corruptions, and often
blush, that so many Saints have been so patient under mountains, and that such
sinners as we should so complain under feathers?

4. Obs. 4.
Its our duty to take heed of this sinful distemper of murmuring against, and
complaining of Gods dealing with us. To this end, in the most unpleasing
dispensation of providence, 1. More study what thou deservest, than consider
what thou sustainest. Whatever thy Condition be, thou have deserved that it
should have been worse. The fire is not answerable to thy fuel. Wonder more at
what good thou have, then what thou want; and at the evil thou art without,
then at that which thou undergoest. The godly say, He has not dealt with us
after our sins, nor rewarded us after our iniquities. It Is his mercy that we are
not consumed. Our God has punished us less than our iniquities. 2. More mourn
for thy incorrigiblenesse under, than the unpleasantnesse of any providence;
that thou have been so long in the fire, and lost no more of thy dross; that
folly is still so bound up in thy heart notwithstanding all thy rods of
Correction, Hos. 13 13.
and that thou art that foolish child which stays so long in the place of
breaking forth of Children. More labor to make thy shoulder strong, than to
get thy burden taken off, and rather to be fit to endure cross providence than
to have them ended. To this end, 1. Prove. 23.18.
More look upon providence as concluding, then as at present: in the end thou
shall say, the wilderness was the best way to Canaan, and that God dealt better
by thee than thou could have done by thy self. Wait the winding up of
providence, prejudg not Gods proceedings; he often turns water into wine* Gods
furthest way about, will prove better than thy shorter Cut. 2. Clear up thy
interest in Christ, and so possess thy self of true riches. Gratia Dei portio
locuples.
If God be thy portion, thou will never complain, its small, or smart. ^
Labor to kill Lust, which is the sting of every trouble, making a sweet
Condition bitter, and a bitter Condition bitterer: rather mend thy house, then
complain of the raining into it. Get affections weaned from the world: Count
the greatest worldly gain small, and then thou will never think the greatest
loss great. Love every thing, besides Christ, as about to leave and loath it.
4. Endeavor after submissivenesse of heart. Say rather, oh that I had patience
under, than riddance from my trouble. Study for an annihilated will or rather
to have thy will losing it self, in Gods. 5. Compare thy let with theirs who
have less then thou have, and yet deserve more then thou do. If thy drink be
small, others drink water; if thine be water, others drink gall; if thine be
gal, others drink blood; if thine be blood, others drink damnation.

6. More Consider whence every providence is, than what it is: it is bitter in
the stream, but sweet in the fountain. Observe the hand of a sovereign Lord,
a wise Governor, a merciful Father, a righteous Judge. In Precepts, consider
not what is commanded, but who commands. In Providence, not what is the
Correction, but who is the Correcter; the former will make thee obedient in
doing, the latter in suffering.

4 Remember, if thou have a murmuring tongue, God has a hearing ear: God hears
thee when thou mutterest most secretly, most inwardly. He who hears the groans
of his own spirit, hears the grumblings of thine. Exodus 16.7, 8 9,
The Lord (says Moses) teareth our murmurings. If his ear be open, let thy
mouth be stopped; be afraid thy God should hear thee. Murmuring is a great
provocation.

5. 5. Eccles. 7.10.
Meditate of the folly and vanity of this sin of discontented murmuring against
God. 1. Consider it cannot benefit and relieve us. I may say of sinful
complaining (as Christ of sinful Care) which of you by complaining, can add one
cubit to his stature? Never did any find ease or obtain their desire by
contending with God. An impatient murmurer is like a man sick of a burning
fever, who tumbles and tosseth from one side of the bed to the other for
coolness, but till his distemper be removed, he gets no ease. God must have
his will; there is no escaping from him but by submiting to him. Its a vain
thing for a man in a boat, by pulling with a cable at the rock, to think to
draw the rock to him. 2. Its a distemper which disquiets him most in whom it
is. The impatient murmurer is his own martyr, his afflictions are
selfe-created. He would take it very ill to have another do half so much
against him, as he does against his own soul. All his trouble is from his own
pride, through which comes all Contention with God and man. It Is fullness of the
stomach which makes a man sea-sick, and the proud heart which causes all the
vexation in a troublesome estate. The arrow of murmuring shot up against God,
falls down upon the head of him who shot it. The wild bull in the net, in stead
of breaking it, does by struggling the more, hamper himself. 3. This sin of
discontentednesse^ deprives a man of all that spiritual benefit which he may
reap by the troublesomnesse of his wordly alotments. Were not men peevish and
unsubmissive, they might take honey out of the carcass of every Lion-like and
tearing trouble. They might learn those lessons of heavenly mindedness,
meekness, faith, mortification, which would countervaile for every cross. The
silent and submissive acceptance of a severe dispensation, turns every stone
thrown at us into a precious stone, and produces the peaceale fruit of
righteousness: whereas murmuring discontentednesse makes us spend that time in
beating of our selves, and wrangling with God, which we might profitably
improve in laboring for a sanctified use of every dispensation.

This for the first proof, that this seducers were those ungodly ones who
should be judged at the last day. viz. because they were murmurers,
Complainers. The second followe^ in these words, Walking after their own lusts.

EXPLICATION.
Two things are here to be opened. 1. Their guides who led them; their own
lusts. 2. Their following these guides; they walked after them.

In the first, their guides are set down 1. by way of specification, so its
said they were lusts. 2. By their relation, or their appropriation to these
seducers; and so they are said to be their own.

1. They are specified and denominated lusts. Two things here are considerable.
1. What is meant by lusts. 2. Wherein their hurtfulnesse stands. 1. The word
(...), lust, is indifferently used concerning lust, good or bad, it denoting by
its proper force, only an ardent, earnest desire. And therefore there are lusts
not only lawful and indifferent (they being the motions of the concupiscible
power, desiring such objects as tend to the preservation of nature, Luke 16.21.
That which in insensible things is (...), the sensible and rational is (...)
Phil. 1.23. Psalm. 119 127.
as meat, drink, rest etc.) but also holy and spiritual; in which respect the
spirit is said to lust against the flesh, Gal. 5.17. in regard of that new and
holy inclination of the regenerate, whereby they endeavor to put off the old
man, and to put on the new. But here (as elsewhere very frequently, the word
(...) intends Carnal, sinful, and Corrupt lust. And this is twofold.

1. Original; that inordinate disposednesse, that inbred and primitive pravity
of nature, standing in an aversation from all good, and propension to all
evil; the root not only of all wicked desires, in the will, but also of all
the evil thoughts in the understanding; and its called lust, because it
principally discovers it self by sinful lustings, and by them manifests its
vigor and strength. And of this speaks the Apostle Jam. 1.14, 15. when lust
has conceived, etc.

2. Actual: Is every sinful rising or inodinate motion against the law of God,
every evil desire springing from the root of Original concupiscence. And of
these speaks the Apostle Ephesians. 2.3. We had our conversation in times past in the
lusts of our flesh, etc. and also Ephesians. 4.22. that ye put off, concerning the
former Conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful
lusts. Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies that ye should obey
it in the lusts thereof; our natural Corruption is the root which sends forth
these lusts as its branches, and upon them grow those bitter fruits mentioned,
Gal. 5.19. adultery, fornication, witch^raft, heresy, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, idolatry, etc. Now these lusts are of two sorts. 1. The vicious
inclinations of our minds, or of the upper or rational soul. We must not
restrain lusts to the sensitive or lower part of the soul only, (which they
call the unreasonable) exempting the mind and reason from these blemishes; these
lusts of the flesh into which the radical pollution of nature has diffused it
self, belonging to the understanding and reason also, as well as to the other
inferior faculties; the very wisdom of the flesh, being (as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 8.7.) enmity against God, and such as cannot be subject to his law
and will; for from hence is all impiety, idolatry, superstitution, heresy,
rejecting of the truth; and indeed all those sins which directly are committed
against the first table, and the Apostle expressly mentions the wills of the
mind, Ephesians. 2.3. whereby he understands that superior part called (...), Gal.
5.20.21.
intellective and discursive; and the Apostle Col. 2.18. speaking of those who
drew others to the superstitutious worship of Angels, discovers that flesh is
found in their very mind or understanding, in these words, vainly puffed up by
his fleshly mind ((...).

2. The lower and more brutish appetites, in the sensitive part of the soul,
the motions to uncleanness, drunkenness, gluttony, the lusts called of the
flesh, 1 John 2.16. the vehement motions of the soul after sensual delights and
carnal pleasures, which often degenerate into beastly excess. These are Ephesians.
2.3. called the (...), Romans 13.14. 1 Pet. 1.14. 1 Pet. 2.11.
the wills of the flesh, joined also with pleasures, Tit. 3.3. serving diverse
lusts and pleasures; And Tit. 2.12. called worldly lusts.

The Original contagion of man's nature having poisoned and corrupted all the
cogitations of the mind and conceptions of the heart, from them diffuseth it
self through the affections, and inferior appetites, stirs up innumerable
inordinate passions, to the breach of the second Table of the law. And from the
corruption of this inferior part, the whole depravation of nature is (I
conceive) called flesh; it drawing the unregenerate from things above and
heavenly, to such as are below and earthly; from spiritual to corporal objects;
from the Creator, to the creature; and after a sort, transforms a man into a
beast: And these carnal desires, sensual lusts, are the guides which (our
Apostle says) these seducers followed, as is evident from what he had
expressed against them in the fourth verse, turning the gace of God into
wantonness: and verse 8, filthy dreamers, defiling the flesh: and ver. 10.
what they know naturally as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt
themselves: and ver. 11. feeding themselves without fear, etc. And from these
ungodly lusts (as he after calls them) the Apostle may well prove them ungodly
men.

2. For the second. The sinfulness of these sensual lusts, appears in respect
1. Of their objects, when such things are desired and craved as are forbidden,
Ephesians. 53.4.
whether persons or things. 2. Of their measure, when things lawful are desired
unlawfully, because excessively; the desires after food, apparel, sleep,
recreations, or any other sensual delights being boundless, and concupisence
unlimited; when in eating, men so gluttonize, that their souls in their bodies
are like a candle in a stinking, greazy lanthorn; when we grasp the world, til
we make our sinnews crack. Oh how unsuitable is it for men to grow cold in
prayer, hearing, and to sweat in the world; to account a little grace enough,
and enough wealth a little! 3. Of their end, when things are desired not for
the glory of God, but for our own pleasure, greatness, and benefit; not for the
advancing of God, but our selves; when we seek great things for our selves; not
for the fitting us to duty, but for our carnal interest: all the good things we
crave, should be scaffolds to erect a building of honor to God, not to erect a
structure of glory to our selves. It is the part of an Epicure, not of a
Christian, to make his enjoyments center in himself, and to sing with that
sensualist, in the midst of abundance, Soul, thou have much goods etc. take
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry.

4. Of their effects: and so they are sinful in being, 1. Entangling and
incumbring; like long garments, which being let down about ones heels, hinder
him from walking, and trip them up in his race; and therefore the Apostles
commands us to gird up the loins of our minds. Hence by some, they are not
unfitly called the birdlime of our spiritual wings; Vis^us spiritualium pennarum.
and by others compared to a string tied to a birds leg, with which she flying
unto the trees, is hamperd in the boughs. Inordinate lusts stop Christians
progress heavenward; Mar. 4.19. 1 Pet. 2 1.2
they hinder him in prayer, meditation, heairng, practicing: they choke the
word: and from the lusting of the flesh against the spirit, it is that the
Apostle says, ye cannot do the things that you would, Gal. 5.17. women are
led into error with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3.6.

2. These lusts are deceitful: so they are called expressly by the Apostle.
(...) Cupiditates deceptionis, ut vir sanguinis homo peccati. Vir desideriorum.
Heb^. Psalm. 7.15. James 1.14. (...).
Ephesians. 4.22. and that in several respects. 1. They are not what they seem to
be. All the pleasures which are found in them, are but false and appearing, not
true and real, and proper. But secondly, and especially, they are termed lusts
of deception or error, because they do not what they promise; they are
deluding and disappointing of that expectation which they raise up in any one.
They promise honor, pleasure, riches, etc. but they perform nothing less,
and make a man more miserable after all his endeavoring to satisfy them, then
he was before; by their embraces they strangle. They who sow to the flesh, of
the flesh reap corruption; lusts end in death, and therefore in disappointment.
Like a Chimney-pe^ce, they are fair without, black within. They promise a
Rachel, they give a Leah. They give not what, but contrary to what they
promise. What was Achans wedge of gold, The breasts of lust give wind and
wormwood.
but an instrument to rive his body and soul a sunder? and what did his
Babylonish garment cloth him with, but confusion? Hence they who will be rich
are said to fall into many foolish lusts, that is, such as make them fools who
fall into them. 1 Timothy 6.9.
Solomon speaks of a lustful fool, who went as an ox to the slaughter, and a
fool to the correction of the stocks.

3. These lusts are defiling: they are unclean lusts, Non faciunt b^nos vel
malos mores, nisi beni vel maliamores.
Corrupt and corrupting. The old man is said to be corrupt according to
deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4.22. Christ tells us that the lusts which are within
defile a man, Matthew. 15.19. They corrupt and defile the very body, as I have
shown before, much more the soul, making it an unclean cage of unclean birds:
they defile all we are, ye all we do, prayers, hearings, Sacraments. We lift
up impure hands if in wrath.

4. disquieting lusts: 1 Timothy 6.9. (...) dammosas cupiditates.
they are called noisome or hurtful. Every man set upon lust troubles his own
flesh. How many more are made Martyrs to their lusts than to God himself? Oh
the diseases, losses, torments, disgraces that uncleanness, drunkenness,
ambition, wrath, covetousness, etc. have brought upon their vassals, who
indeed are no other than very hackneys, whipped and driven through thick and
thin, in obedience to their lusts! But most of all do they fight against the
soul. 1 Pet. 2.11. by reason of their contrariety they tear and pull it
several ways. They disquiet the Conscience: the very worst and foulest days
of a saint, are better than the days of a sinners sunshine. How many wracks
and silent scourges do sinners carry in their bosoms for satisfying their
lusts? In a word, they drown the soul in perdition, and produce an eternity of
pain for a moment of pleasure. To all this I might add, the unquietness of
men's lusts to others who live near them, from whence (says James) come wars
and fightings among you? Come they not hence, even of your lusts? Jam. 4.1.


This for the first particular, the denomination of these guides, which these
seducers followed. They were lusts.

2. The relation of these lusts to these seducers is mentioned; the Apostle
calls them their 2 Timothy 4.3. James 4.1.3. 2 Pet. 3.3. Jude 18.
OWN: and so they were in several regards.

1. In respect of propagation, and derivation. Lust is the Legacy left by our
progenitors: It Is a natural, imbred, hereditary propension to sin, from which
all those unholy motions and inordinate inclinations proceed, after which these
seducers walked. Men are carried to the service of lust by the tide of Nature,
as well as by the wind of Tentation. Lusts are more truly ours then any thing
left us by our parents.

2. In respect of seat and habitation. Lusts are our own, because they are in
us, in our hearts; they lie liegers for Satan in the soul, and there they are
his proxies, spokesmen, and advocates. And therefore Christ says Matthew. 15.19.
Out of the heart proceed murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, etc. Men
lodge not strangers, but their own: my children are with me in bed, Luke 11.7.
Lusts are our own then, because we harbor them, lodge them, bed them, give
them houseroom, heart-room. 3. Their own in point of provision: Men provide for
their own children and charge; and much more do they so for their own lusts.
The Apostle speaks of making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, Romans 13. ult. The high fare, the impure dalliances, unclean objects of
these Seducers, were all provisions for their lusts: The work of the Covetous,
Glutton, Proud, etc. is to prog, project for, and provide fuel for lusts, like
the poor Israelies, that painfully gathered stubble, to please their
taskmasters. 4. Their own in point of protection and defense: as men provide
for, so likewise protect their own. These Seducers would not endure the wind to
blow upon their lusts: Hence 'twas that they spoke evil of dignities appointed
to curb their lusts. Hence they were raging waves, and gave the faithful hard
words. Sometimes sinners protect their lusts with denial, with excuses,
allegations of Scripture, appearances of sanctity; and if none of these will
do, with fire and sword, open rage and opposition; yea, with tears and
lamentations, as those women who wept for Tammuz, as if some gainful good were
taken from them; as Micah cried for his gods, and as the Harlots bowels yearned
over her own child. 5. Lastly, their own in point of peculiarity of delight and
dearnesse. Some lusts are peculiarly a man's own: such as to which he is given
by constitution: so some men are addicted to gluttony, drunkenness, some to
Uncleanness, some to Covetousness, others to Ambition, etc. By Interest,
calling, the time, age, or place wherein he lives. Psalm. 18.23.
David kept himself (as he says) from his own iniquity: that is, (as I
conceive by the subject of that Psalm) from murdering of Saul, a sin to which
his Interest tempted him. The reason why some men follow not some lusts, is
because some are not so peculiarly their own; but stop them in the prosecution
of their own, and then they show themselves.

Thus of the first Branch of Explication, the Guides: The second follows, viz.
the following of these Guides, in these words, Walking after, etc.

(...), walking: An usual Metaphor in Scripture to set forth the course of a
man's life, whether good or bad. Luke 1.6. Zechary and Elizabeth were righteous,
(...), walking in all the commandments, etc. False Teachers (2 Pet. 2.10.) the
Apostle calls (...), those who walk after the flesh. So 2 Pet. 3.3 and 1 Pet.
4.3.

And most fitly is this their following their lusts called a walking, in
respect 1. Of their motion, labor and unquietness in the prosecution of them;
a man who walks, sits not still, but is laborious and restless: none are such
true drudges, as they who serve their lusts, as Paul speaks, Tit. 3.3. 2. Its
called walking, in respect of skilfulnesse. They who walk in a path, are versed
in it, and skilled in it, know every step of it: Wicked men are wise to do evil,
they are curious and witty workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7.22. 3. Walking,
because of progressiveness; he who walks, stands not at a stay, but goes on
from step to step; the wicked grow worse and worse, they daily add something to
their stature in sin; they add sin to sin; they never think they have done
enough for lust, they are daily throwing some more mites into the treasuries of
Gods wrath, and their own wickedness. 4. Walking, in regard they are going and
tending to some term or place; the wages of sin, and the end of every lust is
death; though hell be not the end of the worker, yet is it of the work; every
lust is hell in the bud, and it has fire and brimstone in the belly of it;
damnation is its center. 5. Walking, in point of a voluntary obsequiousness;
wicked men obey their lusts, they willingly walk after the commands and
dictates thereof; Saints are dragged, sinners walk after lust, they are not
driven; They seek after their own heart and eyes, after which they go a
whoring, Numb. 15.39. They are taken captives of the devil at his will. 2 Timothy
2.26. taken alive by his baits without any resistance. (...).
What ever lust (the devils spokes man) dictates, they obey.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. All the visible abominations and notorious extravagancies in the world,
come from within: Lust is the womb of all the drunkenness, gluttony, adultery
murders; these things come from within, the heart; from the lusts that war in
our members, come wars and fightings. These Seducers fell into all profaneness
and licentiousness, by following their lusts: A lustful heart makes a lewd
life; that is the Trojan horse, from whence issue all hurtful practices; we see
then the folly of only external mortification; what is the whipping of the flesh,
lying in the ashes, voluntary poverty, outward abstinences, without inward
mortification, but the plucking off the leaves, without the withering of the
root? Of this more before. Page 400. etc. part 2.
The lusts must be destroyed inwardly, before ever practices can be with
success amended outwardly: Christ so cursed the figtree, that it withered at
the root, that was the way for fruit never to grow on it more.

2. In reformation, Obs. 2.
it is not enough to forsake the evils we have no desires after; but we must
leave our lusts, yea our own lusts, those evils to which we are most inclined.
Some men will say, they are no sectaries, why, heresy is not their lust: others
say, they are not drunkards, when drunkenness is not their lust. The prodigal
pleases himself that he is no covetons griper, etc. but this is a token of
sincerity to forsake our own evil ways; and like those who sighting with an
enemy, mar every good piece of ground, to strike at those si^ns, which by
custom, constituion, interest, we are most addicted to.

3. The course of a wicked man in sin, Obs. 3.
is very earnest and impetuous. It Is with a sinful lusting and an eager desire.
Of this at large before, page 198. etc
in Baalams running greedily.

4. Obs. 4.
Its the duty of faithful instructers (with holy Jude here) to tell men of their
own lusts; to strike at those sins to which they see them most inclined: Thus
did the prophets, who lifted up their voice like a trumpet, and told Judah of
their transgressions. Thus did Christ, who reproved not idolatry, but
pharisaism and hypocrisy, the sins of his time: otherwife Ministers do but
like unfaithful soldiers who in war, discharge not against the enemy, but
shoot up into the air; though striking at men's lusts makes Ministers hateful,
yet it speaks them faithful.

5. Obs. 5.
Miserable is the condition of the poor misled followers of seducing teachers.
The seducer follows his lust, and the follower is led by the seducer; here it
is true, the blind leads the blind. In all solicitations to follow others, we
should consider whether they be led by Christ, or by lust: Be followers of
others only as they are led by Christ: you set your watches not by the clock,
but by the sun; do so with your hearts.

6. Great may be the comfort to Gods people in case of inward, Obs. 6.
if hateful temptations. When vile motions come into the godly, and they do not
lust after, but dislike them; nor entertain them with spiritual dalliance, they
may be assured, that those evils shall not be charged upon them. Before a
temptation can be a sin, it must have somewhat of lusting in it: Christ was
tempted as we are, and yet he sinned not, because he rejected his temptations:
How great a comfort may it be, when Christ is thy love, and lust thy load!

7. Obs. 7.
Though wicked men have their own several peculiar lusts, yet they all agree
together against Christ. Pilat and Herod consent in this third. Envy moved the
high Priests against Christ; covetousness stirred up Judas, popularity Pilate,
but all these lusts concentred in opposing of Christ: Pharisees and Sadduces
unite their forces against him, though they were mortal enemies between
themselves; a fever and a lethargy are contrary to one another, yet both are
against health: and therefore let not people please themselves in opposing some
kind of sins, let them ask themselves whether there be not that within them,
that is enmity to Christ. And what a strong argument may this be to the godly,
who have their lesser differences, to unite for Christ against sin?

8. Every man's woe and wickedness arises from himself, Obs. 8.
his own lusts. The root of all is in our selves. Every man forgeth his own
confusion, and coyneth his own calamity: None is hurt purely from another. A
man (as Augustine says) is an Evah to himself. We must not altogether blame
suggestions and temptations without. The Devil tempted David to number the
people, and to see Bathsheba naked; but after both, he confesses that he had
sinned. Commonly, volenti.
It may in this case be said, Nolenti non fit injuria: None can hurt him that
will not hurt himself. Every man is tempted, when he he is drawn away of his
own lust. Poison would never hurt unless taken in. The strongest enemy cannot
hurt us, nor the falsest delude us, if we will be true to our selves. Were
there not a complying principle, outward objects of sin would draw out nothing
but detestations, as in Christ; in whom, because the Devil found nothing, he
could do nothing against him. And it is the duty of the godly, to make use of
ungodly examples, not for imitation, but greater abhorrence. Saints (like fire
in cold weather) should be hotter and holyer for living in times of greatest
coldness and profaneness. The best men have often lived in worst places; as
Lot, Elijah, Obadiah, etc. and shined as lights in the midst of a crooked
Nation; and redeemed the time although, nay, because the days were evil. It Is
not outward power and opportunity to sin, but inward poison that makes us sin;
and therefore in all our humiliations, we should more angrily smite upon our
own thighs, than upon any outward occasional furtherances to sin.

9 The servitude and slavery of a man that follows his lust, is very miserable.
Tit. 3.3. Serving diverse lusts. Obser. 9.
Oh how true a drudg is he that is a lacquey to his lusts, and who has lusts
for his Leaders and Commanders! 1. A servant is hindered from doing any thing
but what his Master pleases. A servant to his lusts, is in the bond of
iniquity; hindered not only from doing, but even from willing to do any thing
but what pleases his lusts: He is alienated from the life of God, cannot hear,
pray, meditate holily: Sometimes he is in arcta custodia, in close custody,
not so much as able to go about the very outward works of holiness: at least he
is in libera custodia, he cannot do them any further then his lusts allow,
never spiritually; he is Satan's captive, Gaol-bird. The Romans cu^ off the
thumbs of their slaves, that so they might be able to handle the Oar, but not
the Sword; so the Devil hinders his slaves from holy services, but leaves them
in a posture of activity for sin: Satan gives some of his slaves longer line
then he gives to others; but he ever keeps them in his power. 2. A servant is
servilely employed: The Gibeonites were hewers of wood and drawers of water. A
Sinner is put upon basest and hardest works: like the Israelites in Egypt, who
had their shoulders under burdens, and were put upon base and dirty drudgeries.
Issachar couched under his burden like an Ass. A wicked man takes pains to go
to hell: his employments are most painful and vile: the workie-dayes of a Saint
are better then the holidayes of a Sinner: Christ's yoke is easy, and his
burden light. 3. A servant is beaten, bellybeaten, back-beaten: Oh the wounds
of conscience that sinners get in the service of their lusts! there is no peace
to them; they carry furnaces in their breasts, silent scourges. Not to speak of
the wounds upon their bodies, healths, names, estates. 4. A servant is
rewarded: but what are the sinners wages? Sum'd up they are in that one word
(how comprehensive!) Death. The very work of a Saint is abundant wages; the
very wages of a sinner his greatest woe. After sinners have drudg'd for lusts
all the day of their lives, Satan lodges them in flaming sheets at night. He
who has now been their Tempter, will then be their Tormenter. And yet how
unlike is a servant to lusts, to a servant unto men!

1. The work of a man's servant is at length at an end; A sinners work is never
done; peccator nunquam feriatur, sinners have no holidayes: they drudg without
intermission: on the Sabbath they sin, in prayer, hearing, Sacraments, in
eating, drinking, recreations, on earth, in hell.

2. A man's servant is weary of his servitude, groans like the Israelites under
his bondage, and desires delivery. A slave to lust loves to be so still, he is a
boared slave that will not be free, but accounts every one his enemy that would
deliver him, he thinks his servitude his liberty, his prison his palace.

3. Among men, one master has many servants, but spiritually one servant has
many masters, serving (says the Apostle Tit. 3.3.) diverse lusts and pleasures;
Quot habet Dominos qui unum non habet!
yea these masters are contrary, some haling this way, others another:
Covetousness hales one way, prodigality and pride another; ambition drags one
way, uncleanness another. A sinner by these lusts is drawn as by wild horses.

4. Among men, the master is better and more honorable then the servant; but a
servant to lusts serves masters that are infinitely below, and baser then
himself; a man never goes below himself, but when he serves them. Every lust is
the devils brat, and Satan's excrement; how unworthy is that servitude, when a
heaven-born soul has such a master! Only sin disennobles intellectual nature,
making men sinners, Angels devils. Concerning the means of opposing and
overcoming of lusts, see at large before.

The third proof which our Apostle brings to show that these seducers were
ungodly men, Vulg. Superba. Bez Tumida. Tigur. vehementer fastuosa. Alii
praetumida; supra modum turgida immen* sa.

Projicis ampullas et sesquipedalia verba. Horat.


and to be judged at the last day, is set down in these words (wherein he
taxes them of their proud arrogant boasting) their mouth speaks great
swelling words. These words Great swelling words are in the Greek expressed in
this one word (...), which signifies not only big, bulkie, bunching out, or
swelling, but all these to a very great measure, or (as some) beyond measure;
the composition increasing the signification, and importing that these seducers
spoke words of a vastly rising, swelling, H (...). De educ. lib.
mountanous bigness. Thus Plutarch uses the word (...), when he says that
(...), turgid or swelling speech is very unfit to be used about civil affairs.
And a very apt and true accusation is this brought against these false teachers
by Jude; it having been the constant course of heretics, to speak very high
and bigly swelling words, Descripsit sermo apostolicus Jovinianum loquentem
buccis tumentibus et inslata verba trutinantem. Hier. l. 1. Contr. Jovin.
of arrogant boasting. Hierom applies this expression of swelling words to
Jovinian, whom (says he) the Apostle describes speaking with swollen cheeks, and
puffed up expressions.

Two things may here be opened. 1. What the Apostle meant by great swelling
words. 2. Wherein stands the sinfulness of using them.

For the first. In two respects might their words be called swelling; 1. in
respect of the things that they spoke: 2. Of their manner of speaking them.

1. In respect of the things they spoke, and that 1. of God, and so they might
speak great swelling words against him, either when they blasphemed him in
their murmuring and complaining of his providence, or otherwise in uttering
blasphemous expressions against his glorious and divine excellencies: We read
of those who set their mouth against the heavens, Psalm. 73.9. and of the beast
its said, Rev. 13.5. That there was given him a mouth speaking great things,
and blasphemies. 2 These. 2.4. Oraclis vocis mundi moderaris babenas. Et merito
in terris crederis esse Deus.

Omnia quae Dei, quae Christi sunt, sibi usurpat, Tollit pec cata m^ndi,
dominans a mari ad mare. Leo de tribu Judae. Radix David, mundi Salvator.


Antichrist exalts himself above all that is called God. Pope Nicholas
blasphemously decreed, that the Pope was not subject to the secular power,
because God could not be judged by man. The Pope calls himself a god on earth,
to him (he says) is given all power in heaven and in earth; he takes away the
sins of the world, he is the lion of the tribe of Judah, the Savior of the
world, etc. 2. They might speak great swelling words in respect of others. 1.
Magistrates, of whom they spoke evil, and whom they despised, and from
subjection to whom they openly professed that they were exempted. 2. Illi
acclamatur, Tu es omnia, et super omuia: tibi data est omnis potestas in coelo
et in terra. Vid. Paraeum. in Apoc. 13. v. 3
Their words in respect likewise of common persons might be swelling, as 1. by
threatening curses against them who would not embrace their errors; Threatening
words are swelling words. Thus Goliath, Rabshakeh, Jezabel, Benhadad uttered
their swelling threats. 2. By great and swelling defamations, making their
throats open sepulchers, to bury the names of those who opposed them, they
being valiant in calumniation, but weak in consutation; they spoke evil of what
they knew not. 3. By promising great and admirable privileges of peace,
pleasure, liberty to those who would embrace their errors. Thus we read 2 Pet.
2.18. while they spoke great swelling words of vanity, they allure others
through the lusts of the flesh, i.e. by promising pleasure; and v. 19 they
promised them liberty; like Mountebanks, they proclaimed the virtue of their
salves, the better to put them off. Thus the false prophet Zedekiah, making him
horns of iron, promised that with those, the King should push the Syrians, til
he had destroyed them. Thus the devil that great Seducer, promised to Christ
all the kingdoms of the world and their glory, if he would fall down and
worship him. Matthew. 4.9.

3. Their words were swelling in regard of Omnes tument, omnes scientiam
pollicentur, ante sunt perfecticatechumeni, quam edocti. Ipsae mulieres
haereticae quam procaces? quae audeant do. cere, contendere, exorcismis agere,
curationes repromittere, forsan et tingere. Tert. de praescrip. c. 41.
themselves and those of their own party, whom they voiced and cried up with
full mouths, for their knowledge and piety: hence they arrogated to themselves
the title of Gn^sticks, or knowing men, and perfect ones, they commended
themselves, as if they alone had the monopoly of wisdom, and had only insight
into deep and profound mysteries; as if all others in comparison of them were
poor short-sighted people, and as far short of them, for quick-sightednesse, as
the owl is short of the Eagle. Thus Tertullian describes them, when he says,
They all swel, they all promise wisdom, they are perfect catechumens before
they are taught; how mallapert are the very women, who are so bold as to teach,
contend, etc. Iraeneus likewise describing the pride of the Gnostics, says,
Perfectos seipsos vocant, quasi nemo possit exaequari magnitudini agnitionis
ipsorum, nec si Paulum aut Petrum vocas, vel alterum quendam apostolum, sed
plus omnibus se cognovisse, et magnitudinem agnitionis solos ebibisse, esse
autem se in altitudine supra omnem virtutem, etc. Iren. l. 1. c. 9.

Matrem habent iniquitatis suae superbiam, dum semper se scire altiora
jactitant Hier. in Hos. 5 (...). 1. Paedag c. 6. Indicatur haereticos resonare,
vociferari, mugire, sonum sine fructu emittere, in clamore vocisque contentione
victoriae summam constitnere. Lorin. in 2 Pet. 2.18.


they call themselves perfect, as if none were able to equalize them for the
greatness of their knowledge; as if Peter, or Paul, or any of the Apostles were
inferior to them for knowledge; the greatness whereof they make as if they had
drunk up and devoured, boasting of such an height as if they were above all
virtue. Pride (says Jerome) is the mother of their iniquity. while they boast
of their knowledge in the highest mysteries. They think higher of themselves
(says Clemens Alexandrinus) then ever did the Apostle.

Arius that pestilent heretic (as Athanasius reports) proudly boasted that he
had received his doctrine from the elect of God, men that knew God, and had
received the anointing of the Spirit. But concerning the high boastings of
heretics I have spoken before part 1. page 270. as also p. 322, etc. of this
part.

2. They might be said to speak swelling words, in respect of the manner of
speaking those things which they utterd: and that both in respect 1. Of their
voice, and 2. Style.

1. In respect of their voice, it might be with that hight and loudness which
savoured of a proud boysterousness. Peter (2 Ep. 2.18.) mentioning their
speaking great swelling words, uses the word (...), which properly signifies
their lifting up their voices and making a great noise, a bellowing or roaring
like beasts; as if these seducers placed their victory in the loud Contention
of their voices. Thus the Idolatrous Ephesians lifted up their voices to the
hight, when they cride out with so much rage, Great is Diana of the Ephesians,
Act. 19.28.34.

2. In respect of their style or phrase wherein they utterd what they spoke. It
has been the course of seducers to speak bubbles of words, sublime strains,
strong lines, big and new expressions, that they being not understood, may be
admired: what they want in the weight of matter, they make up in the
perswasivenesse of wooing words. Their novell doctrines were clothed with new
and formerly unheard of expressions. They laid aside the form of wholesome
words, 1 Timothy 1.13. 1 Timothy 6.3.4. Or as Chrysosteme (...), new coynd
expressions (...) Disputationes instituunt de rebus obscurioribus, eas etiam
sermonis inumbrando nova quadam obscuritate, et vocabulorum recens
excogitatorum barbaric. Lor in 2 Pet. 2.13
consented not to it: but being proud, they doted about strifes of words; their
speeches in this respect are aptly by the Apostle twice called vaine-bablings.
Gr. (...), mere empty cracks of words, windy expressions without any
substance. Thus Paul Romans 16.18. tells us of some, that by good words and fair
speeches, by a winning, meretricious wording of what they delivered, deceived
the hearts of the simple: and Peter, 2 Pet. 2.3. with fained words, they make
merchandise of you. They resembled merchants, who commend their wares to sale,
by using false words fitted to that purpose. Seducers doctrines, like some
empty boxes in the Apothecaries shops, or some forry book that the Stationer
has a mind to put off, shall have goodly titles affixed to them. And commonly
(especially at the first broching of an error) seducers are wont to shadow and
cloud what they utter in obscure and doubtful expressions, and to swath their
heresy while it is yet in its infancy, in the clouts of obscurity.

2. The sinfulness of using these great swelling words is considerable,

1. In the hypocrisy of it. Seducers put beautiful colors upon that which
within is blackness and rottenness, gay titles upon empty books and boxes;
they speak lies in hypocrisy. Oh how contrary is this both to a God of truth,
and the truth of God! they deal with their persons and opinions as some Popes
have done, who in naming themselves, have such names of holiness imposed upon
them, as are most contrary to their ungodly natures and dispositions.

2. In the seducing others, who by hearing the high promises, and viewing the
holy appearances of godliness affixed to opinions and persons, are led away to
their own destruction after them both. Words are too often esteemed according to
the estimate of the speaker. Tert. de praescrip. contr. Haer. cap. 3.
Tertullian observes that sundry were edified into error by the example, high
reputation of those that had fallen into error: though we should judge of
persons by their faith, yet commonly we do judge of faith by persons: If men
like the cook, they will eat of the meat whether it be wholesome, and well dressed
or not: the having of the gifts and persons of men in admiration, has drawn
many to follow their pernicious ways. Men of renown (like Corahs accomplices)
perish not alone; and yet is there any who has not sins enough of his own to
answer for, unless he become likewise a misleader of others, and so contract
their sins upon himself likewise?

3. In the destructivenesss of this arrogant boasting to him who uses it: how
impossible is it, that ever he should blush at those errors and impieties
whereof he boasts? they who will speak highly of their own follies, are farthest
from amendment, and by consequence farther from mercy. The boasting Pharisee
was farther from mercy then the blushing publican: Luke 18.12.14.
Recovery cannot be obtained but in a way of confession. A proud boaster
obstructs to himself the way of his own happiness; others may, he must
miscarry. And how hard is it for one who has spoken highly of his own person
or opinion, ever to vail his proud and sinful gallantry by an humble and holy
retractation!

OBSERVATIONS*
1. Obs. 1
None are so ready to commend themselves, as they who are least commendable.
They who are lowest in worth, are commonly highest in boasting: they who are
emptiest of grace swel most with pride. Wicked men advance, Saints debase
themselves; Goliath, Rabshakeh, Senacherib, Benhadad, Jezabel, Nebuchadnezzar,
etc. were all egregious boasters. And among other titles which the Apostle
gives those wicked men, 2 Timothy 3.2. he calls them boasters; but mark the
language of Saints, Abraham calls himself dust and ashes. Jacob speaks himself
not worthy of the least of all Gods mercies. David says (and that as a type of
Christ) that he was a worm and no man. Agur, that he was more brutish than any
man, and had not the understanding of man. When Paul had said that he labored
more then they all, he corrects himself by adding, not I, 1 C^r 15.10.
but the grace of God with me. Though Luke writes that Matthew made Christ a
great feast, yet Matthew himself says, Christ did eat bread with him. As
humility makes way for more grace, so grace ever makes way for more humility.
They who have most grace, ever most see their own want of grace: that which a
man boasts of when he is in his natural estate, he blusheth at when God opens
his eyes; he is now (says the Apostle) ashamed of it. Romans 6.
Paul a pharisee, accounted himself blameless, and perfect: Paul a Christian,
reckoned himself the chiefest of sinners, and the least of Saints. Of some we
say, when they are single, they want nothing but a wife; but when they are
married, they want every thing else. They who are without grace, say they want
little or nothing; they who have grace, see they want every thing: they are the
poor people who cry in London streets what they have; the richest Merchant
holds his peace, and proclaims not his wealth to the world. Besides, a wicked
man makes himself his end, and improveth all his endowments to self
advancement; and therefore the more wicked, the more he sets up himself by
boasting of what he has. Moses was a beautiful child, and his parents hid him;
they who have most beauty, most hide it; a child of God like Moses, when God
appeared in the bush, hides his face, and pulls off his shoos; covers what is
comely, and confesses what is deformed and uncomly. Pride (then) is both a
sign and a cause of want of grace; a Saint ever sees he has enough to be
thankful, and thinks he never has enough to be proud.

2. Obs. 2.
Self-advancement is a sin and folly to be shunned; Let another man's mouth
praise thee, and not thine own, a stranger, Laudet te os alienum, accuset te os
tuum.
and not thine own lips. They who strove in the Olympic games, did never (when
victors) put the crown upon their own heads, but that honor was done them by
another. (...)
It is our duty to do things worthy of praise, our sin and folly to praise our
selves for doing them. Our works should praise us, not our words. Humilitas
lau. dum fugitiva.
Its said of Greg. Nazianzen, that he was high in his performances, but low in
his opinion. It is our duty to carry our selves so, as our very enemies may be
forced to speak well of us; The sheep only speaks how much it feeds by its
wool, milk, fatness, fruitfulness.
(and some have noted, that the word stranger, Let a stranger praise etc. Pro.
27.2. (Nochri) sometime signifies an enemy in Scripture.) But we our selves are
of all men, the unfittest for that employment; praise is comely in thy enemies
mouth, not comely in thy friends, uncomly in thine own. The performances which
(another reporting them) appear glorious, being related by thy self, lose all
their luster, because they who praise their own good deeds are thought not
therefore to report them, because they did them; but therefore to have done
them, Pin. Ep. 8. ad Saturntnum. l. 1.
that afterward they might report them. A man in commending, does not, yea
undoes what he is a doing. Thou hear witness of thy self, (said the
Pharisees) thy witness is not true. When Paul mentioned his own necessary
praise, 2 Cor. 12.16, 17.21.
he says, he speaks foolishly, and that he was become a fool in glorying, 2
Cor. 12.11. Though he were compelled thereto. A man should not therefore do
any good, that he may have a good report, but therefore and only therefore
desire a good report, that he may be in the greater capacity of doing good. If
a man commend himself, he should do it modestly and constrainedly, for the
advantage of the Gospel. Paul speaks his commendation as belonging to a third
person; I knew a man etc. 2 Cor. 12.2. and ver. 11. ye have compelled me, etc.
But ordinarily we should neither praise nor dispraise our selves; even the
latter of these being the giving of others an occasion to praise us, and often a
putting of praise (as one says aptly) to usury, Robinsons observations.
that we may receive it with the greater advantage. To conclude, if it be a sin
to praise our selves when we have done good, how great an impiety is it to
glory in evil! the former discovers the corruption of a man, the latter of a
devil. Lastly, Though it be a sin for a man to commend himself, yet it is our
duty to praise the good we see in, and done by others; that God may be
honored, Thus diis, laus bonis debetur.
who was the Author of all good, and men encouraged; the doer to proceed, the
beholder to imitate him.

3. Obs. 3.
Great swelling words should not seduce us from the truth: We should not regard
the words, but the weight of every teacher; nor who speaks, but what is spoken:
the Kingdom of God is not in word, but power. 1 Cor. 4.20. We must not mislike
truth, because the bearers words are low and contemptible; nor embrace error
because the words of him who brings it, are lofty and swelling. A Christian
should be a man in understanding, not like a little child, ready to swallow
what ever the nurse puts to the mouth. We should ever be more forward to
examine by Scripture with the noble Bereans, the truth of what is taught us,
than to be bewitched like the ^^^ish Galatians with the words of any teacher;
suspect the cause that needs them, and the men that use them: as a rotten
house, so a rotten cause needs most props. Truth like a beautiful face, needs
no painting: Though he were one that speaks big, nay with the tongue of an
Angel, nay were an Angel; yet if he preached another Gospel, we should hold him
accursed: Christians should labor for knowledge to discern between great words
and good words, or rather between good words and good matter.

This for the third proof, that these seducers were those ungodly men who
should be judged at the last day. viz. because they spoke great swelling words.
The fourth and last follows, in these words, having men's person in admiration,
because of advantage.

In which words our Apostle 1. describes what they did, they had men's persons
in admiration. 2. Discovers why they did it; for advantage.

For the first: their having men's persons in admiration.

EXPLICATION.
That we may understand the sin wherewith these Seducers are here charged, in
admiring of persons, We must first open these two expressions.

1. Persons. 2. Admiring, or having in admiration.

2. Show what admiring of persons is here by the Apostle condemned, and why.

1. For the former. The word persons in the Original is (...): now though (...)
signifies the face, and properly answers to an Hebrew word of the same
signification, yet in Scripture its taken several ways; not to speak of the
diverse acceptations of the word in Scripture, when attributed to God; as being
too remote from our present purpose; when it is used concerning the creature,
1. its given to things without life; as Matthew. 16.3. and L^^e 12.56. ye can
discern the face of the sky; that is, the outward show, or appearance. Luke
21.35. and Acts 17.20. we read of the face of the earth; in which places its
taken for the superficies or outside. 2. Most frequently to man; and so, 1.
properly, it signifies his face and countenance. Thus Matthew. 6.16. they
disfigure their faces, and ver. 17. wash thy face. So Matthew. 26.67. then did
they spit in his face. 2. His person; as 2 Cor. 1.11. the gift bestowed upon us
by the means of many persons, (...). 3. His bodily presence, 1 These. 2.17, we
being taken from you (...), in presence. 4. A man, as accomplished with his
gifts, excellen* cies or indowments, real or appearing; which are outwardly
beheld, or looked upon to belong to him; (for which he is (often unduly)
respected) either in regard of his body, mind, or outward condition; and thus
its taken Matthew. 22.16. Mark 12.14, where the Herodians tell Christ that he
regarded not (...), the person of men, and Acts 10.34. God is no respecter of
persons. So Romans 2.11. And thus I take it in this place, where Jude accuses
these servile seducers for their excessive sinful flattering of men in
eminency, advanced in respect of their outward state of wealth, honor, etc for
their own private gain and advantage.

2. The other expression is admiring, or as we render it, having in admiration.
Gr. (...). A (...) video, unde (...).
It signifies two things. 1. To wonder at a thing in respect of its
strangeness, unusualness, at which men use to look very earnestly and intently.
Thus its taken, Matthew 8.27. where it is said, that Christ rebuking the winds,
and the sea, the men marvelled, (...). So Matthew. 21.20. when the fig tree
withered, its said, the disciples marvelled; Matthew. 27.14. Luke 1.21 63. Luke
4.22. Euk. 11.38. John 7.21.
when Christ had with such admirable wisdom answered the ensnaring question of
the Herodians, it is said they marvailed. Matthew. 22.22. etc.

2. It signifies highly to honor, fear, or reverence the person or thing
which we look upon as strange; and thus some take it, Matthew. 8.10. when Christ
heard of the centurions faith, it is said, (...), he marvelled; that is (say
some) he respected and honored his faith. Thus its taken in this place of
Jude. Vid. Ravanel in Tit. admiratio.
These seducers honored highly, advanced, cried up the endowments and
qualifications of great men, for advantage; and probable it is, that the
Apostle expresses their honoring of men's persons by the admiring them,
because the Septuagint so translate those places, where honor and respect to
persons is mentioned. When Naaman the Syrian is said to be honorable; they
render the place (...), 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Septuag.
admired in his person. So Deuteronomy. 10.17. the Lord regards not persons.

2. For the second, what admiring of persons is to be condemned as unlawful.
Certainly all kind of admiring of persons is not unlawful before God, nor
disallowed by this Apostle. Honor to the persons of others may lawfully be
given; Even for those gifts and endowments wherewith God has furnished them,
whether outward or inward: for the outward glory and majesty which God gave
Nabuchadnezar, all people trembled and feared before him, Dan. 5.19. And God
commands honor to parents natural and political; and the elders who rule
well, are to be counted worthy of double honor. And some are deservedly
preferred before others, for their age, calling, gifts, graces, relation to us.
But several ways admiring of persous is unlawful. I shall reduce them all to
these two heads.

1. As this admiration of man does more particularly concern 1. God.

2. Man. 1. The admired. 2. Man. 2. The admirer. 2. Man. 3. Others.
1. As it may concern God. And thus we admire men sinfully. 1. When we so
admire man, as that we honor him without eying Gods Command: the lowest
service must be done in obedience to the highest master: our earthly parent
must be honored and admired because our heavenly Father injoynes it. An
Earthly master must not be honored and served with an eye only to his
Command, but out of Conscience of duty to Gods Command. Herein must we resemble
that noble Roman who disdaining to bow before a foreign Prince, when he came
into his presence, let fall his ring, which he stooping to take up, and
thereupon the Prince insulting, the Roman utters these, words, Non tibi, sed
annulo; I bow not to thee, but to take up my ring. Or as that Frederick
Barbarossa, who kneeling down before the Pope to receive his Crown, said, Non
tibi sed Petro, not to thee but to Peter. The Apostle makes the application,
when he injoynes servants to be obedient unto Masters, as unto Christ, not as
men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, Ephesians. 6.6, 7. and not as
men-pleasers, but etc. fearing God. Col. 3.22.

2. When we so admire men as to honor and serve them in those things which
they command against God: our earthly Lord must be obeyed, but our heavenly
Lord must be preferred. When these two come in Competition, we are disobedient
unless we be disobedient. Against my heavenly fathers will, I neither owe
burial to my dead, nor obedience to my living Father. Whether it be right to
obey God or man (says the Apostle) judge you. Ephraim was oppressed and broken
in judgment, because he willingly walked after the Commandment. Hos. 5.11.

3. When we so admire men for any excellency as not to give the glory thereof
to God, the sweetness of the stream must not make us forget the fountain. Men
must be honored as instruments, not adored as deities. It was cursed, and it
proved costly flattery which was given to Herod, when the people shouted, It is
the voice of God, and not of a man; because he gave not God the glory, he was
smitten, and eaten up of worms, Act. 12.22, 23. That must not be offered to
any which the best never durst take, namely, the praise of having or doing any
thing of themselves. How fearful have holy men been in their highest
performances, lest any of Gods glory should cleave to their fingers! When Peter
had wrought that great Miracle of healing the creeple, and the people greatly
wondered, fearing the sinful admiring of his person, he takes all from
himself, and casts all upon Christ. Ye men of Israel: (says he) why look ye
steadfastly upon us, as though by our own power or holiness, We had made this
man to walk? The God of Abraham etc. has glorified his Son Jesus, etc.
Barnabas and Paul rent their clothes when the people were about to sacrifice to
them. I labored (says Paul) more abundantly then they all; yet not I, but the
grace of God which was with me. 1 Cor. 15.10. Our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor.
3.5. Who is Paul, or who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believed? I have
planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase. So then neither is he that
planteth any thing, etc. 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7. the Corinthians faith was not to
stand in the wisdom of men, but power of God, 1 Cor. 2.5, 39. People are
commonly in extremes; either they deifie men, or nullify them. Either they
make them dwarfs or Giants; but for people so to admire any men as to ascribe
their conversion, or edification to them; as if men were not only Gods
instruments and Christ's servants, but Gods and Christ's themselves; and as if
their grace were from the abilities of the teacher, and not from the power of
Christ, is a very plainly sinful admiring of men's persons, even to an
unchairing of Christ, and a lifting up of man into his Seat; to a depriving the
shepherd and Bishop of our souls, and a substituting another in his room. In
a word, It is all one, as to thank the ax for building the house, and to
attribute nothing to the Carpenter. Nor indeed is it any other than idolatry.

4. When we so admire and honor men, as to put that trust and Confidence in
them, which we owe only to God. Thou (says Job) art my confidence. Job. 31.24.
He is the confidence of the ends of all the earth. Ps. 65.5. Put your trust in
the Lord. Psalm. 4.5. Trust in him at all times. Ps. 62.5. so Psalm. 37.3. But
men, though never so full of love, skill, strength, must not have our trust.
Put not confidence in a guide. Mic. 7.5. It is better to trust in the Lord then
to put confidence in Princes, Psalm. 118.8. Every man at his best state is
altogether vanity. Ps. 39.5. Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils,
for wherein is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2.22. Man is to be used as a wand in
our hand, not leaned upon as our staff or support; in subordination to, not
sin stead of God; only as one that can help us, if God will help him; as one
that of himself cannot move, or undertake, much less accomplish any good for
us. Oh how often has God snapt in sunder all these rotten crutches in England!
and how many lectures of vanity has he read upon men in greatest admiration!

5. When we so admire men as to fear their power more then Gods. Men are
sinfully admired, both when (they being for us) appear to us so great as that
God need not help us; and when (they being against us) they appear so great as
that God cannot help us. Man is idolized both by looking upon him as one that
can work without God, and much more by looking upon him as able to work against
God. How sinfully did the Israelites admire the persons of the Giants in
Canaan, in respect of there strength and stature! How sinfully did David admire
Saul, when against Gods promise he said, he should perish by his hand! thus the
Israelites sinfully admire the Egyptians, when upon the sight of them,
notwithstanding the word and works of God, they tell Moses in their march, that
he took them away to dye in the wilderness. Exodus 14.11. Who art thou, that
thou should be afraid of a man that shall dye etc? and forgettest the Lord
thy maker. Isa. 51.12. The fearing of man is the forgetting of God.

6. When we admire men's goodness, or what of God we see in men, their persons,
loving the message for the messenger, the liquor for the vessel, holy
instruction for the sake of him who gives it; and so hearing the word of God as
the word of man; this is to prefer a man of God before God in a man, or rather
man before God. And (contrary to what Tertullian speaks) not to judge of persons
by faith, but of faith by persons.

2. Admiration of persons is sinful as it concerns Man. and 1. As it concerns
the admired, and so admiration of persons is sinful.

1. When we admire such persons, as are not able to bear their own admirations.
A proud man having done any thing commendably, is not (yet) fit to be
commended. Some weak brains will be turned with a small quantity of wine;
others more strong will endure more. Herod was intoxicated with applause, when
the people cryde him up for a God; but Paul and Barnabas rend their clothes,
and are ready to sacrifice themselves when the people meditate a sacrificing to
them. A weak stomach cannot concoct fat morsells, he is a man of strong grace,
who can hear his own commendations without hurt. Nothing more discovers a man
then the praising him. Its as the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for
gold, Prove. 27.21.

2. When we so admire persons, as thereby to make a prey of them, or to
overthrow either their bodies or souls. Thus the Herodians, Matthew. 22.16.
admired and honored Christ, telling him that he was true, and taught the way
of God in truth, and regarded not the person of man; but all this was but to
entangle and destroy him, by bringing him on to answer to a captious question.
Thus afterward Christ was betrayed with a kiss; and not seldom have we known
that men have lain in ambush behind the thickets of commendation and
admiration, and so unsuspectedly, fallen upon the unwary and credulous hearer.
Jael gives her nail soon after her milk, and poison is oftnest drunk in gold.
Thus after the death of Jehoiadah, the Princes of Judah, came and made
obeisance to King Joash, whereby they prevaild with him to leave the house of
the Lord, 2 Chr. 24.17.
and to serve groves and Idols: and thus (as Ecclesiastical history tells us)
Simon Magus cried up Nere above the clouds, and accounted and called him a God,
to make him the greater Enemy to the Christians. Thus Tertullus admired the
person of Felix, that thereby he might stir him up against Paul. Act. 24.2.

3. When we so admire persons, as to cover, hide and excuse their sin because
of their greatness. A sin the greater, in regard that greatness ought to be
so far from being a cloak for, that it is an aggravation of sin and makes it
the more heinous. A wicked person in scripture phrase is but a vile person, and
by so much the more vile, by how much the more he corrupts and abuses any
eminent gifts and endowments which God has bestowed upon him. The word speaks
as basely of rich wicked ones, as they think contemptibly of Gods people That
wicked King was very low in the eyes of the holy Prophet, who said, were it not
that I regard the person of Jehoshap at King of Judah, I would not look toward
thee, nor see thee, 2 King. 3.14. See more of this before page 2. part 14.
Unsanctified greatness is most likely to be pernicious, and therefore should
be most reprehened.

2. Admiration of persons is sinful as it concerns the admirer, and so

1. When we so admire persons, as thereby only to advance and advantage our
selves, and that 1. either in profit and gain: or 2. in honor or reputation.
1. In profit: and thus these seducers here admired great ones, and honored
their greatness for their own advantage, servilly cringing and crouching to
them for filthy lucre: they gave them great titles, and flattered them in sin,
and assented to them in every thing, that they might fill their purses, and (as
Peter speaks) through covetousness, did they with feined words make
merchandise of people, hereby showing that they neither served Christ, nor
indeed those whom they flatterd, but their own bellies: at once laying off both
the Christians, and the Man. 2. In honor and and reputation, and for this end
sometimes the persons of great men, are admired, as Mr Fox tells us that the
bloody Tiger Steph. Gardener was wont to admire the person of Henry the 8.
speaking of him to others with greatest honor, and calling him his gracious
Lord and Master, only to be looked upon as his favorite, though he knew that
the King never loved him. But for honor, hypocrites commonly admire the
persons of good men, admire their persons (I say) though they imitate not their
practices. Thus Saul desired the presence of Samuel, to be honored before the
people. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees admired the dead Prophets, only to be
accounted (as they were) holy.

2. When we so admire persons as withal to imitate their sins and
imperfections. Thus these seducers were so admired, as that many followed their
damnable errors, putting no difference between their faces and the warts, their
speaking and stammering. The falls and folly of the admired, are commonly the
snares of the admirers; and the error of the master often the tentation of the
scholar. Its very hard to admire the person of another, and not to imitate his
imperfections.

3. Admiration of persons is sinful as it concerns and hurts others: and so

1. When for some commendable actions or endowments, we so admire a person who
is in most things very discommendable, and a known wicked person that thereby
we give occasion to the hearer, who is though wicked, yet not so wicked as he,
to judge his own condition very good, and to bless and flatter himself in his
sin, as thinking that he deserves Commendation as well as, or better then the
other. This I have ever thought to be one stratagem whereby the hands of the
wicked have been strengthened in sin; and a stumbling block which some either
weakly or wickedly have laid before others. Thus I have often heard even with
grief, when in funeral Sermons, a profane drunkard, a swearer, an adulterer,
or one perhaps at the most but civilly honest, has for some few good deeds,
been cried up and even sainted by the Preacher, that the wickedest persons have
been ready to saint themselves, and to say, If such an one were commendable,
and voiced by our Minister for a good man, I thank God, it is much better with
me, I never was guilty of half his extravagancies, and I see I may be a good
man, yea and commended when I am dead, notwithstanding my failings, (so he
calls his allowed wickednesses) though I be not so pure as such and such are.
Oh how unsuitable is it, that by funeral Sermons men should be made more unfit
for death! to paint those in the pulpit who are punished in hell, and that a
Minister should be strewing that dead body with flowers, whose soul is bathing
in flames! For my part, though I should not deny due commendation, even at a
funeral, to some eminently exemplary saint, or publicly useful instrument;
yet mostly, I think his speech concerning the deceased may suffice, who said,
If he were good, he did not desire; If bad, he did not deserve praise.

2. When we so admire the persons of some instructers, as to neglect and
despise others who happily deserve better then they: the sin of the Corinthians,
when the Apostle tells them, 1 Cor. 3.21. of their glorying in men, some
teachers being so gloried in peculiarly, as if they were only worth the
hearing, and none else to be regarded. Some accounted Paul the only teacher,
some delighted only in Apollo, some magnified Peter as the alone worthy man;
thus they thought of men above what was meet, and they were puffed up for one
against another. They gloryed in some, disdaining all others as not to be named
with them, though teachers of the same truth; because they had an high conceit
of their learning, wit, cloquence, holiness, or the like qualifications. A
great sin doubtless, and (I fear) the common sin of this City. How unthankful
for the bounty of Christ, do men make themselves hereby, who gave all the
Ministers of the Gospel to be theirs for their good! ( all things says the
Apostle are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.) Its
unthankfulness to a bountiful Prince, when he bestows many Lordships on his
favorite, if he should regard one of them only, and despise all the rest. Yea
how injuriously is the Spirit of Christ hereby reproached! For the despising of
those who are of small gifts, is a reproaching of the Spirit of God, as if he
were defective in his gifts; whereas their variety sets forth the fullness and
freeness of Gods spirit, who divides to every man severally as he will, and
works all these, 1 Cor. 12.11. Besides, this sin is often the maine cause of
schisms in the Church. It makes people to divide themselves under different
teachers whom they admire, and it causes teachers to take away those that
affect them, from other teachers whom they affect not so much. Now this sin of
schism (in it self very great (as afterward shall be shown, God willing, on
the 19. ver.) is made much the greater by being occasioned by those very gifts
of men, which God bestowed upon them to this end, that there might be no scisme
in the body, but that the members should have the same care one of another, 1
Cor. 12.25. Nor is there any sin which does more expose Christian Religion to
so much contempt and obloquy, then this kind of admiring of persons; for
hereby several Companies of Christians are made like the several schools of
Philosophers, some whereof followed Plato, some Aristotle, some Epicurus; and
the doctrines of faith are but accounted as the proper opinions of several
teachers, and all zeal for them is conceived to arise not from a certain
knowledge of heavenly truth; but from peculiar humor and strength of fancy.
And how great a stumbling block must this needs be to those who are without,
how will it hinder them from embracing the truth, and lay it open to derision?
yet further, the sinfulness of this sort of man-admiration appears, in that
hereby both the despised person is so greived and discouraged, that he is
infeebled and disabled in his work, and also he who is admired, is not only
puffed up with pride, and thereby occasioned to adulterate the word, invent and
broach errors, that still he may be advanced above all others by going in a
different way from them; but also put upon the pleasing of men by sinful
flatteries, in stead of profiting them by faithful reprehensions: To conclude
this consideration, nothing begets so great an aptness in men to receive
errors, as this sinful admiration; nor has any seed of heresies and
superstitions proved so fruitful as this; affection commonly makes men take
down falsities, and error is easily received from them whom we much admire; and
God does often leave admired teachers to err, for trial of the people, and the
punishing of their vanity in making Gods truth to stand at the devotion of the
teacher, for its acceptance, and trampling upon the holy and (perhaps) learned
labors of those who are more seeing and faithful than the admired.

3. When we so admire men's persons as to give all respect to men in outward
greatness, (though perhaps wicked) despifing the poor Saints, because poor;
this James reproves, my brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ
in respect of persons, James 2. When wickedness in robes is magnified, and
holiness in rags contemned. Oh how unworthy is it that the gold ring, and
costly apparel should be preferred before the robe of Christ's righteousness,
and the jewel of grace! that godliness and good examples, should be rejected
for their want of a gold ring, that he who shall have a throne in heaven, must
here be a footstool upon earth!

4. When Elections and offices are passed and bestowed partially, for
freindship, favor, money, kindred, a sin by much agravated, when men have taken
oaths to a Corporation to the contrary, and its ost a great tentation to the
party who enters by money, to sell justice dear.

5. When we so admire the person of one, as to do injustice in judgment,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical; which is when our affection does so blind our
judgment by some outward respect or appearance, that we will not determine
righteously, the cause being over balanced with such foreign considerations
as have no affinity with it. Thus men are in judicature sometime swayed with
foolish pity, sometime with cowardly fear; both these the Lord forbids. Levit.
19.15. Thou shall not respect the person of the poor, Deuteronomy. 1.17.
nor honor the person of the mighty. This sin would make God a patron of
iniquity, the sentence being pronounced from God.

OSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
The oondition of men in greatest out ward emiuency and dignity is often very
miserable. None have so many flatterers, and therefore none so few friends as
they: flatterers (as worms) breed in the best fruit. When a poor illiterate man
is admonished for sin, a rich, a learned man is admired in, nay, happily for sin.
As the bodies, so the sonls of Kings and great men, have oftnest poison given
them. Hushai humoured Absalom, Ziba flattered David the people admired Herod,
etc. Jezabel foothed Ahab out of sadness into sin. Ahab had four hundred false
Prophets who flattered him in to wickedness, and and but one faithful Michaiah
to tell him the truth. The common sound in the ears of Princes is, quod libet
licet, your will is a law; as if they could not be carried fast enough into sin
by the tide of their own nature, Canis Aulicus. Melius est in (...) quam in
(...) incidere.
unless they be driven also by the wind of flatterers breath. The running water
has no certain color of his own, but its colored like the soil which is
under it; so flatterers fit themselves to every humor. Aristippus for his
flattering of Dionysins, was called the Court-spaniel. Flatterers are crows that
hover about the carcass of greatness, friends in prosperity only, summer
friends, like lookers upon a dyal, they only regard men when the sun of
prosperity shines upon them, likelice, they leave dead bodies.

None are so little to be envied by others, or so much to be careful of
themselves, as they who are in dignity: they should much more delight in words
that are bitter, and wholesome, then in such as are sweet and destructive.
'Twas a holy and wise resolution of David, He that walks in a perfect way, he
shall serve me; Psalm. 101 6, 7.
he that works deceit shall not dwell with me, etc. And Psalm. 141.5. Let the
righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, etc. Faithful are the words of a
friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. Prove. 27.6. Pro. 27.4. Pro.
28.23.
A flattering mouth works ruin. Prove. 26.28.

2. Obs. 2.
How just is God in stayning the pride of worldly glory! The persons of great
ones are often admired and adored as Gods, and therefore God makes them often
lower than men. God often even smites godly men when they are over admired. That
late renowned Gustavus of Sweden, feared as truly, as humbly, when he said, he
thought that God would take him off, because men too much admired him, When we
unduly set men up, God deservedly pulls them down. How many golden calves, how
much sinfully adored greatness has God ground to powder of late years in
England! We are angry that it is done, but why are we so well pleased with that
sin which did it?

3. How sinful is it to admire our own persons! Obs. 3.
If it may be ungodly to admire others in their outward excellencies, how much
more then, our selves, who are conscious of so many inward defilements and
deformities? Concerning self-advancement, I have spoken in the last words.

4. It is a sin to receive, Obs. 4.
much more to seek for admiration from others. If it be a sin to offer it, it
must be a sin to receive it. The receiver of vainglory, is as a theif in Gods
account, though others bring it to him; Ye receive honor one of another. If
men admire us sinfully against our wills, it is not our sin; if we close with
the tentation, we become partners in their wickedness. We cannot be too worthy
of having praise, nor too wary in hearing it. All our commendations should fall
upon us as sparks upon wet tinder, humility should damp all our praises.
Siomnes me odissent, baberem quod est meum, si propter me amarent, usurparem
quod est tuum. Nier. dead. 414.


Its as unsafe for a proud person to have praises fly about him, as for a
disarmed man to stand among flying bullets a gracious heart can only digest
both his sufferings, and elevations, so as neither to be impatient under the
former, nor to be proud under the latter; they alone set every crown of
commendation upon the head of Jesus Christ. How vain and sinful is it to hunt
after our own bane, and Gods dishonor, popular applause!

5. Obs. 5.
The proudest spirits are often the basest; These arrogant seducers, who spoke
great swelling words, unworthily cringed, and basely crouched in the admiring
of persons for their own advantage. None now are so proud in their highness,
nor so base in their lowness, as they; see an evident example in Benhadad, who
though at first he proudly demanded of Ahab, 1 King 10.5, 6.10 31.32.
his silver and gold, wives and children, and the plunder of all his houses,
and bragged that the dust of Samaria should not suffice for handfulls for his
army, yet being overcome, he sends his servants to Ahab with sackcloath on
their loins, and ropes about their necks, with a petition for the life of his
servant Benhadad. See Mr. Pryn in the life of the late A chB^sh^p of Couturbury
Job. 32.31, 32
The late Bir shops who tyraniz'd over their poor brethren, were yet the most
servile flatterers even to the servants of the King for their own advantage. Oh
how different is this temper from that true and heavenly nobleness of Saints!
who with Elihu, cannot accept any man's persons; nor know not to give flattering
titles! who in their own cause, though high, they bow as low as the reed; yet
in the cause of God, when they are lowest, Flexibiliores arundine, duriores
adamante.
they are as stout and strong as the Oak, yea, as hard a the Adamant. There is
a silent glory, and a secret generosity, that discovers it self in the poorest
Saint; a rich, honorable sinner, is a beggar in robes; a poor, disgraced,
imprisoned Saint, is a King in rags. Paul at the bar discovers more true
nobleness and magnanimity, than Felix upon the Bench. The former reproved sin,
and speaks of judgment with courage; the latter hears him with a servile
trembling; the Scribes and Pharisees taught with servile flattery, Christ with
authourity, and not as they.

6. Obs. 6.
Its our duty to preserve our selves from this note of ungodliness, and
practice of ungodliy ones admiring of persons. To this end,

1. Get an untainted, renew^d judgment; a carnal eye sees nothing glorious but
carnal out side objects. Moses had a rectified judgment, a sanctified
estimate, he prized the reproach of Christ above the treasures of Egypt, Heb
11.26. A skillful eye discerns the excellency of a picture curiously drawn,
though it be not adorned with gold, yea though it be set in a rotten frame; and
contemns the gaudry of that workmanship which is only rich, and has nothing
of art. A rich sinner, is but a vile person in a saints eye, an honorable
leper. The four Monarchies in Scripture-emblems, are but four beasts, violent,
base, sensual. Ahab is not worth the looking upon by an holy Elijah; as
beholders are, so will things be accounted; the World loves its own; a child is
taken with a gay, more than with the conveyance of a great estate.

2. Study the nature of a persons true glory; this (grace I mean) is spiritual,
hidden, not sensible, and outward. The best of a man, and that which is truly
admirable is within; the Kings daughter is all glorious within; Psalm. 45.10.
grace is vayled, the man of the heart is a hidden man. 1. Pet. 3.4. That which
is most to be desired of a man, is that which cannot be seen, his goodness. We
admire the lesser because we see not the greater beauties: the worst of a man
is, that which the eye sees; he who admires only the wealth and outward
grandeur of a person, neglecting his grace, is as ridiculous as he who
reverenceth a Princes robes, and despises his person.

3. Study the vanity of all common endowments and accomplishments, wherewith
the most gaudy sinner is adorned; consider they are but beauties in fancy, and
appearance, outside glisterings, at the best but well acted vanities. There Is
not one of them, but God puts upon his enemies; with them he often gilds
pot-sherds, they are paint which is put upon the worst faces, and waterings
upon the rottenest stuffes, such as alter not the nature of him who has them,
who is still but a swine under all his robes, an ass though crowned, or though
carrying the rites of Isis. All the honor, parts, domination, riches in the
world ammount not to the excellency of the least dram of true grace; they are
not objects noble enough for a Christians admiration. I remember when I was a
child, that I heard a godly Gentlewoman relate, that that holy man of God (old
Mr. Culverwell) heartily chid her for saying, that she wondered how such a
(formerly poor) man (of whom they were speaking) came to be so exceeding rich;
Oh! (says he) are these toys fit for such an one as thou art to wonder at?
besides, there is no robe of worldly excellency but must be laid off. The
greatest potentate must stand naked of them at the day of Judgment; nay before;
their honor descends not with them to the grave: when they crow'd into that
narrow hole, all their gaudy ornaments will be swept off. The dust of an
Emperor is no sweeter than that of a beggar.

4. Study Gods dispensations: in them we shall see that he is no respecter of
persons; (...)
he has commonly set the greatest respect upon those things and persons that
are of least account in the world. He has chosen the base things of the world,
poor fishermen for disciples, nay, great sinners. The things of God were hidden
from the wise and prudent, and revealed to Babes; God chose not the Eagle, or
Lion, but Dove and Lamb for sacrifice: the poor of the world, rich in faith.
Jam. 2.5. He accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more
than the poor. Job. 34.19.

5. Study thine own profession, which is that thou art a Saint, not a
Sensualist; that thou art a servant of Christ, not of men; that thou expectest
to admire God for ever in glory; not worms upon a dunghill; that thou art
called out of the world, and crucified to it, and that they who are spiritual
and heavenly are thy brethren thy companions, thy fellow members. Oh! how
heinous an evil is it for Christians to despise Christians, the Heroes of
heaven, and to admire the wicked, Satan's slaves. Oh! what a dishonor is it to
Christ, and a confutation of thy Christianity, when thou who art acquainted
with higher glories, admirest dung and dunghil-rakers! In short, remember, thy
Master never admired any thing but grace, regarding that in a poor woman, when
he despised all the glory of the world.

6. Banish self interest and carnal designs out of all the respects thou
give to others: the aiming at honor or riches, will pervert thy estimate, and
make thee admire those that can most advantage thee. This will make a great
saint basely to fall down before unsanctified greatness; Luther could not
admire the Pope, because he admired neither money nor preferment. Covetous
designs will make thee, with these seducers, to honor those, where there is
most gain, not most grace. Mortification is the best remedy against sinful
admiration.

For the second, viz. The motive of their admiring of others, or why they did
it, viz. For Advantage, besides what I have spoken in this last branch, I refer
the Reader to Part 2. page 193. etc. 210. concerning the running, etc. for
reward.

Verse. 17, 18, 19. But beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before
of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; (ver. ^8.) how that they told you
there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own
ungodly lusts. (ver. 19.) These be they who separate themselves, sensual,
having not the spirit.
THe body and substance of this divine Epistle continued from the Preface in
the two first verses, to the Conclusion in the two last verses, contains (as I
have said part 1. page 179.) An exhortation to the Christians earnestly to
contend for the faith: in the managing whereof

1. The Apostle sets down the reasons of his sending them this exhortation.

2. The exhortation it self; both contained in ver. 3d.

3. Several arguments to move the Christians to embrace that exhortation from
the 3d. to the 17. ver.

4. And fourthly sundry directions to guide and teach the Christians how to
observe that exhortation, from 17th. to the 24th. verse.

Of the three former, we have largely by Gods assistance spoken: now we come to
speak of the fourth and last, the directions: And these directions are of two
sorts.

1. Such as concern 1. Christians themselves. 2. Others.


1. The former in relation to themselves, are principally five.

1. The improving and recollecting of the words of the Apostles who foretold
the carriage of these seducers, containd in these three, the 17, 18, 19.
verses. 2. Edification on their holy faith. ver 20. 3. Supplication in the holy
Ghost. Ibid. 4. Conservation of themselves in the love of God. p. 21. 5.
Expectation of the coming of Christ. Ibid.
2. Such directions as concern their Carriage toward others are laid down ver.
22, 23. whereof afterward, Deo volente.

The first is the improving of the testimony of the Apostles. In which
testimony I note five particulars.

1. To whom it is commended: to his beloved.

2. How it was to be improved: by remembering it.

3. From whom it proceeded: the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. Wherein it consisted: in a prediction that there should be mockers, walking
after their ungodly lusts.

5. To whom it is applied, viz. to these seducers. These are they who separate
themselves. ver. 19.

1. Concerning the first. The persons to whom this testimony is commended: such
as he calls beloved, I have at large spoken before, part. 1. page 180. etc.

2. As also concerning the second, viz. their recalling it to remembrance,
part. 1. page 376. etc.

3. For the third, from whom this testimony proceeded, viz. the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

EXPLICATION.
I might in the explication hereof be large in setting down the nature of the
apostolical function; and in showing what Jude means by this term Apostles,
and wherein stands the difference between them and ordinary Ministers of
Christ, (as namely, in respect of immediate calling, their authentical
authority in writing, and speaking; their work and office to plant Churches, to
work miracles, to give the holy Ghost by imposition of hands, to use the
Apostolical rod against obstinate offenders.) But to pass by these as not
concerning our purpose, and as being spoken to by others.

Two things in relation to this testimony here alleged by Jude may be touched
by way of explication.

1. What Apostles these were of whom Jude speaks, and where this testimony is
to be found.

2. Why Jude makes use of that testimony which came from them, and tells that
it did come from them.

1. Sermo videtur esse tum de verbis scriptis, tum de praedicatis. Lor. in 2.
Pet. 3.2. Non id in propbanis autoribus observavi. Id.
For the first, who these Apostles were that gave this prediction which Jude
here alleges, and where they gave it. Although possibly sundry of the
Apostles might by word of mouth, testify what Jude here mentions, yet I doubt
not but he principally relates to their writings. And in them do they
frequently foretell and forewarne of these seducers. Matthew (chap. 24.11.)
tells us from Christ's mouth, that many false Prophets shall arise and deceive
many. John (ep. 2. cap. 2. ver. 18.) tells the Christians, that there are many
Antichrists, whereby they knew that it was the last time. Possibly Jude might
intend these proofs among others; but I conceive (with Oecumenius) that he
principally aims at that which Paul and Peter before him had foretold
concerning these seducers. Paul warned of these seducers in sundry of his
Epistles. Peter particularly in his second Paul especially foretells of them, 1 Timothy 4.1. The spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, etc. and 2 Timothy 3.1, 2.
This know, that in the last days perilous times shall come; (and the
description of those who shall make the times so perilous, exactly agrees to
these seducers, as I have shown throughout this Epistle of Jude) for men shall
be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, etc.
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those who are good, traitors, heady,
high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God. And 2 Timothy 4.3. The
time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own
lusts, they shall heap to themselves teachers. Plainly likewise does Paul
foretell the Coming of seducers, Act. 20.29. I know this, that after my
departure, shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock:
also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away
Disciples after them. But especially Jude seems to intend the remembering of
that prediction concerning seducers which Peter gives us, 2 Pet. 3.3. There
shall come in the last days, scoffers, walking after their own lusts. And our
Apostle in exhorting the Christians to remember the words of the Apostles,
wherein they foretold the coming of these mockers, seems to some, to imitate
Peter, who in the forementioned place, ver. 2. exhorted the Christians to
remember the command of the Apostles (namely to avoid the doctrines of
seducers) knowing that there shall come in the last days mockers, etc.

For the second. Jude makes use of the Apostles testimony, and mentions the
coming thereof from the Apostles, and that in respect of Those Apostles, Jude
himself, these Christians.

1. In respect of those Apostles; by the mentioning of their foretelling of
these Mockers, Jude shows the great care which those faithful servants of
Christ had of the Churches welfare, their desires being, that the Church should
get good by them, and live holily and peaceably, when they had done living; and
that they might by their writings, live even when they were dead, to be
serviceable to the Church of Christ.

2. In respect of Jude himself, he mentions the words of the Apostles, as to
show his humility in acknowledging the grace and gifts of God bestowed upon
others, so to show the sweet accord and agreement beween them and him in the
doctrines which he delivered to them in this Epistle, concerning these
seducers, that hereby he might gain the more credit to himself and present
service, there being a joint concurrence between him and the other Apostles: as
to this end he had before told the Christians, that James was his brother in
respect of parentage, so here he tells them that he and the other Apostles were
brethren in respect of judgment and opinion; all the Apostles were stars
enlightened by the same sun, they drew the waters of life out of the same
fountain, plucked the fruits of wholesome doctrines off from the same tree; and
by the producing of the testimony of so many others who witnessed the same
thing with him, he more clearly evidenced that he had spoken nothing but the
truth against these seducers, whom he had so sharply reproved.

3. In respect of the Christians to whom he wrote: he mentions the Apostles, 1.
To show how zealous they ought to be against these seducers and their
doctrines, in regard the Apostles, who were so holy and unerring, had given the
Christians warning of them, and with such vehemence spoken against them, as if
they were desirous to leave hatred of error as their legacy, to their spiritual
children.

2. To preserve these Christians against discouragements, by seeing such
ungodly soul-subverting seducers, rage, and prevail in the Church; it being no
other than what was foretold by those who could not be deceived; and therefore
they were not to look upon it as if some strange thing had happened to them. Joh.
16 14.


3. To direct the Christians to the right means, to discover, and so toavoid
all those seducers and seductions, wherewith the Church of God was then
infested. The words of the Apostles being observed, these Characters of
seducers which they had delivered, might be so plainly seen to agree to these
who had crept into the Church, that the one being known, the other could not be
hid, and they being seen, they (surely) ought to be shunned.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
Great should be the care of the ministers of Christ to warn the Church of
approaching evils, especially of seducers. The Apostles of Christ foretold of
the coming of these seducers among the Christians, (see the forecited places in
the explication) Paul warned every one night and day with tears. Act. 20.31.

They are Watchmen, and its their duty to give warning of every enemy. They
should be unfaithful to your souls, if they should be friends to your
adversaries. Their loving and faithful freeness herein creats them many
enemies: but they can much more easily endure the wrath of man here for
discharging, than the wrath of God hereafter for neglecting their duty. Its
better that the lusts of seducers should curse them a while, then the souls of
their people to all eternity. Ministers must defend as well as feed their
flock, and keep away poison as well as give them meat; drive away the Wolf, as
well as provide pasture. Cursed be that patience which can see the Wolf, and
yet say nothing. If the heresies of seducers be damnable, the silence of
Ministers must needs be so too.

2. Obs. 2,
Its our duty to acknowledge and commend the gifts and graces of God bestowed
upon others, with respect. Jude honorably mentions these Apostles, both for
the dignity of their Function, and also for the faithfulness of their
discharge thereof, by forewarning the Christians. The prudent commending of the
gifts and graces of another, is the praising of the giver, and the
encouragement of the receiver. The good we see in any one is not to be dampt,
but cherisht; nor should the eminency of our own, make us despise another
endowments. Peter, though he had often heard Christ himself preach, and long
been conversant with Christ upon earth, though at Pentecost the spirit was
poured upon him, yet he thought it no derogation from his worth to make an
honorable mention of Paul, to read his Epistles, and to allege the authority
of his writings. 2. Pet. 3.15. Peter does not say, why is not my word as
credible as Paul's, but without any selferespect he appeals to Paul, honors
Paul, and fetches in Paul for the warrant of his writings. Oh, how unworthy is
it either to deny or deminish the worth of others!

How unsuitable is it to the spirit of Christianity, when mere shame compels a
man to speak something in commendation of another, to come with a But in the
conclusion of our commendation! But in such or such a thing he is faulty and
defective. This kind of commendation is like an unskilful farriers shooing of
an horse, who never shoes but he pricks him.

3. Obs. 3.
The consent between the penmen of scripture is sweet and harmonious: they
were all breathed upon by the same spirit, and breathed forth the same truth
and holiness. Jude and the rest of the Apostles agree unanimously against
these seducers. Moses and all the Prophets accord with the Apostles in their
testimony of Christ. Luke 24.
Peter and Paul agree harmoniously. 2. Pet. 3.15. All holy writers teach one
and the same faith. They were several men, but not of sevrall minds. The
consideration whereof, affords us a notable argument to prove the divine
authority of Scripture, all the penmen whereof, though of several conditions,
living in several ages, places and countries, yet teach the same truth, and
confirm one another doctrine. 2. It teaches in the exposition of Scripture to
endeavor the making of them all to agree. Weemes.
When other writers oppose the Scripture, we should kill the Egyptian, and save
the Israelite: but when the holy writers seem, (for they never more than seem)
to jar one with another, we should study to make them agree, because they are
brethren. But 3. and especially, the consideration hereof should put all
Christians upon agreeing in believing and embracing the truth: if the writers
agreed, Mauns dextra non taniopere indiget ministerio sinistrae, quam
necessaria est Ecclesiae doctoribus Concordia. Gerhard. 2 Pet. 3.15.
the readers should do so too, but chiefly the preachers of the word should
take heed of difference among themselves in interpreting the Scripture. Concord
among teachers is as necessary as is the help of the left hand needful to the
right. When the children fall out in interpreting their fathers Testament, the
Lawyer only gains; and when Ministers are at variance among themselves,
heretics only rejoice, and get advantage to extol and promote error. In a
word, (as the Apostle holily exhorts, Phil. 3.16.) we should walk by the same
rule, and mind the same thing, and 1. Cor. 1.10. Speak the same thing,
laboring that there may be no division among us, but that we be perfectly
joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment. All Contention among
Ministers should be who shall be foremost in giving of honor, and gaining of
souls.

4. Obs. 4.
Scripture is the best preservative against seduction. The Apostle directs the
Christians to make use of the words of the Apostles to that end. The Scripture
is the best armory to afford weapons against seducers. Its only the Sword of
the Spirit the word of God, that slayes error. Mat. 4.
Jesus Christ made use of it when he conflicted with that arch-seducer the
devil. The reason why people are children tossed about with every wind of
seduction, is because they are Children in Scripture-knowledge. They are
children which commonly are stolen in the streets, not grown men. Ye err (says
Christ to the Sadducees) not knowing the Scripture. The Scripture is the light
which shines in a dark place, an antidote against all heretical poison. A
touchstone to try counterfeit opinions; that Sun, the luster whereof if any
doctrines cannot endure, they are to be thrown down as spurious. And this
discovers the true reason of Satan's rage against the word in all ages: never
did any thief love the light, nor any seducer delight in the word. Luci fugae.
Heretics fly the Scripture as the owl does the Sun: when that arises, they
fly to their holes, when that sets they fly abroad and lift up their voice.
Its Satan's constant design that there may not be a sword found in Israel. Our
care should be to arraigne every error at the bar of Scripture, and to try
whether it can speak the scripture shibboleth, whether it has given them
letters of commendation or no, or a pass to travel up and down the Church or
no, If to Scripture they appeal, to Scripture let them go: and let us with
those noble Bereans, with pure, humble, praying, unprejudiced hearts, search
the Scriptures whether those things are so.

5. Obs. 5.
They who are forewarned should be forearm'd. Its a shame for them who have often
heard and known the doctrines of the Apostles, to be surprised by seducers.
Jude expects that these Christians who knew what the Apostles had delivered,
should strenously oppose all seduction. To stumble in the light, is
inexcusable. To see a young beginner seduced, is not so strange; but for an old
disciple, a grey-headed gospeller to be mislead into error, how shameful is
it! and yet how many such childish old ones as these are, does England, London
afford; who justly, because they are ever learning and never coming to the
knowledge of the truth, but remain unprofitable hearers of truth are left by
God to be easily followers of error?

The fourth particular which I considered in Judes producing of this testimony
of the Apostles, was wherein this testimony consisted, or the testimony it
self laid down in the 18. ver. in these words, That there should be mockers in
the last time, who should walk after their own ungodlylusts. In which words
these seducers are described, 1. From the time wherein they appeared. 2. From
their qualities or conditions wherewith they appeared, according to which the
Apostle says, they were, 1. Mockers. 2. Such as walked after their lusts.

1. For the first, their appearance was in the last time.

EXPLICATION.
Two things here briefly for explication.

1. What the last time is?

2. Why these seducers showed themselves in the last time?

1. For the understanding of the first; the last time (in the Greek * (...), in
quo necesse est ut consistamus. Ultimum dicitur, ultra quod pergere non licet.
(...)) we must know, that by speeches of last time, the Scripture means
sometime a Continuation or length of time, sometime an end of time. When by the
last time it means a Continuation of time, it intends a space, which in
respect of that compass of time whereof it is the last part, may fitly be
called the last time. Thus the life of man being made up of several ages, the
last space thereof, old age, may be called its last time.

Thus within the compass of a year, there being four seasons, the last season
thereof, winter, may be called the last time of a year; or, 1. Uitimum tempu^.
2. Ultimum temporis.
sometime by the last time, is meant terminus temporis, the very end or
expiring of time, as the moment wherein a man dies is his last time, or the
last day of December, is the end or last time of the year.

Now thus the last time is the end of the world, and it is ever expressed in the
singular number, and usually called the last day, as four times Joh. 6th and
once in the 11th 1. Pet. 1.5. And thus 1. Pet. 1.5. the last time is taken,
where the Apostle mentions that salvation ready to be revealed in the l^st time.

The last time in this place must needs be taken in the former sense, viz. for
a space which is the last age of the world, or the last part of its time: and
thus those places are ever to be taken where we read of the last times or days
(in the plural number) as 1 Pet. 1.20. Its said that Christ was manifested in
the last times, which times have continued many hundreds of years. So Heb.
1.2. God has spoken in these last days by his Son. So 2 Timothy 3. In the last
days perilous times shall come. And Act. 2.17. In the last days, I will power
out of my spirit. So 2 Pet. 3.3. And thus its taken in this place. Nor does the
holy Ghost intend these last times, (by a word of the singular number in any
place, as I remember) save only in this place of Jude. Now by these last times
in general, are meant all those times from the revelation of Christ to the end
of the world, Vid. Mead. in his learned discourse of the Apostasy of the last
times.
in which space the Kingdom of Christ was founded and advanced in the world:
which times, because says (learned Mead) they are under the last Monarchy (
viz. the Roman) are called the last times: and because under the times of that
last Monarchy the Kingdom of Christ appeard in the world: hence its said, that
in these last days God has spoken by his Son, Heb. 1.2. and 1 Pet. 1.20.
Christ was manifested in these last times. and Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of
time was come, God sent forth his Son etc. Others think that these times after
the coming of Christ to the end of the world are called the last times, in
respect of those which went before, wherein the state of the Church was often
changed, and the Covenant frequently renewed; but now by the death of Christ
the Covenant of grace being so established, that its never again to be renewed,
or changed; but the condition of the Church is to be in a sixth state to the end
of the world, and no other to succeed it, these are called the last times.

For the second why these profane seducers arose in these last times.

1. The last times are times of presumption and security, and therefore of
dissoluteness and impiety. In former times, judgments were threatened, the
dissolution and destruction of all things foretold; but because the execution
hereof is not beheld, therefore they who live in these times are encouraged to
sin. Because sentence against their evil works is not speedily executed,
therefore are their hearts set to do evil. This security Christ foretells
should be in the last of the last days, namely, at his coming to judgment, as
in the days before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and
giving in marriage, etc. so shall also the coming of the Son of man etc. and
this continuance of all things as they were from the beginning, occasioned
these seducers, to scoff at the promise of his coming. 2. Pet. 3.4. The nearer
they came to the feeling, the further they were from the fearing of punishment.

2. They who live in the last days, are more skillful practitioners in sin,
wittily wicked, understand more how to contrive sin, and work iniquity, by the
improved experiences of their own and former times. Thus as it is in every other
art, so likewise in that of sinning, by length of time, custom, and
experience, it is improved to a greater degree of finenesse and exactness; The
sinners of the last times are men, they of former times were but children in
wickedness. That old Serpent, the older he grows the more of the serpent he
has, and so it is with the seed of the Serpent.

3. In the last times, the Kingdom of Jesus Christ is more to be enlarged, and
advanced, and therefore the malice of Satan is the more increased. As Christ
rises in glory, so will Satan and sinners more swell with rage and envy. Its
said, that those people that live in places where the sun is hottest and most
scorching, every morning curse the rising sun; and thus in times where the
Gospel reaches men with its holy heat and light, they curse and malign it.
Hatred is the genius of the Gospel, and as wicked men the more raged at Christ
the older he grew, so the more his Gospel spreads the more the Devil
despights it.

4. Lastly. In the last times, the Devils time grows short, and therefore his
wrath grows great. Satan labors to supply the shortness of his time, with
the sharpness of his assaults. Besiegers make their last onset upon town or
Castle, the most resolute and terrible of all others. Satan now sets upon
souls by seduction the more furiously because when these times are at an end,
he shall never be suffered to do so any more. Like a malicious tenant, who
perceiving that his term is almost expired, does what he can to ruin the
house; or like a bloody tyrant, who suspecting the loss of his usurped
Sovereignty, makes havoc among his subjects.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
The wicked are worst in the best times; In the last days, wherein the light
of the Gospel, the knowledge of Christ, and the means of grace are most
abundant, the wicked are most wicked. In the land of uprightness they live
unholily. As the means of grace can make no man good, of themselves; so by
reason of our oppositenesse to holiness, they occasion us to be far worse. A
Judas in the fellowship of Christ. A Doeg detained before the Lord. An
unreformed person under the means of reformation, is most pertinaciously such.
The means of grace without the grace of the the means, does but draw forth
our rage against them. Let not men therefore please themselves, because either
the times or places wherein they live are holy, unless these find themselves
betterd by them. The higher we are lifted up, the sorer will be our fall; we
cannot sin at so cheap a rate in these last times, as formerly. Sins in the
last times find out the lowest places in hell. Let this likewise be an apology
for the Gospel. Lay not the sins of Gospel Times to the Gospels charge, since
men are not wicked because the Gospel is so much preached; but because it is no
more than preached, not lived and practis^d also.

2. Obser. 2.
The dispensation of the Covenant of grace is now unalterable. In former times,
it has appeard under several dresses and forms; but now in the last times we
must look for no renovation or change thereof. The present administration of
the Covenant goes next to the end of the world, Vid part, 1. p 231, 232, and^
and shall be closed up of the last day.

3. Obser. 3. Vide Part 1. p. 337
God is abundant in the discovery and dispensing his grace even in times
wherein men profanely abuse it; the Gospel is in the last times most liberally
afforded, though most ungratefully neglected, and abused.

4. Of all times, Obser. 4.
the last require most care in our carriage: They who live in them, enjoy the
helps and advantages of the former. Jesus Christ is most clearly discovered. We
should do our work better by sun light, than others have by twylight, else
'twill be our inexcusable, shame. We should imitate God, as his last works, his
works in the last times, are his best, so should ours be, the best of our lives
should be in the bottom of time; nay herein our very adversary should teach
us; if his rage against God increases because his time of doing hurt is short;
should not our zeal increase, because the time of our doing good is short?
Besides, in the last times we have greatest tentations, most examples of sin;
when the times are worst, we should be best; and if we cannot make the times
good, they should not make us bad. In dirty ways we should tuck up our
garments, we should keep our selves from this untoward generation, and shine as
lights in a crooked and perverse nation, and give Gods glory reparations, for
all it suffers from the wicked

5. The people of God should bear, and forbear. Obs. 5.


1. Bear their crosses: these are the last times, the end of time is
approaching, and with time all their troubles shall end. Be patient (says
James;) for the coming of the Lord draws nigh, and the Judge stands at the
door. And Heb. 10.37. Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come,
and will not tarry. And 1 Pet. 1.6. Now for a season ye are in heaviness. The
elect which cry day and night to him, shall be averged speedily, Luke 18.7, 8.
And our light affliction is but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. We count a moment a
thousand years, but in Scripture-Computation a thousand years are but a
moment. Nothing should be great to him, to whom is known the greatness of
eternity. He who keeps a City for his Prince, though it be straightly besieged
will hold out, if relief be approaching. Our relief, redemption, from all
troubles, draws nigh; oh how great a shame and vexation will it afterward be,
to deliver up our selves, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30
by impatience to apostasy, since our relief is within the sight of the
besieged, we being in the last times.

2. Forbear, use comforts moderately: Let your moderation be known, the Lord is
at hand. Phil. 4.4. A tenant being in the last year of his house, builds not,
plants not. He is a mad man who sets up a stately fabric upon that ground
which is troubled with earthquakes, and sure shortly to sink; lay up treasures
in heaven; labor for everlasting habitations, a City that has foundations.
Because the time is short, they that marry should be as if the married not,
etc. they that buy as if they possessed not, etc. for the fashion of this world
passes away; love not the world, 1 John 2.16. It passes way, v. 17. Use
perishing comforts with perishing affections: love them, as always about to
leave them.

Thus of the first part considerable in the testimony it self, viz. the time
when these seducers were to appear: the last time. The second follows, their
qualities, which are here said to be these two. First mocking. Secondly Walking
after their lusts.

The first is set forth in this word Mockers.

EXPLICATION.
Two things I shall here briefly show by way of explication.

1. What we are to understand by mockers.

2. How great the sin is to be mockers. From (...) est proprie, instar pucri
aliquem tractare, iudificare, et irridere. Gerh H^rm. de passione page mihi 106.


1. For the first. The word in the Greek (...), properly signifies such who
deride and mock at others, as if they were but foolish, and silly children; or
such who scorn or scoff at any thing, as if it were but foolish and childish.
And to this signification of the word agree those expressions whereby mocking,
is shown; as sometime by 1. Scornful and contemptuous speeches; thus Josophs
brethren called him the Dreamer; Elijah was called Bald-pate; Gal. 6.7. (...),
nasum significat. Naso suspendit adu^^o Horat. Sermon. 1.
Christ the King of the Jews etc. 2. Deriding and scornful gestures, as
^^iering with the nose, making of mouths, nodding of the head, Psalm. 22.7.
Making a wide mouth, putting out of the tongue, Isa. 57.4. and shooting out the
lip, Prove 16.30. Psalm. 22 7. Putting out of the finger, Isa 58.9. Clapping of
the hands; Lam. 2.15 3. Scornful and abusive dealings; thus Christ was crowned
with thorns, clad in purple, a reed was put into his hand, he was spit upon,
etc.

But that we may understand what the Apostle here means by mockers, we must
consider this malicious and contemptuous derision or mocking, in his objects,
against which it is committed. It is expressed either against man, or God
himself.

1. Against man, and that for several causes. As

1. For his Country: so some interpret that place. Ezekiel. 36.6. where God tells
the Israelites, that they have born the shame of the heathen. And ver. 15. that
they should not bear the reproach of the people any more. It seems that the
heathen objected to the Jews, the frequent sterilities and famines of their
land, (which we read of in Scripture) or the destructions and captivities which
for their sins they had endured. Julian the Apostate called Christ (by way of
contempt) the Galilean; and (to some) it seems a contemptuous proverb, Can
there any good come out of Nazareth? Joh. 1.46.

2. For his poverty and meanness; Christ in and for his sufferings was mocked,
Mat. 20.19. and 27.29, 31 Thus Tobiah mocked the poor Jews, when building,
saying If afox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall, Ne. 4.3. And
thus Solomon tells us, that he who mocketh the poor, reproacheth his Maker,
Prove. 17.5. The contempts of this nature, reflect upon God himself; who, when
the rich and the poor meet together, is the maker of them both. Prove. 22 2.

3. For his deformity, or any infirmity of body; and so they mocked Elias,
when they said (2 Kin. 2.23.) Come up thou bald-pate: thus men are mocked for
their low stature, their black and unbeautiful complexion, their weakness etc.

4. For his religion, or godliness, Heb. 11.36. the godly suffered cruel
mockings; thus Micol mocked David for dancing before the Ark. 2 Samuel 7. Thus
Festus tells Paul, that too much learning had made him mad, Acts 26.23. This
sort of mocking was that which the Babylonians expressed against the Jews in
their captivity: Let us hear your Hebrew songs, Psalm. 137. such (some conceive)
was Ishmael's mocking of Isaak, Genesis 21.9. and this was that derision expressed
against those who had received the gifts of the holy Ghost, Acts 2. profane
scoffers saying, that they were drunk with new wine. Psalm. 69.12. David was the
song of the drunkards; I and the children which thou have given, are for signs
and wonders, Isa. 8. ver. 18.

5. For his office and employment: and thus they asked Jehu, wherefore that mad
fellow (meaning the Prophet) came to him? 2 King. 9.11.

2. Mocking (with highest impiety) is expressed against God himself; and that
sometimes as in respect of his works of judgment, so oftnest of his word; as
either commanding, reprehending, or threatening; thus when Christ had preached
against covetousness, the Pharisees, who were covetous, derided him. Thus Isa.
22.12. when the Lord called the secure scorners to weeping and mourning, to
baldness and girding with sackcloth; there was joy, and gladness, slaying of
oxen, and killing of sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine, etc. When Hezekiahs
Posts went with letters to stir up Israel to celebrate the passover at
Jerusalem, they were mocked. 2 Chronicles. 30.10. Sad is the complaint of Jeremy,
chap. 20.7, 8. I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me etc. The word of
the Lord is made a reproach unto me, and a derision daily; and that in 2 Chronicles.
36.16. They mocked the messengers of the Lord, and despised his words etc. When
Paul discoursed of the resurrection, Act. 17.32. some mocked; and of this
mocking at Gods word, our Apostle accuses these seducers (I conceive) in this
place. I Doubt not but they mocked at dominions and dignities, at the holiness
likewise and godly strictness of these Christians, as at a needless and vain
severly; 2 Pet. 3 4.
but here Jude seems to run parallel with Peter, who tells us, 2 Pet. 3. that
the mockers of the last times showed themselves such, by deriding at the
promise of Christ's coming, they asking, where is the promise of his coming? for
since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were etc. These
sensual Atheists, then turning the grace of God into wantoness, and giving over
themselves to the following of their lusts, securely derided and scoft at any
directions of holiness, or denunciations of judgments, which opposed them in
their ungodly courses, as vain and contemptible fables.

2. For the second, viz. the great sinfulness of mocking.

1. Its a sin of unspeakable profaneness, very heinous in respect of the
glorious excellency of that God whom we mock. It is a great offense to mock
man, a weak worm, a King, our parents; but to mock the great God, is a
surpassing wickedness. What does the profane mocker, but (according to the
meaning of his name) carry himself toward God, as if all his power, justice,
threatenings, commands, ordinances, were childish toys?

2. In respect of that gross unbelief which is in it; men are therefore
mockers, becanse they are unbelievers: threatenings, commands, promises are
therefore derided, because they are distrusted. Where is the promise (said
these mockers) of his coming? all which the God of truth says, 2 Pet. 3.4.
is accounted but a notion, a fable.

3. It argues the greatest contempt of Gods long-suffering and forbearance.
That goodness of God which should lead to repentance, is to scorners a pillow
of security; and what greater uningenuousness, then to make God a sufferer
because he makes not us to suffer, and to strike him because he strikes not us,
to fight against him with his own weapons?

4. It makes all the means of grace ineffectuall; scorners will not be
bettered: Prove. 9.7, 8.
Rebuke a scorner, and he will hate thee; the strength of this sin makes all
the helps of holiness to be but weak; they all slide off, as water from an
oyld post. A scorner, is (as it were) a brazen wall, which beats back all the
arrows of reprehension. Mocking argues obdurateness in sin; It extinguisheth
light natural, and opposes light spiritual. Pertinacem monere, est speculum
caeco objicere.
The admonishing of a scorner is the holding of a looking-glass before a blind
man, who indeed by his breath may blemish the glass, but cannot behold
himself.

5. It notes progressiveness in sin, and the ariving even to the top of
impiety: the beginnings of sin are modest. Its bad to sin (as at the first
sinners do) though with blushing and concealment; but afterward by continuing
in sin, not only to grow insensible of it, to proclaim it, to maintain it, but
to scorn all reproofs and threatenings against it; this shows a sinner is
higher by the head and shoulders in sin, than other men; and one who is gone so
far in ungodliness, that he seldom turns. The LXX. express the Hebrew word
which signifies a Scorner by the word (...), Prove. 20.1. which signifies
incorrigible, that which cannot be tamed because a Scorner is such: there is no
hope of him. Commonly Mockers are either Idolatrous or profane. The little
children who mocked Elisha, and called him Bald pate, came out of that
Idolatrous City where Jeroboam had set up his Calf: and Idolatrous Jeroboam and
his Courtyers were great Scorners, Hos. 7.5. probably they scoft at those who
would not yield to that Idolatrous way of Worship that Jeroboam had set up. Often
also Profaneness and Sensuality causes mocking: When the King was sick with
wine, he stretched out his hand with Scorners, Hos. 7.5. When wicked men are
most pampered, they scoff most at piety. Religion makes them sport at their
Feasts, Psalm 35.16. Mockers in Feasts.

6. Scorners are the gratest instruments of Satan; the main promoters of his
cause, and advancers of his Kingdom. The Hebrew word, Scorners (according to
the LXX) is expressed by the word (...), Psalm. 1.1. which signifies Plagues, in
the Chair of Plagues, because Scorners are plagues to the place where they
live, and do infect many. Scorners are they who sit in the chair, Psalm. 1.1.
Prove. 29.8.
and are the Doctors of impiety, and the Antesignani and ringleaders to all
mischief. They are the spokesmen and proctors of Satan. Nor do any bring such
instruments of Cruelty to wound Religion and Religious ones, as do Scoffers.
Mocking is called a Persecution, Gal 4.29. and mockings are called cruel
mockings. Heb. 11.
By no devices does the Devil so much dishearten from Religion, and afflict for
Religion, as by this. By no means has he more instructed those who would be
bad, and discouraged others from being good.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Great is the patience and forbearance of God. Observe. 1.
None but a God, would spare those impudent and bitter Scoffers, which he is so
able to punish. Men are under nothing so impatient, as under scoffs and
derisions. How sull of vexation are they, when either they have not wit enough
to return scoff for scoff, or strength enough to return stripes and blows for
scoffs? But God is as full of patience to endure Scoffers, as of power to
confound them. Surely, God as truly shows himself a God by sparing, as by
punishing these his enemies. Of this before Part 2. page 561. To whom is
reserved, etc.

2. Observe. 2.
How just will the confusion of Scorners be! Nothing is more suitable and
deserved, then for the impudent in sin to be dashed out of countenance, to be
beaten with their own weapon: The Lord scorneth the Scorners, Pro. 3.34. He
will mock at the calamities of those when they come, who mocked at God before
they came. None was a more bitter Scoffer at the Godly, than that cruel Doctor
Story, who when the meek and Lamb-like Martyr, Fox Martyrolog.
Missed Mr. Denly, was singing a Psalm at the Stake, wounded his face by
throwing a faggot at it, adding this bitter and profane Scoff, That be had
spoiled a good old Song; but never was Mocker so handsomely mocked, for in
Queen Elizabeth's times, he being beyond Sea, Authorized to go on Ship board,
to search out the Heretical Books (as they called them) which he hoped to find
in the Ship of an English Merchant, and going down into lower parts thereof, to
ransack it for that purpose, the hatches were presently clapped down upon him,
the Sails hoised up, he brought into England, and deservedly for Treason,
executed at Tyburn.

3. Its our duty patiently to carry our selves under mockings. Observe. 3.
It has been the lot of the Saints in all ages to meet with them: Psalm. 44.14.
Thou make us a byword among the Heathen, Psalm. 109.25.79.4.
Psalm. 79.4. We are become a reproach and derision to them who are round about
us. And Psalm. 109.25. I became a reproach (says David) to them; Psalm. 31.1.
when they looked upon me, they shaked their heads. Tertullian tells us, That
the Christians in his time, were mocked for ignorance. The Heathens painted the
God of the Christians with an Asses head, and a Book in his hand, to signify,
that though they pretended Learning, yet they were silly and unlearned people.
Such who kept the Sabbath, were said to have a Disease upon them, in regard
whereof, they were fain to rest once in the week. Athanasius was called
Sathanasius, for being an Adversary to the Arians. Cyprian was abused by the
name of Coprian, one that gathers up dung. But why speak I of the mockings
which befell Christians; they were the portion of Christ himself (as I have
before showed.) Our head was crowned with these thorns; they spit in his face,
gave him a reed for a Scepter, bowed before him: Though he despised, yet he
endured the shame, Hebr. 12.2. If mocking were the Dyet-drink of Christ should
not we patiently taste now and then a drop thereof? yea, none can bear so much
contempt as God does daily. Besides, by impatience under scoffs we hurt our
selves more then Scoffers can do. If we would not vex and disturb our own souls
by impatience, our enemies could not hurt us by reproaches; and indeed, this
self-disquieting is the only way to gratify our enemies, whose alone aim by
mocking is to trouble and disturb us. And by fretfulness and rage we are liable
to discover as much evil, as our enemies can discover by all their scoffs; and
though we are unjustly reproached, yet we may discover so much folly and
passion, as to be a just cause of Reproach. We live among Reproachers, and
Scoffers, and without patience we shall never have comfortable lives, but the
comfort and quiet of our lives will ever lie at the mercy of others. The
greatest evil of reproach is from him that receives it. As it is with meat, so
it is with mockings: It is not the goodness and sweetness of meat in it self,
that makes it to be good and sweet to me; but so it is to me, as my stomach and
body is affected; and scoffs and reproaches are not evils as they come from him
that casts them upon us, but the greatest part of the evil of reproaches comes
from the affection of the receiver. Further remember, there is more honor in
bearing scoffs patiently, then there is disgrace in having them cast upon us
wrongfully. Every fool can cast a reproach, but only the wise man can bear it
well. Chrysostom tells us, That the Reproacher is below a man, but the Patient
under reproach, is equal to an Angel. Consider likewise, that God takes the
care of our names, as well as of our souls. When David's enemies spoke
mischievous things against him, he tells us, Psalm. 38.12, 13. that he heard
not; but verse. 15. he says, that God hears. The less we hear, the more God
will hear. They who mock here, shall be mocked hereafter; and they who are
here mocked, shall then be honored. And how countervailing a mercy is it to be
delivered from eternal Reproach! Meditate also how much contempt and mocking,
many do justly suffer for their sins. Many care not how much shame they endure
in the service of a base Lust. Who are so basely looked upon as the Drunkards,
Covetous? and yet they go on, and bless themselves, notwithstanding their
reproach. What cause have we then to go on in the ways of God, though all the
world mock us! Consider also what honor God has put upon thee for the
present. He has (if thou art Godly) brought thee to the honorable estate of
Sonship, and has put his glory upon thy soul, and has honored thee by that
near relation thou have to Christ. How base was Hamans spirit, who being so
honored by the King, was so vexed because Mordecai would not bow to him! And
truly it is a sinful baseness in Saints, that when God has raised them to such
glory, as to be members of, and coheirs with his Son, and has provided for
them the glory of Heaven: yet for all this, when they have but a mock from men,
to be so discouraged and cast down, as if all the honor that God had put upon
them were nothing. Think likewise how much religion has been scoft at for your
sake: and is it so great a matter for you to be mocked for religion?
Chrysostom says, that when for us our Lord is blasphemed, it is worse then if
we perished. Consider also the goodness of God in keeping in those many secret
wickednesses of thy heart from appearing, which had they been suffered by God
to break forth, would have been matter enough of scorn and reproach, whereas
now the enemies are fain to watch, and pry, and pump for some occasion, and yet
can hardly find any. Remember also that there is more danger in being honored,
then contemned by men. Luther said, his greatest fear was the praise of men,
and that reproach was his joy, and that he would not have the glory and fame of
Erasmus. Lastly, The bearing of scoffs patiently is a great help to our
progress in godliness: As they who have overcome the evil of shame in a way of
sin, grow hardened in sin; so they who regard no reproach cast upon them for
holiness, will much proceed therein. And that we may bear the cruellest
mockings patiently, 1. Labor to get good by them; If thou see another so
vigilant to find thee out, to reproach thee; how vigilant should thou be over
thy self, to find out what is in thee to humble thee! Psalm. 119.
Herein (as David speaks) be wiser then thine enemies; and the less credit
thou have in the world, labor for the more in heaven. 2. Persuade thy soul of
the reality of the honor, that is in the ways of God: Prove. 18.7.
consider thy honor here is real, true, and hereafter it shall be visible to
all. 3. Pity your reproachers; be troubled for their sin, in stead of thine own
disgrace. 4. Spread thy condition before the Lord when thou art mocked. Psalm.
109.12. prayer was David's best medicine against mocks. 5 Labor for holy
magnanimity and greatness of spirit: Psalm. 57.2.3
Great men think themselves above reproaches; exercise thy soul with the great
things of eternity. Its a weak spirited man, who cannot endure contempt. St
John's spirit was so holily high, that he calls all the malicious words of
Diatrophes but triflings. 6. Return not scoff for scoff, for hereby as you
will harden scoffers in their sin, 3 John 10. (...).
for hereby as you will harden scoffers in their sin, who will think they do
not worse then you, and show that you think there is a greater evil in
suffering then sinning; so you are put to base shifts, as if you thought that
you had no other remedy for an ill name but an ill tongue; and you deprive your
selves of relief from God: and ever remember that he who is willingly overcome
in the fight of scoffing, is ever the better man. 7. Keep conscience quiet; let
not thy heart reproach thee, Job. 27.6. Winds move not the earth, unless they
get within it; be careful of what you do, and then you need not care what men
say.

4. Obser. 4.
Its our duty to shun the sin of scoffing, especially at the people, word, and
ways of God. To this end,

1. See the beauty and excellency of them. Men deride that which they account
base and contemptible; let not worldly bravery dazzle your eyes. Study the glory
of holiness, the comeliness and rationality of every way of God: Learning and
religion meet with no other mockers but the ignorant.

2. Consider Satan's end in stirring up mockers against the ways and people of
God; the devil knows there is no such likely way to darken religion, and to
damp the hearts of people from embracing it, as by these; and therefore it is
observable, that Julian one of the subtilest enemies that ever the cause of God
had, would not oppose religion by open persecution, but sought all means to
cast contempt upon it by jeers and scoffs, and hereby he drew off multitudes
from it.

3. Labor for faith in threatenings; faith fears a threatened evil as much as
sense mourns under an inflicted evil; faith takes into its vast comprehension
the threatenings of judgments, as well as the promises of mercies; and causes
holy fear in respect of the former, as it quells unholy fear in respect of the
latter.

4. Study the end of Gods forbearance. 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
It is not that thou should mock at God, but repent of sin. Scoffers turn
the motive to repentance, 25.16.
into an encouragement of rebellion. God is not long-suffering, that the wicked
should be securely sinning. How unavoidable is his destruction, who is ruined
by the means of recovery!

5. Study the vanity of all earthly refuges: Judgment will throw them down all,
the overflowing scourge will easily break down these weak banks, nor will any
fancyed defenses appear any other then paper towers, when wrath approaches.
Ezech. 22.24.
Can thy heart endure or thy hands be strong (says God) in the day when I
shall deal with thee. It Is not so easy to resist judgments when they come, as
it is to scoff at them before they come. Scoffers, when vengeance meets them,
will be found to be but like cowardly soldiers, who though they vaunt, and
boast, and swagger before the enemy comes, will run away as soon as they see
him come.

5. Its our duty to take heed that mockers at our holiness, Obs. Vlt.
hinder us not in the ways of holiness. Though the clouds darken the light of
the Sun, yet the Sun cease not its course; Was there ever such a fool, as to
be scoft out of his inheritance? and yet its a greater folly to be scoft out of
holiness; this will make us a reproach before God, Angels and Saints, yea and
before our very enemies, who will, when they have got their will of us, the
more vilify and contemn us; whereas if we persist in holiness, they inwardly
admire us. They who sought by scoffing to hinder Nehemiahs work, would have
mocked him much more, had they made him to have given it over. He that will not
suffer scoffs for Gods name, shall deservedly suffer it for his own sin.

The second property of these seducers was their walking after their own
ungodly lusts, of which I have spoken largely before ver. 16.

The fifth and last particular in this first direction, viz. the remembering the
words of the Apostles, is the application of their testimony to these seducers,
ver. 19. in these words. These are they who separate themselves, sensual,
having not the spirit. In which words the Apostle shows that these who
separate themselves from the Church, were scorners, and that these who were
sensual and void of the spirit, did follow their ungodly lusts. Or in the
words Jude expresses, 1. The sin of these seducers in Separating themselves.
2. The cause thereof, which was 1. Their being sensual; and 2. their not
having the spirit. For the first, their separation.

EXPLICATION.
Two things are here to be opened.

1. What the Apostle here intends by separating themselves.

2. Wherein the sinfulness thereof consists.

1. segregantes. separantes. Disterminantes. Exterminantes.
For the first: The words in the Original are (...). This word (...) (several
ways rendered by several interpreters) may signify the unbounding of a thing,
and the removing of a thing from those bounds and limits wherein it was set and
placed (for the words (...) and (...) signify to terminate or circumscribe a
thing within limits and bounds, and the preposition (...) added to it, may
import Thus the Preposition (...) is frequently taken in Scripture.
the taking away or exempting a thing from those bounds and limits wherein it
was contained) and this interpretation of making themselves boundless, as
being a generation of Libertines that would be kept within no bounds or
compass of restraint by Scripture, Magistrates, Church Discipline, etc. does
both agree to the word (...), and also the whole series of the Epistle, and
context, in which the Apostle (immediately before) says, they walked after
their own lusts and immediately after, says, they were sensual, given over to
sensual pleasures. These seducers were sons of Belial, without a yoke, like
yokelesse heifers. Scope and Liberty were their study. They would needs make
the way to heaven (as he who went over a narrow bridge with spectacles before
his eyes, desired to make the bridge) seem broader then it was. This
interpreation I dare not reject, I desire to present it to the learned: but
though upon my maturest thoughts I much incline to it, yet seeing the stream
of interpreters going another way, I shall not refuse the second, according to
which the word (...) imports the parting and separating of one thing from
another by bounds and limits put between them, and the putting of bounds and
limits for distinction and separation between several things, it being (thus)
a resemblance taken from fields, or Countries, which are distinguished and
parted from each other by certain boundaryes and Landmarks set up to that end:
and thus its commonly taken by interpreters in this place, wherein these
seducers may be said to separate themselves, divide, or bound themselves from
others, either first, doctrinally, or secondly, practically.

1. Doctrinally, by false and heretical doctrines, whereby they divided
themselves from the truth, and faithful, who were guided by the truth of the
Scripture, and walked according to the rule of the word; hence these seducers
were deceiving and deceved, and its said that they brought in damnable
heresies, and many followed their pernicious ways; and that they spoke
perverse things to draw away Disciples after them. 2 Pet. 2.
And thus they separated themselves from the Church; 1. By holding that the
grace of God, gave men liberty to live as they pleased, and by maintaining of
unchristian libertinisme, because Christ had purchased Christian liberty for
us. Whereas the word teaches the contrary, namely, because the grace of God
has appeared, therefore that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lust.

2. By teaching that among the people of God there ought to be no Civil
Magistrate, no superiority, nor any to restrain and hinder people from their
going on in what ways they pleased; whereas the word commands every soul to
be subject.

3. By denying the day of judgment, at which they scoft as at a vain
scar-crow, because it was deferred; whereas the faithful were, 1 Pet. 4.4.
to account the long suffering of the Lord salvation, to labor to be made meet
for the approach of Christ, and to look for the mercy of the Lord to eternal
life.

2. Practically, they might separate themselves as by bounds and limits. 1. By
profaneness, and living in a different way from the Saints, namely in all
looseness and uncleanness; for as the faithful separate and difference
themselves from the wicked by their holy and heavenly Conversation, so the
wicked divide themselves from the faithful, by profaneness and falling from
the profession of godliness into all manner of looseness and irregularity;
and thus the ungodly make such bounds between themselves and saints, as saints
dare not break over, ungodliness being too high a wall for a godly man to
scale, or rather too deep a mote for him to swim over and wade through.

2. Calv. in loc. discessionem faciunt ab ecclefia quia disciplinae jugum far
nequeunt.
By Shismaticalness and making of Separation from, and divisions in the Church.
Because they proudly despised the doctrines or persons of the Christians, as
contemptible and unworthy; or because they would not endure the holy severity
of the Churches discipline, they (says Calvin) departed from it. They might
make rents and divisions in the Church by schismatic withdrawing themselves
from fellowship and Communion with it. Their heresies, were perverse and
damnable opinions, their schism was a perverse Separation from
Church Communion; the former was in doctrinalls, the latter in practicals.
Schismaticos facit non diversa fides, sed communionis disrupta societas. Aug.
Co^tr. Faust. l. 20. c. 3.
The former was opposite to faith; this latter to charity. By faith all the
members are united to the head; by charity, one to another; and as the breaking
of the former is heresy, so their breaking of the latter was schism. And this
schism stands in the dissolving the spiritual band of love and union among
Christans, and appears in the withdrawing from the performance of those duties
which are both the signs of, and helps to Christian unity; as prayer, hearing,
receiving of Sacraments etc. for because the dissolving of Christian union,
chiefly appears in the undue separation from church communion, therefore this
rending is rightly called schism. It is usually said to be twofold, 1.
Negative, Camero de schismate
2. Positive. The first, the Negative is when there is only simplex secessio,
when there is only a bare secession, a peaceable and quiet withdrawing from
Communion with a Church, without making an he^d against that church from which
the departure is. 2. The other, the positive is when persons so withdrawing do
so consociate and draw themselves into a distinct and opposite body, setting up
a church against a church, or as divines express it, from Augustine, an altar
against an altar, and this it is which in a peculiar manner, and by way of
eminency is called by the name of schism, and becomes sinful either in respect
1. of the groundlesnesse, or 2. the manner thereof; 1. The groundlesnesse, when
there is no casting of persons out of the church, by an unjust censure of
excommunication, no departure, by unsufferable persecution, no heresy nor
idolatry in the church maintained, no necessity (if Communion be held with a
Church) of communicating in its sins and corruptions. 2. The manner of
separation makes it unlawful; when it is made without due endeavor and waiting
for reformation of the church, from which the departure is: and such a rash
departure is against charity, which suffers both much and long, 1 Cor. 13.4.
all tolerable things; It is not presently distasted, when the justest occasion
is given, it first uses all possible means of remedy. The Surgeon reserves
dismembring, as the last remedy. It looks upon a sudden breaking off from
communion with a church (which is a dismembring) not as surgery, Non medicina
sed Laniena, non Chirurgia, sed Carnificina.
but but chery, not as medicinal, but cruel.

2. For the second, the sinfulness of this separation, appears several ways.
Not to the speak of the sinfulness of separation by heresies and prophanness,
I having in this and the former part of this Commentary shown it at large
before; Error of Balaam. ver. 11. Sunt qui peccatum schismatis adaequent
peccato heresis; sunt qui illud adhuc prae isto exaggerent. Musc. loc. Com. de
schism Aug. Cont. Donat. lib. 2. cap. 6.
but briefly to manifest the sinfulness of schismatical separation. I shall
not spend time to compare it with heresy, though some have said that Schism is
the greater sin of the two. Augustine tells the Donatists, that Schism was a
greater sin than that of the Traditores, who in time of persecution, through
fear delivered up their bibles to the persecutors to be burnt (A sin at which
the Donatists took so much offense, that it was the ground of their
separation.) But to pass by these things: by these three considerations
especially, the sinfulness of Schism shows it self.

In respect of 1. Christ. 2. The parties separating. 3. Those from whom they
separate.


1. In respect of Christ, it is first an horrible indignity offered to his
body, it dividing Christ (as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 1.15.) and makes him to
appear the head of two bodies: how monstrous and dishonorable is the very
conceit hereof!

2. It is rebellion against his Command, his great command of love, the grace
of love is by some called the queen of graces, and it is greater then faith in
respect of it is object, not God only but man; its duration, which is eternal;
its manner of working, not in a way of receiving Christ (as faith) but of
giving out the soul to him; Ephesians. 4.3. Phil. 2.2. Joh. 13.34.
and the command of love is the greatest command in respect of it
Comprehensivenesse, it taking in all the commandments, the end of them all
being love, and it being the fulfilling of them all.

3. Joh. 12.52.
Its opposite to one great end of Christ's greatest undertaking (his death)
which was that all his Saints should be one.

4. It tends to frustrate his prayer for unity among Saints, Joh. 17. and
endeavors that Christ may not be heard by his father.

5. It opposes his example; By this shall all men (says he) know that ye are
my disciples, if ye love one another. Love is the Livery and Cognizance which
Christ gives to every Christian. If there be no fellowship among Christians,
there is no following of Christ. Let this mind be ^n you that was in Christ
Jesus, Phil 2 5.

6. Its injurious to his service and worship. How can men pray, if in wrath and
division? how can Christians fight with heaven and prevail, when they are in so
many divided troops? Nullum schisma non sibi aliquam confingit haeresim, ut
recte ab Ecclesia recessisse videatur. Hierom, in Tit. Schisma viam facit ad
haeresim et separationem a Christo.
What worthiness can be in those Communicants who celebrate a feast of love,
with hearts full of rancour and malice?

2. In respect of the parties separating. For,

1. It causes a decay of all grace. By divisions among our selves,* we
endeavor to divide our selves from him, in and from whom is all our fullness.
All wickedness follows contention. Upon the stock of schism, commonly heresy
is grafted; there is no schism (says Jerome) but ordinarily it inventeth and
produces some heresy, that so the separation may seem the more justifiable.
The Nonatians and Donatists from schism fell to heresies: our own times sadly
comment upon this truth, they equally arising to both. The farther lines are
distanced one from another, the greater is their distance from the Center; and
the more divided Christians are among themselves, the more they divide
themselves from Christ. Branches divided from the tree, Anima vivisicat membra
cohaerentia, non divuls^ Peccatum schismatis non martyrii sanguine deletur. Quo
pacto qui animum pro Christo exponis, Ecclesiam oppugnes, pro qua animum suam
Christus tradidit?
receive no sap from the root. The soul gives life to members which are joined
together not plucked asunder.

2. Schism is the greatest disgrace to the schismatics. A schismatic is a
name much disowned, because very dishonorable. All posterity loads the name of
sinful Separatists with disgrace and abhorrency. He spoke truly, who said, the
sin and misery of schism cannot be bloted out with the blood of martyrdom. He
cannot honorably give his life for Christ, who makes divisions in his Church,
for which Christ gave his life.

3. In respect of the Church from which this separation is made; For, 1. Its
injurious to the honor of the Church, whose greatest glory is union. 3. Cant.
6.9.
How can a body be rent and torn without the impairing of its beauty? Besides,
how disgraceful an imputation is cast upon any Church, when we profess it
unworthy for any to abide in it, that Christ will not, and therefore that we
cannot have communion with it?

2 Its injurious to the peace and quietness of the Church. Schismatics more
oppose the peace of the Church, then do heathens. If the natural body be
divided and torn, pain and smart must needs follow. The tearing and rending of
the mystical body goes to the heart of all sensible members. They often cause
the feverish distempers of hatred, wrath, seditions, envyings, murders. Schism
in the Church puts the members out of joint, and disjointed bones are painful.
All my bones (says David) are out of joint. Church divisions cause sad
thoughts of heart; true members are sensible of these schisms, though
artificial ones feel nothing. None rejoice but our enemies. Oh impiety to make
Satan music, and to make mourning for the Saints!

3. Its opposite to the edification of the Church. Division of tongues hindered
the building of Babel, and doubtless division in hearts, tongues, hands,
heads, must needs hinder the building of Jerusalem; while parties are
contending, Churches and Commonwealths suffer. In troublous times the walls
and temple of Jerusalem went but slowly on. Though Jesus Christ the head be the
only fountain of spiritual life; yet the usual way of Christ's strengthening it
and perfecting thereof, is the fellowship of the body, that by what every joint
supplies, the whole may be increased; when Church Members are put out of joint,
they are made unserviceable, and unfit to perform their several offices. They
who were wont to join in prayer, sacraments, fasting, and were ready to all
mutual offices of love, are now fallen off from all.

4. Its opposite to the future estate of the Church in glory. In heaven the
faithful shall be of one mind; we shall all meet (says the Apostle) in the
unity of the faith, Ephesians. 4.13. when we are come to our manly age. Wrangling is
the work of childhood and folly, and a great piece of the folly of our
childhood. Luthe^ and Calvin are of one mind in heaven, though their disciples
wrangle here on earth.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Naturally men love to be boundless, Obs. 1.
they will not be kept within any spiritual compass, nor endure to be held in
any bounds. This (according to one signification of the word (...)) the Apostle
Jude aims at in this place. Wicked men are sons of Belial; they cannot endure
the yoke of Christ, though it be sweet and easy. They break his bonds asunder,
and cast away his cords from them. Men love to have liberty to damn their own
souls. Psalm. 2, 3. Hos. 4* 16.
They back-slide like a backsliding heifer. Though men account it no unwelcome
streightning to them to have a fence between them and their bodily enemies, yet
they cannot endure those limits and bounds of Gods law or corrections, which
stop them from sin; their fear of hurt makes them love preservation, their love
of pleasure makes them desirous of sinful liberty. How good a sign of a
gracious heart is it, rather to desire to be in Christ's enclosure, then in
Satan's champain! to account Christ's service our liberty, and Satan's liberty our
bondage! How just also is God in suffering sinners, to take their course and
swinge in the ways of sin and destruction! They who will not be kept within
Gods compass, are deservedly left to Satan's disposal. They who are back
sliding heifers, who will not endure the yoke, are justly threatened to be
suffered to be as a lamb in a large place, without a keeper or preserver. They
shall have their fill of liberty; but their liberty is like that of the Deer;
which though it were gotten out of the park-pale, yet it was at the cruel
courtesy of the hounds. On the contrary, God is very gracious in stopping up
his churches way, though with a thorny hedge. Oh happy thorns, that stop us in
our ways to hell! Such thorns are better then roses. The setting up of the
thorny hedge, Hos. 2.6.
is a promise, a branch of the Covenant.

Our separation from Rome cannot be charged with schism. Obs. 2.


This will evidently appear, if we consider either the ground or the manner of
our separation.

1. For the ground and cause thereof; our separation from Rome was not for some
slight and tolerable errors, but damnable heresies and gross idolatries. The
heresies fundamental, and idolatries such, as those who hold communion with
her, cannot but partake of. In respect of both which, the church of Rome was
first Apostatized before ever we separated; nor was there any separation from
it, as it had any thing of Christ, or as it was Christian, but as it was Roman
and Popish. The Apostasy of the Roman church, which was the ground of our
separation, appeared sundry ways. 1. In that she did thrust the Lord Jesus the
great and only teacher of the church out of the chair, and in it, placed the
Pope as the infallible Doctor of the church, to whom she ties her belief; and
subjects her faith, though he always may, and often does rise up against Christ
himself. 2. The Scriptures (the alone rule of faith) the Romanists slight and
impiously despise, and make them an insufficient rule of faith, by joining
their over-fond and false traditions to it, by preferring a vicious and
barbarous interpretation before the sacred originals, by making the holy
Scriptures to have neither life, nor soul, nor voice, till the interpretation
of the church (or rather the Pope) be added. 3. They have depraved the great
and main article of faith, concerning the justification of a sinner, the nature
whereof though the Scripture makes to stand in the remission of sins, and the
application of Christ's righteousness by faith, yet they ascribe it partly to
Christ's, and partly to our own merits and righteousness, in which respect that
of the Apostle suits with them. Christ is become of no effect to you who are
justified by the law. 4. Though the worshipping of the immortal and invisible
God under any visible image or representation, or the likeness of a mortal
creature, be frequently and expressly forbidden in Scripture, Ecclesia
Romanaeusus admittit basce trinitatis imagines, caeque pinguntur non solum ut
ostendantur, sed ut adoren^ tur. In 3 Aq. 9.29. art. 3.
yet they set forth, and teach the worshipping of the Father, under the image of
an old man, the Son under the image of a Lamb; and the holy Ghost of a Dove.
And Cajetan confesses, that they draw these images of the Trinity, not only to
show, but to adore and worship them. To these I might add their maiming, or
rather marring the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, their denying the cup to the
laity. Their ascribing of remission and expiation of sin to the sacrifice of
the Mass, their seven Sacraments, their praying to Saints, Auge pi^s justitiam.
Reisque dona veniam. Solve vinela reis. Profer lumen Coecis. Psalt. Romans
and ascribing to the Virgin Mary, the bestowing grace and glory, pardon of
sin, etc. Their dispensations with the most hideous and bellish abominations,
as murders, incest, Sodomy, etc. for money, etc.

2. For the second, the manner of our separation, it was not uncharitable,
rash, heady, and unadvised, nor before all means were used for the cure and
reformation of the Romanists, by the discovery of their errors, that possibly
could be thought of; notwithstanding all which (though some have been enforced
to an acknowledgment of them) they still obstinately persist in them. Our
famous, godly, and learned reformers would have healed Babylon, but she is not
healed; many skilful Physicians have had her in hand, (but like the woman in
the Gospel) she grew so much the worse. By prayer, preaching, writing, yea, by
sealing their doctrine with their bloods, have sundry eminent instruments of
Christ endeavored to reclaim the Popish from their errors; but in stead of
being reclaimed, they anathematized them with the dreadfullest curses;
excommunicated, yea murdered and destroyed multitudes of those who endeavored
their reducement, not permitting any to trade, buy or sell, to have either
religious or civil communion with them, except they received the beasts mark in
their hands and forheads. All which considered, we might safely forsake her,
nay could not safely do otherwise. Since, instead of our healing of Babylon, we
could not be preserved from her destroying of us, we did deservedly depart from
her, and every one go into his own Country: and unless we had so done, Jer.
51.9.
we could not have obeyed the clear precept of the word. Apoc. 18. Come out of
her my people etc. Apoc. 18.4.
Timothy is commanded to withdraw himself from perverse and unsound teachers.
Though Paul went into the Synagogue, 1 Timothy 6.3.5.
disputing and persuading the things concerning the Kingdom of God; yet when
diverse were hardened and believed not, Acts 19.9.
but spoke evil of that way, 1 Cor. 10.14.
he departed from them, and separated the disciples. And expressly is
Communion with idolaters forbidden, 2 Cor. 6.14.17. what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? what Communion has light with darkness?
what concord has Christ with Belial? what agreement has the temple of God
with idols? Come out from among them, and be ye separate. And Hos. 4.11. Though
thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend: and Come ye not unto
Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethaven. Though in name that place was Bethel,
the house of God; yet because Jeroboams calf was set up there, it was indeed
Bethaven, the house of vanity. If Rome be a Bethaven for idolatry and
corrupting of Gods worship, our departure from it may be safely acknowledged
and justified. In vain therefore do the Romanists, Stapleton, Nic. Sanderus de
visib. monar. eccles praefat. ad lect. Staplet. demonstrat. Princ. fid. l. 4.
c. 10.
Sanders and others brand our separation from them with the odious imputation
of Donatisme, and schism; it being evident out of Augustine, that the
Donatists never objected any thing against, nor could blame any thing in the
Church (from which they separated) either for faith or worship: whereas we have
unanswerably proved the pseado-Catholick Romane-Church to be notoriously guilty
both of heresy and idolatry; and our adversaries themselves grant, in what
ever Church either of those depravations are found, Communion with it, Schisma
aliud malum, aliud bonum. Malum quo bona bonum quo mala scinditur unitas. Musc.
de schism.
is to be broken off. I shall conclude this discourse with that passage out of
Musculus, concerning schism. There is (says he) a double schism, the one
bad, the other good; the bad is that whereby a good union, the good that
whereby a bad union is broken asunder. If ours be a schism, it is of the later
sort.

3. Obs. 3.
The voluntary and unnecessary dividing and separation from a true Church is
schismatic. When we put bounds and partitions between it and our selves, we
sin (say some) as did these seducers, here taxed by Jude. If the Church be not
heretical or Idolatrous, or do not by excommunication, persecution, etc.
thrust us out of its Communion; If it be such an one, as Christ the head has
communion with, we the members ought not by separation to rend and divide the
body. To separate from Congregations, where the word of truth and Gospel of
salvation are held forth in an ordinary way, 1 Timothy 3.15.
as the Proclamations of Princes are held forth upon pillars to which they are
affixed; where the light of the truth is set up as upon a candlestick, to guide
passengers to heaven. To separate from them to whom belong the Covenants, and
where the Sacraments, the seals of the Covenant, Rev. 1.13.
and for substance rightly dispensed, where Christ walks in the midst of his
golden Candlesticks, and discovers his presence in his ordinances, whereby they
are made effectual to the Conversion and edification of souls, in an ordinary
way; where the members are saints by a professed subjection to Christ and his
Gospel, and happily have promised this explicitly and openly; where there are
sundry who in the judgment of charity may be conceived to have the work of
grace really wrought in their hearts, by walking in some measure answerable to
their profession, I say to separate from these, as those with whom Church
Communion is not to be held and maintaind, is unwarrantable and schismatic.
Pretenses for separation (I am not ignorant) are alleged. Frequently and most
plausibly that of mixed Communion, and of admitting into Church Fellowship the
vile with the precious, and those who are chaff, and therefore ought not to
lodge with the wheat. Answ. 1. Not to insist upon what some have urged, viz.
that this has been the stone at which most Shismaticks have stumbled, and the
pretense which they have of old alleged, as having ever had a spiritum
excommunicatorium, a spirit rather putting them upon dividing from those who
they say are unholy, then putting them upon any godly endeavors of making
themselves holy, as is evident in the examples of the Audaeans, Novatians,
Donatists, Anabaptists, Brownists etc. 2. Let them consider, whither the want
of the exact purging and reforming of these abuses proceed not rather from some
unhappy obstructions and political restrictions (whether or no caused by those
who make this objection, God knows) in the exercise of discipline, then from
the allowance or neglect of the Church it self. Nay 3. Let them consider
whether when they separate for sinful mixtures, the Church be not at that very
time purging out those sinful mixtures: and is that a time to make a
separation from a Church by departing from it, when the servants of Christ are
making a separation in that Church by reforming of it? But 4. Let it be
seriously weighed, that some sinful mixtures are not a sufficient cause of
separation from a Church. Has not God his Church even where corruption of
manners has crept into a Church, if purity of doctrine be maintained? and is
separation from that Church lawful, from which God does not separate? did the
Apostle, because of the sinful mixturess in the Church of Corinth, direct the
fuithful to separate? Must not he who will forbear communion with a Church,
till it be altogether freed from mixtures, tarry till the day of judgment? til
when, we have no promise that Christ will gather out of his Church whatsoever
does offend. 5. Let them consider, whether God has made private Christians
stewards in his house, to determine whether those with whom they communicate,
are fit members of the Church or not; or rather, whether it be not their duty
when they discover tares in the Church, in stead of separating from it, to
labor that they may be found good corn, that so when God shall come to gather
his corn into his garner, they may not be thrown out? Church Officers are
ministerially betrusted with the ordering of the Church, and for the opening
and shutting of the doors of the Churches Communion, by the Keys of doctrine
and discipline; and herein if they shall either be hindered or negligent,
private Christians shall not be entangled in the guilt of their sin, if they be
humbled, and use all lawful means for remedy, though they do communicate. 6.
Let them search whether there be any Scripture warrant, to break off communion
with the Church in the ordinances, when there is no defect in the ordinances
themselves, only upon this ground, because some are admitted to them, who
because of their personal miscarriages, ought to be debarred. The Jews of old,
though they separated when the worship it self was corrupted, 2 Chronicles. 11.14,
16. yet not because wicked men were suffered to be in outward communion with
them, Jerem. 7.9, 10. nor do the precepts or patterns of the Christian Churches
for casting out of offenders, give any liberty to separation in case of failing
to cast them out; and though the suffering of scandalous persons be blamed, yet
not the communicating with them. 1 Cor. 5.11. Rev. 2.14.15.20.24.
The command not to eat with a brother who is a fornicator or covetous etc.
concerns not religious, but civil communion, by a voluntary, familiar, intimate
Conversation, either in being invited or in inviting, as is clear by these two
Arguments. 1. That eating which is here forbidden with a brother, is allowed to
be with an heathen; but its the civil eating which is only allowed to be with
a heathen; therefore its the civil eating which is forbidden to be with a
brother. 2. The eating here forbidden, is for the punishment of the nocent, not
for a punishment to the innocent; but if religious eating at the Sacrament were
forbidden, the greatest punishment would fall upon the innocent, the godly. Now
though such civil eating was to be forborne; yet it follows not at all, much
less much more, that religious eating is forbidden, 1. Because civil eating is
arbitrary and unnecessary, not so religious, which is enjoined, and a commanded
duty. 2. There is danger of being infected by the wicked in civil, familiar,
and arbitrary eatings; not so injoyning with them in an holy and commanded
service and ordinance. 3. Civil eating is done out of love either to the party
inviting, or invited, but religious is done out of love to Jesus Christ, were
it not for whom, we would neither eat at Sacrament with wicked men, nor at all.

To conclude this, separation from Churches, from which Christ does not
separate, is schismatical; now its clear in the Scripture, that Christ owneth
churches where faith is sound for the substance, and their worship,
Gospel Worship, though there be many defects and sinful mixtures among them
And what I have said concerning the schismaticalnesse of separation because of
the sinful mixtures of those who are wicked in practice, is as true concerning
separation from them who are erroneous in judgment; if the errors of those
from whom the separation is made, be not fundamental, and hinder Communion with
Christ the head. And much more clear, (if clearer can be) is the
schismaticalnesse of those who separate from and renounce all Communion with
those churches, which are not of their own manner of Constitution, and modeld
according to the platform of their own particular church order. To refrain
fellowship, and communion with such Churches who profess Christ their Lord,
whose faith is sound, whose worship is Gospel Worship, whose lives are holy,
because they come not into that particular way of church order which we have
pitched upon, is a schismatic rending of the church of Christ to pieces. Of
this the church of Rome are most guilty, who do most plainly (...), and
circumscribe and bound the church of Christ within the limits and boundaries of
the Roman jurisdiction, even so as that they cast off all churches in the
world, yea and cut them off from all hope of salvation, who subject not
themselves to their way. Herein likewise those separatists among our selves are
heniously faulty who censure and condemn all other churches, though their
faith, worship, and conversation be never so scriptural, merely because they
are not gathered into church order, according to their own patterns. In
scripture, churches are commended and dignified, according as their fundamental
faith was sound, and their lives holy; not according to the regularity of their
first manner of gathering. And notwithstanding the exactest regularity of their
first gathering, when churches have once apostatized from faith and manners,
Christ has withdrawn communion from them, and most severely censured them. And
this making of the first gathering of people into church fellowship, to be the
rule to direct us with whom we may hold communion, will make us refuse some
churches, upon whom are seen the Scripture characters of true churches, and
join with others only upon an humane testimony, because men only tell us they
were orderly gathered.

It should be our care to shun separation. Obs. ult.
To this end,

1. Labor to be progressive in the work of mortification; the less carnal we
are, the less contention and dividing will be among us. Are ye not carnal
(says the Apostle?) and he proves it from their divisions; separation is
usually, but very absurdly, accounted a sign of an high grown christian: we
wrangle because we are children, Jam. 4.1.
and are men in malice because children in holiness; wars among our selves
proceed from the lusts that war in our members.

2. Admire no man's person: the excessive regarding of some, makes us despise
others in respect of them; when one man seems a giant, another will seem a
dwarf in comparison of him. This caused the Corinthian schism. Take heed of
man-worship, as well as image worship; let not idolatry be changed, but
abolish't. Of this largely, before, upon Having men's persons in admiration.

3. Labor for experimental benefit by the ordinances. Men separate to those
churches which they account better, because they never found those where they
were before (to them) good. Call not Ministers good (as the young man in the
Gospel did Christ) complementally only; for if so, you will soon call them bad.
Find the setting up of Christ in your hearts by the Ministry, and then you will
not dare to account it Antichristian. If with Jacob, we could say of our
Bethels, God is here; we would set up pillars, nay be such, for our constancy
in abiding in them.

4. Neither give nor receive scandals; give them not to occasion others to
separate, nor receive them to occasion thine own separation; watch exactly,
construe doubtful matters charitably. Look not upon blemishes with multiplying
glasses, or old men's spectacles. Hide them, though not imitate them; sport not
your selves with others nakedness. Turn separation from, into lamentation for
the scandalous.

5. Be not much taken with novelties. New lights have set this church on fire;
for the most part they are taken out of the dark-lanthorns of old Heretics.
They are false and fools fires to lead men into the precipice of separation.
Love truth in an old dress; let not antiquity be a prejudice against, nor
novelty an inducement to the entertainment of truth.

6. Give not way to lesser differences; A little division will soon rise up to
greater, small wedges make way for bigger. Our hearts are like to tindar, a
little spark will inflame them. Be jealous of your hearts when contentions
begin, stifle them in the cradle. Act. 3^.38.
Paul and Barnabas separated about a small matter, the taking of an associate.

7. Beware of pride, the mother of contention and separation. Love not the
pre-eminence; rather be fit for, then desirous of rule; despise not the
meanest; say not, I have no need of thee. All schisms and heresies are mostly
grafted upon the stock of pride. The first rent that was ever made in Gods
family, was by the pride of Angels, ver. 14.
and that pride was nothing else but the desire of independency.

8. Avoid self-seeking: he who seeks his own things and profit, will not mind
the good and peace of the church. Oh take heed lest thy secular interest draw
thee to a new communion, and thou color over thy departure with religion and
conscience.

1. Thus we have spoken of the First, viz. what these seducers did; separate
themselves.

2. The cause of their separation, or what they were, in these words, sensual,
not having the spirit. Wherein,

1. Their estate is propounded, They were sensual:

2. Explained, having not the spirit.

EXPLICATION.
But 1. In what respect were they Sensual. In what respect were they 2. Not
having the spirit.


2. Why does the Apostle here represent them to be such.

1. For the first.

1. The word here translated sensual, in the Gr. (...), comes from (...)
anima, the soul; so that (...) signifies primarily one who has a soul:
Animalis ab anima, non ab ab animo.
And in Scripture the word is used three ways. 1. Sometimes its joined with
the word body, in opposition to a glorified body; and then the body is called a
natural body, that is, such a body as is informed, governed, moved by the
soul; or is subject to animal affections and operations, as generation,
nutrition, augmentation, etc. or such a body as is sustained and upheld by the
actions of the soul, as it receives from it life and vegetation; that is, by
the action of the vegetative power, Vid. Aquin. Cajet. Estium, Pareum. in 1
Cor. 15.44. Homo in puris naturalibus confideratus qui nihil eximium habet
praeter animam rationalem, Piscat. Homo non alia quam naturalis animi luce
praeditus. Bez.
the chief whereof is nutrition, which cannot be without nourishment; so that
this natural body wants the constant help of nourishment for its preservation,
in which respects it is distinguished from a glorified body. 2. This word (...),
is in Scripture opposed to regenerate, and so imports one who has in him
nothing excellent but a rational soul, who is governed only by the natural
light of reason, who has in him only natural abilities and perfections. And
when thus its taken, our learned translators, translate (...) by the word
natural, 1 Cor. 2.14. intending one who is guided by natural reason, he being
there opposed to (...), the spiritual man, who is endued with, and guided by a
divine and supernatural illumination. 3. Its taken for one who being guided by
no better light than that of his own natural reason, or rather who, Anima
significat animalitatem, cum ab animo, i. e. part superiori distinguitur
Lapide in Jude Sapim^^ animo, fruimur anima; fine animo anima est debilis.
being altogether addicted to the service of that part which 1 These. 5.23. is
called (...), the soul, (whereby is meant the sensitive and inferior part of
the soul, the sensual appetite, common to man with the beasts, as distinct
from (...), the spirit, or intellectual and rational part) follows the
dictates of that his sensual appetite, and the inclinations of his sensitive
soul, and his only ben^^^nd intent is upon satisfaction by worldly delights;
his study and care is for the sensitive and vegetative part, and for those
things which belong to the animal and present life: and hence it is, that some
learned Vid. Lorin. in loc.
men conceive that (...) sensual, comes from (...), as (...) is (in scripture)
used to denote life, and the functions of life common to us with beasts. Vox
Arabica exponitur per sibi viventes. (...)Oecum. Haeretici vocantur animales ab
anima sensitiva and vegetativa, cui toti serviunt. quia ut animalia non
rationem sed sensum sequuntur, vi^un^que in concupisce^tiis carnis non
spiritus, sed sensus puta gulae, avaritiae libidinis* etc. Lapide.
Thus Christ, Mat. 6.25. says, Take no thought for your life, (...), what you
shall eat, or what you shall drink, etc. is not the life ((...)) more then
meat etc. And in this notion of sensuality Tertullian, after he began to favor
Montanisme, took the word (...) when he fastened that odious name of Physici
upon the orthodox, because they refused to condemn second marriages. And in
this place likewise (with submisson to more mature judgments) I conceive that
(...) is intended to denote their brutish and unruly sensuality. Thus the
Arabic interpreter, and Oecumenius, with sundry others likewise understand it.
Thus likewise our learned translators thought, who interpreted the word
sensual, as conceiving that Jude intended that they altogether served their
sensitive and vegetative soul, and (as beasts) followed their senses, and lived
in the lusts of the flesh, not according to the spirit, prosecuting those
carnal objects with all industry, which tend to preserve their present life,
Ii dicantur animales, qui animae indulgent, et ea quae ad vitam tuendam valent,
curiosius sectantur. Gnostici animales sunt, mortalia bona avide concupiscunt,
usque adeo ut ecclesiam potius sibi desere^dam putent, qua^ corporeis
voluptatibus careant. Justinian in loc. Praesenti loco congruit ea significatio
qua animales dicuntur qui sectantur eas cupiditates quae sunt secundum animam
sensitivam i.e. qui senfibus acsensuum voluptatibus obsequuntur. Estius in loc.
and choosing rather to leave the church, then to abridge themselves of any
bodily pleasures. And the Apostle by this word, seems to me to make their
brutish sensuality, and propensions, to be the cause of their separation: as
if he said, they will not live under the strict discipline where they must be
curbed and restrained from following their lusts; no, these sensualists will be
alone by themselves in companies, where they may have their fill of all sensual
pleasures, and where they may gratify their genius to the utmost. And this
exposition of (...) most aptly agrees also to that first interpretation of
(...), viz. such who will be boundless, and kept within no limits, or
compass^^ but like a company of beasts shut up in a field, who seeing better
pasture in that on the other side of the hedge, and desirous also of more
scope, break the fence and leap over the bars that they may both run and
raven. The more I think of (...), the more I incline to think the Apostle
intends thereby to represent them boundless, extravagant libertines.

Of this their sensuality I have before spoken atla rge on verse 10. and 12.

2. The Apostle represents them, not having the spirit.

The word spirit (not to speak of the many acceptations of the word, when
attributed to creatures, to angels, the soul, etc.) when attributed to God, is
taken either, 1. (...), essentially, and so God is called a spirit, a spiritual
essence, Joh. 4.24. and the divine nature of Christ is set forth by the word
spirit. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Pet. 3.18. Heb. 9.14. Or 2. hypostatics, personally, in
which respect it notes the third person in the blessed Trinity: and thus its
taken, either, 1. properly for the third person, Matthew. 28.19 Joh. 1.32. and
14.26. Ephesians. 1.13. 1 These. 1.6. etc. or 2. improperly and metonymically, for the
effects and gifts of the holy spirit, ordinary or extraordinary; in which
respect some are said to be anointed with the spirit, to have the spirit on and
in them, to be filled with the spirit, 1 Cor. 1.4. 2 Cor. 6.6. Gal. 3.2. Gal.
5.17. Luc. 2.25. 4 18. Act. 2.17, 18. Tit. 3.6. Act. 8.16 10.44. Luc. 1.41.
Act. 4.8.31.6.3.5.7.55.13.9.52. Romans 8.1.9.
and in this respect these seducers are said not to have the spirit, viz. the
saving, working, gifts, graces of the spirit, to teach, act and rule them, to
sanctify and purify them, etc. which they wanting, it was no wonder that they
were sensual and given over to the sinful prosecution of all carnal delights
and pleasures: not having the spirit, they could not walk in the spirit. Gal.
5.21. not having the spirit to lust in them against the flesh, they must needs
be carried away wi^^ the lusts of the flesh, as acting them without
contradiction.

For the second, Jude tells these Christians, that these seducers were so far
from being more spiritual then others, that they were mere sensualists, and
had nothing in them of the spirit at all. For by their boundless separation
and sensuality, they showed, that 1. They had not the spirit of wisdom,
discerning, and illumination, to discover to them the beauty of that holiness
and truth which was in the ways of the Saints which they hated and forsook,
and to guide and lead them to that happiness which they should look after for
themselves. The spirit is a spirit of truth, of knowledge, Joh. 14.17.15.26.
of judgment, Isa. 11.2. Isa. 26.8. The spirit guides into all truth, and is a
voice which says, This is the way: whereas these seducers were led by a
fooles-fire into the bogs and precipices of delusion and damnation by a lying
spirit, a spirit of error. 1 John 4.16.

2. They had not the spirit of renovation to change their natures, of
sanctification and holiness to mortify their lusts: Romans 1.4.
the spirit of God is an holy spirit, a spirit of grace, Zech. 12.10. through
the spirit we mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13. whereas these impure
monsters wallowed in all manner of sensuality and uncleanness, and showed that
they were acted by an unclean, impure spirit; that they walked not after the
spirit, but the flesh.

3. Romans 15.30. Gal. 6.1.
They had not the spirit of meekness, Love ^^^ce: these are the fruits of the
spirit, Gal. 5.7. the spirit makes us enjoy peace in our selves, and study
peace with others, whereas these boutifeus and incendiaries, made rents and
schisms in the Church of Christ; by their divisions, they showed themselves
carnal.

4. 2 Cor. 3.17.
They had not the spirit of Liberty and activity in the ways of God; they were
without any quickening of the spirit, they were not able to do any good work,
nor enlivened in any way of holiness; but slaves and prisoners (even in arcta
custodia) to Satan, and their own lusts; the servants of corruption, though
they boasted of liberty.

OBSERVATIONS Obs. 1.

1. Commonly sensuality lies at the bottom of sinful separation and making of
Sects. Separate themselves, sensual, etc. It Is often seen that they who divide
themselves from the faithful, either in opinion or practice, aim at loosnesse
and libertinisme. Such were the Nicolaitans and the Disciples of Jezabel. Apoc.
2.6.20 who seduced the people of God to commit fornication. Heretics are
seldom without their harlots, Simon Magus had his Helena, Montanus his
Maximilla, Donatus his Lucilia, Priscillian his Galla, Pope Sergius his
Marozia. Gregory the seventh his Matildis. Alexander the sixth his Lucretia.
Leo the tenth his Magdalena. Paul the third his Constantia. Rome, which
condemns all the Churches in the world, tolerates stews, and sets an easy
rate upon all the impure practices of luxury, natural and unnatural. Non est
adulterium apud nos, cum enim unum eundemqspiritum habeamus, unum Corpus sumus.
Gastius de exord. Anab.
The Anabaptists allow plurality of wives, and some of them have said, that
none of their sect can commit adultery with another wife (according to the Ad
alterum part 1. p. 615.616. etc.
etymology of adulterium) for all of their sect (say they) are so knit the one
to the other, that they are all one body. John of Leiden had 13. wives, and
gave a liberty to every one to marry as many as they pleased. Its reported that
after the taking of Munster there was not found a maid of 14. years that had
not been viciated by his followers. Of this before.

2. Its possible for those who are sensual and without, Obs. 2. Part 1. page
309. part 2. p. 130.
the spirit, to boast of spiritualnesse. Of this before.

3. Sanctity and sensuality cannot agree together. If a man be sensual, he
has not the spirit; if he have the spirit, he will not be sensual. Sowing to
the spirit, Obs. 3.
and to the flesh, are opposed. Gal. 6.4. The opposition also is remarkable, be
not drunk with wine, etc. but be filled with the spirit, Ephesians. 5.18. when sense
is gratified, the spirit is opposed Mark the like opposition also, Romans 8.13.
If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye; but if ye through the spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Romans 13.14. But put ye on the
Lord Jesus, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill it in the lusts
thereof: and Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh: these have contrary originalls, the one is from earth, the
other from heaven. The motions of sensual lusts, and the spirit are contrary,
one downward, another upward (a man cannot look those contrary ways at once)
Lust, like the woman's disease in the Gospel, bows us down to the earth, the
spirit moves to the things above. Like two balances, if one go up, the other
goes down, they put upon contrary practices. Gal. 5.17. walk in the spirit and
ye shall not fulfill the deeds of the flesh, Gal. 5.16. They both endeavor to
take up, and each to ingrosse and monopolize the whole man, soul and body: they
will neither endure to have their dominion over man parted. They can admit of
no accommodation; what ever means or helps advance the one, suppress and
expel the other. The fuel of lust, (worldly excess) extinguisheth the spirit;
the preservatives of the spirit* prayer, word, fasting, meditation, are the
poisons of lusts. Oh the madness then of those who thin^ to serve these
contrary masters! Matthew. 6.4. If one be loved, the other must be forsaken. The
allowance of any inordinate lust is inconsistent with the spirit. How great
should our care be (hence) to take the spirits part against the flesh! 1. by a
through hearty inward work of mortification and the plucking up of lust by the
roots, not only by snibbing the blade of it. 2. By a holy and watchful
moderation in worldly enjoyments (behind which Satan like the Philistines ever
lies in ambush when the lust like Delilah is tempting) 3. By diverting thy
joys and pleasure upon heavenly objects: and 4. By laboring for a sanctified
improvement of all the stoppages in the way of lust, and Gods breaking down thy
bridges in thy march.

They who want the spirit are easily brought over to sensuality. Obs. ult. Vide
Part. 2. ver. 10.
They had not the spirit, and no wonder if sensual. Natural light is not enough
to overcome natural lusts. He who is but a mere man, may soon become a prey to
sensuality. Vae soli, woe to him that has not this spirit to renew him, nay
constantly to reside in him, and to act him. Even Saints themselves, when the
spirit withdraws and leaves them to themselves, how sensual have they proved!
David, Lot, Samson are proofs. Let thy great care be then to keep the spirit
from departing. Psalm. 51.
'Twas David's prayer, take not thy holy spirit from me, Take heed of giving way
to sins of pleasure, or to sins of deliberation, or to repeated sins, or to
sins against conscience, or to the sin of pride and presumption of thine own
strength; delight not in sinful company. Beware of worldly mindedness, follow
the dictates of the spirit, and listen to its first motions. Fruitfully improve
the ordinances wherein the spiritdelights to breath.

VER. 20. But ye Beloved, building up your selveson your most holy faith,
praying in the holy Ghost.
THe second direction to teach the Christians how to observe the former
exhortation to contend for the truth, and to oppose seducers, is building up
themselves on their most holy faith; yet so as this and the next direction, are
set down as dispositions and means to keep themselves in the love of God,
mentioned in the next verse. In this the Apostle shows, and we ought to explain
three things.

EXPLICATION.
1. The Builders, or the parties directed. Beloved.

2. Their Foundation, their most holy faith.

3. Their building thereon, in these words, building up your selves on etc.

1. Of the parties here, called Beloved, Part. 1.
I have largely spoken before.

2. The Foundation. Their most holy faith.

In this I might inquire, 1. What is meant by faith. 2. How its called your
faith. 3. How its called most holy.


1. Concerning the several acceptations of faith, I have largely spoken Par. 1.
p. 117.118. etc. when I handled the Apostolical exhortation of contending for
the faith. And here by faithh (as in the forementioned place) I understand the
doctrine of faith. For enlargement upon which, Vid. ver. 3. and wha^ about
delivering of the faith, I have there said.
and reasons why the word is called faith, I refer the Reader to what I have
spoken on the forenamed place.

2. This faith is called your faith, and the doctrine of faith was theirs. 1.
Because of Ministration, it was delivered to the Saints, and by God given to
them, and to others for their sakes.

2. Because they received it, were molded into it: it was so delivered to
them, that they (as the Apostle speaks) were delivered into it, as it was
ministered to them, so it was accepted by them. It was not scorned, rejected,
but received, embraced, yea contended for by them. It was effectually theirs,
as well as ministerially.

3. Theirs it was in regard of the fruit and benefit of it. It was for theirs
the salvation of their souls, 1 Pet. 1.9 It was to them a savor of life, not a
sentence of condemnation.

3. 3 Vid. Lorin. in loc.
Its called most holy faith.

1. To put a difference between those unholy and fabulous dreams of these
seducers, the most impure inventions of the Gnostics, Jewish fables, etc.

2. Considered in it self, and that,

1. In its supreme auhtor, and efficient cause, the holy Ghost. It was (...),
by divne inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16.

2. In the Instruments of conveying it, who were holy men of God, who spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1.21.

3. Quanam Paul^ Epistol^ non melle dulcior, non lacte candidior. Hierom.
In the matter of it, which is altogether holy, every word of God is pure. The
threatenings holy, denounced against sin; the precepts holy, and such as put us
only upon holiness; the comforts and promises holy, parts of a holy covenant,
and such as only comfort in the practice of holiness, and encourage to
holiness, and are made to holy ones.

4. In the effects of it. It works and exciteth holiness in nature, heart,
life. Its that which being believingly looked into, makes the beholders holy
like it self; as the rods of Jacob which laid before the sheep, made them
bring forth young ones of the same color with those rods.

3. building on this foundation is contained in these words, building up your
selves. Two things are in this branch comprehended. 1. How we are to understand
this building up. 2. This building up of themselves. The first is contained in
that word (...), and it imports three things. 1. A fitting, and a joining the
building to the foundation. 2. A skilful disposing of the materials and parts
of the building. 3. A progressivenesse and proceeding therein, even to
perfection, and all these are aptly applicable to that spiritual purpose of our
apostle in this place: for by this expression he intends to put them upon
laboring for confirmation and stability in their Christian course by sitting
fast to the word, the foundation of faith, and as a building which is firmly
fixed and immoveably set upon its foundation, steadfastly to abide in and rest
upon the truth of the word; that all the winds, and waves and oppositions of
seducers may not be able to unsettle and remove them. And this it is, which the
Apostle, Col. 2.7. intends by the very same expression (...), built up; in
which he exhorts the Christians to stability in Christ and his truth, by being
joined to him as the building is to the foundation; and hence it is that
Christ, Matthew. 7.24. commended the wisdom of that man, who built his house
upon the rock, and ver. 26. blamed the folly of him who built his house upon
the sand. He that hears my words (says he) and does them, I will liken him
unto a wise man that built his house upon the rock. The firm and unfeined
belief of the doctrine of faith is as the resting and depending upon the rock
or foundation. It Is true, faith sets us upon Christ as a foundation personal or
mediatory, upon whom alone we depend for life and salvation; but faith sets us
upon the word as the foundation scriptural or manifestative, or that for the
truth of which, and of its discoveries, we believe in and depend upon Christ.
And hence it is, that as Christ is in scripture, called a foundation, Ephesians.
2.10. the chief cornerstone, a stone for a foundation, and besides whom, no
other foundation can be laid, 2 Cor. 3.11. So is the word adorned with the same
title, Ephesians. 2.20. where by the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Mat.
16.18.
we are to understand their doctrines; and the way to build upon Christ, is by
building upon his word as our foundation: for Christ is not a foundation of
happiness every way that man frames in his own heart; but only so as God
offers him in the word of the Gospel; and Christ makes it all one to build and
believe on his word as on himself. He that refuses me, and receives not my
word, Joh. 12.48. And if ye abide in me and my words abide in you. Joh. 5.17.
As we rest upon a man by trusting to his word, so we build upon Christ by
building on his word, and the word being rooted in our hearts, unites us to
Christ.

2. building up, puts the Christians upon a right ordering of the materials
and parts of the building: for in the building the materials are not only to
be laid, but skilfully to be laid upon the foundation: and this comprehends two
things. 1. The providing of good materials. 2. The placing of them fitly.

For the first. In buildings, sundry profitable and useful materials are
provided, as brass, Iron, stone timber, lime, lead, glass etc. and in this
spiritual building there must be parcells of all graces, faith, hope, love,
knowledge etc. Faith must be those brazen gates to let in Christ into the
soul, and to shut out Satan; watchfulness and courage must be as the
stone-wall to oppose the approaches of our enemies: Patience the dormers
bearing the weight of the house, and every burden that may be laid upon it:
Love the Cement to bind and knit all together: Knowledge as the windows to
lighten the house; Hope, as the glass or casements to look out and wait for
things believed.

2. These must be fi^ly placed, and that, 1. So as that all the parcels may be
set upon the foundation, Phil. 4.13.
all must lean upon Jesus Christ as manifested in scripture: grace of it self
is but a Creature, and defectible; he can only continue life and vigor to it:
without Christ the greatest and highest graces will but be pondera ad ruinam,
and could neither be set up nor kept up: grace will prove but deceitful,
unless it stands upon upon the strength of Christ the foundation. 2. All the
parts must be disposed, and contrived for the best advantage of, and so as they
may be most useful to the dweller. Every grace must be for God, as it is from
him. Who builds an house and does not expect to be accommodated and benefited
by it? 3. There must be a due proportion between part and part, and such a
laying out of the one, that there may not be too great an abridgment or
hindering of the beauty and largeness of the other. Christians must have all
the parts of holiness and parcells of grace. There must not be so much allotted
for one room, that nothing be left for another; a Christian must not be all
for knowledge, and nothing for Love; all for zeal, and nothing for humility;
all for humility nothing for courage. A Christian must neither be maimed, nor
monstrous. 4 All the parts must be built according to the line and rule of the
word. The tabernacle was according to the pattern in the mount. Exodus 25.40. A
Christian must walk and build by rule, entertain every grace, and perform
every duty which is enjoined, and because it is enjoined: he must not live
according to example, but rule.

3. By this expression of building up, the Apostle puts these Christians upon
progressivenesse and perfection in the work of Christianity: he not only
enjoins every Christian to be busy in building, but by this word (in
Composition) (...), he notes a building up till the work be finished, an
increasing in building, even to a consummating thereof: this also is intimated
by the note of opposition But.
(in the connection) to those who fall off; whereby he would teach the
Christians not to give over the work till they be builded up a perfected
building for Christ. Hence it is that Peter (though not in the same words, yet
to the same effect) directs the Christians 2 Pet. 3.17. to grow in grace, and 2
Pet. 1.5. to add grace to grace. Add to your faith virtue, and to your virtue
knowledge etc. and Ephesians. 4.15. to a growing up in Christ in all things. It Is
true, building is a slow and leasurely work, a work of time; but yet it must be
a progressive and proceeding work: it is done by little and little, but yet many
littles will bring forth much, and make a beautiful building at length. What
more dishonorable, then for a man to begin, Luc. 14.30.
and not to be able to finish? the disgrace hereof Christ mentions in the
Gospel, no change so unworthy and dishonorable as to begin in the spirit and
end in the flesh. And not to go forward in Christianity is to go backward,
and they who build not up, pull down. There Is no standing at a stay in this
work; the want of a roof, impaires the walls, the leaving of the building
imperfect and unfinisht by not adding what is wanting, tends to the ruining of
that which is already set up. We lose those things which we have wrought, 2 ep.
Joh. 8.

To conclude, this pains and progressivenesse in this work, Part 1. page 158.
etc. 163. etc. Part 2.
is about a building which is not temporal, and in time to fall down, but
spiritual and eternal. Of this at large before.

2. Concerning the second viz. the building up themselves; It may be demanded
1. what is meant by themselves, (...). 2. How they may be said to be able to
build up themselves.

For the first, the word, themselves, added to building up, may import a
building up of one another, and intend a mutual duty, to be put forth and
exercised between Christian and Christian; (...).
and thus the Apostle Col. 3.16. uses the word (...); where he exhorts them
to admonish (...), one another: and Ephesians. 4.32. to forgive one another: and this
mutual and fraternall helping of one another forward in our Christian
progress, is elsewhere frequently commanded in scripture, Heb. 11.25.
exhorting one another, and 1 These. 5.11. edify one another. Christians by
their counsels, comforts, exhortations, examples, should advance one another
spiritual welfare; but though this be a truth, and here not excluded, yet this
hinders not but that primarily the Apostle intends that every one should
promote his own particular holiness, and progress in the faith of the gospel.

2. For the second. It may be doubted how we can build up our selves. Is
edification man's work? Non Liberate gratiam, sed gratia Libertatem. Aug.
Are we not Gods workmanship? Ans. I grant, spiritual houses cannot build
themselves more then any other. Our houses are not naturally houses of God; but
made so to our hands. Unless the Lord build the house, all labor is vain. And
the Apostle points at the builder, when in the next words he bids these
Christians pray in the holy Ghost. But he here writes to the regenerate, who
have the spirit, by whom, and whose grace they have spiritual liberty afforded
to them, and being drawn they run, and being acted they are active. Gratia acta
fit activa.
Inward and habitual grace was the sole work of the spirit infusing; that
which is practical is the work of the regenerate person flowing from infused
grace.

2. Though we be Gods workmanship and building, yet he builds by means; and by
such precepts as these he exhorts us to submit our selves to the means, to
yield our selves to be hewn, squared, and laid in the building.

OBSERVATIONS. part 1. p. 182. 183. 184. etc. and 219, 220.

For Observations drawn 1. from the title, Beloved, as also 2. from the
Apostles expressing the doctrine of faith by the term faith, see before.

1. From the pleasant and significant metaphor of building. I note, that The
faithful are the house of God. 1. Obs.
By this resemblance the Church is not seldom set forth. Heb. 3.2. Moses was
faithful in all his house. 1 Timothy 3.15. How to behave thy self in the house of
God. 2 Timothy 2.20. In a great house there are vessels, etc. Heb. 3.6. Whose
house we are, if we hold fast, etc. 1 Pet. 4.17. The time is come that judgment
must begin at the house of God. etc. 1 Cor. 3.9. Ye are his building. 1 Pet.
2.5. Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house. And this
resemblance of an house aptly belongs to the faithful, either in respect of 1.
Christ. 2. Themselves. 3. God.


1. Christ is the foundation of this house; he was a Cornerstone, Isa. 28.16.
on which both the Jews and Gentiles meet, Ephesians. 2.20. he is called a stone for
a foundation, Christ is a foundation 1. in point of sustentation, upon him the
faithful build their hope and expectations; upon him all their grace and
holiness is built, 1 Pet. 2.4.
he is a living stone, that sends life and influence into all the stones of the
building set upon him; upon him all their Comforts are built; all their
rejoicing is in him. Take away Christ, and all their joy falls to the ground;
upon him are built all their duties, both in respect of power to perform them;
and in respect of acceptance from God when they are performed.

2. Christ is a foundation in respect of union. Between the building and this
foundation, this is the ground of sustentation, this union (set out sometime by
a matrimonial union, sometime by an union between head and members; sometime by
that between root and branches, etc.) is on the part of Christ, Romans 8 9. 1
Cor. 12.8. Phil. 1.19.
by his spirit laying hold on us, and infusing spiritual life into us, and
affording to us all supplies of grace. On our part by faith, putting and
setting us into him, as also receiving and drawing grace from him

3. Christ is a foundation in point of hiddennesse, the building is seen, the
foundation is hidden, he is a hid treasure. 1. His person is not yet seen. When
he shall appear, 1 John 3.2. whom having not seen, etc. 1 Pet. 1.8. 2. His
benefits and graces are hidden. Our life is an hidden life, hidden not only to
the wicked, but even often to the godly themselves, who behold not their own
happiness either of grace or glory. This life is the obscurity of their
adoption, his face is frequently hidden from them, and the tokens of his
presence removed.

And for the excellency of this foundation; he is first the sole foundation. 1
Cor. 3.11. Act. 4.12
No other foundation can be laid. No other appointed by God. No other ever
embraced by saints. No other ever revealed by the word. No other needed beside.
No other willing or able to bear the weight of the building. No other was fit
to have the honor of our affiance and dependence.

2. He is a strong foundation, so strong that he bears up every stone, every
saint of all sizes that ever was or shall be laid upon him, and all their
weights and pressures; he bears them up always, so that they shall never fall.
They who are built upon this rock are safe, Renatus nunquam denascitur.
Matthew. 7. as Mount Sion that cannot be moved. The word shall fall, but not a
Saint, because Christ falls not. The gates of hell, the floods of temptation
shall never totally prevail, Potest aliosquo modo recedere, non penitus
excidere.
a child of God shall never sin away all his holiness, he may sin, not
perish, not sin to death. Grace may be abated, not abolish't, shaken in, not
out of the soul. Of all given to Christ, He has lost none: his sheep never
perish. Joh. 10.29.

2. The Church is an house in respect of Believers, who are the stones of which
this house is built up, and these stones are naturally 1, rugged and
unpolished, til they be hewn, smoothed and made fit for the building, Hos.
6.7. the word of God takes away their natural asperity, and makes them fit for
the building, and submissive to Gods disposal, and fit for his purpose. 2.
These stones are of several sizes, some greater, some lesser. Christians are of
diverse degrees, some more eminent, some more obscure, some of stronger, others
of weaker graces. 3. The stones which are different in their bigness, are yet
cemented and united one to another. As there is an union of faith betwixt the
building and the foundation, so there is an union of love between the parts of
the building. And hence Ephesians. 4.16. The whole body is said to be fitly joined
together and compacted. The greatest stone in the building cannot say to the
least, it has no need thereof. The Foundation disdaines not the least pibble,
no more should the strongest stone in the building.

3. The Church is an house, He who dweleth every where by his essence, dwells in
his church by the presence of his grace.
in respect of God. Who,

1. Dwells in this house. He has two houses. That above, of glory; this below,
of grace. God takes more delight in his Church then in all the world. He rests
in this house.

2. He furnishes his house with all necessaries, yea ornaments, his
ordinances, graces, etc.

3. He protects his house, he that destroys the temple of God, him will God
destroy. His enemies shall answer for dilapidations, for every breach they have
made.

4. He repaires his house, and when his enemies have broken it, he restores it,
and makes up its breaches, it shall never utterly be destroyed.

5. He purges and cleanses his house; disorders and abuses are too ready to
creep into it, it often wants reformation. Amos. 3.2.
Judgment begins at the house of God. You have I known of all the families of
the earth, and therefore I will punish you. Man regards not much what lies in
his field, but he is curious that nothing offensive be laid in his house.
Judgments begin at the sanctuary. Sins in the Church are most heinous.
Christians are so much worse then others, by how much they should be better.
The meditation of this resemblance should therefore put us upon trial and
strengthening of our union to Christ our foundation; upon dependency on, and
trusting to him. It serves also to strengthen the love, neernesse, and
dearnesse of believers. living stones, to make us dedicate our selves to the
Lord, as his house and temple, to offer up the daily sacrifice of prayer and
praise, to him, to tell Satan and lust, whenever they sue for a room in our
house, that every room is taken up for God, that his enemy must not be be let
in. We are the temple of God, on let us not make our selves a temple of idol,
by covetousness, or a stews by uncleanenesse, or a taphouse by drunkenness,
or a stye by any swinish lusts. To conclude this, labor for the costly
furniture of holiness for thy house, use the perfume of prayer, the washing of
godly sorrow, give the Lord costly intertainment. Repair all thy breaches by
repentance. Run not too long to ruin. Patiently bear the Lords visitation and
the means he uses to mend and cleanse thee. And lastly, depend upon him for
care and protection in all dangers.

2. The word of God is the foundation of a Christian. Obs. 2.
(Build your selves on your faith) Its a foundation to bear a Saint out in all
his duties, comforts, belief of truths. 1. All our duties, services must be
built upon a word. That which will not stand with the word, must be no part of
the building: the word must be the foundation of practice; he that walks by
this rule, Gal. 6.16.
peace shall be upon him. It Is not the showing of any warrant of man that will
bear thee harmless at the day of judgment. 2. The word is the foundation of a
Christians comfort, no promises but scripture promises but may deceive. No
other promises can bear the weight of an afflicted soul: Unless thy law had
been my delight, I should have perished in my affliction. Ps. 119.92. Absque
Scriptura claudicat cogitatio.
Thy statutes were my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. Psalm. 119.54. 3. But
especially the word is the foundation of a Christians belief of truths
asserted, we can only securely assent to the assertions of the word. That
which I read not I believe not. A written word is the only food of faith, the
formal object of faith is the truth manifested in scripture, every truth has
an esse credibilis, Baron. contr. Turnbullum. Deus verax and manifestans. Faith
is (...). Deuteronomy. 17.18.
because it was delivered in the written word, and spoken by God. Faith is
carried to its object under the notion of infallibility, which can never be
without divine revelation; all humane testimony being fallible, though not
false; and hence it is that the revelation of God in his word is only
propounded by God as a foundation of faith, Joh. 20.31. These things are
written, that ye might believe. 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a more sure word of
prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed. So 1 John 5.13. These things
have I written to you, that ye believe on the name of the Son of God. Isa.
8.20. To the Law and the Testimony. Joh. 5.39. Search the scriptures, for in
them ye think to have eternal life. And this word of God has only been
embraced by the faithful in all ages as the foundation of their faith. When
ever they would prove any thing to be believed, they have gone to the written
word for a foundation of belief. Thus the noble Bereans, Act. 17.11. who
searched the scriptures daily whether those things were so. Thus Paul. (Act.
13.33. 1 Cor. 2.9. 1 Cor. 15.54. Romans 14.11.) grounded what he wrote upon
scripture and Act. 24 14. professed, that he believed all things written in the
Law and the Prophets: and Act. 26.22. that he said no other things then those
which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. So that the doctrine of faith
revealed in the scripture, must be the foundation to bear us up, and out in all
duties to be performed, Comforts to be entertained, Truths to be embraced. And
hence, as we may see the misery of those who have no foundation at all, holding
their religion only for form, fashion, example, fear of superiors, which
sandy bottomes will never keep them up from sin, nor bear them out in
sufferings; especially death and and judgment; so we should labor to improve
the doctrine of faith as our foundation in all the forementioned respects.

1. By having a deep sense and feeling of our misery, so that not finding in
our selves whereon to found our selves, we may be driven to look after the
foundation discovered in the scripture, which is only Jesus Christ.

2. By faith, whereby we give a supernatural assent to the word, and
spiritually discern the truth thereof, whereby, likewise we apply the word to
our selves, and are knit unto it as a foundation* as mingling it with faith.
Although the doctrine of faith be a foundation in it self, yet it is not so to
us, unless we believe it, and apply it to our selves by the gift of faith.

3 By laboring that the word may take so deep a root in the heart, that it may
descend into the affections, and there be embraced until it has wrought an
experience of its own delightful sweetness.

4. By several needful considerations. 1. By considering that it never failed
any that ever depended upon it, it having in all practices, distresses,
debates, upheld them. The public faith of heaven was never broken, the
promises, commands and assertions of the word have born Saints out in all
difficulties. 2. By considering that every other foundation will fail, whether
fancied by our selves or suggested by others, it is but a lying vanity. 3. By
studying the nature of him whose word it is, who is the rock of ages, in whom
is no shadow of change, for whom it is impossible to lie to us, or deny
himself.

Sundry Observations which might have been concerning steadfastness and
proceeding in Christianity, and the usefulness of a constant progress therein
to keep us from seduction (the best way for Christians not to be losers of
what they have, is to be laborers for what they want) I shall not mention, as
having larg^ly insisted thereupon before. Part. 1. p. 174. 175. Part. 2. p.
328. etc. 355. etc. 370. etc.


Thus of the second direction, whereby the Apostles teaches the Christians to
embrace the foregoing exhortation of contending for the faith. viz.
Edification on the faith, The third follows, viz. praying in the holy Ghost,
whereby he instructs them (withal) how to build prosperously, viz. by taking in
Gods help, and how to to keep themselves in the love of God, which is the
direction next ensuing.

EXPLICATION.
Two things are here to be opened.

1. The thing to be performed, Prayer.

2. The manner of performing it, in the holy Ghost.

1. The thing to be done, or what he commands: Prayer, Praying.

I shall not here handle the duty of prayer in a common-place-way, (...).
by insisting either upon the sundry sorts of prayer, Petition for good things,
Deprecation to remove evil things, Intercession for others, Imprecation against
others, Thanksgiving for our selves or others: or upon the Circumstances of
prayers, for time, place, measure: only as to the former, I shall note, that
when this word prayer is set alone, as it is here in Jude, it compriseth all
the kinds under it; when it is joined with thanksgiving alone, it compriseth
all kinds belonging to request; when ^t is joined with deprecation or
intercession, it is restrained to a desire of good things for our selves. But
as to the present occasion, I shall only show what prayer is in regard of its
general nature.

The word in the original here used (...) praying, imports an earnest wishing
or craving of such things which are according to our desire, because by prayer
we open our hearts desire to God. There are sundry rhetorical, brief,
commendatory descriptions used by learned men to set forth prayer; as, The key
of heaven, and of all Gods Cabinets, the Conduit of mercy, Dr. Sibbs. Oration
cararum hirud^.
faith flaming, Jacobs ladder, an invisible and invincible weapon, a victory
over the omnipotent, the consumption of cares, a box of ointment broke upon the
head of Christ, the perfume of heaven, the mount of transfiguration, the souls
messenger, Satan's scourge. The ascending of the mind to God. (...).
To wave these, though sweet and pious expressions, prayer is more fitly called
(according to the nature and import of the word (...), a right opening of the
desire of the heart to God; or (as the Apostle Phil 4.6.) (...), Damasc. de
orthod. fid. l. 3. c. 24.
a making known of our desires to him; or (as some) a religious speech directed
to God after a due sort, concerning things appertaining to his glory and our
good.

1. First, the will is filled in prayer with desires, and then these desires
flame forth, blaze upward, and are opened to God. Formally, prayer is an act of
the will, and has its Conception in the heart as in its womb: and

2. Then its birth is the expression of our desires, how ever uttered. And
these desires are expressed sundry ways, either by an inward or an outward
word, there being a twofold speech, the first (...), and (...), a speech
uttered with the voice; the second (...), and (...), a speech conceived in the
mind: 1. (...)2. (...)1. Vocalis. 2. Mentalis.
prayer is not the outward voice only or chiefly, but the inward of the soul.
Sighs are articulate. Exodus 14.15. Moses is said to cry to God, when we read
not of his uttering any words: and 1 Samuel 1.13. Hannah spoke in her heart, but
her voice was not heard; her prayer was oration mentalis, Non vox sed votum, non
musica cordula sed Cor, Non clamans sed amans clangit in aure Dei. Psalm. 142.2.
2 Timothy 2.22. Psalm. 119.7.
an inward mental prayer, and this is the strongest voice of all, and by it we
speak loudest in the ears of God. Hence prayer is called the lifting of the
heart to God. Ps. 25.1. and the pouring forth of the soul before the Lord,
Psalm. 62.8. 1 Samuel 1.15. As for that prayer which is only the outward speech
of the mouth, without the inward of the heart, it is rather lip-labor then
prayer. Desires are usually made known by outward means, words, signs; words
do most exactly set forth the intent of the heart; yet signs also, as lifting
up the hands or eyes, stretching abroad the arms, bowing the knees, do both
express and excite inward affection. But by inward means, as sighs and
groans, God discerns a man's desires, as well as by words and signs, he
understanding the motions of the heart as well as of the tongue. And hence it
is that God knowing the secrets of the heart, and understanding our thoughts
afar off, prayer is not made, to make known our desires to God, as if otherwise
God would be ignorant of them, but to testify man's obedience to that order
which God has set down, God appointing prayer in this way a means to obtain
needful blessings: and that very wisely, as 1. That by making known of our
wants to God, we may not only know, but acknowledge God to be the author and
fountain of all blessings, and so upon the receiving thereof ascribe the praise
to God. 2. That it may appear we understand our own desires, and have sense of
the thing we want. 3. That others may mutually join with us in prayer. 4. That
our affections may be the more enlarged: for as desires help us to words, so
words inflame our desires. 5. To prevent distraction and interruption in our
thoughts.

3. Psalm. 38.9. Mat. 4.10.
Prayer is made to God only. It is a principal point of divine service. 1. God
only is religiously to be worshipped and served. 2. God only knows whether we
pray or no, Jer. 23.23.
i. e. from the heart. 3. God only is every where present to hear the suits of
all. 4. God only is almighty and able to grant whatsoever we ask.

4. In prayer, as the desires must be made known to God, so after a due manner:
but of that in the next part, In the holy Ghost.

The manner, of performing this duty, is in the holy ghost, (...).

There is in scriptures sometime mention made of praying in the spirit of man,
as 1 Cor. 14.15. I will pray (...), with the spirit, or in the spirit, i. e.
(say some) may understanding and my heart or soul, so as I may both
understand, and also be affected with what I pray. And Ephesians. 6.18. The Apostle
injoynes praying in the spirit, which may be understood either of Gods spirit
or man's: but in this place, particular and express mention is made of the holy
spirit, or the spirit of God, in which we are to pray; whereby is meant by the
assistance, motion, inspiration, strength, help and guiding of the Spirit; for
(as this sense agrees with the preposition (...), here translated in, which is
in scripture often of the same signification with (...), by, as Matthew. 5.34, 35.
swear, etc. neither, (...), by heaven, nor (...), (...).
by the earth, nor (...), by the head; and 2 Cor. 6.6, 7. it is eight times
thus taken) so is it most suitable to other places of scripture, where the
spirit of God is mentioned with prayer, as Zec. 12.13. where is promised the
spirit of supplication, that is, the spirit as giving, bestowing and working
the gift and grace of prayer, (as 2 Cor. 4.13. we read of the spirit of faith,
i.e. the spirit working faith,) and Rom 8.15. we read of the spirit ((...)) by
which we cry Abba Father. Jam. 5.16. we find mentioned (...), which properly
signifies a prayer wrought in us, and excited, and so imports the efficacy and
influence of the holy Ghost in enabling us to pray. And the Apostle Romans 8.26.
most fully expresses this truth. 1. Affirmatively, the spirit helps our
infirmities; and makes intercession for us. 2. Negatively, saying, we know not
what to pray. Whence it is clear, not that the spirit of God does truly and
properly pray for us, as our high Priest and Mediator, or as one of us, for
another, (the attributing of the office of Mediator to the holy Ghost was one
of Arius his heresies) for then should there be more than one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. and God should request to God (the holy Ghost being God, but not man
also as was Christ,) but that the spirit of God stirs us up to pray,
quickneth and puts life into our dead and dull spirits, yea and infuseth
into us such desires, sighs and groans, and suggesteth unto us such words as
are acceptable to God, which for their truth and sincerity for their vehemence
and ardency, for their power and efficcacy are unutterable, they pierce through
the heavens, and enter un to the throne of grace, and there make a loud cry in
the ears of God. More particularly, from these expressions of both these
Apostles, Paul and Jude, we may consider, wherein this assistance of the holy
Ghost, or this praying by the holy Ghost stands and consists; And that is, 1.
In respect of the matter. 2. Of the manner of our prayer.

1. In respect of the matter of our prayer. We pray in the holy Ghost, as he
instructs and teaches us to ask such things as are according to the will of
God, (...). Romans 8.27. 1 Job. 5.14,
lawful and good things. The Spirit of God stirs us not up to desire what his
word forbids us to desire. We know not what is good for our selves, and God
has often heard us by denying us. Though when we ask bread, our Father he gives
us not a stone, yet when we ask a stone God has often given us bread. The thing
asked (if by the Spirit) is warrantable; the Spirit put us upon asking
(especially) spiritual blessings, as our lusts upon craving things which are
their fuel. The spirit of wisdom desires not its own poison.

2. We pray in the holy Ghost in respect of the manner of our praying. And that
1. As it enables us to pray sincerely and heartily. Gods Spirit is a spirit of
truth. And whenever we pray in his spirit, we pray likewise in our own,
and his stirs up ours to pray. The prayer of a Saint goes not out of fained
lips. The spirit lifts up the hand and the heart together. Psalm. 25.1.86.4.
Lam. 3.41.

2. As it enables us to pray with fervency. The motions of the Spirit, as they
are regular in regard of the object, so vehement in regard of the manner. Romans
8.26.
Its groans are such as cannot be uttered. The symboles of the spirit were
fiery tongues, Act. 2.2.3.
and a mighty rushing wind. As a bullet flies no further then the force of the
powder carries it, so prayer goes no further then the fervor of the Spirit
drives it. Prayer is called a knocking, a seeking, and figured by wrestling.
Genesis 32.26. Hos. 12.4. Nay called a wrestling. Romans 15.30. The importunity
required in prayer is called (...), impudence, Luke 11.8. (...) cognationem
habet cum verbo (...) quod significat attendere, intendere, animumque
advertere. Oration attente fundi debet.
sluggish prayers are no spiritual prayers. The device of shooting a letter at
the end of a dart (used as I have sometimes heard in sieges) is a fit emblem
of a soul sending its Epistle to heaven. As the Spirit wrought vehemently in
those holy men who were (...), and (...), moved by the holy Ghost to speak the
word of God to men, so it works fervently in those who are to speak in prayer
to God. David mentions the setting forth of his prayer as incense. and incense
burnt before it ascended: there must be fired affections, before out prayers
will go up. The Tribes, Acts 26.27. are said to serve God (...), which
signifies a stretching forth themselves with all their might.

3. As it enables us to pray in faith, 2 Cor. 3.14. Spiritus vicarius Christi.
the spirit is called the spirit of faith, and the spirit of Christ; as its
sent from him, so it sends us to him. The spirit so intercedes in us on earth,
for the operation and framing of our prayers, that it sends us to him who
intercedes for us in heaven, for the acceptance of our prayers; through Christ
we have access by one Spirit unto the Father. Ephesians. 2.18. And hence the Spirit
enables us to pray in faith, nothing wavering, Jam. 1.6. in confidence that
through the faith of him, our prayers shall be successful, in such a way as
our gracious father in Christ sees best for us. This is called the full
assurance of faith, Heb. 10 22. and a praying without doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8.
faith applying the promise, Joh. 14.13. and 16.23.
whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you.

4. As it enables us to pray in holiness, with pure hearts, and hands. He is a
Spirit of holiness, his office is to make us holy, and wheresoever he
witnesses, he washes. If he be a spirit of faith to strengthen our confidence
in Christ, he is a spirit of holiness to cause our conformity to Christ;
hence the spirit of grace is mentioned with the spirit of supplication. As the
spirit makes us come boldly before the throne of grace; So he makes us come
purely before it too, as being a throne of glory. If I regard iniquity in my
heart (says David) the Lord will not hear my prayer, Psalm. 66.18. I will wash
my hands in innocence, so will I compass thine altar. This legal washing is
Evangelically improved. 1 Timothy 2.8. Lifting up holy hands, and Heb. 10 22.

5. Lastly, as it is enables to pray in love. The spirit of love (for so he is
called 2 Timothy 1.17.) never in prayer witnesses Gods love to us, unless he
draws ours to him, nay for his sake to others. He never makes us lift up hands
without doubting, unless also without wrath. 1 Timothy 2.8. and when he makes us
at peace with our selves, Matthew, 5.24.
he makes us peaceable to others.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
Without the spirit there is no praying. They who are totally destitute of the
spirit, in their natural condition, can no more pray in faith then a dead man
can crave help of another. They may have the gift of prayer, not (in that
state) the grace of prayer, All natural men are in this respect (...), brute
and mute.
we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves. The
wicked call not upon God. There Is no natural man but is spiritually deaf and
dumb. If a man have not the spirit of grace, he must needs be destitute of the
spirit of supplication. He is a mere stranger to those prayer-graces, faith,
fervency, holiness, love. etc. He derides at prayer, I mean prayer by the
spirit: the wicked they howl upon their beds, not pray in the spirit; they may
say a prayer, not pray a prayer, as it said of Elijah who prayed in prayer,
(...), Jam. 5.16. they do but make a loud noise like a wind-instrument. They
are but like Balaam, into whose mouth God put a word, without any heat of love
or zeal in his soul. But why speak I of natural men? when as without the acting
of the spirit in our very regenerate estate, all our abilities to pray are
presently gone: as a wheel which is turned about with an hand, if the hand be
taken away, the wheel will soon stand still. Its necessary that unto the first
grace, following grace be added; man after he is regenerate, still needs the
present, effectual, conetinuall work of the spirit. Preventing grace is not
effectual, unless helped with a supply of second grace. It Is true even of the
regenerate, without me, ye can do nothing; God gives first the will, and then
the deed, and continuance of doing that which is truly good. Grace must be
every way grace, else it will be no grace at all. He that has begun a good
work in us, must also perfect it. Phil. 1.6. Oh how heavily do even saints draw
and drive, when they have sinned away the spirit of prayer! When saints have
yielded to sin, they are like a bird whose wings are besmeared with birdlime,
they cannot fly up to heaven. How lamely and miserably (I have sometime
thought) did David pray upon his murder and adultery! The fire which consumed
the burnt-offering came out from the Lord. Lev. 9.24.

2. 2. Obs.
How excellent and honorable a work is that of prayer! The whole Trinity has
a work in this holy exercise; the holy ghost frames our requests; The Son
offers them up to his Father; Rev. 8.3. with his incense the prayers of the
Saints are offered, he prays them (as it were) over again; and the Father
accepts these prayers thus framed and offered up.

3. As without the Spirit there is no prayer, 3. Obs.
so without prayer a man evidently shows himself to have nothing of the
spirit. Wherever the Spirit is, there will be praying in the spirit: if the
Spirit live in us, 'twill breath in us. God never (yet) had, nor ever will have
a dumb Child. They who are the Lords, will name him. 1 Timothy 2.19. They who are
saints, call upon Christ. 1 Cor. 1.2. Breathing is a true property of life. As
soon as ever Paul was converted, he prayed, Act. 9.11.

4. Obs. 4.
Needs must the prayers of the saints be acceptable They are by the holy Ghost,
his very groans, and by him our spirits are made to groan. Oration longius
vulnerat quam sagitta. Exodus 17.11.
Prayer prevails not only over Creatures, but even the very Creator
himself. One faithful man's prayer is more forcible then a whole army. There
is a shadow of omnipotency in prayer. It was said of Luther, he could do what
he would. Needs must that petition be granted, which the framer receives. The
Lord cannot more be out of love with prayer, then with his own will. Prayer is
but a kind of Counterpane or reflection of Gods own pleasure.

5. Obs. 5.
How good is God to his poor saints! He not only grants their prayers, but
makes their prayers. God does not only provide a gift, but an hand also to
take it with; not a feast only, but a stomach; both grace for the desire, and
the very grace of desire. Oh how sweet also are the Conditions of the Covenant
of grace! God bids us pray, and helps us to pray; Commands us duty, and enables
to perform it, gives work, wages, and strength.

6. Obs. 6.
Its our greatest wisdom to get and keep the Spirit. If either we never had
it, or lose it, we cannot pray. 1. It Is gotten in the ministry of the gospel.
The Spirit is peculiar to the Gospel, and not belonging to the law, if
considered alone by it self as a distinct Covenant; for so it gendereth only
to bondage. Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by hearing of
faith. q d. ye receved the spirit by hearing the gospel. 2 Cor. 3.8.
The gospel is called the ministration of the Spirit.

2. It Is kept by following his motions, and suggestions. Make much of his
presence; the Spirit is a delicate thing: grieve him not by negligence in using
his gifts, pride, Ephesians. 4.30.
eagerness after the world, sensuality, ungodly company, premeditated,
repeated sins, etc. If the Spirit be gone, thy best friend is gone. 'Twas
David's prayer, Take not thy holy spirit from me. Without the spirit, thou art
like lockless Samson, as another man: poor, weak Samson, when the Lord was
departed! thou art like a ship winde-bound. No stirring without the spirits
gales. Lord, what were my life if I could not pray! it would even be my burden;
and how can I pray without thy spirit? As a man cannot preach without external
mission so not pray without internal motion.

7. How happy are saints in all straits! Obs. Vlt.
they have the spirit to help them pray. There Is nothing but sin can drive or
keep away the spirit. Sufferings, prisons, banishments, etc. cannot: and have
thou the spirit, it is better, like Jonah, to be praying in a Whales belly, then
without the Spirit, to be devout in a gilded chapel. Suppose thy friends
cannot, will not visit thee, the Spirit is a guest that cannot be excluded.
Like Joseph, he delights to manifest himself to his, when all are gone out.
Holy Mr. Dod was wont to say, never despair of him who can but pray. Suppose
men cut out thy tongue, or stop thy mouth, they cannot hinder thee from praying
in the Spirit, because not the Spirit from praying in thee.

Ver. 21. Keep your selves in the Love of God; looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ to Eternal life.
THe fourth direction whereby the Apostle guides them to observe his exhortion
to contend for the Faith against seducers and seduction, is contained in these
words. Keep your selves in the Love of God. A very apt and suitable mean and
course for the foresaid end and purpose; for he that will be a friend to God,
can never be in love with error, which draws the soul away from God and his
truth.

Two particulars are here in this direction contained.

1. That thing about which the Christians were to be employed, or the object,
The love of God.

2. How they were to be employed about it, viz. By keeping themselves therein.
There Is the act.

EXPLICATION.
So that by way of Explication two things may be enquired after.

1. What the Apostle intends by the love of God. 2. What by keeping themselves
therein.
1. For the first, by the love of God, I here understand not that love whereby
God loves man, but that whereby man loves God, rests in him, and cleaves
to him as the most absolute good; of this both in respect of its several
kinds and properties, as also in several Observations I have very largely
spoken in my first part. Page. 124.136 148. etc. To avoid tediousness and
repetition, I shall refer to that place.

2. For the second, by keeping themselves in this Love, I understand
perseverance in the loving of God, or a preserving of the love of God in their
hearts, from all those things whereby they might be enticed to let it go and
part with it: and this preservation or keeping thereof stands in using those
means which God has ordained to preserve in us our Love toward him; which is
done by sundry 1. Considerations. 2. Pactises.
1. Considerations.
1. Of Gods Loveliness and soule-ravishing perfections, and his blessed
sutablenesse to our souls exigencies: Part 1. page 152.
when we know him to be a full good, as having all the scattered Excellencies
of all the world and all the persons and things therein, in himself, and
infinitely more; a filling good, and able to satisfy our desires to the brim.
2. By considering that he loves us, loved us first, and perseveres and rests in
his love. The more we walk in this sun, the hotter we shall be; nay were our
hearts as cold as stones, Zeph. 3* 17.
the sunshine of his love upon us should heat us with love toward him again.
Of this at large before part 1. page 152.153. 3. That every one of us keeps up
a love to something; the poorest of us has a love, and if not for God, for
that which is infinitely below him, yea which is unworthy of us. 4. That we
have nothing besides love to give him. 5. That he accepts of it, in stead of
all other things, seeks it, bespeaks it, Deuteronomy. 10.40. 6. That we always profess
we love him, and have chosen him. Josh. 24.12. 7. That its a greater dishonor
to him, to cease to love him, then never to have begun to love him at all. 8.
That the keeping of our selves in his love, is the true keeping of love to our
selves. Deuteronomy. 5.19. We are the gainers by loving him; we forsaking his love and
our own mercy at once.


2. By practices. As 1. By keeping our selves in a constant hatred of all sin.
As love to sin grows, love to God will decay. These are as two buckets, as the
one comes up, the other goes down. 2. By keeping our selves in the delight of
Gods friends, and favorers, who will ever be speaking well of him, and by
taking heed of those misrepresentations that sinners make of him and his ways.
3. By keeping our selves in the delight of the ordinances, wherein his glory
and beauty are displayed, and Communion with himself is enjoyed, and our love
is increased by these in exercising it. 4. By endeavoring for an holy
remissness in loving other things: when we love the world as always about to
leave and loath it. A soul weaned from these breasts, will only feed upon
Communion with, and the enjoyments of God. 1 John 2.15. If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. No outward object should be
further beloved then as it is either a pledge of Gods love to us, or an
incitement of ours to him: in short, nothing should be loved much, but only he
whom we cannot love too much 5. Lastly, by keeping up and increasing of
Brotherly love among our selves; for though the love of God be the cause which
makes us love our brethren, yet the love of our brethren is not only a sign,
but an excellent preservative of our loving of God. In every saint we may see
Gods image, he is Gods best picture, now though the love of a man makes us love
his picture: yet the often delightful looking upon his picture, continues and
inflames our love toward him; the fire of love to God will be extinguished, in
an heart cold and frozen to the saints; our love to God and the godly grow and
decay together; the Sun on the dyal moves though not so swiftly, yet according
to the proportion of its motion in the heavens: and so though our love to God
be more swift and intense, then that to the saints; yet this is proportioned to
that; without love to a brother we can have no assurance of Gods love to us,
nor any continuance of our love to God. He who has not the love of a brother
toward saints, cannot have the love of a son toward God.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. 1. Obs.
We are very ready to decay and grow remiss in our love to God. Keep your
selves (says Jude.) The word (...) keep, notes such a keeping as wherewith we
keep a prisoner, our gadding hearts should be kept with all diligence. Its hard
to get, and not easy to keep up our spiritual fervor. The love of most
grows cold; water grows cold of it self, but it gets heat from the fire, we
grow remiss of our selves; fervent from the Spirit. When we go from prayer,
Sacraments, hearing, though our hearts have been warmed, yet upon our going
into our worldly employments, we are ready soon to fall into a spiritual
chillness, as those whose heat having come outward, going into the sharp air,
are very ready to catch cold. A tender person had need to take heed of leaving
off any clothes, and our hearts upon leaving off of duty, are subject to abate
in the heat of their affections. God complains of those who had lost their
first love. Our hearts are like green wood, wherein fire cannot be kept without
continual blowing; Grace of it self is desectible, Rev. 2.4.
and without constant supplies of the Spirit, it would soon come to nothing. It
is only kept by the power of God. Parents will not trust their little children
to have their money in their own keeping. How had we need beg of God, to keep
this Jewel of love for us, and to preserve it from being stolen from us!

2. The lest things should be most carefully kept. Obs. 2.
Spiritualls are only worth the keeping; and indeed only can be kept. Men
cannot always either keep the world, or their love to it. Judas threw away his
30. pieces, and his love to them at the same time. There will come a time when
as we shall say, Eccles. 12.1.
we have no pleasure in these things. It Is good sometimes in a way of duty to
part with these things; for to be sure, we shall part with them in a way of
necessity. How poor is that man, who has no better a treasure then that which
is at the courtesy of the theif and moth! Oh how great is their folly who will
keep every thing but that which deserves their care: to lay up trash and
pibbles under lock and key, and to lay their gold and Jewels abroad in the
streets! If thou can keep thy God, thy love, be not troubled though thou
partest with thy gold.

3. Further, How great, how full a good is God! Obs. 3.
Even when we have him, and have had him never so long, he has enough within
him to draw forth fresh and fresh loves toward him. The more we love him, the
more we should love him. The glorious saints in heaven sing a new song, because
it is a song of love. It is new to them, and sweet, though they have been
singing it so many thousands of years. We soon grow weary of our worldly toys
after we have had them a while. As they are withering objects, so our delight
in them is a withering delight; they are fulsome, rather then delightful and
filling. It Is true profane Esau said, I have enough; and a saint says. I have
enough; but with as much difference are both these enoughs, as when one man
says, I have enough by taking a little fulsome Physic, and a thirsty man
says, I have enough, by drinking a sufficient draught of thirst-satisfying
water. Before worldly enjoyments are had, they seem beautiful, but when they
are once obtained, they soon clog the soul. Here is the excellency of
spiritualls, they sweetly fill and satisfy, and yet at the same time we ever
desire and hunger for more.

4. Obs. Vlt.
The preserving of our love to God is an excellent preservative against
Sectaries and false teachers. He who loves God, will fear to break the unity
and peace of the Church, Ephesians. 4.15.
also he will (...), follow the truth in love. Error comes from men's
affection; a cold corrupt suming, vapouring stomach makes an aching head. A
corrupt cold heart which wants the heat of love to God, makes an erroneous
head. And besides, God has bound himself to keep them from error and folly
who love him. If a man love and keep the commands and will of God, he shall
know his will. God never leaves them that will not leave him first. A man will
not forsake a friend, a lover. Sweet and suitable is that expression, Psalm.
91.14. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: and
Psalm. 145.20. Psalm. 119.132.
The Lord preserves all them that love him. Be merciful unto me (says David)
as thou usest to do to them that love thee. Though heresies and false teachers
come, yet these (as Paul speaks 1 Cor. 11.19.) shall but make those which are
approved to be manifest. They shall discover true love to God, not destroy it.
And fidelity will be the more apparent (like that of loyal subjects in times
of sedition) in the treachery of others. To conclude, this love is a
breast plate (as the Apostle calls it, 1 These. 5.8.) to repel all the darts of
error. Oh then what need have we to go abroad with this breast plate, in these
times wherein these deadly arrows fly so thick! And consider here the true
cause that so many are wounded with them. Christians want their breast plate,
their hearts are not kept, nor their love preserved for God.

The last direction which our Apostle prescribes, is contained in these words.
Looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life. An excellent
and suitable direction! The expectation of a reward in heaven, countervails and
sweetens all their labor and faithfulness in opposing the enemies of truth
upon earth; and withal keeps up their love to God, who commands their
resisting of error and seduction.

Two things are here principally contained. 1. A duty. The looking for the
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ: where he sets down, 1. What was to be regarded;
the mercy of Christ. 2. How it was to be regarded; by looking for it. 2 An
enducement encouraging to the performance of that duty; Eternal life.

EXPLICATION.
In the first branch, two things are to be explained, 1. What the Apostle
means, 1. By mercy. 2. The mercy of Christ.
2. What by Looking for it.


For the first, mercy. Gr. (...). I have very largely discoursed thereof Part.
1. page 92. on those words, Mercy to you. To avoid needless repetition, I only
say, that mercy as attributed to man is such a sympathy or compassion of heart
as enclines us to relieve the miserable.

But as attributed to God, and Christ (in glory, as here) it notes either, 1. A
gracious disposition or inclination to help and succor us in our distresses.
De Na. Dei. l. 4. c. 4. q 1,
As for sympathy and compassion, they are not (as learned Zanchy observes)
essential to mercy in self, but accidental to it, in regard of our present
state.) 2. The effects and expressions of mercy, or the actual helping of us
out of our distresses; and so God is said to have mercy on us, and show mercy
to us.

Now these effects of mercy, are either common or special. Common, such as are
afforded to all men and creatures. Psalm. 147.9. Luke 6.36. etc. Special,
bestowed upon the elect; who are the vessels of mercy, and who only have the
inward effects of mercy, in preventing and following grace; the outward, in
justifying and glorifying mercy bestowed upon them. And thus mercy is
principally to be taken in this place, and that peculiarly for those gracious
expressions and discoveries of mercy, which shall be shown toward the faithful in
acquitting and delivering them at Christ's second coming, or coming to judgment.
And this is called mercy in scripture, 2 Timothy 1.18. where the Apostle speaking
of Onesiphorus, prays that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. And
deservedly its so called. For,

1. It comes from the purpose and intention of free favor and good will. Joh.
6.39. This is the Fathers will that has sent me, that I should lose nothing,
etc. Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, it is your fathers good will to give
you the kingdom. The means and the end, the bestowing of grace and glory, are
both referred to the Fathers pleasure Election to this state was from free
grace. And in that regard the Elect are called vessels of mercy.

2. In it there are the greatest effects and discoveries of mercy. A removal of
all bad, sin, sorrow, tears, temptations; outward, inward, eternal evils. Woes
from our selves, other men, devils, God himself. A confluence of all good, of
perfect grace in the soul, glory on the body and soul. By it we enter into the
vision and fruition of the chiefest good, a supply of all exigencies. A
fullness of joy, Rivers, nay a fountain of pleasures. In one word, in this
respect, it is not so much a mercy, one mercy, as a bundle of mercies, and the
perfection and consummation of them all. Its called by the Apostle (...), the
mercy, that mercy, by way of excellency. God here had much mercy in his heart,
but his hands will be full of mercy at the coming of Christ.

3. Its mercy in respect its bestowed upon the miserable. Indeed the saints are
vessels of mercy, and in comparison of the reprobate, happy in this life; but
yet in comparison of the glorified they are miserable, and that in respect of
the remainders of sin in the soul, the frequent eclipses of Gods lightsome and
loving countenance, tentations from devils, opposition and persecution from a
cruel and unkind world; they are here in a valley of tears, surrounded with
shame, sicknesses, pains, losses, deaths. Their eyes run down with rivers of
tears, they are men of sorrow, yea sorrow is not only their condition but
their duty: but sorrow and sighing shall flee away, Luc. 17.7. (...). Arist.
pol. 1.^.4. Romans 8.17. Gal. 4.7. Romans 11.35. 1 Cor. 4.7. Phil. 2.13. Bonum opus
in quantum est naturae, est impuratum; in quantum gratiae, non est nostrum.
(...). Basil in Psalm. 14.
and all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, when this mercy comes.

4. Its mercy because bestowd upon those who could not merit and deserve it.
Romans 6.23. Eternal life is the gift of God. It could never be deserved by
doing nor suffering. The best men are unprofitable servants. Al our good is
either ipse, aut ab ipso, either God or from God; all we do is due debt, all
we receive is from free grace. Our very sufferings are not worthy of the glory
that shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. We are not purchasers, but heirs of
this happiness; our works as they are good, are not ours but Gods mere gifts,
as they are ours they are impure and imperfect. Besides, none can give any
thing to God equivalent to what he has already received, therefore he cannot
deserve that which he has not received. I am les^ (says Jacob) then the least
of thy mercies. What shall I render for them, says David. Genesis 32.10. Psalm.
116.12. There Is no proportion between a finite work and an infinite reward, a
reward no less then the infinite rewarder himself. Its the alone free grace
of this God whereby we come to partake of his glory.

2. But why is it the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ?

1. Its his, ratione meriti, he has purchased it by his merit. The obedience
of Christ was not only satisfactory, but meritorious, by reason of the
infiniteness of the person, there being an infinitely greater excess and
proportion of virtue in his obedience, then of malignity in our disobedience;
by virtue of which merit a purchase is made of this mercy, as well as there is
a removal made of our misery. Christ's merit at his first, procures mercy at
his second coming.

2 Its his, respectu praeparationis, he has prepared us for it, Parat
quodammodo mansiones, mansionibus parando mansores. Aug. Trac. 68. in Job.
by sending his Spirit into us to make us meet to partake of this mercy. He
has bestowed upon us the earnest of our inheritance, and the first fruits of
the Spirit, given us a part in the first resurrection. The heaven without us is
from his merit, the heaven within us from his Spirit.

3. It Is his, respectu donationis, of giving and exhibiting it at his coming.
It Is he who shall be the Judge to acquit the saints, that shall pronounce the
blessed sentence, Come ye blessed etc. that shall give his faithful soldiers
a Crown of righteousness at that day. 2. Tim. 4.7. That shall present us
faultlesse before the presence of glory Jude 24.

Secondly, first branch, we are to consider what is this looking for this
mercy? Gr. (...), noting properly an earnest receiving of it, or taking it to
us as some welcome guest or stranger whom we take in. A disposition commended
in and commanded to the saints. Tit. 2.13. (...), looking for that blessed
hope: and Christ commands his to be like men (...), Luke 12.36. Romans 16.2.
that look for their Lord. And this comprehends several particulars under it,
as

1. Meditation of this mercy. I may think of that which I do not look for,
but I cannot look for that of which I do not think.

The wife that looks for the return of her welcome husband, spends her
thoughts upon him; by this time (thinks she) he is come to such a place, to
night he lodges in such an house. The thoughts of saints run upon this mercy
of Christ. Heb. 11. Psalm. 39. 1 Pet. 1.
The reason why they are called strangers here, is, because they dwell so much
in their thoughts of another condition. Every saint is made to look upwards.
Beneficial and great things are much thought on. The covetous man thinks of
his treasure, the labourer of his hire, the prisoner of his enlargement, the
heir of his possession. And great things are greatly observed, and serious
matters seriously regarded. Trivial toys and enjoyments cannot hinder a saint
from the thoughts of this great mercy; yea all other things are but so many
steps to raise his meditation to it. Wicked men are bowed downward in their
contemplation, as in their condition. Saints are low in the latter, high in the
former. They are as unlike, as a piece of dirt, and a ball. Cast dirt upon the
earth, it lies still, cast a ball on it, and it rebounds upward.

2. Belief of this mercy. The looking for this mercy imports a groundednesse of
expectation. A saint looks for nothing without the foundation of a promise.
Faith certainly lays hold on that certain word; Heb. 6.11.19.
and hence hope has such a certainty as never makes us ashamed. There Is a full
assurance of hope, called therefore the sure and steadfast anchor of the soul.
This expectation is not overcome by humane sense and reason, Heb. 11.1.
but climbs above them. Faith gives a reality to things not seen. This looking
is for that which is clean contrary to sense. Its an hope above hope: they who
have it, see the mercy of Christ's coming even through a cloud of sin and
misery, and look at things within the veil. Heb. 6.19.


3. Ardent desires after this mercy. This looking for it, implies the
welcomness and acceptableness of it; and its a looking for mercy. Saints are
both said to be lookers for, and lovers of it. 2 Timothy 4.8. they are sick of
love to it. The Bride says, Come, Rev. 22.21. Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly,
shuts up the scripture, and sums up the churches wishes. Rev. ult. There Is a
grief for his absence, and a groaning desire after his presence. Romans 8.23. We
sigh in our selves, waiting, etc. as no worldly difficulty can disappoint so no
worldly enjoyment can bribe the souls desires A Saint with Abraham, stands at
his tent door, or with Sisera's mother, 2 Pe^. 3, 12,
looks out of the window, and says, why is his chariot so long a coming? It
hastes. We cannot thus look for Christ, unless we love him. 2 These. 3.5. the
devils and the wicked have a fearful, the faithful a longing looking for
Christ.

4. It imports patience of expectation. The faithful will stay Gods leisure
for his dole of mercy, as beggars at a door that continue there till there be
leisure to serve them. They make not have, Isa. 28.16. Though they dwell in an
unkind world, and among them that hate peace. Though they are wounded with
crosses, yet they say with Augustine, Lord, here burn, wound, cut, the mercy
of Christ makes amends for all. Though they are environed with a body of death,
and had infinitely rather (if God pleased) change a necessity of sinning for a
necessity of obeying, yet they contentedly think Gods time is the best for
removing, though the worst of evils. Their patience concocts their miseries,
and their empty stomaks keep them from being sick, though in a wide and stormy
sea. Romans 8.21.
Through faith and patience they inherit the promises, Heb. 6.12. This looking
for the Spirit of Christ, is, 2 These. 3.5. called (...), patience it self.
Mercy must not be bestowed, nay 'twill be no mercy, if patience be not tried.
Certainty countervails all delays.

5. This looking conteins in it a joyful expectation of that great good for
which we look. Though the deferring makes the heart sad and sick; yet the
expecting thereof makes the heart glad and cheerful. We rejoice under the hope
of the glory of God, Romans 5.2 In whom believing, we rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory. 1 Pet, 1.8. If Abraham looking for the day of
Christ's humility, two thousand years before, rejoiced; must not believers
needs rejoice in looking for the day of his and their own glory approaching so
near, it being now (as it were) the last minute of the last hour before the
day of our marriage, redemption, coronation?

6. It notes prudent vigilance; what we look for, we watch for; when we look
either for friend or foe, we keep our selves waking. Hence Luke, Luke 12.36,
37. makes this looking and watching all one. They who look for an Enemy will
watch to prevent his coming (as Christ speaks of the theif.) They who look for
a friend, will watch to welcome and entertain him. All who look for mercy,
labor to be found in peace, they look up as watchmen upon their Tower, they
keep their loins girt and they are in the posture of servants expecting their
Lord, they are afraid of surfets and sleeping by worldly pleasures They who
reach after this mercy must let worldly trifles fall out of their hand. 2 Pet.
3.11.
The better the mercy to be enjoyed is, the fitter we should be to receive. A
prepared mercy suits not with an unprepared heart. Every day to a saint should
be as his last. And of every one he should say, art thou the last, or look I
for another? Am I now in a meet posture to receive the mercy of Christ?

To shut up this, it is not strange that Jude enjoins these Saints to look for
this mercy of Christ, considering the sutablenes of this exhortation to the
persons exhorted, who 1. are Saints, such as have the spirit, which says Come,
whose motions are upward, who are begotten again to this lively hope, who (as
they are men) look upward with their faces, so (as they are Saints and new
men,) look upward with their spirits, and wait for Christ from heaven, 1 These.
1.10. and love his appearance, 2. Tim. 4.8. Such as are like the young ones of
the fouls of heaven, who though they may be hatched under a hens wing, yet
being grown, they presently fly abroad. The Saints are born, and for a time
live in the world, yet they soon show that they are not of this world, who 2.
also were so opposed and tempted by seducers, that looking for the Crown of
life was little enough to make them constant to the death. 2. Considering for
whom they were to look, their Master, their Husband, Head, their Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ. 3. Considering for what they looked, mercy, to be bestowed
at a time when they should want it most, even at Christ's coming, when nothing
else will help. Lastly, considering the great beneficialnesse of this mercy, it
was such a mercy whereby they should be possessed of eternal life. Which is the
second branch to be opened.

2. inducement encouraging to the duty of looking for the mercy of Christ. It
was a mercy whereby they should be brought to eternal life. Of this, though
we shall enjoy it so much, yet can we speak but little. Under two words,
eternal life, the Scripture frequently sets forth the state of the Saints of
heaven; which for its blessedness is c^lled life, and for its durablenesse
eternal.

1. Life. There is a threefold Life. 1. Natural, consisting in the conjunction
of the body and soul. 2. Spiritual, (which is eternal life begun) in respect
of grace, here. 3. Eternal life, in respect of glory hereafter, whereby is
understood all the happiness to be enjoyed in heaven. As under the word death,
(the greatest of evils) are comprehended all the miseries inflicted for sin,
in this and the next state: so in that of life (of all things the most
precious, and the most set by) are contained all the blessings to be enjoyed
here and hereafter; but because our happiness cannot be perfect and consummat,
til we come to heaven, that condition is principally and frequently called
life. Which life stands in our immediate communion with God in an unitive
vision, or in seeing and enjoying him. Mat. 5.8. 1 Jo. 3.2. Psalm. 16. ult. etc.
Heaven is a low thing without God (says Angustin.) Whatever is less then
himself, is less then our desires. In him is contained infinitely more then
either we want, or all other things in the world, have: his presence shall be
our life, and (as it were) enliven all things else, which without him (as here
they are, so) there would be dead things. In the immediate, full and perfect,
(not in respect of the object but subject) uninterrupted, reflexive, unmixed,
enjoyment of this God, stands life.

2. Which in respect of its duration is called eternal; as never to be
interrupted, and intermitted, so without any end or amission: and indeed, this
it is which makes all the enjoyments of heaven to be truly such, and as the
faggot-band whereby all the particular parcells of happiness are bound and
tied together, and without which they would be all scattered and lost.
Frequently is the life of glory said to be eternal. Joh 3.15.8.51.11.25. etc.
pleasures for ever more, a treasure in the heaven that fails not. Luke 12.33.
Extra jactum fortunae. Extra periculum jacturae.
an eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17. a treasure beyond the reach of
thief and moth, etc. God the fountain and treasury of life can never be
exhaust. The saints can never be willing to part with this God. Enemies shall
never be able to separate them. A complete happiness, to be truly and
necessarily happy also!

OBSERVATIONS. [From the whole part.]
1. Obs. 1. The hope of salvation is an helmet to keep off tentations to sin.
Ephesians. 6.8.
The looking for the mercy of Christ quickens us in our course of Christianity.
The Apostle directs them to contend for the faith by looking for the mercy of
our Lord Jesus etc. 1. It purges the heart from fin, Whosoever has this hope,
purifieth himself, 1 John 3.3* He who looks for Christ, looks to be like
him, and therefore he conformes himself to Christ in purity. He who looks for
great revenues within a few years, will not cut off his hopes, We may say of
sinners, as of some men who are adventurous in the world; they have no thing to
lose.
but rather remove impediments. The looking for mercy, and the living in sin
cannot stand together. The love of sin is the confutation of our hopes. 2. The
looking for this mercy damps our affections to the things of the world. He who
beholds the glorious sunshine of Christ's appearance has his eyes so dazzled,
that he can behold no beauty in any thing besides. He is like Jacob, who when
he was to go to a rich Egypt and a dear Joseph, was not to regard his stuff.
Earthly objects, which to earthly minds seem glorious, 2 Cor. 4.16.
to be a believer have no glory, by reason of that glory which excels.
Though Jezabel paints her face, he throws her down, and treads her under foot.

3. It makes us conscientious in holy duties. Paul charge Timothy to keep the
command without spot, by an argument drawn from Christ's appearance; and upon
this ground, of looking for a reward from the chief Shepherd, Peter warns the
Elders to feed the flock. As we cannot conceive what manner of mercy (for its
glory) it is which we look for, so neither can we express what manner of
persons we should be, 1 Cor. 15.58.
or what manner of performances ours should be for holiness. What manner of
persons (says the Apostle) ought we to be? 2 Pet. 3.11.

4. It engages to patience under every difficulty and distress. Behold I come
quickly, hold fast that thou have. Rev. 3.11. Thus. 1 John 2.28. Little
children, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have confidence etc.
Non sunt condigna passiones ad cul. pam quae remittitur, ad gratia^ qua
immittitur, ad gloriam qua promittitur.
He who beholds a Kingdom appointed for him, will abide with Christ in his
tentations. The drawing nigh of the Lords coming, is the Apostles ground of
patience. Jam. 5.8. and 2 These. 1.6, 7. John Hus and Jerome of Prague appealed
from the unjust sentences of men, to the righteous judgment of Christ. This
days misery, is not worthy of that days mercy. Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. No
more comparable with it, then is the uncovering of the head, a trouble
comparable to the honor of receiving a crown. 1 Samuel 10. ult.
Saul held his peace, though he were despised, because he was King. How easily
should our sea of honey swallow up our drop of vinegar! Though godliness
brings sufferings, yet it affords encouragements; like Egypt which though it
were full of poisonous creatures, yet full of Antidotes. The reason why we are
cast away in tempests, is for want of this anchor of hope of the mercy of
Christ. Let then (O Christians) the looking for this mercy, engage you to duty.
Remember such mercy to be received, deserves better services to be performed.
Psalm. 36.5.
As Gods mercy and faithfulness are put together, so let not his mercy and our
faithfulness be severed. Brethren, if any shame could befall the Saints at
the day of judgment, it would be for this, that they who have done so little
on earth for God, should receive so much in heaven from God.

Mercy.] Its mercy, not merit, Obs. 2.
that must stand us in stead at the last day. Of this largely, page 100. Part.
1. as also to this part may be reduced, Page 101, 102, 103, 104, 105. Obs. 3.
the six Observations there handled concerning Gods mercy.

Of our Lord Jesus Christ.] How much are they mistaken who expect mercy, and
yet have no interest in Christ! It Is the mercy of Christ. Christlesse persons,
are merciless persons, merciless in respect they show no mercy, and
merciless because they receive no mercy; true saving mercy is derived from God
through Christ. He has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ. God
in himself is a full fountain, verse 3.
but in his Son he only is an overflowing fountain of mercy. He who is in
Christ a God of mercy, is in himself a God of wrath. It was a saying of
Luther, Let me have nothing to do with a God in himself. Nolo Deum absolutum.
Luther.
We are only accepted in the Son of his love. Its his blood which only
quenches the fire of his Fathers wrath. As soon may thou extract water out
of a consuming fire, as a drop of mercy out of an unreconciled majesty. Say not
then (poor ignorant sinner) he that made me, will save me, God is a merciful
God. What mercy for him who despises mercy, by refusing Christ? Think not with
a fawning presumption to say God is my God. I tell thee, he is only so thy
God, as that he is also thy Judge.

They who have Christ for theirs, 4. Obs. Turbabor, non perturbabor quia
vulneram Christi recordabor.
cannot be under wrath. Their portion is mercy, In all conditions, they meet
with mercy. It Is mercy when it is misery; ^et their straits, poverty, disgraces,
death, judgment come, it is all mercy. The day of judgment shall be to them a
day of mercy; Aug.
nay therefore a day of mercy, because a day of judgment, for God shall be
most just in showing them that mercy which by Christ is so dearly purchased. So
that even as they may appeal from the justice of God to his mercy, so may they
(in a sort) expect mercy from his justice. How willingly then may Saints submit
to every divine though smart dispensation! God may be severe, never unmercifull
toward them. There Is not a drop of wrath in a sea of their sufferings. If God
scourge them, it is in mercy. Oh how great is the difference between an
Executioners axe, and a Fathers rod!

5. Obs. 5.
Its our wisdom to be made fit to look for the mercy of Christ, Of this, see
Part 1. page 543, 544. etc.

6. Obs. Vlt.
Its our duty to be quickened in looking for this mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Its certainty, greatness, speediness, are all motives, of which at
large before Part. 1. page 536, 537. etc. 545, 546.

Ver. 22, 23. And of some have compassion, making a difference; 23. And others
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire: hating even the garment spotted
by the flesh.
WE have handled the first sort of directions, guiding these Christians how to
contend for the faith, viz. such as chiefly concern themselves.

The directions of the second sort, viz: such as concern their carriage toward
others, are contained in these two verses, wherein the Christians are directed
to the using of a different deportment and carriage toward the different
delinquents which were among the seduced for their recovery.

The first kind of deportment and carriage, is that of Christian lenity and
gentleness toward some, in the 22. ver.

The second is that of holy austerity and severity toward others, ver. 23.

Their carriage of Christian gentleness toward some, is enjoined, 1. More
generally. by setting down the thing to be done. viz. their showing of
compassion, 2. More particularly how they should extend their compassion, in
way of making a difference between offenders.

EXPLICATION.
Two things then are here briefly to be explained.

1. What Jude intends by having compassion of some.

2. What by making a difference.

1. For the first, Have compassion. Gr. (...). Vulg. (...), arguite.
By compassion here we must not only understand inward sympathy, no nor yet
only inclination to help the miserable, but principally the expressing both
these by outward real tokens and effects of mercy; and here more particularly
these expressions were to be put forth toward those who were such of the
seduced followers of these ungodly seducers, of whose recovery the Saints had
most hope.

Not that the Apostle exhorts the Christians by a preposterous patience,
either, 1. To wink at and dissemble their sins and errors, and silently to
forbear the discovering of them to the offenders. Silence in a reprover was by
Luther called an irremissible sin, and the greatest hatred to the offender: and
if sin be bold, reprehension must not be bashful. Or, 2. (much less) to
sooth and flatter sinners in their errors and impieties. A wickedness which is
in scripture frequently charged upon, and reproved in false Prophets, Isa.
58.1. Ezekiel. 3.17, etc.
and the contrary duty of faithful and upright reprehension is both commanded
and encouraged. Lift up thy voice, show my people their transgressions, and the
house of Jacob their sin, and Prove. 20.23. He that rebukes a man, afterward
shall find more favor then he who flattereth with his tongue.

But by this showing of compassion toward some offenders, he intends an
endeavor in convincing of, and reproving for sin, to reduce them from their
falls and follies, in a mild, gentle, meek manner, and a mixing or seasoning
all the means used for their reduction and repentance, with Christian
gentleness and sweetness, so as the offender may not be swallowed up of grief
and despair. The same counsel is given by Paul, Gal. 6. namely, of restoring a
fallen brother in the spirit of meekness, and 2 Timothy 2.25. of instructing those
who oppose themselves, in meekness. In the former place Paul bids them (...),
restore such an one, etc. the word fignifying to set a joint or bone that is
broken, to show the care and skill of him who undertakes the employment of a
reprover. Sinful severity is too ready to creep into and corrupt the duty of
reprehension. Commonly men are either too remiss if thy endeavor gentleness,
or too austere, if labor for faithfulness. But it must be with a reprover as
with a Chirurgian, who binds not up the wound either duriter or segniter, Nec
duriter, nec segniter.
either too slack or too hard; This Christian gentleness shows it self toward
the offender in restoring him, several ways. 1. Buy porpounding a reproof in
our own person, and declaring how great a sin it would have been for our
selves to have done thus or thus. So Paul 2 Cor. 4.6. These things (says he) I
have in a figure transferred to my self and to Apollo for your sakes, that by
this wise way, he might reprove them and their teachers in making of sects and
factions. 2. By conveying the sharpest reproofs in sweet and gentle words, and
accompanying them with courteous carriage. The pill of a reprehension is to be
gilded and sugared over with gentleness: soft words do best with strong
arguments. The iron of Napthalies foot was dipped in oil. 3. By conveying the
reproof in a parable, as Nathan did in his convincing David of his sin. Who
hereby was made his own judge, and spared the Prophet the unpleasing pains of
a large application. 4. By persuading the reprehended of our love to their
persons, and convincing them that it is not the person who has sinned, but the
sin of the person which we strike at. A man will take any thing from one that
loves him. A Surgeon we will not strike, though he cut us deep, whereas we
will not endure half those wounds from a murderer, without returning stroke for
stroke. 5. By mixing hopes of pardon with the severest reprehensions and
denunciations. When God had humbled Adam, he concludes with the promise of the
seed of the woman. Thus Joseph dealt with his brethren when he had humbled
them. Thus Nathan with David. The needle of the law is but to make way for the
thread of the Gospel, and the most legal reprehension must be uttered with an
Evangelicall purpose and intention.

For the second, putting a difference, (...). The word having several readings
and significations, is differently rendered by interpreters The vulgar Latin
reading the place (...), interprets it, arguite judicatos, reprove them as
being judged, without hope of recovery (it making the Apostle to speak of the
openly and incorrigibly wicked) and so Beza says he found it in three Greek
copies: But this is overthrown by comparing this with the next exhortation.
But others save with fear, etc. the opposition is destroyed by this exposition.
Others reading (also) (...), though they hold to (...), yet interpret it,
arguite judicati, reprove some while ye are judged; that is, faithfully
admonish them, though they condemn and censure you; but since the word (...),
may signify discerning or putting a difference, and this signification is most
suitable to the Apostles scope, which is wisely to direct them to discern
between offender and offender: and since the word (...), is of a middle
signification, and may be as well taken actively as passively, I therefore
doubt not but it is most aptly rendered by reverend Beza, Or dijudican^es.
habito delectu, putting a difference, that is between those who are more
gently, and those who are more severely to dealt with, by reason of their
several demerits, and dispositions. etc.

More particularly, this putting of a difference between some and others, is
considerable in two respects.

1. In respect of the parties offending. 2. In the way of their offending.
1 For the parties. 1. Difference is to be put between Magistrates in public
authority, and private persons: In the reproving of the former more prudence
and caution is required, their authority being to be honored, when their
faults are reprehended. Of this see more, Part. 2. page 152. Difference is to
be put between those of more soft, tender, and humble dispositions, and those
who are more rugged and pertinacious. A Venice-glasse is not to be rubbed so
hard as an iron or brasse-vessel. A word will do more with some then a blow
will do with another. A gentle admonition will be more prevalent with one, then
a dreadful commination will be with another. The reed will be more easily
bowed then the sturdy oak. The fitches are not threshed with a threshing
instrument, neither is the Cart-wheel turned about upon the Cummin, but the
fitches are beaten with a staff, and the Cummin with a rod, Isa. 28.27.3.
Difference is to put between those of nearer relation to us, and others. Snakes
or Foxes I will destroy in my own and my neighbors garden, but with more
hatred and indignation in my own then in his. Sinners in mine own family, my
own servants, children, relations, I should oppose, and reprove for sin with
more zeal then another. By how much an enemy is nearer to me, by so much the
more sharp is the conflict with him.

2. In the way of their offending, 1. Some offend, either in judgment, or
practice, of ignorance, blind zeal, as the Jews who had the zeal of God, but
not according to knowledge To. 10.2. Paul persecuted the Church of God
ignorantly. Others of malice and obstinacy, who know they offend, and yet
persist. Between these a great difference is to be put, Tit. 3.10. Philip.
3.15. Some of simple ignorance, who have not the means of knowledge; others of
wilful and affected ignorance, who are willingly ignorant, and refuse the
means of knowledge. 2. Some offend secretly, and so the scandal is the smaller,
the offense being known but to few, happily but to one. Others sin publicly,
and the sun is a blushing beholder of their enormities, and they are observed
by all. If the offense be private, First admonish the party between thee and
him, If he hear thee not, tell the Church. If he offend publicly, he must (for
preventing the like in others) be openly reproved, 1 Timothy 5.20. The plaster
must be as broad as the sore. 3. Some sin of infirmity, overborn by the
violence of sudden passion; others of premeditated, contrived forecast. The
latter is to be more humbled. The one fell by a slip and trip (as it were) the
other lay down, yea made his bed (as easy as he could) before. 4. Some have
fallen but once, it is the first fault, the first time they were overtaken;
others live in and practice sin, as their trade, their element. Gentle
physic will serve for a begun distemper, a chronicall disease is cured more
hardly and harshly. 5. Some are Leaders and captains in wickedness, happily,
heresiarchs, and masters, and authors of heresy, the contrivers and commanders
of impiety; others are poor misled seduced souls, like Absaloms followers: now
the heads of treason and conspiracies are most severely punished, Mark them who
cause division. Romans 16.17.6. Lastly, some offend in matters of highest and
most vast importance. Happily their error is fundamental, as Papists in
justification by works, Idol worship etc. possibly their practice has been
bloody, their offense adultery, incest etc. others offend in matters not of so
high a nature, as happily in an error disciplinary, or if in doctrine, not
overturning the foundation, but building of hay and stubble upon it. All sins
want an equal price and merit for satisfaction, but not an equal severity in
our reprehension.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
Those duties which seem most opposite must be reconciled in our practice.
Holy mourning, and rejoyceing, love and hatred, holy anger and meekness,
zeal, and Compassion. Job was holily both patient and impatient. Patient under
his crosses, Impatient against the sinful counsel of his wife. Moses was the
meekest man, and yet eminent for zeal; when he was with God, he prayed for the
people; when with the people, he pleaded even with the sword for God. Holy
duties never interfere among themselves. Causam populi apud Deum precibus;
causam Dei apud populum gladiis allegavit. Greg.
In vain do men pretend the distance of the Commands, as if they could not be
brought together. Holiness never destroys holiness. There Is a Connection
between every duty. The faithful prefer not one duty before another; but are
uniforme in observing the Commands.

2. 2. Obs. Col. 3.12.
Compassion is most suitable to a Christian. They have obtained mercy, they are
elect of God, and put on bowels of mercy. They are peculiarly commanded to be
merciful from the pattern of Gods mercy. Luke 6.36. to sympathize with others
in their afflictions. 1 Pet. 3.8. Christ and all the saints are herein our
copy. Jer. 9.1. Mat. 9.36. Luke 19.41. 2 Cor. 11.29. Grace dryes not up, but
diverts the stream of our affections. Holy men have ever been most tender
hearted. Insensiblenesse of others miseries is neither suitable to us as men or
Christians. According to the former we are the same with others, according to
the latter, grace has made the difference. If Christians be hardhearted who
should be soft and tender?

3. The souls of people are true objects of mercy. No misery is so great as
that of souls: Obs. 3.
they who are spiritually miserable cannot pity themselves, though their words
speak not, yet their woes do. We weep over a body from which the soul is
departed, and shall we not do so, much more over a soul from which God is
departed? What in this world is so noble, excellent, precious as the soul? We
pity not so much a baseborn beggar in his distresses, but when we behold some
high borne Prince brought to beggary, how do our bowels yearn! The soul is
heaven-borne, noble in regard of its original and endowments. Oh weep to think
that hell should have such excellent furniture as precious souls; that these
who are, Acts 20.
or rather were once so high, should fall so low. I wonder not at Paul's
industry, entreaties, wooings, 2 Timothy 2.
solicitations in doing good to souls, his advice to Timothy to be instant in
season, and out of season, to exhort etc. Paul was an excellent Orator, and all
his oratory was to woe and win upon souls, and to persuade men to be saved.
Never did malefactor so plead for his own life, as did Paul plead with men to
accept of life. Though the more he loved, the less he was beloved, though the
more he sued to people, the more he suffered from them, yet he patiently
suffered all this for the Elects sake. He labors abundantly. He becomes all
things to all men, that he might by all means save some. 1 Cor. 9.22, 2. Cor.
10.1. Ephesians. 4.1, Romans 12.1. 2 These. 2.1.
He besieges souls with beseechings, throughout all his Epistles. Its
impossible to be too importunate with souls. Even impudency here is holy.
Courtesy must veil to Christianity.

4. Obs. 4.
Compassion is not to be denied to the fallen, as if there were no hope of their
restitution and salvation. Paul commands that they should be restored who are
overtaken with a sin. Gal. 6.1.
As the best of saints have sometimes fallen, so they have also been raised, and
afterward better then ever before; He who does but stumble, gets ground by his
stumbling. Jonah, Peter and David stumbled, yea, fell foully, but they were
raised, and received, and afterward were more holy and watchful then ever
before. And although Christ says that whosoever shall deny me before men shall
be denied before my Father etc. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
yet this is meant of a total and final denial: and although a wilful,
malicious, universal renouncing of the known truth admit of no sacrifice for
sin, yet the gospel excludes none from pardon, that can be humbled, and
sincerely sorrowful for their falls. Greatly therefore did the Novatians err,
in teaching that sins committed after Conversion, are unpardonable. Christian
meekness must, as wholly restrain unjust, so temper even just anger; our zeal
must not transgress its due limits. We live not among the perfect, but such as
are subject to many slips. And we have frequent want of Gods meekness and
gentleness toward us in our daily falls and follies. Considering what we both
have been, and may again be; we should pity the fallen. If two travelers fall
into a deep ditch, the one being helped out, must not deny help to the other.

5. Obs. 5.
Wisdom is requisite in every one that would recover a fallen brother. There
must be a wise discerning between offender and offender. The setting of a soul
in joint is a point of skill and dexterity. It is not for every horseleach to
meddle with this art. Every unskilful workman is not to tamper with men's
souls. The Apostle puts those that are spiritual, Gal. 6.1. upon this
employment such as had received a greater portion of the graces of the Spirit,
1 Cor. 14.37.
and were stronger then others. He who speaks a word to the weary, Philip. 3.13
must have the tongue of the spiritually learned. The wisest course must be
chosen for recovering of the fallen. The Physician administers not the same
medicine to every patient, but he varies his prescriptions according to the
nature of the disease, or the constitution of the diseased. Oh that Christians
would employ their wisdoms for God: we see how wise men are to damn and undo
their souls, and how witty seducers are to mislead others into sin and error;
why should not Christians then study the heavenly art of saving and delivering
the souls of others?

The gifts of God are not bestowed upon us for our selves alone, but for the
good of others. Obs. 6.
Every Private Christian (in some sort) should be a public good. The
possession of our gifts belongs to us, but the use of them to others also. No
Christian is a treasurer, but a steward of Gods gifts. The more spiritual any
man is, the more he is bound to restore others. The hotter the Sun shines upon
the wall, the more it warmes the passenger. The more mercy has relieved thee,
the greater obligation lies upon thee to relieve others. As any man has
received the gift, so let him minister unto others 1 Pet. 4.10. It Is not the
having of good in us, but the doing of good by us, that makes us called good.

2. others more obstinate and pertinacious sinnesrs, namely, with holy
severity, In these words, And others save with fear, pulling them out of the
fire, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.

The words consist of two parts.

1. A duty enjoined. To save others with fear.

2. The manner of performing it.

1. Vehemently and earnestly, pulling them out of the fire. 2. Vigilantly and
warily, hating even the garment spotted, etc.
1. For the first, The duty, others save with fear.

EXPLICATION
1. What intends the Apostle by these others.

2. What by saving?

3. What by saving them with fear.

1. For the first, by others, he means those who were to be looked upon as
unlike to those of whom he had spoken in the foregoing part, that were to be
dealt with in a way of Christian compassion. This is clear by the adversative
expression (...), and, or rather but. So that as those of whom they were to
have compassion, were of the more hopeful and corrigible sort, who had happily
fallen out of ignorance, infirmity, or blind zeal; so these others were such as
were more obstinate and stubborn in their sin and errors, and who did more
knowingly and maliciously offend; and by this indefinite expression others, he
intends those more hateful sinners of any rank or degree whatsoever, high or
low, rich or poor, there being no sinful respect of persons to be had, in this
terrifying them from their accursed impieties.

2. save these others, that is, to deliver them from that sin into which they
had fallen, and destruction into which they were falling; saving is in
Scripture attributed 1 To God. 2. To Christ. 3. To men. 1. To God, who is the
supreme author of our safety and deliverance, by whose proper power we are made
safe from evils, either in respect of Common salvation or preservation afforded
to all men, or of peculiar salvation bestowed upon those who believe. According
to that of 1 Timothy 4.10. He is the Savior of all men, especially those who
believe.

2. To Christ, who is called a Savior. Luke 2.11. Matthew. 1.21. The only
Savior, Act. 4.12. a strong sufficient Savior, a horn of salvation, able to
the utmost to save. And that both by delivering by his merit and spirit, from
the condemning and destroying, as also from the reigning and defiling power of
all our spiritual enemies.

3. To men. Who are frequently in scripture said to save, and to be Saviors.
Obad. 21. Saviors shall come upon mount Sion. 1 Cor. 7.16. How know thou O
man, whether thou shall save thy wife? 1 Timothy 4.16. Thou shall save thy self
and them that hear thee, etc. Jam. 5.20. Not as if men were the authors of our
salvation, but instruments and subordinate helps and means appointed by God to
serve his providence in the saving of themselves or others, whether from bodily
or spiritual enemies. Words proper to the supreme cause, being thus in
Scripture attributed to the instrument, who though he be by God appointed to
use the severest means toward any, yet all is to be done in order to their
salvation and recovery, 1 Cor. 5.5. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. Tit 1.23. The most sharp
and cutting reproofs are to be used that the reproved may be sound in the
faith.

3. He directs to the saving of these others with fear, Gr. (...). terrifying
of them, or making them afraid of continuing in their sin, lest they fall into
destruction of soul and body. So that hereby the Apostle intends the using
Christian severity toward these others, as by showing compassion, he directed
them to use Christian lenity and gentleness toward the former. For though Jude
intends not that these to whom he wrote should put forth or exercise ways of
terror in a civil or earthly respect, by corporal punishments, (in which
regard the Magistrate is called a terror to evil works, Romans 13.3.) yet
spiritually, and by using spiritual means, and for the saving of the Spirit,
he directs them to terrify these offenders; and this may be done two ways:
either, 1. By charitative, or, 2. By authoritative means. 1. Charitatively, or
in a way of Christian charity, and thus one Christian is bound to terrify
another from sin, and not to suffer him without reproof and denunciation of
Gods judgments to go on in any way of wickedness. And this (though)
severity, is a token of love, and the refraining from it interpreted by the
Spirit of God to be hatred. Levit. 19. Thou shall not hate thy brother.

2. Authoritatively, or by those whom God has put into office for this end
(among others) to reduce offenders, and save them by fear. And this
authoritative affrighting from sin is double: 1. Doctrinall. 2. Disciplinary.

The Doctrinall, is put forth three ways.

1. By information, and clear discovering of the nature of sin in it self, and
showing the difference between good and evil, and the hatefulness of sin both
in its nature and effects. For want of this knowledge many a soul has
perish't.

2. By application and conviction, and bringing home the sin to the conscience
of the offender. Thus Nathan, Thou (says he to David) art the man. Thus Peter
to those Converts, Him (meaning Christ) ye have taken and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain. Thus also Stephen, Acts 7.51. Ye do always resist the
holy Ghost. Isa. 58.1.
Thus God bids the Prophet to tell the people of their transgression. Ministers
must not be like fencers, who so strike every where, that indeed they strike no
where; but the two edged sword of the word they must sheath in the bowels of
sinners, and lay the deformed brat of sin at the right door, and so must we
preach, that in our Ministry the Spirit may convince of sin. Joh. 16.8.

3. By Commination and denouncing of punishments for sin, that so by hearing
them men may not feel them. Offenders must be warned of the wrath to come.
Knowing the terror of the Lord, we warn men. Thus frequently the Prophets
denounced judgments against sinners. Woe unto them.
Of this largely before part 2. page 153, 154.

2. There is a disciplinary affrighting from sin. Consisting 1. in solemn and
particular admonition of a party offending, with a declaration of judgment
against him in case of obstinacy. Mat. 18.
A sinner is first to hear this from the Church. 2. Suspension from the Lords
Supper, and denying the pledges of grace to the wicked as unworthy of them. How
should the child be ashamed, who is debarred from sitting at his fathers table
with the rest of his brethren! How can he think himself fit to partake of
benefits signified in the Sacrament, to sit down in the Kingdom of glory, who
is duly excluded from participating of the signs thereof in the Kingdom of
grace! 1 Cor. 5.5. Mat. 18.17. 1 Timothy 1.20.
Of this before largely part 2. page 3. Excommunication, whereby obstinate
sinners are cast out of the Church, and delivered up to Satan, and accounted as
heathens, and reckoned among the number of Satan's servants, who rules in the
world, and therefore to have him hereafter pay them their wages.

2. OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
Others.] We must be careful to save others as well as our selves. No man
should be willing to be saved alone. A Christian should not be a Cain; We are
neither born the first, nor second time for our selves.
he is in a sort his brothers keeper. Nor are the Ministers solely the watchers
over, or saviors of their people. In many cases every sheep is to be a
shepherd. Hence those exhortations of provoking one another, Heb. 10.24.
Looking diligently lest any of you fail of the grace of God. Heb. 12.15.
Exhorting one another. Salvation is large enough for our selves and others. If
Gods eye be good, ours should not be evil. The doing good to others souls is
encouraged, Jam. 5.20. And rewarded, Dan. 12.3. Its the nature of grace to
propagate it self. The Spirit appeared in the likeness of fiery tongues, and
both fire and tongues are very communicative; the one of it* self and heat,
the other of sound and voice. Our relations of Brethren, fellow members, etc.
call for this expression of love. Yea the contrary practice of sinners who
damn and defile one another souls, may put us upon this duty. How great then
is their sin who destroy the souls of others, by error and seduction, and
ungodly example? etc. who watch over others for evil, and to make proselites
for hell, who are factors for Satan, and agents for that Prince of darkness!
If their own sin and damnation will be so heavy a burden, what will other men's
sins and damnations also be to them in hell! O what a holy covetousness
should be in every Saint to propagate holiness and leven others with grace in
the world! Oh pray, Lord let hell never be the fuller for me or mine, but
heaven for both! In respect of the privilege of saving of souls (its by some
said) that saints on earth excel the very glorified in heaven.

2. Obs. 2.
Others,] Necessity should be the mother of severity. Others, i. e. they who
will be by no other means reclaimed, upon whom compassion will not work, must
be saved by fear. First gentle means must be used, severe afterward.
Severity (though good) is but accidentally good, not in it self, but only
because of man's stubbornenesse: Medicines were only brought in and kept up by
sickness. The Be gives its honey naturally, its sting only when provoked. We
should run to Compassion, but be driven to rigor. If the birds will be driven
away, its needless to shoot them: our will must bring forth peace, necessity
war. Paul was much more willing to come to the Corinthians with the Spirit of
meekness, then with the rod of severity. Even when we are most deeply engaged
in rigor, let all see that in afflicting others, we more afflict our selves.

3. Obs. 3.
Others.] Severity is to be regulated not by outward respects, but by the merit
of the offense. Others, that is, they who are more obdurate, not who are
further from us in relation, or poorer etc. should be affrighted. Though the
nature of the offense should should make us put a difference in our rigours,
yet other considerations foreign to the cause, should not. Some are fiery hot
in terrifying the poorer sort, whereas the rich are like the mount that might
not be touched. Having men's persons in admiration.
An ungodly base respecting of persons! Of it see at large before, page 536,
537. Part. 2.

4. Save.] Even a man may be a savior of souls. Obs. 4.
See the proofs in the Explication. Paul speaks of laboring by all means to
gain some. And we read of those who catch men, and win souls, and Christ
mentions the gaining of thy brother. How great an honor does God cast upon
weak worms! 1. If the supreme Cause be pleased to attribute salvation to men
because of ministry, should not men attribute salvation to God in regard of
efficacy? How careful should we be to honor that God who so dignifies dust
and ashes! Lay that Crown at his feet which he sets on thy head. How
industrious should this likewise make us in doing good to others! The Lord
reckons it as our own. Though he guided thy hand every letter, yet he says,
thou have written the fair copy, whereas indeed only the blots and blurs
were thine. Though thou did but lay on the plaster, yet he attributes the
cure to thee, who could never put virtue into the salve. To conclude this,
how fearful should any be of despising the ministry of man! Though salvation
sometime be attributed to our selves, that we may not be negligent, and
properly to God, that we may not idolize man; yet its often ascribed to others
that we may not contemn their help.

5. [Save with fear.] Obs. 5.
Severity should be exercised to this end, to save. The scope of using the
sharpest rebukes by spiritual Physicians, should be cure. Merciful intentions
must be lodged under severest performances. The end of Excommunication must be
the saving of the Spirit. Tit. 1.13.
The most cutting reproofs must be given to others, that they may be sound in
the faith. Even the dreadfullest Censures of the Church are not mortal, but
medicinable. In the body of the Church, members are wounded and cut, that
themselves and the whole body may be saved. And herein Ecclesiastical censures
excel civil punishments, the latter being to preserve the public peace, and
for warning to others; the former being principally to save the offenders
soul. How sharply did Peter reprove Simon Magus when he said, Thy money perish
with thee, and thou art in the gall of bitterness! and yet he adds, repent,
and pray etc. We must not reprove men to disgrace their persons, but to shame
their sins, and neither insulting over men's falls, nor despairing of their
risings. And therefore let not people sum and rage against the constrained
rigor of the faithful (especially) Ministers, for it is not butchery but
Surgerie. As reprehension faithfully ministered shows the strength of zeal, so
meekly received, the sincerity of grace. A godly heart would not one threatening
less to be in the Bible. It Is a bloodlesse martyrdom humbly to embrace the
strokes of a reprover. To conclude, how ridiculously profane are the Papists,
whose loudest thunderings out of excommunication are against the holiest
persons! But Christ's Spirit is not in their counsels, nor will he refuse
graciously to meet thee unjustly ejected, as he did the blind man sinfully
cast out by the Jews.

6. [Save with fear.] Obs. 6.
Severity to sin is mercy to the soul. This affrighting made way for saving.
Holy severity is a wholesome thing: even rending Mastiffes are very useful to
kill woolves. The nipping frosts of winter, though not so pleasant as summer
Sunshine, yet are as needful for the earth, they killing the worms and
vermin. Jacob is said to Every one according to his blessing. Genesis 49.28.
Nonnul lis been dixit maledicendo.
bless his sons, and yet he sharply censured three. The smitings of the
righteous are desirable to a saint. They are precious ointment. They slay sin
and save the soul. How wild a madness is it then to be angry with them, who
by telling thee truth love thy peace. There Is none but fools that oppose
faithful reprovers, and who are such, that if the truth be told them, will not
be pleased, and if they be pleased the truth is not told them. Such a
disposition as this is an evident token that God has a purpose to destroy
them. 2 Chronicles. 25.16.
How much is this cruelty to their own souls to be pitied by every reprover!
They oppose reproofs and their own happiness both at once. Let them read their
dismal doom, Prove. 29.1. He who being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. To conclude this, let those
whom God has appointed to be reprovers, take heed lest like drones they lose
their stings. If sinners be not saved, it should be their trouble; if they be
neither reproved nor saved, Mr. Daniel Rogers David's cost.
its their sin also. Oh let not the sinners Phrensy drive any Minister into a
palsy.

7. [With fear.] Wicked men are often fearlesse in sin, Obs. 7.
though on hel's brink. These sinners were to be made to fear, but otherwise
they were fearlesse, they were without fear or shame, bold presumptuous
sinners. The sweetness of sin does so bewitch, that the bitterness of sin
does not affright. Sinners look upon wrath through the wrong end of the
prospective glass, so that it seems remote. They put on Satan's spectacles,
which greatens mercy, Of this before, part 2. page 576. 577.
and lessens wrath to the eyes of sinners: they are faithless, therefore
fearlesse.

Vlt. [With fear.] Obs. Vlt.
Bold presumption makes way for fear. These libertines who fed themselves
without fear, and feared no judgment, but mocked at the promise of Christ's
coming, if ever they came to salvation, went by the way of fear. Oh that you
would think of this in your bold adventurings upon sin: your audacious
undertakings must all be undone, and picked out stitch by stitch. That which
was thy glory, thy rejoicing, thy valor will afterward be thy shame, thy
sorrow, thy fear. And truly it is happy if the Lord make it so before it be too
late. Holy fear is no sign of unmanly cowardice. Of this at large. Part 2.
page 108.

This for the first part, the duty, Others save with fear. The second follows,
the manner of performing it, and first for the vehemence and holy earnestness
thereof, pulling them out of the fire. This has two branches. 1. A sinners
woe. 2. A saints work. The first is to be in the fire. The second is to pull
them out of the fire.

EXPLICATION.
1. What is meant by their being in the fire.

2. What by pulling out of the fire.

1. For the first. Not to enlarge upon the several Metaphorical acceptations
of the word Fire in Scripture 1. Its sometime used to set forth sin. 2. Misery
and punishment.

1. Sin. All sin, Isa 9.18. Wickedness burns as the fire. More particularly
the burning lust of uncleanness, Romans 1.27. they burned in lust one toward
another. Ignis Sodomiticus.
And 1 Cor. 7.9. Its better to marry then to burn. Thus with this fire Sodom
burnt, before it burnt with fire from heaven; Sine Cerere and Libero friget
Venus. Venus in vino.
and this agrees to these impure wretches compared to Sodomites, ver. 6. for
sin and punishment, and this fire of lust has gluttony for its fuel.

2. Misery and trouble. And these are compared to fire. 1. As probatory and
refining. Thus Isa. 31.9. fire in Zion and furnace in Jerusalem. So 1 Pet.
4.12. Fiery trial, which is to try you. Or 2. as its painful and tormenting,
in which respect hell torments may be compared to fire. Or 3. As its violent
and irresistible. 4. As its diffusive and spreading. 5. As it smutcheth and
takes away beauty. 6. As its dangerously destructive and consuming; hence the
wrath of God is compared unto fire, fire is kindled in my anger which shall
burn upon you. So Ezekiel. 22.31. and Heb. 10. Our God is a consuming fire. Hence
the people returned from Babylon, is said to be a brand plucked out of the fire,
Zec. 3.2.
(to which place Jude happily alludes:) and this I take to be the meaning of the
holy Ghost in this place, where he speaks of these seducers as being in the
fire, to set forth their dangerously miserable estate, and destructive courses.
These sinners without recovery by Christians, were certainly to be destroyed
and consumed here and hereafter. They corrupted themselves, ver. 10. and they
who sow to the flesh, reap Corruption. Gal. 6.4.
And the consumption and destructivenesse of this fire is worse then that of
natural fire. 1. Because a sinner lying under wrath is consumed spiritually.
His precious soule^is destroyed; and this is worse then if his house, his
money, his child, his body were consumed in fire. The fire which, destroys
the soul, consumes not the dross but the gold. 2. In this fire a sinner is
destroyed insensibly he feels no pain, fears no hurt. Men shun material
fire, but they run into this fire. Fools makes a sport of sin and wrath, sin
is their Element, they are displeased with any who would pluck them out of it.
Like the horse, they will not stir, though they be in never so much danger by
the approaching flames. 3. He is destroyed pitilesly, there are few that rescue
and pluck him out of the fire. Every one will quench the fire which burns the
house, few labor to quench the fire which burns the soul. There are few
faithful reprovers. Who warns his neighbor of Gods wrath! most are afraid to
black or burn their fingers Most men pour oil rather then water to these
flames. 4. He is destroyed everlastingly. Natural fire consumes so as it ends
and eats up that which it burns; this fire is ever destroying, never
destroys. Without the blood of Christ its unquenchable; a sinner shall ever
burn in it, but never be burnt up in it. Mors vivacissima.
That which makes other fire so dreadful, namely to make an end of things,
would make this fire merciful.

2. For the second, the plucking out of this fire. Gr. (...). The word properly
signifies the soldiers violent rushing or seizing upon a town or Castle for
plunder or prey. The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent
(...), take it by force etc. And more particularly.

This plucking sinners out of their misery as out of fire, imports 1.
Speediness. When a thing is in the fire it endures no delays. Sin like poison
admits of no dallyance. The abiding in spiritual fire but a little longer,
Venenata non patiuntur inducias. In sacris non est deliberandum.
may make the recovery impossible, no deliberation so dangerous; Its needless
here to call a council. While we are lingering and doubting, the fire is
devouring. Satan (like a subtle Enemy) never desires to treat but for his own
advantage.

2. It imports sollicitousnesse and care, an holy fear of the future event,
the ruin of that which is to be plucked out of the fire. Paul was afraid of
the Galathians, Gal. 4.19. holy love is sollicitous, does its best, but fears
the worst. Titus had an earnost care for the good of the Corinthians, and their
burning calamity, caused in Paul burning care. Who is offended (says he) and I
burn not? 2 Cor. 8.16.


3. Pity and Commiseration. The more violence and speed is used in plucking a
good thing out of the fire, the more tender pity is expressed. If pity should
be showed to thy neighbors beast, or to his house, much more to his own body,
but most of all to his soul. Its reported of Aeneas, that his pity made him
take his father upon his shoulder, and carry him out of the flames of Troy. Its
storyed Genesis 19.16. that while Lot, his wife and daughters lingered in Sodom,
upon which fire was falling, the Lord being merciful to them, the Angels
brought him forth and set him without the City. This mercy in this spiritual
plucking out, is here imported.

4. Esteem and appreciation. Men pluck that with eagerness out of the fire,
which they value and set by. A piece of pot-sherd they neglect, but a costly
garment, some rare book, or much more a dear child, Oh how earnestly are they
snatched out of the flames! The estimate which ought to be had of souls is
much greater. Heaven-born, beautifully endowed, eternal souls are so precious
that Christ shed his blood for them, and Satan only delights in shedding theirs.

5. Hazard and indangering of him who plucks the party out of the fire. They
who will take a thing out of the fire, commonly burn their own fingers. The
most zealous adventurers for souls have seldom escaped the scorching rage and
fury of the wicked. Hatred is (as Luther calls it) the G^spels genius; truth
begets hatred, both in others, and (often) in him whom we labor to save. Satan
will not let go his hold willingly. All the militia of hell is raised against
the faithful saving of souls. All the holy Prophets, Apostles, Min^^ters, more
or less, must feel the scorching of the fire, if they will be plucking out of
souls. The Saviors of soul; must be sufferers for souls, and herein resemble
the great Savior, who for souls was the greatest sufferer.

6. Diligence, earnest industry. This is principally here intended according to
the signification of the word (...) They who pluck a precious thing out of the
fire, do it with putting forth all their vigor and pains. They who will save
souls, must apply heart and head to this employment. Faithful Ministers are
ever laborious. They are peculiarly called Laborers. They labor in the word
and doctrine. As much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel. Romans 1.15.
This work he made his business, and he gave himself to it. In comparison of
this, his diligence for other things was but negligence. For three years
together he warned every one with tears, Act. 20.31. He was willing to spend
and be spent. 2 Cor. 12.15. He was fervent in the spirit in this serving of the
Lord. In plucking a precious thing out of the fire, the finger is not held up,
but violently is the thing laid hold upon, and drawn forth with our hand.

OESERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
The fire,] The hell of a sinner is begun in this life. He is even here in the
fire; hellfire is but his greater sensiblenesse of that fire of wrath, wherein
he even now is. As heaven, so hell is now in this world in semine. In hell the
damnation of the wicked is but displayed; Here it is, though wrapped up as the
flag about the staff. Sinners in this life are treasuring up of wrath: put
sin into its best dress it is but gilded damnation. The fire of Gods wrath
is kindled on this side hell, and it burns inward, only in hell it blazeth
out. The incorrigible are condemned already. They are even here the children of
perdition, and there is nothing between them and the fire of hell, but a thin
wall of flesh. And therefore,

2. Obs. 2.
How madly merry is every sinner! Fond creature, to bribe and sooth thy burning
soul with toys and rattles! How unseasonable and unsuitable is thy mirth, when
thou art burning thy soul; and yet (as the idolaters of old, when they
sacrificed their children to idols) make music and singing! This does every
secure sinner. Oh how much better is it here to mourn and shed the tears of
godly sorrow, especially to get the blood of Jesus Christ to quench the flames
before they blaze out in hell, where they will be unquenchable.

3. Obs. 3. Per quot pericula itur ad majus periculum!
The Devil has his martyr^; nay the most are burnt for irreligion. Wicked men
here burn themselves (not as Saints to escape) but (in regard of the end of the
work) to embrace eternal burnings. It should be a shame to consider how mad
sinners are upon, and patient in the flames of wrath and sin, and how impatient
Saints are in those flames out of which all the heat and hurt is taken.

4. Obs. 4.
Even they who are in the fire may be pulld out. There Is a peradventure
mentioned of Gods giving repentance even to opposers, 2 Timothy 2.25. Such (says
the Apostle) were some of you. 2 Cor. 6.9. (...), such trash, such rubbish;
Manasseh, Magdalen, and Paul the greatest of sinners, and those Christians
hateful and hating one another, serving diverse lusts, and children of wrath,
found mercy; Ephesians. 2.1. Tit. 3.3. God sometimes turns people in their race of
sin, when they are gotten almost to their gole, hell-gates, and receives
prodigals who smell of the hogs-trough, and recovers brands which are smutch't,
singed, yea almost consumed. The freeness of his grace, the riches of mercy,
the depth of his wisdom, the greatness of his power, are all hereby magnified:
we must not despair of the most seemingly desperate. We may censure the
actions, not determine the ends (though) of great sinners. To conclude, the
greater the mise^y and the more scorching the fire is out of which any o^ us
have been plucked, the stronger is, the engagement upon us to save others, and
to serve our Savior.

5. The faithful are very useful and beneficial to the world. Obs. 5.
It Is a misery when any thing dear to us falls into the fire; but this is by
much the greater, when there is no man near to pluck it out of the fire. They
who save our goods from the flames are commended for helpful people. But they
who save souls from the wrath of God and the fire of hell, are much more
necessary. The people of God are falsely accounted the troublers and
incendiaries of the world whereas their work is to recover out of the fire, not
to cause and increase the fire. There are none so miserable as they who may be
suffered to lie in sin as long as they please, without controlers or
recoverers, who may be as bad as they please, without check or reprehension.

6. The greatest diligence in recovery of souls, Obs. ult.
is very excusable. The most earnest plucking of our treasure or child out of
the fire wants not an apology. The best things require most labor about them.
Trifles, fancies, riches, honors deserve not our diligence. Cum periculo iguis
temporalis eripiendus est peccator, ex igne aeterno.
No persuasions should be so vehement, no pains so great as those we take for
souls. We may easily be too importunate and painful when we labor for our
bodies, but its impossible to be so when we labor to benefit ours or others
souls. It Is an holy impudence to be impudent in urging any to pity their better
part. Its a sinful bashfulnesse to be so courteous to forget christianity.
We can never warn men too much of their spiritual danger. Its very good
manners in christianity, to stay and knock again, though we have knocked more
then thrice at the door of a sinners conscience. Either here or hereafter his
conscience will commend us, though now his lusts be angry with us. How willing
therefore should people be to take holy importunity for their souls good, in
good part! If importunity overcame an unrighteous judge to do good to another,
how much more should it prevail with us for our own good? Let not Ministers
complain that they spread out their hands to a gainsaying people.

2. vigilance and warynesse; In these words, hating even the garment spotted by
the flesh. And this he adds to the former, to warn the Christians that in their
conversing with these offenders, when they labored to recover them, they
should take heed of getting any hurt from them, they being only to deal with
them as physicians, not as companions. Explicat.


EXPLICATION.
Two things are here briefly to be explained.

1. The thing to be hated, the garment spotted, etc. 2. How and why it was to
be hated.
1. For the first, the garment spotted with the flesh. Many impertinent and
overcurious expositions by Popish writers are given us of this place, some
understand this garment spotted by the flesh, properly as if Jude intended that
the filthy uncleanness and obscenities of these impure sinners, did not only
defile their manners and actions, but even their very clothes and garments, by
reason of their nearness to their defiled flesh, and even these (say they) Jude
bids these Christians to shun or not touch, to show their hatred of carnal
uncleanness. Levior mihi sensus videtur quam ut gravitatem Apostolicam deceat.
Justinian. in loc.
But Justinian seems rightly to conceive that this is an exposition of more
lightness then to savor of apostolical gravity. Others by this garment
understand that natural unholinesse which Paul calls the old man with his
deeds, and commands the Christians to put off as an old filthy garment, Col.
3.9.

But this is not agreeable to the scope of the Apostle, which is not to direct
the Christians what to put off from, and hate in themselves, but to shun and
hate that which might be conveyed from others to themselves. The best
exposition is that given by learned Calvin, and some others, who say that by
this garment spotted by the flesh, the Apostle intends that which seems to have
any affinity or neernesse to the vices of these sinners which were among them.
And this is very much confirmed, 1. by the word (...), here translated (even)
which (as Calvin notes) ad amplificationem valet, has the force of
amplification, and imports as if the Apostle had said in a full speech, hating
not only the flesh it self, but even the garment spotted or infected by the
flesh, and also 2. by that apt allusion which in these metaphorical
expressions, Jude makes unto that commanded rite of the ceremonial law, whereby
the Israelites were ceremonially unclean, not only by touching the flesh of
one who had a running issue, or the matter it self that issued forth, but even
by touching the seat, bed, saddle, garments of such a person, Levit. 15.4, 5,
6, 17. etc. so that this direction of hating the garment spotted by the flesh,
imports as much as if Jude had said, Know Oh Christians, though I have exhorted
you to have compassion of the persons of these sinners, and to labor with them
that they might be plucked out of their miserable estate yet I would have you
warily to take heed to your selves, lest while you are about the curing of
them, they infect you, and lest that while you lend them your hand to draw them
out of the pit, they being stronger then you, pull you in to them. Nay, so far
must you be from allowing and likeing their gross and ungodly practices, that
you must abstain from whatever has any neighborhood or nearness to their
sins. For not only would* I have you kept from touching the infecting and
defiling flesh, the sin it self; but I exhort you to hate even the very
clothes, or that which fits any thing near to it, or borders upon it, or has
affinity to it. And this direction principally comprehends two particulars.

1. That they should hate all incentives, occasions, inducements or inlets to
sin, and that both in respect of themselves, and others. 1. In respect of
themselves. Its safest keeping far from the brinke of the river. He who bath
fallen, and yet will walk in slippery places, shows that (yet) he has not
been bruised enough. Thus Eves looking on the apple, so as that it drew on her
appetite; her parley with the Serpent should have been avoided. 2. In respect of
others. Paul was very careful to avoid occasions of making others sin, though
things which he avoided were neither sinful in themselves, nor to him. Paul's
eating of flesh was lawful in it self, and lawful to him, and yet rather
then he would offend his weak brother, 1 Cor. 8.13. Romans 14.21. Gal 4.19.
he would never do it while the world stands. Paul was sometimes here
traveling in birth with his little children, and was like a careful mother
that is with child, who forbears many meats for fear of doing her child hurt.
Thus Paul, refused to circumcise Titus, fearing the confirmation of the Jews in
their error. Gal. 2.3.

2. That they should avoid that which carries a show of evil, and is liable to
misconstruction. Thus Paul refused the using his liberty in taking a lawful
maintenance for his labors, lest a sinister interpretation of covetousness
and mercenary affection should have been put upon it by his adversaries. Though
here it must be noted, that in all necessary duties, we must yield absolute
obedience to God, though to the world it appear never so evil. Christ preached
himself the bread of life, though the Jews were offended, Joh. 6. Daniel will
pray three times a day, though it cost him his life. John will preach against
Herodias, though all the Court be offended. For though evil must not be done
that good may come of it, yet good must be don though evil may come of it.
Thus in doctrine we must abstain from such speeches, which though they may
have a right interpretation, Haereticorum vocabula timenda.
yet carry a show of evil. To say we are saved by works, may have a true
interpretation, but its better to abstain from it, because it has an
appearance of popish merit. To call Evangelicall Ministers Priests may be truly
expounded, but it were better to avoid the expression, because of the show of
Popish sacrifice and priesthood. The words of heretics are to be avoided. And
if we will keep the faith of the scriptures, we must keep the words of the
scriptures. Those things which are male colorata, though not in se mala, which
have an ill color, though not an ill nature, must be shunned.

Caesar said of his wife, that she ought to be without suspicion of fault, as
well as without fault. Valentinian having a drop of the water sprinkled upon his
garment, which was cast about by the Priests in their heathenish services, cut
out that piece of cloth upon which that drop fell, from the rest of the
garment. The ancient Christians would not set up lights and bays at their
doors, Tertul. lib. de Idol.
though for this they were persecuted as Enemies to the Emperor, because the
temple and the doors of Idolaters were wont to be thus garnished. These
primitive Christians would not endure that any Christian should look toward
Jerusalem, praying, because they would avoid show of Judaisme. Augustine
thought it in his time, unlawful to fast on the Sabbath day, because the
Manichees did so. God appointed his own Ceremonies, so, as a wall of partition
might be put between the Israelites and Heathens. In which respect his people
are forbid to eat swines flesh, (the ordinary food of the gentiles to make
their heads bald, to shave their beards, to cut their flesh. And Aquinas
thinks, that because the Heathens set their Temples Eastward, Aquin. 1^.20. 3.
^.
therefore Gods was set Westward, ad arcendam idololatriam (says he.) Not
only apparent sins, but sins in appearance are to be avoided by Christians.
Even the accompaning with sinners is suspicious, as well as the acting of their
impieties is heinous. Tell me (said a good man once) where thou have been, Ephesians.
5.7.
and I will tell thee what thou have done. A man sins as well by not reproving
a swearer, as by swearing. He that does not preserve the law, does not observe
it. This (say some) was one reason why David refused to take the threshing
floor, oxen, etc. as a gift, but would buy them, because he would avoid the
show of covetousness.

For the second, why this garment spotted etc. was to be hated, i. e. inwardly
loathed, outwardly shunned.

In respect of God. In respect of Themselves. In respect of Others.
1. God. 1. It Is his Command, he would have his to adorn the Gospel, to shine
as lights, to abstain from all appearance of evil, and be holy in repute, as
well as in reality. 2. His honor is hereby advanced. The farther we keep from
defiling our selves, the more we keep from dishonouring him. Its the glory of
the Gospel, when men cannot lay any thing like an evil to our charge, and when
they cannot speak reproachfully and truly at the same time. 3. His example is
hereby imitated. He hates all that's evil and like evil. The conformity of our
affections with the Lord is very acceptable. How highly is the Church of
Ephesus commended for hating the doctrine of the Nicholaitans, which (says the
Lord) I also hate. There is in God no shadow of change, and therefore nothing
like sin: He is of purer eyes then to behold sin or to look upon iniquity.

2. Themselves. 1. It is a true note of sincerity to shun evil in its very
likeness. He who hates a person, loves not his very picture. This is a main
difference between a sound Christian and an hypocrite. A wicked man will
abstain from evil in extremes, but commonly he cares not for petty and
appearing evils. Hence, tell him of such and such a sin, his reply usually
is, give me some plain manifest scriptures against it, scriptures which oppose
his sin by consequence and proportion will not serve the turn. It must only
be a plain barefaced evil that he will forsake. An hypocrite loves the
appearance of good more than goodness it self; the godly hates the very
appearance of evil, as well as the evil it self. 2 Its his wisdom to avoid
the appearance of evil. He who will never give way to so much as an appearing,
shall not be overthrown with a real evil. He who will not touch, will not
taste, much less swallow down a sin. And he who cares not to avoid the
appearance of evil, by little and little comes to esteem the evil and the
appearance both alike: the beginnings of sin are modest, and yet make way to
immodest proceedings. 3. He takes the wisest course to preserve his good name,
he who abstains from appearing evils, provides for his conscience and
reputation at once; and stops the mouths of accusers abroad, as well as of the
accuser in his own bosom.

3. Others, 1. The weak. 2. The wicked. 1. They who shun the very
resemblance of sin. make those who are any thing inclinable to follow them,
more exact and precise in their walking. ^ommonly if a leader will adventure
upon an appearing, a follower will be imboldned thereby to commit a real evil:
for though when we behold men strict in holiness, we are too ready to hope
that we may be allowed to come a little short of them, yet when we see any
take liberty to do that which enclines to evil, we are prone to imagine that
we may go a little beyond them. They who write copyes must write a fair hand;
trifles in a leader are blasphemies. As reports lose nothing in the telling, so
sin loses nothing in the imitating. Commonly the Scholar out-goes the Master.

2. They who allow themselves in appearing evils, harden wicked men, who ever
make the faults of such seem bigger, and more then they are, and for fifty
write down an hundred; and ever make use of the appearing evils of Saints as
sheilds and apologies ^o bear them out in their greatest enormities.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Obs. 1.
Sin and sinners are spotting and defiling, they stain what they touch. Of
this before largely, Part. 2. p. 226. etc

The allusion here, is to a running issue defiling the thing it touches.

2. Obs. 2.
The people of God in this world are subject to defilements. Jude in exhorting
the Christians to carry themselves compassionately toward sinners, directs
them likewise to carry themselves warily, lest they get hurt from them. It Is as
hard to be in the world and not to be polluted by it, as to be among
infectious persons and not to be infected. The best of Saints have a principle
in them which will make them catch infection. The great industry of worldly
persons is to pollute the godly. Jam. ^. ult.
The power of religion is principally seem in keeping a (...) of the world. The
people of God had need gird up their loins, and carry themselves watchfully in
every place and condition; spots are easily seen in white garments, and
defilements on those who have more then ordinary purity. The men of the world
are spotting, defiling creatures. They are such vessels of dishonor which a
man cannot touch without pollution. A vessel of honor must purge himself from
these, 2 Timothy 2.21. And how great cause have Saints to long for that place,
where they shall be freed from places of, and temptations to sin! In
infectious times we use to covet the country, and to desire an open and fresh
air. It Is for scullions to be among the pots, and for worldly men to love to
live in the world.

3. Obs. 3.
Reprehension of sin must be accompanied with sincere hatred to sin. 'Twas
not enough for these Christians to make offenders afraid, unless they also
hated that thing from which they terrified them. That man will be but an
ineffectual reprover, Personatae reprehensiones fri gent. Animum non saciunt,
qui animum non habeut.
and seldom works upon the heart, who speaks only from the lip. The best
oratory is that which proceeds from experience, knowing (says Paul) the
terror of the Lord, we warn men. He who does but act the reprover, does
seldom benefit the reproved. But should such a notionall teacher of others, do
the^m good, what benefit comes to himself? surely he would be but like an
unskilful serving-man, who opens the gate for his Master, but lets it fall to
again, so as that he himself is hindered from following.

4. Appearances of good are to be loved and respected. Obs. 4.
If any thing like to sin be to be loathed, then the very shows and pictures
of holiness are to be regarded. Christ, looked upon the young man in the Gospel,
and loved him. The outward humiliation of Ahab, went not without its reward.
His appearing repentance had an appearing recompense. And God (says Calvin)
would show how much he loved the truth of grace, by rewarding the shadow
thereof. We love the picture for the persons sake. Much more we should love and
cherish the least spark or dram true of grace; The very smoking flax, and
bruised reed. Its murder to kill a little infant of a spanne long, as well as a
full grown man.

5. A Christians honor is exactness in carriage. Obs. 5.
He must walk accurately, not only abstaining from gross, but even from the
finest spun sins, the very show and appearance thereof. Every earthly Artist
is so much regarded as he can show exactness in this profession. In false
religions exactness is highly set by; how great a sin and shame then is it,
that exactness in the most honorable art should only be reproached! The
enemies of preciseness most oppose Christianity, nay they who are ashamed of
holy strictness, are ashamed of the greatest glory.

6. Obs. 6.
Great is the safety of the ways of God. They preserve from coming near the
confines of sin and destruction. The farther from sin the more distant from
danger. He who keeps himself far from sin, needs not fear though troubles
come never so near. Vid. Part. 1.
The beloved of the Lord shaldwel in safety by him, Deuteronomy. 33.12. though they
are not taken out of the world, Joh. 17.15.
yet they are kept from the evil, and so as that the evil one touches them not.

7. Obs. 7.
Religion provides for our fame, as well as for our conscience. It keeps us
from any appearance of a spot or suspicion of a sin. Sin martyrs the name,
but holiness puts us upon those things only which are of good report, our
names are only scratcht by the briars of sin. In keeping our purity we
cannot part with our reputations, unless it be among those whose praise is our
reproach, and whose reproach is our praise.

Ver. 24, 25. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to
present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, To
the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, now
and ever. Amen.
WE have finished (by Gods assistance) the two first parts of this divine
Epistle, viz.

1. The Title. Contained in the two first verses.

2. The Body and substance of the Epistle, contained from the 2d. verse to the
24.

The third Part, the Conclusion, laid down in ver. 24.25. remains to be
handled. Though I shall rather briefly touch, then handle these two verses.
Both because my scope when I began this Epistle was to insist upon the body and
substance thereof, and because I have already at large spoken of the main part
of the 24th verse, viz. Christ preserving us from falling, and also in regard
that the substance of the 25th verse is handled by those who comment upon the
Lords Prayer, and both largely and learnedly by Doctor Gouge in his Exposition
of that prayer.

These two verses shut up this whole Epistle with a sacred and solemn Doxology,
and celebration of Gods name by praise and thanksgiving. And three parts are
herein principally considerable.

1. The person to whom praise is given, the Lord Christ, set forth three ways.

1. By his power. 1. To keep these Christians from falling. 2. To present them
faultlesse before, etc.
2. By his Wisdom. The only wise God. 3. By his Goodness. Our Savior.
2. What the praise is that is given him, viz. The praise of Glory. Majesty.
Dominion. Power, All amplified by their duration, now and ever.

3. The manner how this praise is given him, intended in this word Amen.

1. For the first. The party praised, is so described by our Apostle, as that
the says of these Christians may be the more confirmed in the praying for and
expecting those things to which Jude in this Epistle had exhorted them.

And first he is set forth by his power, 1. To preserve them from falling. Of
this power of Christ to preserve from falling into sin and misery, I have at
large spoken part 1. page 58, 59. etc. on these words, preserved in Christ
Jesus. I here avoid repetition.

2. He is set forth by his power to present them faultlesse before the presence
of his glory with exceeding joy. In which words are contained a description of
the glorio usestate of the Church in heaven. This estate is, 1. Generally
propounded. 2. Particularly exemplifyed.


1. In the general proposition the saints are said to be presented before the
presence of his glory.

2. The particular exemplification thereof is

1. Privative, by removing of all deformity, noted in the word faultlesse.

2. Positive, by partaking of fullness of joy, noted in this expression, with
exceeding joy.

1. Statcere, sistere.
The word (present) Gr. (...), Imports, 1. To place or set, as Matthew. 4.5.
Matthew. 18.2. To dispose of a thing to a station. And 2. To place it in a way of
firmness and stability, to establish it, Romans 3.31. Matthew. 12.26. The same
thing is intended both here and Ephesians. 5.27. (...).
where the Apostle speaks of Christ's presenting to himself a glorious Church:
in which place the word [present] is taken from the custom of solemnizing a
marriage. First the Spouse was wooed, and then set before or presented to her
husband, that he might take her for his wife to be with him. Thus Eve was
presented by God to Adam, that he might take her for his wife, Genesis 2.22. and
Esther was presented to Ahasuerus; to which custom Paul elegantly alludes 2
Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may (...), Present you as
a chaste virgin to Christ. And this presentation is said to be before the
presence of his glory. Gr. (...). By this glory is meant the beaming forth,
discovery, manifestation of the excellency of Christ before the saints. That of
which Christ speaks, Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have
given me, may be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory, etc. By
which glory I understand, not only that glory of soul and body, which he has
in common with the saints, subjectively abiding and inherent in him; but also
that which is bestowed upon the humane nature by the personal union, and its
exaltation to the right hand of God, above all saints and Angels. Before the
presence of this his glory shall the saints be placed. (...), before it, coram,
Rev. 3.21.
in conspectu, in the full view of it, in a clear and open vision (not as
having a glymps of this glory) right against it; The sunshine of Christ's glory
shall be full upon them, and they look full upon it, yea so as to be made
partakers of it (in their measure;) this Sun looking upon them will make them
shine also. Mat. 13.42.
The wife of Christ shall shine with his beams, and be advanced to his
dignity, so far as she is capable of it; she shall eat and drink with him at
his table in his Kingdom. Luke 22.30. and Ephesians. 5.27. Its said she shall be
presented a glorious Church.

Thus we see this glorious estate is generally propounded. But 2. Its
particularly exemplyfied, and that.

1. Negatively, and so its said, he will present the saints without spot,
(...), irreprehensible, unblameable, such as in whom the greatest Carper, or
strictest and most curious beholder shall not be able to behold any thing
amiss, no defect of what should be, or excess of what should not be. The
Church shall not have spot, wrinkle, or any such thing, no stain, or scar, no
freckle or deformity. Nothing of stain or contagion received from others, no
wrinkle, no defect of spiritual moisture, nothing which may make her seem
uncomely in Christ's eye: not only great and heinous sins (which are great
botches and boyles) but every least speck and wrinkle shall be taken away. Now
sin is subdued, but then it shall be rooted out. Here saints are freed from the
power of it, but then from the presence of it also. He who will wipe away all
tears from the eyes of his Church, will undoubtedly take away all matter of
mourning from her soul. Heaven would not be heaven to a saint, could any spot
continue in heaven. But when sin is gone, sorrow must needs fly away: if the
fountain be dried up, the streams must needs follow. Sin brought in tears,
and tears shall go away with sin. Because saints shall be presented
faultlesse, therefore with exceeding joy: For,

2. This glory is exemplyfied positively, With exceeding joy. Gr. (...). The
word imports an exceeding joy, Gaudium gestuosum.
with an outward leaping, dancing, or some such cheerful motion of body, an
exultation which is expressed in the gesture. 1 Pet. 18.
Unspeakable is the joy in the hoping for this glory; How great will the joy be
of having it! A Bunch of grapes greatly delights, what then will all the Crop
of Canaan! Its called not only fullness of joy, Gaudium est quoddam filentinm
appetitum etc, quidam thronus jam considentis affectus, quoddam sine sastidio
epulum cord is, quaedam mors desiderii, quidam avaritia limes, etc. quoddam
satis. Nieremb. de art vol. l. 1. Prolep. 5.
but joy it self, Mat. 25 41. And needs must it be so; for what is joy but the
quieting and resting of the soul in its object, the filling it to the brim
with what it desired! Joy is the stilling of all our longings, a cessation of
all our cravings. Joy to desire, is what rest is in respect of motion. When
motion ends, then comes rest. When desire is filled, then comes joy. Now what
crevis, cranny, nook or corner of the soul is there which shall not be
satisfied in heaven, by the immediate and perfect fruition of that chief good,
God himself, who is the heaven of heaven, and who shall fill the soul as
those waterpots of Galilee were filled up to the very brims? There shall be no
empty spaces left in the soul untaken up. He who has fullness enough to fill
himself (a vast ocean) must needs have enough to fill the soul (comparatively)
a small vessel. He who is selfe-sufficient, alsufficient, must needs be
soule-sufficient.

Thus the person is described in respect of his power.

2. He is set forth by his wisdom, in these words, The only wise God.

1. He is called God. Of which largely before part 1. page 356, 357. etc.

2. He is called wise. He often in scripture, has the name wisdom it self
Prove. 8.22, 23, 24. etc. Christ is called the wisdom of God. This his wisdom
(as here attributed to God) is twofold. 1. His wisdom of science, or
theoreticall wisdom, whereby he is omniscient, and with one immutable,
eternal act of understanding perfectly sees, and perceives, observes, and
knows all things. 2. His wisdom of working, Job. 12.13.
whereby he does all things, both in respect of Creation and providence with
infinite wisdom: Oculus mundi.
according to the former, he is said to be a God of knowledge, 1 Samuel 2.3.
There is no Creature that is not manifest in his sight. All things are naked
and opened unto his eyes. Heb. 4.13. Known unto God are all his works. Acts
15.18. He sees under the whole heaven. 2. According to the latter, he is said
to make all his works in wisdom. Psalm. 104.24. By wisdom he made the
heavens. Psalm. 136.5 Isa. 40.28. Psalm. 92.6.
By wisdom has he founded the earth, and stablisht the world, Prove. 3.19.
Jer. 10.12. etc.

3. He is said to be only wise. Not to exclude the wisdom of the Father, and
holy Ghost, but the wisdom of all the Creatures. As God the Father is called
the only true God, not to exclude the Son and holy Ghost; And though the
Creatures have wisdom, yet is not theirs comparable to Christ's, nor deserves
the name of wisdom. 1. For his wisdom of science, which is 1 universal,
perfect complete. He knows himself and all things, Joh. 21.17. 1 John 3.20.
Acts 15.18. Known to God are his works, Psalm. 147.5.
his understanding is infinite. Whereas the greatest part of what man knows is
the least part of what he does not know. 2. He knows things to come. Isa.
41.23. Men and devils cannot foretell future Contingents, but either by Gods
discovery, Praescientia Dei tot habet ^estes quot facit Prophetas. Tert.
Potentiae divine extenditur ultra futura.
or conjecturally. His prescience, has so many witnesses as he has made
Prophets.

3. He knows all things possible, though they never shall actually be: his
knowledge is as large as his power, and his power is such as that he can do
more then he ever will do. An artificer may frame that house in his head which
he never will set up with his hand. God calls those things that are not as if
they were, Romans 4.17.

4. He knows all things clearly, particularly, distinctly. All things are
anatomized, ripped up before him. Heb. 4.13. His knowledge is not (as ours)
general or confused. We are said to know a man, though we know not an hundred
things in a man.

5. He knows the least things. Every circumstance of every action. His
knowledge extends it self to every hair of the head, Matthew. 10.30. Every
sparrow that lights on the ground.

6. He knows things with one simple view; not as man, by sense, opinion,
relation, reasoning and discoursing, and drawing conclusions from proposition,
and gathering knowledge of that which is less known by that which is more
known. He is not for knowledge beholding (as we are) to the images and
representations of things, which first are printed on our sancy, and thence
offered to our understanding. He goes not out of himself to the objects for
knowledge. He knew them before they were.

7. ^. Chron. 28.9 Jer. 11, 24, 17.10. 1 King. 8.39. Psalm. 139.2. Psalm. 94.11.
Ezekiel. 14.3. 1 Cor. 4.5. Matthew. 9.4. Obliviscitur (...).
He knows the secretest things, even the very thoughts of the heart, he knows
them when they are, he knows them before they are; as what we do think, so
what we will think, he puts thoughts into us, he publishes, punishes,
reproves thoughts.

8. He knows permanently, nothing slips out. He forgets nothing, his knowledge
can neither be diminish't nor increased.

And 2. for the wisdom of his working. 1. He only is originally wise; the
wisdom of the wisest is from him. Bezaleels wisdom was bestowed by him, he
tiacheth men wisdom: all wisdom either speculative or practical is from
Christ, every candle received light from his. The very husbandmans discretion
is from God; Isa. 28.26. 2. He only is exactly, perfectly, thoroughly wise, all
his works for number, measure, and weight are done to the height of wisdom,
not one of the creatures could have been made in greater wisdom. The fairest
copy that was ever written by the sons of men had some blots and scratches in
it. The wisest men sometime slip and sleep like the wise virgins. 3. He only
is irresistibly wise, there is no wisdom against him, Prove. 21.30. None can
go beyond him. He destroys the wisdom of the wise, 1 Cor. 1.19.
and brings to nothing the understanding of the prudent.

3. The person praised is set forth from his goodness and compassion in
saving. Concerning the meaning of the word Savior, as also from what Christ
saves, and how excellent a salvation his is, see before Part. 1. p. 195.196,
197.

2. The second main part of this Doxology, is The praise it self which is here
given to Christ, viz. the praise of Glory. Majesty. Dominion. Power. All set
forth by the duration, for ever and ever.

1. Glory. By it I understand that infinite and incomprehensible excellency by
which Christ excels all, and for which he is to be honored above all. The
glory of a thing is that excellency thereof, Exodus 33.20.
which causes it to be in high esteem, and procures fame and renown unto it.
The glory of his essence is the Godhead it self. When Moses desired God to
show him his glory, God answered, Thou can not see my face, for there shall
no man see me and live, so that Gods glory is his face, and his face is
himself. This Glory is the fountain of all glory, and excellency in the
creature. All the creatures shine in any excellency with beams borrowed from
Gods glory, as the stars shine with the light they receive from the Sun. And
its brightness obscureth all other glory. The glorious angels have wings to
cover their faces; otherwise the brightness of Gods glory would dazzle them. The
glory of God is without measure, infinite, above comprehension, A light to
which none can approach, 1 Timothy 6.16. When God darted a faint ray of this glory
upon Moses's face, they were afraid to come nigh him. How much more may any
creature be afraid to come to God by reason of the incomprehensible shining of
his glorious face? When the Sun shines the Stars are not seen. When Gods glory
shines no other is seen.

2. Magnifi^er^ia est^ erum magnarum and excelsatum cum animi ampla quadam and
splendida propositione agitatio atque administratio. Cic, de Juvent.
Majesty. Gr. (...), Majesty or magnificence. By this we are to understand that
admirable highness and greatness, amplitude, splendour, dignity of Christ (as
God) which appears principally in his works, thereby making himself
wonderful, Psalm. 111.3. The works of the Lord are great, and called
wonderful. The royal Majesty of Solomon, Ahasuerus, Nebuchadnezzar, in their
apparel, buildings, feastings, attendance, etc. were but sordid and
contemptible in comparison of Gods Majesty shown forth in the truth, wisdom,
justice, goodness, power of his works. In respect of these the Psalmist says,
he is clothed with honor and Majesty.

3. Dominion, (...), properly signifying strength, Luke 1.51. sometime power
and by consequent dominion. I here understand by (...), the strength and
ability of Christ, whereby he can do whatsoever he will. This strength and
might extends it self unto every thing that by power may be done. Is any
thing too hard for the Lord? Genesis 18.14. Psalm. 115.3. 1 Job. 4.4. Psa. 147.5.
Ephesians. 3.20, 21.
With God nothing is impossible. Luke 1.37. With God all things are possible.
Mar. 10.27. He is God Almighty, (...). All things are within the compass of
his power, but such as import impotency and imperfection, as matters of
iniquity, contradiction, passion, infirmity etc. All the power of the Creature
is derived from, and subordinate to this.

4. Power. Gr. (...). Ab (...) non est jus proprie, sed efficacia, talis quae
quod vult aequum aut iniquum facile effectum dat. Grot. in Joh. 19.10. (...).
Libertas est potestas agendi ut velis, qua datur extra alios esse, aliis
obstrictum non esse, sed liberum, sui juris supereminere, praecellere. (...)
q^asi (...).
The word signifies authority and power. It properly imports a Liberty to
do as one list. By it in this place Jude (I conceive) intends that supreme
sovereignty and authority which Christ has over all things, in governing and
commanding them. He is an absolute Lord. Of this I have largely discoursed,
part 1. page 344, 345. etc. on those words, The only Lord.

2. All these are amplified from their duration. Now, and ever. Gr. (...). Now
that is in this life, and in all the ages of the world. The original word
(...) does properly signify that which is for ever, and because an age is the
usual and longest distinction of time, this same word is put for age. And when
there is no end of that which is spoken of, the plural number ages, or all
ages, is used to set out the everlastingnesse of it. And this Eternity properly
taken, is proper to God. For though other things are said sometimes to be for
ever, and may have sempiternity or everlastingnesse (which looks forward to
that which is to come;) yet they have not Eternity, which looks backward and
forward, and cannot (as here the properties of God) be said to be without
beginning and ending. Besides, the very continuance of every creature is
alterable and dependent. All the glory, majesty, power, Acts 17.28. Romans 11.36.
Dominion of the Creature is as the flower of the field, fading, indeed every
thing in this world, like flowers, the sweeter they are, the shorter lived they
are, and the sooner withering; the more beautiful (as they say of glass) the
more brittle.

3. Lastly, In this divine doxology, Amen signaculum orationis Dominicae. Hier.
in Mat. 6.
is considerable after what manner, or with what affection this praise is
given; this is set down in the word Amen. Which imports a Confirmation of all
that was said before, as is clear from 1 Kings 1.36. The Greek Translators turn
it (...), be it done. And the root from whence the word comes signifies as
much; but it was held fit by the primitive Church, Non est interpretatum, non
ut esset negatum, sed ne vilesceres nudatum. Aug. Trac. in Joh. 41. Judai non
solum ad omnes preces, sed ad omnes Conciones and Expositiones Allegoricas,
dicere debent Amen, ut per hoc significent, quod credant id omne quod Rabbini
l^quuntur. Buxtorf, de Synagog. Judaic. c. 1. p. 64.
for the greater dignity of the word, (says Augustine) not to translate it.
Some have noted, that it cannot be translated without losing much of its
weight; for when it is added to a speech, it is 1. A note of assent, and
therefore it was not used only by the Jews at prayer, but at the Sermons and
Expositions delivered by the Rabbis, to testify that the people assented, and
agreed to all that they taught. Hence Amen may not unfitly be called (as it
were) a kind of audible subscription. Thus the Apostle 1 Cor. 14.16.
directs the Christians to speak in a known tongue, that the unlearned
understanding what he hears, may give his assent to it by saying, Amen. 2. It
imports earnest desire. Hence Jer. 28.6.
Jeremiah said Amen to the (though false) prophecy of Hananiah concerning the
return of the Captives to their Land, to show how earnestly he desired that it
might be so. 3. Steadfast faith, or a trusting that the thing to which we say
Amen shall so be as was spoken, either when petitioned by us, or promised by
God. And hence it is that Christ having made a promise of his second Coming,
the Church says, Amen. Rev. 22.20.

Having thus briefly explained this concluding Doxology, I might draw from its
several parts very many large and fruitful Observations. But because I have
noted many of them in the forenamed places where I have met with the same
subjects contained in these verses, as also because I only intended a touch
upon this Doxology, I shall conclude with these general notes.

1. Obs. 1.
Praising of God is a work very suitable to Saints.

2. After all exhortations for the obtaining any good, Obs. 2.
God must be acknowledged the Author of that good.

3. Its our duty to praise God for future blessings, Obs. 3.
for what we have in hope, as well as for what we have in hand.

4. Spiritual blessings principally deserve our praises. Obs. 4.


5. In our adresses to God, Obs. 5.
we should have such apprehensions, and use such expressions concerning him as
may most strengthen our faith.

6. Our speeches concerning Christ, must be with highest honor and reverence.
Obs. 6.


7. Praise should conclude that work which Prayer began. Obs. 7.


8. The concluding thanksgivings which are affixed to writings, are only to be
given to God. Romans 16.27. Obs. 8. Claus^la doxologicae Deo propriae. Estius. in
2 Pet.
2 Timothy 4.18. Heb. 13.21. etc. I have ever with the deepest abhorrency of my
soul looked upon the endings of many Popish books, especially of those made by
Jesuits, who share their concluding praises, between God and Saints. Thus
Tannerus concludes his first Tome of School Divinity, Pineda his Comment on
Ecclesiastes, with returns of praise to God and the Virgin. Quos mihi ad hoc
opus patronos and tutelares advocavi. page 1659. Virgini Dei genetrici Mariae
and divini numinis conciliatrici. Baron: ad fin. Tom. 1. Annal. Tua open et
intertersessione da, ut quod hic exterius scripsi, interius spiritus sanctus
suggera^ Cornel. a Lapide in Heb. 13. ad fin.
Sanctius ends his on the Kings and Chronicles, with ascribing the glory to
God, the Virgin Mary, Ignatius, and Francis Xaverius; all which (says he
blasphemonsly) I have called upon as my Patrons and Defenders in the performing
this work. Thus Baronius ends the First Tome of his Annals with ascribing the
praise thereof to God the Father, Son and holy Ghost, and (to use his own
words) to the most holy Virgin Mary, the mother of God and our reconciler. But
Cornelius a Lapide exceeds all, in blasphemy and idolatry, who divides all the
praises between Saint Paul and the Virgin Mary, at the end of his Comment on
Paul's Epistles. He tells Paul, that by his strength and intercession, he had
performed that work, and he desires him to grant that the holy Ghost may make
his writings beneficial to others, yet he tells the Virgin Mary, that he owes
himself, Cui me, meaque omuia debeo, utpote quae me in hoc opere direxit,
invit, instruxit, ^ss^itque, ut tarda, and impolita men's and manus mea fiereut
calamus scribae velociter scribentis. Id, Ibid.
and all his works to her, and that she has made his dull mind and hand, as
the pen of a ready writer, page 1035, 1036.

For my self, All of good that I have, can do, or have in this or any other
service ever done, I humbly desire may be returned only to the honor and
praise of my most dear and blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, whose grace
was the principle of all that is rightly done in this performance, whose spirit
was my guide in doing it, whose word was my rule, whose glory was my end, whose
merit can alone procure acceptance for me and all my services, and the
everlasting enjoyment of whose presence is my souls desire and longing. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5 line 8 del despising, page 5 l 35 read evil of, page 7 l 22 r it, p 8 r
highest, p 24 l 9 r sinner, page 44 marg r Isag. p 53 l 12 r make, p 73 l 13 r
in that, p 80 l 20 r full of, p 102 marg r detractatores, p 112 l 22 r
moderator, p 200 l 22 r prosecutions, p 205 marg r finis, p 253 l 21 r ever, p
257 l 3 r curam, p 288 marg r adipibus p 300 l 17 r Cocumenius, p 335 l 152
defects, p 381 marg del (...), p 512 l 13 r peaceable, p 544 l 25 26 dele so
much, p 560 marg r lucifugae, p 583 marg r Hieron, p 612 marg r aliquo, p 637 l
32 r as they look, p 672 l 27 r seen. p 678 marg r silentiam appetitus, p 644 l
28 r By propounding.


