A CONTRITE AND HUMBLE HEART WITH Motives and Considerations to prepare it.

PARIS. M.DC.XCII.

Permiss^ Superiorum.

PSALM. L. A Contrite and Humble Heart, O God, Thou will not despise.

I. SAM. VII. Prepare your Hearts to God, and Serve Him only.


TO THE READER.
THe Subject which I treat of, is the Best of Hearts; a Contrite and an Humble
One. A Heart which is the Price of Heaven. An inestimable Jewel, which deserves
our selling all we have to purchase it. What disadvantages it may have sufferd
in my hand, who have prepared and fashioned it according to my Fancy, I pretend
not to excuse. As rough, and as unpolisht as it is, the Jewel is entire: the
interior Value of it is the same within it self: And that is abundantly
sufficient to atone for all. Besides, Contrition and Humility affect not the
advantage of a Modish Outside: Plain Sincerity becomes them infinitely more. An
humble Penitent who has an angry God to please, and trembles under his Almighty
Hand, has something else to think of. When a Magdalen once comes with
penitential Tears to bathe her Savior's feet, she quite forgets her
Looking-glass; and comes, without consulting it. She brings her precious
Ointments with her: But these are only for her Lord: They are not, either to
adorn her self, or please the Company.

The Method I have followd, may perhaps seem arbitrary, and require a line or
two, to justify it. I begin with the Love of God. 1. Because it is the First,
the Greatest, and indeed the Whole Duty of Man. 2. Because although the
Practice of Repentance commonly begins with Fear, goes on with Hope, and ends
in Love; yet where our Practice ends, our Theory begins; and what is last
performed, is generally first designed, and principally aimed at. 3. Because
there is no ground for either Hope or Fear, before we Know our Duty. When we
know it, and consider well how little we observe it; Then it is that we begin
to tremble at the thought of our Appearance at the Bar: The Terror of a Living
God awakens us, and makes us sensible, how fearful a thing it is, Hebr. 10.31.
to fall in to his hands. For this reason, in the second place I show the
general Motives of our Fear: Which, to prevent Despair, I counterballance with
the Motives of our Hope: And, after all, because Presumption is the greater
danger of the two, (our Pride inclining us to think Repentance easy, and our
Self-Love daily tempting to Differr it,) therefore I have taken care to show
the Danger of Delay. These Preparations I thought proper for a Contrite and an
Humble Heart.

When I describe Contrition, I enlarge much more upon the Resolutions of
Amendment, than the Sorrow due to Sin: because these Resolutions are commonly
the more neglected of the two. A little Melancholy, or a little Tenderness of
nature, with no more than merely Self-Love in the Case, may oftentimes produce
a sensible concern, and even Tears, when we reflect upon the danger we are in:
Though all this while, our Darling Humors, our beloved Sins, are every jot as
dear to us as ever. Some slight Thoughts we have, in general, of doing so no
more: But these are only superficial: They produce not a sincere and hearty
Detestation of our Crimes: They are to God, what our Compliments are to our
Neighbors; These are Words of course, and Those are Thoughts of course; Both
signify just nothing.

These two Sections of Contrition 91.
have been printed apart, by One who signed the Paper as his Act and Deed;
inviting others to take pen in hand, Intro. Par. 1. chapter 21.
and do the same. I sign it not with my Hand; but only wish, my Reader and my
self may sign it with our Hearts.

In the first four Sections of Humility I offer little or nothing of my own. It
would not have become me to pretend to much acquaintance with so rare a Virtue.
And besides, in such a Matter, so extremely disagreable to our Corrupted
nature, there was need of more Authority than mine.

I conclude with the Character of a Good Christian. Having described his Heart,
I thought it would not be amiss to finish the remainder of his Character. In
this also, I advance not a word of my own. Should I presume to draw a Christian
to the life, 'twould be in me as great a Vanity as if my Reader should pretend
to sit for the Picture. I produce the Scripture chiefly, and the Fathers; now
and then a Modern Author: Any helping Hand was welcome in so difficult a Piece.

No matter Who I am. I am a Son of the Church; and Submitt my self entirely to
Her. S. Pacian B. of Barcelone.
My Name is CHRISTIAN, and my Surname CATHOLIC; the rest I have leave to
conceal. God's Honor and my Neighbor's Good is All I aim at; And, as to
either of these Designs, I have no other Name, but what is altogether useless.

Advertisement.
I Have yet something more to say, which I had almost quite forgotten. It
relates not, either to the general Design of this little Tract, or to any
considerable Part of it; but only to some few pages in the last Section of
Humility Having there proposed one general Motive of that Virtue, by setting
forth the great Enormity of Sin, I proceed to several aggravating
Circumstances of it, and amongst many others I undertake to prove, that there
never was, nor ever can be, upon Earth, any Impiety, Disloyalty, or Treachery,
equal to that of a Sinner. This could not be performed, without answering the
Objections of some people who seem to be of another Mind: And my present
Business is only to put my Reader in a way of observing, who it is that speaks;
that he may not confound my Adversaries words with mine. I have heard of a Man
who opening the first Volume of S. Thomas of Aquine, and lighting by chance
upon the third article, Utrum Deus sit? He no sooner cast his eye upon the
following words, Videtur quod non, but immediately he shutt it again, and laid
it by, as a book pernicious and not fit to be read. It Is a gross mistake, to
imagine that every thing, which is said in an Author, is said by him. In
Scripture it self, there is many a thing said, which the Scripture dos not say.
For example: It Is said in Scripture, that There is no God; Ps. 14. v. 1.
and yet the Scripture dos not say so: it is the Fool that says so, in his Heart:
And this is my Case, in the three Articles above mentioned. There are several
things said in them, which I do not say. There are Things, alluding to some
Transactions, which I had no inclination to speak of; but, being Objected by
Others, I could not avoid Answering. As to the Matter of the Objections, I say
nothing my self; but only Argue against Those who are inclined to say too much.

It Is commonly said, that Losers have leave to talk; Nor is it altogether
without reason: Why should they not have it? They pay for what they have. But
nevertheless, how hard soever it may be to gouvern a man's Passion in some
occasions, it is certainly a very poor excuse, when there is nothing but the
Temptation to atone for the Sin. Let a Man lose what he will, a judicious
Stander by never likes Him the worse for being Wise enough to hold his Tongue:
And when we have made the best we can of the matter, it is but an unbecoming
thing, to be so much transported as some are. A Man's Reputation, in this
point, is as much at stake as his Money; and, of the two, it is better to save
one, than lose both.

Upon such Thoughts as these, I have ever been reserved and moderate in
speaking of the Times. I hold my Tongue, as an Honest man may, and a Wise man
ought: I submitt to Providence, as many a better Man dos: And, whatever my
Thoughts may be, I keep them to my self.

For this Reason also (although it be no affront to the Creation, to speak ill
of the Chaos which preceded it) I have, even in those Affairs which were
forerunners of the 92.
present Settlement, taken care to say nothing of my own. The Allusion is
totally Theirs whom I dispute with: The Application only, is Mine. I pretend to
silence them by their own Principles; and therefore am obliged to give them
fair Play. I pretend not, to argue from my own Ideas of things, but from
theirs; and should be very disingenuous, if I did not represent them their own
way, according to their own liking. All this while, I know well enough what to
think of these matters; but is it not my business, at present, to tell any man
my Thoughts. Whatsoever any man may deserve, I accuse no man. I endeavor to
entertain my self with such Considerations as become a Contrite and an Humble
Heart: I accuse my self in the Sight of God: And, as for Those who so violently
accuse their Neighbors in the Sight of Men, I have so much Zeal as to wish
They would please to call home their Thoughts, and find them better Employment.
Mean time, there is nothing but the Grace of God can calm the Spirits of Men:
And One might as well pretend to chide the Winds and the Waves in a Storm, as
advise people in some occasions to be Silent. The only way of Dealing with such
Persons, is to let them run on quietly, till the Humor begins to be out of
breath. They take it kindly, that they are not contradicted; and are afterward
more willing to hear Reason. Let them alone: Let them say what they please of
the Mote in their Brother's eye: Never interrupt them: When they have done,
Then is the Time, and even then it is hard enough, without Offense, to mind them
of a Beam in their own. According to this Method, I have in the Allusion given
the Losers leave to talk: And afterward, in the Application, I make a
Parallel, which plainly shows, Their Crimes are greater, in the Sight of God,
than ever any Man's were, in the Sight of Men.

When our Savior heard the Clamours of the People against the Woman whom
they loudly accused of Adultery, He knew well enough what to think of the
matter, but however He kept his Thoughts to himself. He saw how violent they
were; their stones ready in their hands; and themselves in great have to
execute the sentence of her Death. All the while, the Scripture says, He seemed
as if he heard them not. Jo. 8. v. 6.
He contradicted nothing; questioned nothing; whatsoever they objected, He gave
all for granted. In the end, when they continued asking him, v. 7.
and would not be quiet without an Answer, He said; He that is without Sin
amongst you, Let him first cast a stone at her.

And now, pray give me leave to ask: Had the Woman any reason, to take it ill
of our Savior, because he said nothing in her defense? Or had the People any
just cause to be offended at him, because he minded them of their Duty?
Without doubt She was pery well pleased to hear him say nothing against her:
And, as for the People, they were confounded by their own principles, and went
away quietly, one by one, as soon as our Savior had putt them in mind of being
greater Sinners themselves. In a word, Both Parties were pleased: The Design of
his Argument was a Charity to the One: And his Way of Arguing was no Injury to
the Other.

If I have not the same good Fortune, in pleasing both Parties, it is none of my
fault. My Way of Arguing and the Design of my Argument are Both exactly the
Same. Whatsoever my Success may be, My Comfort is, I have done what I can to
draw Good out of Evil; and He who sees my Heart, I hope, will reward my
Endeavors. My Matter led me to it, whether I would or no, And 'twould have
been an uncharitable thing, to step out of the way, when I thought my self in
such a fair one, of Doing Good.

Page 67. line 18. way. read may. p. 91. l. 22. witten. r. written. p. 140.
lin. 11. (?) r. (.) p. 141. l. 7. have. r I have. p. 202. l. 10. Sprituall. r.
Spiritual. p. 203. l. 10. dedepends. r. depends. p. 216. l. 10. has dishonor.
r. has dishonored. p. 225. l. 23. his. r. is. p. 235. l. 22. not. r. not for.
p. 280. l. 18. if we once. r. if once. p. 301. l. 14. bids always. r. bids us
always. p. 331. l. 6. All is. r. All his.

MOTIVES OF LOVE.
SECT. I. How much it imports us to Love God above All Things.
WHen the Pharisee asked our Savior, What is the Great Commandment in the
Law? Math. 22.36.
Our dear Redeemer, who came to perfect the Old Law, who came to change the Law
of Fear into a Law of Love, who brought down fire from Heaven to inflame our
Hearts, replied: Thou shall Love thy Lord thy God with all thy Heart, v. 37.
with all thy Soul, v. 38.
with all thy Mind. This is the Great Commandment.

I fear that many of us little think how Great it is. We little reflect on the
one side how great our Obligations are to Love our God; and on the other side
how great are the Advantages which cannot fail to attend this Love. We little
consider how great our Ingratitude is, if we omit our Greatest Duty; How great
our Folly is, if we neglect our Greatest Good.

SECT. II. That the Love of God is our Greatest Duty.
TO make it plainly appear that the Love of God above all things is the
Greatest Duty of a Christian, One would think it were enough to show, that it is
a Duty which comprises all our other Duties; that it is the Total Sum of
Christianity; and that, without the least hyperbole, it is the Whole Duty of
Man; because all other Precepts whatsoever only are so many Branches of this
Great Commandment, which is the Root of all the rest. Sermon. de Orat. Domin.
S. Cyprian calls it the Grand Epitome of all our Obligations. And were it
necessary, it were easy to demonstrate that as God is therefore infinitely
Perfecter than all his Creatures, because He really contains in his own Essence
all Perfections whatsoever; so our Obligation to Love him is incomparably
greater than all other obligations, because it eminently comprehends them all
together.

This is enough to give us a confused Idea of our Duty at a distance. If we
draw the prospect nigher, we shall find an infinite variety of pressing motives
which enforce our Obligation. Every single Excellency of the Object we adore is
all Divine* No shadow there of any Blemish to obscure those Charms which
challenge our Affection: Nothing in our God but what is infinitely amiable, and
deserving infinitely more than All the Love that we are able to return. Since
therefore All and every one of his innumerable Excellencies are unlimited and
boundless; since they All and every one deserve a suitable Esteem; since they
command our Love as much as they deserve it: hence it follows clearly, that our
Duty is as boundless as their Merit; and that, as S. Bernard says, There is no
other Measure of our Love, than Loving without Measure.

Amongst the numberless variety of those divine Perfections, which the Eye has
not seen, 1. Cor. 2.9.
nor the Ear heard, nor have entered into the Heart of any man; there is One
which we are more acquainted with; there is One which in a manner makes the rest
our own; and which, of all, is the most apt to make a sensible impression in a
Generous Heart; I mean that of a True Friend. We read in Ecclesiasticus, 6.15.
that There is nothing comparable to a True and Faithful Friend: and that, in
the balance of the Wise, He weighs much more than all the Gold and Silver in
the world. As there is nothing Better upon Earth than a True Friend, so there
is nothing more pretended to. And as the world deceives us most, where we
expect it least; so there is hardly any thing in which it more deceives us,
than in this. Of all, that read these lines, perhaps there is not one who has
not been already very much mistaken in a Friend: and it is no wonder, if we
always (...) so, till we raise our hearts above this World, and fix them there,
where we are sure to find a True and Faithful One; who Loves us gratis; Always
Loved us; Loved us even when we were his Enemies; and will for all Eternity
continue the same Love, unless we prove Ungrateful, and refuse to Love Him
above all things, as He very well deserves.

He Loves us gratis: Not for any Good He gains by it; or any little Service we
can do him. He cannot stand in need of any of those Goods, which every moment
He bestows upon us. 16.2.
Thou art my God, says the Psalmist; My Goodness extends not to Thee. When we
have done all we can, Luke 17.10.
we are unprofitable Servants: We have done our selves the greatest good we can
imagine, but our God is not a jot the better for it. Lib. 10. de Civ.
The Fountain, says S. Austin, is not better for our drinking at the Stream,
nor the Sun the better for our walking by his Light. If I may use S. Paul's
expression, 2. Cor. 12.14.
He seeks not what is Ours, but Us. He seeks for nothing but our Love, and even
this Command he lays upon us merely for our Good: Deuteronomy. 10.12.13.
And Now, says He, what dos thy Lord thy God require of thee, but to Love Him
with all thy Heart; which I command thee, this Day, for thy Good. Behold dear
Christians, a True and Faithful Friend! and see how you can answer it to your
Good Nature, if you do not Love Him.

He always Loved us; always thought of us; not only all of us in general, but
every one of us; and Loved us with a Love Eternal as Himself. He says, in the
Prophet Jeremy; 13.3.
I have Loved Thee, with an Eternal Love; therefore with loving Kindness have
I drawn Thee. And what more powerful Attractive can there be to draw us to
Him; than that Loving Kindness which from all Eternity took care of our
Concerns, contrived our future Happyness, and drew a Scheme of all the
necessary means to bring us to it. Except himself, He hardly thought of any
thing but Us; Our first Creation, our Redemption, our Salvation, were always in
his Eye; they were the Eternal Entertainment of his mind; they were the Great
Design which gave occasion to the first Production of this World, which we
ungratefully prefer before Him, though He made it for us. Never forsake your
Old Friend, Eccli. 9.14.
your New one will never be like Him. Alas! who can help it, if we will be so
ungrateful, and forsake so ancient a Friend? we may be sure it is impossible
to find a New one comparable to him.

He Loved us, even when we were his Enemies. It Is true; The first Production of
the Universe was Proof enough; and no man can deny but that so Great a Gift
bestowd upon us, for our Use, abundantly sets forth the Greatness of his Love.
But yet the whole Creation of the World is nothing to the constant Conservation
of it for our sakes, who have so long so much abused it. If the first bestowing
of a more than ordinary favor, without any previous merit on our side, be such
an argument of more than ordinary Love; What is the constant repetition and
continuation of the Same so long a time, although the longer we enjoy it, we
demerit more and more, and are as obstinate in our Ingratitude as He is
constant in his Kindness? Was there ever any true and hearty Love, like this!
S. Paul expresses some ressemblance of it in a second Letter which he writes to
the Corinthians, and declares his readyness to serve them, though (says he) the
more abundantly I love you, 1. Cor. 12.15.
the less I am loved. We read it in the 12. chapter, which relates his Rapture
into the third Heaven: and without all doubt this Love of his was copyed there
from the divine Original. If one small Spark of this celestial Love had such a
wonderful effect in the Apostle's breast; What can we say or think of that
immense and boundless Fire of Everlasting Love, which no Ingratitude of Man was
ever able to extinguish! Though our God foresaw how much it was in vain to
court our Love, although He was not ignorant that his Affection for so base and
so unworthy Creatures would be more despised the more he labored to endear us
to him; though He knew before hand the unparallelld Ingratitude of Man;
Nevertheless He sent his only Son to save us, He could not hold his Hand, He
could not deny himself the Satisfaction of being infinitely Kind. Be astonished,
Jerem. 2.12.
O ye Heavens, at this!

S. John, discoursing of this Love, takes notice of no other motive of it than
our Gratitude; our indispensable Obligation to be Grateful to so Good a
Friend. 1. Jo. 4.19.
We Love Him, says he, because He first Loved Us. He dos not say, because He Is
infinitely Good and Perfect in himself, but because He has been infinitely Good
and Kind to us. His reason I gather from the 12. v. of the same Chapter, where
He says, No man has seen God any time; and the 20. where he adds, How can a man
Love God, whom he has not seen? If we had ever seen him Face to Face, 1. Cor.
13.12.
as all the Blessed Spirits do in Heaven, we should then have loved Him here as
they do there; The very Sight of Him (although He never had been Kind) would
have transported us beyond all thoughts of any thing but Him; it would have
been impossible to entertain the least impression of any other Love, in
Competition with Him. But because this Happyness is not to be expected here,
where it is impossible to see Him as He is: 1. Jo. 3.2.
Therefore S. John, the Disciple whom JESUS Loved, Who by experience knew that
no impression sinks deeper in a Generous heart, Jo. 21. v. 7.
than the endearing Obligation of returning Love for Love, pleads nothing else
but Gratitude for the fullfilling of this Great Commandment; We Love Him, 1.
Jo. 4.19.
says he, because He first Loved us.

There Is nothing more obliging than the Love of a True Friend; and nothing else
obliges us without it. Whatsoever the interior value of a Benefit amounts to,
when we cast it up, the Obligation is not taxt by any other weight or measure
than his Love to whom we stand indebted for it. In this Case, Ingratitude of
all crimes is the most unpardonable, a Crime so base, which Human Nature so
abhorrs, that even the Worst of men who are ashamed of nothing else, can never
endure that any man should either say or think They are Ungrateful. Other sins
they publish to the World, but This They always labor to conceal. And though I
scarce can think of any Wickedness so infamous but Some have been so Wicked as
to Glory in it; yet Ingratitude is so Unworthy, carries so much Baseness in the
very Front of it, that I could never hear of any that were ever Proud of being
thought Ungrateful. Rather than a Man should think They are so, they invent a
thousand frivolous pretenses to disown the Obligation; they quarrel with the
Benefit; revile the Benefactor; and that they may deny a less Ingratitude they
hide it with a greater. So ashamed they are to own this fault, that they had
rather be a thousand times ungrateful than be once esteemd so.

This is the Crime which many of us are so Guilty of, although we as are as
much unwilling to believe it, as we are ashamed to own it. And One of the most
notorious aggravations of our great Ingratitude is this; that we not only are
so, but are in a manner quite insensible of being so. Because our God is
infinitely more our Friend than any Other can be, Therefore we regard Him
infinitely less. We cannot without indignation observe one man ungrateful to
another: The very Story of an ungrateful Action, says Seneca, puts us out of
all Patience, and gives us a loathing for the Author of it. That inhuman
Villain, we cry, to do so horrid a Thing! And yet when we observe how horribly
ungrateful a poor miserable Creature is to our Creator, we take little notice
of it; we regard it with a cold indifference, as if we were content it should
be so.

We cannot plead in our defense that we are ignorant how much we stand indebted
to him for his Love: Alas! we all know well enough that there was never any
Love like His: so True, so Ancient, and so Constant. If we plead Forgetfullness
or Inadvertency; 'twill only make the matter worse by offering to mend it. He
is the most Ungrateful of all, says the Moral Philosopher, who Forgets either
the Benefactor, or the Benefit. And yet when we have made the best we can of an
ill Cause, it is certain that the true, if not the only, Reason why we are
insensible of our Ingratitude, is because we seldom call to mind, and almost
quite Forget, 1. Jo. 4.19.
how Great our Obligation is to Love our God, because He first Loved us.

All the Ends of the World, Psalm. 22.28.
says the Psalmist, shall Remember, and be Converted to God. Let us Remember
only What a Friend God is; how infinitely Better than the Best we have besides:
Let us Remember only This, and We shall be Converted: We shall be ashamed of
our Ingratitude, and Love Him above all Things.

SECT. III. That the Love of God is our Greatest Good.
WHatever our Duty is* the very word Commandment is always odious to those who
love their Liberty, and makes it so much harder to go down with them. But yet,
if after second thoughts upon the matter, we discover that One reason, why it
is our Greatest Obligation, is because it is our Greatest Good; Math. 11.30.
the Yoke will then seem easy and the Burden light.

Three things there are, which gain our Hearts, command our Inclinations, and
in a manner gouvern all our Actions; and these three things are, Honor,
Profit, Pleasure. Whatsoever we call Good falls under one of these three Heads;
it is either Honorable, Profitable, or Delightful. All these three accompany
the Love of God; and none of them are ever be found without it.

1. To begin with Honor: I take for granted, No man ought to judge that This
or That is Honorable, because the Generality of Mankind, by mistake, is apt to
value and admire it; but before he gives his verdict, every man should first
consider well the merits of the cause. A Wife Man though he lived amongst a
Multitude of Infidells, and saw how much they honor and adore false Gods, he
would not therefore presently conclude such Idols Honorable; but would rather
laugh at those who are so blind as not to see how little They deserve it. The
Question is not, what we (by a vulgar error) are inclined to honor most, but
What it is that is most worthy of it? And This upon a strict enquiry will
appear to be the Love of God. Honor, at all hands, is agreed to be, a
Testimony of some Excellence; and Nothing can be truly honorable, if it be not
truly Excellent. A man has no just Title to his Honor (any more than what the
common Duties of Civility amount to) if he have not something in him more than
ordinary, some Perfection to distinguish Him, and raise him to a Height more
elevated than the lowest Rank of men.

The Qualities which justly challenge men's Esteem, are Wisdom, Justice,
Power, and Whatsoever raises us to the Perfection of our Nature. 2.2. q. 47. a.
13.
As for Wisdom; S. Thomas of Aquine has demonstrated that No man can be truly
Wise, who dos not Love God above all things. He may be, says he, a Wise
Merchant, or a Wise Pilot, a Wise Statesman, or a Wise. General; because he
may be Prudent in the choice of Proper Means well fitted to the Purpose and
Design of such Employments: But it is impossible to be a Wise Man without being
Wise in order to the Proper End of MAN, the great Design of his Creation,
which is nothing but the Knowledge and the Love of God. A Magistrate, who is
created merely for the Public Peace, whatever he may be in other things, if he
be not Wise in order to that End, He is not a Wise Magistrate: And since All
Mankind was created to be happy in an Everlasting Union with God, Whatever a
Person may be in other Affairs, if he be not Wise in order to this End, He may
be a Wise What you please, but he is not a Wise MAN.

As for Justice, I would gladly know how any Man is thoroughly and truly Just,
who is perpetually Guilty of the most notorious injustice, we can think of.
Such is the Man, whoere he be, that dos not Love his Maker as he ought. It Is
true; He only is injust to God; He only wrongs Himself; he never wronged his
Neighbor, may be, all his Life. But what would you say of a Steward who only
cheats his Master? Would you think him a Just Man, because he never cheats his
Fellow Servants?

As for Power: I Confess it may be Great, in some particular respects, but
never can be Absolute, without the Love of God. I may say the same of Power,
that S. Thomas says of Wisdom. A Man without this Love may be a Powerful
Prince, a Powerful Warrior, or the like: because, without it, He may have
all Power necessary for the main Design of Gouvernment, or War, etc. But
since, without this Love, he neither can Command his Passions, nor Himself;
it is evident He has not all the Power necessary to attain the proper End of
Man's Creation: in a word, He is no Powerful MAN, who is not Master of Himself.

Thus you may plainly see how these three Characters of Wise, Just, Powerful,
which are the most esteemed and Honored in the World, are only Shadows, and
imperfect Semblances, if separated from the Love of God. You plainly see; that
it not only is the Greatest Excellence of Man, most Honorable, most Deserving
our, Esteem; but that, without it, there is hardly any Thing which truly is so.

2. As it is our Greatest Honor, so it is our Greatest Profit. S. Paul was so
sensible of this, that though the Fervor of his Zeal appears in all his
Writings, yet he never speaks with greater Emphasis than when he has a fair
occasion to discourse upon this subject. Though I speak, 1. Cor. 13.
says he, with the Tongues of Men and Angels, and have not CHARITY, I am become
like sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. And though I have the Gift of
Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge: and though I have all
Faith so that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity; I am Nothing. And
though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and though I give my Body to be
burned, and have not Charity; it PROFITS me nothing. He has reckoned up the
greatest Gifts, and best Advantages, that he could call to mind; and yet he
says, They All are Nothing to our Purpose, without Love. On the other side, the
same Apostle teaches us, that All things else are Profitable with it, though
they never can be so without it. VVeknow, Romans 8.28.
says he, that All things work together for GOOD, to those who LOVE God. The
Secret of changing all things in to Gold has, in vain, long time been sought
for: but the mystery of changing all the meanest of our Actions in to more than
Gold, is much more easy to be found. 1. Cor. 10.31.
Whatever ye do says S. Paul, Do all to the Glory of God; and every thing you
do, will have more value in his sight, than all the Gold and Silver in the
World. The least Degree of Love, the coldest Act of Charity, Math. 10.42.
even the Giving a Cup of cold water, for the Love of God, our Savior tells
us, shall in no wise loose its Reward. So true is that, of S. Austin; All
things else are Profitable, with it; Nothing else is truly so, without it.

3. As it is our Greatest Profit, so it is our Greatest Pleasure: There is
Nothing so Delightful, even in this World, as to Love God with all our Heart,
with all our Soul, with all our Mind. It Is hard enough, I know, to make the
World believe it: Because although the Truth be, in it self, as clear and
bright as the Meridian Sun; Our Passions raise a cloudy Mist before our Eyes,
which intercepts the Sight of it. All Persons, whose Affections are fixed upon
the Pleasures of this World, can hardly ever be persuaded but that the Love of
God is the Dullest, and the most Insipid Thing imaginable. They easily
conceive, that Nothing is so Honorable, as to be a Saint; And that it is but
very little Profit for a Man to gain the World, Math. 16.26.
and loose his Soul: The Honor and the Profit are agreed upon; But where is the
Pleasure? All that can be said upon this subject, They are unacquainted with,
They understand it not. He preaches in an unknown Tongue, who preaches the Love
of God to those who never Loved Him. The Language of Love, says S. Bernard, is
Barbarous, to those who Love not.

As soon as ever they begin to turn their back upon these rotten Pleasures, and
look toward Heaven; presently these Darlings of their Heart begin, as it were,
Conf. lib. 8.
to pull them by the sleeve, as Saint Austin words it, and whisper in their
Ear; Do you Forsake Us? And from this moment shall we have your Company no
more, FOR EVER? Shall we NEVER see you more? Thus they solicit, Thus they
importune, and tempt them, to differr the time of their Conversion. Do you
think it possible to Live without the Pleasures of this World? Ah Christians!
It Is not only possible; it is the Greatest Pleasure in the World to Live without
them. It Is true: The very Thoughts of Separation are like Thoughts of Death: But
then we ought to reflect, that as we feel no pain when we are Dead, but all our
pain is only whilst we are in Dying: So we feel the pain of leaving worldly
Pleasures, whilst we are Deliberating what to Do; But we are Dead, We feel no
pain at all, when once we are Resolved upon it. You are Dead, 3.3.
says S. Paul to the Colossians, and your Life is hidden with Christ in God. I
am Dead, 2.19.20.
says the same Apostle to the Galatians, and the Life which I now live in the
Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God who Loved me. See the powerful
Effects of Love! It makes us as insensible to all the Pleasures of this World,
as if our Inclinations were already Dead, and quite Extinguished in Us. Love is
as Strong as Death. Cant. 8.6.


It Is this Victorious Love which frees us from the Tyranny of all those
Passions, which divide the Kingdom of our Heart: Math. 12.25.26.
a Kingdom brought to Desolation; where Satan casts out Satan; and How can this
Kingdom stand? How is there any true Content and Satisfaction to be found in
it? A Man who places all his Happyness in Humouring his Passions, can never
please himself, till he has pleased them All: And since it is impossible to
please two Masters, how is it possible for any Man to please so many? I might
here appeal to each Man's private Conscience for a farther Testimony of this
Truth; But, if a Sullen Conscience (even when it is upon the Wrack) refuses to
Confess, We have the Word of God, the best and clearest Evidence, we can
desire: The Wicked, Isai. 57.20, 21.
says He, are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot Rest; whose Waters cast up
Mire and Dirt: There is no PEACE, says my God, to the Wicked.

On the other side, when once the Love of God has full possession of our Heart;
when Christ Gouverns it by Faith, and the Holy Ghost by Charity; Genesis 1.2.
Math. 8.26.
when the Spirit of God begins to move upon the face of the Waters; it
presently Commands the Winds and the Sea, and there succeeds a Great Calm. In
a word, As much as Liberty is more agreeable than Slavery, As much as Unity is
better than Division, As much as Peace, Content, and Ease, are more Delightful
than perpetual Disturbance, Discontent and Pain; so much the Pleasure, which
attends the Love of God, is Greater than the Pleasures of this World.

Had it been possible for our Creator to oblige us All to Love Him gratis, we
might then have had more Color for our Crime. And yet, it would have been no
more than what He very well deserves. He Loved us gratis, without any
possibility of Recompense: He humbled himself to repair our Honor; He quitted
Heaven to promote our Interest; He sufferd torments to procure our Ease; And it
would only be a Suitable Return, if we preferred his Honor, Interest, and
Pleasure, far before our own. But, as our Kind and Gracious God has ordered it
to our advantage, we are All obliged to seek our Own True Honor, Interest, and
Pleasure; and despise the False Appearances of Honorable, Profitable, and
Delightful, which the World endeavors to delude us with.

When we have made the most we can of such an Obligation, 'twill amount to
neither more nor less than What we daily see before our Eyes. Consider how the
Ambitious, the Covetous, and the Voluptuous, love their Honors, Riches,
Pleasures: Is it not plain, They Love them above all things? And why should not
we Love God as well as Worldlings Love the World? They Love it with all their
Heart, They desire nothing else but to enjoy it; with all their Soul, They have
no passion for any thing else; with all their Mind, They think of nothing else,
but how to make a Figure in it. Has God less charms than the World? Or is a
Flattering Friend (well known to be our Greatest Enemy) more amiable than the
Best of Friends, most True, most Ancient, and most Constant, who has always
Loved us better than we Love our selves? Is it a Greater Honor, for a Man to
be the Divel's Slave, than be a Favorite of God? Is it a Greater Profit, to be
cheated in the End, than be Eternally Rewarded? Or are those Pleasures which
are always mixed with intervalls of discontent, anxiety, and pain, greater than
those Delights which are unchangeable, immortal, and divine, which even in
this Vale of Misery begin our Heaven upon Earth? Ah Christians! We have little
reason to dispute the terms of such an Obligation, where the whole Advantage is
entirely on our Side: So great Advantage, that we cannot truly Love our selves,
Math. 22.38.
unless we Love our Lord our GOD, with all our Heart, with all our Soul, with
all our Mind: This is, not only our Greatest Duty, but our Greatest Good.

SECT. IV. That the Love of God is the chief Grace of the Holy Ghost.
I Am come, Luke. 12.22.
says our Savior, to Send Fire on the Earth; and what do I desire but that it
may be Kindled? This He desires; for This He came; and This we pray for, in the
Service of the Church; Come Holy Spirit; Fill the Hearts of thy Faithful, and
Kindle in them the Fire of thy Love.

The Holy Ghost came visibly at first; and proved his Presence by the Miracles
He did. But yet a Spirit is not naturally sensible; and when He comes
invisibly, He comes more like Himself; nor have we any reason (when He dwells
within us) to suspect that He is less at home, because He less Appears
abroad. Although we do not see the Fire descend, and rest upon our Heads; yet
if the Love of God inflame us, if it burn within our Hearts, if it appear in
our Devotion, in our Conversation, in our Actions; it is enough; we then may
hope we have received the Holy Ghost, and that our Savior verifies in us his
Promise, which He made us, when He said, He shall be IN YOU. Jo. 14. v. 17.
He did not come in to the World, to visit the Apostles only, and abandon their
Posterity: Our Savior did not send him to us, that he might immediately
forsake us, but that He might remain with us for ever, to the End of the World:
Jo. 14. v. 16.
I will pray my Father, says He, that He may abide with you for ever.

The Spirit of God shall be in Us. It Is a solemn Promise of our Savior himself:
we cannot doubt of it, although we cannot but admire it with profound
astonishment, Kings. 3.8.27.
like that of Solomon: Will God dwell with us on the Earth! will the Spirit of
God not only dwell here with us, but within us! If Heaven says he, and the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain Thee, How much less this House which I have
builded! If we find that Solomon was thus transported when he looked upon his
Temple, and compared it with the Majesty of God, to whom he built it; may not
we admire much more the living Temple of the Holy Ghost? If the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain the Spirit of God, How much less this little House of
clay? Can we imagine that this little Heart of ours is more capacious than
Heaven? Or can our Heart contain our God, if Heaven cannot? Oh no: our God is
infinite; He cannot be contained in either; and yet He dwells in both. Hear the
Psalmist; 122.1.
To Thee I lift up my Eyes, O Thou that Dwell in the Heavens. Hear S. Paul;
1. Cor. 3.16.
You are the Temple of God, and the Spirit of God Dwells in You. Compare both
Testaments, the Old and New; and if you seriously believe them both, conclude
we have the same assurance that God dwells in Virtuous Souls, as that He dwells
in Heaven.

The Kingdom of God is within you. Luke. 17.21.
Wheresoever Majesty resides, the Court is there; and wheresoever the King
gouverns, there his Kingdom is. If the Almighty gouvern all the Passions,
Motions and Affections of our Souls; if once He be the Souvereign Monarch of
our Hearts, if the Love of God give Law to all our Inclinations; the H. Ghost
is then as truly in us, as a King is in his Kingdom, and He is no otherwise in
Heaven. This is that Heaven upon Earth which none can understand but those
devout and pious Souls, who by experience Taste and See how sweet God's Kingdom
is, Ps. 33.9.
where Christ gouverns by Faith, and the Holy Ghost by Charity; or (as S.
Austin says) whose King is Truth, whose Law is Love.

A Spirit, having no proportion with Place (if we believe Philosophers) is
neither here, nor there, nor any where, of its self; but only by its Operation
in a Body, which is in some Place. When Angels formerly appeared with airy
bodies, they were truly and substantially present in those human Forms, which
they inhabited, by operating there. Whatever the Airy Body seemd to do, the
Angel truly did; the Angel moved, the Angel walked, the Angel spoke, discourst,
converst with men. The Holy Ghost is likewise truly and substantially present
in the Soul of a devout and pious Christian. He dwells in his Heart by
operating there: His Heart becomes a Paradise on Earth: The Love of God, now
planted in the middle of it, is the Tree of Life: Genesis 2.9.
The Holy Ghost himself becomes the Angel Guardian, of the Place, and like the
Cherubin defends it with a Flaming Sword: Genesis 3.24. Gal. 5. v. 25.
He gives him Life, we Live by the Spirit; He gives him Motion, we Walk by the
Spirit; He gives him Speech, It Is not You that Speak, Math. 10.20.
says our Savior to his Apostles, but the Spirit of God that Speaks in You.

So far you see the Parallel betwixt the Presence of an Angel dwelling in an
airy Body, and the Presence of the Holy Ghost inhabiting in us. Only this
difference there is. Philosophers are puzzled to explain the Virtue and the
Operation by which an Angel moves the Body it assumes; But Christians, by the
light of Faith, have this Advantage over them: They plainly read and understand
in Scripture, that the Virtue of the Holy Ghost, by which He moves and gouverns
us, is Charity; and that the Operation, which with us He produces in us, is the
Love of God above all things. God the Holy Ghost is Charity: 1. Jo. 4.8.
He is the Consubstantiall Love of God the Father and the Son. If Charity
inspire us; if the Love of God direct us, gouvern us, and influence the
principal Designs and Actions of our Life; we then may reasonably hope, 1.
Cor. 2.12.
we have not received the Spirit of this World, but the Spirit which is of God.

That Inclination which is predominant, and gouverns all the rest, is usually
called the Spirit of a man. If this be Love of Honors, Riches, Pleasures of
this World; It Is an Ambitious, a Covetous, a Carnal, or (to speak them all at
once) a VVorldly Spirit. But if it be the Love of God above all things, without
any competition of Creatures; it is a Virtuous, a Divine, a Holy Spirit: Then it
is that the Love of God is diffused in our Hearts, Romans 5.5.
by the Holy Ghost, the HOLY SPIRIT which is given to us.

S. Paul, Acts. 19.1.2.
when he came to Ephesus, and found certain Disciples, demanded of them; Have
ye received the Holy Ghost, since ye believed? And I am apt to think, it would
not be amiss to put the Question, to the Christians of our Age. You in whose
Minds Christ dwells by Faith, dos the Holy Ghost dwell in your Hearts by
Charity? Is your Love suitable to your Creed? Do you Love God, as you Believe
He deserves? Do you Love Him above all things? Your greatest Care, is it to
please your God? Your greatest Grief, is it to have displeased Him? In all
things, which deserve Deliberation, do you first consult his Law, and make it
the Rule of all your Measures? Examine well the whole Course of your Life; your
Actions, Humors, and Designs. What is it that employs your Mind the most? What
Thoughts are those which close your Eyes at Night, and open them next Morning?
Are they fixed upon the Only Necessary? Do they tend to Heaven? All things else,
what are they? Are they Nothing in comparison of That? If so; you have received
the Holy Ghost; the Spirit of God, Io. 14. v. 17.
whom the World cannot receive. But if the Souvereign Inclination of your
Hearts be Love of Honors, Riches, Pleasures; if your greatest Grief and
Trouble be your disappointment of Success in these; if upon all occasions you
consult your Inclinations and the Maxims of the World: You then may answer, as
the Ephesians did; Alas we are but little acquainted with this Holy Spirit; we
have scarce heard of him; we know not what He is: A VVorldly Spirit we have
more acquaintance with; But, as for the Spirit of God, He is a Stranger to us.
We say our Prayers, we frequent the Sacrements, we are in the common road of
customary Duties: But our Ambitious Spirit, our impatient Love of Honor is
such, that we are more concerned for an Affront, than for a Mortal Sin: Our
Avaritious Spirit, our insatiable Love of Riches is so violent, that we had
rather hazard the loss of all the Heaven we pretend to, than expose the
Treasure we possess: Our Carnal Spirit, our incontinent Love of Pleasure is so
passionate, that we had rather quitt our Right to all the Eternal Joys above,
than any way deny our selves the rotten satisfaction we seek for here below: In
short, we love this World so much, that if we might but always have it at
Command, it is All we ask; We wish no more; We have received the Spirit of this
World. 1..Cor. 2.12.


I hope I may be pardoned if I am a little importune in pressing home this
Question; Acts. 19.2.
Have you received the Holy Ghost? Eternity depends upon it: Your Choice of
Heaven, or Hell; Your being Children of God, or of the Devil; Your being Saved,
or Damned for ever: All This, (and what is All if This be not?) All This
depends upon the Answer to this necessary Question. Romans 8.16.
As Many as are led by the Spirit of God, says Saint Paul, They are the
Children of God. Compute your Actions, Words, and Thoughts; from Morning to
Night; from Day to Day: Dos the Spirit of God direct and lead you? Or the
Spirit of this World? If the Spirit of God, You are the Children of God: If
not, Hear what the Apostle says, If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, He
is none of his: Romans 8.9.
He is not a Brother of Christ; He is not an adoptive Son of his Eternal
Father; He has a Father in Hell, but none in Heaven. Our Savior plainly says,
Jo. 8. v. 42.
If God were your Father, You Would LOVE Me above all things; but because You
do not, v. 44.
You are of your Father, the Devil.

Let those who, above all things, Love the World, Consider this, and Tremble.
Let them not gaze in vain upon our Savior ascending to his Father: Let them be
assured his Father is not theirs; and that, as certainly as He ascended to his
Father in Heaven, they shall in time (unless they seriously repent) descend to
their's in Hell.

This was the Reason why our Savior told the Jews: VVhither I go, Jo. 8. v. 21.
You cannot come: As if He should say; I go to my Father; If He were your
Father also, then you might bear me Company: But, 1. Cor. 2.12.
since you have received the Spirit of this World; as long as you are
gouvern'd by the Spirit of another Father; You may in due time follow him to
Hell, But it is impossible (without sincere Repentance)* You should ever follow
me to Heaven: VVhither I go, you cannot come. The Jews amazed to hear it, knew
not what He meant. He told them the reason: I am from above, Jo. 8. v. 23.
says He, I am not of this World; The Spirit which gouverns all my Actions is
from above; it is not the Spirit of this World; it is the Spirit of my Father;
therefore I go to him. But on the other side, You are of this World, Ibid.
You are led by the Spirit of this World; and therefore VVhither I go, You
eannot come.

Let us not flatter and deceive our selves with vain appearances of
superficial Piety which flote upon the Surface of our Souls; but sound the
very bottom of our Hearts, and be assured that if we find them chiefly fixed
upon this World, or any Creature in it; We may stand gazing with the Men of
Galilee, We may contemplate and admire the Ascension of our Savior; but all in
vain; All this will be no Comfort to us; Whither He goes, we cannot follow Him.
We cannot Ascend, unless we first receive the Holy Ghost: nor can we receive
Him, unless we first prepare for His reception.

SECT. V. That we ought to prepare our Heart for this great Grace.
WHen our Savior was upon the point of leaving his Apostles, after He had been
forty days discoursing with them concerning the Kingdom of God, The last and
most important thing He recommended to their Care, was that They should prepare
themselves for the receiving of the Holy Ghost: Acts. 1.4.
He commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
Promise of the Father.

Prepare your Hearts, 1. Sam. 7.3.
says the Prophet; Prepare your Hearts to God, and serve Him only, and He will
deliver you: Prepare your Hearts to entertain the Holy Ghost, or else you never
will receive Him. Prepare Materials for the Temple of the Holy Ghost: 1. Cor.
6.19.
His Temple is not to be built and finished in a day: We must have Time to carry
on the Work, and more than ordinary Preparations must be made: Chron. 1.29.2.
With ALL MY MIGHT, says the Royal Prophet* I have PREPARED for the House of
my God; because, says he, v. 1.
the Work is GREAT; and the Palace is not for Man, but GOD.

Our Heart has been profaned with Idols: Our Ambition, A varice, and Lust have
had their several Altars in it; and from time to time, according as occasion
served, have offered Sacrifice to Honors, Riches, Pleasures. Such a Temple, so
Profaned, must be demolisht; and a New one built upon the Ruins of it. 18.31.
Make your selves a New Heart, and a New Spirit; says the Prophet Ezechiel.
Although it be God's Work, it is not only His but also Ours. As much as lies
in us, we must cooperate and labor with Him: And the more difficult it is, the
more industriously we must endeavor to effect it. Chron. 1.29, 2.
With all our Might, with all our industry and diligence, we must prepare our
Heart, that it may be a Temple of the Holy Ghost.

O that we had but VVings like a Dove (the wings of that Dove which once
descended visibly upon our Savior) Then would We fly away, Psalm. 55.6.
and be at Rest: Our Hearts would fly away from all things in this World, and
be at Rest in Heaven. If once the Love of God inflame our Hearts, with ardent
and continual desires of being happy with Him, We shall find that these
Desires are VVings by which our Hearts aspire and mount to Heaven. But if the
Love of any thing in this World bind us to the Earth, We then shall find that
our celestial Desires are clogged with earthly Passions; and although we now
and then, with a faint sigh, look up to Heaven, yet our stronger Inclinations
will always bear us down. He who is wholly disengaged from all the Charms of a
deluding World, He only is at liberty; S. Austin says, The VVings of his soul
are Free; But if his Heart be any way ensnared with any other Love, He then has
Birdlime in his VVings; He cannot fly away, and be at Rest.

The Apostles themselves were not prepared for the receiving of the H. Ghost,
as long as they were satisfied with being Happy in our Savior's Company on
Earth. If any Satisfaction here below could innocently challenge so much place
in their Affections, surely Innocence it self descending down from Heaven had
the best and clearest Title to their Love. And yet as long as they were of S.
Peter's mind, and though^ with themselves, Math. 17.4.
It Is Good for us to be Here; It Is Good to make our Tabernacles Here; so long we
find they were not fit for the Reception of the Holy Ghost. Jo. 16. v. 7.
I tell you the truth, says our Savior; It Is expedient for you that I go away.
Because you Love me with so little Resignation, and are so unwilling that I
leave you; therefore it is expedient for you that I now ascend, to raise your
Hearts above the World, and carry them to Heaven with me. If I go not away,
your Love will creep upon the Earth, the Spirit of the World will still possess
your Hearts, the Spirit of God will find no habitation there, v. 7.
the Comforter will not come: But if I depart, if I (whom you so dearly love)
ascend, your Minds and Hearts will follow me to Heaven, they will be raised
above the reach of all things in this World, the Spirit of the World will have
no dwelling there, You then will be prepared for the receiving of the H. Ghost,
and when you are so, v. 7.
I will send Him to you.

When the Holy Ghost came, Acts. 2.2.
He filled All the House where they were sitting. Wherever He comes He fills
the House; He takes it All to Himself; And it is no wonder, being Infinite, He
takes up so much room. As God would cease to be Immense, If there were any
Corner of the World in which He is not Present: So the Holy Ghost would cease
to be our Infinite and Souvereign Good, if any Corner of our Heart have any
thing lodged in it, that excludes Him. When once we have received the Holy
Ghost, our Heart is the Kingdom of God. He is the Absolute and Only Monarch
that commands it: He cannot Alienate the least part of his Title to the
Gouvernment: He cannot any way admit of a Companion in his Throne. Our Heart
is the Throne of the Most High: And, if we remember what became of Lucifer, I
hope it will suffice to make us sensible, how dangerous a thing it is, to place
a Creature in the Throne of God, Isai. 14.14.
and make it like the Highest.

S. Austin, wondering at the overflowing measure of Gods Holy Spirit in the
Apostles Hearts, observes that the reason why they were so full of God, was
because they were so empty of his Creatures: They were very Full, says he,
because they were very Empty: because they were so Empty of the Spirit of this
World, therefore they were so full of the Spirit of God.

O that our Hearts were Empty; O that they were purged and cleans'd like theirs
from all inordinate affection to this World; We then should be prepared like
Them, and ready to receive the Fullness of the Holy Ghost. It Is a great Work;
and will require some time. Why are we then so flow in undertaking it? Acts.
1.11.
Why do we stand Gazing? We gaze, we lift our eyes to Heaven: But yet we
stand; our feet are fixed upon the Earth. We prefer Heaven before Hell: of the
two we had rather be there: But, of the three, (if it were possible) we had
rather be always here.

How long will you love Vanity? Psalm. 4.2.
says the Psalmist. This World is nothing else but Vanity: How long will you
Love it? Eccles. 4. v. 16.
It Is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit: How long will you delight in it? It flies
before you like a Shadow: 6. v. 12.
How long will you run afterit? Alas! it is but a Shadow if you overtake it. The
World passes away: 1. J^ 4.17.
It Is an unkind, illnatur'd World which passes by us with a flattering smile,
and will not stay a moment with us. If it had ever been a true and faithful
Friend to any man, We should have some pretense to justify our expectation of
its being Kind: But, since we know it never was so to its greatest Favorites,
We way be sure it never will be so to us. The Time will come, when we shall
plainly see (although perhaps, too late) that All is Vanity; and we shall love
no more what we are now so fond of. The Love of all those Trifles, which our
Infancy was once much pleased withal, is now forgot: and we so much contemn
those childish entertainments, that unless we saw the same in other Children,
we should scarce believe we ever loved them. As when we advance in years, we
see the folly of our Childhood; so upon our Deathbed we as plainly see the
folly of our Life: we then discover, that the Honors, Riches, Pleasures of
this World, are only so many serious Trifles, which are therefore more
ridiculous because more serious. When once the Period of our Time approaches:
When we are upon the Borders of Eternity: When we are, as it were, betwixt two
Worlds, the End of this, and the Beginning of the next which never will have
end: Then it is that all our Joys begin to vanish out of sight; they are the
same to us as if they never had been present: Than it is that all our Miseries
are every one in View, such Miseries as never can be past, but will for all
Eternity be always present: When once that Hour comes, we shall be Wise enough
to undervalue and contemn what we so dearly love: But then, I fear, We shall be
Wise too late: Our useless Wisdom will not rise in Judgment for us, but
against us. O let us now endeavor to be Wise, and disengage our Hearts from
all inordinate affection to this world; that we may be prepared for the
receiving of this Grace, which is the best and surest Pledge of the Eternal
Glory, which we hope for in the world to come.

MOTIVES OF FEAR.
SECT. I. How much it imports us to remember the Day of Judgment.
WHen the Disciples asked our Savior what would be the Sign of his Coming and
of the End of the World? Math. 24.3. v. 36.
Our Savior answered, that the Day and Hour were not to be known before hand:
that his Coming would be like a Flash of Lightning, v. 27.
when they least expected Him: Therefore, v. 44.
says He, be ready; for in such an Hour as you think not, the Son of Man will
come: v. 35.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words shall not pass away. The
World shall have an End. The Son of man shall Come to Judge the World. The Hour
of his Coming shall surprise us, when we think not of it. If we knew before
hand, we should certainly prepare: And we have much more reason, since we do
not know it.

But, alas! our Savior Jesus Christ himself has prophesied, v. 38.
that As in the days that were before the Flood, they were eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage, till the Day that Noe entered the Ark; v. 39.
And Knew not, till the Flood came, and took them all away: So also, shall be
the Coming of the Son of man. He told us how it would be: and every day we see
how true it is. We mind nothing, but eating and drinking, marrying and giving
in marriage; We seek for nothing but Diversion, Sport, and Pastime; We now
Rejoice; But then, when the World ends, our Joys will end with it; Then we
shall Grieve; and not only then, Math. 24.30.
but for ever. THEN all the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn.

They shall All mourn. Not All the Just; Not All God's Friends, Not All devout
and pious Christians; who not only in their Baptism, but also during Life,
renounced the Vanities and Pleasures of this World: All these will have just
reason to abound with Joy, at the Approach of their so long defir'd, and
everlasting, Happyness: Psalm. 126.5.
They sowed with Tears, but now shall reap with Joy.

All the Tribes of the Earth; All Those whose Hearts were always fixed upon the
Earth; upon the Honors, Riches, Pleasures of the Earth; THEY shall All mourn.
And not without sufficient Reason. For, 1. They shall see the fatal End of all
their transitory Happyness; 2. They shall see the sad Beginning of their
everlasting Misery.

SECT. II. That our Last Day is the fatal End of all our transitory Happyness.
AS, on the one side, Nothing can be truly Little, which is Infinite; So, on
the other, Nothing can be truly Great, which has an End. Baruch. 3. v. 25.
Our God is Great, says the Prophet, and has no End. As if he had a mind to let
us understand, that God himself, with all his other Attributes, would be but
little, if He had one: that All this World is therefore inconsiderable: and
that the Next is therefore to be valued above all things, because it is a World
without End. This is the common Misery, attending all our Happyness. All that
is past, is Nothing: All that we enjoy at present, is but one poor moment: All
that is to come, is every moment less and less, approaching nigher to the
final period of its future Being; which is Nothing.

The very Thought of this is so afflicting, that it puts a stop to all our
joys, and makes us miserable in the full Carreer of our Felicity: We need no
more, to damp our Spirits in the midst of our enjoyments, than the importunity
of this unwellcome Thought; All This will shortly have an End. The Paradise of
our first Parents would have been to them no Paradise at all, had they foreseen
the End of it. And when God pleased to interdict the eating of the fatal
fruit, He seemed to judge that nothing could be more effectual to contain them
in their Duty, than to let them know, that Death should put an End to All, if
ever they presumed to eat of it. As it was then their chief and only comfort,
to survey the vast extent and great variety of their Delights, and at the same
time confidently say, All this is ours for ever, if we please: So it had been
impossible for any artifice of the malicious Serpent, to surprise them, or
prevail upon them, if He had not flattered them with some assurance, that they
should not Die; but still be truly Happy, that is, happy without End.

The Devil dos not now pretend to face us down, We shall not Die: He knows
that so notorious a Cheat would never pass upon us. But yet, for fear least we
should undervalue all the vain allurements of a miserable World, he whispers in
our ear, We shall not Die so soon: he has not the impudence to tell us that the
World will never end, but that it will not end so soon as we imagine: Luke.
12.19.
Thou have many Goods, says the Rich Man in the Ghospel, laid up for many years.

This is, in short, the Sum of our Felicity on Earth. The Happyest Man, that
ever lived, could say no more than this. He could not say, that he had All
which he desired: he could not but observe, by sad experience, that he was
still unsatisfied, and that his small possessions were nothing to his Great
Desires. Nor could he say, that what he had would always be his own: He could
not but be well acquainted with the truth of What Man is; He daily Dies; He
every moment is upon his journey to the Grave; He wastes away, Job. 14.10.
gives up the Ghost, and Where is he? However, he might say, to comfort his
insatiable Soul; Although thou have not All that that thou can wish for, Thou
have MANY Goods; And, though thou can not possibly enjoy them always, yet
they are laid up for MANY years: thy Palace is magnificent, thy Entertainment
splendid, thy Attendance numerous, thy Gardens are a Paradise of pleasure and
delight, thy Honor equal to thy Fortune, and thy Power equal to both; the
World admires thee, courts thee, and almost adores thee; is not this enough?
Thou have many Goods. And why should any melancholy apprehensions seize thy
Spirits, and disturb thy Mind with fearful thoughts of loosing what thou have?
there is no danger, whilst thou liv'st; and thou art in the flower of thy age,
just ripe for pleasure, healthy, vigorous, and like to live these many years:
And what have thou to do, but take thy Ease, Eat, Drink, Luke. 12.19.
and be as Merry, as if thou were to live for ever?

Behold, the Best that we can make of the most happy State we hope for here. We
dare not look before us, least we see the End of All our joys: We blindly dote
upon these Darlings of our Passion, and endeavor to forget the misery of their
Mortality and ours. We are not able to support a serious thought of our
perpetual decay; and though we love our selves above all things, yet we hate
the very sight of our condition; we cannot endure to look into our selves; and
as an idle Solitude is ever troublesome, because we love no company so little
as our own; so the great reason, why the company of any other person is so
pleasing, is because it hinders us from thinking of of our selves.

The Greatest and most Happy Man whose Heart is fixed upon this World, would
soon be Melancholy if he had but leisure to reflect that every Moment le^ads
him to the Period of his Happyness. The doleful Prospect of a future
Separation is so terrible, that he endeavors all he can to think of nothing
farther than the present. All the busy Agitation of his mind, the Exercises of
his body, and the Pastimes of his Conversation, are delightful to him chiefly
upon this account; because they are Diversions; that is, because they fix his
mind upon the present moment, and divert him from the melancholy Thought, that
All his Happyness must have an End.

If the bare thought of our approaching Period be so doleful, even at a
distance, where Uncertainty gives room to make the most we can of our Felicity;
if I say, the very Thought of it be so afflicting; What will the Presence of it
be, when with our own eyes we shall see that fatal End which now we are so
much afraid to think of? We now are merry and rejoice; because we banish from
us the uneasy Apprehension: But then All those who will be sad Spectators of
this doleful Scene, will be no longer able to divert themselves from thinking
of the Misery, they see before them. Then All the Tribes of the Earth shall
mourn. Math. 24.30.


To close the Eyes of any dying Friend we dearly love, is apt to move our
tears; although our other Friends who yet survive, are still a comfort to us.
But when their Dearest Friend, the World it self, begins to die; When All
their Comfort, all at once, forsakes them; When the Sun and Moon grow dark, and
the expiring World begins to close its Eyes: THEN they shall All mourn.

When once that dismal Day is come, which the Prophet Zephaniah calls, the
Great Day of the Lord, Chapter 1. v. 13.
a Day of Calamity and Misery, a Day of Darkness, a Day of Tribulation and
Distress: When Cataracts of Fire shall shower down upon their heads, as if the
Stars themselves fell from the Firmament: When in the last Convulsions of its
mortal Agony, the Earth trembles, and Hell it self lies gaping under their
feet: Then they shall plainly see the meaning of that Vision in the
Revelations, 10.5.6.
which represents an Angel standing with one foot upon the raging Sea, another
on the trembling Land, lifting his hand to Heaven, and swearing by Him that
lives for ever; Time shall be no more.

Poor miserable Wretches! There was once a Time, when Honors Dignities and
Titles recommended them to the admiring World, whose eyes were dazzled with the
glory of their Greatness: They were followed, waited on, and celebrated in
their Generation: But now, alas! They shall be so, No more. There was a Time,
when they abounded in the overflowing measure of their Wealth; their Palaces
were sumptuous; and All things suitable to the aspiring Height of their
Ambition: But now, No more: Their great Magnificence is buried in the ruins of
the World; their Gold and Silver melted down into the Earth, from whence it
came; and All their Pride lies levelled with the common Dust, to which All
Things return. There was a Time, when all the sinful Pleasures of the World
attended them; when they denied their Passions nothing that they asked; when
they had full Command of All that they desired, and rather cloyed than
satisfied their brutall appetites: But now, No more. Their Honors, Riches,
Pleasures, All are at an End: Their Time is at an End: Their Time shall be NO
MORE.

When, as it happens frequently amongst the various accidents of Human Life, We
are deprived of some particular Enjoyment which we passionately love; though we
lament and grieve, yet we have still some Comfort left: It Is not a total
deprivation of All that we enjoy: The Damage is supported by some other
Pleasures and Conveniences. If one Friend die; our other Friends survive. If
one forsake us; we may find another faithful to us. Or, if they all abandon
us; yet our misfortune is not universal; We have always something left, which
we can think upon without affliction, and repose our wearied Thoughts. He that
is dangerously Sick of one or two diseases, is not at the same time sick of all
the rest. Whatever his condition is, he always has some hopes of being better:
And although these hopes are very little, They are still some little Comfort to
a Man in Misery. But when this Dreadful Day is come, which putts an end to
Time, it putts an end to All their Hopes; All that they ever loved, or now
desire, abandons them; their Inclinations are more lively than they ever were,
and All are disappointed. Then All the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn; to see
the fatal End of All their transitory Happyness. But, alas! this is not All:
They shall have much more reason to lament and grieve, when at the same time
they behold the Sad Beginning of their Everlasting Misery.

SECT. III. That our Last Day is the Sad Beginning of our Everlasting Misery.
WE have seen the dreadful symptoms of an agonizing World; the terrible
Convulsions of expiring Nature; and the final End of All that Sinners love
with so much Passion: an End of all Ambition, Avarice, and Pleasure; an End of
all their Honors, Riches, and Amors; an End of politic Designs, of ancient
Families, of nuptial Joys; an End of idle Conversations, Balls, and Plays; an
End of Beauty, Wit, and Courage; an End of all their Feasting, Drinking, and
Diverting; an End of all their Mirth, Delight, and Pastime; And, which of all
things is most terrible to a despairing Soul, an End of Sin, but not an End of
the Sinner; an End of Pleasure, but not an End of Pain; an End of Time, but not
an End of their Eternity, which will eternally Begin, and never have an End.
After Hundreds, Thousands, Millions, not of Years but Ages; if we may suppose
that Heaven and Earth, with all that they contain, were changed into numerall
figures; at the foot of the Account, whatever it amounts to, you may find it
witten, Here Eternity Begins. Moreover, if you multiply this number by it self,
and by the same rule multiply the Product of it, All is Nothing to Eternity;
Wherever this innumerable number ends, Eternity Begins.

If All be Nothing to Eternity, What will the inconsiderable number of those
years which Sinners prodigally spend in Sin, What will it then appear to be?
Will it not seem incomparably less than Nothing? And will not Sinners then
have too much reason to lament, that for so short a Moment, so much less than
Nothing, they have forfeited the eternal Joys of Heaven, and incurred the
everlasting Pains of Hell? What is a man advantaged, Luke. 9.25.
says our Savior, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself? Alas! poor
Souls, what Comfort is it to have gained the World, and lost your Selves? to
have lost all Happyness, and gained (If I may call it Gain) all Misery, and All
for Nothing.

What Pains, and by what Means, they are to suffer, is a question fitter for
our Curiosity than our Edification. It Is enough, to know as much of Hell, as the
Apostle tells us of Heaven: Neither the Eye has seen, 1. Cor. 2.9.
not the Ear heard, not has it entered into the Heart of any man, what
unspeakable Pains and Torments the Almighty has prepared in the next life, for
those who have in this offended Him. It Is enough that God is certainly as Just
as He is God, and therefore infinitely Just. It Is enough that the Enormity of
Sin, which He so patiently endures, is aggravated by the Greatness of his
Majesty, and therefore infinitely Infinite. It follows evidently hence, that
All All the most effectual and most proper Means
which God's great Wisdom can invent, All that his Justice By the Eternal Rule
of his Decree
can exact, and All that his Omnipotence According to the rigor of the
Sentence.
can put in execution will be All employed to punish those who have offended
him. It follows also that it is as much impossible for any man to comprehend
the great excess of those eternal Pains, as it is to understand God's Wisdom,
Justice and Omnipotence, All which are infinitely raised above the reach of
human Reason. However we may easily conjecture something, by considering God's
Justice in this World, and judging thence, what it may be hereafter.

If the Just themselves are so severely punished in this World, if it be true,
as the Psalmist says, 34.19.
Many are the Asslictions of the Righteous; if even God's Friends, who are so
faithful to him, undergo such punishments for little failings in their Duty;
what will become of his Enemies, who forfeit all their Title to his Friendship,
by their grievous Sins?

If in the days of overflowing Mercy, which appeared so eminently above all his
Works, he gave such signal instances of his avenging Anger; if even when his
Pity (in a manner) held his hands, the Fury of His Wrath broke loose, and with
an universal Deluge laid the world so deep in water, that amongst so many
millions not a single Sinner could escape: what will become of miserable
Sinners at the Day of Judgment, when the End of Time shall put an end to all
his Goodness, all his Kindness, all his Mercy, and begin the Triumph of
Eternal Justice? When our God will be to us no longer Good, no longer Kind, no
longer Merciful, but only Just; eternally, and infinitely Just?

Our Savior Jesus will not then appear as the Physician It Is too late to be
Cured or Redeemed.
and Redeemer of our Souls, but only as the Judge of all our Actions: And even
to his Friends As Judge he appoints them that place.
at his Right Hand, He will not show himself in any other Quality: The very
Sentence of their Happyness will be an Act of Justice only Not an Act of Pardon.
not of Mercy: Our Lord, says the Apostle, at that Day will be a Righteous
Judge. It Is true, 'twas nothing but the merciful Assistance of his Grace which
heretofore enabled them to sight, and finish well their Course; But now, in the
Rewarding of his Friends according to his Promise No longer inclind to Pardon.
He Is no longer Merciful, if we believe S. Paul, but only RIGHTEOUS and JUST.

If at that Day He would b^ Merciful to any, He would surely be so to his
Friends And since the Best and Faith fullest of all his Servant find no Mercy
It Is too late to ask for Mercy.
at the Trial, Can his Enemi^ expect it? It Is called the Day of Judgment, to
distinguish it from all these other Days of Mercy: And if in these He shower'd
dow^ Fire from Heaven, it is no wonder if in those the Star^ themselves will
seem to fall* If Sodom and Gomorrh were consumed, it is easy to believe that then
the Earth will All of it be laid in Ashes But, alas! this universal^ Deluge of
devouring Fire together with the Darknes^ of the Sun and Moon, the roarings of
the Sea, and howlings of the Wind and Air, All this is but a Prelude to the
Misery of Sinners; This is only the Beginning of their sorrows; Math. 24.8.
This is nothing but their Summons to appear before the Bar; And it is the
dreadful Appprehension of their Judgment and Damnation which torments them
with an agonizing Fear.

There was a Time, when Life was sweet; but now they hate it. There was once a
Time, when the despair of Living was their greatest Pain; but now, the Scene is
changed, and the despair of Dying is incomparably more tormenting. In those
days, says the beloved Disciple, Men shall seek Death, Revel. 9.6.
and shall not find it, They shall desire to Die, and Death shall fly from
them. There was a Time, when Sinners laughed at all the Fears and Apprehensions
of this Day; Eccles. 3.4.
but now the Time of laughing will be past; nor will it be, as Solomon calls
it, a Time to mourn: it will not be a Time, but an Eternity to mourn.

Then All the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn. Not only Those who whilst they
lived were thought to carry visibly the mark of Reprobation in their foreheads;
but also such as lived great Saints in the esteem of men, and died great
Sinners in the Sight of God; shall then desire to die again, and seek for an
Eternal Death, and shall not find it. Then shall their concealed Abominations,
all their shameful Actions, all their secret Works of Darkness, come to light.
Then nothing shall be coverd, nothing so industriously hid, Math. 10.26.
but what shall be revealed to all the World. Nor only Those who took such care
to hide their Sins from others, but even those who formerly were used to hide
them from themselves, shall clearly see the Malice of their palliated Crimes:
Math. 24.30.
Then they shall SEE; and Then they shall MOURN.

We now are willing to live peaceably and quietly within our selves; We do not
much delight in the remorses of a guilty mind; and therefore we contrive some
kind of Conscience for every thing we do. We are uneasy at the thought of
everlasting pains; and therefore, if we ever take our selves to task, we rake
together all we can to make a favorable judgment of our State. As the Examen
rather is designed to please our selves, than God, it is generally very
superficial. We look upon our Actions all in gross, without enquiring much
into the drift and chief design of them: We look upon the outward show; the
approbation, and esteem of men; The example of some, who pass for good and
virtuous, and yet have often done the same as we do; Our being free (as we
suppose) from many faults which we observe not in our Selves; Our great
abhorrence of some certain Sins, which we observe in others; Our being
punctually and religiously precise in some small matters, some exterior
mortifications, some particular devotions, which we take a fancy to: And thus
we frame a false Idea of the miserable State we shall be found in, when we come
before the Bar. We now are proud, and willing to excuse our selves: but then
the Testimony of our clearer sighted Conscience will confound and humble us.
Our Passions blind us now; we see not what we truly are: But then the Sun of
Justice will arise, and scatter all the darkness which conceals us from our
selves. The piercing rays, the All-discovering beams of Truth will break like
lightning through the Clouds of our affected ignorance, when once the Son of
Man appears, to judge the World.

If there were any possibility of cheating his All-seeing Wisdom; of calling
back the time of his indulgent Mercy; or escaping from the hands of his
Allmighty Power: Were there any possibility of this; or were there any Friend
from whom the Guilty might expect the least assistance; it would be some little
Comfort.

They had once a true and faithful Friend, who dearly loved them; came from
Heaven to instruct them, and conduct them thither; lived a painful and
laborious life amongst them; and although neglected, scorned, and persecuted by
them, yet continued constant in his Love, and to redeem them, paid their Ransom
with the price of his own Blood. But now their best and only Friend becomes
their greatest Enemy. He loved them once: But Love so long neglected and so
much abused, is now quite changed into a mortal and eternal Hatred. He
invited all of them to come to Him whenever they had need of his Assistance;
Math. 11.28.
Come to me All you that labor: But now, alas! it is too late to come: His
Patience now is spent; and in the Fury of his everlasting indignation He for
ever banishes them from Him: Math. 25.41.
Go from Me ye accursed. Go Ambitious Souls, and leave your honorable Titles
all behind you; go and seek the best preferment you can find amongst the Devil
and his Angels: Ibid. v. 41.
Go Infatiable Misers; go, and take possession of that Misery which you have
purchased with the loss of your beloved Treasure: Go Voluptuous Wretches; you
who formerly have wished your Flames might ever burn; Go now, and Burn for ever,
in the everlasting Flames of Hell.

Behold, the dreadful Sentence, we must All expect, Luke. 21.36.
unless we follow his Advice who then will be our Judge: VVatch therefore, says
He, and Pray always; that you may then be accounted worthy to escape, and stand
before the Son of Man. Alas! Our dear Redeemer takes no pleasure in Condemning
us. No Man, says S. Austin, who designs to strike us, bids us have a Care. Our
Savior often warns us, often calls upon us, often bids us Have a care. S. Paul
exhorts us in his Name: Romans 13.11.
It Is Now the Hour for us to Rise from sleep: It Is now the Hour to go with tears
of true Repentance to the Throne of Grace; that then we may appear with
Confidence and Joy before the great Tribunal his Justice: It Is now the Hour to
hearken to Him, Math. 11.28.
Come to me All you that labor; that then we may be sure to hear him call us
to Him, Come ye Blessed; Math. 25.34.
Come and reap the Fruit of all your labors; Come and Take possession of those
Everlasting Joys, which were prepared for you, from the Foundation of the
World. Amen.

MOTIVES OF HOPE.
SECT. I. How unreasonable a thing it is for any Sinner to Despair.
THe greatest Mystery of Christian Morality consists in the equal ballancing
of Hope and Fear, betwixt God's Mercy and his Justice; that we may neither be
secure in Sin, because he is so Merciful; nor yet despond, because he is so
Just. Presumption and Despair are the two Rocks 'twixt which all Christians
ought to steer an even course; and so avoid the One as not to dash upon the
Other. It Is perhaps the greatest Secret of the Divel's Art. He first inclines us
to Presume; And we no sooner see the danger of it; but he tempts us to Despair.
Thus he commences; Thus he finishes his work.

I must confess The greatest part of Mankind being so insensible, so stupid, so
immerst in wordly cares and pleasures, is enough to justify the pious zeal of
those who frequently proclaim the menaces of an offended Majesty, and with the
formidable noise of Hell, Damnation, and everlasting Torments labor to awake
and rouse them from the Lethargy of sin. But, when they are awake, and looking
round about them, take a prospect of their miserable State; when every horrid
Crime appears in its own dreadful shape; when Multitudes of past offenses
crowd into their minds, and overwhelm their heavy thoughts with a despairing
expectation of no less than everlasting Misery: Alas! poor Souls, it is not
now a seasonable time to magnify the motives of their Fear. If ever Comfort
and Encouragement were necessary to allay the pains and anguishes of a
despairing Soul; Now is the time. What shall we say? Tell them, they need not
fear? Oh no: The malice of their grievous sins is infinite; The danger of their
lamentable State is greater than they can imagine: Let but their Hope be equal
to their Fear, they cannot fear too much. How then shall we encourage their
expiring Hope? I Will tell you how.

If God were only Just, and were not also Powerful and Merciful, a Sinner
then might lawfully despair: But when God's Power and Mercy both concur to
comfort the desponding Heart of an afflicted Penitent, What can he wish for
more? There are but two conditions requisite to qualify the Person, upon whose
assistance we depend, that we may safely hope, and with a loving confidence
assure ourselves of his Protection. The first is; that he can relieve us, if he
will: the second; that he will relieve us, if we please. Will, without Power,
signifies but little: Power, without Will, signifies much less: But when they
both meet in the person of a Friend, to whom we always have a free access; who
certainly can help us, if he will; and no less certainly will help us, if we
please: Then, let our present misery be never so great, let the approaching
danger of our future ruin every day seem greater; we may with trembling hearts
expect the helping Hand which can and will deliver us; but all our Fear can
never exclude our Hope; it cannot rob us of that comfort, satisfaction, and
joy, which so much Confidence insuch a Friend inspires.

If when a Sinner strugles with his Chains; endeavors to break loose; and more
he strugles, more he finds himself engaged; (which the All-seeing Wisdom
frequently permitts, to humble a proud Soul:) If then these two great Truths
were settled in his Mind, to wit, that God can free him, if He will; and that
He will not fail to free him, if he please; O! with what pleasure would he
relish the assurance of this loving Confidence! with how much transport of a
joyful mind; would he recite those words of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 1.12.
I know in whom I have believed; I know in whom I put my trust; I know, and am
persuaded, He is able to deliver me. I am assured, He is not only Powerful but
Merciful; and therefore I am certain He both can and will assist me.

SECT. II. That God can help us if he will.
DIvinity and boundless Power are so much the same, that no man can deny the
one, and own the other. There is no Truth so evident, in which the World so
universally agrees, as God's Omnipotence. Every body knows that Nothing is
impossible to God. It Is one of the first Truths which a Philosopher
demonstrates, or a Christian believes. Almighty is his Name; the Name we know
him by; the Name He answers to, when ever we call upon Him.

What need I then discourse upon a Truth, which every body knows? The reason
is, Because although we know it well enough, We very seldom, hardly ever, think
of it.

We all know Nothing is impossible to God: and that the lamentable State of a
poor Sinner cannot be so desperate, but that He can retrieve him. And yet how
little do we think of this, when we are tempted to despair? Do we not then
behave our selves as if we doubted of it? I am afraid that, at the best, we
pray like him, of whom S. Mark makes mention; Lord, Chapter 9. v. 22.
If Thou CAN do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us. I fear we
often are incredulous, and have just reason to repeat with tears his humble
prayer; Lord, I believe, v. 23.
help Thou my unbelief.

If David, that great Saint according to God's heart, 1. Sam 13.14.
who looking back to take a view of all his past iniquities, saw at a distance
only some few Sins, which he had long since washed away with penitential tears;
if He could scarce support the terror of that melancholy prospect, Ps. 38. v.
3.4.6.10.
as he says himself, and all day long went mourning for his Sins; if his heart
panted, and his strength failed him; if had no rest, because he was over head
in his iniquities, which like a heavy burden were too heavy for him; If He, I
say, were thus perplexed with Fear, and almost ready to Despair of his
Salvation; Have not I Just cause to apprehend much more the Danger of such
Doubts in greater Sinners, who are almost surfeited with Sin, before they
seriously begin to look behind them and compute the terrible arrears of all
their past Offenses?

I must confess, the difficulties which occurr in the conversion of a Sinner,
are insuperable, if compared to the weak strength of our corrupted Nature; and
if the possibility of working our Salvation be considered only with regard to
human Frailty, there appears no hope of compassing so great a Work. Such is the
Ignorance and Blindness of our Understanding; Such is the Malice and
Perverseness of our Will; Our Inclinations are so prone to liberty; and the
Restraint of our unreasonable Humors is so sensibly uneasy to us; that a
thorough Reformation of our Lives is far above our single strength. Without the
Grace of God, we neither have the Wisdom to contrive it, nor the Courage to
begin it, nor the Power to perform it.

But yet this Darkness of our Reason, though we cannot of our selves dispell
it, may be dissipated by a lively Faith in Him who enlightens every man that
comes in to the World: Jo. 1.9.
This Depravation and Corruption of our Will, (although it be to us alone
impossible) may by the sweet and forcible impulses of a powerful Grace be
changed and rectified: This obstinate Rebellion of our Appetite against the
Rule of Reason, and the Precepts of a Christian life, (though we have often
found our Selves unable to reduce it to the terms of just Obedience) may easily
be conquered by Omnipotence.

If Sin have so much blinded us, that we can hardly see our Danger: If the
Noise of Wordly vanities have made us almost deaf to all good counsel: If the
Habit of our Sins have lamed us, so that we can scarcely move a foot toward
Heaven: If we are blind, deaf, lame, nay even dead to God and all that is good,
(no Person can be in a worse condition than this) All this is nothing to the
powerful hand of God: Such miracles as these were his familiar Exercise on
Earth: The blind see, the deaf hear, Math. 11.5.
the lame walk, the dead are raised to lise. All this our God can easily
perform, in favor of us, whensoere He pleases.

Lord, if thou will, says the Leprous man, Math. 8.2.
thou CAN make me clean. Let the diseases of a sinful Soul be ever so
inveterate, so deeply rooted in the heart, He clearly and distinctly
comprehends the nature of them all: He knows exactly the proportion and virtue
of his Remedies: And all of them obey the word of his Command; I will, Math.
8.3.
says He, Be thou cleans'd; (when once God says the word, the work is done)
immediately his Leprosy was cleans'd.

Create in me, Ps. 50.
O my God, Create in me a clean Heart. I ask not any thing but what is easy to
Thee. Alas! it is to me impossible: but Thou, my God, can do it with more
ease than I can ask it. Behold my misery with pity and compassion. Behold me
indigent and naked, clothed with nothing but the horrid scurf of my
Uncleanness. Behold me blind, deaf, lame; and almost dead with a contagious
leprosy of Sin, which covers me from head to foot, and has not left a sound
part in me. Conscious of my unworthyness, after so long neglecting my
condition, after so long confiding in my own weak strength, after so long
despairing of my health, because I thought I could do any thing, and found I
could not cure my self; Conscious, I say, of my Unworthyness, I scarce pretend
to ask for Mercy: I only cast my self upon my knees and face prostrate before
thy Feet, exposing and laying open all my grievous distempers, which, every one
of them (though I am humbly silent) every one speaks loudly my necessities, and
begs with all the moving eloquence of Misery thy pity and assistance. I know my
Sins provoke thy Justice, whilst my Misery appeals to thy Almighty Power: But
thy faithful servant David tells me, that the Israelites provokt Thee also;
and nevertheless, not for their sake, but for thy Name's sake Thou wast pleased
to save them; Psalm. 106.8.
that Thou might make thy mighty Power known. This is the first Foundation
of my Hope: I know the Credit of thy Power is engaged in their behalf, who
trust entirely in it, firmly expect it, and depend upon it: And therefore, in
this posture, I present my self with loving Confidence before thy Feet,
resolving there to expect with all Humility and Patience when thou shall please
to cast an eye upon me, and either find the Benefit of being cured, or (which
appears to me impossible) die in the hands of an omnipotent Physician. Ah my
dear Jesus! This is all that I can do: And even This I cannot do without thy
Grace: But, when I have done This, my Comfort is, that Thou can do the rest:
Lord if Thou will, Math. 8.2.
Thou can make me clean.

Dear Christians, let us pause a while, and with a serious attention behold
this Leper at our Savior's feet: Behold the lively Image of a Sinner, and the
perfect Model of a Penitent: Behold both what we are, and what we ought to be:
In his Disease, we see our Misery; in his Behavior, we see our Duty: in his
Disease, we see the sad effects of Sin; we see the strong temptations and
assaults of a most terrible Despair: In his Behavior, we see the fruits of
true Repentance, we see the victory of a triumphant* Hope, and the great
comfort which attends a loving Confidence in God's Omnipotence.

O what a Comfort is it to an humble Penitent, to be assured that as God gives
him All he has, so He can give him All he wants! If we are almost quite
oppressed with those aridities and desolations of Mind, which none can know but
by experience; S. Paul tells us, 2. Cor. 9.8.
God is able to make all Grace abound in us: If we labor under the perpetual
violence of importune temptations; the same S. Paul assures us, Hebr. 2.18.
God is able to succor those that are tempted: If our temptations are so
strong, and we so negligent that after some resistance we relapse into our
Sins; if we rise again, and yet fall; if we renew our Resolutions, and when we
think our selves securest, are surprised and fall again; S. Paul assures us,
Romans 14.4.
God is able to make us stand: If having tried all ways we can imagine, we are
at a loss, and know not either what to think or what to ask; Ephesians. 3.20.
the same Saint tells us, God is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all
that we can ask or think.

Is any thing too hard for God? Genes. 18.14.
Can any thing be hard to him whose Power is infinite, and whose Will is his
Power? 1. Sam. 2.6.
Our Lord kills, and makes alive; brings to the grave, and raises up: His Power
accompanys our Souls as far as the Gates of Hell it self, and brings them back
again. Although your Soul quite overgrown with sin, may be (perhaps) in the
All-seeing Eye of God, a much more horrid object than the foulest Devil in
Hell; Nevertheless go confidently with the Leper to our Savior; crowd in
amongst the multitudes that follow Him; cast your self down upon your knees and
face; Say, with a truly contrite truly humble heart, Math. 8.2.
Lord if thou will, thou CAN make me clean: Then shall you hear him
graciously return that comfortable answer; I will; Be thou clean: Then shall
you be transported with excess of joy, to find and feel the truth of what I now
advance; to wit, that God not only can relieve us if he will, but also will
relieve us if we please.

SECT. III. That God will help us if we please.
ALthough God's Power be the first Foundation of our Hope; his Mercy, always
ready to assist us, is the principal, if not the only, Motive of it. This was
the comfortable Meditation with which the Royal Prophet counterballanc'd all
his Fears; Psalm. 26.3.
Thy Mercy, says he, Thy loving Kindness is always before my eyes. Without this
comfort he would never have supported the remorses of his Conscience; Psalm.
50.4.
his Sin was ever before him: His continual Apprehensions and frightfull
Thoughts would certainly have driven him into a deep Despair, Psalm. 26.3.
had not God's Mercy also always been before him. The very thought of God
revived his drooping Spirits: he could not so much as think of Him, without
thinking of his Mercy: to be God, and to be Merciful, were to him one and the
self same thing: 59.17.
my God is my defense, says he, and the God of my Mercy. If he lifted up his
eyes to Heaven, with enflamed desires of being happy there; he adored that
Mercy which preserved the Angels, and rewarded them with Glory: Thy Mercy, O
Lord, 36.5.
is in the Heavens. If he looked down, and took a prospect of this vale of
miseries; he admired, to see God's Mercy stoop so low, to see it most appear
where there is most occasion for it, to see it superabound where Sin abounds:
33.5.
The Earth is full of his Mercy. If he looked before him he beheld God's Mercy
starting first, preventing, and forerunning all his good designs and
entreprises: 59.10.
His Mercy will prevent me. If he looked behind him, he beheld the self same
Mercy following him, promoting, carrying on, and perfecting his good
Endeavors: 23.6.
His Mercy shall follow me, all the days of my life. Which way soever he cast
his eye, he saw himself defended and surrounded with God's Mercy; himself the
Center, Mercy the Circumference: 32.10.
Him that trusts in God, Mercy shall compass him about: Thus did this Saint,
who once had been a Sinner, Thus did he comfort and encourage his afflicted
Soul, when ever the remembrance of his Sins oppressed his Mind: And thus may
we, in imitation of him, Thus may we also answer all the troublesome
suggestions of our panik Fears; confronting Sin with Grace, Justice with Mercy,
Fear with Hope and loving Confidence in him, whose Mercy still is infinite,
100.5.
and always will be so; His Mercy is Everlasting.

All this, you will say, is little comfort to a Sinner, who is day and night
obsesst with all the terrifying Specter of a guilty Conscience. Every body
knows, that God is infinitely Merciful. But yet the Word of God assures us,
and it is a fundamental Truth which every Christian is acquainted with; Math.
22.14. Math. 7.14.
That few are chosen amongst many which are called; that the Gate which leads
to Life is strait and narrow; and that there are but few who find it: so that
all the splendid Appearance of God's Mercy, when it is well examined seems to
vanish out of sight, or shrink into a little compass, if compared with the
innumerable numbers of those Reprobates, Romans 9.22.
who are prepared and fitted for Destruction. Is not this enough to make a
Sinner tremble? A Sinner who is conscious to himself of being much more guilty
in the sight of God, than many millions of those Souls who are already gone
before him, and already suffer the eternal flames of Hell?

These Thoughts, I must confess, are Terrible. To him whose eyes are open by
God's grace to see the malice of his Sins, and see Death, Judgment, and
Damnation attend; Such thoughts as these, to such a man, are terrible beyond
expression. But however, if a man be more afraid than hurt, where is the harm
of all his Fear? Are we not All obliged to humble our proud hearts under the
powerful hand of God, 1. Pet. 5.6. Phil. 2.12.
and work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling? Is not our obligation to
fear, consistent with our greater motives, greater obligations to hope? It Is one
of the most dangerous mistakes that we are subject to. We seem to fancy that
our Fear destroys our Hope; and that we cannot hope unless we cease to fear. We
take these two Affections of the Mind for mortal Enemies, because their
humors are so opposite. But, as that Friendship is the greatest, which no
difference of Humor can divide: So, if we examine well the matter, we shall
find that Fear and Hope are such inseparable Friends, they cannot possibly
subsist without each other's company; The Separation of the one, is certainly
the Death and Ruin of the Other. Fear, without Hope, degenerates into Despair.
Hope, without Fear, is now no longer Hope, but dangerous Presumption. If now
and then our Minds are troubled and perplexed with Fear; We must not therefore
presently conclude, that we have lost our Hope: No, no; We should have lost it,
if we did not fear.

If the Consideration of God's Justice make a Sinner tremble; he may lawfully
desire to be delivered from the uneasyness, the pain, and the anxiety, which
are the troublesome Companions of his Fear: But, as for Fear it self, it is an
essential Duty of a Christian, which cannot upon any terms admit a
Dispensation. If the unsearchable Designs and Secrets of God's Providence are
apt to fill our Souls with apprehensions and fears; this only helps us to
perform the one half of our Duty, without prejudicing the performance of the
other: for the more we fear his Justice, so much more we hasten to the shelter
of his Mercy.

This was the only Refuge which the Royal Prophet had recourse to, in his days
of trouble, Psalm. 77.2. v. 9.
when his Soul refused to be Comforted. Has God, says he, forgotten to be
gracious? v. 8.
Has He shut up, in Anger, all his tender Mercies? Is his Mercy clean gone for
ever? Does his Promise fail for evermore? Oh no; His promise cannot fail: He
can no more deceive, than be deceived. He has signed his promise more than once
in Scripture: And with a solemn Oath He has delivered it. A Promise and an Oath
which, by Commission from Himself, his Ministers are ordered to make use of.

When Sinners are dejected with Temptations of Despair: Ezekiel. 33.10.
When their Transgressions and their Sins lie heavy upon them: When they begin
to pine away with Fear, and melancholy Thoughts of never being able to recover:
What shall we say, to comfort them?

Say to them, Ezekiel. 33.11.14.
says the Prophet: If the wicked turn from his sin; if he repent; if he amend,
v. 15.
and walk in the Statutes of Life; He shall surely live, (and what can be more
sure, since God himself is pleased to say it?) v. 15.
He shall surely live; He shall not die. v. 16.
None of the sins he has committed, shall be ever mentioned to him; he shall
hear of them no more; they shall not rise in judgment against him: God himself
has promised, v. 16.
He shall surely live; He shall not die?

Say to them again; and say it boldly, in his Name whose Justice makes them
tremble: Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the Death of the wicked;
but that the Wicked turn from his way, and Live. Return, says He, Return from
your evil ways: Why will you die?

Why will you Die? As who should say; you may live if you will; I always am at
hand, prepared to help you, if you heartily repent; you know, you may recover,
if you have a mind to it; you know, that if you die, it is because you will: As
I Live have no pleasure in your Death, and therefore I have reason to complain,
Why WILL you Die?

Dear Christians, What can we wish for more? We know that God can help us if He
will. Whether He will or no, we need no farther proof, than his own Word. We
have his Word: We have his Oath: He cannot take his own Great Name in vain; And
He has sworn by his own Life, He has no pleasure in our Death; He dos not, of
himself, desire it; but that we return and live. O! we are happy; O beatos, quo
rum causa Deus jurat! O miseros, si nec juranti Domino credimus!
for whose sake God swears! But O! how miserable are we; if, when God himself
is pleased to swear, we cannot believe Him!

If Deeds are better proof than Words, Let us pass from what He has said, to
what He has done. What has. He done for Sinners? Or rather, What has He not
done? For them He came from Heaven; for them He lived a pain full life on
Earth; for them He died upon the Cross. Math. 9.13.
I came not, says He, to call the Just, but Sinners; He came, because 'twas
necessary he should come: And therefore for their sakes, for whom it was most
necessary, for them he principally came. He never was so kind to any, as to
Sinners. All his Conversation was in their Company, He made it his chief
business to oblige them, He followed them from place to place, He thought of
nothing else but how to gain their love, He came with a design to inflame their
hearts, He brought down fire from Heaven with him, and wished for nothing more
than that this fire might burn. His more than ordinary Kindness was in all
occasions so visibly remarkable, that He was taken notice of, and pointed at.
The Pharisees were scandalized to to see it. And in those days, it was his great
Reproach; He was too much a Friend to Publicans and Sinners. Math. 11.19.
All this while, alas! they little understood his Business upon Earth. His
great Compassion of their Misery, was the occasion of his coming: And since
their Indigence first brought him from above, it was no wonder the Relieving of
it was his chief Employment here below. He came as a Physician to his dying
Friends, whom He most dearly loved; and therefore took most care, and was the
most concerned, for those who were most dangerously sick. Thus did our God
behave himself to Sinners. Thus did he love his Enemies; and treat them as his
dearest Friends. Thus did He live to serve them, till at length He died to save
them.

S. Paul concludes from hence, Romans 5.10.
We now have much more Hope than ever. For if when we were Enemies, we then
were reconciled to God; undoubtedly we now have much more reason, being
reconciled, to hope we shall be saved. If then, before he sent his only Son,
God loved his Enemies so dearly as to send him: We may well conclude, that
since He came amongst us, since He interposed betwixt us and his Father's
Anger, since He died to reconcile us to Him, since He rose again, Romans 8.34.
and at the right hand of his Father is our Advocate in Heaven, making
intercession for us; surely now our humble Supplications, joined with his, and
offered in his Name, Jo. 14. v. 15.
will for his sake be much more easily received. If then a Contrite and an
Humble Heart was always so agreeable, He never would despise it; Will He now
refuse it? If the Total Sum of all the horrid Crimes of Mankind during
several Ages, if the Malice of them All together, could not any way divert the
course of overflowing Mercy; if it could not hinder Him from sending Jesus to
redeem the World; How can we think, the Greatness of our Sins can hinder Him
from having Mercy on us, when we heartily repent?

Let us therefore, once for all, humbly confess, and own our Fault. The Truth
is; We are proud, and willing to excuse our selves. We are willing to lay the
blame of our Impenitence at our Creator's door, and say; He will not pardon us;
He will not give us Grace; He will not save us: When, if we well examine, we
shall find the blame is always ours; We will not repent; We will not comply
with his Grace; in a word, We will not be saved.

All we can say, in our defense, is that our sins are great, God will not look
upon such grievous Sinners as we are. I cannot, say they are not great, or that
we are not grievous Sinners: But, that therefore God will never look upon us,
is as false as the Word of God is true. He hates the Sin, but loves the Sinner:
He hates the Leprosy, but loves the Leper: S. Aug. Conf. lib. 8. cap. 3.
And, as a Merciful Father, He rejoices more, at the Repentance of one Sinner,
than the Innocence of ninety nine who do not stand in need of it.

Let us therefore, once again, humbly acknowledge, and confess our Fault. We
only pretend our Leprosy is so inveterate, God will not suffer us to come into
his sight, He will not cure us, He will not make us clean. The Truth is; we are
so negligent, so stupid, so insensible of our condition, that though we now and
then are terrified to see the Danger of it, nevertheless we will not make our
Supplications to Him as we ought, We will not be cured, We will not be cleans'd.

DANGER OF DELAY.
SECT. I. Hew apt we are to differr Repentance.
THat we are, All of us, some time or other, betwixt this and Death, obliged
under pain of Eternal Damnation to rouse our sleepy souls from the bewitching
Lethargy of Sin; is an important Truth, which no man can dispute. We All are
fully satisfied, that if we live in the state of Sin, if our Affections are
criminal, if our Hearts are divided betwixt Heaven and Earth; we must, before
we Die Repent and Mend, or we are lost for ever. Luke. 12.3.
Unless we repent, we shall All perish.

This we agree upon: Our difficulty lies not in the knowing, but in the
performing of our Duty. When we discourse with our Selves in general terms,
what it is we ought to do; the Debate soon comes to an Issue: But, as we
descend to the particulars of when and how; We come not so easily to a
Resolution, about the Time. We suppose that we are able, at our pleasure, to
change our Hearts, subdue our Passions and reform our Lives: But our Hearts, at
present, are otherwise engaged; our Passions are youthful, and very importune;
our way of Life, though none of the best, is suitable to the common Maxims of
the World; And what have, I pray, to do just now, what may be done as easily
another time, when ever we please? Besides, the present Circumstances are very
particular: An abrupt Disengagement would now go very much against the hair: We
had better, for a time, content our Passions, and bring them to a composition:
When this or that Business is over, that we may more freely attend to the work
of our Salvation; when our Company changes; when we meet with a Conjuncture of
more favorable circumstances; O! then we will begin the New Man; bid Adieu to the
follies of this World; and from that instant date the beginning of our journey
toward Heaven.

Thus the Color of Piety gives a reputation to the Delusion: We cover the
popular Cheat with an agreeable disguise: And betwixt gratifying our
Inclinations, on the one side, with a criminal condescendance, and pacifying
the remorses of our Conscience, on the other side, with a plausible pretense of
future amendment at a more convenient time; We make Virtue, in appearance,
subscribe to our Vices, and counterfeit God's Hand to one of the worst
Temptations of the Devil.

SECT. II. How dangerous it is to differ Repentance.
It Is clear, we are not Masters and Disposers of our Time: only He, who was the
first Author of Time, who now conserves it, and who will one day put a final
period to all Time; He I say, and only He, disposes of it as he pleases.

Besides, the Changing of our Hearts is far above our single strength; we are
not able, by our selves, so much as to begin so great a Work, how then shall we
be able to perform it, at our leisure, whenever we please? S. Gregory assures
us (and we know it well enough) that God who promises to PARDON us, Ho. 12. in
Ev.
if we Repent; has never promised us the TIME of our Repentance.

It Is true: we cannot but confess, (to the great shame of our Ingratitude,) that
our Creator loves us far above our merit. If we look back from hence as far as
the first Creation, and carry our serious thoughts through all the steps of
Providence, we meet with nothing but remarkable instances of his good wishes
toward us. Nay, if we yet look farther back from the first moment of this
World into Eternity, We find Him, before the beginning of all Time,
entertaining his Thoughts with the premeditation of our welfare; And in the
first page of his Eternal Accounts, we find the great Design of Man's
Redemption, that stupendous Mystery of Mercy and Justice, the Incarnation of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; who held nothing so dear, no obligation so
important, as our Sanctification; even to the degree of laying down his Life
for the advantage of that sacred Interest. See here, the Motives which we have
to think He loves us! Yet give me leave to tell you, He is not so fond of us,
but that He can be angry at us, when He finds his Love neglected. Witness all
those miserable Christian Souls, who once were happy in the same Testimonies of
his Affection: Who thought, as we do, to reform their lives at a more
convenient season: Who supposed, as we do, that God's extraordinary Grace would
never fail to be at hand, when ever they pleased to have occasion for it. Alas,
poor Souls, they now are lodged in the flames of Hell for all Eternity; and
know, too late, that though God never fails to bestow his extraordinary Graces,
where He finds a faithful correspondency of our Endeavors with his merciful
Assistance; yet He often shuts his Hand, if we withdraw ours. He dos not first
desert us: Yet, if deserted by us, it is no wonder if He treat us upon equal
terms, and so desert us.

Wonder not, that God who is so infinitely good, can find in his heart to
Abandon thus a Sinner, who stifles the remorses of his Conscience, who resists
the frequent inspirations which invite him to Repentance, who has always
something else to do when he thinks of his Duty, always is so rude, so
scornfully uncivil, in receiving all the Embassys of Peace which Heaven sends
him; that every trifling Object which salutes his Fancy, every miserable
creature which a silly Passion recommends to him, is sure to have the
preference, and be the first admitted.

How often dos God court us, when we are alone, as it were carefully managing
that favorable occasion, when it may be presumed we are at leisure for his
entertainment? But, alas! we are perhaps never less alone, than when we are
alone: The Common Enemy of Mankind is then most busy to prevent the advantage
of such a happy circumstance. How often dos He apply himself to us, when any
sudden Accident has crossed our inclinations, when we have been dissappointed
in our intrigues, when we begin to find our labor lost in the pursuit of what
we hunted after, when we sit down angry and affronted at the confusion of our
mistake, almost ready to fall out with the World for having cheated us: then it
is that He takes hold of this conjuncture; begins in a loving manner to
expostulate with us; to exprobrate to us how treacherous a Friend we find the
World to be; on the contrary, how constant and faithful a Friend He has been
to us, from all Eternity to this moment; how ready He is, notwithstanding all
that is past, to receive us with open arms into favor again, if we return
sincerely to Him. And how do we hearken to all this? Why, truly, it passes away
like a little Fit of melancholy; we were then in an ill humor; we are now glad
it is over; and so we think no more on it. What ever God speaks to our Hearts, is
all out of doors: Our Hearts are shut against him, Apoc. 3.20.
all the time; He stands at the door, and knocks; and we neglect Him, letting
Him stand and wait our leisure; We approve the Friendship of the World before
his; And though we may have some slight thoughts of hearing Him some other
time, yet for the present we flatly deny Him Entrance, and refuse Him Audience.

Let us now Consider a little; What pitiful Worms we are, who thus contemn
the Almighty; Who He is, whom we affront; What trifles we prefer before him:
And we shall not wonder if at length He leave us, and desert us with a
Resolution never more to offer us these extraordinary Favors: I go away, says
He, Jo. 8. v. 21.
and you shall Seek me, and you shall Die in your Sins.

SECT. III. Reasons why Delay is so Dangerous.
THat I may discover, yet more clearly, the Extravagance of Sinners who differr
the entire Conversion of their Hearts from time to time, upon a vain
Presumption of choosing their own time, when they please; I suppose, as a
fundamental Principle, 1. Pet. 5. v. 5.
that God gives Grace to the humble, and resists the Proud.

He who values himself upon being Wise enough in the management of his
salvation; Who neglects the time which God's great Mercy offers him; Who
presumes He can, whenere he pleases, choose the time of his Conversion; Such a
Person, if ever he approach the Throne of Grace, comes in a disposition
directly opposite to Reconciliation; he carries Pride barefac't in the very
Front of him; and the Address, he presents, is endorst with the very same fault
which he begs pardon for.

A true Convert comes trembling, with a Heart truly humbled under the
Omnipotent Hand of an offended Majesty; And such a Penitent will always find
Favor; A Contrite and Humble Heart God never will despise; All his former
Offenses will pass for nothing; Ezekiel. 33.16.
None of his sins He committed shall be mentioned to him; In the Day of his
Conversion his Impiety shall never hurt him; What time soever God shall please
to mark out to him, if he manage that, he is secure.

But if a Sinner carelessly reject God's inspirations, and from time to time
neglect the opportunities He mercifully offers him; if he behave himself as if
he thought his Time of Reconciliation were entirely at his own disposing; and,
upon this account, when he thinks fit, presents himself before the Throne of
Grace; His very Coming in this manner is an Act of Pride, a Pride by which he
dangerously presumes upon a more than ordinary Favor, such as he knows has
been denied to many thousands, who are damned for ever, for less Sins than his,
and less neglect of the Almighty; a Pride, which is the greatest provocation
that can be imagined, in as much as it abuses all his infinite Goodness,
Longanimity, and Patience, not only to the utmost degree of contempt, but even
to an impudent assurance of obtaining Mercy when we please, although we have so
much, so often, and so long, contemned it. This is a sufficient Reason, why God
may abandon such proud Penitents as often as He pleases: and this Reason is
attended with a sort of Obligation (if a man may term it so) incumbent upon
Providence, if not always, at least generally and for the most part, to treat
them according to their merit.

This Obligation arises from two Titles. God is the the Creator of Man, and the
Redeemer of Sinful man. The first gives Him the Prerogative of being the
supreme and universal, Lord and Master of the Universe; under which Character
it belongs to him to give Law to all the parts of it, and take such methods as
may with a smooth and easy, yet strong and steady influence promote and carry
on the great Design of the Creation. Hence comes the Obligation of supporting
the Credit, and maintaining the Authority of his Gouvernment, which sinks
immediately and falls to nothing, if his too great Indulgence always tolerate
the open violation of his precepts, joined with all the indignities, affronts,
and insolences, of a haughty Subject, that will not be reclaimed but when he
pleases, will not take the advantage of those favorable Opportunities which
are so often offered him, but differrs the only necessary Business of his life
from time to time, upon a proud Presumption of being received at any hour
whensoere he pleases. Nothing under Heaven can in this occasion keep up the
Spirit and vigor of Discipline amongst us, and place the Fear of God before
our eyes, but a just and severe Punishment, such as becomes the Indignation of
an angry God abused, affronted, and contemned; which is, to treat us as we
treat Him, leave us as He finds us, and flatly refuse us Audience when we make
our supplications to Him.

This Motive which arises from the Title of Creator is abundantly sufficient;
but yet the Title of Redeemer is a far more powerful inducement to the same
rigor of Justice. The Creation of the World was but a small Expense: A Word
said, and the whole Work done. But the Redemption of sinful Man, the
Extraction of him out of the profound Abyss of Sin and Malice, was a more
laborious Masterpiece of Mercy and Justice; it cost him his descent from
Heaven, a painful life for many years upon Earth, and the last drop of his
most precious blood upon the Cross. Having redeemed us from the Devil, at so
dear a rate, and having paid the utmost price of our Salvation, He has a strict
Right to the Honor and Reputation of his Mercy; Isai. 42.8.
He is Lord of All, and his Glory He will not give to Another. He is our Lord
and Master; by Redemption All of us are His; He has paid the full Discharge of
our Account; but He will not apply the Value of this Payment to those persons
whose Pride will either Challenge the Credit, or Share it with Him; He bestows
it only where it may be evident, if not to all the World, at least to every
Sinner's Conscience who receives the benefit, that nothing but the Power of
Grace could work so wonderful a Resurrection, and free him from the Servitude
of Sin.

He who made our Hearts, cannot but know the temper of our Inclinations. He
cannot but see how partial and unequal we are in our Judgments. If any thing
be amiss with us, we presently begin to murmr and repine within our selves,
as if God only were the Author of our failings. But if we succeed in any thing,
that seems praiseworthy, either in the Sight of God or Man, we presently assume
the reputation of it to our selves. Our Faith teaches us the contrary: And we
seem to believe it. But yet, I know not how it is, our Pride which comes into
the World with us, S. Ber. de ord. vit. and mor instit.
That Vice which is the first we fight with, and the last we conquer, is so apt
to work upon our Judgment, that if we examine well, we cannot but observe, we
always are a great deal more inclined to magnify our own Endeavors, than to
admire the Power of Grace. If God should never treat us as we merit; if He
never should abandon those who from his Goodness take occasion to abuse it; We
should grow insensible of our necessities; We should forget our Obligations to
the Grace of our Redeemer; We should behave our selves as if we thought that
All is done by our High Hand, Deuteronomy. 32.27.
and not by the Assistance of our Lord. This is one Reason, and a just one, why
He is obliged (as I may say) in honor, if not always, at least generally, and
for the most part, to refuse them Audience in a Time of their own choosing, Who
during the time which He thought proper for their purpose, never would
vouchsafe to hearken to Him. Jo. 8. v. 21.
I go away, says he, and you shall Seek me, and you shall Die in your Sins.

SECT. IV. That we ought to begin immediately, without Delay.
HE who has promised PARDON to those who Repent, S. Greg. Hom 12 in Evan.
has never promised TRUE REPENTANCE to those who differ^ it. A man must be a
Stranger to the ordinary Course of Providence, who dos not know that there are
certain Times in which our God is kinder and more favorable to us; when Clouds
of Anger disappear; when Heaven seems to smile upon us; and the Almighty seems
to meet half way the Prayers and Addresses of his people. It Is not that God is
liable to any shadow of Inconstancy: He always is inclined to Mercy, and
nothing but our Sins can force him to the Rigor of his Justice. Sometimes He
showers down his Graces in a plentiful abundance; visits and inspires us with
good Thoughts, good Inclinations to amend our lives; strongly and sweetly moves
us; frequently and importunely presses and sollicites us to true Repentance.
But, if we slight his favors, He withdraws them from us: Mercy neglected and
abused gives place to Justice: And all those great and extraordinary Graces,
which before abounded, are denied us; that we may, by this means, grow sensible
of their Necessity and our Dependency, their Power and our Weakness.

What Wise man is there in the World, Christ. Directory. p. 2. c. 7. 3. and n.
35.
who reading This, will not fear the differring of his Conversion, though it
were but for one day? Who knows, whether this shall be the last day, or no,
that ever God will call him? God says, I called, Prove. Chapter 1.
and you refused to come; I held out my hand, and you would not look toward
me; and therefore I will FORSAKE you in your Extremity. He dos not say, how
many times He called; or how long He held out his hand. God says, I stand at
the door, and knock: but He says not, how often. Ibid. n. 37. A. D. 1673.
Almighty God is ready and bountiful to knock and call; but yet he binds
himself to no time or space, but comes and goes at his pleasure. And they who
take not their times when they are offered, are excuseless before his Justice,
and do not know whether ever it shall be offered them again, or no: for that
this thing is only in the Will and Knowledge of God alone; who takes Mercy where
it pleases him best, and is bound to none. And when the prefixed time of calling
is once past, Woe be to that party; for a thousand Worlds [perhaps] will not
purchase it again.

This Reason is abundantly sufficient to make us manage carefully the work of
our Salvation with fear and trembling; Phil. 2.12.1. Pet. 5.6.
and humble our selves under the powerful hand of God; without pretending to
any absolute Security of our admittance whensoere we please. We are certainly
damned, if we never ask pardon; probably it may be yet time enough, if we ask
it now; And in concurrence of a certain ruin on the one side, with a
probability of safety on the other, No Wise man will loose time to deliberate
upon the choice.

Some will say, perhaps, It Is a severe Case, to Renounce all worldly Affections,
and Deny them what is most dear to them; to declare war against the most violent
of Passions; and to undergo the hardship of perpetual service in the
engagement; if we have no absolute security of making peace when ever we desire
it. Had we an assurance of our Pardon, whensoere we ask it; it were some
encouragement to undertake a thorough Reformation of our lives. But, to
renounce All, upon a a hazard of gaining Nothing, is too cold an invitation to
encounter so painful and laborious a Task.

O Man! 9.20.
says S. Paul to the Romans, who art Thou, that thus replyest against God? Who
are you, that dare presume to article with Him, in this manner? Is it not
enough, to have so frequently transgrest his Laws, so much contemned his
Menaces, so long abused his Patience? Is it not enough to have idolized the
objects of your Passion? to have set up your Single self in opposition to all
the dictates of Duty and Obedience? to have affronted the Omnipotent Hand,
which (had not his Mercy held it) had long since sunk your miserable Soul to
the Abyss of Hell? Is not this enough, unless the same Pride, which began your
Misery, accompany also the Petition of your Pardon? Remember that God resists
the proud, 1. Pet. 5.5.
and gives Grace only to the humble. Remember that he is a very proud Beggar,
who will not ask an alms except he be assured before hand of receiving it; And
that God is so far from receiving the insolent Request of such a proud
Petitioner, that (on the contrary) He openly declares he hates him: Eccli. 25.4.
My Soul, says He, Hates a proud Beggar.

Ah Christians! We must (if we hope for Salvation) we must come in another
disposition. We must not loose time upon the debate, whether or no we have a
certain prospect of success. We must work our Salvation with fear and
trembling; Phil. 2.12.1. Pet. 5.6.
and humble our selves under the powerful hand of God. In this Conjuncture we
have nothing else to do, but fly in all have to the Throne of Grace: Hebr. 4.16.
Every Moment is precious: Every Moment of Delay increases the Danger.

The prodigal Son, whose imitation our Savior recommends to us, proposing him
as a great example of an humble Penitent, did not loose time in studying
whether his Father would receive him or not; he did not before hand enquire
into his Father's humor; how he stood affected to him? whether he were ready
to admit him? or determined never more to look upon him? But, immediately,
Luke. 15.17. v. 18.
at his first coming to himself, he said; I will rise, and go to my Father, and
say to him, Father, I have Sinned. So far was he from any absolute assurance of
his pardon, and so sensible of his unworthyness; he did not so much as offer to
demand a perfect reconciliation, but left himself entirely to his Father, to
dispose of him, and do with him what he pleased: Father, v. 19.
I am not worthy to be called your Son.

Alas! What can we do in this condition? We must redouble our prayers which we
have heretofore so often huddled over, with as much indifference and coldness,
as if we were afraid lest God should hear us, and assist us with his Grace to
take up our Cross, Math. 16.24.
deny our selves, and follow Him.

If after a month, a year, or more, we find no great effect of Mercy; we must
still persever firm in our Endeavors: The more we fear God's Anger, the faster
we must fly to the Protection of his Goodness. We must not sink under the
apprehensions of our Reprobation, but without disputing our Destiny, we must
resolve, either to obtain pardon, or die in the demanding of it.

If the Almighty seem to take no notice of us; if He seem as it were to command
us out of his sight; we have nothing else to say, but, Lord, whither shall we
go? Jo. 6. v. 68.
What way is there to fly from thy Anger, but by the speediest recourse we
possibly can make to the shelter of thy infinite Goodness? We know, we deserve
an Eternal Bannishment from thy Presence: We know, we often have refused Thee
Audience: We know, it was our common Answer, Go, Prove. 3.28.
and Come again another time: and therefore we know, we have no reason to
complain, if now we are forsaken and abandoned by Thee. But this is only what
we deserve; it is only what we justly Fear: Thou nevertheless command us to
Hope otherwise; And it is in compliance with this Command, Romans 4.18.
that we Hope even against Hope. We come not to dispute about our Heaven or our
Hell; We come not to capitulate upon the Articles of our Salvation; We only
fear as we have reason, and hope as we ought; so that, setting aside the whole
solicitude of that Affair, we leave it entirely to thy Mercy. We come with a
Contrite and Humble Heart; full of nothing but a sincere Sorrow for all our
past Offenses, joined with a hearty Resolution never to offend Thee any more:
Except it may be an Offense for Sinners, such as we are, to continue in thy
Presence; Which cannot be: No, no; though we should see thy Sword of Justice
drawn against us, and thy Omnipotent Hand stretched out to strike us dead at thy
Feet, We will not quitt the place, Job. 13.15.
Although Thou kill'st us, we will still Trust in Thee.

This is the Humble Heart, which charms our God; the Heart which He cannot
refuse; Ps. 50.
Such a Contrite such an Humble Heart He never will despise. This is the only
disposition that can make amends for the abuse of so much Goodness; and for the
differring our Conversion so long, upon a proud Presumption of Amendment when
we pleased. Such an Humble Heart, as this, gives God no reason to be jealous of
his Honor: His Hand appears manifestly in the management and preparation of
it: Ex od. 8.19.
The Finger of God is here. Such a Convert, as this, will never challenge any
share in the Honor of his Conversion; but, admiring the Benefit, will resign
the Honor, and humble himself so much the more in his presence Who made him
what he is. But God will always have the Honor of the work; He will be
Merciful when He thinks fit, and not allow proud Man to dispose of his Mercy;
He will take his own time, and confound the presumptuous Pride of those, who
(as if they were God's Masters, rather than his servants,) make no doubt but
they can choose a Time convenient, when they please.

Sinners, Deceive not your selves. Think not that God is always equally
disposed to hear us, whenever we appoint our time of Audience. He will not
suffer us to pretend to the honor of beginning our Conversion, and challenging
his. Greatest Graces, at our leisure. It Is true; He died to save us: But, though
He died for our Benefit, He died for God's Honor; and will not part with any
share of this Honor, to humor a proud Penitent. Isai. 42.8. 1. Pet. 5.5.
He is Lord of All, and his Glory He will not give to Another. He Resists the
Proud, and only to the Humble He gives Grace in this World, Glory in the next.

A CONTRITE HEART.
SECT. I. Sorrow for our Sins.
O My God! Anton. das Chagas.
God of my Soul, my Life, my Heart, and All that is within me! I have sinned, o
my God; I have offended Thee; I have done ill before the Face of Heaven and
Earth. Neither the Stars of Heaven, nor the grains of Sand upon the Earth, are
equal to the boundless number of my grievous sins.

Ah my dear God! my Maker, my Preserver, my Redeemer, and my Only Benefactor,
how it grieves me to have So offended Thee! Ibid.
I am much more troubled at my great Ingratitude, than at the greatness of the
Torments I deserve.

O that I could bewail, with Tears of blood, the base Unworthyness of my
behavior to my only most Obliging, most Endearing, most Deserving Friend! A
Friend who always loved me, even when I loved my silly Humors and his
miserable Creatures more than Him; who always Loved me, even when I was his
most Ungrateful Enemy; And notwithstanding All, still Made me whatsoere I
Was, still Gave me whatsoere I Had, and still Invited me, nay even Courted me,
with daily inspirations of his Grace, to Love Him above All Things. O that my
Eyes were living Fountains of continual Repentance, to bewail my base
Unworthyness!

And yet although my bleeding Heart should burst out at my Eyes, my Grief would
nere be equal to my Grievous Sins; the Guilt of which is infinite, and
infinitely greater than I Am able to conceive. Though I should weep with Tears
of blood in every corner of the Earth where I have sinned; All that would never
wash away the Guilt or Scandal of my Crimes. There Is nothing but the bleeding
Sacrifice of the Unspotted Lamb of God; There Is nothing but the Blood of JESUS
dying for my sake upon the Cross; There Is nothing else can reconcile me to the
Souvereign Majesty which I have so provoked; There Is nothing else can wash out
the deep Stains of my unspeakable ingratitude.

This is that Mercy of my God, which the admiring World has Reason to call
Great: That Mercy which is truly Great, not only in it is self, but Great to all
that are Partakers of it. Have Mercy on me, O God, Ps. 50.
according to Thy Great Mercy. VVash my poor soul from it is Iniquity, and
Cleanse it from it is Sins. Sprinkle me only, with the blood of JESUS, and I
shall be Cleans'd; VVash me with it, and I shall be whiter than Snow. Cast me
not away from Thy Face; but look upon a Contrite and an Humble Heart, which
(for the sake of Thy Beloved Son, Math. 17.5.
with whom Thou art well Pleased) I hope Thou will not despise; but that Thou will have Mercy on me, O God, according to Thy Great Mercy.

SECT. II. Resolutions of Amendment.
I Have said: Now I Begin. Alas! Ps. 76.
How often have I said So, and as often broke my word! And what Hope have I Now
to keep it, more than any other Time? When I renew the doleful memory of my
Relapses, how I tremble at the very Thought! To think how often, in a lukewarm
Fit of Piety, I have imagined I was Now beginning to amend my Life; And yet how
Soon, how Easily, how Shamefully has every sudden Passion, every sinful
Inclination, every silly Humor overcome my best and* firmest Resolutions!
Proud as I was, I wonderd always at my weakness, and could scarce believe it,
though I Saw it. Proud as I was, still went on in the same road; Still fancyd
it was easy to Reform when I Resolved upon it; And still excused my self, by
laying all the fault upon my Neighbors, my Employments, or some other
Circumstances of my Life. And yet, what Place soever I have lived in,
whatsoever Business I have been employed in, whatsoever Circumstances have
attended me through all the several changes of my Fortune; I have always been
the same Frail Creature, always equally unfaithful to my word. What Hope then
have I Now to keep it, more than any other Time?

Must I Despair? Yes, yes: It Is absolutely Necessary for me to Despair of my
own Strength, that I may seriously begin to Hope in nothing else but Him who
gives Grace to the Humble, 1. Pet. 5.5.
and resists the Proud. And may I by his Grace Persever all my Life, improving
each day more and more, in This Despair, which is the Reason why I Hope more
now than any other Time.

O that I had long since Despaired entirely of my own sufficiency, and placed
my Confidence in nothing but the powerful assistance of his Grace; I should
not then have been so Negligent so openly Exposed on every side, to the
continual surprises of my Passions. I should then have carefully employed the
precious moments of my Time, either in Studying how to Meet my several
Dangers, or Forecasting how to Avoid Them. I should then have Prayed as
heartily, as men do in a Storm; who every moment fear to sink, and every moment
lift their trembling Hands and weeping Eyes to Heaven; the same angry Heaven
whence They justly apprehend their fatal Ruin. Ah my God! how seldom have I
Prayed so! And how often have I Asked Thy Grace as Carelessly as if I had no need
of it!

My Resolutions, like my Prayers, hitherto have only been in General terms:
That now I would Reform my Life; I would no longer be a Slave to Passion and
Humor; I would now Begin to be a Saint; And, O! how I have been ashamed to
Think of all my Follies! Alas! This very Pride which made me thus Ashamed, was
That which made me Fancy, 'twas an Easy matter to Amend; and therefore made me
Careless in observing the Particular Occasions of my Greatest Sins, the
Remedies which ought to be applyd, and the Impediments which ought to be
removed. But since the sad experience of my weakness makes me wiser, I am now
resolved it shall be the chief Business of my Life, to watch and study all the
Motions of my Heart: What Passions are predominant; what Inclinations Second
them; by what Approaches They gain ground; and by what Means, in This or That
particular Occurrence, They may be resisted, weakened, and subdued.

A Master Workman needs but now and then apply his Rule, because his Habit
guides his skillfull Hand. But I, Unskillfull as I am, who only now Begin the
necessary Art of Living well, and have so many years contracted an ill habit of
neglecting all those Holy Precepts; I must now, not only in my
Morning-Recollection carefully Foresee each Danger I am like to meet with in
the Day; But frequently Renew those pious Resolutions; In All occasions Consult
the Eternal Truth Which came from Heaven to instruct me; And Examine
seriously, if the Employment of my Thoughts, Words, Actions, and Desires, be
suitable to so Divine a Rule.

All This I am Resolved upon, in Presence of my God, and the whole Court of
Heaven. Help me, All ye Blessed Spirits, Luke. 15.7.
who are Joyful witnesses of these my Holy Resolutions; Assist me now to make
an humble Offering of them All before the Throne of Grace; Hebr. 4.16.
And join your Better prayers with mine, to beg a Blessing for Them; without
which, although I daily water Them with penitential Tears, They never will
Increase, and bring forth Fruit. I have said: Now I Begin. Have mercy on me, O
God, according to Thy Great Mercy; For Such a Change comes only from the Right
Hand of the Highest. Psalm. 76.11.


AN HUMBLE HEART.
SECT. I. The Necessity and Advantages of Humility.
ALl our Savior's Life and Conversation upon Earth, S. Aug. lib. de ver. rel*
was a continual instruction for the modelling of ours. But above all things
He particularly recommended to us the example of his great Humility: Math.
11.29.
Learn of me, says he, because I am humble of Heart; and you will find rest
for your souls.

The necessity of this incomparable Virtue is so great, Rodriguez. Par. 2. Tr.
3. chapter 1.
that it is impossible without it to make any progress in a Sprituall life. Our
Pride corrupts and ruins all our virtuous Actions, unless Humility begin,
continue, and conclude them.

S. Gregory says, Rodriguez. chapter 2.
True virtue never grows in any Soul, but when it is nourisht by its proper
Root, which is Humility. This plain comparison expresses very well its nature,
and its properties. 1. A flower fades and withers when it is parted from its
root. 2. The root is never better, than when hidden in the earth, and trampled
under foot. 3. A Tree is longer-liv'd, and yields more fruit, according as the
root of it is deeper, and lies lower under ground.

How much our Faith dedepends upon Humility, Rodr. chapter 3.
the Apostle tells us, when he speaks of casting down imaginations; 2. Cor.
10.5.
every high 'thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God; and
captivating every thought to the Obedience of Christ. Man's Reason is but weak,
and subject to mistake; and therefore a submissive Spirit is required: the want
of which has been the first beginning of all heresies, and verified S. Paul's
prediction, 2. Tim. 3.1.2.3.7.
that in the last days dangerous times will come: because Men will be Proud;
despisers of good people; and ever learning, but never coming to the knowledge
of Truth.

The same Humility which guides our Faith, encourages our Hope: Rodr. c. 10.11.
because the more we fear our weakness and diffide in our own strength, the
more we have recourse to God, in whom we place our confidence: and thus when we
are weak, 2. Cor. 12.10.
says the Apostle, we are strong. That is to say, when once we rightly
understand our selves, and being thoroughly convinced of our infirmity, we
seriously begin to hope in nothing but the assistance of God's Grace: then it is
that He himself begins to take in hand the management of our affairs; provides
for us in all our spiritual wants; supports, and guides us, by a special
providence, in all our pious undertakings. It Is with us, as it is with Beggars
who expose their ulcers and their miseries: the more they lay them open in the
public view, the more they move our pity, and obtain more alms of Charitable
persons: So the more sincerely we confess, and with profound humility
acknowledge, our extreme necessities, exposing them in presence of our God, the
more we move him to compassionate our miserable State, and to bestow upon us
more abundantly the riches of his Grace.

Humility, as it encourages our Hope so it improves our Charity. An humble Man
perpetually considering his innumerable faults and imperfections, the more he
sees his great unworthyness, the more he wonders at God's patience, and is more
inclined to love his Goodness above all things. P. Crasset. T. 2. Con. 14.
Nothing makes me better understand how good God is, than when I see with how
much patience he endures a man, who is not able to endure himself. It Is He who
is offended: I am the offender. I, all Wickedness: and He, all Holiness. As
wicked as I am, I cannot endure my self: As holy as He is, He suffers me with
patience. I only see a small part of my faults, and hate my self: He sees them
all, and yet He dos not cease to love me. I have such a horror of my self,
when I consider how inconstant and how frail I am: and yet I cannot perceive
that God has any horror of me. On the contrary, the more I humbly own my
wickedness, the more obliging and endearing proofs He gives me of insuperable
Goodness.

Our Humility preserves and guards our Chastity. Rodr. chapter 3.
Saint Bernard dos not fear to say, that even the Purity of the Blessed Virgin
her self, had never been agreeable to God, without it. Corn. a Lap. in c. 1, ad
Romans
Besides it is not only necessary to preserve our Chastity; but is the the best
and most effectual remedy, that can be, to procure it. Luxury is the
punishment of pride: and Chastity the triumph of humility. S. Hierome says, it is
hard to find a Heretic that loves Chastity; although in his discourses he may
seem to praise it, and pretend to practice it. The reason is, 1. Pet. 5.5.
because God gives grace only to the humble, and resists the proud: and where
there is no Grace, there is no Chastity, but all Concupiscence. Hence comes the
common saying of our Novellists, that Chastity is impossible: and it is no
wonder that they think so; for it is so, to the Proud, and Graceless; who can
nere be truly chaste, till they are truly humble. They are given up by God to
all uncleaness, Romans 1.24.
through the lust of their own hearts: and it is but just, that if the Soul
refuses due submission to God, the Body should be found, by his permission, as
untractable and disobedient to such a Soul. Because, says S. Gregory, by Pride
they prefer themselves before Men: by Luxury they soon become like Beasts.

A man might easily go through all other virtues, Rodr. chapter 3.
and observe Humility as necessary for the acquiring and preserving of them
All. But what has been already said, suffices to convince us, that the most
compendious method of aspiring to Perfection, is to make it our chief business,
to be truly humble.

It Is enough to add, P. Crasset. T. 1. Lund. 3 de l' Avent.
that All our virtues and good actions, without Humility, will never save us:
and that all our sins and imperfections, with true Humility, will never damn
us: For as soon as ever we are truly humble, all our vices leave us, and
immediately all virtues take possession of our heart. My soul! why are we then
discouraged? Why do we despair? Why are we, now and then, so melancholy when we
think of all our imperfections and faults? If therefore we have reason to
despair: have we not therefore reason to be humble? Let us be so then: and we
shall have no longer any reason to despair. Let us but humble our selves in
presence of our God: we shall soon obtain all that we have not; we shall be
able to do all that we cannot; and we shall receive all that we deserve not.
You cannot fast? At least you can humble your self. You cannot weep for your
sins? Humble your self, because you cannot. You have not Time enough, nor
Health enough, to say much prayers? However, you may be as humble every jot, as
if you had. Do what you can, you always pray with much distraction? Be content,
and humble. You are now and then surprised, and fall into some sin? Have
patience: take more care another time: and be more humble ever after.

An Humble Heart God never will despise. Ps. 50.
And is not This enough to show us the Necessity and great Advantage of
Humility? How comfortable is the Thought of it, to them whose Want of health,
or other Circumstances, will not suffer to make use of corporal Austerities,
in Satisfaction for their Sins! What Comfort is it to them, to reflect that
still they have a Refuge left them in the Sanctuary of this Virtue. It Is the
only One they have, if we believe an ancient Father of the Church. S. John.
Clima. Recapitul. Ar. 35.
Whoever has committed grievous Sins; and has a Body weak and Sickly; Let him
tread the footsteps of Humility: In all things Let him fellow, where the Spirit
and the Impulse of that Virtue lead him: It Is the only way He has to save his
Soul.

SECT. II. First Degree of Humility.
THe first Degree, Rodr. chapter 5.
is to have a mean opinion of our selves; to think our selves contemptible; and
judge that we deserve to be despised by all the World. The Knowledge of our
selves, our Weakness and our Misery, is no Humility; but only is the necessary
Means to come to this Degree of it.

A person truly humble, Rodr. chapter 3.
always has before his eyes his own defects and imperfections: in others he
considers chiefly the perfections and virtues which he finds: and thus he
always is persuaded that his neighbors are much better and more perfect than
himself. He loves them with respect and tenderness. He is not angry at his
being valued less than they; but glad to see them All preferred before him.

His Sins, Ibid. Ps. 50.
which ever are before him, make him sensible that he deserves the worst of
punishments: and therefore whatsoever happens to him, he esteems it infinitely
less than his iniquity deserves. He never thinks himself affronted. Whatsoever
wrong is done him; he receives it as a favor, in comparison of what he has
just reason to expect. He suffers all, in silence, upon this account: And far
from breaking out into complaints, he only calls to mind that humble saying, of
the Prophet Micah, 7.9.
I will bear the indignation of my God, because I have sinned against him.

The hardest measure we can suffer in this life; Rodr. Chapter 7.
the greatest and the most severe humiliations we can think of, are
incomparably less than what is due to any single crime, which we committ
against the Majesty of God. Can we imagine, all the World is able to dishonor
him too much, who has dishonor God himself? And is it not just that having
slighted and neglected his Creator, he himself should be despised by All, and
live for ever after in disgrace? Ephesians. 2.3.
Remember that a Sinner is a Child of wrath, an Enemy of God, a Monster of
deformity, condemned to everlasting flames: Remember this; and you will shrink
below the feet of all the World; because you will be then convinced, that
howsoever you are humbled and oppress't, a Man who has but once offended God,
deserves to suffer more.

Although my Conscience accuse me not, Rodr. ibid. 1. Cor. 4.4.
Though I know nothing of my self, says the Apostle, yet I am not hereby
justified; but he that judges me, is God. When we consider well, how doubtful
our condition is, and how we always are uncertain of our being justified: This,
this alone, without all other motives, which are numberless, is of it self
abundantly sufficient to humble us. What Christian is there, that would dare
to show his face? or Man that would not rather wish to sink into the bowels of
the Earth, to hide himself? if this reflection once had made a deep impression
in his mind, My Crimes are certain, but my Pardon is uncertain. Nothing can be
more uneasy to a Soul, that would be saved, than this Uncertainty. But yet
there is nothing in the World of greater use for the acquiring and preserving of
Humility. There Is nothing can refrain us more from Censuring our Neighbors, or
Despising even those who seem the greatest Sinners; than to think, that We our
selves are far from having any certainty of being in the State of Grace; and
that, this very moment we may be, for ought we know, in equal danger of the
everlasting flames of Hell.

SECT. III. Second Degree of Humility.
THe Second Degree, Rodr. chapter 13.
is when we love to be neglected, and desire to be despised. As hard as it
appears, if we were once well grounded in the first Degree, the way would then
be short and easy to the second. If we had but once a mean opinion of our
selves; if once we truly thought our selves contemptible; if once our judgment
were convinced that we deserve to be despised by All the World; it would not
then be difficult to suffer their contempt: We then should even wish for such
occasions of improving our humility: they would be always very welcome to us,
and afford us, every day, new joy and consolation. It Is certain, says S.
Bonaventure, that we naturally love to see our sentiments approved, and our
opinions followd. Which if it be true, as our experience too often teaches us,
why are we so uneasy when we see our neighbors undervalue us? It Is
questionless, because we are not, in our judgment, thoroughly convinced that we
deserve to be despised; for if we were, we should be glad to see our neighbors
follow our opinion. Rodr. chapter 14.


The Dispositions which make way to this Degree, are, 1. to shun as much as may
be, all occasions of praise. 2. To suffer patiently the humors and insults of
others. 3. To take no pleasure in our being celebrated and admired.

1. The Avoiding all occasions of praise, Ibid.
is recommended to us by the great example of our Savior, and the universal
practice of the Saints. Our Savior fled from those who thought to choose him
King. He showed his Glory on mount Thabor to no more than three of his
Disciples; and immediately charged them not to say a word on it. Whenever his
great Charity appeared in doing miracles, his great humility appeared no less
in his commanding secrecy. S. Fr. Sales. p. 3. c. 5.


Humility affects not to appear in her own likeness. She forbears expressions
which discover her. She desires, not only to conceal all other Virtues, but
particularly, to conceal her self. P. Crasset. T. 1. Mar. 3. de l'Arent.


It Is a dangerous thing to speak of one's self; either well, or ill: if well,
it is to appear deserving; if ill, it is to appear humble.

An humble man had rather hear another say, S. Fr. Sales. p. 3. c. 5.
that he is miserable, inconsiderable, good for nothing; than be heard to say
it of himself. At least, he never contradicts it. Whosoever says it, he
believes it firmly and is therefore glad that others are of his opinion.

2. If we seriously considered, Rodr. chapter 14.
that the esteem of men, is generally, if not always, an Occasion of
Presumption and Pride; and that the Saints themselves, who by Gods Grace were
more secure from danger, always fled from such temptation, even with aversion
and horror: we should certainly conclude, that whatsoever may contribute to
the humbling of us, and inducing us to have a mean opinion of our selves,
should be received with patience, and embraced as useful means of purchasing,
preserving, and increasing our Humility. The opportunities of practicing this
Virtue are so frequent every day, that if we did but carefully forecast to
profit by them, we might almost make it our continual Exercise. B. III. chapter 49.
It happens, says the Devout Kempis, that what is pleasing to others, shall go
well forward; that which thou wishest, shall not speed: That which others say,
shall be heard; what thou say, shall be nothing regarded: Others shall ask,
and shall receive; thou shall ask, and not obtain: others shall be great in the
praise of men; but of thee there shall be no speech: to others this or that
shall be committed; but thou shall be accounted fit for nothing. At this,
Nature is apt sometimes to be troubled; and it is much, if thou art humble
enough, to bear it patiently with silence.

3. Ibid.
To be charmed so little with Esteem and Honor, as to take no pleasure in
them, is a third step to the height of this Degree; much harder than the other
two. For as Saint Austin very well observes, although it may be easy for a man
to live without praise, when it is denied: it is hard enough for any man, to take
no pleasure in it, when it is freely offered him. A proud man, says S. Gregory,
rejoices even when he knows that his admirers are mistaken in him. For he cares
not what his Life is in the sight of God, but only values the appearance of it
in the sight of Men. And therefore he his puffed up with the least applause: He
fancys he has reap't the fruit of his endeavors: He desires no more: He aims
at nothing else. But, on the contrary, an humble man is so averse from the
applause of Men: that he is uneasy with it. He Is afraid there is no real ground
for it: or else he fears the loss of his Reward in Heaven, by receiving of it
here; and trembles at the apprehension of exchanging, for a little popular
Esteem, the Crown of everlasting Glory, which he hopes for. Solomon says, Prove.
27.21.
As gold is tried by the furnace, so is a man by his praise. S. Gregory adds;
if he grows vain by hearing it, he is like false gold, which suffers by the
fire: but if the hearing of it makes him tremble, least it may be prejudicial
to his soul before the Souvereign Judge; it is like a fire which only serves to
purify, and give him a new luster. We should be so grounded in the knowledge of
ourselves, that when we are commended, we may always have before our eyes our
base Unworthyness; and be so much the more ashamed, to think, we are so far
from being what we seem to be; that we fall short of being, even what we should
be.

By these three Steps we come at last to the Degree of loving and desiring to
be undervalued and despised: Rodr. chapter 15.
We become, not only humble in our Judgment, but our Heart. The first degree,
which is Humility of Judgment, was not to be found in J. C. as S. Bernard well
observes: because He knew himself too well, to have a mean opinion of himself,
or think himself contemptible, or judge that He deserved to be despised by all
the World. But the second Degree, the true humility of Heart, was the Humility
of our Redeemer. He took pleasure in descending, and becoming Man: He loved to
be neglected, scorned, and ridiculed: He heartily desired to undergo all
injuries, insults and outrages. Behold the Example of our Master. See the
Lesson which he came to teach us. Math. 11.29.
Learn of me, says He, because I am humble of HEART.

A true Disciple of Christ, Ibid.
is dead to all things in this world; he hates it, and detests it; he desires
not to be valued and esteemed in it; but embraces all Humiliations with the self
same passion, which worldly persons have for Honor and Esteem; and is as glad
to meet with all occasions of appearing inconsiderable and contemptible, as
they are overjoyed to meet with opportunities of seeming Great.

To know if we are true Disciples of our Master, Rodr. chapter 16.
and have perfectly acquired this Virtue; we must, by this Rule, examine well
the disposition of our Heart, and see if we rejoice as much at being
undervalued valued and despised, as others do at being honored and applauded.

This Examen is the Touchstone of Humility. Ibid.
For it is agreed upon by all, that Virtue is imperfect in us, till we practice
it with satisfaction and pleasure. If we find the least repugnance in the
practice, when occasion serves; and use much preparation to surmount the
difficulty of it; it is indeed the way to acquire such Virtue, but it also is a
certain mark, we have not yet acquired it in perfection. A Master of an Art, as
Aristotle says, has such a habit of it, that he uses no deliberation, but
performs the operations of it with such ease, he scarce knows what he is doing
when he dos his work. And Philosophers tell us, that in surprising Accidents,
we act not by Reflection, but by Habit. For which reason, it is in vain to
examine, what our Inclinations are (and whether we are truly Humble, or no) by
what we do with preparation and leisure: We must carefully examine, what we
suddenly are apt to do, without deliberation.

However, Rodr. Chr. 17.
if by this Examen we observe, that notwithstanding our Endeavors to improve,
we frequently are importuned, and sometimes overcome, by Pride and Vanity: if
we are yet so far from taking pleasure in the practice of Humility, that we are
hardly able to support in silence the Uneasiness we suffer in it: Let not this
discourage us: But on the contrary, the more we see our weakness, let it humble
us the more; and let us learn from thence

to use our utmost diligence in laying a more firm Foundation of Chrisstian
Humility, which is Humility of Heart. It Is not a thing impossible. For, by the
grace of God, we may be able, says S. Austin, not only to imitate the example
of the Saints, but also of the Souvereign Master of the Saints. He invites us
all to imitate his Virtue; and can we fancy He invites us to a thing
impossible? Learn of me, says He, because I am Humble of HEART. And S. Hierom
very well observes, that those words of our Savior, If thou will be Perfect,
Math. 19.21.
come and follow me, are a manifest conviction, that by his Grace, (which
always is at hand,) we have it in our power, to be Perfect, if we will.

SECT. IV. An Objection Answered.
IF Charity incline us to desire our neighbor's Good, Rodr. cb. 29.
and to contribute what we can to their Salvation; why should our Humility
desire that all the World may undervalue us? Without their thinking well of us
(in some capacity, or other) we shall never do them any good; they never will
confide in us; they will not hearken to us; we shall have no credit with them.
Is It not therefore reasonable, even by the Rule of common Charity, that we
should rather seek their Kindness and Esteem, than their Aversion and Contempt?

S. Ibid.
Gregory answers. It Is one thing, to desire our neighbor's Esteem; another, to
rejoice at his Profit. It Is a Crime to covet Reputation for it is own sake, and
rejoice at being Great in the opinion of men. But yet, to wish as much of it,
as may be necessary for so good an End, as that of serving Souls and gaining
them to Christ; is an effect of Charity. And thus it is lawful to desire our
neighbor's good opinion and esteem, so far as may enable us to do them good:
because we thus desire it, only for their service, and the greater glory of our
our God, with a sincere and total disengagement from the charms of Pride and
Vanity. If any man, who naturally hates a Potion, or a Pill, upon occasion
procures it, and desires to take it; we may be assured, that such a man takes
physic, not Physic sake, but purely for his Health. So when a man, who by an
extraordinary grace of the Almighty, hates the applause and honor of this
World; when such a man procures, desires, and manages with care, the good
Opinion of men; because it may be useful to him in their service; we may be
assured he only seeks God's Honor, not his own.

However, Ibid.
this great Truth is generally much abused; and under the pretense of it, we
only cover our Ambition, and disguise our Vanity. We covet Honors, seek
Preferments, and intrude our selves into Employments, letting slip no
opportunity of being or appearing. Great; and all this while, we plead; it is
only Charity, to qualify us for the better service of our Neighbors. We have
therefore need of no small circumspection to discern the cheat. The way to know
it, says S. Gregory, is to examine all occasions, where our Reputation is a
thing indifferent, and useless to our neighbor. If in these, we care not for
the good Opinion of men; we may suppose, that when we are concerned for it, it
is only for our neighbor's sake, and not our own.

S. Ibid.
Gregory thus untys the knot; but S. Francis cutts it with more ease, and much
more clearly takes away the difficulty.

Whatsoever the Occasions are, Ibid.
He roundly answers: that our Charity begins at home: that if it inclines us to
desire our Neighbor's spiritual good; with much more reason it inclines us to
desire our Own: that if our Reputation may be useful to our neighbor; our
Disgraces and Humiliations (incurred without our fault) may prove more
beneficial to our selves. If when I preach, says he, or when I practice any
virtue which is edifying, I am pleased with praises, which endanger my
Salvation; because their good Opinion of me, helps them to improve by my
instruction, and example: How much reason have I, for my own sake, to rejoice a
great deal more, when (having done my best) I still am undervalued and
despised; because, by this means, I my self am more acceptable to God, and more
secure of my Eternal Happyness?

Our Savior himself, See R. chapter 29.
whose Charity inclined him to descend from heaven, and to sacrifice his life
for Sinners; knew that many unbelieving Souls were lost by undervaluing and
despising him; He knew that many millions of them would have been converted, if
they had admired and honored him as he deserved; and yet He never sought for
wordly Honor as a means to save them; but although though their Souls were
dear to Him, his honor was not. Jo. 6.38.
As He came from heaven, not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent
him: So He came to seek the Honor of his Father, not his own. I honor my
Father, Jo. 8.49.50.
says He; I seek not my own glory. It Is enough that whilst I only seek his
Honor, He takes care of mine; and that although I never seek my own, v. 50.
yet there is One that always seeks and judges it; and always will be sure to
do me justice. Let us follow the Example of our Savior. Let us make it the
chief Business of our life to do the will of him that sent us, not our own. Let
us honor our Father in Heaven. Let his Honor only be the Object of our care,
and never let us mind our own, but rest content that He himself takes care of
it. Let no appearance of our Neighbor's Profit cheat us into an Ambition of
being popular; but let us faithfully, in all things, do our Duty for the Love
and Honor of our God; and as for men's opinion of us, let us leave it to his
Providence. His Honor, here below, is left (as I may say) to our discretion:
He committs it to our care: He forces not our Liberty, but only offers the
assistance of his Grace, and lets us Honor him, and serve him as we please.
Shall God thus trust his honor in so bad a hand as ours? and shall not we be
satisfied, to trust our honor in so good a hand as His?

SECT. V. Third Degree of Humility.
THe Third, Rodr. chapter 30.
and Last Degree is the Humility of Saints, who are most humble in the sight of
God, when they are most esteemed and celebrated by the World.

When a Person, full of faults and imperfections, has a mean opinion of
himself; esteems himself no better than he is; and is content to be reputed
such as he esteems himself; We may commend him, says S. Bernard; but have
little reason to admire him. Who admires to see a poor man have a mean opinion
of his riches? think himself no richer than he is? and rest content that others
think so too? but if a Rich man rank himself amongst the poor, and treat them
with respect, as if he were the least considerable of them all; This very well
deserves our admiration.

By this description of the third Degree, we plainly see, that the Humility of
Saints and the Humility of Sinners is the same in Substance, though they differ
in Perfection. It Is true: we wonder not, to see a man stand steady upon even
ground. But when we see the same man stand as firm upon a lofty pinnacle; we
gaze, and wonder at him. All this while, the Man's the same; though we admire
him more, because the place is higher and the difficulty greater. So it is in
our present case. Humility is either of the Judgment, or the Heart. The third
Degree is comprehended in the First, and Second. But however we admire much
more an humble Saint; because his eminent degree of Sanctity is higher, and the
difficulty of his being humble, therefore seems much greater.

I say seems greater: because I am not apt to think it is so; upon second
thoughts. My reason, in short, is This. Humility of judgment and of heart, are
chiefly grounded in the Knowledge of our selves, and Love of God. The First
induces us to have a mean opinion of our selves: the more we know our selves,
the more we think our selves contemptible, the more we judge that we deserve to
be despised by all the World. The Second makes us glad to be neglected, and
desire to be contemned: And as the Love of God increases in our hearts; the
more we have and scorn the transitory honor of this world; the more we love to
follow the Example of an humble God; the more we heartily desire to be agreeable
to none but him; as being every day more sensible of this great Truth; He only
is approved; 2. Cor. 10.18.
whom God commends.

Let us only lay these notions right together. 1. The Knowledge of our selves
and Love of God, is that which makes men Saints. No Person ever was a Saint
without them: No man ever was a Sinner with them. And the more this Knowledge
and this Love increase, the Greater is the Sanctity. 2. This Knowledge and this
Love, is that which makes men Humble. Knowledge helps them to be humble in their
Judgments: Love assists them to be humble in their Hearts. The more they Know
and Love, the greater is the assistance of God's Grace, which is the only means
of making all things easy to us. Why then may we not conclude? Whoever is a
Saint, the greater Saint he is, the easyer it is for him to be humble.

Sinners indeed have much more matter for Humility to work upon. Their
Weakness, their Corruption, and the Misery of their deplorable condition, are
incomparably worse. But, which is worst of all, they are so miserably blind, as
not to know their misery. A Beggar, in his drink, imagines he is a Prince: and
is as proud as if he were. It Is true; he is miserably poor: but since he knows it
not; what signifies it? He Is as proud, as if he were the richest man alive. It Is
so with Sinners. They are drunk with Self-love, Pride, and Vanity. They little
know, and much less think, how Poor, how Miserable, how Contemptible they are.
And we may very well apply to them those words of the Apocalypse: Because Thou
say, Chapter 3.17.18.
I am rich, and have need of nothing; and know not that thou art wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: Therefore I counsel thee, to
anoint thy eyes, that thou may See. This is the general Reason why Humility
is harder to be found in Sinners, than in Saints. The First have more to humble
them: but the more they have, the blinder they are, and the less they know it.
The Second have less to humble them; but the less they have, the more their
eyes are open by God's Grace, and the more clearly they discover what is enough
to make them fear and tremble all their life.

SECT. VI. First Reason why the greatest Saints are the most humble.
I Shall only add two Reasons more: because all Saints (I speak of such as are
now living) are comprised in these two Classes: They are either such as have
been Sinners heretofore; or such as may be so hereafter.

The first Reason is so universal, that it comprehends them both: but more
particularly Those who have preserved the Innocence of their Baptismall Grace.
D. Sp. chapter 26.
It Is gatherd from that Oracle of Scripture; work out your Salvation with Fear
and Trembling: Philip. 2.12.13.
For it is God who works in you to will and to do; according to his pleasure.
See the unsearchable Abyss of the Almighty's Judgments! where it is dangerous to
dwell too long, and search too curiously, lest it cast us into an excess of
Fear. It Is enough, that none are saved, but who persever to the End; and that
the greatest Saints can never be assured of their Perseverance. It Is a special
Gift which the Apostle chiefly points at, when he says; Romans 9.18.16.
God has mercy on whom he will have mercy. It is not of him that wills, or him
that runs; but of God that shows Mercy. And again: Ephesians. 2.8.9.
By Grace you are saved: and that not of your selves: it is the Gift of God:
Not of works; lest any Man should boast. Alas! how is it possible for any Saint
to be assured of his condition for the future, since he is not certain even of
his present State? Who can sound the bottom of our Heart? Or rather, Who can
sound the Heart of God, and tell us what He thinks of our condition? Who is He,
that can assure us, We are good enough to be Rewarded by Him? woe be to that
Life, how innocent soever, says S. Austin, Psalm. 19.12.
which He Judges without Mercy. Who is He, says David, that can understand his
failings? Cleanse me from my secret faults, Psalm. 143.2.
O Lord: and enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight shall
no man living be justified; if once Thou judge him according to the utmost
rigor of thy Justice. Who is there that dos not tremble, when he hears the
Just and Holy man, whom God himself was pleased to praise, confess that, all
his life time, God was such a Terror to him, Job. 31.23.
he was hardly able to endure it? Who can, without trembling, hear the Prophet
Isaiah tell us; 64.6.
we are all unclean; and all our righteous works, like filthy Rags? Or hear S.
Hierom, in the life of S. Hilarion, tell us how that blessed Saint was
terrified at the approach of Death; and to encourage his departing soul, said
to himself; Go forth, my Soul; what are thou Now afraid of? Thou have served
thy God these threescore and ten years; and do thou tremble Now to appear
before him?

Let us therefore fear and tremble in the way to Heaven. Never let us fancy, we
are so advanced in Virtue; that we need not fear. The greatest Saints were
never so Presumptuous, as to banish from their thoughts the Fear of God.
Philip. 2.12.
They workt out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling. They were always full
of Fear: and this Fear always Humbled them. They were not Blinded, as we are,
with Passion and Humor; but, as they improved in Grace, they every day
discovered more and more their secret Imperfections.

The Property of Grace is to enlighten the Understanding, as well as to inflame
the Heart. It makes us Know our Misery, and Love our God, who only can deliver
us. These two Effects of Grace were lively represented on the Day of Pentecost,
by that mysterious Fire which rested on the heads of the Apostles. Fire gives
Light and Heat: and as the Fire increases, it affords more Heat and greater
Light. So, Grace Enlightens and Enflames the Minds and Hearts of Saints, with
Knowledge of themselves, and Love of God: and as their Grace improves, this Heat
and Light increase: They discern more clearly the innumerable dangers that
surround them; and become more Humble under the Almighty Hand of God. 1. Pet.
5.6.


S. Paul compares the different States of Sin and Grace, to Light and Darkness,
Night and Day. Rom 13 12.13.
The Night says he, is spent; the Day is at hand. Let us cast of the works of
Darkness, and put on the armor of Light. Let us walk honestly, as in the Day.
A Traveller benighted, walks he knows not where. He hardly sees his Hand; much
less his Feet. He sees perhaps, some Stars shine through the clouds, whose
sparkling light serves only to amuse him, and mislead him to a Precipice. But
when the rising Sun appears, the Stars immediately vanish out of sight; our
Traveller no longer gazes there; but has a much more useful prospect, of the
Earth below him; where he plainly sees the Ground he go's upon, the Risings,
the Descents, the Inequalities, and Precipices of it. Sinners, like benighted
Travelers, march blindly on; mind little what they Do; and much less where
they Go. However, now and then, they practice some good actions, either out of
custom, or good nature; and amuse themselves with some few semblances of
virtue, whose dim luster seems perhaps more sparkling in the Darkness of that
Night, which hides them, even from themselves. But it is not so with Saints.
Their Night is spent; their Day appears. The Sun of Justice Rises in their
Hearts. 2. Pet. 1.19.
Their Virtues, like the Stars, (which only shine in Darkness) disappear
immediately. The Clay which they are made of; the Corruption of their Nature;
the Enormity of Sin; the Power of their Passions; and the Weakness of their
Reason: These are Motives of Humility, which Now they clearly see, and daily
have before their eyes. Besides all This; they plainly see an infinite variety
of Artifices and Disguises of Self-love, which easily assumes all shapes, and
counterfeits all Virtues, even Charity it self. And therefore they suspect the
best of all their Actions; trembling at the very thought of them, for fear they
may be secretly corrupted by Self-love. But, above all, the importunity of
Pride, which never ceases to attack them; but continually endeavors to
surprise them (notwithstanding all these motives of humility) is that which
seems the most extravagant of all their faults; and humbles them the most.

Behold the Misery of Man! And, what can be more miserable, if the Sight of so
much misery suffices not to humble him! the greatest Saint, who is not
conscious to himself of any forfeiture of his first Innocence, has no Assurance
of his being justified. D. Sp. chapter 27.
He may be in the State of Grace; but whether so, or not. He cannot tell. And,
which is worse, although he knew it, He has no assurance of Persevering one
single moment. He who Stands, may Fall: and He who is a Saint, may prove a
Sinner. Nothing but God's Grace is able to support him, to the End: and the
Continuance of this Grace requires so faithful and so punctual a Cooperation
with it; that a very small Omission oftentimes suffices to deprive him of it.
His Perseverance is, as it were, a Chain of Graces, linkt together, and
continued to the utmost period of his life: S. Tho. 1.2. q. 114.9.
and this is more than He can Merit. All that he can do, is to be always
vigilant and faithful in the Use of every single Grace God offers him. One
Grace, well used, draws on another; This, a third; and That, a fourth: but if
he trip the least in his Fidelity, the Chain immediately breaks. And this is
that great Diligence which the Apostle recommends so earnestly to all good
Christians: 2. Pet. 1.10.
Use Diligence, says he, to make your Calling and Election sure. For IF YOU DO,
you shall never fall. I must confess, this Saying is extremely comfortable; if
we do: But, if we do not, what becomes of us? If all our life, we Use such
Diligence; the Apostle tells us, we shall never fall: But, if we do not; what
remains, but that the greatest Saint amongst us will be sure to fall? Consider
this; and Tremble, Whosoere you are. Assure your self, the more you are a
Saint, the more you will tremble, and the more you will see, how terrible a truth
This is; which is one Reason why the greatest Saints (who are the most
convinced of it) are always the most Humble.

SECT. VII. Second Reason why the greatest Saints are the most humble.
I Have said enough of Saints, who have preserved their Innocence. The Second
Reason only has regard to Saints, who by their Crimes have lost it heretofore;
and now are truly Penitent. If They who Know Themselves the best, are therefore
the most Humble, because they Doubt the most of their Perseverance. Surely
These who Know most clearly the Enormity of Sin, which they are guilty of, have
much more Reason to be Humble; because they Doubt much more, of their obtaining
Pardon.

There is a great deal of difference says S. Jerome, Epist. ad Salv.
betwixt a Man whose Vessel is entire, and richly laden, when he sails into the
Port of Bliss: and Him who, after Shipwreck, after Swimming for his life, rides
naked on a Plank; and after being dashed, a hundred times against the rocks, at
length is cast upon the Sands, half-dead, and almost bruised to pieces. If a
man, who sails in a sound Vessel, never is secure from Storms which may arise,
but always doubts of his arrival at the Port: we may be sure his Case is much
more doubtful and more terrible, who has already sufferd Shipwreck; and has
nothing left him, but a Single Plank, to bear him up.

It Is true: it happens now and then (and it is a comfortable Observation of a
Holy Man, Abbe Jean. Entretien. 7.
whose Name is famous in our present Age) it happens now and then, that He,
Math. 8.27.
to whom the winds and and sea obey, is pleased to make them for a time so calm
and quiet, that a Man who swims upon his plank with industry and courage, meets
at length, by Providence, another Vessel, better than his own; and sails with
much more Comfort, much more Joy, into the Haven, than he would have done if he
had never sufferd Shipwreck in a Storm. S. John Climacus, in his 15. Degree,
inquires which of the two is Greater in the sight of God; he who died by sin,
and rose again to life by Grace? Or he who never died the spiritual death of
Sin? And answers, that whoever Thinks the Innocent more happy of the two, is
much mistaken. The Reason is: because All Sanctity is founded in Humility and
Charity. Whoever Loves God best, and is most Humble, is the Greatest Saint. It
happens oftentimes that He to whom a little is forgiven, Luc. 7.47.
Loves but little: and it happens now and then, that He Loves best, who is most
mercifully pardoned, v. 43.
and forgiven most. We read in Scripture several examples of this nature.
Zachary as soon as he had done sufficient Penance for his incredulity,
immediately had his Speech restored him; and not only that, but he was also
honored with the Gift of Prophesying; which we do not read he had before. The
Prodigal received much greater favors and caresses from his Father, than he
ever had experienced before he left him. Lazarus himself, (who was the Figure
of great Sinners) never had the honor to be entertained, at Table, with the
Son of God; before he was, by miracle, raised from the Grave. S. Peter had not
confidence, before he sinned, to ask our Savior, Who he was that would betray
him? But, when he had washed away his sins with Tears, he was permitted to be
more familiar with his Master, and was made the Souvereign Pastor of his
Church. From whence it is easy to conclude, that Sinners may sometimes, by
Penance, grow more Perfect than those Saints who having kept their Innocence,
Love God less fervently, and serve him, with more coldness and indifference.
Behold, says Saint Ambrose, the great Goodness of our God! How liberal and
generous He is, to whom He pleases to be merciful! He Is not contented to
restore what they have lost. He grants them over and above, such Graces, and
such Favors, as they never dirst have hoped for. Thus, as the Apostle says,
Romans 5.20.
where Sin abounded, Grace abounds much more: because, the more Sin Humbles
them, the more they are Exalted. When a Penitent, whom Sin had blinded, once
begins to See, and to discover clearly the Enormity of his offenses, he has
much more reason to be humble all his life, than if he had been always
innocent. He looks upon himself no better than a Criminal reprieved, who is
upon his good behavior for his pardon; and persuades himself that he can never
give sufficient proof of his Fidelity, and the Sincerity of his Repentance. All
his Exercises of continual Penance never make him Vain; but only serve to
humble him the more: because he looks upon them, only as the Remedies of his
Diseases; and such Remedies as he must use till Death; which is the only End,
he hopes to see, of his Distempers. The Employment of his Thoughts is the
Consideration of his grievous Sins, which he perpetually laments; Where ere he
goes, he never leaves the doleful Memory behind him; Micah. 6.14.
His humiliation is always in the midst of him. Since therefore He, who hates
the Proud, 1. Pet. 5.5,
gives Graces to the Humble; is it not lawful to infer, that Sinners may
sometimes arrive to a more eminent Degree of Sanctity, than many of those
Saints, who never fell quite down, but yet walk slowly in the way to Heaven?

This happens, now and then it is true: but such Examples are as rare, as they
are great. They are effects of more than ordinary Grace, which God grants only
when and where he pleases. S. Peter never would have wept so bitterly, if Jesus
had not mercifully turned and looked upon him. Luke 22.61.62.
Lazarus had never risen from the grave, if Jesus had not come himself, and
called him forth with a loud voice. Jo. 11.43.
The Prodigal had never come back to his Father, if he had not first come to
himself. Luke. 15.17.
Alas, poor Wretch! he followed Swine before; and if he might have filled his
belly with their husks, v. 16.
he would have been contented. See the blindness of a Sinner! But as soon as
ever he came to himself, v. 17.
his eyes were open; and the opening of his eyes was that which brought him to
himself. He Saw the great Enormity of his offenses; I have sinned, says he; v.
18.
I have sinned against Heaven; and before my Father's face; v. 19.
I am not worthy to be called his Son. The Idea of his Sins was now so
terrible, and made so deep impression in him; that it humbled him, not only in
his Judgment, but his Heart. It humbled him so much, that he not only thought
himself unworthy, but desired to be received accordingly; and begged his Father
not to entertain him as a Son, but as one of his hired servants. v. 19.


When once the Grace of God enlightens us, and by a miracle of Mercy breaks
through the impenetrable Darkness which our Passions cloud our Reason with;
this Light discovers clearly to us the Enormity of Sin; and as this Light
increases, we discover daily more and more. This Light is followd with a Sacred
Heat that softens the obdurate coldness of our Temper; by which means, the
terrible Idea of our Guilt makes, every day, a deeper and more sensible
Impression in our Hearts. And This is the Second Reason, why the Greatest
Saints are the most humble: because, the greater Saints they are, the more They
see the great Enormity of Sin; the more They feel the Terror of their Guilt;
the more They doubt of their obtaining Pardon; and the more They fear and
tremble all their life.

I. The Enormity of Sin.
THe humble Penitent; whose words I lately cited, thus describes his coming to
himself. Entretien. 7.
Whilst I pursued, says he, the wandering Errors of my Heart, I drunk iniquity
like water, and not only that, Job. 15.16.
but was so hardened, and so blind, that whatsoere I read, or heard, of Sin,
made no impression; and instead of working my Conversion, only served to render
me more Guilty, and more inexcusable. At length, the happy Time arrived, 2.
Cor. 1.3.
in which it pleased the Father of all Mercies, and the God of all our Comfort,
to bestow a favorable look upon me: and the first Glance presently dispersed
the Darkness of my Soul. The very Dawning of that Light discovered to me the
Infernal Monster, in whose company, I had so long lived unconcerned. I saw,
and was immediately seizd with so prodigious Fear and Trembling at the Sight,
that I am confident, as long as I have breath to live, I never shall recover it.

S. Ifidore of Damiette describes this Monster in surprising terms: Ibid.
Some think, says he, that the Devil was the Father of Sin: and others on the
contrary maintain, that Sin was the Father of the Devil. Be it how you please,
says he, I leave you to imagine, either what a Father it must be of such a Son;
or what a Son we may expect of such a Father. This, I must confess, is Black
enough: But all it is Blackness only serves to leave us in the Dark. We are not
yet, one jot the nigher Knowing, what Sin is. And all that we can gather from
it, is that we are never like to have it painted to the Life, unless an Angel
undertake to draw it, and the Devil sit for the Picture.

The Philosopher was in the right of it, when being asked the question, what God
is? he took a Day; then two; then three; and after all, ingenuously confessed,
the more he thought of it, the more he found himself unable to express it. If a
man should ask me the like question; what a Sinner is? I should not be ashamed
to own, I am not able to describe the one, no more than he was to express the
other.

If God be the Supreme and Souvereign Good, if with Him all things else are
good, if nothing else be good without Him; We may, in proportion, say the same
of Sin. It Is the Supreme and Souvereign Evil, All things else are evil with
it, Nothing else is so to us without it.

If it be true, that All good comes from God, as from the First and Univerfall
Cause of All; The same is true of Sin, which is the First and Universal Root
of all our Evils. God made Heaven: Sin made Hell. He made the Earth: Sin made
it miserable. He created Angels in his Paradise above: Sin threw them down. He
created Man and Woman in our Paradise below: and Sin immediately cast them out.

Consider all the Torments of the Damned, the cruel Pains of those Eternal
Flames, the neverceasing Anguishes of their despairing Rage, etc. All This, and
More than All that you are able to conceive, is only Part of the Effects of
Sin. It Was Sin prepared All this, and More than this, for Them and Us.

If what you only know by Faith make no impression: if you are more sensible of
what we suffer here, than what they suffer there: Consider the Revolt of all
the Elements against us. Fire which once was only made to serve us, now becomes
the fatal instrument our angry God makes use of to destroy and punish us: the
very Air we breath, infect's us with Diseases: and the Earth, we walk on,
trembles, opens, buries us alive. All This had never been, if Man had never
Sinned.

Consider all the Miseries, which Famine, Plague, and War involve us in: the
Poverty of half the World; with all the Hunger, Thirst, Cold, Sickness, and
Despair, which Follow it: And after all, the Civil War of Passion against
Reason; which, if well examined, will be found the Greatest and most Painful
of our Miseries; from whence proceed our Ignorance and Malice; and from thence
all Immoralities, Corruptions, and Scandals, which we meet with in the World:
All This had never been; if Man had never Sinned.

Consider all the sad Disasters, You or Yours have met with; all the Losses
you have sufferd, in your Family, Estate, or Friends; and all the Crosses you
have born with so much Pain: Whatever you have undergone, you never had been
subject to; your Heart had never ak't; if Man had never Sinned. Accursed Sin!
the only first Beginning, and first Cause of all our Mischiefs, both in this
World and the next!

My God! 1. Jo. 3.2.
if once we Saw Thee as Thou art, we could not possibly be Tepid and
Indifferent; the very Sight of so much Goodness would, in spite of all our
Passions, force us to Admire, Adore, and Love Thee above all the World.
Accursed Sin! if we once we could but See Thee as Thou art; the very Sight of
so much Malice would not suffer us to Love Thee any longer; it would be
impossible for either World, or Flesh, or Devil to prevail against us; we
should Hate Thee above all things; we should then abhor, detest, abominate
Thee evermore. Accursed Sinner! such Goodness: and and Thou not Love it! such
Malice: and Thou not Hate it!

If the Eternal Source of all our Good be infinite in Goodness: what is the
First and Everlasting Root of all our Evils? Is It not infinite in Malice?
Questionless it is. Besides; God is not only infinite in Goodness; He is
infinite in Wisdom, infinite in Justice, infinite in all Perfections
whatsoever. So is Sin. It is not only infinite in Malice; it is also infinite
in Folly, infinite in all the Notions we can frame of it. The Treachery,
Disloyalty, Impiety, Ingratitude, Presumption, Pride, and Insolence; All This,
and More than all that we can think of, All is infinite.

According to the Principle which I have here laid down, if any man should ask
me, what a Sinner is? I should not know what other Name to Give him: SINNER is
his only Name: and I can think of nothing like Him, but the Man related in S.
Mark. Chapter 5.2.
He is possesst with an Unclean Spirit: possesst with the Devil; and which is
worse; possesst with Sin, the Father of the Devil. He is so unruly in his
Passions, Inclinations, and Humors; v. 3.
that No Man can bind Him: No, not with Chains. The Laws of God are his
Fetters; but these He breaks in pieces; v. 4.
neither is it possible for any man to tame Him. If you ask his Name; the
Ghospel says it is Legion, v. 9.
because He is Many. Sin, and Sinner, are two Names, like that of Legion: Every
Mortal Sin, is Many Sins: and every Sinner, is as Many Sinners. It Is impossible
to number all the Aggravations of a Mortal Sin: They are as numberless as the
Perfections of our offended God: and therefore I shall only mention those which
are the most Notorious, the most Obvious to common Sense, and such as are most
Odious betwixt Man and Man.

A Sinner, Every sinner, is in every mortal Sin, not only guilty of one Crime,
but of a Legion of Crimes. He is a Treacherous Soldier, who Deserts his
General: a Disloyal Subject, who Rebels against his King: an Impious Son,
who Dethrones his Father: an Ungrateful Villain, who Betrays his Benefactor: a
Presumptuous Slave, who Abuses his Deliverer: a Proud Servant, who Despises his
Master: an Insolent Criminal, who Offends before his Judge's face. All* these
are Crimes we have a Horror of, when we observe them only betwixt
Fellow Creatures, betwixt Man and Man. All these are infinitely Greater,
betwixt Man and God. And every Mortal Sin includes the utmost Aggravations of
them All.

II. The Treachery of a Sinner.
WHen the Prophet Nathan had a mind to open David's eyes, and make him sensible
of the Enormity of his Offense; He first began, by way of parable, to tell him
of a certain Man, who was exceeding Rich in herds and flocks, 2. Sam. 12.2.
and yet was so injust, so cruel, as to rob a poor man of his little Lamb, the
only Lamb he had. He told the Story in pathetick terms, which though they were
but few, sufficed to make him have a horror of so cruel an Injustice. David
little thought, he was the Person aimed at in the parable. The indignation he
conceived, was suitable to the Good nature and the Zeal which always had
appeared in him. He presently pronounced the Sentence of no less than Death,
upon the Man that had been guilty of so barbarous a Crime: As the Lord lives,
v. 5.
said he, the Man that has done this, shall surely die. Upon this; the Prophet
presently let fall the mask, v. 7.
and said; Thou art the Man.

If Parables be lawful, upon such occasions; I beg the leave, to tell you one.
There was a General, the most Endearing, most Deserving, and most Just that
ever lived. He had a Standing Army under his Command for several years: an
Army which He generously raised, and paid, Himself: an Army which He cherisht,
as a Master would his Family. He raised it merely for his Country's service;
more for their advantage, than his own; and with no worse Design, than to
secure the Public Peace from either foreign or domestic Enemies. He raised
Them out of Nothing; They subsisted by his Service; Their Estates were the
Preferments He bestowd upon them. They were punctually paid; well armed; well
clothed; and No convenience wanting, which a reasonable Soldier could
require. The Camp was his Delight: His Fellow Soldiers were his Company: Their
Exercises were the chief Diversion He took pleasure in. His Courage He had
showed abundantly in former Wars, where He exposed his Life in their Defense:
He never Commanded any thing but what He did Himself: They never sufferd any
hardship, which He did not first endure: and in the greatest Dangers, where
Death looked most Terrible, He always was the First to meet it, at the head of
them, and look it boldly in the Face. If any thing were able to endear a
Soldier's heart, He wanted no accomplishment: He always showed himself as
Brave, as He was Good and Just. There never was a Man that loved his Soldiers
more than He: Nor ever was a General, in all appearance, more beloved. No men
could show more signs of being glad to serve him with their lives and fortunes.
Their Fidelity was written in their foreheads: You might read it in their
looks: Their Acclamations showed it, in his Presence; Their Addresses, in his
Absence. The Professions, Protestations, and solemn Oaths, which they so
frequently repeated, were such evidence, as any man (though not so Good as He)
might venture to rely upon. When first the unexpected noise of an approaching
Enemy began to fill the Land, They seemed as firm as ever. They were All in
readyness to march at first Command. They never showed more cheerfullness, than
when they went to meet the Foreign Power which disturbed their Peace. Nor is
it any wonder that they were so cheerful. They were well informed of the
condition of their Enemies: They knew their weakness: in a word, They knew that
they were sure to Conquer, if they would but Fight. Their General, who had
some secret reasons to mistrust them, could not so dissemble his concern, but
they observed it. They assured Him of the contrary. They made Him fresh
Professions, Protestations, and Oaths, that they would faithfully stand by Him,
to the utmost moment of their Lives. He heard: And, even to the last, was
willing to believe. But yet the doleful prospect, which He had, of so inhuman
Treachery, where He had placed such Confidence; was an Affliction so surprising
and so sensible; it made Him bleed with grief, to think of it. His Fears
immediately proved true. The day of Battle was no sooner coming, but they
almost All deserted Him, and served his Enemy.

Sinner, whoere Thou art, that readst this Parable, if Thou have any spark of
Honor left, or any thing of common Justice, or Good nature in Thee; I am
confident, Thou can not but conceive some horror of so base a Treachery.
However, have a care of being so severe, as David was, in giving sentence. Have
a care, I say, of calling God to witness, that the men who have done this, 2.
Sam. 12.5.
deserve to die. Remember, what the Prophet said; Thou art the Man. Remember
the Apostle's words; Romans 2.1.
O Man, whoere Thou art that judge, Thou condemnst thy self; Thou do the
same. And I dare boldly add; Thou do incomparably more. In every mortal sin,
which Thou art guilty of, thy Treachery is infinitely worse.

If once We Sinners were sufficiently sensible, of what we are our selves, We
then should be more moderate in censuring, and railing at, the crimes of
Others. If we find our selves transported with an unbecoming Zeal, which we too
often show too much of; Let us call our Anger home, and find Employment for it
there. The Case is ours. It Is we who are the Men: It Is we, who are the Traitors:
We our selves, who are the Treacherous Soldiers, that desert in time of
Battle. If we offer to compare our General with theirs; we cannot but confess,
that Ours is infinitely more Endearing, more Deserving, and more Just. When we,
in former wars, had been defeated by the common Enemy, and taken prisoners by
the Devil; God himself descended to assist us, and to rally up our scatterd
Forces. He immediately clothed us; armed us; punctually paid us; taught us all
our Exercises; trained us up to all the hardship of a Soldiers life. Whatever
He commanded us to do or suffer, He endured and did Himself: in every danger He
was always at the head of us: and every drop of his most Sacred blood, He
freely Sacrificed to serve us. See the Standing Army which our God has
mercifully raised, to fight for Heaven against the Powers of Hell. The Devil
with a foreign Army of such Spirits as himself, endeavors to surprise us. He
would never venture to attack us, if he had not some intelligence amongst us.
All our Passions, Inclinations, and Humors are his Friends. With these He
always keeps a private correspondance: and by their Assistance, which they
under hand assure him of, He ventures to invade us, even when our God himself
is at the head of us. Before the Day of Battle comes, we never shrink the
least: We march on cheerfully: We know that we are sure to conquer, if we will
but fight. It Is true: Our General, who sees the bottom of our Hearts, has
reason to suspect our Constancy. Yet, we assure him of the contrary with new
Professions of Fidelity: We solemnly declare, that we will rather Die than
Yield: We take the Sacrement upon it: And yet, after all, the Hour of Trial,
the first Moment of Temptation, is no sooner come, but we immediately Desert our
God, and Serve the Devil. Was there ever any Treachery, so base, so horrid, so
extravagant as This!

III. The Disloyalty of a Sinner.
THis is not All. The God we thus Desert, not only is our General; but He is
also King of all the World. We are not only Soldiers to our General; but we
are also Subjects to our King: And every Sinner is, in every Sin, as much
Disloyal to the One, as he is Treacherous to the Other.

It Is a shame to see, how easily, how clearly, we discover all the Malice and
Injustice of Rebellion in our Neighbors: and how little we observe it in our
selves. If any of our Neighbors, one day, preach up Loyalty, Obedience,
Non-Resistance; and, the next day, take up arms against their Souvereign: If,
to day, they humbly offer their Addresses to their lawful Prince, with all
expressions of their Duty, Constancy, and Resolution to serve Him; and perhaps,
the next day, call a foreign Power in, to head their Faction against him: If,
to day, they swear Allegiance; and the next day, break their Oath: How
scandalized we are! what Liberty we take, of saying what we please! how Violent
we are in our Invectives against Rebels!

All this while, we are the Men: we do the Same: And, which is worse, we do a
great deal more in every Mortal Sin. Our Passions, Inclinations and Humors,
like so many factious Common-Wealth-Men, always are endeavoring to subvert the
Gouvernment of Reason; which is, in effect, the Gouvernment of God himself, who
made us Rational. He made us out of Nothing: Therefore, we are All Entirely
His. He, every moment of our Life, preserves us from returning back to Nothing:
Therefore we are Always His. We cannot possibly be any Body's else but His: He
cannot give us over to another Maker or Preserver. It Is impossible for God to
Abdicate his Right of Gouverning the World. His Title to the Monarchy of all
the Universe, is as Unalterable and Unquestionable as the Deity it self.
There Is no Appearance of Appeal from Him who is Essentially Supreme, in Heaven
as well as Earth. No Deist ever had the Face to say, His Right descends
originally from the Mobile, who gave it Him upon such Terms as they thought
Fit, and such as He agreed to: Upon which account, unless He Gouvern as they
please to understand the Contract betwixt Him and Them, They still reserve the
Power to Depose his Majesty, and set another in his Place. No, no: As weak as
human Reason is, it never was so blind, as to subscribe to so much Blasphemy as
This.

And yet, the Common Outcry of our Passions is for Liberty and Privileges of
the Subject: They perpetually complain of Slavery and Arbitrary Power: They are
Mortal Enemies to any Gouvernment, in which they have no Voice. The Passion
which we call Predominant, is that which heads the Faction: And, although there
be no Color for the Crime, they openly Rebel: Luke. 19.14.
we will not have this Man, say they, Reign over us. Our Savior Jesus Christ
Commands us All to follow his Example; not to set our Hearts upon the Riches,
Pleasures, Honors, of this World; but to be always ready, for his sake, to
suffer Poverty Affliction and Disgrace: we will not have this Man reign over
us. He bids always be upon our Guard, and make it our chief Business to observe
the Motions of our Enemy: He bids us Mortify our Passions, Disengage our
criminal Affections, and Avoid all dangerous Occasions of Sin: in short, He
bids us Love Him above all things, and our Neighbor as our selves: we will not
have this Man reign over us.

This Man! And Who is He? It Is He who is true God as well as Man. It Is He who
measures out the waters, Isay. 40.12.17.
in the Hollow of his Hand: who measures out the Heavens with a Span: Before
whom all the Nations of the Earth are Nothing; even less than Nothing. It Is He
whom all his Creatures wait upon, Psalm. 104.
that He may feed them in due Season: who gives them, and they Gather; who
opens his Hand, and they are filled; who takes away their Breath, and they
return to Dust. It Is He, who sitts in the Heavens, and laughs at the Kings and
Rulers of the Earth: Psalm. 2.
who makes their Devices of no effect: Ps. 33.
who breaks them with a Rod of iron; Ps. 2.9.
and dashes them in pieces like a Potters Vessel: He who is the Lord of All;
Ps. 47.
most High; most Terrible; and GREAT KING over all the Earth. This King we
openly Rebel against, in every Mortal Sin.

IV. The Impiety of a Sinner.
THe Duty which we ow to Parents, is a Virtue which we commonly call Piety: And
every Breach of such a Duty may be properly called Impious. It Is a Virtue by it
self; whose Character, compared with other moral Virtues, is as different from
them, as it is eminent above them. Her Authority extends to all of them: And
when they are obedient to her orders, when they serve her, when they wear her
Livery; we call them by her Name. It Is thus we call all Virtues Pious, and all
Vices Impious.

The Reason is, because our God not only is a General to his Soldiers, and a
Monarch to his Subjects; But He also is a Father to his Children. We are All of
us his Children. He Is a Father to us All. Each virtuous Action of our life is
more or less a Duty which we ow to such a Father; and is therefore Pious. On
the contrary, in every Offense, we Sin against our Father, and are therefore
Impious.

Whenever we offend our God, we sin against our General. We basely break the
Promises of our Fidelity, which once we made so solemnly in Baptism, and since
so frequently renewed: We treacherously Desert him, even in the very moment
when we should begin the Battle. Whenever we offend our God, we sin against
our King. We break the sacred Oaths of our Allegiance, which we sealed so often
with the Sacrament: We trample under foot all Ties of Loyalty, and openly
Rebel against Him. Whenever we offend our God, we sin against our Father. We
are Impious, even beyond expression; we Dethrone his Majesty; we Banish him
from our Heart; we Vsurp the Gouvernment of it our selves, and manage it
against Him.

When the Scribes murmured at our Savior, Luke. 15.2.
for receiving Sinners, and eating with them: He told them of the Prodigal Son,
who was not only Received, but Feasted by his Father; after he had so unkindly
left Him, after he had wasted all his Substance in a foreign Country; after he
began to be in want, feed Swine, and long for busks to fill his belly with. His
chief Design in telling of the Parable, (as we may judge by the occasion) was
not to accuse the Son, but to excuse the Father, and by consequence Himself.
His principal intention was to justify the Father's Mercy Tenderness and
Kindness to his Son: and therefore it was not proper to exaggerate his fault.
It Was fitter for the present purpose, to set forth his great Contrition and
Humility; who notwithstanding all his former Folly Brutishness and Blindness,
yet at length came to himself; repented; v. 17.
and returned with such a contrite, such an humble heart, to cast himself
before his Father's feet.

A wilful Fool; A swinish Brute; and Both so Blind as not to see their
Misery; is the Idea of a Sinner, and the whole Idea, which the Scripture gives
us, in this Parable. There Is no Ingratitude, Presumption, Pride, or Insolence
appears, from the beginning to the end of it. The Treachery and the Disloyalty,
which I have lately spoken of, have no room there: Much less the great Impiety
which now I am about to speak of. He was no Deserter, Rebel, or Usurper. True
it is; He left his Father, when he went to seek his Fortune: but we do not
read, that he Deserted Him in time of Battle. He returned again without his
Father's leave: but yet we do not read, that he appeared in Arms against Him,
and by Force obliged Him to Submitt. He envied not his Father's Power and
Authority. His great Ambition only was to be as happy as his hired servants. He
desired no more than to be one of them. He came and humbly said; Luke. 15.21.
Father, I am not worthy to be called your Son. He did not impiously tell him;
Father, You are not worthy to be Master of your House. We do not read; He sent
a Messenger, with peremptory Orders to his Father's Palace, to Command him to
be gone by such an Hour. What would you have said; Suppose our Prodigal had
been so Impious as This?

Ah Sinner! Let not too much Zeal transport Thee. Call thy Anger home: The Case
is thine: Thou art the Man. In every Mortal Sin, which we consent to, We are
All as Impious, and infinitely more.

Our Heavenly Father, is He not our King? Our Heart, is it not his Throne? Was
it not He who Made it for Himself? And is it not his Right to Gouvern it, and
Guide it to the Happyness for which He made it?

As often as we Value any Honor Interest or Pleasure, any Passion Inclination
or Humor, more than his Commandments; So often we Vsurp the Empire of our
Heart; we sway the Scepter; Gouvern as we please; and Banish Him from thence.
And is not This as much as if we said; Father, You are not worthy to be Master
of your House?

As often as the Devil tempts us, or our Wickedness inclines us, to preserr our
Self, or any other Thing before Him, If we freely give Consent; and suffer any
Creature to possess the Chief Place in our Heart; So often we are every jot as
Impious, as if we sent Him peremptory Orders to be Gone, that very Hour.

I tremble whilst I write. Each Line increases my Despair of ever being able to
express the Malice of a Mortal Sin. The more I amplify, the more I see how
much I am to blame, for undertaking so impossible a Thing.

V. The great Ingratitude, Presumption, Pride, and Insolence, of every Sinner.
I Have said enough to show that every Sinner is a treacherous Soldier, a
disloyal Subject, and an impious Son. I now design to show, This is not All:
but that He also is a most ungrateful Villain who betrays his Benefactor; a
presumptuous Slave who abuses his Deliverer; a proud Servant who despises his
Master; and a Criminal so insolent as to offend before his Judge's face.

A most ungrateful Villain. A mere Upstart, raised from less than Dust. An
empty Thing, extracted out of Nothing. That such a Thing as this, and so
exalted as it is, should be so stupid, so insensible of all his Obligations, so
unmindfull of the Favors he receives, and so illnatur'd to his greatest
Benefactor; who continually makes him all he is; who daily gives him all he
has; to whom he ows, the bread he eats, the air he breaths, the ground he goes
upon, the hand he moves, the very life he spends in Sin, and all the Time
allowd him to repent! Can such a Creature; so obliged; by such a Benefactor; be
so basely and so horribly ungrateful, to betray Him; and prefer before Him
the unreasonable satisfaction, of a silly Humor? of a shameful Passion? of a
sinful Inclination? Open (once for all) thy Eyes, Blind Sinner; and confess,
that no Ingratitude, but that of Judas, can compare to thine.

A Slave; (I wish he were so, to his Master) A Slave to Passion and Humor; A
Slave to Sin and Misery; A Slave condemned to worse than Galleys, during Life,
and afterward to the Eternal Flames of Hell, 1. Cor. 2.9.
where neither Eye has seen, Nor Ear has heard, nor has it ever entered into the
heart of any Man, what Torments God's great Justice has prepared for those who
dare abuse his Mercy. A vile Slave, delivered from the mischief of all This; by
God himself; descending from his Glory; living here a poor and painful life;
and laying down the same, with every drop of his most precious blood, to pay
the the ransom of this Wretch: That such a Slave; delivered so; by such a Hand;
should offer to abuse the Mercy which once saved him, and still holds him by a
slender thread, from falling into everlasting Misery!

A Servant; I should have said, A miserable Insect, full of sinful
putrefaction; A vile Spawn of Man's original Corruption; A Worm, whose very
Crawling on it is fellow-dust is more Preferment than it can deserve. That such
a Thing as This, should be so proud as to despise the Master of the World! So
Great, so Wise, so Infinitely Perfect, and so every way Deserving, as He is!
This Vermin has indeed a Soul; an Angel once, by Grace; but now, by Sin, a
Devil black as Hell it self; Genesis 3.5. Isai. 14.14.
a Lucifer that will be knowing Good and Evil, will be like the Highest, will
pretend to Gouvern in his Master's House, despise his Orders, slight his
Menaces, neglect his Admonitions. Be astonished, Jer. 2.12.
O ye Heavens, at this.

A most insolent Criminal; A Criminal so insolent, as to offend before God's
Face; in presence of his General, his King, his Father, his Deliverer, his
Benefactor, and his Master; and besides all this, in presence of his Judge;
before the very Bar, where he continually is upon his Trial for his
everlasting Life or Death. Our Savior says, that Whosoere believes not, Jo.
3.18.
is condemned already. We may say the same of every Sinner: In the very moment
he offends, He is condemned already. His All-Seeing Judge is always VVitness of
his Thoughts Words Actions and Desires: and He no sooner is a Criminal, but He
is Tried and Judged.

This Insolence of his, in some respect, exceeds all other Aggravations of his
Crime. It Is an Extravagance of which we hardly find the least Example betwixt
Man and Man. We often hear of Soldiers that Desert: But whensoere they go,
they steal away: We never hear that they acquaint their General with such
Designs. We often hear of Subjects that conspire against the Gouvernment: but
never hear them talk such matters loudly, in the hearing of their Prince. We
often hear of Murders, Robberies, and many other Outrages, committed in the
World: But when the Prisoner once was brought to Trial, did you ever hear, He
either Robbed, or Murdered, at the Bar? No, no, such Insolence was never heard
of, betwixt Man and Man. And yet this very Insolence is infinitely less than
Ours, which we are always guilty of, in every Mortal Sin.

I say no more. I tremble at the very thought of having said so much; when I
reflect, how All that we can either say or think, will nere convert us without
Grace. There Is nothing but the Grace of God can make a deep Impression of it in
our Hearts.

VI. Our Saviors Idea of Sin: and the Impression it made upon Him.
OUr Savior Jesus Christ best knew the great Enormity of Sin: and we may judge
how great it is, by the Impression which it made upon Him; when the approaching
Hour of his Passion laid before his Eyes the terrible Idea of it.

It Was the first bloody Scene of all his Sufferings. He began to be Sorrowful
and very heavy. Math. 26.37.
A Deluge of Grief broke in upon his Soul; quite overwhelmed his Heart; and lay
so heavy upon his fearful Thoughts, He was not able to conceal it any longer,
and support the pressing weight of his Affliction, all alone, in silence. His
three most Dear and most Familiar Disciples, were surprised so much, to see
this sudden alteration in their dearest Lord; They were not able to enquire
the Cause, but like Job's three Friends they stood astonished, and spoke not one
word to Him, Job. 2.13.
because they saw his Grief was very Great.

Our Savior could hold no longer; but broke out into this doleful expression;
Math. 26.38.
My Soul is exceeding Sorrowful, even unto Death. Ah my dear Disciples! if you
knew, as well as I do, all the Motives of my Grief; you would not wonder that
the very Thought of them makes me look pale, and shows you the face of Death in
my countenance. The violent pangs of my afflicted Soul are so sharp and
piercing, that, did not my Divinity support me and preserve my life, I should
immediately, this very moment, die upon the place. Stay a while, and watch with
me. Math. 26.38.
You, who love me best, who have been always most familiar with me, Be not now
so unkind as to leave me in this sad condition all alone: Stay a while, and
watch with me, till my Storm of Grief blow over.

Dear Christians, Let us stay a while; and with these three Disciples, not only
admire but search into the cause of this great alteration in the Soul of our
Redeemer. How was it possible that now He should begin to fear so much that
Death, which all his life He had so much desired? His Love for Man, and his
Desire of dying for us, were conceived by the operation of the Holy Ghost; they
came into the World with him; and ever after so employed his Thoughts, He
scarce could talk of any thing else. Amongst his Disciples, his common
Discourse was of his Sufferings, the Cup he was to drink, his Obligation, his
Readyness, his Impatience, to fulfill the Prophecies. I have, says he, Luke.
12.50.
a Baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straightened, till it be accomplished?
When the time drew nearer, He redoubled his desires of dying for us: Luke.
22.25.
with Desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you. And why? (says S.
Chrysostom) Because it is a preparation to my Passion, which I have so long, so
earnestly desired. He knew, from the beginning, every Torment; every degree of
it: Often reflected on each Circumstance apart; and as often took delight in
viewing all of them together. Upon mount Thabor, when the Glory of his Blessed
Soul shined through his body, like the Sun through a transparent cloud, upon
the dazzled eyes of his Disciples; giving them a glympse of the Eternal Glory
we expect hereafter: Our Savior seemed to be as much delighted with the
prospect of his Passion, as with all the joys of Heaven: and as, upon another
occasion, Jo. 4.31.34.
when his Disciples prayed him to eat; He told them, My meat is to do the will
of Him that sent me, and finish his work; So when they desired Him to stay and
make Tabernacles, Luke. 9.30.33.
it was his joy and delight to talk with Moses and Elias of his Decease, his
Passion which he should accomplish, v. 31.
at Jerusalem.

Ah Christians! you have reason to admire, and wonder that the God of all your
comfort is now heavy and disconsolate: 2. Cor. 1.3.
But you will fear and tremble, more than wonder, if you seriously reflect that
all his Grief proceeded chiefly from the terrible Idea which He had of Sin; not
his but ours. S. Hierome says, Apud D. Tho. In Cat.
His greatest Grief proceeded not from fear of suffering, because He came to
Suffer; But He chiefly grieved for Judas, for the Scandal of the Apostles, and
the Reprobation of the People, etc....

This agrees exactly with our Savior's words, Luke. 23.27.28.
to those who followed Him to Calvary; when turning to the women who lamented
Him, He said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me only, weep also for your
selves, and for your children. Weep not for me; My torments will be short: weep
for your selves; your torments (if you do not weep, repent, and mend) will be
Eternal. Alas! the Torments which I willingly and freely suffer for your sake,
are Nothing to the Pains of Hell, which you for ever will endure, unless by
penitential tears, mixed with my blood, You wash away your Sins. v. 31.
If they do thus, in the green wood; what will they do, in the Dry? If I,
though Innocent, suffer thus for your Sins: You, who are Guilty, what are you
like to suffer for your own? If I, who am true God, the only beloved Son of my
Eternal Father, who never once offended Him; if, because I interpose betwixt
you and his Justice, I am thus severely treated; what will become of miserable
Creatures, grievous Sinners, who so often have offended Him, if they do not
join their tears with mine; if they are not afflicted with me for their Sins,
for which I die upon the Cross? Levit. 23.29.
Every Soul who upon this day is not afflicted, shall perish. Every Soul who
thinks upon this Day, and is not afflicted with his dying Savior; is not
heartily afflicted for those Sins, for which He dies; shall certainly perish.

Neither does it contradict, what commonly is said; that One great Difference
betwixt our Savior and his Martyrs was, that by a miracle of Grace He gave
them that undaunted Courage, which by a greater miracle He now refused to
himself. It Is true: He freely sufferd in himself the Natural Fear of Death; to
show himself True Man as well as God; to let us see at once the Weakness of our
Nature, and the Power of Grace; and comfort us, by making it appear that such
Infirmities of Nature are not Sins, as long as Reason gouverns them, and
Resignation submitts to the will of God. But yet there is another greater
Difference betwixt his Case and theirs. Martyrs, who die for God's sake, are
Secure of their Success; they are sure not to suffer in vain; they are certain
to possess All that they desire, and to enjoy eternally their God to whom they
Sacrifice their Lives. This is the reason why our Martyrs look Death boldly in
the face; with open arms receive it; and go to meet it with the same
assurance, as if they went to Heaven. Let the Body suffer all the worst of
Pains; the Soul is unconcerned, Anima de Deo suo semper secura. S. Cypr.
the Soul is secure of God, the Soul is in Heaven before hand. When Man dies to
enjoy God, he is sure he shall enjoy him. But (alas!) it is not so when Jesus
dies for Man. He dies to gain his Love; and at the same time knows that he will
prove ungrateful. He dies to enjoy him in Heaven; and foresees he will be
damned for all Eternity. The lively apprehension of his torments all together
was enough to make him Sorrowful, even to Death; but however, if he have
promised himself the Eternal Salvation of all those dear-bought Souls for
which He died, the joyful assurance of so happy a Success, would have eased
the burden of his Grief; His torments, all of them, would have been well come
upon that condition. But to sweat blood in vain; to be scourged to no purpose;
to spend the last drop of his sacred veins to no effect; was an Affliction not
to be supported, without praying his Eternal Father to have pity and
compassion on Him: Math. 26.30.
Father, if it be possible, dispense at least with this part of my Sentence;
Let me die; But do not let me die in vain.

It Is said of Joseph in the Book of Genesis; 45.15.
He kissed all his Brethren, and wept over every one of them. I may say the
same of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane: He grieved for All is brethren, and
wept over every one of them, in particular. He saw before his eyes the Sins of
every person in the World; the Graces which he would from time to time bestow
upon us; the neglect of all his Offers; and abuse of all his Favors. He
foresaw every Temptation which we yield to; and grieved to see it. He foresaw
each profanation of the Sacrament, which we frequent unworthyly, and fainted
with grief, when He thought how often his most precious Blood would by our
fault become the Poison of our Souls. He foresaw in the whole course of our
Lives, where, when, and how, we would resist, and render ineffectuall, all the
Directions, Admonitions and Exhortations of his Ministers; and fell into a
bloody Sweat at the very thought of our Ingratitude, by which the chief means
of attaining Everlasting Happyness serve only, in the end, to justify our
Sentence of Eternal Misery. Isaiah. 35.4.6.
He bore our Griefs; He carried our Sorrows; He took upon him the Iniquities of
us All; and every one of our most grievous Sins appeared to him in a more
hideous shape, than ever it appeared to any Creature.

Mortal Sin is as Bad as God is Good. It separates us from our God, and leaves
our Souls as Empty as our God is Great. So that as God is infinitely Good, the
Malice of a Mortal Sin is infinitely Evil. As none of us can understand the
infinite Goodness of the one; so none of us are able to conceive the infinite
Malice of the other. Christ himself, as God, could comprehend them Both: as
Man, He comprehended neither. But yet the clear and full Idea He had of it was
proportioned to his Beatifick Vision of God's Essence, and by consequence the
perfectest that ever was. His clearest Sight, and ardent Love of God, were in a
manner infinite: So were his Knowledge and his Hatred of all Mortal Sin. And
the Impression this Idea made upon him, was the chief, if not the only, Reason
why our Savior could not hold from telling his Disciples; My Soul is exceeding
Sorrowful, Math. 26.38.
even unto Death. His Soul was overwhelmed with such a Deluge of Affliction,
that his Grief, not being able to contain it self within the Bounds of Nature,
violently forced it self through all his Pores, in Tears of Blood.

Ah my dear Jesus! when shall I be able to make such a perfect Act of true
Contrition for my Sins, as Thou have made for mine! When shall I be able to
say, My Soul is exceeding Sorrowful even unto Death! When shall I lament my
grievous Sins in Tears of Blood! Give me, at least, Jerem. 9.1.
water to my Head, and Fountains to my Eyes. No Contrite Heart, but Thine,
bleeds otherwise than at the Fyes: and it is (I hope) enough for me, if I can be
so sorry for my Sins, as to lament them all the days I have to live, and rather
Die than ever Sin again.

VII. The Saints Idea of Sin. How much it humbles Them.
There Is Nothing but the Grace of Jesus Christ can make us Saints. There Is
Nothing else can make us clearly See and heartily Detest the Malice of our
Sins. The greater share we have of this great Grace, the more we see it and
detest it; so much more we fear and tremble at the very thought of it; and as
our Grace increases, we grow every day more humble by remembering it.

To make this out, I need not write the lives of all the Saints. A Pattern is
enough to judge of all the Piece: especially such a one as S. Degrees. 5.
John Climacus, an ancient Father of the Church, has left behind him. He
assures us, Ar. 20.
his Relation is no Fable: He affirms that, what he says, Art. 2.
He saw with his own eyes: and that He was a whole month in their Company. Ar.
27.


Draw near, says he, all You who have provoked the wrath of God by your
Offenses: Come, and Hear the Wonders He was pleased to let me See, for my
Edification: Be attentive to my words, all You who have a mind to reconcile
your selves to God, by a sincere Conversion.

When I was, says he, in the Monastery of Penitents; I saw Men so extremely
humbled with the grievous weight of their Offenses, that their cries and
prayers to God, would even move the stones themselves. With heads bowed down,
and eyes upon the ground, I heard them say: we confess, O Lord, we confess that
we deserve to suffer all chastisements and afflictions; because our Sins are
such, that should we Summon all the Universe to weep for us, the Tears of all
the world would never make sufficient Satisfaction. There remains one only
thing we ask, one only thing we pray for; that Thou never may correct us in
thy Anger, Ps. 6.1.
nor chastise us in thy great displeasure; but a little spare us, through thy
infinite Mercy. It Is enough, O Lord, that Thou deliver us from those
inexplicable Torments hidden in the Center of the Earth. We dare not ask a
full and perfect Pardon: we, who have not kept the holy Laws of our Profession;
but have broken them again, when Thou had given us the most endearing Marks
of Love and Mercy, in forgiving of our Sins.

Who ever saw them Laugh? Who ever heard amongst them any idle Talk? Who ever
could observe that any Passion transported them? Or any Anger moved them? Alas!
they hardly knew what Anger was: their great Affliction and continual Grief
had now extinguished in them all Emotions of Resentment. There was never known
the least appearance of Dispute: the least lashing out in Discourse: the least
Sign of Vainglory. There was no Jollity of Feasting: no Concern for the body:
no Love of ease and pleasure: no Thought of Wine: no Use of fruits: no Care for
delicacies pleasing to the palate. The Desire of all such things was quite
extinct. And after all, there was not to be found the least Censoriousness, or
least appearance of an Inclination to Judge their neighbors.

Some of them, now and then, would knock their breasts; and, as if they were
already at the Gate of Heaven, Open us, said they, O Judge of Mankind, Open us
the Gate of Happyness, which we have shat by Sin. Others would say, Luke. 1.79.
Give light to us, O Lord, who sit in Darkness, in the Shades of Death; and
guide our steps into the way of Peace. Others again; will the Almighty look
upon as any more? Is It possible to pay our Debts, and satisfy for our Offenses?
will our God, once more, afford us any Comfort? we are laid in chains of Sin;
And shall we one day, hear him say, Come forth?

They always had their Hour of Death before their eyes; and sometimes they
would say to one another; what will then become of us? what Sentence will our
God pronounce upon us? what will be our End? shall we be then called home from
Banishment, to which we have been hitherto condemned for our Offenses? Shall
such Criminalls, as we, find any favor then? Such Sinners as we are? Such
miserable wretches, coverd with Confusion and Darkness? Have our Prayers
mounted to the Throne of God? Or have they been rejected, as they well deserve?
If well received, how far have they prevailed? Have they obtaind a full
Discharge, or only Part? Alas! they could not have much force, proceeding from
such mouths, so sinful, so impure, as Ours.

At other times, They thus discourst their fears and doubts: what think you
Brethren? Do you think that we advance? Do you think that we obtain the effect
of our Demands? Do you think that God will once again receive us? Do you think
He Will open us the Gates of Heaven? Who can tell, (said the Ninivites;) who
knows, but God may change the Sentence which He has pronounced against us?
Though perhaps He will not free us from the rigorous Chastisements which we
have deserved: However, Let us labor all we can, and Do whatever we are able.
If He open us the Gate of Heaven, we are Happy: if He dos not, He is Just: and
therefore never let us cease to bless Him. Doubtful, as we are, of what may be
our Destiny, we must continue all our life, still knocking at the Door. Perhaps
our Importunity, our Constancy, and our Perseverance may find Admittance, in
the End.

Behold the Language of the Saints! Consider how their Fear and Trembling
humbles them, in Presence of their angry God. Consider the Idea which They have
of Sin: how different it is from what we generally have. Consider the
Impression which it makes upon them, and compare it with our Stupidness, our
Hardness, our Insensibility. Conclude with shame and sorrow, that this
Difference twixt them and us proceeds not from their having been much greater
Sinners than we are; but from our being much less Saints than They.

When any of these Penitents drew nigh the hour of Death; how Terrible, how
Lamentable was the Spectacle! These Blessed Criminalls, when any one of their
Companions was upon the point of leaving them; They All surrounded him, with
aching hearts, and weeping eyes, to ask him; How do you find your self, Dear
Brother; Dear Companion in our Miseries and Sufferings? what say you, Now? what
do you hope? what do you think? Have you obtained what you have labored for,
with so much pain? Or is your labor lost? Are you arrived at the Port? Or are
you not? Have you a full Assurance of your Happyness? Or have you only an
uncertain Hope? Do you find your self in perfect Liberty of Mind? Or are you
yet in Trouble and Anxiety? Have you heard already, in the Secret of your Soul,
a voice, which tells you; Your sins are forgiven you? Math. 9.2. Psalm. 9.17.
Or do you seem to hear that formidable Sentence; The wicked shall be turned
into Hell? what say you, Brother? Tell us, we conjure you, Tell us Now
sincerely; that by knowing what Condition you are in at present, we may guess,
what State we may be in, one Day, our selves.

To these Demands, some of these dying Penitents made answer: Psalm. 66.20.
Blessed be God who has not turned away my Prayer nor his Mercy from me.
Others, in a doleful tone replied: Psalm. 124.4.
Can our Soul go over the Stream of waters, which are like to overwhelm us?
This they said, not being yet assured of their Salvation; but considering with
fear and trembling what might happen to them in the terrible Account which now
was nigh at Hand. And others answered more uncomfortably: woe be to the Soul
that has not kept inviolably all the Laws of it is Profession. See; the Hour is
come; the only Hour in which we shall begin to know our State for all Eternity.

These Blessed Penitents, for one Relapse, did Penance, the severest they were
able to invent: And we, for numberless Relapses, many of them worse than
theirs, Do none at all. These Penitents Persever'd in the same Austerities till
Death; their Penance had no End: We still Persever in our Sins; our Penance
never begins. Their Fear and Trembling, their profound Humility, went hand in
hand with all their Penance and Perseverance: Our Confidence and
Vnconcern'dness, our extravagant Presumption, always keep an equal pace with
our Tepidity and Slothfulness. Dear Christians, give me leave to ask, Why all
this difference twixt them and us? A thousand years, betwixt their Age, and
this which now we live in, have they altered the Almighty? Has He less
Authority to punish us? Or we, less Obligation to Obey Him, Honor Him, and
make Him Satisfaction, if we do not? Is our God less Just, because we more
abuse his Mercy? Or more Merciful, because we less regard his Justice? Alas!
Our Blindness is the only Reason: We are blinder than They were: And therefore
we are more secure, more unconcerned, more proud, more tepid, and more
slothful.

Jesu, Luke. 18.38.
Son of David, have Mercy on me. Thou Blessed Savior of the World, Jo. 1.9.
who enlightnest every man that comes into it; Open once, my eyes; and keep
them ever open; that I may continually See and Love thy Goodness, Wisdom,
Mercy, Justice; and by the assistance of so great a Grace, perpetually See and
Hate the Malice of my Sins. There Is nothing but thy Grace, that can enlighten
every man that comes into the world: There Is nothing else can Clear my
Understanding, and Inflame my Heart: There Is nothing else can make me truly
Contrite, truly Humble. Jesu, Son of David, Luke. 18.38.
have Mercy on me, a Sinner, who am not in the way, nor going on, but sitting
by the way-side, v. 35.
begging thy Assistance. Here I sit, and wait thy passing by: My Blindness
hinders me from doing any more: And even when I hear Thee pass, v. 36.
I know not how to follow Thee. The Crowd of all my Passions, Inclinations and
Humors, and the Multitude of my Engagements Cares and Troubles, make a noise
about me; such a one (I fear) as will not let Thee hear me. When I offer to cry
out for help, they try to stop my mouth, v. 39.
and bid me hold my peace: and therefore I cry out so much the more; v. 39.
Jesu, Thou Son of David, have Mercy on me. Thou need'st not stand to ask me
what I want, or what I will that Thou should Do unto me; v. 41.
Thou, who know my Wants so infinitely better than my self. The only Favor,
which I humbly beg, v. 41.
is that I may receive my Sight. Say only, to my Soul, as once Thou said to
that Blind Man who was a Figure of me; Say, Receive thy Sight; v. 42.
Thy Faith has saved Thee: Say but this, (Thy words are powerful, and make
themselves prove true) Say only This; and then immediately I shall receive my
Sight, and follow Thee. v. 43.
I then shall follow thy Example. I shall follow thy Disciples, and thy Saints.
I then shall do fit Penance for my Sins: and shall Persever in it to the End.
I then shall study how to punish every Passion Inclination and Humor which
induc't me to Offend Thee. I shall then be truly Contrite, truly Humble; I
shall Glorify Thee all my life; v. 45.
and all the People, when They See the Happy Change, shall give the Praise to
God. Amen.

THE CHARACTER OF A GOOD CHRISTIAN.
SECT. I. The Perfection of his Duty,
WHoever seriously professes the Religion of Christ, D. Sp. P. 1. c. 3
and takes the Ghospel for the Rule of that Divine Religion, making it his
Business to acquire that Sanctity which Jesus Christ demands of his Disciples;
is a Christian. The Ghospel was not only writ for those we call Religious. We
are, All of us, Religious persons; of the Best and First of all Religions,
which is that of Jesus Christ. We have a Rule, a Habit, and a Founder: We have
Vows and Exercises. Christ first instituted and established our Religion: He Is
the Founder of our Order. Innocence and Sanctity make up the Habit, we receive
in Baptism. Our Promises of abrenouncing all the Pomps and Works of Satan, are
our Vows. The Ghospel is our Rule. Our Prayers, Pennances, and generally all
Good Actions, are our Exercises.

Do you think the Ghospel was not written, Ibid.
says S. Basil, every jot as much for married persons, as for Monks?
Undoubtedly it is by this Rule, that Both are to be Judged. It Is well, if married
people can obtain God's pardon for the faults committed in that State. In all
things else, they are as much obliged to live like Saints, as the Religious
are. The Ties of marriage, and Engagements of the world, will never justify an
idle Life; or any way Dispense with the laborious Task of living like a
Christian. It Is lawful to live in the world; but not, to live according to the
Maxims of it. On the contrary; the more we are exposed to the Temptations of
the Devil, so much more we are obliged to use our utmost Care and Vigilance.

Believe not, Ibid.
says S. Chrysostom, that God expects from wordly Men a Sanctity quite
different from that of Monks. It Is true, indeed, that Those may marry, and These
may not: But in all things else, the Case is equal. They have Both received
the same Laws; and Both are subject to the same Punishments. When Jesus laid
his Curse upon the Rich, and those who lead a jolly life in Sensuality and
Pleasure; when He spoke of the Evangelicall Beatitudes; He spoke, not only to
Religious, but to all the Faithful; and without the least exception. He was
never heard to say; that the Religious Man shall suffer for his Sins, but not
the Secular. The difference we fancy in this point, is only an Invention of
Men; it is not grounded in the word of God, who equally obliges All, that will
be saved, to keep his Laws. S. Paul, addressing his discourse to married
persons, dos not He require of them as great a share of Sanctity as we can find
in the most perfect Monks? what Disengagement he prescribes to all of us! what
Moderation in our Clothes, our Diet, and our Use of Riches! 1. Tim. 6.8.
Having Food, says he, and Raiment, Let us be contented. They who are married,
1. Cor. 7.29.30.31.
Let them be as if they were not: and They who use the world, as if they used
it not: what more can we expect from those we call Religious? Let us therefore
never say, that wordly Men are either not obliged or else not able to observe
the Rules of Christianity; and that Religious only can attain to such sublime
Perfection. There is Nothing so pernicious as this false Opinion. It maintains
the greatest part of Libertins in their disorders, and encourages imperfect
Souls to lead a loose and lazy Life. Assure your selves Our God requires, of
All, one selfsame Sanctity. The Means, of our arriving to it, may be different;
but yet Religious Persons have no other Aim than we have. They design to save
themselves, and so do we. They are not to be saved, but by the narrow way; and
we shall never be saved, by walking in the broad one.

Hence it follows clearly, Ibid.
that the Ghospel being preached and made for All, we All are bound to follow
it; we All must labor to acquire the Sanctity demanded by it; we must All be
thoroughly persuaded, that it is the only way which leads to Heaven, and that
every other way is sure to end in everlasting Death. It Is true; the methods and
the Exercises, which are used and followed in Religious houses, to arrive to
such Perfection, are quite different from what is usually prescribed to Wordly
Persons: But their Virtues always are the same, although their Exercises are
not. These two things we commonly confound; to wit, the Exercises and the
Virtues of a Christian. We imagine, for example, that a modest and a homely
Dress is only fit for Cloisters; where they always wear a certain Habit, poor
and plain. We fancy that the Recollection which is practiced in Religious
Houses is a thing peculiar to their Character; because we find, that only They
have certain Hours allotted them for keeping silence. We imagine also that a
Penitential life belongs to none but them; because They fast, and practice
several Austerities commanded by Superiors. It Is a great mistake. These
Virtues all are Evangelicall: We find them in the Ghospel, which is ours as
much as theirs: They are prescribed to all Men by the Common Rule of
Christianity: And, though we have not (as Religious have) so great Advantages
to make the practice of them Uniform and Easy; Nevertheless we All are
indispensably obliged to have them, and to practice them. Our Modesty, our
Moderation, Phil. 4.5.
must be known to All, as well as theirs. Our Recollection of Mind must be
preserved amidst the Multitude of our Employments. We are equally obliged to
Mortify and Circumcise our Heart, and to Extinguish in it, all our Sensual
Desires. These. 5.17.
The Precept of Continual Prayer, is as much for us, as them. We are not bound
to sing in Choire at certain Hours as they do: but our Heart must be, as much
as theirs, continually united to our God, by Loving of Him above all things.
Though we have not made a Vow of Poverty; yet we must be, as well as They,
entirely disengaged from all the Riches of the Earth, and never set our Hearts
upon them, whilst we use them. Though we have not Vowed Obedience, we are All
obliged, as much as They, to be attentive to the Precepts of our Founder Jesus
Christ, and punctually observe the least of his Commandments. Math. 5.19.


Behold the Duty of a Christian! See how Generous, how Noble, how Heroical his
Resolution is, of making good the full Signification of his Name! He meets with
an infinity of Obstacles: but notwithstanding all, He is resolved to Sacrifice
and Save himself: He is resolved to use all Violence, what ever may be
requisite, to make his way to Heaven, Math. 11.12.
and to take it even by force.

SECT. II. His Contempt of the World.
HE always looks upon himself, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in Ep. ad Hebr.
as a mere Stranger in this World; and the continual Remembrance of his being
So, is the Foundation and Root of all his Virtue. He takes little pleasure in
employing of his busy thoughts about this Life, and the Affairs relating to it:
but is like a banished Man, who lives uneasy in a foreign Country; always
looking homeward with extreme Impatience, to see the Blessed Place which gave
him Birth; and always doing all he can, to lay all things in readyness for his
Return. He never is dejected with Adversity, nor puffed up with Prosperity, which
happen to attend his Fortune here; but passes unconcern'dly by, without
regarding either; and without the least stop in his way, pursues his journey,
like a Traveller, who longs to be at Home, and thinks of nothing else but how
to make have thither. And this is the Reason why our God obliges him to say, in
his daily Prayer, Thy Kingdom come; that he may always have before his eyes,
the happy Day which is to be his Last, and generously scorn to value any
transitory Honor, Profit, Pleasure, which he meets with upon Earth.

A Christian by these noble sentiments of true and solid Wisdom mounts to such
a height above the reach of all this World, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 15. ad Popul.
Antiochen.
that He is hardly capable of feeling, much less of admiring, whatsoever passes
in it. He is like a man who from the top of an aspiring Mountain takes a view
of All below him, and can hardly See the Towns and Cities, which appear like
Molehills; where the numerous Inhabitants like swarms of Ants, run up and down,
and follow eagerly their little Trade, of hoarding up a petty Treasure, which
is nothing to his purpose. All his Treasure and his Heart are both in Heaven.
There his Loving Eye is generally fixed; And if he now and then look down upon
the Riches, Glory, Power, Honor, of this miserable World, they all seem
trifling matters; All such Things are little, inconsiderable, and contemptible,
to Him.

And yet, He cannot justly be accused of Pride, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 11. in ep.
1. Cor.
because he thinks the wisest Politicians are but Fools; their Riches, Shadows;
all their Pleasures, Dreams; and all their Titles, Dignities, and Honors, only
Childrens Baubles. No; it cannot justly be accounted Pride: It Is certainly the
greatest Wisdom to submitt our Judgments, and conform them, to the Eternal
Truth of God himself; and judge of things, as they are truly in themselves. Or
otherwise we must allow that Solomon himself was guilty of Presumption and
Arrogance; when, after a full Trial, after long and sad Expeperience, He
pronounced that All the World is Vanity of Vanities, and nothing else but
Vanity.

He labors all he can to make his Soul become a Heaven upon Earth; S.
Chrysostom. Hom. 16. in Epist. ad Heb.
and fails not to succeed in such a noble entreprise. The Heaven which we see,
and so admire, is but an Emblem of his Happyness. As Heaven is enlightened by
the rising Sun; his Soul is more enlightened by the Grace of God, the Sun of
Justice, which arises, without setting, in his Heart. As Heaven always is the
same; still beautiful and bright within it self, although the midnight
Darkness seem to alter and obscure it; so his Soul is still the same, it is
always easy and content within it self, although He live obscurely, in disgrace
or poverty, and seem a miserable man to those who little understand the Secret
of his Happyness. As Heaven is so high above the Winds and Storms, that the
most violent disturbance of the Air can never reach it; so the Soul of a good
Christian, even when the World combines to make him suffer most, receives no
harm at all. His Treasure is in Heaven, and his Heart is with it. He Is above
the reach of all that they can do. His Heart is raised to such a height, that
when He takes a prospect of the Earth below, He sees no difference twixt Men
and Pismires. Neither are the Poor the only Objects that seem little in his
Sight; but Kings themselves, and Generals of Armies, Politicians, Usurers, and
what you please, seem every jot as little and contemptible as They. The
Difference of Poor and Rich makes no impression upon Him; no more than when He
sees, amongst a Swarm of little Pismires, some creep loaded, others empty.

What can Men do to such a Man as This, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. ad Popul. Antio.
suppose they have a mind to make him miserable? Will they rob him of his money?
All his Riches are in Heaven. Will they Banish him from home? He has no other
Home but Heaven; and it is not in their Power to Banish him from thence. Will
they lay him fast in Chains? His Conscience will still be free: And, for his
part, He fears no other Chains but those of Sin. Or will they kill him? When
they have done this, They have no more to Do; And even then, His Soul will Live
for ever, his body one day Rise again.

A Man, S. Chrysostom. lib. 2. ad Theod. lapsum. c. 3.
who lives not but for Jesus Christ, is quite above the reach of all
misfortunes that can threaten him. Provided that He will not freely and
deliberately hurt himself, No man alive can have the least advantage over Him.
He Is invincible at all Arms. The Loss of his Goods is no Affliction to him,
because he well considers, that we All bring Nothing with us, at our Birth; and
that we All shall carry Nothing with us, at our Death. The vain desires of
Reputation and Honor cannot seize his Heart; because he knows that all our
Conversation ought to be in Heaven. All the injuries and outrages He meets
with, are not able to provoke him: He Is a Christian: And, being truly such, He
fears but one great Danger of one only Loss; the Danger of offending God, and
Loosing of his Favor, All things else, as Banishment and Poverty, with all the
greatest and most dangerous Extremities, He values not at all: and even Death
it self, which others think so Terrible, is always most agreeable, most
comfortable, and most welcome, whensoere it comes.

SECT. III. His Desire of Heaven.
THe Scripture generally represents a Christian, as a Person disengaged and
separated from the World. If you were of the world, S. Jo. 15.19.
says our Savior, the world would love his own: but because you are not of the
world, and I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.
1. Jo. 2.15.
He loves not the world, nor the things that are in the world: Because, if any
man love the world, the Love of God is not in him. Romans 12.2.
He is not conformed to the world, but transformed by the renewing of his Mind,
that He may prove what is the good the acceptable and perfect will of God. He
uses the world, 1. Cor. 7.31. Gal. 6.14. Coloss. 3.3. Jam. 1.27. 1. Pet. 2.11.
as if he used it not. The world is crucifyd to him, and He to the world. He is
Dead, and his Life is hid with Christ in God. His Religion pure and undefiled
is that by which He keeps himself unspotted from the world. He abstains from
all Desires which war against the Soul, because He is a Stranger and a Pilgrim
in the World. But that which most inclines him to Desire the Happyness of
Heaven, is his Knowing that, as long as He is here, 2. Cor. 5.6.
He Is Absent from his God.

No wonder He so much Desires to be in Heaven: D. Sp. Par. 2. Chapter 21.
All his Comfort is his Hope of being there. The Gate so strait; The way so
narrow; The continual Violence so necessary to be used; The Cross he daily
bears; The Self-denial which he always practices; The Penance without which
we All shall perish, Luke. 13.3.
if we do not mortify our Passions, curb our Humors, and resist our
Inclinations: All this, putt together, is enough to make a Christians Life, so
painful, troublesome, and disagreable, 1. Cor. 15.19.
that if in this life only, He had Hope, He would of all Men be most miserable.

It Is no wonder therefore He so much Desires the Sight of God, Ibid.
which only can deliver him from all the miseries He labors under. Chapter 22.
It Is the great Affliction of the Just; to see themselves so far from Sion,
separated from their God, and banished from their Heavenly Jerusalem. Although
the Riches of the World were all their Own, They still would think themselves
Unfortunate, because their Treasure is is not here; it is only to be found
hereafter. They as earnestly Desire the Happyness of Heaven, as a Heart long
hunted thirsts for Water. It Is a Duty indispensably incumbent upon all true
Christians to Desire it above All Things.

Hear S. Austin: Ibid. Chapter 21.
He who finds himself at Ease on Earth; who is contented to live always Here;
And finds his greatest Joy and Satisfaction in this world; will never enter
Heaven. If you ask the Reason; He replys: because He has not in his Heart the
Love of God, whoever dos not Sigh, and above all things Wish, for the Enjoyment
of Eternal Life. Examine well your Heart. If God should promise you a long
Life upon Earth; and tell you* You shall here enjoy whatever you can wish for;
Riches, Pleasures, Honors, Health, Prosperity, and what you please besides,
shall every where attend you: Only, You shall never See me; You shall never
have a Share with Me in Heaven: would you be Content? whoever is in such a
Disposition, dos not yet begin to Love Him above All Things.

Hear the Royal Prophet: Ibid. Chapter 22.
Hear the Language of his Love. As the Heart pants after water, Ps. 42.1.2.3.
so my Soul pants after Thee, My God. My Soul is thirsty for Thee, O Thou
Living God, the only Life and Comfort of my Soul. My Tears have been my
Entertainment Day and Night; and it is the only Ease of my impatient Grief, to
have the Liberty of weeping in thy Absence. When shall I appear before my God?
When once that happy Day approaches, Ps. 17.15.
when I once Behold thy Face, I shall be Satisfyd: but never shall be satisfyd
till then. It Is this, Ps. 27.4.
and only this One Thing I always have Desired of Thee; that I may Dwell in thy
House for ever, and behold thy Beauty.

All God's Children say the same: Ibid.
they daily pray to their Eternal Father, that his Kingdom come: And their
Desire of Everlasting Life, (though sometimes out of Mind) is always in their
Heart. By this, they Pray incessantly. By this, they are attentive to God's
Presence, in the midst of those Employments and Affairs, which otherwise would
easily divert them from the Thought of Him. By This, they frequently Recall
their wandering Thoughts, Renew their decaying Fervor, Inflame their cooling
Love, Encourage their desponding Hearts, and March a great deal faster toward
Heaven. When the Scripture commands us, says S. Austin, to Pray Always; we are
not therefore obliged to be always on our knees, or always singing Psalms in
Choire: we only are obliged to have continually, in the Bottom of our Heart, a
true Desire to leave this Earth and enter into Heaven. This continual Desire
must still persever in our Heart. We always must lament, and sigh; and say; I
am a Captive and a Pilgrim; I am far from Home; I am not with my God. It Is true,
(S. Austin adds,) a Just Man may divert himself sometimes; and spend some
hours, in such Employments as appear quite different from Gaining Heaven. It Is,
alas! the Servitude of his Captivity, which thus obliges him to work for the
Egyptians, whilst he is a Slave to Pharaoh But however, in the midst of all his
Slavery, He never can forget the Land of Promise; He laments, He sighs, He
always wishes to be There: And Thus He always Prays to God that He will please
to grant him the Possession of that Souvereign Good, which only can Suffice to
make Him truly and for ever Happy.

THE CONTENTS
Motives of Love.
. 1. How much it imports us to Love God above All Things. page 1. 2. That the
Love of God is our Greatest Duty. 3. 3. That the Love of God is our Greatest
Good. 20. 4. That the Love of God is the chief Grace of the Holy Ghost. 40. 5.
That we ought to prepare our Hearts for this great Grace, 57
Motives of Fear.
. 1. How much it imports us to remember the Day of Judgment. 71. 2. That our
Last Day is the fatal End of all our transitory Happyness. 75. 3. That our
Last Day is the sad Beginning of our Everlasting Misery. 90
Motives of Hope.
. 1. How unreasonable a thing it is for any Sinner to Despair. 109. 2. That God
can help us, if He will. 115. 3. That God will help us, if we please. 130
Danger of Delay.
. 1. How apt we are to Differr Repentance. 149. 2. How dangerous it is to
Differr Repentance. 153. 3. Reasons why Delay is so Dangerous. 161. 4. That we
ought to begin immediately, without Delay. 172
A Contrite Heart.
. 1. Sorrow for our Sins. 189. 2. Resolutions of Amendment. 193
An Humble Heart.
. 1. The Necessity and Advantages of Humility. 201. 2. First Degree of
Humility. 213. 3. Second Degree of Humility. 219. 4. An Objection answered.
233. 5. Third Degree of Humility. 242. 6. First Reason why the greatest Saints
are the most humble. 249. 7. Second Reason why the greatest Saints are the most
Humble. 262 I. The Enormity of Sin. 273 II. The Treachery of a Sinner. 285 III.
The Disloyalty of a Sinner. 296 IV. The Impiety of a Sinner. 303 V. The great
Ingratitude, Presumption, Pride, and Insolence of every Sinner. 311 VI. Our
Saviors Idea of Sin: and the Impression it made upon Him. 319 VII. The Saints
Idea of Sin: How much it humbles them. 335
The Character of a Good Christian.
. 1. The Perfection of his Duty. 352. 2. His Contempt of the World. 362. 3.
His Desire of Heaven. 372
FINIS.

