LAMENTABLE AND SAD NEVVES FROM THE NORTH viz. York; Lancaster, Darby, and
Newcastle, Sent in a Letter from a Gentleman resident in York, to his friend
living in Lumbard*street.

ALSO Strange News from Leicester, how Colonel Lunsford, Captain Leg, and Mr
Hastings have appeared in a warlike Manner, with a true discovery of their
intention, and the manner of the opposition by the Earl of Stanfoord Lord
Lieutenant of that County.

London, Printed for G. Thomlinson, and T. Watson. 1642.

LAMENTABLE NEWS FROM THE NORTH.
SIR,
ACcording to my engagements when I was at London, I can do no less then
advertise you of our newest news at York, which indeed at this time is so
terrible, that it would melt an adamantine heart into tears to Relate.

The Rebellious insurection and wicked polices and stratagems of these most
Hellish Papists and malignant party are grown to such an head, that it is feared
without the great mercy of God, we are like to undergo the hardest censure and
bloodyest devices they possibly can inflict upon this our flourishing Kingdom,
the whole City and County of York, is so grievioufly perplexed with the fear
of a civil war, which still these Cavaliers with oaths and threats do daily
insist to the terror of all good Christians they are now grown to so insolent
and turbulent spirits being countenanced with the smiles of many noblemen that
men cannot dispose of their own goods themselves nor families, nor indeed being
in possession of them over night, know not whether they may lay claim to them
as their own the next morning or no, for their will is a Law, and what other
men have is theirs contrary to Law, nolens volens.

For their own parts, they are wickedly grown desperate, through the favors of
so many men of note in York, Noblemen, that they care not for the ruination of
a whole Kingdom, so themselves may imbrue their hands in innocent blood, which
the Lord be merciful to us, if we come to stand to their mercy, for then
shall we see our Wives ravished before our faces, our childrens brains dashed
out against the walls, and our selves exposed with so great loss to the
adventure upon any opposition of far more tyranny if possibly infllicted on
us: therefore had we need in time to call and cry unto the Lord to be merciful
unto us, and to this our finfull Nation and unanimiously join against viperous
brood of Satan, and locusts of the bot tomlessepit.

They have showed themselves so insolent; and so assured of possession of the
city of London, that for a wanton kiss of their Ladies, they have undertaken
to sell any man's goods or Jewels, or what else ^hey require, which is the
propriety of any man's in the Kingdom, and so careless have they bin here to
pay for any thing which they have a mind to, that they take it with a let us see
who dares say, let it belong to who it will.

They will as familiarly come into a Tavern or alehouse cellar, and knock out
the bottom of the vessels, and make nothing of it to drink so long as they
think good, so is it likewise if they have occasion for clothes, boots, or
any other commodities in the City, take them without demanding what is to pay,
promising when they receives pay or pillage to pay them, which upon the least
opposition, they undergo the right of their cane, and upon any further
resistance, slash them with their swords.

And in the like nature has the whole County of York undergone the punishment
these caviliers thought fit to inflect upon them, by riding, 20. 30. 40. in a
troop 10. or 12. miles from the City a purving where with them, all is fish
which come to the net, be they poor or rich that are loosers, it is all one to
them.

Likewise, in contempt of all Justice, they have abused many honorable
personages, imploye by the Parliament in York, and other places adjacent,
swear^ing bitterly, Damn and sink them, they will be revenged on the Puritan
Parliament, and all other adherents the Citizens of London. So that with their
bloody oaths, and most damnable actions, ter^ible to relate, the whole City
and County of York is frustrate of that happiness and fruition, which we might
by the providence of God enjoy.

But now to the terror and amazement of all true hearted protestants, other
neighboring Counties are like (without the abundant mercy of God) to be
sharers of this doleful tragedy now acting in the North, for they have already
begun their desperate intentions in Lancaster, as may appear by the Lord
Strange his Carriadge there, where, with a company of about 700 men has by
virtue of the Commission of Array, disposed of some part of the Magazine there,
and has opposed the Deputy Lieftenant, appointed by the ordinance for the
Militia, for putting the same in execution, and likewise it plainly appears by
his Majesty's letter to Sir John Gerlington the high Sheriff of that County to
sum up all the protestant Subjects with all speed at Preston, to hear his
Majesty's two last declarations, and the Lancashire petition to the King, and
his Majesty's answer thereunto, some of the Committees for Lancaster desired
the forbearance of them to be read, but he in contempt of their order from the
Parliament departed with some of his friends, and cried out, all that are for
the King go with us, crying, for the King, for the King, and so about 400
persons, whereof the most part of them were popish Recusants went with him and
rid up and down the moore, and cried, for the King, for the King, but far
more in number stayed with the Committee and prayed for the uniting of the King
and Parliament with a general acclamation, so that it is thought since the
Committees going there, it has wonderfully wrought upon the hearts of the
people; but upon contempt of the Committee Sir John Gerlington, Sir George
Middleton and Sir Edward Fitton are sent for to the House as delinquents and
for Manchester, they all stand upon their own guard, with their shops shut up,
well affected to the Kings Majesty and both his Houses of Parliament, in
opposition of any that shall oppose them, and the country round adjoining, are
very observant to any command, to be in readiness to attend there or else
where for the defense of their Country, lives, liberties, and estates, and the
defense of the true protestant Religion with their lives and all that is
theirs, so that it is now probable that the Lord Strange has dismissed the
most part of his men, and is weary of what he has begun, seeing no more
supply come to his Lordship, and heareing of the stay of four of his engines
of war to be sent to him stayed at the b^^^l savagene^^^^ ^^eet bridge
according to his expectation.

We also credibly hear, that Colonel Lansford and Captain Leg have appeared
at Leicester with about 500 men, horse and foot, and great store of powder,
match, and ammunition, where above a hundred more Cavileers are gone to tender
their service, also one Mr. Hastings came out of Darby-shire, with about 300
men, some 100. Colyers and 32. ministers such as they were, to animate their
cause, and Mr. Hastings mustered about 100 horse, 120. musketteirs, and 80
pikes, by virtue of the Commission of Array, who (as it is thought) came on
purpose, to join with Colonel Lunsford and Captain Leg, but being
disappointed, Mr. Hastings for fear stole away in the night, and left his
priests and Colliers to contend with each other, who was the cause of their
following so light a heeld gentleman, so the men were dismissed, and their arms
taken away, and sent them every one into his own Country, but since we hear
that Mr. Hastings is joined with Colonel Lunsford and Captain Leg, we hear
that the Earl of Stamford, Lord Lieutenant of that County, seeks by all means
to suppress with his wisdom and gravity these, and all other the like
insurrections and rebellions, but what the event will be the Lord knows.

We also hear from Newcastle, that the Earl of Newcastle has placed about
500 men in garrison, is raising a troop of Horse; and beats the Drum for
Volunteers, but the trained bands in most places Refuse to come in, also 4
pieces of Ordnanc^ is carried down to South Tixmonth, and there are 300 men in
work making a Sconce to command all ships that come in, and go out, the town
is in greater perplexity already, then they were all the time the Scots were
there, and Ship masters refuse to go in, least their ships be stayed, seeing
such strange combustion beginning to arise.

Thus having certified you of the truest news that is now amongst us, which I
pray God in his good time to cease all such Turbulent and malicious disturbers
of this Common wealth, with my best respects to your self, and love to all my
friends, with the next convenience you shall hear from me. In the mean time I
take my leave, and rest.

Your assured Loving Friend, Will. Ienkinson.

FJNIS.

