A DISCOURSE Touching the Inconveniences of a Long continued Parliament.

AND THE IVDGEMENT OF THE LAW OF THE LAND In that Behalf.

By DAVID JENKINS now Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.

June 17thPrinted in the Year, 1647.

A DISCOURSE Touching the Inconveniences of a Long continued Parliament.
1. A Perpetual Parliament is repugnant to the Act made this Parliament for a
Trienniall Parliament; for how can every three years a Paliament begin, if this
be perpetual, which may be so if the two Houses please? 2. An adjournment of
the Parliament makes no Session, 4 Pars, Institut. fol. 27. Howbeit, before the
Adjournment, the King gives His Royal assent to some Bills. Cook, ibid. 3.
There is no Session till a prorogation or dissolution of the Parliament. 4.
This Parliament, as appears by the Act for not dissolvirg thereof, set down
in the Printed Statutes of this Parliament, fol. 138. cannot be prorogued but
by Act of Parliament. There has been as yet no Act of Parliament present, and
therefore all the Acts of this Parliament, are Acts of one Session. 5. All the
Acts of one Session relate to the first day of the Parliament, Plowd com. 79 35
H. 8. Bro. relation 35. Bro. Parl. 86. Dier. 1 Mariae 45.
and all the Acts of such a Parliament are Acts of one day; so the Act for the
Trienniall, and the Act for this Perpetual, are two Acts of one day by the
Law. 6. 4 Ed. 3. cap. and 36 Ed. 3. cap. 10. A Parliament is to be holden once
every year, and more often if need shall be; those Acts are confirmed by the
Act for the Trienniall Parliament. How does a perpetual Parliament agree with
a Parliament once every year, or with the intention of those Laws? How does a
Parliament every three years agree with a Parliament for ever, which may be, if
the two Houses please? 7. The result is this; at one day in Law this Parliament
two Acts have passed (for howbeit the one was in 16 Carol. and the other in 17.
Carol. yet both in Law are Acts of one day) the one says there shall be a
Trienniall Parliament after the end of the sitting of this Parliament: The
other, this Parliament shall sit for ever, if they please. The one will have a
Parliament with an end, the other, a Parliament without an end.
When an Act of Parliament is against common right or Reason, 8 Pars, Doct.
Bonhams case fol. 118. 8 Ed. 3.30. 33 E. 3. cessavit, 32. 27. H.G. Annuity 41.
14 Eliz. Dier, 313.
or repugnant, or impossible to be performed, the Common Law shall control
it, and adjudge this Act to be void; they are the words of the Law.

An Act of Parliament, that a man shall be Judge in his owne-cause, is a void
Act.

Begin with Common Right. It is against Common Right, that indebted men should
not pay their debts: That if any Member of the House of Commons do any Subject
wrong by disseising him of his land, or dispossessing him of his goods, or
blasting of his fame, or doing violence to his person, that such persons during
their lives should not be questioned by a privilege of Parliament, and that
extended also to many others besides themselves. Common Right does abhor
these enormities, which a perpetual Paliament does beget, besides the utter
destruction of all men's actions, real, personal, or mixed, who have to do
with Parliament men, 21 Jac.
by the Statute of Limitation, which confines suits to certain years.

For Common Reason. Parliaments were ordained for remedies to redress public
grievances; It is against Reason they should make public and insufferable
grievances. The Law of the Land allows no protection for any man employed in
the service of the Kingdom but for a year, to be free from suits, and in many
suits none at all, howbeit he be in such service; 39 H. 6.39.
but a Parliament perpetual may prove a protection, not for a year, but for
ever, which is against all manner of Reason.

For Impossibility. The death of His Majesty (whose life God prolong) dissolves
it necessarily; For the Writ of summons is, Carolus Rex in hoc individuo, and
Carolus Rex is in this particular, Habiturus colloquium and tractatum cum
Prelatis and proceribus, etc. 2 H. 5. Cook Title Parliam 3. pars.
King Charles being to have Conference and Treaty with his Prelates and Peers;
Carolus Rex cannot have Colloquium and tractatum, Conference and Treaty, when
he is deceased; and therefore it is impossible for any Parliament to continue
as long as they please, as for a Parliament to make a dead man alive.

For Repugnancie. That which is but for a time, cannot be affirmed to have
continuance for ever, it is repugnant.

The end of the Act of 17. Caroli Regis, which is to continue at pleasure, is
in the said Act expressed to be to raise credit for money for these three
purposes. First, for relief of his Majesty's Army and people in the North.
Secondly, for preventing the iminent danger of the Kingdom, Thirdly, for
supply of other His Majesty's present and urgent occasions. These ends are
ended, the relief of that Army, the iminent danger supposed was six years
ago, the supply of His Majesty has been a supply against him, take away the
end, the means thereto are to no purpose, take away the cause, the effect
cease; and therefore the three ends of this Act being determined, Sir Anthony
Mayns case. 5. pars, 1 H. 4.6. Littl. cap. Villen.
it agrees with Law and Reason, the Act should end, the Law rejects things
unprofitable and useless.

A perpetual Parliament (besides that it incites men to selfe-ends,
destructive of the public of which the whole Kingdom has had sufficient
experience) will be a constant charge to the Kingdom; for that every County and
Borough, who send Members to the Parliament, are by the Law to pay wages to
their Parliament men, which to many Counties will amount above some Subsidies
Yearly: There are many poor Borough-Townes in each County of this Kingdom,
who being to maintain two Burgesses in Parliament, will be quickly beggered,
if the Parliament have no end; for all which reasons it is clear, that such
long continuance of Parliaments, will instead of a remedy (which is and ought
to be the proper and true end of Parliaments) become an insufferable grievance
and oppression to all the People of the Land.

The Writ of Summons this Parliament is the basts and foundation of the
Parliament. If the Foundation be destroyed the Parliament falls. The Assembly of
Parliament if for three purposes. Rex est habiturus colloquium et tractatum
cumpraelatis, magnatibus et proceribus super arduis negotijs, concernentibus,
1. Nos. 2 Defensionem regni nostri 3. Defensionom Ecclesiae Anglicanae. This
Parliament has overthrown this Foundation in all 3 parts, 1. Nos. the King,
they have chased him away, and imprisoned him; they have voted no prelates, and
a number of other Lords, about 40. in the City must not come to the House, and
about 40. more are out of Town, the colloquium et tractatus are made void
thereby. For the King cannot consult and treat there with men removed from
thence. 2. Defensionem regni nostri, that is gone; they have made it their
Kingdom, not His, for they have usurped all his Soveraigntie. 3. Defensionem
Ecclesiae Anglicana, that is gone, that Ecclesia Anglicana must be understood
necessarily that Church, that at the test of of the Writ was Ecclesiae
Anglicana, they have destroyed that too. So now these men would be called a
Parliament, having abated, quashed, and made nothing of the Writ whereby they
were Summoned and Assembled. If the Writ be made void, all the process is void
also: that House must needs fall, where the Foundation is overthrown, Subato
fundamento opus cadit, the Foundation being taken away, the work falls, is
both a maxim in Law and Reason.

For some years past, there is no crime from Treason to Trespass, but they
are guilty of: all Treason, Felonies, Robberies, trespasses are contra pacem,
coronam et dignitatem Regis, against the Peace, Crown and Dignity of the
King; as appears by all Indictments in all Ages. Pax Regis the Kings Peace,
Corona Regis, the Kings Crown, Dignitas Regis, the Kings Dignity, are all
trod under foot, and made nothing; Pax Regis, the Peace of the King is become a
War against the King, His Dignity put into prison, and the Crown put upon
their own heads.

All the Judges of England have resolved, Nevills case 7. part, 34. 2. Jacobi.
that Noblemen committing Treason have forfeited their Office and Dignity,
their Office is to council the King in time of Peace, to defend him in time of
War, and therefore those men against the duty and end of their Dignity
taking not only Council, but Arms also to destroy Him, and being thereof
attaint by due course of Law by a tacit condition annexed to the estate of
their Dignity, have forfeited the same; they are the words of the Law, and
therefore they have made themselves incapable to be Members of the upper House.

The Oppressions of the People.
Briberies, Extortions, Monopolies, ought to be inquired after by the House of
Commons, and complained of to the King and Lords, what have they done?

The House of Commons cannot by the Law commit any man to prison, who is not of
the said House, for Treason, Murder, or Felony, or any thing but for the
disturbance of the public Peace, by the privilege of the whole body.

They have no power by the Writ, which the King issues to elect and return
Members of that House, so to do. For the Writ for them is only ad faciendum
et consentiendum to those things, whereof His Majesty shall consult and treat
with his Prelates and Nobles, et de communi consilio Regni shall be there
ordained, as appears by the Writ. Here is no separate power given over the
Kings people to them, but only ad faciendum et consentiendum, 4 Pars.
institut. 23.24.25.
and in all times this has been expounded and restrained to that which
concerned their own Members in Relation to the public Service, as he is a
Member of the corporate body of the Parliament, whereof the King is the Head.

But that the House of Commons have committed any man for Treason, Murder or
Felony, or for any offense that had no relation to a Member of the House of
Commons, as it is against Law and Reason, so no instance can be given till this
Parliament. 19 H. 6.43.22. E. 4.22. 5 H. 4. cap. 8. 3 H. 6.46.


All Questions and trials where witness are examined, the examination is upon
oath by the Law, by all our Books, Statutes, every days practice. Examination
without an Oath, is but a loose discourse; therefore the House of Commons not
claiming power to give an Oath, have no power to examine any man.

No man shall be imprisoned by the King or His Council, unless it be by
Indictment, 25 E. 3. c. 4. Perition of Right. 3 Car.
presentment of his good and lawful Neighbors where such deeds be done, in
due manner, or by process made by Wtit original at the Common Law: This
Statute rehearses Magna Charta, page 29. and expounds Lex terrae, the Law of
the Land there mentioned: This Law binds all men, and the House of Commons (for
they say they are of the Kings Council) in all points, but only against the
disturbers of the service of the Parliament; and therefore the imprisonment of
several persons who are not their Members, and for no disturbance to their
Members, is utterly against the Law of the Land, and the franchise of the
Freemen of this Realm.

Cui non licet quod minus, non licet quod majus; he who may not do what is
less, may not do what is greater; they cannot commit a man for murder or
Felony, much less for Treason.

No Court can fine and imprison, 8 Pars, Cook 120. 27 H. 6.8.
but a Court of Record, the House of Commons is no Court of Record, the House
of the Lords where the King is in his Person, his Nobles and his Judges, and
Council at Law, the Masters of the Chancery assisting, is a Court of Record,
and that is the Court of Parliament, where the colloquium and tractatus is. The
House of Commons may present grievances, grant or not grant aids, consent or
not consent to new laws, but for fining and imprisoning any but as aforesaid,
is but of a late date, and no ancient usage: They have no Journall Book, but
sithence Edw. 6. time. 6 Hen. 8. cap. 15. does not prove the House of Commons
to be a Court of Record, it mentions only to be entered on Record in the Book
of the Clerk of the Parliament, if any Member depart into the Country. There
is no Journall there but sithence Ed. 6. time, or it is a remembrance or
memorial, as 12 H. 4.23.

The whole Parliament is one corporate body, 14 H. 8.3. 36 H. 8. Dier 60. 4
Pars Instit. c^p. 1.
consisting of the Head and three Estates: The Court is only there where the
Consilium and tractatus is, where the consult and treaty is with the King,
which is in the House of Lords only.

The House of Commons claim not to examine upon oath any man; no Court can be
without a power to give an oath, Courts Baron, Court of Pipowders,
County Court, may and do give oath: No Court can be without a power to try,
no trial can be without Oath; and therefore the House of Commons not claiming
power to give an Oath, can bring no matter to trial, and consequently can be
no Court.

The behavior of the Commons at a Conference with the Lords, the Commons are
always uncovered, and standing when the Lords sit with their hats on, which
shows they are not Colleagues in judgment, for fellow Judges owe no such
Reverence to their Companions.

When was ever Fine imposed by the House of Commons estreated in the Exchequer?
11 H. 4. ca. 1.
The ejecting of a Member, who has sitten, is against the Law; for they cannot
remove a man out of the House unduly returned, much less a man returned duly.

By these Laws it appears, ^^ H. 4. cap. 1. 1 H 5. cap. 1. 8 H. 6. cap. 7. 23
H. 6. cap. 15
that if any undue return be made, the person returned is to continue a
Member, the Sheriffs punishment is 200. pound, one to the King, another to the
party that is duly elected, imprisonment for a year without Bail or
Mainprise; and that person who is unduly returned, shall serve at his own
charge, and have no benefit at the end of the Parliament by the Writ De
solutione foendorum Militum, Civium and Burgensium Parliament. and the trial
of the falsity of the return, is to be before the Justices of Assizes in the
proper County, or by action of debt in any Court of Record. This condemns the
Committee for undue elections, which has been practiced but of late times; 3
Ed. 4.20. 5 Ed. 4.41.
for besides these Laws, it is against a maxim of the Common law; an averment
is not receivable against the return of the Sheriff, for his return is upon
Oath, which Oath is to be credited in that suit wherein the return is made.

The said Statutes condemn and make those members no members, which were not
resiant in the County or Boroughs, for which they were elected, at the time of
the test of the Writ of the Summons of the Parliament, and any abusive practice
of late times to the contrary is against the Law, and ought not to be allowed.

Assault upon Parliament Men.
If a Par^iament man or his Meniall Servant be assaulted, beaten, or wounded,
in the Parliament time, 5 H. 4. cap 6. 11 H. 6. cap 11.
proclamation shall be made where the deed is done, that the offender shall
render himself to the Kings Bench, within a quarter of a year after
proclamation made, and the offense there to be tried, for default of appearance
the offender is declared, attainted of the misdeed, and it is accorded that
thereafter it be done likewise in the like Case.

Serving of process upon a Lord of the Parliament punished in the Lords House.
Bogo de Clare 18 E. 3.4 pars, Instit. fol. 24. John Thornsbyes case, Clerk of
the Parliam, ibid. 10. E. ^.


Serving of process upon Thornsby inquired of in the Chancery, and there the
offenders were convicted.

The premises prove, that breaches of privilege of Parliament may be
punished elsewhere then in Parliament.

Upon all this Discourse, it is easy to discern what fruits may be expected
from this Parliament, continuing as long as the two Houses please; and that
there is no safety for this Commonwealth, but by the Observations of their
ancient Franchises, Customs and Laws.

CONCLUSION.
I Say again, that without an Act of Oblivion, a gracious general Pardon from
His Majesty, the Arreares of the Soldiers paid, a favorable regard had to
tender Consciences, there will be neither Truth nor Peace in this Land, nor
any man secure of any thing he has.

The End.

