THE ANSWER OF JUDGE JENKINS, TO THE Imputation put upon his Plea in CHANCERIE;
Which was read in open Court the 14 of February, 1647.

And avowed by DAVID JENKINS, Prisoner in NEWGATE.

Printed in the Year, 1648. 1647.

The Answer of Judge JENKINS, to the Imputation put upon his Plea in CHANCERIE,
etc.
I Have no disposition, nor ever had, to be known by any public writing:
These miserable times, which fill many men's mouths, and most men's ears with
notorious untruths, thereby to blast and destroy the Kings Sacred Majesty, his
Laws and Government, and to bring in a confusion; enforces me at this time
(who formerly have written nothing but for the public) to let the world know
how unjustly the Pamphleter of this week, Licensed by our Reformers, has
traduced me touching a Suit commenced in their Court of Chancerie against me,
by one M. Erneley a Wiltshire Gentleman, touching the Estate of one M. Thomas
of Glamorganshire: The truth whereof is as follows:

M. Thomas, whose Father and my Grandfather were two Brothers, about 17 years
past made his Will, and declared by the same his son being then of very tender
years) a Ward to his Majesty, and made him his Executor, and my self during
his minority, (referring to his Wardship) to Administer his Estate personal
and testamentary, and to be accomptable to his son when he came to age: And
17 years sithence the Father dyed.

This Estate consists in a stock of Sheep, so disposed by me as the number are
yet continued, and for the number and condition, they were at their deliverie
back, to be made as good by those persons who had the charge of them, as they
were when they were rec^^^ed.

The rest of the Estate (for any considerable part) was in mortgages of Land,
forseited in the life of my young Cousin Thomas for many of them; and many
absolutely purchased by me in his name in his life time, for the which I am not
yet paid.

The Land descended, and ought, upon Sir Edward Thomas, my Cousins Heir at
Common Law; so that M. Erneley, the Plaintiff in Chancerie, has no color for
the Land: For my young Cousin dyed without issue about 17 years old, and could
not dispose of the Inheritance of any Land by any pretended Will: The stock of
Sheep remains, if the Plantiffe and the Reformers have not Plundered them:
For the Money, it came all to the Court, it was to satisfy the King for the
Marriage.

The color the Plaintiff has, is this: After the death of my old Kinsman M.
Thomas, by undue means the young Gentleman was married to M. Erneleys Daughter,
in a way of Ravishment, being both children, without one penny paid, or consent
of Friends or Kindred: For the which, a Suit of Ravishment depended against M.
Erneley and others in the Court of wards.

The young Gentleman dyed about 17 years of age, sithence these confusions,
without Issue; and some hour before my young Cousins death (who dyed of a
pestilent Fever) M. Erneley pretends a Will made by him, and that he made his
wife (M. Erneleys Daughter) his Executrix: His said wife dies soon after, and
is pretended to make a Nuncupative Will, and to make her Father (M. Erneley)
her Executor, and so pretends as Executor of an Executor of an Executor: which
pretended Wills, he says he has proved in the Courts of his Friends, the
Reformers.

Whether such Wills were made or no, must receive an equal examination, and of
what validity they are, being pretended to be made by children in extremis, if
made at all? And whether an Executor of an Executor of an Executor can maintain
an account by the Law of the Land? And whether (I being Executor during the
minority, viz. the Wardship) my young Cousin could make such a Will as is
pretended, he being no Executor till his full age.

The age touching Wills, the Law of this Land determines to be 21 years, 37.
H. 6.5. 21 Ed. 4.24.
and before that age at Common Law an use could not be devised. For Wills
touching Goods and Chattells, our Law for many ages have left the same to the
decision of the Civil and Canon Laws, in the Bishops Courts: That Law, (as
Justinian has it in the second Book of his Institutions, the twelfth chap.)
is, Impuberi non licet testari: This Pubertas begins at 14, it is Plena
pubertas at 18 years of age; The question is, whether this jus testandi is in
pubertate plena, or pubertate incepta: Pigots Case, 5. part of Cooks Reports,
the Doctors affirmed, that 17 years of age was a full age as to an infant
Executor to dispose of Goods: This opinion has bin by others sithence denied.
Sir Edward Cook 11 part, Instit. sect. 123. says, He must be 18, which is the
time of plena pubertas. 2 Hen. 4.12. an infant of 18 years of age may be a
deisseisour. Sir Io. Dodderidge in his Book called, The Office and Duty of
Executors; which they say is his, and it is a Learned and laborious Treatise,
fol. 347. delivers, that this opinion of 17 years, for that ability in an
infant, has been reported otherwise: This latter opinion comes nearer the
Common Law, and the Statute Law of the Land: which Common Law, and Statute Law,
gives infants no power by Deed or Will to make any disposition of any thing
they have, before 21 years of age.

It seems also more reasonable, because infants at 18 years have, by the
intendment of Law, as they grow in years, more use of reason, to discern what
is fit for them to do and act. And for a mere stranger to sue in a Court of
Conscience, who pretends by such Wills of infants (the infant Husband being
ravished) against the will of the Kindred of the deceased, who died six years
sithence without issue (being 17 years of age) and that any part of his estate
should go that way by a course of Equity, unless the Law be for M. Erneley,
who paid not a penny with his Daughter, and who would have the Husband of his
Daughter bring him a Portion, by his pretended Title of an Executor of an
Executor of an Executor, viz. of an infant the Executor of another infant, the
Executor of a third person, seems very strange.

The said Licensed Historiographer of theirs, has published the 16 of this
present month of February, 1647, That I, out of a desire to keep the Estate,
have in a Suit in the Court of Wards, in my Cousins life time, pleaded to the
Jurisdiction of that Court. It is true, I did so: for I conceived that the
Estate would be unsafe in M. Erneley's hands, and I was willing to preserve it
till my young Cousin came to be of age, to dispose of it himself, according as
I was trusted.

The Law being, 32 H. 8. c. 45. 4 pars Instit. fol. 201.202.
that the Court of Wards had no Jurisdiction over the personal Estate (for
then the Marriage was paid for to the King, and all due to the King
ascertained.) It is true, that that was insisted upon as was just, for to
preserve the Estate from M. Erneley, who would have made what Account he
pleased to my Cousin at his full age: And this is the truth of that business.

That I declined not the Jurisdiction of the Chancerie, to keep an Estate in
my hand, appears, by my declining long sithence the Power of the House of
Commons to examine me; and the Reformers have all my Estate: What would M.
Erneley have, when they (the Reformers) have all already, or can have from me,
if he had any color?

I desire the good people of this City to observe what notorious Untruths
their Licensed Historiographers publish, to delude the people: In this
particular Case they publish;

First, That the Suit against me, is in the behalf of an Orphan: M. Erneley
(who is Plaintiff in their Court) is a Wiltshire Gentleman, at least of 50
years of age; there is their Orphan.

Secondly, That I made a speech to the people at the Hall door, that the
questioning of me for what I had done for the King, was illegal; and that the
Judges had no power to try me, the King being absent: Another notorious
untruth! For I protest to God, all that I said was only this, God preserve the
King, and the Laws.

Thirdly, it is said, That coming to the Bar, I stirred not my Hat: All the
Lawyers then at the Bar were uncovered; wherefore I held it a civilitie, to
be also uncovered: and so I was, as they all know.

Fourthly, That the Earl of Manchester should say, I received a great Estate
in Money of the Orphans Estate: As there is no truth in it, so it is most
untrue that the said Lord said so (as all men present can testify.) The truth
is they care not what they do what they say, what they swear, nor what they
write: Witness their Declaration of a prevailing party of the House of
Commons, of the 11 of this instant February; who contrary to the Oath of
Allegiance, the Oath of Supremacy, the Protestation, their solemn League and
Covenant, their Declarations, to make his Majesty a glorious King, fearful
to his Enemies, and beloved of his Subjects; and yet now, after 22 years, they
would insinuate to the people, that this King, whom they have so much
magnified, has poisoned his own Father.

Fifthly, it is a public notorious untruth* That the Parliament has published
a Declaration against the King, of the 11 of this instant February; whereas it
is well known to be the Declaration of the prevailing party of the House of
Commons only, without the Lords; and so they would make that prevailing party
only to be the Their licensed Historiographer, who publishes this, is called
their Kingdoms weekly Post, from Wednesday, Febr. to wednesday the 16 of
Febr. 1647.
Parliament.

Let the people of England believe their five Senses; how it was with them
seven years ago, and before, during his Majesty's Reign; how this Kingdom
abounded then with Peace, Plenty and Glory, to the admiration and envy of
other Nations: and now let them consider and judge by their Senses, sithence
those men (whom nothing would satisfy, but all Power both by Sea and Land,
which in truth is the Regalitie and Kingship, and which they call the Militia)
have usurped the said Power Regal, whether they have not by Impostures and
Delusions, diffused among the people by themselves and their Agents, brought a
flourishing Kingdom to the most deplorable condition it now is in.

To the end that this Kingdom may not utterly be ruined, God incline their
hearts to restore his Majesty, and for their own and their Posterities sake,
to receive from his Majesty an Act of Oblivion, a general Pardon, assurance
for the Arreres of the Souldierie, and meet satisfaction for tender Consciences.

DA. JENKINS.

FINIS.

