Parliament Physic FOR A SIN-SICK NATION.

OR, An Ordinance of Parliament explained, and applied to these diseased times.

CONTAINING A Catholicall Medicine for all Natures and Nations, but especially,
A General Receipt for all the sickly people in our English-Hospitall, and
Welch-Spittle, compounded after the art of the Apothecary, and according to
Parliament prescription, as hereafter follows.

Wherein thou may see as in an Urinal-glasse, the dangerous state of thy
English Mother, and the Genius of the Reforming Physicians, in seeking her
speedy cure, and lasting happiness, unto all succeeding Ages.

By Philo-Parl.

Imprimatur, JA: CRANFORD.

LONDON, Printed for E. BLACKMORE, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the Angel in S. Paul's Churchyard.

MDCXLIV.

To the True, yet Sickly-Church of England, Health and Peace, through Jesus
Christ our Lord and only Physician, Amen.
Most dear Mother,
I Cannot but acknowledge you to be the true Church of God, Matter est
Jerusalem. Lyran. Ecclesia est congregatio Israel. Rab. David Kimhi.
and the Spouse of Jesus Christ, when I consider these particulars following,

1. That the definition of a true Church does accord with you, which is this. A
true visible Church on earth, is a company of people called by God from Idols,
to the true Religion, and professing subjection to that call, 1 These 1.9, 10.
Jam. 1. ult. 2 Cor. 9.13.

2. When I consider that the Church of England has Christ only for her
foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. I confess wood, hay, and stubble has been laid upon
this foundation, yet salvation in mercy belongs to such as are the true sons
of it, verse 15. and do retain the foundation in faith and verity.

3. When I consider that Christ is your Head, Ephesians. 1.22.
and not Antichrist, though in circumstantials you do symbolize too much with
Rome.

4. When I consider that you have all the Essentials of a true Church, though
not all the Circumstantials; Ecclesia participans ipsam essentiam quae ipsi in
sua specie debetur, est vera Ecclesia.
We have the Word and Sacraments, like gold Oar mixed with some dust, but yet
it is called Gold, Job 28.6. Job was a true man, though he was full of biles,
and his friends knew him not, Job 2.7. The seven Churches in Asia are not
unchurched for their imperfections, Rev. 2.3. The Church of the Jews was a true
Church, in Essentials, when it was most corrupt, and Christ did not depart from
it, but did labor to better it.

5. When I consider that Christ has not given you a Bill of Divorcement as
yet, for he has still communion with us in his Ordinances, and is about to
refine you, and to enter into a nearer union with you: Hos. 2.16, 17. he is
taking away the names of Baalim out of your mouth, and pulling down the
relics of superstition.

6. When I consider your opposition in Fundamentals to the false Church, I
mean to Rome, that Synagogue of Satan.

7. When I consider of Gods extraordinary love to England, in affording us his
presence so long, even unto admiration, and in defending his people here as
much as in any Church in the whole Christian world; Exodus 33.13, 14, 15. Jacob
would not have kept company so much with Rachel, if she had not been his
beloved wife.

8. When I consider your fruitfulness, I cannot but take you to be the Spouse
of Christ, Cant. 1.16. Do but look on former Martyrs, and on the present
Parliament and Assembly of Ministers; yea do but behold those sons of our
English Church in New England, and who can but say our Mothers bed is green?
Cant. 1.16. Christ does lodge betwixt her breasts, ver. 13. even all our night.

9. When I consider the hatred of Antichrist, it convinces me that Rome and
England are different Churches, John 17.14.

10. When I consider your agreement with all the true Churches that have been
or are in Christendom, in Essentials, and how that all the Reformed Churches
in Europe have and do give the right hand of fellowship to England; I cannot
but stand and admire that any should be so ignorant and uncharitable, Mammae
indicant legem utramque scriptam, and v^e tenus acceptam. Rab David Kimhi.
as to deny the womb that bare them, and to despise the paps that gave them
suck.

Yet notwithstanding all this (dear Mother) I cannot but mourn when I behold
your present lamentable face in a new, yet true glass, made by such as have
not only skill in feeling your pulse, but also in viewing your physnomie.
Wherein though you seem to appear to me, in the shape of a true Church, and
living Spouse of Christ Jesus, yet I cannot deny, but that you are a corrupt
and sick one: (the Lord help you) Now in the grief of my soul, give leave to
a legitimate child of your own womb, to crave on his knee one courtesy at your
hands, it is but this, to accept and make use of a little spiritual physic
prepared for your necessity, and presented to your sin-sick, yet curable-selfe,
in this Galley pot, containing within it, Parliament physic for a sin-sick
Nation.

But lest you should deny me the common courtesy of indulgent mothers, who love
to hear their little ones prattle, and to read their scribbling notes, though
as full of blots and blurs, as Jacobs sheep of ring-strakes and spots, give me
leave to Apologize a little for my self.

First, because as the Ordinance of Parliament is new, seasonable, and
necessary; so the Explanation and Application of it must needs be something
answerable to the nature of it, though far short of a correspondent excellency.

Secondly, because your own Act in that Representative Body, does put me upon
this Kingdom-healing duty, which I cannot so fully and publicly perform, by
preaching only, as by writing also.

Thirdly, because its a thousand pities that such an Ordinance as this is,
should be buried in the grave of Oblivion, which may be also profitable for
succeeding Ages.

Lastly, because as I have appeared on the Stage, a friend to the Parliament of
England, according to my power; so I desire to go off no changeling, leaving
behind me, not only a testimony of my constant resolution to live and die with
such a pious, loyal, charitable, wise, and truly Honorable Parliament: but
also rendering a reason of my faith, and Anti-cavalier actions.

Now what remains (dear Mother) but prayers for an all-curing benediction on
this Catholicall medicine of Repentance, hereafter following: Except it may be
thought necessary to use one motive to persuade your appetite to long after
this metaphysicall potion, and that in regard of its transcendent excellency.

Many men have received gross receipts upon either a vain, or weak hope of a
short and imperfect health. And of these I will report a few, which the more
unpleasant they are to be uttered, the more fit they are, 1. To shame our
negligence in taking, 2. To persuade the speedy and greedy using this most
excellent parcel of Divine physic, compounded after Parliament prescription
for a sin-sick Nation.

The excrements of dogs and of swallows have been taken for the squinancy Gal.
M su. Ma^om. Arab. Avicen. treat. of the diseases of the throat.
. The dung of a wolf with white wine for the colic Avic Pe. Ap. li^. de
Venen. c. 4. Gal.
. Doves dung for the torment of the stone and bladder Plin. lib. 30. cap. 4.7.
New Ass dung, and also goose dung with white wine for the yellow jaundis
Arnol. 2. vin. lib. 2.
. The dung of horses, boares, sowes, bears, calves, hares, mice, for many
other griefs Plin. lib. 28. cap. 14.
. And generally the dung of all beasts is good for one distemper or another
Paul. Agine^. lib. 7.
.

Also Physicians prescribe the urine of a boar Plin. lib. 28. cap. 15.
, of an asse-colt Plin. lib. 28. cap. 10.
, and of diverse other beasts for several uses Gal. cap. 2.
.

The sweat and filth of the cares both of men and diverse beasts Gal Simp. l.
10. Plin. l. 28 c. 4.
, spittle Gal. dict. l. 10
, and some other excrements of men and women not fit to be named Gal. ibid.
.

Furthermore, they have prescribed the foame of horses and of boars Plin. l.
28. c 10
. Hoofs of goats and asses Gal. Simp. l. 10.
. The brains of mice, and vomit of dogs Plin. lib 30. cap. 11.
. A Vulture fatted with man's flesh Plin. lib. 30. cap. 10.
A Viper roasted like a pig Plin. lib. 30. c 6.13.
. Also they have prescribed red slies Plin. lib. 30. cap. 12.
, and worms of the putrefaction of Vipers Marcel. c. 6. Argumentum a minore.
, and such as breed in rotten trees. And many of other sorts, any of which, a
man would not give a horse, were it not for health sake.

Now the strength of the Argument lies thus. If men will take such base
materials (as I am ashamed to write in clean paper, and thou may blush to
read) and that only for the regaining of a little bodily health and ease: how
much more should you (sick mother) be persuaded to take the potion of
Repentance, which is most precious and healthful for the soul, as appears
in the Ordinance, and the explanation thereof?

Say not that a physical life is a miserable life, Medice vivere est misere
vivere. Dissicilia quae pul^bra.
a melancholy and painful life; for you know that sweet meat must have sour
sauce. Gainful physic is always painful. Its true, Repentance will make you
weep a while, while it is working, but it will make you merry for ever and a
day, Psalm. 16. Mat. 5. after it has done working. Though it be bitter in the
taste, consider bitter physic is better then sweet poison. Consider also that
its usual to take unpleasant pills, to sweeten life, though they be hurtful to
all the parts of the body, in one regard or other Mes^e. lib. 2. Intent. 2 Sum.
1 cap. 1. can. 2.
, and that chiefly by two means: 1. By evacuating the healthful humors
together with the hurtful. 2. By affecting the parts, with a quality contrary
to nature Mes. lib. 1. de virib. cord. tract. 2. c. 2.
. There is no physic but has some poison in it, and a destroying power in
some part of it Aver. 5. Collicen. Avicen. in 4. prim. Gal. Simp. l. 4.
. Hereupon Plutarch affirms, that they are so far from purging the body, that
they had need themselves to be purged, because they breed grosnesse and
hardness in the body Avenzoar li. T^isi tract. 9. cap. 8.
. Hereupon diverse Physicians have settled an opinion, that its the best physic
to take no physic at all.

But its not so with this Parliamentary physic, as hereafter shall appear, if
it shall please your wisdom to cast an impartial eye, and benign aspect on
this my Primrose composition; the which, with the most humble addresses of a
self-curing child, I present to your charitable hands, both for acceptance and
protection in these physick-spilling, and Physitian-contemning dog-dayes. Think
not (dear Mother) that all the aspersions which are cast on your first borne,
and the Glory of your sanctified womb, I mean the Parliament and Synod now
assembled, or on me your Apothecary-son, are true, or likely to be so.
Declaration and Vind cation of John Pym Esquire. p. 4.
To put all out of doubt, I will conclude with that great Orator,
State-Physitian, and Patriot of his Country, Cicero Pym, whose words are these.
How unlikely this is, and improbable, that I have promoted and fomented the
differences and schisms now abounding in the English Church, shall to every
indifferent man be rendered perspicuous; For that I am, and ever was, and so
will dye, a faithful son of the protestant Religion, without having the least
relation in my belief, to those gross errors, of Anabaptisme, And not only
of the Protestant profession.
and Brownisme, and the like, every man that has any acquaintance with my
conversation, can bear me righteous witness: These being but aspersions cast
upon me, by some of the discontented Clergy, and their fautours and abettors.

Your dutiful son, and Health-wishing Apothecary, N. J.

To the Honorable Lady, the Lady DUDLY, Widow of the late Lord DUDLY, and her
pious Daughter the Lady Hobart, wife to the Valiant Colonel of Horse and Foot,
Sir Miles Hobart, and Knight of the Bath; Health, and Peace through Christ
Jesus, the Prince of Peace.
Madams,
WEre I not in awe of your Humility, which though it self publishes the glory
of your graces, yet commands me silence, I might have given the world a taste of
that, which in these holinesse-contemning days would not have been relished,
but distasted, yet thus much I am constrained to say, that I cannot but look on
you both, as an honor each to the other, the Mother to the Daughter and the
Daughter to the Mother, and both as the Rachels of the true Church of God, and
beautiful spouse of Christ, who do daily preach by example, what in this
Manual I have written with my pen: So that if any would know, what kind of
Christians I would have in this sickly season, let them cast their eyes on your
virtues, as the best pictures I can draw, to hold out my meaning to the world.
Such is your piety, mixed with prudence and humility, that you deserve a never
dying name amongst those honorable women, (in the sacred Heraldry) which
believed also, and received the word with all readiness of mind, Acts. 17.12.
and searched the Scriptures daily, whether things were so; Pious poverty is a
head of gold on feet of clay, but your devout Nobility is like Apples of gold
in pictures of silver. Its honor upon honor, when terrene honor is gilt with
celestial graces: amongst which let me name (without flattery) these two as
most honorable and seasonable, your Christian Sympathy and Religion-adorning
humility. The maine ground, why I am so bold to present this little Treatise
(called Parliament physic for a sin-sick Nation) to your Ladyships, is,
because you are the exemplary pieces of my following discourse, hoping that you
will be pleased to favor that draught which is so like your noble selves,
whose daily task it is, not only to help forward a national reformation, but
also, and that in the first place, a personal, in your sin-sick selves, both
which you shall find urged in this Treatise, dear Ladies, if this poor
tribute of my Physical studies may but kiss your hands, as a sacrifice
offered by your servant, or as a weakness that stands in need of your
protection (for I look to be censured as a State Emperick) I shall acknowledge
my self not only much honored, but also secured, at a distance, from my Noble
Colonel, and much honored Governor of Lincoln, under whose Buckler, many of
these truths have been taught by me, and manfully defended by himself, both by
strength of argument, and dint of sword: for whose fidelity, fortitude and good
success, not only you and yours, but also the Church of God have cause, as to
pray, so to praise the Lord of Hosts, who has made him an instrument of much
good in the Parliament service, both to King and Kingdom. Much might be said in
way of commendation, but lest my words might seem to know flattery, I will
conclude with a word of exhortation; Trust God with Sir Miles Hobart abroad,
and take a sweet nap in the lap of Providence at home, for Divinity and
experience say, that no bullet can touch him; without a Divine commission. For
whom I shall always pray, and rest,

Your humble and devoted servant Nathaniell Ioceline.

Fifteen APHORISMS handled in this TREATISE.
1 The Parliament of England is a College of State-Physitians, Page 1 2
Impenitencie is a Nation destroying sickness. page 14 3 Humility prepares the
sin-sick patient to receive the bitter potion of Repentance. page 22 4
Possibility of a cure does sweeten the most bitter physic of Repentance. page
28 5 England is a sin-sick Nation, and a Parliament-Patient. page 37 6
Repentance is only physic to cure a sin-sick Nation. page 43 7 Confession is
the sin vomiting part of Repentance. page 57 8 Humiliation in the
soule-afflicting, and heart-fainting part of Repentance. page 63 9 Reformation
is the restoring part of Repentance. page 70 10 The potion of Repentance is to
be taken without delay. page 76 11 Englands sins, are Englands diseases. page
79 12 Ministers are to behave themselves like Apothecaries. page 84 13 The
Temple of God in every parish, is to be like an Apothecary shop. page 88 14 The
bitter potion of true Repentance does bring forth the sweet fruits, and
pleasing effects of peace, glory, and prosperity. page 92 15 Parliament physic
is alluring physic. page 97
The Authors Sacrifice.
O Lord my God, for ENGLAND I emplore,
Which in thy wrath thou now have wounded sore;
Thy Will be done, Lord we submit;
For Mercy yet, Lord, make us fit.
the Cause is just, we do confess,
Its only sin that breeds distress,
Which in England is now so rife,
That it can hardly look for life.
Yet thou have left to nations sick,
Parliaments, and their Physic,
Which is REPENTANCE Personal,
And REFORMATION National:
Which physic is compounded in this book,
LORD bless it to the sick that in it look.
Psalm. 65.2. AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament,
Exhorting all his Majesty's good Subjects in the Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales to the duty of Repentance (as the only remedy for their
present calamities) with an earnest confession, and deep Humiliation, for all
particular and National sins, that so at length we may obtain a firm and
happy peace both with God and Man.

To be used privately in Families, but especially publicly in Congregations.

Die Mercurii. 15. Feb. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, that this Ordinance shall be forthwith Printed and published, and
read in all parish Churches and Chapels throughout the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, by the Parsons, Vicars, and Curates of the same.

John Brown Cler. Parl. LONDON, Feb. 16. Printed for John Wright in the
Old Bailey. 1642.

AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament. The Ordinance
divided into 9 parts, by these 9 Letters, PARLEM^NT

Die Mercurii. 15. Feb. 1642. Part 1. P.

THat flourishing Kingdoms have been ruined by impenitent going on in a course
of sinning, the sacred story does plainly tell us; and how near to such a
ruin our sinful Nation now is, the present lamentable face of it (...) too
apparently show. And though we should feel the heavy strokes of God yet seven
times more, Part 2. A.
it is our duty to accept the punishment of our iniquity, and to say, Righteous
art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments.

Yet because the Lord who is just, is also merciful, and in his infinite mercy
has I (...) the excellent and succesfull remedy of Repentance, to Nations
brought near (...) the gates of destruction and despair; O let not England be
negligent in (...) application of it; Humble address^s of a penitent people to
a merciful God have prev^iled with him. They prevailed for Ninev^h when the
sentence seemed to be gone out against her, and may also prevail for England.

It is therefore thought most necessary by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
that all his Majesty's subjects in this kingdom of England, be excited and
stirred up, Part 3. R. Part 4. L. Part 5. E.
speedily to lay hold upon this only and unfailing remedy of Repentance,
tr^^ly acknowledging and heartily bewailing, even with deepest hum^liation,
godly sorrow and detestation, secretly and in families, but especially
publicly in congregations, both their own personal sins, and chiefly those
sins that are and have been the sins of this Nation: a confession of National
sins being most agreeable to the National judgments under which the land
groans, and most likely to be effectual for the removing of them.

Neither ought this confession to be slight or light, when there is so heavy a
weight of sins, Part 6. M.
infinite in number and heinous in nature, that lies upon this Nation.

Such are, the high contempt of Gods holy Ordinances, and of holiness it self,
Gross and affected ignorance, under the glorious light of the Gospel clearly
shining among us, Unfruitfulnesse under the precious means of grace,
Ingratitude for mercies, Incorrigiblenesse under judgments, Multitudes of
oaths, And blasphemies, Wicked prophanations of the Lords day, by sports and
gamings, formerly encouraged even by authority, All sorts of uncleanness,
Luxury and excess in eating and drinking, Vanity, Pride, And Prodigality in
apparel, Envy, Contention, and unnartural divisions, Oppression, Fraud, And
violence.

From diverse of which sins and many other, not one person throughout the whole
Nation, can say that he is wholly free; but all must confess that they have
contributed toward the great stock of National sins, and so have increased the
treasure of wrath, against these days of wrath; And therefore since, according
to the language of the Holy Ghost, we are a sinful Nation and laden with
in-quity, and that from the sole of ^he foot, to the head, there is no
soundness in us, we may justly expect the desolations that are denounced
against so great and general a corruption.

And as it is our d^^y to humble our selves, and to give glory to God, the f^^r
cher of all hearts, by confessing all sins; So ough we to be affected and
humbled with deepest sense of sorrow, for those most crying sins which now we
find by too sad experience to have a more immediate influence upon the
destruction of a Kingdom: Some of which are Idolatry and Bloodshed.

That of Idola^ry as it was the sin of our Ancestors, so it is the spreading
sin of these latter days, while by a general connivence, and almost
toleration, it has been several ways fomented and encouraged; the grievous
effects whereof this kingdom; now begins to feel, from multitudes of armed
Papists, and their abettors. And the kingdom of Ireland far more heavily has
felt, being brought almost to utter ruin, by the intestine wars of Romish
Idolaters.

And for that o her crying and cruel sin of bloodshed that calls aloud for
vengeance, (besides many murders not expiated, and the blood-guilty pardoned)
did it not go hand in hand with that abominable Idol of the Mass in the days
of Queen Mary, and some of her predecessors, when many hundreds of dear
Martyrs and Saints of God, lost their precious lives in flames and prisons? And
though several acts by which that innocent blood was shed have been repealed
by Parliament, yet to this very day was never ordained such a solemn,
public, and National acknowledgment of this sin, as might appease the wrath
of that Jealous God, against whom, and against whose people, with so high a
hand it was committed.

Now that all the sin and misery of this polluted and afflicted Nation, may be
bitterly sorrowed for, with such grief of heart, and preparedness for a
through Reformation, as God may be pleased graciously to accept, Its required
and ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, Part 7. E.
that every Minister and Preacher of Gods word in the Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales, in their several Auditories and Congregations, especially
upon the fast days, Part 8. N.
shall most earnestly persuade, and inculcate the constant practice of this
public acknowledgment, and deep humiliaton, for these and all our national and
crying sins, and likewise the necessity of a personal and national Reformation,
and shall publish this Ordinance concerning the same.

That so at length we may obtain a firm and happy peace, both with God and
Man.

That glory may dwell in our Land, Part 9. T.
and the prosperity of the Gospel with all the privileges accompanying it, may
crown this Nation unto all succeeding ages.

The parts In this Parliament Physic for a sin-sick Nation, consider these
parts. As appears in 1. The Physicians. The Lords and Commons. P 2. A
Preparative for this physic. Its a discovery of the necessity, goodness of
this physic, and possibility of a cure. A 3. The Patients. They are 1. the
Kingdom of England, and the Dominion of Wales. R 4. The Physic it self. Its
Repentance, which is divided into 3. parts. 1. Confession, 2. Humiliation, 3.
Reformation. L 5. The time when it is to be taken. Its speedily. E 6. The
maladies or distempers of the Nation. They are infinite in number, and heinous
in nature, amongst which 20. are nominated as chief. M 7. The Apothecaries who
are to compound this physic. They are all Ministers and Preachers in the
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales. E 8. The shops, where this National
physic is to be had. Its to be had in public Auditories and Congregations. N
9. The ends, why this physic is prescribed. They are three, as 1. Peace with
God and man, 2. Glory, 3. the prosperity of the Gospel for afterward. T 10.
The motives to take this physic. They are many, secretly contained in this
Ordinance, as hereafter by Gods assistance and your gentle patience, may more
clearly appear.

PARLIAMENT PHYSIC for a Sin-sick Nation.
THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. The Physicians are the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
IN explaining and applying the ten forenamed parts of the late Parliament and
Physical Ordinance, I purpose (God assisting) to observe three things, that I
may avoid confusednesse, tediousness, and unprofitablenesse. The first is
Order; the second is Brevity; the third is Plainness; and therefore after the
example of Hippocrates, I intend to sum up the chief Doctrinall Points, into
brief Aphorisms, or general Heads in Evangelicall Physic, and then apply
them to every sin-sick member, as may be most suitable to the work in hand,
which is a National cure; which thing is much desired by that great College
of Physicians, and by me an unworthy and unskilful, yet a well-willing
Apothecary to that most Honorable and Nation-curing Assembly.

APHORISM I. The Parliament of England is a College of State-Physitians.
It will be needless to spend much time in the proof of this point, because so
much has been lately written concerning it, Master Pryn. Master Bridge.
as may satisfy any rational man, that will but seriously, and without
prejudice, Polyd Virg. an Italian, Archdeacon of wels, in Ang hist. l. 11 p.
188. Hen. (...).
study the point. Yet give me leave to add one testimony out of an impartial
Historian, who lived long before these disputing, and truth gainsaying times,
and was as little a friend to a Reforming Parliament, as any of his function
are in these times.

My Author says, that from the reign of Henry the first, the Parliament of
England had such a lawful and firm power conferred upon it, that whatsoever
was to be consulted on, tending to the well-governing and preservation of the
Kingdom, that was to be referred to that Council. Moreover he says, that if
any thing were either decreed or done by the command of King or people, all
that was accounted as nothing, of no force, except it were approved on by the
authority of the parliament. Furthermore he says, That if any thing were to be
taken from, or added to the ancient Statutes, that ought to be done by the
sentence of the Council. Not to be tedious, he affirms, That nothing could
be established, but what the major part of both Houses (then sitting) did like
of. Something else he says, which I leave to thy own private examination, and
serious meditation. From whence collect these Parliament Positions, making good
the forenamed Aphorism, and present practice.

1. Position. That Parliament power is an ancient power. -- Ab Henrico id
institutum jure manasse dici possit. Reges ante haec tempora, non consuevisse
populi conventum consultandi gratia, nisi perraro, facere.

2. Position. That Parliament power is a loyal and legal power. -- Ab Henrico
id institutum jure dici possit. Not by a schismatic and disloyal faction,
but by Regal Authority it was appointed.

3. Position. That it is a firm and well rooted power. -- Quod tam altis
defixum, uti etiam nunc, radicibus semper stetit.

4. Position. That Parliament power is a large and universal power. -- Vt
deinceps quicquid ad Rempublicam been gerendam, ejusque conservationem,
deliberandum foret, illud ad conciliu^ referretur.

5. Position. Parliament power is a supreme power. -- Et si quid aut Regis,
populive jussu decretum factumque esset, Bodinus de Repub. lib. 7. c. 8.
id totum pro nihilo haberetur, nisi ejusmodi concilii autoritate foret
comprobatum.

6. Position. Parliament power is a selected power. -- Ac ne imperitae vulgi
multitudinis judicio, consilium impediretur, certa lege exceptu^ suit a
principio, qui ex sacerdotum coetu, quive, quotve ex reliquo populo vocari
deberent ad concilium.

7. Position. Parliament power, it is a Statute-changing, and a Law-making
power. -- Vt ibi si quid ex antiquis institutis, legibusve tollendum, ac rursus
condendum sit, id de conciliisententia fiat.

8. Position. Parliament power is a King-profiting, and a people-benefiting
power. -- Cumenim de principum pariter atque caeteri populi commodo in concilio
agatur.

9. Position. Parliament power, is an impartial, equal power. -- De principum
pariter, atque caeteri populi commodo.

10. Position. Parliament power is a free speaking, and serious consulting
power. -- Aequa unicuique potestas loquendi fiat; alteri ab alteris disjuncti
consulant.

11. Position. Parliament power is a major part consenting power. -- Etenim
nihil ratum habetur nisi quod major pars utriusque consessus senserit, idque
rex comprobarit.

12. Position. Parliament power is inherent and adherent to both Houses sitting
together. -- Major pars utriusque consessus, etc.

This Aphorism agrees with Parliament practice in former ages. Ro^. Parl. 11.
Rich 2
In Richard the seconds time, all the Lords and the Commons there assembled,
seeing the loss of the King and Kingdom eminent, in regard of many perils and
mischiefs in the Kingdom, because the King was departed from the Council of
the Kingdom, and hearkened wholly to the counsel of Alexander Archbishop of
York, Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pool, Earl of Suffolk,
Robert Tressilian ^alse Justice, and Nicholas Brembre false Knight,
Malefafactors and Traitors: remonstrated unto the King at full, how that he was
ill governed, counseled and carried a way by the aforesaid Traitors and
Malefactors, declaring unto him their wicked conditions, and required him most
humbly as his loyal Subjects, for the safety of him, and of his whole
Kingdom, to put from him the aforesaid Malefactors and Traitors, and that
hereafter he would follow the wis^, loyal, and discreet men of his Kingdom.
And their reason was good, Votes of both House, Die Ven. 20. May. 1642.
(and showing the truth of this Aphorism) which was this, because they knew no
other remedy (or physic) to provide for the safety of the King and Kingdom,
being there withal betrusted.

King Richard the second did afterward acknowledge this his fault, P l. V^^g
A^g. ^^st l. 2 c. R^^n. ^ P 47.
and mis-guidance by his evil Counselors; and this he did not only privately
to Duke Henry, to whom afterward he willingly resigned his Crown, ^en^ ocato
^^ Tar^^m (...): pum con^^l^o.
but also publicly in the Tower, to a Council of Princes called thither.
Moreover, this was done willingly, and of his own accord, as the same Author
writes.

The judgment of this Parliament in condemning the forenamed evil
Counselors, 11 Rich 2. c. 3. 1 Hen. 4. c. 3, 4. In the old printed Stat.
as Traitors and Malefactors, was confirmed by two Acts of Parliaments
afterward; to wit, in Rich. 2. and Hen. 4. their times.

Finally, if any desire to know how the Parliament of England came first to
have such power, as tends to the health and wealth of the whole Realm, let
him but study the point made plain by many late Writers, and he shall find
it arises from the constitution of our mixed Monarchy, both by the consent of
King and people in the days of old. This is in part proved by the first
Position before set down, collected out of Pol. Virg. but more fully and
certainly by a remonstrance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
concerning Hull. Declaration concerning Hull May. 21 1642.


Where you shall find, that as the Kingdom is entrusted to the Kings of
England, for the good and safety, and best advantage thereof, and as this trust
is for the use of the Kingdom; so ought it to be managed by the advice of the
Houses of Parliament, Page 10.
whom the Kingdom has trusted for that purpose, it being their duty, to see it
be discharged according to the condition and true intent thereof, and as much
as in them lies, by all possible means, to prevent the contrary.

This Parl. power is not only justified by the Fundamental Laws of our
Kingdom, Calv. Inst. l. 1. c. 20 Christ ^p. Goodman de Obed. page 119. Knox
appel. fol. 56. Beza. Conf^ss. page 216. Buchan. Re-ruin Scot. l. 17. p. 590.
Discipl. Eccl. from Rochel, fol. 105. Franc. Gal. pa 48. Jun. d^ jur. Magist.
p. 306. Eusebius. Phylad. Dialog. 2. p. 57 Vind. cont. tyran. page 206. Dan.
Chist. pol l. 3. c. 6. Cartw. Dud. Fen. sacra Theol. l. 5. c. 13 Herm. Renech.
on Psalm. 1.
but also by the politic principles of Religion, as appears by the general
consent of Modern Divines, since the Reformation: who agree in this position,
that the Popular Magistrates are appointed to Moderate the wills of Princes, in
some cases. To quote all the sentences of these Learned and Orthodox Authors
would be too tedious, and therefore I will conclude with the determination of
Learned Doctor Willet on the 13. Chapter to the Romans, page 593. God forbid
that the Church and Commonwealth should be left without remedy, (the former
conditions observed) when either havoc is made of the Commonwealth, or of the
Church and Religion.

CHAP. II. Application of this Aphorism.
GIve me leave to set thy thoughts right concerning the power of English
Parliaments, against which too many dispute, and at which too too many kick
and spurn, as they did against Righteous Lot, who did no more then was lawful,
for the preservation of the innocent, in case of necessity. Genesis 19.9. Def. of
the Apol. page 52^. part 6.
Do but consult with Learned and Reverend Jewel, an Orthodox and pious Bishop
in his time, and he will tell thee (though thou art an Anti-parliament Bishop)
as he did thy old friend Master Harding, that great is the Authority of an
English Parliment.

His words are these.

Whereas ye call the Doctrine of Christ, that now by Gods great mercy, and to
your grief, is universally and freely preached, A Parliament Religion, and A
Parliament Gospel, (for such sobriety becomes you well, and may stand you in
stead when learning fails) ye might have remembered that Christ himself at
the beginning, was universally received, and honored through this Realm, by
assent of Parliament. And further, that without Parliament, your Pope himself
was never received, no not in the late time of Queen Mary.

Yea, and even then, his Holiness was clogged with Parliament conditions,
that, Whatsoever had been determined in Parliament, and was not repealed, were
it never so contrary to his Will and Canons, should remain still inviolable,
and stand in force: otherwise his Holiness had gone home again. Such, Master
Harding, is the Authority of Parliament. Verily if Parliaments of Realms be no
Parliaments, then will your Pope be no Pope, therefore as you now call the
truth of God, which we now profess, a Parliament Religion, and a Parliament
Gospel, even so with like sobriety and gravity of speech, ye might have said,
Our Fathers in old time had a Parliament Christ: And your late fathers and
brethren had of late in the time of Queen Mary, a Parliament faith, a
Parliament Mass, and a Parliament Pope.

I pray what is the English of all this, P^lyd. Virgil Angl. histor. l. 11. p
188. Hen 1.
but the sense and meaning of that which Polydor Virgil said long ago, in his
History concerning Henry the first, and his great Council of State: whose
words are these in English. After the French custom, they called the Council,
in their usual dialect, a Parliament: which every King in the beginning of his
reign was wont to call, that therein, if any thing either in the old Statutes
or Laws, were to be taken away, or added again, it should be done by the
judgment of that Senate: and that afterward, as often as the State of the
Kingdom required (Suo arbitratu) he called another Assembly.

I might write down the first conclusion of the Council of Basil, in the time
of Hen. 6. but it would be too tedious, thou may read it at large in the
Acts and Monuments of our Church, where thou shall find, that as the authority
of a General Council is above the Pope, so the authority of a General
Assembly of a Kingdom, is above the King, who is to be subject to Laws,
according to the first institution of Kingly government in the whole world.

And therefore in the judgment of that Council, Fox p. 684. Hen. 6. printed
Anno 1576.
all such are to be esteemed as flatterers, who attribute so ample and large
authority unto Kings, that they will not have them bound under any Laws: for
such as so do say, talk otherwise then they think.

I cannot omit the determination and plain English of a most skillful Lawyer
in his time, which is this. There is no King, Carpzorius de Capitulatione
Caesarea. cap. 1.
or chief Commander in the whole Christian world, whose power may not be
restrained by the Orders and Degrees of a Commonwealth, by virtue of their
Compact and Agreement at first.

Such as would cast our government into the mould of the Jewish Monarchy, cast
it into a bounded mould, Jun. Tremel. in loc. S^c volo, sic ^ubeo, violentum
genus dom^nandi est, and tyrannicum, neque unquam potest esse diuturnum. Pet.
Martyr. 2 Samuel 5.3. Intrum est foedus, ut dominatio esset. Pia. Justa. Clemens
ut rex populum, secundum jura ac leges gubernaret, populus autem ei pareret.
Mart. in loc.
and stinted jurisdiction. 2 Samuel 5.3. The Elders of Israel and David made a
conditional Covenant.

David's government was not arbitrary.

An Arbitrary Government, is not only violent, but also tyrannical, and
cannot be perpetual, and therefore Kings ought always to have before their
eyes that great charter Deuteronomy. 17. for the law of God is to be the Schoole-dame
of Princes, and their line and rule, by which if they square all their counsels
and actions, they shall not err, and therefore David in the 101. Psalm. did
willingly oblige and bind himself to three things. 1. that his government
should be pious, 2. just, 3. merciful, as appears plainly in that psalm:
Also you shall find the same confirmed 2 Kings 11.17. which was, that the King
should govern the people, according to Laws and Statutes, and that they should
obey him so commanding.

This was not says the same author, a new Covenant, but the renovation of the
old, which Athaliah had broken.

They that write concerning the Sanhedrin, Joseph. l. 4 c. 17
the highest Court amongst the Jews, Numb. 11.16. which continued until the
time of Herod, who put it down to set up a Tyrannical government of his own:
make it differ very little from our English Parliament.

First, Mos^s Kot^ (...)
in regard of the number, it was the fullest Court, there were 70 Elders in it,
and the Nas^or Prince, did sit in the midst of the half circle.

Secondly, in regard of the place, it was in the chief City, the Metropolis of
the Kingdom, Jerusalem.

Thirdly, (...) N^m (...)
in regard of their Election, there were 6 chosen out of every tribe, except
out of the tribe of Levi, out of which only 4. were elected.

Fourthly, in regard of their power, which was very great. 1. Galatin. l 4. c.
5.
There was no Appeal from this Court. 2. Its authority continued in the
vacancy. 3. The authority of the Prince did not infringe the power of this
Court.

Lastly, (...) ^^op H^^od. Sabellicu^ and Grin^ston in the lives (...), Domit
an, (...).
they that would cast our Government into the mould of the ancient Roman
Monarchy, will miss of their much desired Boundlesnesse, and absolute
Monarchy: for it plainly appears by Roman Histories; That the Roman Senate
did not only elect and confirm their Emperors, but did also often times
exercise a judiciary power over them, even beyond coertion or restraint.

The Emperors themselves were willing with it, many of them; H^c p^o me u^e e,
si justa ^ape a (...); contra me, si in^usta.
and therefore Dion prayseth Trajan the Emperor, because when he set a Tribune
over the Praetours, and put a sword into his hand, he said to him after this
manner; Use this sword for me, so long as I rule well; but use it against me,
if I command unjust things.

Therefore the Emperor promises, that he will do nothing (Contra jus)
contrary to Law and Equity, Imperator in ^od. lib 4.
that so his decrees may be of force in the places of judicature; and that they
ought to be of no force, if it be apparent that they swerve from the right line
of Justice.

Moreover he says, Vt revera mapus imperio est.
that the power of the Roman Empire does so much depend on the authority of the
Law, that its greater then the Empire.

Its true the Christians then did choose rather to fly or suffer, then to
resist, and that upon good grounds as its conjectured.

First, because they were private men, not Senators.

Secondly, Privati grassatores. Par.
because those Emperors did not against their own and known Laws, so that
they were not private assaulters.

Thirdly, because they might have done themselves much hurt in not being able
to resist them being far less in number then the unconverted Romans, and
seeing they had not a sufficient Militia amongst them: for though Eusebius
says, Lib. 8. cap. 11.
a whole City of Phrygia was burnt, professing Christianity without resistance;
and that twenty thousand Martyrs were burnt in a Temple; yet we find not that
they were fitted for their own defense. Its otherwise now, as appears by
Parliament Declarations, and men in Arms. Blessed be God for the Militia of
the Kingdom.

Think not this Parliament and National Defense, to be either a new trick, or
an unjustified shift in case of public necessity.

First, it is not a new trick. Polydor Virgill testifies, that when Edward the
Confessor had extracted a few, and those most healthful Laws, out of the old
Laws of the Britains, P^l. Virg. Ang hist. l. 8.
Saxons, and Danes; he established them, both for his own use, as also for the
benefit of his people, whose health and welfare he labored as his own.

But when the Normans came in, then new Lords, new Laws. Velut optimam partem
vitae, repetiverunt armis.
But what did the people now? they did not only complain that they had lost
their Laws, (which they called the Common Laws) but they did fight for them,
as for the best blood in their politic body, the veins of the Kingdom: which
thing my Author does not condemn.

Many are the examples in History of Subjects that have defended themselves in
all ages, against the assaults, oppressions, and groundless wars of misled
Princes; which act of self-defence the very Heathens have justified; and
Protestants also, Isocra. page 108 Cicer. pro Mil. Cicero Tusc. Quaest. 1, 2.
not only by the Laws of nature, but also by the Law of God and Man.

Our own domestic examples of the long continued Barons wars are not unknown
to the learned, who in King John's time, King Hen. 3. Edward the 2. and Rich. 2.
reigns, took up Arms against these Princes, for the just defense,
preservation, and establishment of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom,
Math. Paris. Holins Walsingh. Speed, stow, Math. Westminster. Fab.
even in times of Popery, which act of theirs has been justified by the
learned both in Law and Divinity long since.

By means whereof our Kingdom has quietly enjoyed those Laws and Liberties,
which otherwise had been long ago utterly lost, and the Kingdom with them.

From all which discourse, I hope it will clearly appear to all the world,
that the present Parliament of England has but discharged that trust which
belongs to it, as that great College of State-Physicians, which under the
great Jehovah that heals Israel, Exodus 15.26. is our most honorable and best
Apothecary. As also, that according to their own most religious and seasonable
protestation, they have not invaded that property which belongs to the Crown
of England, whiles they have been forced to stand on their own guard, in
laboring and sweating out the Kingdoms health and prosperity.

I am not ignorant that some object against the present Parliamentary
proceedings, U^ aliquando essetis severi judices, adhib^ndo medicinam
reipublicae Cicer. pro Sest.
which are extraordinary in many particulars, I confess, yet I cannot be so
blind as not to see a more then an ordinary necessity of new and almost
desperate cures, for a most strangely-distemperd Nation.

All that has been or can be said to any purpose, in way of opposition by the
most impatient patient, may be reduced into these five objections. As 1. That
all that is done is against the Law of God. 2. Against the Law of Nature. 3.
Against the Law of Nations. 4. Against the prerogatives of Christian Princes. 5
Lastly, against the practice of the primitive Church.

But all these and more objections, are in part, (though not so sully as might
be) answered in the Explication and Application of this present Aphorism, and
in the latter end of this book, in the first motive to repentance.

The Parliament of England is a College of State Physicians.

Now having by Gods assistance and your gentle patience set your judgment
right in these irregular days, wherein men labor to divide and to keep at a
distance, what God and our Ancestors have joined together, in the happy estate
of a mixed Monarchy, give me leave to end this Aphorism by way of exhortation,
as well as information, both are equally necessary in ignorant and backward
times.

In the first place, Most Honorable Senators, I cannot but thankfully
acknowledge you the repairers of our breaches, the restorers of paths to dwell
in, and the Saviors (next under God) of our almost ruined Church and State;
And I pray the great Moderatour of the Universe, who has miraculously
congregated, preserved, directed, and prospered your honorable Assembly
hitherto, still so to go along with you in all your ways, as that all your
consultations may be crowned with a succesfull issue, so that the present times
and all succeeding ages, may deservedly call your Honors the raisers up of the
foundations of many generations. Yet withal, I humbly crave (most sacred
Sanhedrin) a license from your highest Court of justice, to put your college
of State Physicians, for ever in mind but of one old saying, not altogether
unnecessary, or unbesuiting your most sublime contemplations for the
publick-weale of this sin-sicke Nation, which is, and it is but this, Physician
heal thy self, take your own physic of repentance, Prove. 16.7. When the
ways of a man please God, he will also make his enemies at peace with him.
Piis hosts conciliantur. Ludo. Lavat.
which is an only remedy for your Parliament distractions, as well as for our
Country calamities; and I verily believe, though I thus speak, that many of
you did not only intend this Ordinance for your brethren, but also for your
own selves, and have been mindful to give the whole Kingdom a good example in
the first place: go on and perfect your repentance, and God (the only
peacemaker) will perfect your peace, for we are sure that repentance does
please God. Pro. 16.7.

In the next place, give care O England to Solomon's advice, Amici veteres non
sunt deserendi.
who was the Prince of peace in his days, Prove. 17.10. Thine own friend, and
thy fathers friend forsake not: That is, forsake not such as have deserved well
of us, and our forefathers, when they come into danger and want our help, for
it is ingratitude to them, Magnus thesaurus est amicus bonus, praesertim quem
sidum esse dicitur, non convictu perspeximus. Lud. Lavat.
and dangerous for a Kingdom. A true friend is a Magazine of much good;
suppose thy old friend has some defects, this new friend may prove more
defective; it is not with a friend as with a garment, or a ship, the newer the
better, this Rehoboam Solomon's son found to be too true for his profit, 1 Kings
12.6. etc. when he forsook the counsel of the old men, (or Sanhedrin) that had
stood before his father to give advice, and did choose and follow the counsel
of young men, a cabinet counsel, against the great Senate, Graves and antiqui
Senatores. Pet. Mart. Et a conciliis fuerant. Jun.
which then was like our Parliament now in many regards, as you have heard
before; do but read this chapter through and it will give thee a good hint for
these Parliament-forsaking times. All the world knows, and England cannot but
bear witness, that Englands Parliament, has been Englands friend, many
generations, Jewel def. Apo. part 6. p. 522.
even in the time of Popery, yea even then the Pope his holiness was clogged
with Parliament Conditions. And why we should now think, that the Papists will
rather defend the Protestant Religion in England, then the reformed and
reforming Parliament now sitting, Monstrum horrendum Britannieum.
to me is no little wonder: diverse come over into this Island to see strange
sights, I think there is none like this new wonder which many would persuade
England and the world to believe, in these days; to wit, That a Delinquent and
Popish Army should fight for the due execution of the strict Laws of the
Kingdom, and the maintenance of the Protestant Religion, in England, yea, and
that against such a parliament, as I am persuaded, is the glory of the
Christian world. Ovid never fained such a Metamorphosis, and the Legend of lies
never fabled its like. Certainly this is one of Satan's lying wonders, 2 These.
2.9. who is a great friend to Antichrist, (...) en^m Satanae omn^a agat.
Heming. Obj.
as appears plainly in that verse, and in this York design.

I should like well of your admonition, may some man say, were it not that the
now present Parliament does go about to bring in an alteration, contrary to the
minds and votes of the Bishops, when they were members of the House of Lords.

I will give you the answer of Bishop Jewel to Master Harding a Papist in his
time, Sol. Jewel d^f. Apo. p^t 6. p 521, 522.
whose words are these.

You see me herein to bewray some want of skill, the wise and learned could
soon have told you, that in the Parliaments of England, matters have evermore
used to pass, not of necessity by the special consent of the Archbishops and
Bishops, as if without them no statute might lawfully be enacted, but only by
the more part of the voices, yea although all the Archbishops and Bishops were
never so earnestly bent against it. And Statutes so passing in Parliament,
only by the consent of the Lords Temporal, without the consent and agreement
of the Lords Spiritual, have nevertheless always been confirmed and
ratified, by the Royal assent of the Prince, and have been enacted and
published under the names of the Lords Temporal. At S Edmunds Bury, Anno Do^
1296. Habitorex cum suis ^aronibus Parliamento, and Clero excluso, statutum
est. In provistone de Mart. Anno Dom. 1272.


Read the Statutes of King Edward the first, there you shall find that in a
Parliament solemnly holden, the Archbishops and Bishops were quite shut forth,
and yet the Parliament held on, and good and wholesome Laws were there enacted,
the departing, or absence, or malice of the Lords Spiritual notwithstanding.
In the Records thereof it is written thus; The King keeping his Purliament with
his Barons, (the Clergy being shut forth) it was enacted, etc.

Likewise in the time of King Henry the third, yea, and that quite contrary to
the express decrees of the Church of Rome.

Likewise in the time of Rich. 2. Anno 11. cap. 3.

From whence, Christian reader, thou have not only an answer to the former
Cavalier-cavill, but also a learned confutation of the late Protestation of the
Tower-Bishops: but no more of this matter. Give me leave therefore, O England,
once more to persuade thee as thou love thy self, and tenderest the welfare
of thy posterity, forsake not thy own friend, and thy fathers friend, I mean
the Parliament of England, which has protested as deeply, and ventured as
magnanimously for the good of King and Kingdom as ever any did, since King Inah
his days, and King Elfreds Regiment.

THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. III. A Preparative for this Physic.
THat flourishing Kingdoms have been ruined by impenitent going on in a course
of sinning, the sacred Story does plainly tell us; And how near to such a
ruin our sinful Nation now is, the present lamentable face of it does too
apparently show. Parl. Ordin. P.


And though we should feel the heavy strokes of God yet seven times more, it
is our duty to accept the punishment of our iniquity, and to say, Righteous art
thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments.

Yet because the Lord who is just, is also merciful, and in his infinite mercy
has left the excellent and successful remedy of Repentance to Nations
brought near to the gates of destruction and despair, O let not England be
negligent in the application of it.

Humble addresses of a penitent people to a merciful God, have prevailed with
him. They prevailed for Niniveh, when the sentence seemed to be gone out
against her, and may also prevail for England. Thus far the Preparative.

In which Preparative are several Ingredients.

The first Ingredient, is Necessity, and that in a twofold regard. Necessity.
1. Because Englands sickness is a mortal or deadly disease, which is
Impenitencie, argued by these words, That flourishing Kingdoms have been ruined
by impenitent going on in a course of sinning.

2. In regard of the neernesse of the mortality and ruin of this impenitent
Kingdom, employed in these words, And how near to such a ruin our sinful
Nation now is, the present lamentable face of it, does too apparently show.

From whence naturally arises this Aphorism,

That Impenitencie is a Nation-destroying sickness.

APHORISM 2. Impenitencie is a Nation-destroying sickness. Isa. 6.10, 11. Ier.
29 2 Kings 17. from the 7. to the 19. ver. Ier. 8.6. Rev. 2.5.
For the better understanding of this Aphorism, consider three things:

First, consider what impenitencie is.

It is a going on in a course of sinning without repentance. This description
is in the beginning of the Ordinance. Wherein consisider these parts. 1. It is
a sin. 2. It is a course or trade. 3. It is a going on still without
repentance; for as Christ did destroy the works of the devil, 1 John 3.8. so
does Repentance destroy the work of Impenitencie, it is quite contrary to it.

Secondly, consider the grounds of this Aphorism in general, and these are in
number six:

1. Because it is a great sin, it is a sinning-sin, as one calls it. Rebel
is ^^at rebellione aeterna. Vat.
It is called Rebellion, Ier. 8.5. it is a high aggravation of sin, Mat. 11.20.
Rev. 2.21.

2. Because it is a Diabolical sin; the Devils neither can, neither will
repent, their impenitentiall hearts are so hardened.

3. Because it is a wrath-treasuring sin, Romans 2.5. by it they treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath.

4. Because it is a Nation-unfencing sin. Isa. 5.2, 5. It causes God to pull
up his hedge about his Vineyard and Church, and so to fall to ruin, and all
kind of mischief.

5. Because it is a Physick-rejecting sin. Mat. 23.37. Ye would not come under
my wings to be healed and refreshed. John 3.19. The contempt of Physic does
more displease the Physician, then the loathsomeness of it does trouble him.

6. Because it is a sin-finishing sin. Iam. 1.15. Then sin is finished, when a
man resolves to live and lie in it, though it cost him his life. Now is thy
sore without remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. There is no promise in the Word of God to
an impenitent sinner, that will not turn and live. It is not so much falling
into the water that drowneth, but the lying in it: So it is not so much the
falling into sin, as the lying and continuing in sin, that damneth the
soul.

Thirdly, consider the Demonstration of this Position in-particular, as it
concerns this Nation wherein we live. To this end, let us a little look over
the four great changes of England in former times, and we shall find that the
sins of our forefathers, which were not repented of, were the meritorious
cause of their long-since past miseries. Lam. 3.39.

The first great change was at the coming in of the ancient Romans into
England, which was a thousand years after the beginning of the fable of Brute,
and in the days of Julius Caesar. Rich. Pak. Chron. page 2. Bri^o de Britoni^.
Polyd. Virgil p. 27. Ang. hist. Bid l. 3. c. 1.
Now we cannot imagine but that then the Britains were under their Heathenish
Government, as so many Brutes, like the ancient Romans, before their calling to
be Saints, Romans 1. worshipping and serving the creature more then the Creator,
who is blessed for ever, Amen.

The second great change was at the coming in of the old Saxons. Bid l. 1. c.
24. Hist. Ang.
Now Bid in his History does plainly prove that their impenitencie was the
cause of their punishments, as a pillaging and a spoiling war, etc.

They abused their quietness and plenty, and grew to a loose and wanton
living, whereupon all manner of lewdness followed straight after, especially
cruelty, hate of truth, and loving of lies; Insomuch that if any were gentler,
and more given to truth then others, they would work him all the spite and
hurt they could, as a common enemy of the Country.

This did not only the Seculars, but also the Clergy it self, and the heads
thereof, giving themselves over to drunkenness, pride, contention, envy, and
such other wickedness, casting utterly from them the sweet yoke of Christ. In
the mean time a bitter plague fell among them for their corrupt living,
consuming in short time such a multitude of them, ut vivi mortuos sepelive
nequirent.
that the quick were not sufficient enough to bury the dead. And yet for all
that they remained so hardened in sin, that neither their friends death, nor the
fear of their own, could cure the Morain of their souls, Polyd. Virg. l. 3.
P. 61.
which daily perished through their sinful living. Whereby a greater stroke of
Gods vengeance ensued upon the whole sinful Nation, as appears in the 15.
Chapter of the same Historian, whose words are to this purpose.

To be short, the fire once kindled in the hands of the Pagans, the old Saxons,
took just revenge on the wickedness of the people, not much unlike that fire
of the Chaldeans, which being kindled, consumed the City of Jerusalem. So also
this fire of vengeance, the wicked Conqueror kindling it, or rather God the
just Judge disposing it, raged first upon the Cities and Countries next unto
it, B^de l. 1^ 15.
after from the East sea unto the West, overwhelmed all the whole Island,
without any resistance made to quench it. Both public and private houses were
over thrown to the ground, the Priests were slain standing at the Altar, the
Bishops with their flocks were murdered, without respect of their dignity,
neither was there any that would bury their slain. Some of the miserable
leavings being taken in the hills, were there killed; others being starved with
hunger, were fain to creep out of their caves, and buy their victuals at their
enemies hands, with sale of their liberty for ever, if yet they were not killed
out of hand; others fled over the seas with a heavy heart; others tarying still
in the Country, in fear of death, and lack of food, lived full miserably in
the mountains, woods, and cliffes.

The same author says in another place, that among many other of their
horrible doings, ^^b 1. c. 22.
which their own Historiographer Gildas does lamentably set forth in writing,
that they never took care to preach the Gospel of Christ unto the English and
Saxons which inhabited amongst them in the land.

Also in another place he says, Lib. 3. c. 1.
they, that is the old Britains, were defiled with the filth of Idolatry.

The third great change was at the coming in of the Danes, who did in time
much hurt in this kingdom, as appears by the Acts and Monuments of our Church.

I will give you the testimonies of two sufficient witnesses.

An ancient writer, H^sto. Cariana. In A^g orum quidem Ecclesia Primitiva
Religio clarissi meresp^enda^: ita ut Reges ac Reginae, Principes ac Daces,
Consules and Barons, etc.
in an old Manuscript says to this purpose concerning the invasion of the
Danes into England.

In the primitive Church of the Englishmen, Religion did most clearly shine,
in so much that Kings, Queens, Princes, and Dukes, Consuls, and Barons, and
Rulers of Churches, incensed with the desire of the Kingdom of Heaven,
laboring and striving among themselves to enter into a solitary life and
voluntary exile, forsook all and followed the Lord; But in process of time,
all virtue decayed among them, so much, that in fraud and treachery none seemed
to be like them, neither was any thing to them hateful and odious, but piety,
and justice. Neither any thing in price and honor, but civil war, and shedding
of innocent blood, wherefore Almighty God, sent upon them pagan and cruel
Nations like swarms of bees, which neither spared women nor children: as
Danes, Norwegians, Goths, Suevians, Vandals and Frisians, who from the
beginning of the reign of King Ethelwolfe till the coming of the Normans, by
the space of 230. years destroyed this sinful land from the one side of the
sea to the other, from man also to beast, for they invading England often times
on every side, went not about to subdue and possess it, but only to spoil
and destroy it. And if it had chanced them to have been over come at any time
by Englishmen, it availed nothing, because other Navies still with greater
power in other places were ready on a sudden and unawares to approach upon
them, etc.

Also a late writer says to the same effect, Fox Act. M^n page 141.
that there was an other cause why God did scourge England by the Danes, and
that was the sins of their forefathers, who falsely breaking the faith and
promise made with the Britains, did cruelly murder their Nobles, wickedly
oppressed their Commons, impiously persecuted the innocent Christians,
injuriously possessed their land and habitation, chasing the inhabitants out of
house and country, provoked Gods anger, besides the violent murder of the
Monks of Bangor, 1200 praying monks slain. Bid l. 2. c. 2. Angl. Hist.
and diverse foul slaughters against the poor Britians, who sent for them to
be their helpers. Wherefore Gods just recompense falling upon them, from that
time never suffered them to be quiet from foraine enemies, till the coming of
William the Norman.

From whence it appears, that a going on in a course of sinning without
repentance, is a Nation-destroying sickness.

The fourth great change was at the coming in of the Normans into England, as
appears in the Church histories, and the sin of the land was the cause of the
misery of it, as appears by many authors, I will only quote a few for my
purpose.

Master Fox says, that the cruel fact of Earl Godwine, Acts and Mon. page
164.
and his bloody Soldiers, in murdering, or rather martyring the innocent
Normans, seemed to him to be the cause, why the justice of God did shortly
after revenge the quarrel of these Normans, in conquering and subduing the
English Nation, by the Duke of Normandy, and the Normans that came with him.
For so just and right it was, that as the Normans coming with a natural
English Prince were murdered of English men: so afterward the English should
be slain and conquered by the Normans, coming with a foreign King, being none
of their Country. Gul. Malmes. Jornal. Histor. Rich. 2.


They that write the history of the virtuous and blessed King Edward, make
mention of a dream or revelation that should be showed to him in time of
sickness, which was to this effect. How that because the Peers and Bishops of
the Realm were not the servants of God, but of the devil, therefore God would
give this Realm unto the hand of others. And the King desired utterance to be
given him, that he might declare the same to the people, whereby they might
repent; but answer was made, that they would not repent, and that it should be
given to another people. And so it was not long after to the cruel Normans.

Thus having seen the cause of Englands misery to be sin unrepented of, and
unamended, give me leave to conclude the forenamed Aphorism with the testimony
of two or three learned writers, and so I will conclude with a brief
application of all that has been said.

The first writer of our England Nation, Guild. Brit. natus Anno 493. de excid.
Brit. Propter desid^^ praedicatio^^ Episcop.
shows the meritorious cause of the Britains plagues in the days of old, to
be the covetousness and rapine of Princes, the iniquity and injustice of
Judges, the idleness of Bishops in preaching the gospel, and lastly the luxary
and evil manners of the common people.

Another old writer shows the cause of the destruction of the Britains to be
for these sins, Ex hist. C^rtens.
that follow in his Declaration.

When the vulgar and rascal sort were advanced into the places of Nobles, they
advanced themselves above that their dignity required. And through their
abundance of riches, they surprised with pride, (...) etc. Si quis vero e^rum
miti^r, and veritati aliquatenus propior videretu, in hunc quasi Britanniae
subversorem omnia odia, telaque torquebantur.
began to fall into such and so great fornication, as was never heard of even
among the Gentiles, and as Guildas the Historiographer witnesses, not into
vice only, but also into all manner of wickedness, whereunto man's nature is
inclined: and especially into that which is the overthrow of all good estates,
even the hatred of the truth, the love of lies.

Embracing of evil in stead of goodness, regarding of mischief in stead of
virtue, receiving of the Devil in stead of an Angel of light, they anointed
Kings, not such as could rule a Commonwealth well, but those which exceeded all
others in cruelty: And if any were perceived to be somewhat more humble and
meek, or to be more inclined to favor the truth, then the residue, him did
every one hate and backbite, as the overthrower and destroyer of Britain; all
things, whether they pleased or displeased God, they regarded alike: and not
secular men only did thus, but also the congregation of the Lord, and their
Bishops and Teachers, without any difference at all: Therefore it is not to be
marvelled, that such people so degenerating and going astray, should lose that
country, which they had after this manner defiled.

I will conclude the truth of this Aphorism with the humble acknowledgement,
and hearty prayer of Bishop Ridly in the days of Queen Mary, a prisoner, and a
Martyr for the truth of Christ Jesus, where you shall find what caused Gods
judgment on England in the late Marian-dayes. Fox, p. 16, 20.
The Lord be merciful (says he) and for Christ's sake pardon us our old
unkindnesse and unthankfulness, for when he powered upon us the gifts of his
manifold graces and favor, (alas) we did not serve him, nor render unto him
thanks according to the same. We pastors were too many of us, too cold, and
bare too much (alas) with the wicked world. Our Magistrates did abuse to their
wordly gain, both Gods gospel, and the Ministers of the same; the people in
many places, were way-ward and unkind: thus of every side, and of every sort,
we have provoked Gods anger and wrath to fall upon us, but blessed be he that
has not suffered his to continue in those ways, which so wholly have
displeased his sacred Majesty, but has awakened them by the fatherly
correction of his own Sons cross, unto his glory, and our endless
salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

From all which authors, take notice of these two things. 1. That this
Aphorism is true, not only in general, (that impenitence is a
Nation-destroying sickness) but also it is true in particular, Read the first
Cent. of scandalous Minist.
as it concerns England and its Clergy. 2. From hence take notice, that the
sins of England now are but a crop of the old seed-sinnes of our
transgressing forefathers, ubi multiplicata suerit iniquitas, mittet Dominus
falces, ultores quoscunque elegit, ad perdendum illos. Mere.
and therefore we may justly expect, that the same righteous God should put in
his sickle and sith, as then, to the cutting down of a sinful people, who
seem to inherit all their forefathers foul manners, as well as their fair
Lordships. What hinders our speedy ruin? May not the Lord say of England as of
Israel? Ier. 8.6. I hearkened and heard, and no man spoke aright, no man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? every one turns to
his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

CHAP. IV. Application of this Aphorism.
THe consideration of this point does clear up the Righteousness of Gods
proceedings in the way of punishment, Tu tibi exitii author es, ne id mibi
ascripseris, qui auxilio tantum tibi sum non exit. o. M^^^rus.
Hosea 13.9. God does not destroy a Nation without just cause and weighty
reasons, Isa. 5. unto the 8. verse. God does rather exercise his justice, then
show his power in ruinating a Nation, and depopulating a Kingdom: it is only
impenitency that causes Gods impatiency: this we see plainly in his dealing
with the old world, Sodom, Egypt, and his own people in the howling deserts,
and wilderness of sin.

Jerusalem was destroyed, because it would not be saved, they refused to get
under the healing wings of that al-curing Hen, the Lord Jesus Christ, Nos
malorum autores. Oecelamp.
Math. 23. toward the latter end. God destroyed the seven Churches in Asia,
not without good cause why, Rev. 2. and chap. 3. Omnis iniquus est (...) apud
R^ges lo^^m non ^aheant, Regna fl^ebunt justitia, and alus vi. tutibus, and
firma (...). Cardinales and Episcopi, qui Reges septunt, eos cont. a pu^^orem;
eligionem acceadunt. Lavat. Concupiscentiae vero militaro dicuntur, lyranno
pe^cato morem gerentes, and militia sua per membra corporis perfungentes.
Heming.


Let neither Nation or person therefore blame the Lord chief Justice of the
whole world in punishing, but themselves for sinning against him, for he cannot
but do right, such is his infinite perfection in this attribute of justice, as
well as in any other; so shall you set the saddle on the right horse, and glorify
God by justifying of him, as it becomes a conscience-convincing, and
selfe-condemning sinner. Genesis 42.21. Lament. 5.16. Woe unto us because that we
have sinned.

2. The consideration of this Aphorism does also tell us, and that plainly,
even unto a full conviction, that every impenitent and ungodly man is an ill
Statesman, though a Peer of the Kingdom, and an ill Common-weals man, though a
Parliament man, thou art an Achan, a troubler of Israel, all that go on in a
way of sin against God, are a generation of vipers, and destroy the
Commonwealth as much as in them lies; what they build up with one hand, they
pull down with an other, Eccles. 9. last verse, One sinner destroys much
good. 1 Samuel 12. last verse, every impenitent swearer, liar, etc. is an enemy
to his King, he may, as too many do, pretend that he is a Royalist for the
King, but indeed and in truth he is a traitor to his Prince, a Judas, who
betrayed his master with a kiss; and therefore Christian reader, think it not
enough to have a purse and a hand in driving out the Cavaliers like the
Canaanites in our English-Canaan, but also labor to repent of thy secret sins,
as well as of thy public transgressions, for the unmortifyed lusts in an
unsanctifyed heart, are so many Cavaliers and Malignants against God and his
people, as Saint James testifyeth, James 4.1. which will ever be so many
incendiaries of war, if not mortified, as well as a Popish Army unrouted. Never
wonder my brethren, that it is no better with England this day, then it is, but
rather stand and admire it is so well with us as it is in this our hour of
darkness, seeing there are so many enemies in all places and degrees of
dignity, as there are unrepenting men and women in the whole Kingdom. Certainly
were not Gods befriending-mercies more in number then the sands on the
Seashore, our malignant lusts, and false friends would soon make this Island a
field of blood, and every Corporation, Village, and Family, a Golgotha, Si
malis, flagitiosis parcatur: salus regnorum et Re^um-publicar^m perdi tur. Ludo.
a place of dead men's skuls: for not one person throughout the whole Nation can
say, that he is wholly free from the crying and land-destroying sins of our
forefathers, but all must confess that they have contributed to wards the
great stock of National sins, and so have increased the treasure of wrath
against the day of wrath; and therefore, since according to the language of the
holy Ghost, we are a sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, and that
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there is no soundness in
us, Jer. 8.10, 11, 12, etc.
we may justly expect the desolations that are denounced against so great and
general a corruption. And how near to such a ruin our sinful land now is,
the present lamentable face of it does too apparently show.

Ye the consideration of this Aphorism is comfortable to all that do truly
repent of their sins, because if the Nation do perish, Moses did, Ezekiel.
22.30. and God takes especial notice of thee, for thy security in the
greatest peril. Ezekiel. 9. A righteous man may be slain by and with the wicked,
in time of war, but the righteous shall not be as the wicked, God will put a
great difference betwixt them in the day of death, and judgment, it shall be
for thy advantage: thy suffering under the cross, is thy freedom from the
cross; yea some especial reward, Aquin.
for such as do him especial service.

Lastly,

Prove. 1.24, 26. to laugh.

I will give the answer of an ancient father in the Church of God, who says,
Sol. (...) deus loquitui cum ^isu, tu legas cum lucta. August.
that the laughing at the punishment, argues greatest displeasure against the
sin: what God speaks laughing, read thou weeping, for surely he would not
rejoice at the evil of punishment, if he did not hate and much dislike the evil
of sin. Again 2. take heed of it, in regard of the evil of punishment
belonging to it; Dan. Duke on repent.
this punishment is corporal, and spiritual, private, and public,
temporal, and eternal. Romans 6. vlt.

CHAP. V. The second Ingredient in this Preparative, is Humility.
ANd though we should feel the heavy strokes of God yet seven times more,
(...) Ordin. A.
it is our duty to accept the punishment of our iniquity, and to say, Righteous
art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments.

By which words, the Parliament do labor to beat down all high conceits of
our own healthful and happy condition, that so they might fit the Nation to
receive their physic, which otherwise would be rejected, as altogether
needless. From whence arises this Aphorism,

APHORISM 3. Humility prepares the sin-sick patient to receive the bitter
potion of Repentance.
Our blessed Savior and great Physician of our souls, when he first began to
practice spiritual physic according to his calling, did begin with the bitter
potion of Repentance, Mat. 4.17. as most necessary to cure all spiritual
maladies. But he finding that very few sinners came to his chamber, he does not
only invite them to come to him, but he does labor to qualify and prepare
them for his physic, Sensus nostrae miseriae, primus est gradus, quo venitur
ad Christum. Pareus.
and their own cure. Mat. 11.28, 29. Now this preparation, it is Humility. As
if he had said, You will never be ruled by me for your own health and rest,
except you be meek, humble, and lowly in heart. Therefore he says, that he
came to call sinners to repentance, and not the righteous, Mat. 9.13. That is,
such as are humble sinners, and not proud sinners, Plus quam vulgaris semper
fuit hic morbus. Call. Marl.
who think they have no need of the Physician, Mat. 9.12. but can lick
themselves whole with their own tongue-confessions, prayers, and promises.
This proud conceit of our own ability and righteousness, has been the common
sickness of Adams sinful, yet selfe-conceited posterity, and is a most deadly
distemper in these days.

There is a twofold Humility: First, there is a Humility toward God; Secondly,
toward Man. In this place, we are primarily to labor for Humility toward
God, with whom in Repentance we have especially to do, as appears by the
Ordinance of Parliament, to the scope whereof I intend to confine my wandering
thoughts.

For the better understanding of this point, consider these particulars.

First, what this humility toward God is.

For answer.

1. It is a serious acknowledgement of our own imperfections before God. Psalm.
30.2, 3. Isa. 40.6. 1 Pet. 1.24.

For Pride is in the imagination and affectation of excellency in our selves;
this appears by the Pharisee, Luke 18.

2. It is a full and free confession of our guiltiness before God, in regard
of the sins we have committed against him. Romans 3.19.

Pride does exclude a serious confession, Luke 18.11.

3. It is a silent submission to the judgments of God. Psalm. 39.5. 1 Samuel
3.18. Job 1.21, and 39.37. Sup^rbus responsat. Ames. de Consc.


Pride does resist and cavil against God. Romans 9.20.

4. It is an amplification or magnifying of the riches and freeness of Gods
grace, in all his benefits and blessings. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. Genesis 32.10. I am not
worthy, said Jacob, of the least of all the mercies which thou have showed to
thy servant.

Pride does arrogate good things to its own merits, Deuteronomy. 8.14.17. and 9.4.
Pride is natural Popery.

5. It is a holy admiration of the ways of God, though they be past finding
out, humility thinks God to be wiser then it self. Job 42.3. Romans 11.33, 34.
Psalm. 13.1. Humilitas est contemptus propriae excellentiae. Bern. de grad.
humil.


Pride thinks it can sound and fathom the depth of Gods counsels, and that
God ought to communicate all his reasons to it.

6. It is an exposition or laying aside of all our own worth or abilities above
others, when we are in the worship and service of God. Rev. 4.10.

A proud man thinks much of his own excellencies, and contemns others
better then himself. Luke 18.11.

7. It is a trembling apprehension of our own baseness, when we are in the
presence of God. Genesis 18.27. Abraham thought himself but dust and ashes in
comparison of God.

8. It is holy modesty and bashfulnesse in the worship of God. Eccle. 5.1, 2,
3. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any
thing before God, for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth.

9. It is a voluntary acceptance of any thing from God, though it may seem
too mean, Phil. 2.8. John 13.14.

10. It is a justification of God in all his judgments: thus you find it in
the Ordinance, Though we should feel the strokes of God yet seven times more
heavy, it is our duty to accept the punishment of our iniquity, and to say,
Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments.

Secondly, (...).
Mat. 9.12. he thinks himself so righteous, as that Physic of repentance
is needless, verse 13. and therefore does either neglect or reject it. We
find in the Acts 2. that the unbeleeving and Christ-crucifying Jews, did not
go to Peter for a cure, Prove 21, 2.16, 2., 0, 12.
until they were humbled and thoroughly convinced of their damnable and deadly
condition, in crucifying the Lord Christ. Matter al^arum cirtatum, (...). Greg.
27. Mor.
Such is the temper of every man by nature, and therefore there must be a
supernatural work, or otherwise a sinner though never so sick, will never
make a right use of Christ, John 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye might
have life. The soul will not go out of it self and go unto Christ, or hide its
self in his wounds without self-denial, which must be, but cannot be without
this grace of humility, and therefore as humility is called a mother grace, so
it may be accounted a preparing as well as a childbearing grace.





The Spirit by the shrill trumpet of the law, arouseth the sinners drousie
conscience, sets his sins in order before him, and presents him with the
fearful spectacle of eternal death and condemnation. And that so, that the poor
sinner selfe-convict and selfe-condemned, holds up his guilty hands before
Gods tribunal, and receiving the sentence of death, does not only see hell,
with a wide and gaping mouth ready to swallow him, but even in a manner feels
himself in hell already; so that in this perplexity being brought down to the
very gates of hell, and depth of selfe-despaire, Vel ab hoc corpore mortem
inferente, vel ab hac carnali concupiscentia, etc. Vata. Fragilitatis
conscientia convicti, nec per legem videntes se justificari; poenitendo se
submit tuntgratiae Dii. Raba.
he cries out for a Physician to cure him, O miserable man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death! or from this body bringing death upon
me, by its concupiscence or natural distemper! Romans 7.24. Now the soul is
stamped to very dust, and ground to very powder, so that there is a through
dissolution of all high conceits, and the soul is made sensible of a necessity
of Jesus Christ.

2. The Spirit having broken the proud and rocky heart, does in the next place
melt it by the fire of the Gospel, which fire with the heat of Gods love in
Christ, does dislolve and mollify the frozen heart into the warm tears of
godly sorrow. And now is the sinner sick, and willing to be buxsome and
pliabble to the Physician, now it will take a spiritual vomit, a purge, now it
will do any thing at the discretion of any skillful Christian, now and never
before is the sinner a fit patient to administer physic to, now is the cure
feasile, welcome is the bitter potion of repentance.

CHAP. VI. Application of this Aphorism.
VVOnder not why christ does not save all mankind, who is a common Physician,
as the Sun is a common good, Peccata sunt morbi. Vatab.
with healing under his wings, Mal. 4.2. to cure all your spiritual
distempers, which are your sins; for a proud Atheist, and a meriting Papist
will not go to Christ for a healing medicine, they think they are in very good
health, when they sit in the region and shadow of death. Prove. 30.12. there is
a generation (and it is this generation) that are pure in their own eyes,
Master Dod.
(these are natural puritans) and yet are not washed from their filthiness.
Be it known to every damned soul, that the fault is not in Christ Jesus, Si
quis non suit cong egatus ab co, judicabitur, quasi noluerit congregari. Origin.
but in the proud creature, and Christ-slighting sinner; Christ is more willing
to save us, then we are to be saved. Mat. 23.37.

2. Wonder not why God does not heal our Nation no sooner, seeing we are still
a proud and stiff necked people, and will not return to God by true
repentance that he may heal us; of a Laodicean temper, Rev. 3.17. we think we
are well enough, and have need of nothing, whereas we are most wretched and
miserable, wanting not only salve to cure, but also eye salve to see out sores.

3. In the last place, let the consideration hereof be of use by way of
exhortation, persuading all Christians to be clothed with humility; this
garment will make thee naked, it will strip thee stark-naked of all thy old
rags, and fig leaves, wherewith thou do cover thy nakedness, and it will
fit thee to put on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Be filled with humility, Homo dejectus and humilis videtur samsam sepeliendus.
Tortius.
it will empty thy soul of all physick-rejecting conceits, it will make thee
seem in thine own eyes, like a dying man, yea like one ready to be buried,
whose grave is dug with his own fingers.

Get humility, it is an abyss or bottomless gulf, wherein is no footing for
the sole of thy foot on the shoulders or back of any creature or duty,
Humilitas est magnus mons. Ansel. de simil.
but a total and final desperation in regard of self-sufficiency, Phil. 3.8.
or creature-ability. And yet it is a great high mountain, on the top whereof
thou shall see much light, Christ in his al-sufficiency as the only foundation
of salvation.

Get humility, O medicinam omnibus consulentem, etc. Aug. de verb. Dom.
it is a preparative for Physic, and yet it is a Catholicall medicine that
cures all diseases, it asswayeth all swellings, it cures all consumptions, it
purges out, eats off all superfluities, ill humors, and corrupt flesh, it
restores to perfect health and strength; neither pride, covetuousnesse, nor
anger can be cured, if humility will not do it.

Get humility, Non Ens. Ludovicus nihili.
though it is imperfection, because it is an annihilation, a nothingnesse, it
robs a man of himself, Romans 7.18. 1 Cor. 3.5. a humble Christian is a
Spirituall-no-body.

Yet it is Perfection, Nec potest dic^ perfectus, qui haec virtute est
privatus. Cassiod.
no man can be perfect, that wants this grace, by it tyrannical pride is
conquered, by it we are crowned Martyrs for all eternity; nothing is good
without humility.

Get humility, though it does unarme a man of all self-sufficiency, and causes
a Christian soldier not to trust in man, nor to make flesh his Arm.

Yet it is Armor of proof, Armatura tutissima animi modestia. Euag. Beza.
it makes a man more then a Conqueror, because he conquereth by a humble
suffering; the patience of the Saints is invincible, and overcomes the
tormentours.

To conclude, labor for humility, for as it appears by the Parliament
Ordinance, it is a preparative to repentance, which is the only medicine to
cure, not only a sin-sicke person, but also a dying Nation.

By what means may this humility seem more lovely and necessary?

For answer to this necessary question.

1. Set before your eyes the Majesty and power of God, Guil. Ames. de consc.
page 104
1 Pet. 5.6. Psalm. 93.1. The Lord reigns, he is clothed with Majesty and
strength. Dan. 4.37. Those that walk in pride he is able to abase.

2. Set before your eyes, your own vileness and baseness, Abjectissimus. Vat.
Indignus, Vat. Putredo, Hier. Sept. Vatab.
as thou art in the state of corruption and lapsed condition, thou art dust and
ashes, Genesis 18.27. Genesis 32.10. less then all thy mercies, unworthy of any
promise. Job 25.5. Man is filthiness, a frivolous thing, of no worth, not
worth the speaking on. Ephesians. 2.3. A child of wrath. John 8.44. A child of the
devil. Heb. 12.8. A bastard. John 7.70. A devil.

3. Set before your eyes the necessity of humility, without it we cannot see
Gods face, or turn away his anger, Zeph. 2.3. 2 Cron. 12.7. We would feign
have deliverance from our pressures, but expect none without humility.

4. Consider the nature of humility, it is not only most amiable, In hunc
intueor. Jun. Trem. Mirabiles amores excitaret sapientiae. Super quem
respici^m, nisi super humilem? Sept. Vat. Hier. Pagn. Carol. Signon. de regno
Ital. lib. 9.
sweet and lovely, but also most profitable, Isa. 66.2. God delights to behold
the beautiful countenance of a humble Christian. You may at your leisure take
notice more fully of the benefit that does accompany this grace by these
places, Psalm. 51.19. Prove. 3.35.11.2. 1 Pet. 5.5. Iam. 4.6, 10. Luke 18.14.
Prove. 22.4. and many other places: as Cicero said of wisdom, so may I say of
humity, if it could be seen by corporal eyes, it would win the affections
wonderfully.

5. Consider the ugly nature of pride, its of a diabolical nature. 1 Timothy 3.6.
the devils sin was pride; the most humble God does scorn to look on a proud
scorner, Prove. 3.34. which argues a strange deformity in his creature. Isa.
66.2. To whom will I look, or cast an eye backwards, but on the humble man? God
is said to resist the proud, Iam. 4.6. he looks upon a proud man afar off, he
hates pride as an abomination to him, Prove. 6.16.

It is said of Gregory 7. that as he dejected Henry the Emperor for his pride,
so he exalted Rodolph for his humility, to that place of Dignity.

CHAP. VII. The third Ingredient in this Preparative, is a Possibility.
TO urge the necessity of repentance, and to persuade to Humility, were to no
purpose, if there were no possibility of being healed, and therefore the Great
and most Wise College of State Physicians do in the latter end of their
Preparative, insinuate a possibility of a National cure, to sweeten their
physic with. Now this is done three ways.

1. By showing the goodness of the divine nature in these words. Parl. Ord. A.
Yet because the Lord who is just is also merciful, and in his infinite mercy
has left.

2. By laying open the goodness of the Physic, left by God to Nations, and
prescribed by them in these words, The excellent and succesfull remedy of
Repentance.

3. By laying open the nature of Englands disease, in making known its
curablenesse, argued by these words, And may also prevail for England.

From whence collect this Aphorism,

APHORISM 4. Possibility of a cure does sweeten the most bitter physic of
Repentance. Colligere hoc licet, ex tota scriptura, non posse homi^es ^duci in
viam, nisi spem concipiant unser^co^diae D^, quia desperatro pro^sas (...)
redde^c^, and duplicat etiam, ^mo centuplicat pravitatem hominum. Calv. in Joel
2.12. Steque ad sin^eram venerationem tui invites. Just. Pagnin.
Joel 2.12, 13. Ezra. 10.2.
And therefore we see that the most wise God, does so mix his most glorious
and simple attributes together, and does so conjoyne his threats and promises,
as that the most guilty conscience, and greatest sinner may hope for salvation
in his deepest despair, if the fault be not in himself; and to what other end
or purpose, but to animate and encourage the soul to use all the means God has
appointed and sanctified for good to poor sinners? which otherwise we would
not do, if there were no hope, therefore David in Psalm. 130.2.3. says, If thou
Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? verse 4. But there is
forgiveness with thee, that thou might be feared.

In these words, Gods justice and severity in punishing sin, is wrapped up like
bitter pills in sugar, and all to encourage the soul to seek for a pardon, and
to hope for mercy, as it appears by the 5. verse, I wait for the Lord, my
soul does wait; that is, I want willingly and heartily. Why, what is the
reason David? Mark his reason and ground, its nothing but a possibility, as it
is argued by these words, And in his word do I hope. In hoc ergo mihi spes
est. Aug. Glos. Greg. Car. Innocent.
Hope arises from the apprehension of a possibility of salvation, as despair
does proceed from a supposed impossibility, as appears by Cain, Genesis 4.13. My
sin is greater then that it may be for given, so diverse translate the words out
of the Hebrew Text: and this made Cain flee from the presence of the Lord, and
to give himself wholly to the world, Pagn. Vatab. Sept.
to a mere sensual life, as appears by the 16. and 17. verses of the same
Chapter.

Despair takes off the Charet wheels, and makes a sinner drive heavily
through the red sea of sin-guiltinesse, so that the soul says, Let us flee
from the face of God, for he fights for our sins, against our sinful selves.

And therefore well says my Author, Si quis auserat spem, non potest
consistere verus illius cultus. Musc. in Psalm. 130. Cogitent hic Doctores.
He that takes away the hope of mercy, and propitiation, takes away the
worship and fear of God, for nothing remains but the expectation of the
severity of Divine Justice. And therefore says he, All Doctors of Physic
ought to consider that the doctrine of free Grace, does uphold the fear and
worship of God in the world. Despair does cut the sinews of strength asunder,
and leaves the wounded sinner motion-lesse.

If it be objected, that this doctrine will breed security, negligence, and
contempt: It is answered, it may do so, but it is in carnal wicked men only.
Now says he, I pray, is it convenient that Gods glory should be obscured, and
the consolation of the Elect should be hindered, because of the perverseness of
the wicked, who will go on securely in their sins, Absit, absit.
do what we can? by no means, let any godly man be of such an opinion. Give
the children their own bread, though the dogs, matching it away, Ossicium est
medici ut sucunde curet. Asclepiades.
nourish up themselves unto destruction.

The Arminians do agree with the Church of God, in maintaining a possibility
of salvation; yet herein they do shamefully err, in that they place this
possibility in the powers of nature, as the old Pelagians did. Which false
doctrine has been sufficiently confuted by S. Augustine of old, and by Doctor
Twisse of late time, Aug. de haeres.
and many other learned and pious Writers and Disputants.

CHAP VIII. Application of this Aphorism.
THe consideration hereof is of use by way of Exhortation. Though thou art
guilty of Cain his sin, who was a Malignant, for he was of that malignant
one, Ex Maligno erat. Hieron. Montan.
and slew his brother, and wherefore slew he him, but because his own works
were evil, and his brothers were righteous? 1 Ioh. 3.12. yet deny not a
possiblility of salvation, as Cain did, but believe there is mercy with God,
yea infinite mercy, as the Ordinance says. The belief of this Possibility is
a sweetning ingredient in the preparative for Repentance, and therefore stoutly
maintain it against all the disheartning objections of the devil, and his
physick-rejecting instruments.

To this end, hold a good opinion of three things, which you may see in the
Ordinance.

First, hold a good opinion of the nature of God, who is not only just, but
also merciful, yea infinite in mercy. It is true, God is not made all of
mercy, Exodus 34.7. He will by no means clear the guilty. Heb. 12. ver. last,
He is a consuming fire. Yet it is as true, that The Lord is merciful and
gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, for giving iniquity, and trangression, and sin, as appears in
Gods own Proclamation, Exodus 34.6, 7. Abandat intima m^s^^icordia Dominus. ^un.


Saint James proves the goodness of Gods nature by an old experiment, Iam.
5.11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord,
that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. It does abound in him, as
the water does in the sea, there is an ocean of mercy in God. Huge great
mountain-sins are drowned in the ocean of Gods infinite mercy. Mat. 21.21. This
mountain is in every unbeleever, (...) and ^^^^oquoque infideli mons, secundum
mensuram infideli^atas suae. Orig. Monter sunt portenta vttiorant, mons est
Satan, quem loco movet fides. Aretius.
according to the measure of infidelity, either less or greater, which the
infinite mercy of God can only cover and hide, Psalm. 32.1. Great sins are
great mountains, but as the mercy of God is above all his works, so above all
our sins, and can cover and drown them all, as the old world in the Deluge,
Genesis 7.23, 24. Therefore always maintain in thy judgment a possibility of
recovering thy spiritual health and strength, in the humble and constant use
of the soul-curing means of grace, for this will cause thee with David to make
a right use of God, even when thou see thy sins in their proper colors, and
in their monstrous greatness, Psalm. 25.11.

Not only David had liberty to make use of the greatness of Gods mercy to
cover the greatness of his sins, but also the Church of God ought to do so,
and there is encouragement enough to do it, because the Psalmist argues that
all is free grace, Hoc been refertur ad personam Ecclesiae. Cassiod. Non inquam
propter mea merita, sed propter tuam misericordiam. Hier.
and not merit, such is the boundless goodness of God, that every penitent
sinner has as much liberty to swim in the Ocean of mercy, as the Fish has to
play in the sea, and the thirsty affrighted frog to skip into the poole for
refreshment and safety.

Harsh conceits of God, are not only disadvantageous to a selfe-accusing and
condemning sinner, but also dishonorable to God himself, as if he were less
merciful then the pitiful and debt-pardoning creditour. Whereas all the
mercy that is in Man, is but a drop in comparison of that which is tyde-full
in God. Qua plenus est orbis. Vatab.
Psalm. 103.11. The earth is full of thy mercy. By the Earth, we are to
understand three things: 1. The Church of God, Terra est Ecclesia. Cardin.
wherein is the especial flow of Mercy; and this tide began when Christ began
to redeem the world of Believers. John 8.16. And this is a tide of blood, which
gushed out of the side of Jesus Christ, Quando ^edimere nos venit. Hieron.
and this is the red sea of Mercy wherein the true believing Israelite is
saved, and the unbeleeving Egyptian cannot be drowned, for Mercy is not the
ruin of the creature, but Justice. 2. The Earth signifies Sinners. All
penitent sinners are under the tide of Mercy, Terra peccator est. Card.
as the sands on the seashore are under the spring-tyde. 1 Timoth. 1.15. 3.
The Earth signifies the Inhabitants. To which purpose Ierom quoteth Mat. 5.45.
He sends the rain on the just and unjust. Dumpeccatores sustinet, blasphemos
patienter expectat, vitamque praestat indignis. Cassiod. Totus scilicet muudus.
Hieron.
Now the very wicked enjoy much mercy in this life; for God does sustain and
maintain the very wicked themselves, and he does expect the conversion and
repentance of the blasphemous, Romans 2.4. and does reprieve such as are unworthy
to live. 4. Lastly, by the Earth understand the whole world; for as God is
every where, so is his mercy; for it is inseparable from him. Now God fills
the whole world. 1 Kings 8.27. Yea the heaven of heavens cannot contain him.
So that I may allude to that in Psalm. 24.2. He has founded the earth on the
seas, and established it on the floods of his mercies.

O Christian Reader, strip thy self stark naked of all thy rags, and menstruous
clouts, I mean thine own polluted righteousness, and skip into the sea of
Gods mercy, from often the rock of divine contemplation, or that rock, Christ,
and swim therein, yea play therein, like the Leviathan, Job. 41. who makes a
path to shine after him, and is without fear.

But be sure thou skip and plunge thy self over head and ears, with the two
bladders of swimming Christians, I mean with Faith and Hope under thy Arm
holes; Spe^ and side^ sunt v^si^ espi^tuales.
these will keep thee from sinking, though the weight of thy sins be never so
heavy, even breaking thy back, and bending the very Axeltree of Divine
patience. Peter wanted these bladders when he began to sink in the sea, Math.
14.30, 31. the Apostle says we are saved by hope, as a young swimmer by his
bladder, Romans 8.24.

Think not that God will be displeased at the venturing thy eternal welfare
upon his mercy, through the Merits of Jesus Christ, for the Psalmist says, the
Lord takes pleasure in those that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11. In this
verse the Psalmist joyneth fear and hope together for 2 reasons. 1. To show us
that none will fear God with a filial fear, but such as hope in his mercy,
2. To inform a young beginner to swim, that he must join with his Fear of
drowning and perishing, Hope, or a possibility of landing in the Haven of
happiness. Ille ergo t^mor deo ^cceptus, qui (...), Aug. Gl^s.
Judas did Fear, but did not Hope, and therefore he was drowned in the
bottomless gulf of despair, therefore we must labor for such a fear of
Gods justice, as may stand with a godly hope of his mercy.

The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his
mercy.

Secondly, hold a good opinion of the goodness of the physic; It is called in
the Ordinance, The excellent and successeful remedy of Repentance. 1. It is an
excellent remedy, because it is compounded of the best and most precious
Simples, as Faith, Hope, Charity, Humility. Vera poenitetia non est
solacomtatio, s^d and sides. Luth. Suaquemque fides salvam facit. Theoph.
There is Faith in Repentance, it is the root of it: Faith is a Mother-grace,
Repentance is a Daughter-grace. See how they are united, Act. 20.21. Act. 2.38.
In the order of Nature, faith is first, but in the order of time, they are
twins and both together.

Hope is an other simple, it is impossible that a man should repent, relent,
come in and submit to God, if he apprehend nothing in God, but the vigor of
justice, Psalm. 130.4. Hope as it is a fruit of faith, brings in the soul
creeping and crouching before God, as the Syrians to Ahab, 1 Kings 20.31.

Charity is a third ingredient, a man rejoices at the offense of him he
hates, Osculatur pedes quos te^sit mul^er. Greg.
Christ imputes the tears of that sinful woman to her love, Luke 7.47. this
penitent sinner did kiss the feet of Christ, which argued her love.

Humility is an other simple; this appears by the humble publican, Luke
18.13. Saint Bernard says, Vadam ad por tas inseri, ut jam non nisi in sola
miser^cordia Dei respr^emus. Bern. Ser. 3. de Annunt.
I will go to the gates of hell, that all my hope may be only in the mercy of
God: as you heard before, humility is a preparing grace, therefore we are
commanded to humble our selves under the mighty hands of God, 1 Pet. 5.6. Iam.
4.7, 8, 9. The soul will not draw nigh to God, it will not mourn and weep, til
it be humbled, an impenitent heart is a proud heart. Needs must the potion of
repentance be excellent, Humble Addresses Ord.
when the simples in it are so precious.

2. It is also a succesfull remedy, it has done great, yea the greatest cures:
look over the sacred Scripture-bils and you shall find that repentance is a
never-failing remedy; Jonas 3. It prevailed for Nineveth, when the sentence
seemed to be gone out against her. So that the Parliament seems to write at
the end of the remedy Probatum est.

Now it is a succeesfull remedy. 1. Because it is of divine prescription, The
Ordinance says, he has left it to Nations brought near to the gates of
destruction and despair. Math. 4 17. Rev. 2.5. Luke 13.1. 2. Because it is of
Divine composition, Donum and opus Dei est Poenitentia.
the spirit of God, who best knows the distempers of the soul, does not only
prescribe it, but also make it. 2 Timothy 2.25. 3. Because it is of Divine
benediction, without which nothing can be profitable, Nihil ex se profictunt
conatus omnes nostri, and tamen D^^ be^^^^ (...) Ma^^.
Math. 4.4. the best physic in the Apoth^cary shop cannot cure the least
disease without Gods blessing, Exodus 15.26. I am the Lord that heals thee. 4.
Because it is of Divine infusion, God does not only prescribe and make it, but
also bless and give it. Acts 5.31. and 11.18. and therefore it is called a
supernatural grace, Si^^ tuonum^^ nihil est in (...). Marc.
not only because God does compound it, but does also give it, yea put it into
the mouth of a sinner, otherwise he would never take it, it is so bitter to the
sensual taste of an impenitent sinner.

3. Hold a good opinion of the curablenesse of the disease, approved by these
words in the Ordinance, And may also prevail for England. In the judgment of
the great college or S^^te Physicians, England is not hopeless or curelesse,
though it be sick of a Mortal disease, though our sins are infinite in
numbe^ and heinous in quality, yea gray headed iniquities, yet the mercies of
God are more greater, and older then they, Isa. 1.18. Exodus 34.7. There is no
sin incurable but that impardonable sin against the holy Ghost. Math.
12.32. John 5.16. and this sin is therefore incurable, because it is always
accompanied with impenitence, Dan. Dyke or Repent.
it contemns and rejects the physic that is offered by the preaching of
the Gospel.

I find by conference with the people of God, that many of them are of Manoah
his distrustful temper, Judges 13.22. who said to his wife, we shall surely
die because we have seen God, so say they one to another, we shall surely
perish, we have seen God, who is a consuming fire, in more then any ordinary
manner of late time, not only in Germany and Ireland, but also in England.

But I find that the wife of Manoah was of a better belief, and that upon two
good grounds, Pet. Mart. in Judge 13.22.
as Peter Martyr says, and so am I concerning Englands destruction, and that
for the same causes, and therefore give me leave to comfort you, as she did her
husband.

1. Be of a good cheer, God will not utterly ruin this kingdom, for if the
Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have required, and received of us a
burnt-offering; now certainly God has put the Kingdom upon the means of
deliverance, God has required a burnt-offering on fast days, wherein the
whole kingdom has been sacrificed to God, many times, weeks, months, yea
above a whole year, almost two years together; we never read that God did
destroy a Nation, in the act of public Humiliation, and a through Reformation.
Look over the 4 forenamed changes of the Kingdom of England, and you shall not
find such an Ordinance as this, whereby the Nation was put upon a deep and a
general Humiliation, and public Reformation, as now it is. And we cannot
deny, but that God has received our sacrifices, or else questionless we had
been long since consumed. Believe it, that God that has prepared Englands
heart to pray, has prepared his own ear to hear: Psalm. 10 17. it is observed
from this place, that when God intends any especial mercy to a Kingdom and
people, then the Lord does especially prepare their hearts to pray, as he did
the hearts of the Israelites in Egypt, before their deliverance, and therefore
it is laid down as a most certain sign and infallible rule, S^t igitur
cert^ssimum signum, nondum esse tempus liberationis, quando corda nostra ad
Deum non susp^^ant. Muscul.
that then God will not deliver, when our hearts do not sigh after God; though
I think there was never more sinning then now, yet I think there was never more
sighing and crying for all the abominations that are and have been done in the
midst of us, then now in this kingdom, New-Englands tears.
and in other neighboring and neighbourly countries. Read Zach. 12.9, 10, 11,
12.

2. Rouse up your spirits, and rejoice in the Lord, and again I say rejoice,
for if the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have shown us all these
things, nor would, as at this time, have told us such things as these, verse
25. Wherefore be of good comfort, Pet. Mart.
we shall not die.

Questionless God has discovered to us of late very strange things, he has
brought to light, the hidden things of darkness, Sed tempur revelab^t and
vestram virtutem, and convitratorum malitiam. Oecolamp. Licet igitur nunc
traducant sed pos^ea vos etiam claros reddent. Thoph Archiep. Popish Royal
Favorite, Mystery of iniquity, Romes Masterpiece, P^^^ Pol. Virg. l. 11. Sir
Walt. Ral. Prerog. Parl.
and has made manifest the counsels of the hearts of many seeming friends, but
real enemies. 1 Cor. 4.5. These years of discoveries, are the very presages of
the day of judgment.

If ever that place were fulfilled Math. 10.26, 27. it is made good in these
days, wherein there is nothing covered, which shall not be, or has not been
discovered: what strange plots have been preached on the house tops? witness
the Declarations of both Houses, concerning England and Ireland, which will not
only lay open their malice against God and goodness, but will also clear up
your innocence to the world, in standing for the good of King and Kingdom, in
a Parliamentary way, the good old way of this Kingdom, and mixed Monarchy.

The very truth in Christ Jesus is, God is fitting his people for great
mercies. 1. By humbling of us, we did trust too too much in Parliaments,
Armies, and Commanders, we made flesh our arm, which is an accursed sin. Ier.
17.5. and I pray God we may not Idolize the Scots. 2. By dividing of us, Non
ub^que bona est concordia, sed bonum quandoque est and dissidium. Theoph. Arch.
Et impediunt a salute. Anno 1071.
the precious from the vile, never did England know such a division as this day
it feels, which is the work of Christ, Math. 10.34, 35, 36. And therefore
must needs tend to the good of his members and spouse, the Church militant on
earth. For this separation it is not from Christ, but from such familiars and
kindred, as were hindrances to piety, and obstacles in the way to salvation,
thus said that Archbishop in his time.

It tends to the quiet state, and healthful condition of the body, to cast
out disagreeing humors, says Chrysostom. Cum id, quod insanabiliter se
habet, abscinditur. Chrysostom.
The Physician preserves the body, by cutting off that which is incurable. So
it was in the building of the tower Babell, there an evil peace was dissolved
by a good discord. So Paul caused a division amongst those that were against
him, for peace is not always good, Propterea bellum missum est bonum, ut
rumperetur pax mala. Hieron.
for thieves agree amongst themselves, Prove. 1.14. thus far Chrysostom. To the
same purpose speaks Hierome and Augustine. Every house has some unbeleevers
in it, now Christ sends a division that an evil peace may be broken.

Christ is said to make this war and division, according to Scripture phrase,
Sed illorum mal^tia Chrysostom
when as it is procured by their own Malignity.

To conclude, let not go your confidence, that all things shall work together
for good, like bitter pills, and contrary simples in one and the same body,
Romans 8.28.

Bel^eve, though England be a sin-sick Nation, and brought near to the gates
of ruin and destruction: yet the Lord can and will raise his Church from Death
to life, me thinks the Lord speaks to England, (...) a me (...) manebo
(...), and Rex (...) Occ^l.
as once to Israel, Hoseah 13.9, etc. O England thou have destroyed thy self,
but in me is thy help, I will be thy King, where is any other that can save
thee, in all thy cities, and thy judges?

I will ransom thee from the power of the grave, I will redeem thee from
death. (...).
O death I will be thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction. Repentance
shall be hidden from mine eyes. Ier. 30.10. Therefore fear thou not O my
servant Jacob, says the Lord, and be not dismaide O Israel, for lo I will
save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their Captivity, and Jacob
shall return, and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him
afraid: for I am with thee, (...).
says the Lord, to save thee. Though I make a full end of all Nations whither
I have scattered thee, yet I will not make a full (...) thee, but I will
correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished.

Lastly, let the consideration of this Aphorism not only encourage the whole
Church of God to repent, and help on the work of God in the Kingdom, but also
the Parliament, to continue in faithfulness for the Churches utmost help: this
Aphorism tells that thrice Noble Senate, that there are many and great hopes,
that they are the men God has appointed to repair our breaches, and to heal
our land, which like Lazarus is full of sores. Luke 16 20. To this purpose
consider 3. things.

First, what God has done for you; never more for any Parliament in England,
then for you; if you dweh on these Heads by serious meditation, Herb. Pal p 68
it will plainly appear, 1. What a never-dying authority God has put into the
body of your meeting. 2. The Majesty where with he has clothed your face; yea
your feet are beautiful, and ways terrible. 3. The strength where with he
has girded you. 4. The victories given you. 5. The Armies of Prayers afforded
you all the Kingdom over. 6. Almost a two-yeares Fast kept for you. 7.
Protestations and Covenants made by, with, and for you. 8. Your growth in
courage and zeal for God and his Church, notwithstanding your more then
ordinary oppositions, and State-dangers.

Secondly, consider what God has done by you. I cannot name particulars, your
Journals and Records will tell you, that God never did more by any
English-Parliament.

Thirdly, consider the many rich promises made to you, whiles you work in, and
for God. Exodus 4.12. Josh. 1.5, 6. Neh. 4.20. Victoria. Vat.
Your God shall fight for you. Prove. 24.6. In the multitude of your counselors
there shall be safety, or victory.

THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. IX. The Patients, the Kingdom of England Dominion of Wales.
IT is therefore thought most necessary by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
Parl. Ord. R.
that all His Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom of England, be excited and
stirred up, speedily to lay hold upon this only, and unfailing remedy of
Repentance, etc.

ALSO

It is ordained, That every Minister and Preacher of Gods Word, Parl. Ord. E.
in the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, most earnestly persuade the
constant practice of Repentance, etc.

APHORISM 5. England is a Sin-sick Nation, and a Parliament Patient.
This Aphorism consists of two parts; First, that England is a sin-sick
Nation. Secondly, that it is a Parliament Patient. Of ^oth these briefly, and
first of the first.

England is a Sin-sick Nation.

The present lamentable face of it, does too apparently show it. Also he that
knows it not, is very ignorant, either of the nature of a National
distemper, or of this Kingdoms condition.

Look over the four great changes of England since it was a Nation, and thou
shall find the same sins and sores now, which were in any or all of them,
insomuch, that our Narionall sins and sickness seems to be hereditary. Yea
our days are but the August and Harvest of their seed-times. So that I may say
to England and to Wales, as Moses said to the Reubenites, and the Gadites,
Numb. 32. ver. 14. Behold you are risen up in your fathers stead, an increase
of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the Lord toward Israel.

Look over the writings of late times, Batton, Bast. ^in.
and you shall find the truth of this Aphorism.

Acquaint thy self with the Parliament Declarations, and Kingdom Petitions,
and Englands sickness will seem to be mortal.

Do but well pry into the state of thy parish, family, and County where thou
live; Non o ^^abene
yea do but feel thine own pulse, and thou shall be soon and fully convinced
that all is not well, there is some change and distemper in the body politic,
whatsoever it is, and is the cause of it. This is the general complaint of all
men, on both sides: The one side calls the sickness, Tyranny, and Popery;
the other side calls it, Omnia in malum ruere. Ri. Bak. Chron. p. 162.
Rebellion, and Faction. Sure it is, that England is a sin-sick Nation, and
tends to ruin and destruction, which is a Nations mortality: and so far from
any appearance of any humane remedy, that our only Anchor must be confidence
in God, and Prayer. Yet says my Author, our hope is it will be but a fit, and
the storm once past, ^aetumque choro ^aeana ^ancmus. R. Bak. Chron.
fair weather again, and fairer perhaps then it was before, and then with joy
we may rejoice in a calm and quiet smooth sea. In the mean time let us comfort
our selves with the words of the Prophet David, Psalm. 34.19. Many are the
afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of them all.

This National sickness is twofold, 1. Spiritual, 2. Corporal.

First, it is a spiritual sickness, a Church distemper. Many things have been
brought into the Church, contrary both to the Scriptures, and the true
Protestant Religion, professed and taught in the Church of England, Corpus
confessionum fidei, Cath. consensus, Consensu, (...) Eccles.
Scotland, and all the other Reformed Churches, and Primitive times; which will
clearly appear by comparing these new Tenets following with the Harmony of
Confessions, and Catholic consent, which will be impartial Judges to end a
great Controversy in this Land, concerning the Protestant Religion, which is
in question.

Quid agitur in Anglia? Consulitur de Religione.

The new Tenets are these especially. 1. ^^. Hun.
That Bishops, be they never so wicked, are Jure Divino. 2. That the Government
of the Church of England, as it now stands, by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. is
so holy a Government, that it is a sin to alter it. 3. That the Discipline
which the Prelates establish, be it what they please, is to be punctually
observed. 4. That all the Ceremonies of the Church of England bind the
consciences of the people. 5. That a Minister has power to damn a man, that
is not conformable to the Ceremonies of the Church. 6. That the Scriptures are
not the only Rule of the Church, in appointing out the worship and service of
God. 7. That the word of God cannot assure us that it is the Word of God, as
some have taught. 8. That a Minister or Priest has power to absolve sin
verily, and indeed, where according to his judgment he finds a person to
repent. 9. That there is in Orders given an indelible character. 10. That we
ought to receive the Communion on an Altar. 11. That the presence of Christ is
visible in the Bread and Wine, after Consecration. 12. That Altar-worship is
lawful. 13. That Latin Service is lawful in Churches. 14. That Sacraments do
give and confer Grace, and are as necessary in their place, and no less
required then Belief it self. 15. That Sunday is no Sabbath. 16. That Man has
Free Will. 17. That a man may do works in themselves absolutely good, and
acceptable in the sight of God. 18. That to be preserved from all sin in this
life, is not impossible. 19. That the Church of Rome, as it now stands, is
the Family of Christ, and some Members of that Church amongst us, are the Kings
best Subjects. 20. That Idolatrous wicked Heretics are Members of the visible
Church, if they be not excommunicated. 21. That Christ is not originally God.
22. That Images in Churches are lawful.

2. Secondly it is a corporal sickness, a Commonwealth distemper, as
appears by the several votes of both Houses, and their own Declarations and
Remonstrances, wherein you shall find that the Parliament has wrastled with
great dangers and fears, present miseries and calamities, the various
distempers and disorders of this Kingdom, otherwise the malignant party had
overwhelmed and extinguished, the liberty, peace, and prosperity of this
Kingdom, the comforts, and hopes of all his Majesty's loving Subjects, and
exceedingly weakened and undermined the foundation and strength of his Royal
throne.

Yea that Faction was grown to that height and entirenesse of power, Remon^^^^
the (...) the (...), d^e (...) 15. (...) 1641 (...)
that they began to think of finishing of their work, which consisted of these
three parts.

1. The Government must be set free from all restraint of Laws concerning our
persons and estates.

2. There must be a conjunction betwixt Papists, and Protestants, in Doctrine,
Discipline, and Ceremonies, only it must not yet be called Popery.

3. The Puritanes, under which name they include all those that desire to
preserve the Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, and to maintain Religion in
the power of it, must be either rooted out of the Kingdom with force, or
driven out with fear.

So that I may conclude with the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 1.5. etc. and trouble
you with no more quotations. Whose words are these. The whole head is sick,
and the heart is faint, from the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is
no soundness in it, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores, they have
not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment. Your
Country is desolate, your Cities are burnt with fire, your land strangers
devour it in your presence, and it is desolate as overthrown by strangers.
Except the Lord of Hoasts had left unto us a very small Remnant, we should have
been as Sodom, and we should have been like to Gomorrah.

England is a Parliament Patient.

Now follows the second part of this Aphorism formerly named, and necessary
to be considered on.

The truth of this part appears plainly from what has been said in the first
Aphorism, and therefore I will refer thee thither (courteous reader) desiring
thy right information, and Christian consent to so seasonable and order
preserving position as this is, for if every private well-willer to Englands
health may turn its Physician, I fear we shall have so many Mountebanks on
the stage, as will soon kill a weak and sickely Kingdom, with their strange,
and disagreeing Physic.

For my own part (I thank God for it) my conscience bears me witness, I do
desire a thorough Reformation in Church and Commonwealth, and that according
to the rule, Gal. 6.16. Isa. 8.20. Yet I desire it in an orderly manner, which
as I take it, is a Parliamentary way, according to the constitution of our
government; and to speak the truth, I am persuaded that the indiscretion of
some Parliament patients, have been no little cause why out Parliament is so
much a patient.

And therefore this great college of state Physicians do declare to their
patients, and the whole world, Remonst. of the state of the Kingdom, die Merc.
15. December. 1641.
that it is far from their purpose or desire, to let loose the golden reins
of Discipline and government in the Church, to private persons, or particular
Congregations, to take up what form of Divine service they please; for they
hold it requisite, that there should be throughout the whole realm a
conformity to that order which the Laws enjoyne according to the word of God.
But hey desire (and blessed be God for it) unburthen the consciences of men of
needless and superstitious Ceremonies, to suppress innovations, Die Merc. 5.
Maii, 1641. Protestation.
and to take away the Monuments of Idolatry. My brethren what would you have
more? think not that you are called to reform the best reformers of the
Catholic Church, consider that by your Protestation you are bound to
maintain the power and privileges of Parliament, which falls not short in
this particular.

CHAP. X. Application of this Aphorism.
IF England be a Parliament patient, then let England behave it self as it
becomes a patient.

1. It becomes a sick patient to seek first to God, by prayer, Orandum est ut
sit men's sana in corpore san^. Jue n. 10. Sat.
that he would discover the disease, and so guide and bless the physician that
he may cure him. It was King Asa his fault, in that he sought not to the Lord,
but to the Physicians. 2 Chronicles. 16.12.

All things are to be sanctified by the word and prayer; by the word we enjoy a
holy liberty, and by prayer, we enjoy a curing blessing.

And therefore pray for the Parliament, and forget not the King, who is put
into the first place, and is not last to be remembered, 1 Timothy 2.2. That God
would so bless their consultations, and determinations, that we may lead a
quiet peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Hemingius renders a good
reason, which is, Per preces piorum respubl: tranquillitate and pace fruuntur.
Heming.
because Commonwealths do enjoy peace and tranquillity, through the prayers
of the Saints. But mark what kind of peace it is we must pray for; it is a
holy peace, yea such a peace as may stand with all godliness and honesty, with
a through reformation, and not only such a reformation as was in Queen
Elizabeth's time, for which we have great cause to be thankful.

I say, Quid enim prodesset medicina, nisi Deus illi subministrat vires?
pray for your Parliament Physicians, for they can do no good without a Divine
benediction: They desire it, and God does require it, yea it is acceptable to
him, and profitable to us, verse 3. pray more, and prate less, put thy very
breath out to the exchangers, for thy masters best advantage, the return of
thy Talent will be above eight in the hundred, God is the best Debtor.

2. The patient ought not only to pray, but also to consider that he has
offended God, Agenda est poenitentia. Ludo. Lav. ^.
who has afflicted him for his sins. Lamen. 3.39. and to repent of his sins
the causes of his troubles. Do thou like wise, it is that the Parliament
calls for, without which they cannot cure the Kingdom. Luke 13.1.

3. Peccant igitur, qui medicinam p^orsus abjici^nt, vel non in tempo (...).
The Patient ought to be ruled and ordered by the Physician, and not by his own
appetite, therefore he offends who rejects and neglects physic, and will not
observe the time set him, but will observe his own hours, and fulfill his own
fancy.

Repent therefore speedily, Parl. Ordin. E.
it is not only the doing it, but the speedy doing it that is required in the
Ordinance. Stop beginings, the physic and Physician may come too late, delay
is dangerous: but more of this hereafter in the fifth part.

4. Se^o medicina paratur.
The patient must not only pray, but also pay, Exodus 21.19. he shall see the
Physician paid; good reason then we should pay what the Parliament lay out for
their patients, they desire no gains, Impensas in medicos prae^abit. Vat.
Hieron.
but thanks for their pains, and if we shall deny them thus little, we shall
show our selves very ungrateful: murmr not your physic is too dear, when
it can be got no cheaper, war is chargeable.

5. The patient must be patient, his name teaches him his duty. Submit thy
self to their authority, and patiently suffer what they shall lay upon thee,
for thy private and the public good, Romans 13.1. It is well known which is the
highest Court of justice in England, according to the constitution of our
government, but it is not well observed. Let it not be said that Englands
Parliament is turned Englands patient; if I might lawfully wish it, I would
soon wish, that I might rather die, then live to see that day in England: what
honest man can with patience think of outliving his Religion and Liberty? but
Gods will be done. Saint James gives us all a seasonable admonition, and sets
it on with a strong reason, Iam. 1.4. Let patience have her perfect work, why?
Vincit qui patitur.
that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. The next way not to want,
is, not to want patience, Esa. 30.15. In quietness and in confidence shall be
your strength.

6. The patient must be constant; he sins against his own body, who does
prostrate it to the experiment of every Emperick. Qui quosvis adhibent
Empiricos, anus, etc. in modo quoque peccantur.
Take Solomon's advice, Prove. 27.10. Thine own friend, and thy fathers friend
for ske not. The great College of Physicians is our friend, and has been our
fathers friend, let us not forsake them. They have had most experience of
Englands troubles, and can tell better then outlandish Mountebanks, Popish
Merchants, how to cure our National maladies. All take heed, that to get a
little pleasing ease, they overthrow not the state of the great Body of the
Kingdom.

Let this consideration increase thy patience, Hoc non patietur aevum. Cicero.
Erit vicissitudo.
this sickness shall not last always, God has more healthful days, and
better times for his Church. 2 Pet. 3.13. Rev. 21.3.

THE FOVRTH PART.
CHAP. XI. The Parliament Physic it self, and that is Repentance.
IT is therefore thought most necessary by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
Parl. Ordin. L.
that all His Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom of England, be excited and
stirred up speedily to lay hold upon this only and unfailing remedy of
Repentance.

APHORISM 6. Repentance is only Physic to cure a sin-sick Nation. Jonah 3.
Isa. 22.12.
For the better understanding of this Aphorism, consider

First, what Repentance is.

Secondly, why it is only physic to cure a sin-sick Nation.

What Repentanceis. Considerat. 1


I meet with many definitions; I will give you some of them, but I will
conclude with one taken out of this Ordinance, containing the sum and
substance of the rest.

Repentance is a dying to sin by a true contrition, and a living to
righteousness, Poenitentia est qua vera contritione morinur peccatis, and fide
e^igimus nos^e peccatis Sarc. loc. com. d^ poenit. Peccata sua corrigunt. Just.
Mart. quaest. a Gent. Sed etiam damnare omma ^a, in quae prius confis^s est.
by faith. Mark 1.15. In this definition of Repentance, are two parts. First, a
mortification of sin in our members, Col. 3.5. a crucifying of the old man.
Secondly, a Vivification to righteousness, Ephesians. 4.

The same Author says, To repent is not only to depart from evil, but also
to damn all those things wherein we have formerly trusted.

As sin would send an impenitent sinner to hell, so a penitent sinner sends
sin to hell, yea his idolized duties wherein he trusted, to make God some part
of amends for his trespasses. Every unregenerated man, is a natural, though
not an artificial Papist.

Repentance is not only an aversion, and turning from sin, in regard of the
sorrow of heart it brings with it; but also its a conversion to God, ^ed
multo magis conversio ad Deum, tanquam verum peccati medicum. Pet. Ramus
depre^^t. l. 3. p. 238.
as the only sin-curing Physician, 2 Kings 20. Jonah 3.10.

Every sinner is borne into the world, with his back toward God, and heaven;
but Repentance turns his face toward God, and heavenward.

To repent is to bewail sins past, and for time to come, not to commit sin
bewailed; ^^st mala prae^^ta plangere, and plangenda ^e^um non committere. Amb.
Greg. Pet. Lumb. 4 Sent. did. 14.
It is to grieve for sin, and not to commit sin grieved for.

Many other definitions I might give you, but I will content my self with that
in the Ordinance, which is this that follows, and it contains within it,
virtually what has been or can be said, concerning Repentance.

Repentance is such a bitter grief of heart for all the sin and misery of
this polluted and afflicted Nation, with such a preparedness for a through
Reformation, as God may be pleased graciously to accept. Parl. Ordin. M. E.


Wherein consider these parts, or Positions.

1. Repentance is a bitter grief of heart. 2. This grief, it is a general
grief. 3. This Repentance, it is accompanied with a preparedness for a
through Reformation. 4. Its a God-pleasing Repentance. 5. Its a humble
Repentance. 6. Its a proportionable, and suitable Repentance.
Of these in order.

First, this Parliament repentance, its a bitter grief of heart. This appears
by the first words in the definition, wherein two things are remarkable. 1. The
truth of it, in that it is called grief of heart. 2. The measure of it, in that
it is called a bitter grief.

First then, it must be a real and hearty sorrow. Poenitentia in cord s^^a
est. Calv.
God in all things hates hypocrisy, but especially in the work of Repentance.
Joel 2.13. Thus says the Lord, Turn ye unto me with all your heart, and rent
your hearts, and not your garments. Rab. Ab. Ezra. ut intelligat veritaten.
Rab. Kimchi. Id enim praec^punmest. Si quando ex animo resipiscamus. Vat.
By the renting of the heart, we are to understand the sincerity of this
sorrow. God requires repentance in secret, for this is the best repentance,
most free from hypocrisy. Then God is most willing to forgive, when we do
seriously and indeed grieve for our sins: heart and hands must go together.
Lam. 3. ver. 41. What God has joined, let no man put asunder.

Secondly, it must not only be a hearty and true grief, but likewise a bitter
grief, Joel 2.12. it must be with fasting, weeping, Lucerate cor. Jun.
and mourning, and our hearts must be rent, or cut in pieces, and not only
rased, or pricked. Mediocris poenitentia non sufficit, quum vos tot sceleribus
sitis mihi obstricti. Call.
Therefore Calvin says very well to this purpose, God does not only require
the truth of godly sorrow, but the degree of it, for a little is not enough,
seeing we have committed many great sins against God.

Therefore Saint James, Chap. 4.9. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, let
your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness. If ever a
mourning weed were in season, sure its now in fashion, though too few wear it.
It is with most men, as with those in Amos 6.6. or like those Mat. 11.17. Qui
nullis argumentis ad veram poenitentiam permovemini. Aretius.
who did not suit themselves with the times. They were called to Repentance,
but no arguments would prevail with that pertinacious people. They would not
mourn to those that mourned to them, but like the unconverted Romans, who did
not only sin against knowledge, but also had pleasure in those that did
sin together with themselves, Romans 1.32.

2. Parliament repentance is a general grief, and that in two regards, 1. In
regard of sin, it must be for all sin. 2. In regard of punishment, it must
be for all the misery of this polluted and afflicted Nation.

First, it must be for all sin. Ezekiel. 9.4. They are marked on their
foreheads, who sigh and cry for all the sins that be done in the midst of
the City.

There is good cause why we should do so, Peccato nihil rependitur, nisi mors.
Pet. Mart. Fabius.
because the least sin is committed against a great God, and the smallest wages
that is due to the least sinner is death, Romans 6.23. Death temporal and death
eternal: though all sins are venial inregard of God, yet no sin is venial
in regard of its littleness. Lastly, because every sin is a public enemy,
though committed in private, as Achans stealing and hiding the Wedge of gold,
and Babylonish garment, Iosuah 7. Sin is an accursed thing, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Every
sin is a Peace-breaker, and Incendiary of war, yea the least sin is a great
makebate betwixt God and Man, Genesis 6.5. Evil thoughts in man, caused God to
have evil thoughts to wards man, sin in thought causes God to punish sin
indeed: as the least leake in a ship may drown all the passengers, so the
least sins may destroy man kind; the eating of one Apple did cause all the
rest in the Garden of Paradise to rot; the least sin and the youngest sinner
do contribute toward the great stock of National sins. As the Sea consists
of single and small drops of salt water, so does the sea of misery, of single
and small sins.

Secondly, it must be for all the misery of an afflicted Nation. It is not
enough for a man to grieve for the punishment of his own iniquities, Proximorum
damna ut pro pri^, ^^ntit fidelis. Lyran.
but he must grieve likewise for the afflictions of Joseph. Amos 6.6. We are to
lay to heart our neighbors losses, as if they were our own. By Joseph we are
to understand, the people of God, Joseph, ^d ^l, ^egni (...) Mere.
and by affliction, the sickness of a State or Kingdom, now all the members of
it are to be affected with it: there is a natural sympathy, which is good, and
moves compassion, so there is a spiritual sympathy, which is the ground of
spiritual affection, 2 Cor. 11.29. And this is necessary amongst Christians at
all times, especially in these suffering times. Who is weak, says Paul, and I
am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? therefore we are commanded to
weep with those that weep; Romans 12.15. If ever the counsel of our blessed
Savior was in season, it is now in season, Luke 23.28. Daughters of Jerusalem,
weep not for me, but for your selves, and for your children.

The want of this godly sorrow, and heart-smart, not only for those that are
our Country men, but likewise for all Christian Churches, in Europe, speak
harsh things against us. Amos 6.7, 8, etc. Therefore now shall they go captive
with the first that go captive, and the banquet of them that stretched
themselves shall be removed. The Lord God has sworn by himself, I abhor the
excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces therefore. And it shall come to
pass, if there remain ten men in one house, that they shall die.

For my own part, if I may speak my own thoughts, I do not so much fear the
destruction of England, because of the greatness of its sins, as because of
the littleness of its repentance, and compassion to Germany, and Ireland, our
neighboring and neighbourly Countries, Duo crimina accusat Amos in proceribus
utriusque regni. Calv.
We put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near,
as Amos says, Amos 6.3. In which verse the Prophet does reprove the very
Nobles of both Kingdoms, Judah and Israel, for two great sins. 1. Because
they did not avert by repentance, but provoke Gods anger against them, by their
proud and tyrannical government over Gods heritage, overthrowing all equity
and square dealing with the people of God. 2. Because they did live in
security, Vana terriculamenta.
and would not believe the threats of the Prophet, but did reject them as vain
and mere Scar-crowes, and so they were not touched with any sorrow for their
own sins, or the miseries of both Kingdoms, and so by this means, Non
tanguntur ullo sensu. Call. Solium violentiae. Vatab.
even their impenitency, they did cause the throne of violence to come near.
Surely if we compare the state of our Israel, with that of old, we may say with
Solomon, there is no new thing under the sun. Eccles. 1.9.3.15. Praemium
condignum rependentur. Vatab.
I saw under the sun, the place of judgment, that iniquity was there, and the
place of righteousness, that iniquity was there, and what followed the throne
of violence, but the judgment of God? verse 17. They shall be justly and
sutably punished.

Believe it brethren there is good cause why the Lord does punish, Justus
Dominus, and rectum judicium ejus, etiams^ non semper nobis videtur. Ferus in
Jos 7.
not only subjects but also Kings and great ones, in the season of the
universal apostasy, wherein faith is so rare, that it can scarcely be found on
earth, men are so well acquainted with the artifice of Reservation,
Equivocation, and Elusion.

For my own part, I have often thought that that in Saint Luke 18.8. is now in
fulfilling; the words are these. Neverthelsse when the Son of man comes,
shall he find faith on the earth? I am sure on it there is too little in many of
our late Protestations and vows, Quid verba audiam cum facta videam?
if not in our own hearts.

3. This general grief it is accompanied with a preparedness, for a through
reformation.

It must be with us now as it was with the people of God, in Ezra his time,
Ezra 10.1, 2, etc. They did not only pray, confess, and cast themselves down
before the house of God, but the people did weep very sore. A great weeping,
but here is not all, there was in them a preparedness for a through reformation
verse 3. Now therefore let us make a Covenant with our God to put away all the
strange wives, and such as are borne of them, according to the counsel of my
Lord, and of those that tremble at the commandment of our God, and let it be
done according to the Law.

In which words, a through Reformation is aimed at, as it appears by these
particulars. Die Mer^. May. ^ Anno 1641.
1. They desired to bind themselves in Covenant with God, that they might be
tied the more strictly to it. (As in the Parliament Protestation.) 2. It was to
put away all, and not only some of their wives, though never so dear unto
them. 3. In that it was to put away all their children, though themselves
multiplied, if they were borne of strange women. 4. In that they were willing
to do this according to the counsel of the most holy and scrupulous Reformers,
According to the Counsel of my Lord, and of those that tremble at the
commandment of our God, (...) ju^ta ^^gent. Vat.
tender conscienced men. 5. Because they desired that the law of God might be
the rule of their Reformation.

In which preparedness for a through Reformation take notice by the way, of two
or three things very considerable in these Reforming times.

1. Take notice of their Integrity and uprightness toward God, in that they
desired a through Reformation according to his word, and not according to their
own fancies.

2. Take notice of their Humility, in that they did refer themselves for a
Reformation, to such as were most able to judge of controversies, in regard of
learning and piety: this was the sum and substance of their desires, that all
things might be done according to the Law.

3. Take notice that this their preparedness for a Reformation, being in
conjunction with bitter sorrow for their sins, was a door of hope to
Shecaniah, that God would spare his people Israel.

And truly for my own part, Nos quidem Peccatores sumus, at Deus noster
misericor^ es^ ^esipiscentibus, and ad Dominum convertentibus. Fran.
this is all the ground of my hope, that God will spare England, and not
destroy it totally and finally, I cannot read that God did ever destroy a
Kingdom, in the act of a deep Humiliation, and a through Reformation; now I hope
God will not make Englands ruin a new president of his more then ordinary
justice, seeing not only many of the vulgar sort, but also the Parliament, and
Assembly of Ministers, do desire to practice the Ordinance set forth for the
same purpose, wherein not only a bitter grief for all sin, but also a
perfect reformation is desired and required in the whole Nation.

Now therefore let us enter into Covenant with the Lord, as the Parliaments and
Assemblies of Ministers in both Kingdoms have lately done, and as the people
of God did in Ezra his time, when there was a general corruption in the land.

Otherwise our bitter grief of heart, for sin and punishment, Omnes
caeremoniae, sine laceratione cor dis, mera lud^bria sunt.
will be turned into a sin; the remedy will increase the disease. Some of the
heathen, in the days of their sacrifice to their Idols for health, did
riotously banquet to the prejudice of their health, so too too many of us, in
the very fast days, when we seem to mourn bitterly for our personal and
national sins, run afresh to our sins, But God, in his just judgment, will
punish a hypocritical humiliation, Qui non est hodie, ^^as minus aptus ^^it.
and a bull-rush dejection for a day, with a further unpreparednesse to repent
and amend. When the heart is not rent with the garments, the rending of the
garments, sowes the sin faster together. When the heart and breast are not
knocked together, Tundens pectus and non corrigens vitia, ea cousolidat. Aug.
that knocking will never batter sin, but will consolidate and compact it
together more firmly; it will be as the knocking of a nail, which drives it
further and faster in.

4. Parliament Repentance is a God pleasing Repentance, argued by these words
in the definition, That God may be pleased to accept. Now this is a
God-pleasing Repentance two ways, 1. In regard of intention and purpose of
heart, 2. In regard of acceptance, on Gods part, the effect and consequence of
it is acceptance.

First, in regard of the intention of the heart in grieving bitterly for the
evil of sin and the evil of punishment, its not so much to get a pardon of sin,
and a removal of the punishment, Tristitia secundum deum hinc nascitur, quod
aliquts sentia^ se deum offendisse, and ^am optet id sactum non esse. Heming.
as to procure the love and favor of God who is offended, and justly
displeased, and therefore its called sorrow after a godly manner, 2 Cor. 7.9.
God is the especial object of it: if there were no hell to punish sin in, yet
a true penitent sinner would grieve, because he has displeased so good and
gracious a God, and has broken so holy a law; and therefore David, Psalm. 51.
did especially eye God, in his bitter grief for sin, seeking to please him, as
well as to ease himself. Mary Magdalens tears were mixed with drops of love to
Christ.

Secondly, its a God pleasing repentance, in regard of the ^ffect of it, God
does graciously accept of it, Jonah 3. Isai. 58.5. and in many other places,
but more of this hereafter.

Fifthly, its a humble Repentance.

This is argued from these words in the definition, as God may be pleased
graciously to accept. The Parliament of England does disclaim all merit, even
in their deepest humiliation, they ascribe all to the richness and freeness
of Divine grace, in the acceptance of Englands bitter sorrow for sin, and
preparedness for an amendment of life. This is according to the practice of
the true Church, in all ages, if we look into the histories of former times,
nothing will appear more plain, and imitable.

God cannot endure a proud hypocritical fast, Isa. 57. Or a Pharisaicall and
Popish confession, Propter hoc en^m, quod confidant in se^psis, and (...) totum
deo ^^buunt, etc. and Damonem reddat. Theoph. Arch. Episc. Monstratur per hanc
parabolam, quod non oportet extolli inbono quo^iam opere, imo neque in omn^um
mandato^^n impletime. Chrysostom. Abbreviator. Splead^da (...). Aug.
Luke 18.10. Pride in duties is no little sin, its to deny God, and to turn
adversary to his free grace, as my author says, it makes a man a proud
Devil, who did make himself like to God.

Therefore let us in all our performances, and greatest enlargments, speak the
language of our blessed and thrice humble Savior, and say, when yet have done
all these things which are commanded you, we are unprofitable servants, Luke
17.10. This parable does teach the Church of God, that it ought not to be
puffed up with the performance of any good work, no, if we could fulfill the
whole Law, for all is of God, and but our duty; but now if we consider how
grievously we sin against God, and how exceedingly we fall short of a legal
perfection, we must needs be humbled, in and for our best actions, for out of
Christ they are but beautiful sins, and menstruous clouts.

Sixthly, Its a proportionable Repentance.

This is also inferred from this word Such in the definition, where it is said
to be such a bitter grief of heart, that is, such a suitable grief as it may
be in some measure proportionable to our sinful joy in sinning, Quam magna
deliquimus, tam grand^ter des^eamus. Cyprian.
as it may be pleasing to God, and acceptable to him: And therefore its laid
down as a standing rule to square our sorrow for sin by, that sorrow must be
proportioned to our sins. The greater our sin, the greater must be our sorrow;
David was not so much afflicted for his other lesser infirmities, as for his
Murder, and Adultery. Peter went out and wept bitterly, Math. 26.75. The
medicine must be answerable to the malady, the antidote to the poison.

Yet we must not think with the Papists, that this proportionable sorrow for
sin is required in way of satisfaction for sin, Non opus esset, Christum mo^^,
si Pet^us potuisset pecc^tum suum delere Pareus. Considera. ^.
for its only the blood of Christ that gives justice satisfaction, and by his
blood, not by our tears we are cleansed from all sin. 1 John 1.7. the death of
Christ had been needless, if Peter could have wept away his sins.

Secondly consider, why Repentance is only physic for a sin-sick Nation, the
reasons are these.

1. Because Repentance is most suitable physic, and that in two respects. 1.
Because its most connaturall to the sin-sick soul, for its spiritual physic,
and therefore its called a supernatural grace. 2. Because its contra-naturall
to the disease, which is impenitency. Now physic as it must be suitable to the
nature of the patient, Sublata causa, tollitur essectus.
so it must be contrary to the nature of the distemper, that so the potion may
oppose and so destroy the cause of sickness, which is sin, and only sin. Lam.
3.39.

2. Because its most seasonable physic, its all ways in season, Paenitentia
vera, nunquam sera.
but especially in these dog-dayes, wherein sin is more then ordinarily
mortal, yea so deadly are our national sins, that every faithful Clerk in
this Land, do seem to toll Englands passing Bell, by giving warning, that
England is brought near to the Gates of death and destruction, except it does
repent speedily, Rev. 2.5. Repentance is physic for a dying and gasping
Nation, Isa. 22. and the 12. verse.

Thirdly, because its the most Catholicall remedy that can be, Poenitentia
peccatorum medicus, qui eos, qui septem and septuaginta peccatis se inquinant,
curare potest, dummodo uti velint. Just. Mart. quest. a gent. page 54.
its a salve for every sore, its able to cure that impardonable sin against the
holy Ghost, but that its always accompained with impenitency. Some Doctrines
and Prescriptions are for Governors, some for Subjects, some for rich, some
for poor, some for young, some for old, some for the wicked, some for the
godly, some for the Court, some for the Country, but Repentance is for all men,
being sinners, none can say he has no need of it, because all have sinned,
Romans 5 12. 1 John 1. last ver. Romans 11.32. Psalm. 14. Now its a Catholicall
remedy in 3 regards. 1. In regard of persons. Luke 24.17. Repentance is to be
preached in his name to all Nations. 2. Misericordiae dei, propter poenitentiam
delet omnia peccata. Oeco.
In regard of diseases. 3. In regard of times. At what time soever a sinner
does repent, he shall save his soul and live, Ezekiel. 18.27. there is no other
physic in the world, good for all persons, diseases, and at all times. That
which is one man's meat, is another man's poison, the constitutions of men are
so various. Remedium est poenitentia, quo evadere possint Ferus.
Repentance is physic to all, poison to none, it kills sin, but it
preserves the life of the sinner; Though Repentance be a mortal potion to the
old man, yet its a quickening medicine to the new man, its an enemy to thy body
of sin, but its a friend to thy sin-sick body: all which and more, you may
clearly see in Master Bradfords works and last words.

Parliamentum Anglicanum est Bradfordus-Redivivus.
O England, England, repent thee of thy sins, repent thee of thy sins. Beware
of Idolatry, beward of false Antichrists, take heed they do not deceive you.

As Mr. Bradford was speaking these words, (...), p^g. 1540.
the Sheriff bad tie his hands if he would not be quiet: O Master Sheriff
(said Master Bradford) I am quiet, God forgive you this Master Sheriff; One of
the Officers that was making the fire, hearing Master Sheriff so spoken to, by
Master Bradford, said, If you have no better learning then that, you are but a
fool, and were best to hold your peace. To the which words he gave no answer,
but asked all the world forgiveness, and forgave all the world, and prayed the
people to pray for him. And turning his head to the young man that suffered
with him, he said, Be of good comfort brother, for we shall have a good supper
with the Lord this night, and so spoke no more words that any man did hear,
but embracing the reeds said thus,

Strait is the way, and Narrow is the gate that leads to life, and few there
be that find it. In which picture and words consider 4 things, (Christian
Reader.) 1. How like a Roundhead Master Bradford looks and spoke. 2. How
Cavalier-like his enemies spoke to him, and dealt with him. 3. The truth of
Solomon's saying, U^ in rev^lutione coeli. Cartw.
That which has been is, Eccl. 3.15. And there is no new thing underneath the
Sun, Eccl. 1.9. 4. The oneness of Bradfords and the Parliaments physic, as
appears by his Epistle to the City of London, as follows.

On this sort, my right dearly beloved, let us bewail our sins, and that
heartily let us repent of our former evil life, heartily and earnestly
purposing to amend our lives in all things, continually watch in prayer,
diligently and reverently attend, hear, and read the holy Scriptures, labor
after our vocation to amend our brethren, Epistle to the City of London. Fox,
page 1543.
let us reprove the works of darkness: Let us flee from all Idolatry: Let us
abhor the Antichristian and Romish rotten service, detest the Popish Mass,
abrenounce their Romish God, Prepare your selves for the Cross, Be obedient to
all that be in Authority, in all things that are not against God and his word:
for then answer with the Apostles, It is more meet to obey God then man.

Bradford rendre^h a go^d reason in the same Epistle to the City of London, and
does both urge to repentance, and pray for a spiritual cure of those sickly
times and Marian days, his words are these.

In no case can the Kingdom of God approach to them that repent not, therefore
my dearly beloved let us repent, and be heartily sorry, that we have so
carnally, so hypocritically, so covetously and vaingloriously professed the
Gospel. All this I confess of my self to the glory of God, that he may cover
mine offenses in the day of judgmement. Let the anger and plagues of God most
justly fallen upon us, be applied to every one of our deserts, that from the
bottom of our hearts, every one of us may say, It is I Lord that have sinned
against thee, it is my hypocrisy, my vaineglory, my covetuousnesse,
uncleanness, carnality, security, idleness, unthankfulness, self-love, and
such like, which have deserved the taking away of our good King, of thy word,
and true Religion, of thy good Ministers by exile, prisonment and death. It is
my wickedness that causes success, and increase of authority to thy enemies.

Oh be merciful, be merciful unto us, turn to us but not in thy fury, lest
we be consumed in thine anger, chastise us not in thy wrathful displeasure,
reprove us not, Bradfords prayer for England
but in the midst of thy anger remember thy mercy, for if thou mark what is
done amiss, who shall be able to abide it? but with thee is mercifulness,
that thou might be worshipped. O then be merciful to us, that we may worship
thee: hear us for the glory of thy name, be merciful to our sins, for they be
great. Oh heal us and help us for thine honor, let not the wicked say, Where
is their God?

CHAP. XII. Application of this Aphorism.
THe consideration of this Aphorism is of use many ways. If England perish
and die of her Mortal diseases, blame not the Physicians, but the patients, we
cannot say, there is none to plead thy cause, that thou may be bound up,
thou have no healing medicines, Ier. 30.13. I durst appeal to all antiquity,
whether ever there was such a Parliament Ordinance, for the cure of any
sin-sick Nation before, since the days of Brutus. Now if this be the best
physic in the whole world, blame not the Physician or the physic, but thy
self O England, if thou dye in thy miseries, its not only for thy former sins,
but especially for thy impenitency, thou will not repent of thy sins: thou will
not take this Nation-curing potion prescribed to thee, by that great College
of Physicians, Luke 13.1.2.

Would you know why the body-politike is less at ease then it was before the
Parliament began? certainly this is the cause, Parliament physic meeting with
strong distempers in an old and much decayed body, must needs make the
kingdom deadly sick: purging and vomiting physic is profitable, but
troublesome. Be willing to be sick for thy healths sake, quarrel not with thy
Physicians, and Doctors, who are necessitated to do what they do, for thy
health and welfare hereafter: when thy distempers are weaker, and fewer, thy
physic shall be more gentle.

See what cause we have to fear Englands ruin, there are very few that do
truly repent in the land, I am afraid that God may say of England as he did of
Jerusalem, Ier. 8.6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright, no man
repents him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? every one turned to
his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. Mark what follows in the
10. ver. Therefore will I give their wives unto others, and their fields to
them that shall inherit them, for every one from the least unto the greatest is
given to covetousness, from the Prophet even unto the Priest, every one
deals falsely. verse 11. Contury of Scand. Minist.
For they have healed the hurt of my people slightly, saying, peace, peace,
whon there is no peace, etc.

Its of the Lords mercies, that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not, Lament. 3.22, 23. They are new every morning, great is thy
faithfulness.

Hence the Catharists and Novatians are confuted, who deny Repentance to such
as sin after Baptism: this is contrary to what has been spoken, the examples
of Manasses, David, Solomon, Peter do witness against them; Aug de Haeres.
Judicant Deum, qui negant post lapsum repa^ation^m fi^^^. Greg.
Gods proffering to have spared the Church of Ephesus upon her repentance, does
fully and plainly condemn these Sectaries. Rev. 25.

Lastly, examine your selves, whether you have repented or no, you have been
put upon this duty a long time, Etsi non loquatu^ Dominus, satis tamen
flagellis ipsis and plagis vocat. Call. in Isa. 22.12.
and fast-dayes have been allowed by public authority, as penitential days,
almost these two years and this Ordinance has been out almost a twelve
month, and God has called for it, not only by the word, but also by the
sword: and therefore we shall be guilty of obstinacy if we have not amended our
ways, and made our peace with God.

Now examine and try your selves by these signs.

1. By your grief for sin, not only because it has wronged you, but
especially because it has displeased God, whom the penitent soul does entirely
love, and therefore its laid down as a rule in our gr^^ving for sin, Dolor iste
de peccatis, si sit genuinus, magis oritur ex co, quod Deus per illa sit
offensus, quam quod ^is^riam secum adferunt. Ames. de consc. Ames. de resip.
Sub illa ratione, quia, est peccatum, and divinam offendit majestatem.
that it must be rather out of an apprehension of God displeased, then out of a
sense of our punishment.

2. By your hatred of sin, as a thing most detestable, Rev. 2.6. now this
hatred if it be sincere, 1. Its carried against all sin without exception, its
an impartial hatred, Psalm. 119.104. 2. Its an implacable hatred, without
reconciliation. 3. Its a vehement hatred without toleration. 4. Its a constant
hatred, without intermission.

3. By your fix^d purpose and constant resolution to these things. 1. To shun
all sin for time to come, because its displeasing to God. 2. To practice every
good duty. 3. To use all means that may conduce to those ends. And lastly, to
remove all impediments, both internal and external.

Now if it be thus (Christian Reader) surely there are very few in England that
do truly repent: How little grief is there for sin, in City of Court, in Town
or Country, in Persons or Families? Where can a man meet with a godly
sorrowing, and a sin-hating Christian? I doubt not but some such Lots may be
found in our English Sodom, but they are very rare, like so many Pelicans in
the Wilderness, and Black-Swans in the Rivers, and where they are espied, they
are shot at, as the only Malignants in the world, Psalm. 11.2. Verba venenosa.
Hieron. Cassio.
Lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon the string,
that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart. These arrows are
poisoned shafts, bitter and reproachful speeches: As Parliament dogs,
Roundheads, Anabaptists, Brownists, etc.

But let all such Parliament-slanderers, and self-damming dammees know, that
God is in his holy Temple. The Lords Throne is in Heaven, his eyes behold, his
eyelids try the children of men. The Lord tries the righteous, but the
wicked, and him that loves violence, his soul hates. Upon the wicked he will
rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the
portion of their cup. For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, his
countenance does behold the upright. Psalm. 11.4, 5, 6, 7.

I should now exhort to the duty of Repentance, but I shall refer thee,
(Christian Reader) to the 10 part of this Parliament physic, which contains
several motives to Repentance, only in the mean time make use of what has
been said hitherto to the same purpose.

Thus much concerning the definition of Repentance, now follows the division.

In the beginning of this treatise, Repentance was divided into three parts.

1. Confession. 2. Humiliation. 3. Reformation.
Now, in order I am to handle the nature of confession, as the first part of
Repentance, which appears by these words in the Ordinance, wherein we are
excited to Repentance.

Freely acknowledging, Parl. Ordin. E.
and heartily bewailing, etc. Secretly and in public in congregations, both
their own personal sins, and chiefly those sins that are and have been the
sins of the Nation. A confession of National sins, being most agreeable to
National judgments.

In these words, confession seems to me, to be like a spiritual vomit, which
fetches up the corrupt humors, and raw crudities that lie heavy and
indigested on the stomach, which will without remedy, and that speedily, ascend
so high, that they will stifle and suffocate the whole Kingdom: from whence
collect this Aphorism following.

CHAP. XIII. Confession.
APHORISM 7. Confession is the Sin-vomiting part of Repentance.
FOr the better understanding of this Aphorism consider three things.

1. What confession is. 2. The ingredients in this vomit. 3. Why it is called a
vomit.
1. For the first consideration, What confession is: I could bring forth many
definitions of it, but I will content my self with one gathered out of this
Ordinance, being full and pertinent to the purpose, which is this.

Confession is a free, full, hearty, Parl. Ord. E.
and humble acknowledgement made to God, secretly and in public, both of our
personal sins, and also, and that chiefly of those sins that are and have
been the sins of this Nation.

In which confession consider these parts.

1. It is a free confession, not extorted by pain of the wrack, as Pharaohs
was, nor wrung from us, as Saul's was, or wrested, as Balaams was, when his Ass
reproved him, and the Angel drew his sword at him. Numb. 22.30, 31, 34. But it
should be free, as David's was, 2 Samuel 24.10. whose heart smote him before Gad
came to him. Acts 2.37. The penitent Jews did not stay till the Disciples came
to their houses, but they went to them and said, Hook. Souls preparat. p. 206
Men and Brethren you have spoken against the sin of murder, and we confess
that we are guilty of this sin, what shall we do to be saved?

Let us therefore confess freely, God loves a free confessor, as as he does
a backward sinner.

2. It is a full confession of all sins. Lam. 2.19. Parl. Ordin. M.
Some of the ancient expound that place of a full confession, as in pouring out
water all goes out, not so in pouring out oil, some still hangs behind in
the inside of the vessel.

Thou will discover all to the Physician, or ought to do so, for thy bodies
sake, do it much more for thy souls sake.

3. It is a hearty confession, with the heart as well as the lips, otherwise it
will be but lip-labor, lost-labour, Math. 15.8. They worship God in vain with
their mouth, Frustra colunt Deum, qui per opera illum debono ant. Theoph.
who dishonor him by their works, therefore Let us lift up our hearts with
our hands unto God in the heavens, and say, we have transgressed. Lam. 3.41, 42.

4. It is a humble confession, as it appears by these words in the Ordinance,
Parl. Ord. M.
We ought to humble our selves, and to give glory to God, the searcher of all
hearts, by confessing all sin.

Such was the confession of the humble Publican, Humilis confessio. Glossa.
Innoc. tertius, in Psalm. 32.4. Peccata Deo confitenda, non ut illum moneamus.
Pet. Mar.
Luke 18.13. Such also was the confession of the Prodigal, Luke 15.18, 19. I
am no more worthy to be called thy son.

5. It is made to God, not to inform him, of what he is ignorant, but to
inform our selves, and to stir up in our selves a more ardent desire of his
grace and favor. Psalm. 32.5. Let us confess our sins to God, for he only
is able to absolve us. Mat. 6.12.

6. It is a secret confession, either all alone to God alone, and this is the
most private confession that can be, Psalm. 32.5. Or it is less private, as in
the family, or with some few others, as the husband and wife, or friend and
friend together.

7. It is a public confession in congregations, Lev. 16.21. Aaron was to
confess all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in all their sins. It is also a public confession in
ass^mblies that are civil meetings, (...) Pet. Mart.
Iosuah 7.19. this is called a civil confession, as in Assissis, Sessions, etc.

8. It is a personal confession, Psalm. 51.3, 4. I^ which confession 2 things
are especially to be observed. 1. A self-accusation. 2. A self-condemnation.
David did accuse himself verse 3. and he did condemn himself, Ideo agnos^^ ut
tu agnos^as. Gr^g in Ps. 51. Dete^t, (...) 3.
and justify God, verse 4. Let us do so, it is the next way to obtain an
absolution. 1 John 1. and verse 8. If we confess our sins, he is just and
faithful to forgive us our sins.

9. It (...) National confession, and there is a good reason given for it in
the Ordinance, which is this, Because a confussion of national sinn^s is most
agreeable to the national judgments, under which the land groa^es. This Daniel
did, Dan. 9.8.

There is a strong motive annexed to the reason, whereby we may be stirred up
to do so, and that is, because it is most likely to be effectual for the
removing of Gods judgments, under which the land groaneth.

10. It is a confession of sins both new and old, that have been and are
committed: though God have forgotten the pardoned sins of our forefathers,
yet we ought to remember them, though he has buried them, yet me must uncover
them, though God does cast them behind his back, Ille do^e^, qui videt (...)
sua. Non posui super dorsum quod feci. Gre.
yet we must have them before our eyes, that we may walk mournefully with our
God. Mich. 6.8. Psalm. 51.3. Which is a duty now as well as then.

Secondly, Consider the ingredients in this vomit, which are diverse, I will
only name these three or four.

1. The first is hope. Hosea 10.2. Dan. 9.9. We must not confess as Achan did
to Iosuah, looking for no favor, but as the sick man does to the Physician,
hoping to be cured by him.

Let this encourage thee to hope in his mercy, Timeat unusquisque ne peccet,
non lamen desperet. Aug. Glosa.
because God takes pleasure in such as hope in his mercy. Psalm. ^47.11. Let
thy fear keep thee from sinning, but take heed of despairing.

2. The second is shame. Ezra. 96. Ezra confessed and said, O my God I am
ashamed and blush, to lift up my face to thee, my God, for our iniquities are
increased over our heads, and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens. Romans
6.21. Hoc summo Dei beneficio contingere, ut hommes de anteact is peccatis
erub^scant. Chrysostom.
To be ashamed of our former sins, is a great blessing of God, it is the
property of a holy man to grieve for, and to be ashamed of his former sins.
Though faith is confid^nt, yet a penitent sinner is not impudent. Such as are
not ashamed, Jeremiah compares with the unshamefast whore. Ier. 3.3. such
shameless wretches were the Sodomites. Yet there is an unprofitable shame,
which leads not to repentance, Ier. 2.26. But this Godly shame brings
repentance. Ier. 31.19. I was ashamed, yea even confounded.

3. The third ingredient it is a holy anger: Ephraim in a holy anger did smite
himself on the thigh, Ier. 31.19. And the Publican did knock himself on his
breast, Luke 18. as a man in an angry passion. And David called himself a
beast 2 Samuel 24.10. The repenting sinner though he be most patient to God, yet
he is most impatient to himself, and full of indignation to his sins; though
he is in charity with all men, yet he is out of charity with himself, and could
even eat his own flesh, in an holy anger, when he finds no good thing
dw^lleth in it. He does oftentimes grind his teeth at himself, when he does
smile on his enemy. Job 42.6. Abjicio. Pagn.
Job did cast away himself as in a discontented fit.

4. The last ingredient it is a steadfast purpose through Gods grace never to
fall into the like sin again, otherwise it is but a hypocritical confession,
which God abhoreth: many can speak great words against themselves and their
sins, and yet they do little, when the hot fit of confession is off them, yea
they willingly and speedily fall into the relapse. Not much unlike a thief I
knew in Cambridge bridge Castle, who after 7 years imprisonment, was at last
set at liberty, and to me and others confessed many things against himself, but
about a month after, I saw him hanged at Tiburne, for a new Robbery.

Lastly, Consider why confession is called a Vomit.

Now its so called in regard of its similitude or likeness to a vomit, given by
the welwilling and skillful Physician, and that in diverse regards.

1. A^^^vatio cibo um (...) and condimeg^a (...) Pli. l. 11. c. 53.
A vomit is an ejection or casting out of some ill and burdensome thing within
the body, as raw-crudities, fleame, black, or yellow choler; So confession does
cast up and out, that which does lie heavy upon the conscience. Psalm. 32. Prove.
20.15. Ill gotten goods are like raw and undigested meat in the stomach. Beza
says they can never be concocted, or digested.

2. Per os ejeciio. Amb. Call.
A vomit is a casting out of some troublesome thing, by the mouth: and herein
it is differenced from a purge. Job 20.15. So Confession is done by the mouth.
Romans 10.10. With the mouth confession is made unto Salvation; this confession
unto Salvation, is true of sin, Vomitiones ad haec homini in remedium
excogitatae sunt.
as well as of faith.

3. A vomit is made for a remedy and help to a sick stomach, because it
cleereth and emptieth the stomach. So confession is a part of repentance,
which is the only remedy to cure a distempered Kingdom, as you have heard, it
casts up the filthiness within. Isa. Ventriculi subversione contingit. Calep.
28.8.

4. A vomit is loathsome and burdensome to the corrupted stomach, which is
argued by the subversion of the stomach, and the strainings in the act of
vomiting: So is confession contrary to polluted nature, which would feign hide
sin from the world, Prove. 30.20. but when the guilty conscience does fall
into a sit of confessing, Cant. Pot.
then the Malefactor cries out, O! my back does ache, I am paind extremely,
Ille tacet, qui silentio (...) conteg^ Greg. Hier. Cassiod.
alas! I had almost broke my lungs, and over-stretcht my heart strings,
before I could disgorge and empty my troubled mind and accusing conscience;
Psalm. 32. when David kept silence, and did not confess his sins, his
strength decayed through his roaring all the day long. David would feign have
bit in his sins, but he could not for his heart-blood; he must confess, and
confess he did, Antinomians.
and then, when the sin was up, he had ease.

I have often marvelled with my self what should be the reason why some
understanding Christians (who are called the Pointers or Eatonists) should deny
the confession of their sins; Heb. 4.13.
I could never think it was because God did not see them, Deus totus oculus
est.
for this were to eclipse his Omnisciency; Neither can I think it is because
they are no sinners, for our Savior did teach his Disciples and all Christians
to ask the forgiveness of their sins; Math. 6. 1 John 1.9, 10. But
certainly the cause is in the nature of confession, it is like a vomit which is
loathsome and burdensome to a full and corrupt stomach, as before has beed
declared.

CHAP. XIIII. Application of this Aphorism.
Have thou sinned? suffer not sin to lie upon thy Conscience, cast up all the
filth of sin by confession, suffer not thy painful crudities, as uncleannes,
murder, deceit, hypocrisy, pride, covetuousnesse, envy, malice,
unthankfulness, unprofitablenes under the means of grace, etc. any longer to
lodge within thee, as a nest and bag of stomach worms, but spue them out, and
so get ease.

Motives hereunto are many, some of them are these.

1. Because it is a necessary vomit: without confession no absolution, Prove.
28.13. No cure without confession, Deo peccatum dicere, sufficit, and
absolvitur. Chrysostom. ad pop. And. Hom. 3. Ideo plaga non curatur, quoniam
occultatur. Innocent. 3.
and therefore it is necessary to acquaint the Physician as much as may be with
the state of the Patient, otherwise he cannot make so suitable a composition. It
is a matter of great safety to cast up all the choler and steame that lies on
the stomach, which otherwise would putrefie and infect the whole body with ill
blood, and so a sickness follows by an inevitable necessity.

2. Because confession is a filling vomit, Psalm. 81.10. Noli opponere obicem
defensionis, sed aperi sinum confessionis. Aug. Confitendo dilata os tuum.
Cassiod. Glos. Non datur vacuum. Arist.
Open thy mouth wide by prayer and humble confession, and I will fill it with a
pardon, with the bread of life; the wider thou do open thy mouth, the fuller
it shall be filled. It is the saying of Hierome.

As in nature there is no emptiness, so it is true in grace; If we empty our
selves by confession, and lay our empty pitchers at the mouth of him the
fountain of all good, he will fill them brim full with good wine.

3. Because confession is a royal vomit, it is fit for a King, Psalm. 51. Psalm.
32.2 Sam. 24.10. It is indeed a shame to commit sin, but it is an honor to
confess it aright. Job amongst many fruits of obedience, as justice, mercy,
chastity, reckons also this of confession, equalling the confession of his
sins, with the best of his virtues, Dan. Dyke rep. page 82.
Job 31.33. God has united shame to sin, Romans 6.21. And honor to
confession, Iosuah 7.19. The next way to get glory from God after sinning, is
to glorify God by confessing. It is a disgrace for a drunkard to spue, but it
is his credit to spue out his drunkenness.

4. Non pe^^ant in Reg^s, qui consitentu^ peccataregum. Ign.
Because confession is a loyal vomit. Daniel (who was as true a subject as any
Cavalier in England) did confess the sins of Kings and Princes. Dan. 9 8.
and therefore sca^dalize not the Parliament, and Ministers for confessing the
sins of King and Kingdom, of Court and Country, it is a loyal duty, yet let it
be done with as much discretion as may be.

5. Because it is a gentle vomit; it will make thee sick, yea heartsick, but it
will not kill thee; it will strain, but it will not break thy heart strings,
if it be mixed with Hope, which is a necessary ingr^dient in this potion of
Confession.

Its necessary that some should have a stronger vomit then others, because they
are not so apt to confess as some others ar^, and moreover they have fouler
stomachs, they are guilty of grosser sins as murder, adultery, etc. yet even
these are so to confess sin, as they are not to despair of Mercy. Despair
breaks the very heartstrings of a sinner.

6. Galen. Mesu. Mahom. Arab. Av^nna.
Because its a Metaphysicall vomit, of a more pure and spiritual nature, then
our common and physical vomits are. There is a vomit of Hens dung to cast up
poison, which for health sake men will take, though it be loathsome to the
stomach; but now this vomit is of another nature, its a supernatural vomit.

In confessing thy sins, Caution.
take this Caution along with thee: Thou must not with the dog return to thine
own vomit, nor with the sow that was washed, Hae^ est ^nim vera poenitentia
(...) and ab^^^^ a non (...). Hieron. Snoph. Conversio. Bux Qui (...) quid^m
compunctionis se abluunt, sed in idipsum ^^ve^tentes sordescunt. Greg.
to the wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22.

True repentance does not only consist in confessing and grieving for sin, but
also in ceasing from sin; and therefore the learned do from the Original word,
translate and call Repentance, a Turning, its a turning from sin and the
devil, unto God and goodness. We must not be like that Serpent, which casts
up her poison when she goes to drink, and afterward sucketh it in again; but
as Solomon says, we must confess, and forsake sin, if we would find mercy
and absolution, Prove. 28.13. What Judge will pardon an incorrigible rogue, one
that has often been branded, and committed many robberies? Therefore well says
an ancient Writer on the 51. Psalm. 17. God will not receive their sacrifice,
who weep for their sins, but do again return unto them, and so defile
themselves again.

The consideration whereof gives check to many, yea most confessors in the
world, even amongst those who profess the Protestant Religion, but especially
to the Church of Rome, wherein an A^^icular Confession in the ear of the
Priest is sufficient. But let all such know that the promise of Absolution is
only made to such as confess and forsake their sins, Prove. 28.13. They are
said to forsake their sins, though their sins will not forsake them; for like
our shadow, it will follow us, when we run from it as fast as we can. Romans 7.24.

CHAP. XV. Humiliation.
NExt in order, follows the second part of Repentance, which is Humiliation.
This appears by the Ordinance; and it is the pain and grief which does
always follow or accompany the potion of Repentance, which does afflict the
soul, as corporal physic does the body of the patient. 2 Cor. 7.9.

APHORISM 8. Humiliation is the soule-afflicting, and heart-fainting part of
Repentance.
Lev. 16.29. Ye shall afflict your souls, verse 31. Humiliabitie animas
vestras LXX.
Or as the words are translated by the Septuagint, Humble your souls. Number.
29.7. and 30.13. Ezra 8.21. Ier. 45.3. Jonah 2.7.

For the better understanding of this Aphorism, consider what Humiliation is.
I might give many definitions, but that in the Ordinance is very full and
pertinent.

Humiliation its a hearty bewailing, Parl. Ordin. F.
even with deepest godly sorrow and detestation, secretly and in families, but
especially publicly in congregations, both of our own personal sins, and
chiefly those sins that are and have been the sins of this Nation.

In which definition, consider these eight parts.

1. Humiliation is a hearty bewailing of sin. Toto cord abominantur
peccatum. Occolamp. in Ezekiel. 6.9.
It is not enough to b^waile sin, but it must be done cordially; Repentance
must make the heart sick, Ier. 4.31. A woman in travel of her firstborne, does
bewail her self heartily, and not complementally; so is the Church of (...)
to bewail her self seriously. God does require the heart in every thing,
Prove. 23.26. He does especially eye the heart in any duty, Prove. 21.2. Ezekiel.
33.31.

There is good cause why we should do so. 1. Because our sins are heart-sins,
(...) peccato. Jun.
Mat. 15.19. 2. Because they are hearty and serious sins, 1 Ioh. 3.4. 3.
Because a heartlesse humiliation, is a hearty dissimulation, which is a double
iniquity. My Masters and fellow soldiers, it is not enough that you confess
you do not well to swear, but you must confess it heartily and sorrowfully,
or else God will look on you as Cavaliers, though you fight against them.

2. Dolor de peecatis, quatenas (...) Deum offendit, non tantum (...) hominem a
peccato, quatenus est (...) etc. Ames. de resip. (...), ^o quod sit contra
Deum, quem ama^. Cassiod. in Ps. 51.17.
This Humiliation is with godly sorrow. 2. Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow works
repentance. Now this grief is called godly sorrow in diverse regards. 1. Because
God is the chief object of it. Eze. 6.9. 1 Sa. 7.2. All the house of Israel
lamented after the Lord. Though there were no sparks of fire in hell, yet there
would be drops of water in a truly humbled sinners eyes, not only because of
the evil of punishment which does accompany sin, but especially because of the
evil of sin that is in sin, as it is the transgression of the law of a
righteous, holy, and a loving God. 2. It is called godly sorrow, because God is
the Author of it, Iam. 1.17. 3. Because God is the end of it, it drives the
soul to God, and not from God. Hos. 6.1. Lam. 3.40. As God is the Alpha of
this sorrow, so he is the Omega of it. As the soul returns to God that gave
it, so does this godly grief. 4. Because the subject in whom this sorrow is,
is a godly man; the wicked have not this grief: Cain, Pharaoh, Judas were
without it.

3. Proseindere. Kimhi. Sc^nduntur enim ^^^da, qui bus sactorum suorun
^oenitet. Oecolam. Dolor etiam (...) debet esse maximus (...) dolorum. Ames.
Cor cont^tum dicitur, quod poenitentiae labo^^hus vehemente^ est afflictum.
Cassi.
Its a deep humiliation, argued by these words in the definition, With the
deepest godly sorrow. Ezekiel. 6.9. the word there translated to loathe, signifies
to cut asunder, whereupon my author has this note; Their hearts are cut into
pieces, who repent of their sins. Now this cannot be without heart-bleeding
sorrow. Zach. 12 10, 11, 12. Upon which place one says, that grief for sin
ought to be the greatest grief of all: and there is very good reason for it,
because the evil of sin is a greater evil, then the evil of punishment is or
can be; the one is of the Devil, John 8.44. the other is of God, Amos 3.6.
There is something good in punishment, there is nothing good in sin, only
the most wise God does by accident turn sin to good, Romans 8.28. as the
skillful Physician does make a good and healthful use of poison to his
patient. Again, godly sorrow is the greatest, because our love to God is
greater then to any creature, if we be his children; now according to the
measure of love, is the measure of sorrow.



Gods children feel more sorrow in the intellectual part of the foul for
sin, then for any worldly loss or cross whatsoever. Sol. Thom. Suppl. qu.
4. Art. 1. Bellar. de poen. l. 2. c. 11. Intellective salt^m, quoad
displic^ntiam voluntati, quamvis (...) saepe a^^ dolores mag^^ appareant.
Ameside resip.


But this grief is but the displacency or dislike of that which the
understanding apprehends as evil.

But yet all the children of God do not feel such a sensible stinging smarting
grief for their sin in the sensitive faculty, as they do for out ward
afflictions: and the reason is good, for the more corporal any thing is, the
more it works upon the senses; though preparative sorrow be necessary to
remove the hindrances, and to fit the soul for conversion, yet we grant no
meritorious cause in preparation.

4. This Humiliation is accompanied with a detestation of sin, as it appears
in the definition; This detestation is an abhorring, Odium peccati, and supra
omne, detestabil^s.
and an execrating, or hating of sin, 2 Cor. 7.11. Yea what indignation, the
soul enlightened looks on sin as the most detestable thing in the world, and
least becoming a member of Jesus Christ: and the reason is strong, because the
heart that has been broken for sin, and burdened with it, looks on it as
the greatest evil in the world, and therefore for its own preservation, will
hate and dislike that sin which separates between God and the soul; the soul
knows sin, to be the greatest enemy, and therefore it is most invenomed with
violence against it, and says, whence come war, whence come pillaging and
plundering, whence come killing and slaying, whence come divisions betwixt King
and Parliament. Kingdom and Kingdom, whence come all these and many more
miseries, and what is the mint out of which all these plagues and judgments
come? Is it not my sin? It is not my poverty or disgrace that pincheth me, but
my fin first caused all these. It is the poison of sin, in poverty, shame,
war, famine, and the wrath of God in all these because of my sins, Romans
1.18. and therefore the soul throws away what it loved before, as a
menstruons cloth, Abominari omnia quae pugnant cum cultu Dei. Seria detestatio
ad omnes sordes adjiciendas impellit. Calv. in Isa. 30.22.
and says, get you hence. Isa. 30.21, 22. Upon which place my author gives
this note, the true penitent convert does detest whatsoever is contrary to the
worship of God.

This detestation of sin, if it be right, will compel us to cast away all
vile and base things, it will not spare gold, silver, pearls, but cast away
all rather then to be defiled with them: the consideration whereof may stay our
censuring the Parliament of England, in laboring to take away all the
monuments of Idolatry. Every precious thing ought to be as a dead piece of
carrion in our sight, rather then it should be a defilement to our fingers; Et
quicquid pretiosum est, faetere debet, potius quam talibus slagitiis nos
inquinari patiamur. Call.
We read that Iosuah and all Israel did not only stone Achan, but did burn
the wedge of gold, and the Babylonish garment, which a man would have thought,
might have been put to some necessary uses. Iosuah 7.

This detestation is then true. 1. When a man desires to have all sins
discovered, Hook. Souls preparat. page 236. 237.
Psalm. 139.24. 2. When he labors to have all sin killed. 3. When he hates
sin in others. 4. When he hates all the occasions and means of sinning.

As the consideration of this fourth part of humiliation is comfortable to such
as hunt for the blood of their own corruptions, and cannot be at quiet till
they see the death of all the relics of Popery and superstition in the land;
so it is terrible to the greatest part of the world, even of professors,
because this hatred of sin is very rare in the world, even amongst those that
count themselves some body, in the bosom of the Church; many hate the sinner
rather then the sin, if they consider seriously the ground of their hatred, yea
virtue more then vice.

5. This humilitation it is a secret humiliation: such an one was that of the
Prodigal, Luke 15.19. and that of the humble publican, Luke 18.13. and this is
freest from Hypocrisy; this secret humiliation shall have a public
exaltation, Math. 6.6. This humiliaation is either most secret all alone, Psalm.
4.4. or less secret, as in the family, Zach. 12.12, 13.

6. It is a public humiliation in congregations, on the Lords day, on
fast-dayes, and upon other meetings, as God shall give opportunity and ability.
Isa. 58.4.5. Esther 4.16. this fast was public in their meeting houses, or
synagogues; I fear private fasts on the public days of humiliation, will
prove dangerous to the Kingdom, and so displeasing to their friends, who are
afraid of Schism.

7. (...) homo and nascitu^ in originali peccato quod ex Adamo trabitur.
Hieron. Glos. Gregor.
It is a personal humiliation, it is not enough to mourn for the sins of
the time, but thou must likewise bewail the sins of thy own nature, as David
did Psalm 51.3. Yea original sin, as in the 5 verse, so the ancients expound
the place: good reason we should be humbled, and that deeply for our own
sins, seeing they are as much against God, our selves and the Nation, as
other men's sins are.

8. It is a national humiliation. Ezekiel. 9.4. For all the abominations done in
the midst of Jerusalem; God is dishonored most by public sins, and they
are most dangerous to a Kingdom. Isa. 1. Ezekiel. 9.9. The Land is full of blood,
because the City is full of perverseness, or wresting of judgment; Boni de
altorum quoque malis graviter ingemiscunt. Ex falso cultu sequitur providentiae
abneg atio, and eversio officiorum inter homines. Occ^.
Let us therefore sigh and cry for all the abominations that are done in the
midest of us, it is the property of an honest man to do so. A public
declination and defection from the purity of Divine worship, is an open
floud-gate to all vices, whereof this land has had woeful experience within
these late Marian-dayes, wherein some Prelates have appeared so like Boner and
Gardener, as if there were a Pythagorical-transmigration of souls: but I leave
them to their answers, and Divine providence; only so long as they remain,
and I live, I resolve not only to pray for their extirpation, but also for
their conversion.

Not to digress, this humiliation had need to be personal and national, if
we look on the Cessation of Arms in Ireland, which Cessation to me, is a
clear stating of the question and intention of these wars, to be a trial of
Mastership betwixt the Papists and Protestants.

Flatter not thy self Christian friend, the bloody Irish-Rebels, Irish Remonst.
who have shed so much innocent blood, and boast that they have slaughtered a
hundred thousand Protestants, will not leave one Protestant alive in the three
Kingdoms, if they be not prevented, not only by a strong hand, but also by a
speedy humiliation both personal and national.

CHAP. 16. Application of this Aphorism.
THe consideration of this Aphorism gives a check to the slightness of our
sorrow for sin, a sigh and away; we must feed this sorrow, and wish with the
Prophet that our heads were contuall and unemptiable fountains of tears, Ier.
9.1. but how soon are our tears dried up? Metaphora a matribus, quae and
oculis lachrymas abstergere solent. Par.
If this plaster of sorrow begin to smart a little, presently we pluck it off,
and think it is enough, whereas we should let it lie ontil it be thoroughly
healed, which is not til death, when as all tears of worldly sorrow, so these
of godly sorrow shall be wiped away, and with Gods own hand and handkerchife,
Rev. 7.16. It shall be done as mothers do when their sucking children cry.

As David cried out vehemently O Absolon, Absolon, so ought we to cry, O
England, England: but very few are marked on their foreheads with the letter
Tau, Tau. Montan. Signo salutari. Jun.
as with a sign of safety, because they mourn for the sins of the Church. I
fear too many are of the disposition of the old Romans, and unconverted
heathens, Romans 1. verse 32. who knowing the judgment of God, (that they which
commit such things are worthy of death) not only do the same, but have
pleasure in them that do them, yea too too many old sinners who have spent
their strength in the service of the devil, and cannot now through weakness
run a hunting after their youthful pleasures, yet love to sit on a style, and
see others follow their pleasures with greadinesse.

These neglecters of private and public humiliation, for their personal and
national sins, are the great criers out, and fighters against a through
Reformation; Capt. (...).
a Cavalier Captain at Gainsborough, confessed after his guts came out, that
he took up Arms against the Parliament, because the Parliament did fight for a
reformation of Religion.

Lastly, the consideration of this Aphorism is of use by way of exhortation,
it is as a spur in the sides of such as are backward to begin, (...). Gr^g.
and dull to go on in the duty of repentance: seeing this humiliation is not
only a part of repentance, but also it is the next way to secure our selves
from the storm and wrath to come. Ezekiel. 9.6. Slay utterly old and young, both
maids, and little children, and women, but come not near any man upon whom is
the mark. These are times of danger, and if you would be marked out for
security on the forehead, labor to have the signs of godly sorrow appear in
your eyes, weep as David did, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of waters run down my eyes,
because men keep not thy law, David did grieve much for the sins of the
Jews, and other wicked men. Gregory gives a motive hereunto, (...). Gregor.
because to grieve for other men's sins is to wash away his own filthiness;
he is not cleansed from his own filthiness, that delights in his own
wickedness: what will then become of a world of profane men, that are carried
on with the persuit of sin, from which they will not be plucked? the drunkard
will have his cups, and the adulterer his queanes, and the chapman his false
weights, they are so far from this dislike and sorrow for sin, that they
like, love and rejoice in nothing but sin, they hate the godly Magistrate
that would punish them, they distaste the faithful Minister that does reprove
them, and fight against that government that will curb them: Capt. Fannicks
confession before. Qui omnes convenerunt in unum. Glos. Pro^^ciamus (...),
idest, legem. Glos. Demu^ope^am, ut non nos alliget, neque impona^ nobis
Ch^^stiana religio. Aug. Jumentorum mo c. Cassiod^
and this is a maine ground of our Anti-Parliament war this day in England, if
the Cavalliers would speak plain English, and shame the Devil, as one did.
Psalm. 2.2, 3. Here we find a combination, an association against Christ and
his Disciples, and what is the ground of this confederacy? it is laid down in
the 3 verse, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from
us; That is, let us break the bands of Christ and his followers, wherewith
they would restrain us, that so we may be at the more liberty, for Christian
Religion in the power and purity of will bound and bind us, so as we shall not
have elbow (...) to sin at our pleasure: thus like so many Brutes they desire
to pluck their necks out of Christ's yoke and collar. Is it thus with you (my
Masters) then believe it, and much good may it do you, He that sits in the
heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have you in derision. He will speak to you
in his wrath, and vex you in his sore displeasure. He will break you with a
rod of Iron, and dash you in pieces, like a potters vessel. Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be instructed O ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling; kiss the son lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled, yea but a little.

What is the English of this exhortation of the Psalmist but this, Apprehendite
disciplinam. Francisc. de Puteo. Nisi enim and vos resipueritis, and a
seditionibus intes^ina bella succondentes cessaveritis, and Deum operibus
placare sestinave^itis, graviora pa^emini. Theoph. Archiepise. Bulgariae, in
Lucam. 13.2.
which you find in this Parliament Ordinance for Repentance, which in the last
place consists in a through reformation, and is here meant by kissing the Son?

Or if you like the counsel of an Archbishop better then the exhortation of
the Prophet David, or of God himself in the second Psalm; Then repent, for
except you repent, and be deeply humbled for your sins, and cease from your
seditions, whereby you have kindled an intestine or Civil war, and labor to
pacify God, and that with speed, you must suffer greater punishments then yet
you have suffered.

We are bidden always to rejoice, Phil. 4.4.



CHAP. XVII. Reformation.
THe third and last part of Repentance, its a Reformation, Semper doleat
poenitens, and de dolor gaudeat.
as it appears by these words in the Ordinance,

And likewise the necessity of a Personal and National Reformation, and shall
publish this Ordinance concerning the same. Pa^l O^d. N.


Now this Reformation does accompany Repentance, as an amendment and a
restoration does go along with a successful remedy, by virtue whereof the
sick party is cured of his distempers.

APHORISM 6. Reformation is the Patient-restoring part of Repentance. Matthew.
3.8. Rev. 2.5.
For the better understanding of this Aphorism, consider two things.

First, what Reformation is.

Secondly, why it is called the Restoring part of Repentance.

For the first Consideration, what a Reformation is.

I might give you many definitions of it, but I will gather one out of this
Ordinance, In al^am (...) redigo* Calep. Dum quod suit ante, reformet. Ovid.
11. Met. Reductor ac reformator. Plin. ep. 165. Reformare est in meliorem
fo^mam redigere. Calep. Apollo^o rursas reformandum, velut re^oquendum sededit.
Quintil. l. 12. c. 6. Arch-bish. Herman, Epist. in forma Reform. Parl. Ord. E.
Omnino bonas essicitote vias vestras, and actiones vestras. Jun. Tremel.
which is very full and suitable, and it is this.

Reformation is such a necessary and through change of things amiss, for the
better, and that both Personal and National, as God may be pleased graciously
to accept, upon our Repentance.

In which definition consider these parts.

1. Reformation is a change of things a miss.

This is argued by the signification of the word. To re-forme, is to form a
thing again, to polish anew, to cast into a new mould, to bring to the old
state again.

2. Reformation is a change of things for the better, otherwise it were a
Deformation, a defacing of a thing.

An ancient and learned Linguist uses a word for the word Reformation, which
signifies to boil again, to mend with study, and to polish anew; all which
phrases argue a change for the better, which cannot be, except something were
amiss.

3. Its a necessary Reformation. And this must needs be so, because perfection
is necessary, we must labor for it, Mat. 5.48. and Reformation is the next
way, and shortest cut to it. Lev. 26.23. Without a Reformation, God will make
no peace, its promised in the 6. verse, upon their change for the better in the
3. verse.

4. A Parliament Reformation is a thorow-Reformation. This appears also by
the words in the Ordinance, where its required to be a thorow-Reformation,
according to that, Ier. 7.5. If ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings,
or thus, If ye make your ways and actions altogether good.

Now this thorow-Reformation it is twofold in this place. 1. It is a
Church-Reformation, ver. 4.6. 2. Its a Commonweal Reformation, ver. 5. and 6.
Both Church and Commonwealth were corrupted, as then, so now, as is
sufficiently declared by several Declarations, and therefore a through
Reformation is necessary. And good reason there is, why this should be a through
and Christian correction of all matters, seeing a thing once well done, is
twice done. The more perfect any thing is, Quod been sit, his fit.
the more durable and profitable it is. But more of this hereafter.

5. Its a Personal Reformation. A Christian correction in Ecclesiastical
matters is not only necessary, but also a godly change in life and
conversation it requisite. Every man is to sweep his own door. Every man is
to amend one. In directione sua. Hieron.
Then a Reformation is right, when each one walks in his uprightness, Isa.
57.2. Then a man walks in his uprightness, when he walks in his direction,
and way that is chalked out for him; when every one keeps within his circle
and compass, and does that which belongs to his calling and place. Oportet
enim ut primo cum diligentia investiges, quae tua sunt. Chrysostom
Christ does not blame a man for seeing a mote in another man's eye, but he
blames such a Christian as does not consider the beam that is in his own
eye, and pluck it out: and therefore he commands him first to reform
himself, and then he shall be the fitter to reform others, Mat. 7.5. A man is
to purify himself, as Christ is pure, 1 Ioh. 3.3. Its true, we are to
endeavor the sanctification of others, but we must not forget our selves; we
must not be like our own eyes, that look naturally and usually more abroad,
then on themselves and face wherein they are; and therefore God has made us a
glass wherein to behold our selves, and by which to dress our selves, so as
we may be beautiful and comely in his sight, Iam. 1.23. etc. Let every man
therefore be persuaded to do as they did in Nehemiah his days, when the wall
of Jerusalem was repaired, Nehem. 3.10, Aedificavit domum suam, Hieron.
28. Every Priest repaired over against his house, yea the daughters of Shallum
did so too, verse 12. Every one did keep and sweep his own house and door.
Our blessed Savior renders a good reason for it, as a Father says, Aug. de
Sermon. Do. in Monte.
for hereby we shall be the fitter to reform what is amiss in others, Mat.
7.5. It is the property of an hypocrite to look more to others then to himself;
and therefore as we desire to be found sincere and true Israelites, let us look
in the first place to a Personal, and then to a National Reformation, Parl.
Ordin. N.
which next follows in order in the Ordinance, and latter end of it.

6. Archi^^ (...).
Its a National Reformation. As a Personal Reformation is suitable to a
natural body, so a National Reformation is correspondent to a Politic body,
which is a Kingdom: such an one was that in Jeremiah his time, which God
required of his people in his Proclamation for a Reformation, Ier. 7.2. Stand
in the gate of the Lords house and proclaim there this word of the Lord, and
say, Hear ye the word of the Lord all ye of Judah, that enter in at these
gates to worship the Lord, etc. Without this National Reformation, we cannot
expect a personal correction, the Spiritual Courts are Fleshly Courts,
wherein a grievous swarm of flies have been fed, which have almost destroyed
the land, Exodus 8.24. What Solomon in his time saw under the Sun, too too many
have felt under the moon, that Wickedness is in the place of judgment, and
iniquity in the place of Righteousness. Eccl. 3.16. These spiritlesse Courts
must down, before the Spiritfull, and Presbyterian sin-punishing Courts can be
set up in this Kingdom.

Now this National Reformation in point of Religion is 4. fold, 1. Solemn
league and Covenant for Reformation in the three Kingdoms, Sep. 30. 1643.
In Doctrine. 2. In Worship. 3. In Discipline. and 4. In Government.

The reasons are many, and very strong which have extracted this National
change in point of government, as you may see in the preamble to this Covenant
betwixt the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, but the reasons in the
end of this Parliament Ordinance may suffice any moderate and welwishing
Christian, included in these few lines.

That so at length we may obtain a firm and happy peace, both with God and
Man; That Glory may dwell in our Land; And the prosperity of the Gospel, with
all the privileges accompanying the same, may Crown this Nation unto all
succeeding ages.

7. This Parliament Reformation its a selfe-denying Reformation, this is argued
by these words, As God may be pleased to accept. Its not said, As may please
the Prelates, the Papists, other Nations, or our selves, but such an one as may
please God, Whatsoever it is: Deus non vult (...) nostro, sed pro judiciosu^.
Pet. Ram. Com. de Rel. Christ.
God will not be worshipped according to our Free Will, but according to his own
judgment, and therefore we find in the Scriptures how careful God has been in
all ages to prescribe his own worship, Exodus 20. and how ill he has taken the
inventions of man, in and about his worship, Isa. 29.13, 14. Read the place,
and consider the works of God in these days, and thou will give a
Nonconformist the right hand of fellowship, in point of worship.

8. Lastly its a penitential Reformation, Reformandum est cum dolor, quia
deformando gaud^bamus
collected from these words in the Ordinance and definition, Upon our
Repentance.

Its not enough to turn over a new leaf by a Reformation, without washing
over and wiping out all our deformed scriblings in the Iournals of our sinful
lives, with the bitter tears of godly sorrow. Reformation without sorrow, is
but a sorry Reformation. Its worth the noteing, that reformation is not only
made a part of Repentance in this Ordinance, but its the last part, and
follows Humiliation, which is a godly sorrow for sin, as you have heard
before.



D. Sibs on Lydias convers. page 24.
I will give you the answer of a godly Minister of great note in the Church of
God, and its this, when a man is brought to that pitch that by the light of the
spirit he esteems all nothing but Christ, let him never talk, whether he be
prepared or no, this is enough to bring him to conversion.

The second consideration is, why Reformation is called the patient-restoring
part of Repentance.

The reason is, because a through Reformation does restore to the sin-sick
patient whatsoever he lost: as we lose all by impenitency in sin, so we gain
all by a true repentance for sin, which is always accompanied with an
amendment of life, Math. 3.8. which is the sweet fruit, that the bitter tree
of repentance always bears: the leaves of this tree are like the leaves of
the tree of life, which are good to heal the Nations, Rev. 21.2.

Repentance is a medicine that restores health to the sick, and heals him of
his wounds: God turns Physician to a penitent sin-sick sinner, Ier. 30.17.

Have thou lost thy spiritual strength, wealth, or any good thing? all is
restored to thee again, as to Nebuchadnezzar after his conversion, Dan. 4.34.

Moreover, this Reformation does not only add to the Nation the health and
power it had, but also does detract all possibility of resistance: as things
stand, the surest ground and foundation to build our future peace on, is no
other Substratum but a Succumbency or Invalidity, because when on the worst
part the opposition is spent, and exhaled, then there is no fear that there
will break out any fresh and mutual contendings: and there must needs be more
security in that pacification where all possibility of resistance is taken
away, then where there lives two natures of proportionable abilities, and
contrary qualities, and therefore the wise Physician labors to lay the
foundation of perfect health in absence of malignant humors, which in time
would cause an intrinsecall repugnancy, in the body natural, and to this use
serve purgations, vomits, diets, and leting of blood, etc.

CHAP. XVIII. Application of this Aphorism.
EXamine the truth of thy repentance by the Reformation.

A man may with Pharaoh and Judas confess his sin, a man may weep with Esau,
because of his loss by sin, out of anguish of spirit, Amissis terrenis
angitur. Ut Came, Achitophel, Julianus, Heming.
Heb. 12.17. and yet never truly repent; but when a man does confess sin
freely and fully, when he is humbled for his sin deeply, and does detest all
sin seriously, and adds to all a through reformation in his life and
conversation, and does desire it in the Nation where he lives and in all
Kingdoms where God is dishonored, now doubtless such a man is a true convert,
though still he be like Jacobs sh^ep, Macula (...) Calv.
Ring-straked and spotted with many infirmities, yet his spots are not like the
spots of a Leopard, an impenitent sinner, Deuteronomy. 32.5.

But what sad things does this personal Reformation speak even unto many
Parliament Physicians themselves, who since their Protestation and the putting
out of this Ordinance exhorting all to the duty of Repentance, (as the only
remedy for these present calamities) have forsaken their station, and are
turned rather distemperers then healers of the nation, or to use the sacred
phrase of holy writ, (...) dogmatum. Hieron. In^^st medici, and sonatores
malo^nm omnes. LXX.
Physicians of no value, Job 13.4. or the embracers of false opinions; Unjust
Physicians, and the healers of sins, not of a sin-sick Nation? Let me say to
such as the spirit of God said to the Ephesians, Rev. 2.5. Remember therefore
from whence you are fallen, and Repent and do the first works, or else I will
come unto thee quickly, etc. except thou repent.

Lastly, this through Reformation speaks sad things to all profane wretches
that lie wallowing in the mire, and live in the daily practice of gross sins,
that may say, I was a swearer and so I am still, I was a prophaner of the
Sabbath, a scoffer, and a mocker of all goodness, I was covetous, a drunkard,
an unclean person before those public days of Humiliation, and so I am
still. Thou wretch that have thy leprosy still sticking in thy forehead, will thou ever brag that thou have washed thy self in this Jordan? Thou that have
an Ethiopian-hide, tanned in the sun of thine own scorching concupiscence, and
the Devils fiery temptations.

Thou that have the Leopards spo^s, and the Leviathan scales, will thou ever
take the boldnsse to thee, of saying, thou repentest? when there is no
Reformation, no change or transformation. Deceive not thy self, God is not
mocked, whatsoever a man sows that shall he reap, for he that sows to the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. Gal. 6.7, 8. Bele^ve thy Savior,
Luke 13.1, 2. Except ye repent, ye must all likewise perish. The wages of sin
is death, Romans 6. ult.

How many civil man have we that still remain in their pure naturalls, and
bless themselves in their outward honesty, and glory in this, that they were
always the same, which is just to glory in your shame: for what is it but a
plain profession that they never had any Repentance? for this would have made
a strange change, it would have undone all that they have done; Repentance does
demolish and cast down the goodly bu^ldings of their civil virtues: let all
moralists know that they are in a damnable state, and that it will not be well
with them till they grow to a loathing of themselves and a detestation of their
admired civility, and natural popery, void of all heart and heat of true
devotion; De integro creari. Jun. Esup^rnis, Var. (...) Montan.
they must be borne again or else they can never see the Kingdom of God, John
3.3. this new birth is a new creation, whereof God is the only author Gal
6.15. Its called a new creature, or as the word signifies a new creation.

Lastly, be persuaded to sweat out a personal alteration, for not only the
Parliament of England, but the Parliament of Heaven does require it, John 3.3.
the word Again is significant, (...).
which as Beza there notes, imports that we must go over all again that is
past, and reject it as unprofitable, and begin anew, Ex De^, spirituali
gene^atione. Aug.
thou must be be borne of God by a spiritual regeneration, or else thou can
never be saved. Though thou must be saved only by faith in the point of
justification, yet thy faith must be justified by the reformation, otherwise it
will prove but presumption, and a dead faith, Iam. 2. Its true as the learned
determine, that we are saved solely by faith, but not by a solitary faith,
only by faith, Fide sola, non fide solita^ia. Ex suis enim quisque op^^ibus
justificabitur, non pr^^morum. Theoph.
but not by faith alone that is without good works, content not thy self that
thou art almost a Christian, thou must be altogether a Christian, or else thou
must be altogether damned. In the next place I should persuade you to help
forward the National Reformation which is necessary for our public
preservation; but I will leave it till afterward. So much of the fourth part
of this Parliament physic.

THE FIFTH PART.
CHAP. XIX. The time when this physic is to be taken, its presently.
ALL his Majesty's subjects in this Kingdom of England are to be excited and
stirred up speedily to lay hold upon this only and unfailing remedy of
Repentance. Parl. Ordin. R.


APHORISM 10. The potion of Repentance is to be taken without delay. Officium
est medici, ut tuto et celeriter curet. Asclepiades

For the better understanding of this Aphorism, consider two things.

1. Why Repentance is called a potion.

2. The reasons of the Aphorism.

For the first consideration, why Repentance is called a potion.

Its in regard of its resemblance to the physical drink which Physicians give
to their patients to procure their health.

1. Dolor, Amb. Odium, Mag. Sent. Fides, Luth. Sarc. Vindicta, Aug.
A potion its a composition of curing ingredients suitable to the discovered
distemper. So is Repentance compounded of suitable simples, which are especially
these, 1. Sorrow. 2. Hatred of sin. 3. Faith. 4. A holy revenge of our selves
for our needless excess.

2. Potio, a potando
A potion is given to the sick party that desires to drink it, and sends to
the Physician and Apothecary for it. So is Repentance given to all that desire
it, and use the right means to have it. 2 Timothy 2.25. Iam. 1.5.

3. Potione vinacea onerabo gulam. Plaut. in Sticho.
A potion does burden the stomach, for the present, its distasteful, it
cloggeth the stomach. So is Repentance, its so odious a potion as few love to
drink it, they reject and spill it.

4. A potion is healthful, much good comes by it through Gods blessing: So is
Repentance a salutiferous medicine, as you have heard before.

5. Potio non est cibus.
A potion is not the sick man's diet, there are Cordials, Electuaries, Syrops,
and other Apothecary stuff for food and nourishment. So Repentance is not
properly the food of the soul, it does empty and fit the sick party to receive
in wholesome food, the promises are the souls kitchen-physick, wherewith the
Believer must live the life of grace, Romans 1.17.

For the second Consideration, the Reasons of this Aphorism, and they are

1. It must be taken speedily, Parl. Ordin. A.
because of the dangerousnesse of the disease. The distemper of the Kingdom
will admit of no delay. Englands sickness is mortal, the Kingdom is near to
the gates of destruction and despair, we sit in the region and shadow of death.

2. In regard of the brevity and uncertainty of our lives; life is short at the
longest; this is but a moment whereon Eternity depends: and life is
uncertain when it seems to be most certain. Psalm. 39.5. Verily every man at
his best estate is altogether vanity. He is as if he were not. Now seeing
every Kingdom, Sic est quasi non sit. Vatab. O rem dignam long a meditatione.
Vat.
Parish, and Person is within the Bills of Mortality, as well as the Parishes
in and about London; let every man seriously meditate of the shortness of his
life, and prepare for it, by a lively faith and a true repentance; do but take
this potion before thou die, Principiis obsta, ser^ medicina paratur, cum
mala pe^ longas convaluere moras. Ovid. 1. de Remed.
and thou shall not die eternally, Ezekiel. 33.11. We are but of yesterday, Job
8.9. and may be dead before to morrow; and therefore there is no deferring of
time, take Time by the fore-lock, its bald behind. He is a wise man that takes
Time, while Time lasts. Physic may come too late. If once the Decree be gone
out, there is no recalling it again.

3. This potion must be taken speedily, because the present time is the fittest
time. He that is not fit to day, will be more unfit to morrow. Every disease
gets strength by its continuance; The best Planet to take physic under, its
the (...), the now, Accidit in puncto, quod non contingit in anno.
and moment of time. Who knows what the next minute may bring forth? Prove.
27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what to morrow may
bring forth.

4. Repent speedily, because late repentance is seldom true, Poenitentia sera
raro vera.
rather out of servile fear, then filial love. Many gray headed sinners make
use of the Clergy, and call for the Psalm of Mercy, and all out of fear of
hanging, they care not for the minister, nor his physic, only Necessity which
is a medicine for a Horse, does make an old fornicator swallow down some
bitter pills that are given him by a faithful Minister, but poor man he cannot
contain them long, they give him an unkind, and over-hastie vomit, and little
good comes of his physic, it works not kindly, he is a spent man, as we
say, he wants natural heat to co-worke with the potion, and so he dies in
his sins, though perhaps he goes belching up some part of the Confession, and
Letanie to his grave, and there I leave him, but without an Absolution.

CHAP. XX. Application of this Aphorism.
THis Aphoisme condemns the self-murdering folly of the greatest part of this
declining and sickly age, wherein very few do seriously think of death, and
preparation for it, till the door of hope be shut against them, as against the
five foolish Virgins, (...) poenitendi. Theoph. Archiep.
Mat. 25.9. when to get the oil of Faith and Repentance will be too late. What
greater folly in the world, then to prefer Hell before Haven, the Devil before
God, the flesh before the spirit, corruption before grace, time before
eternity? this is it, even with Esau to sell our birthright for a mess of
pottage, Lampades sunt (...) Oleum sunt (...) Chrysostom.
Genesis 25.30. such men deserve to be begged for fools, and such fools are all
those wise politicians, which labor not to get the oil of virtues into their
souls and lamps.

Lastly let every man be persuaded to repent and amend, and that speedily, here
is no delay for young men and maidens, Non solum vanus, sed (...) Parisiens.
for every man at his best estate is altogether vanity, yea vanity it self.
Again, repent for the kingdoms sake; Repentance is not only profitable to
thee, but to thine, yea to the whole land, if ten Righteous men had been found
in Sodom and Gomorrah, the Lord would have spared those Cities for those ten
penitent sinners sake. Now there is no man Righteous, (...) namque quod per
poen^^^ent^am (...) Hieron. Innocent. 3.
but he whose sin is forgiven, and covered, and this is the true penitent
Christian. Repentance does cover sin as the fathers expound that place, Psalm.
32.1, 2. The Elders commended the Centurion Luke 7.5. because he loved their
Nation, and had built them a Synagogue: surely if thou do repent and amend,
thou will do more for the Nation then the Centurion did, for thou will help to
preserve it, and who knows but that thy voice may be the casting vice? the
want of one does many times lose all. Put not the loss of the Kingdom in
hazard, Varab. Jun.
through thy impenitency. There is much power and virtue in unites, Ier. 5.1.
Had there been one man either amongst the people or the Magistrates that had
been right indeed, God would have spared Jerusalem for his sake. Whether this
one man were one man more, or but one in all, I cannot determine, but sure I
am, from this and other places, Non est, creed mihi, sapientis dicere, Vivam.
Sera nimis vita est crastina, vive body. Martial.
that one man may do much good or much hurt. Eccles. 9.18. But one sinner
destroys much good. O dear brother or sister, be not thou this one
impenitent sinner for the Kingdoms and thine own sake. Repent, Repent to day,
and stay not till to morrow.

The potion of Repentance is to be taken without delay.

THE SIXTH PART.
CHAP. XXI. The Maladies and diseases of the Nation or body Politic.
THese Distempers are so many sins, Parl. Ord. M.
as it appears by the Parliament Ordinance.

APHORISM 11. Englands sins, are Englands diseases.
For the better understanding of this Aphorism consider these things.

1. The number of Englands sins. 2. The greatness of them. 3. The aggravations
of them. 4. Why sin is called a disease. 5. The generality of these sins.
For the fist consideration.

Englands sins are infinite in number, whereof about twenty several kinds of
sins are reckoned up, as you may read in the Ordinance it self in the
beginning of the book.

For the second consideration.

They are heavy in weight and heinous in nature.

For the third consideration.

Some of these twenty sins are aggravated by several circumstances as
follows.

The sin of contempt is aggravated by 4 circumstances. 1. Its the contempt of
holy Ordinances, not of one but of all. 2. Its the contempt of Gods holy
Ordinances; to contemn the Parliament Ordinances is not only a common, but a
great sin. 3. Its a high contempt. 4. Its the contempt of holiness it self.

The sin of ignorance is aggravated by 2 circumstances. 1. Its affected. 2. Its
gross ignorance, and this is proved by these words following. Under the
glorious light of the Gospel clearly shining among us.

The sin of unfruitfulnesse is aggravated by one circumstance, because it is
under the precious means of grace.

Oaths are aggravated by their multitudes.

The profanation of the Lords day, 1. By the wickedness of it. 2. By the
encouragement from authority it had lately.

Divisions are aggravated by their unnaturalness.

Uncleanness is set out with all its sorts or kinds.

There are 2 sins which are aggravated by many circumstances, these 2 are

1. Idolatry, and 2. Bloodshed.
Idolatry is aggravated by 12 circumstances. 1. Its old Idolatry, the sin of
our Ancestors. 2. Its spreading Idolatry in these latter times. 3. Its
connived at generally. 4. And almost tolerated. 5. Its fomented. 6. And
encouraged Idolatry, and that several ways. 7. Its a dysastrous
peace-breaking Idolatry, the grievous effects whereof England feels. 8. Its
Armed Idolatry. 9. And its abetted by no small ones. 10. Its Ireland-destroying
Idolatry. 11. Its Romish Idolatry. 12. Its called a crying sin, as well as
bloodshed.

Bloodshed is aggravated likewise by 10 circumstances. 1. Its a crying, 2. A
cruel sin that calls a loud for vengeance. 3. Its not expiated, 4. But
pardoned bloodshed, unpunished by man. 5. Its Mass or Idolatrous bloodshed, it
did go hand in hand with the Mass in Queen Mary her days. 6. It caused many
Martyrs to dye in flames and prisons, its Martyr bloodshed. 7. bloodshed
slightly confessed. 8. Its unpardoned bloodshed, the wrath of the Jealous God
is not appeased. 9. Its impious bloodshed, its committed not only against good
people, but against God. 10. And that with a high hand, yea with so high a
hand, or a very high hand.

For the fourth consideration.

These sins are so general, as that not one man throughout the whole Nation
can say, that he is wholly free, and that from the sole of the foot to the
crown of the head, there is no soundness in us, so that we may justly expect
the desolations that are denounced against so great and general a corruption.

5. Lastly, Qu^m^d^ antem in corpore est morbus, aegrotatio, and vitium, sic in
animo. Cicero 4. Tusc.
consider why these and other sinner are called diseases. They are so called
for two Reasons; First, That we may follow the Allegory still; Secondly,
Because of the agreement betwixt sin and a disease, which agreement
consists in diverse things, I will name some of them.

1. A disease is contrary to nature, its contrary to created nature; Adam was
made perfectly righteous, and healthful, Morbus est affectus contra naturam.
after the Image of God, Genesis 1, 26. It was Adams sin that brought diseases
and death into the world, Genesis 2, 17. Romans 5. Galenus. tract. de diff. morb^rum.
Adam and Eve did surfeit themselves by the sin of excess, in eating the
forbidden fruit, and so did propagate a sickly posterity after their own
image, Genesis 5.3.

So is sin contrary to nature created, regenerated, and restored to its
pris^nat perfection in some measure, Ephesians. 4, 24.

2. A disease does vitiate and pair the actions of men, Primo viti^ns
actionem, quare cum actio vitiata non fuerit, morbi nomen non meretur. Galen.
and this it does two ways, especially as the learned Physician faith; 1. by
corrupting an distempering the first qualities; Secondly, by dissolving the
Union betwixt the humors of the body. So sin does corrupt the qualities of
the soul, and dissolving and breaking the Union betwixt the faculties of the
mind, does corrupt and make worse the powers of the soul and body, and hence
come all vicious or sinful actions; therefore original sin is called
original corruption, In Psalm. 51.5. Hugo. Hieron. Glosa. Grego. lib. 12. Moral.
and from this original corruption and pravitie of nature, flows all the
corruption in the world, 2 Pet. 1, 4. corruption in the world through lust,
Psalm. 51.5. David discovers the fountain of corruption in his life and
actions, to be his conception in original corruption and sin. God created
man righteous, but man found out many inventions to corrupt and undo himself,
Eccl. 7.29.

3. A disease does weaken the body, so does sin, Romans 7. Morbus and
imbecillitas me exanimat. Cic. A^tic lib. 11. Ex morbo pravitas membrorum and
deformitas. Cicero.
Paul could not do what he would, he wanted power, Romans 7.18.

4. A disease does not only weaken, but also deforme the body, it does
deprive the lovely face of its beauty, etc.

So does sin, like the Pox, deforme a man that was most amiable in his first
creation, it has robbed him of the beauty of holiness, sin is Deformity.

5. Every disease is deadly, if it be not cured, Morbus morti proximus.
though some are more mortal then others.

So is every sin mortal, Romans 6.23.

6. A disease is an enemy to the whole body, though it be but in one part,
Morbum esse (...) corporis (...). Tull. (...). 4. Tus^.
so does one Achan trouble all Israel, Joshu. 7. Adams sin did corrupt the
whole world, Genesis 3. Romans 5. David's numbering the people did wrong to his
Kingdom.

CHAP. XXII. Application of this Aphorism.
THe Consideration hereof is of use by way of Information.

If Englands sins and diseases be infinite, never wonder England is so sick
and ill at ease as it is, the Lord help us, but rather stand and wonder that
its no worse with the Nation then it is this day.

The wages of one sin is death, yea all kind of death; the merit of the least
sin is the greatest punishment: Englands sins are not only infinite, but
heinous in nature, more heavy then the sands on the Sea-shoare; yea, they are
aggravated with many circumstances, and are subjectated in the whole Kingdom,
there is not one man that sins not, No not one, Psalm. 14. And therefore
stand and admire (O all ye Nations) at Gods favorable dealing with England,
we with Capernaum have been exalted to Heaven, and therefore have deserved to
be brought down to Hell because of our Impenitencie. Ideo vos caeda^
durissimis flagellis, ut ingratis convenit. Lyran. Mere.
Math. 11, 23. God must say to us as to his people of old, Amos 3.2. You only
have I known of all the Families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for
all your iniquities: Because you have been more ungrateful to me, then others
that have not enjoyed so many mercies from me; Therefore I will punish you more
sharply then any other Nation. But, blessed by God, we cannot find by his
actions, that he has said such words against this Land and Nation.

If Englands sins be Englands diseases, then that Parliament, that Army,
that Discipline, that are most against sin, and sight most against Popery,
that Parliament, that Army, and that Discipline, are most suitable to Englands
necessities, and are likely to be the best Physicians and Surgeons to cure and
heal a wounded and sin-sick Nation, for when the causes are removed, then the
effects will cease.

Quapropter in adeundis periculis consu^tudoo miranda medicorum est, qui
leviter aegrotantes leviter curant, gravioribus autem morbis, periculosas
curationes and ancipites adhibere coguntur. (...). Amb. Call.
If Englands sins be so many, and so great and dangerous as you have heard,
then blame not that Great College of Physicians for their using more then
ordinary Remedies for so desperate a cure, as the Kingdom has put into their
hands. Its the usual custom of Physicians so to do, in dangerous diseases
and doubtful cures.

If every sin is a disease, Venienti occurrite morb^.
then deal with every sin as with a dangerous and mortal distemper. Stop it
in the beginning, run to the Physician, acquaint the learned Doctor with it,
and follow his direction, this is the next way to have a sound body and a
Kingdom in conjunction.

Smiling sins are flattering diseases, when with Judas they kiss us, and
cry, Hail master, then take heed to thy self, they will give thee up into the
hands of death, as Judas did Christ into the hands of P^late.

If this Aphorism be true, which doubtless it is, then see from hence a
ground for Christian-stricknesse and preciseness as the world calls it.
Sins are distempers, distempers are dangerous to the sick party, and
infectious to others. The plague of the heart which is sin, is like the
plague of Leprosy, its dangerous and infectious, Levit. 13. And therefore we
are to shun gross sinners, and not to come nigh their dwellings, Prove. 4,
14, 15. Ephesians. 5, 11. 1 Cor. 5, 11. Its dangerous to sit at the same table, and
drink of the same cup with them.

Now as my Author says, Peccator ver^ leprosus est, primo enim in cord
corruptusest, d^inde tetrum foetorem emittit, insuper ali^s inficit. and dignus
est qui ejiciatur. Ferus in Number. 12.
a sinner is like a Leprous man in diverse regards. First, because he is corrupt
in heart: Secondly, because he stinketh like a Leper, he has a most grievous
stinking breath: Thirdly, because he does infect others: Fourthly, because he
is worthy to be cast out of the Church and society of the Saints, whether he
be then fit to come to the Communion, judge ye. Now if it be commendable to
shun infectious company, sure its praiseworthy to keep thy soul from
spiritual infection as much as thou can.

Lastly, Solemn League and Covenant, 1643. p. 5.
be exhorted to approve of the Solemn League and Covenant betwixt the three
Kingdoms, to endeavor two things of great moment for the cure of this
Leprous-Nation. The first is, to endeavor the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches: Secondly, to endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacie,
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and what soever shall be found
contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness: (mark the reason)
lest we partake in other men's sins, and thereby be endangered to receive of
their plagues, from whence it appears: First, that Popery and Prelacie, etc.
are infectious leprosies: Secondly, that a strict Government is necessary to
preserve the Kingdom from the plague of sin, and plagues for sin. Englands
sins, are Englands diseases.

THE SEVENTH PART.
CHAP. XXIII. The Apothecaries to compound this Parliament-Physick.
THe Apothecaries, Parl. Ord. E.
that according to their Art, are to compound this Physic, are all the
Ministers and Preachers in the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales.

APHORISM 12. Ministers are to behave themselves like Apothecaries. Exodus
30.25.35. Cap. 37.29.
For the better understanding of this Aphorism, consider wherein they are to
imitate Apothecaries, and wherein not.

First, for the first Consideration, wherein they are to imitate them, I will
name some particulars.

1. Non tyronis, sed periti artificis. Jun. in locum. 1 Timothy 3.6. puer
doctrina. Tremell.
The Apothecarie is to be an Artist, Exodus 30.25. an Apothecarie had need be a
good Grammar-Scholar, to understand the terms of Art, and to reader his
Authors: so, a Minister is to be an Artist, a learned man, Isa. 50.4. that he
may know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary, and that he may
be able to read, Isa. 29.11, 12. what is written for his learning: And
therefore, though the Apostles were not brought up to School, yet they were
great Scholars in an extraordinary way, which is now ceased. As an Apothecarie
ought to have learning sufficient to know the natures of Herbs and Roots, so
is it fit a Minister should know the Hebrew-Roots which are in the Old and New
Testament, especially in that Evangelicall Garden, Saint Mathew's Gospel, and
the various Etymologies of Latin and Greek words.

2. (...). Jun.
The Apothecarie is to work according to his art; therefore its observable,
that the word Work is put in, in stead of the word Art, Exodus 37.29. teaching
or insinuating thus much, That the Apothecarie works according to his Art:
surely he ought to do so, or else wherefore is Art? God is the Author of all
Arts, and would have Ministers especially to be Masters of Arts, in regard of
the profoundnesse of their high Calling: Non Neophytum, Hieron. Recens-natus.
Novus miles quem adhus teri and exerceri oportet.
To this end, God in his providence has appointed Schools of good Learning.
That is observable in 1 Timothy 3.6. Hierome does translate the word thus, a young
Scholar, a Fresh-man: The word signifies also a Fresh-water-Souldier, who had
need to learn his Postures.

3. The Apothecarie is to make his Composition according to his prescription
and direction. So must the Minister follow the prescription of that great
College of Physicians, especially of the Master of that College, who is the
Healer of his sick and wounded people, Jer. 30.17. Calvin has a very good
note to this purpose on Exodus 37, and last verse. Quia Religionis puritati,
nihil magis adversum, qu^m temere aliquid tentare, Calv.
This Composition of Oil says he, was exactly made according to command,
teaching not only obedience, the foundation of piety, but also admonishing,
that nothing be done in Gods worship after our own fancy, for nothing is more
contrary to the purity of Religion then humane inventions.

Mark what Paul says, 2 Cor. 2, 17. We are not as many which corrupt the Word
of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in
Christ.

The word to corrupt, Adulterantes Hieron.
signi^^eth to adulterate or to set to sale for gain, as Victuallers do their
mixed commodities.

Secondly, Cauponantes, Montan.
Consider wherein a Minister is not to be like an Apothecarie.

1. They mind the bodies of men, more then their souls, Curam corporum.
So must not Preachers do, who have the cure of souls, Heb. 13. verse. 17.
They watch for your souls. Curam animarum.


2. Pharmacorum venditor, Amb. Call.
They mind their gai^e more (ordinarily) then the health of the patient and
therefore are called the sellers of Apothecary stuff; So must not the Minister
of the Gospel, he must mind the Flock more then the fleece. Act. 20.28.

3. They compound their Physic more after the prescriptions and inventions of
men, then after the Commandment of God: So must not the Preachers of the
Gospel, Math. 15, 9. Christ blamed this in the Scribes and Pharisees. Mark the
Commission of the Apostles and of the Ministers of the Word of God, Math 28.20.
I'ts to teach them to observe all things whatsoever Christ did command them,
Horrescamus and t^meamus fratres, quia si unum nobis desecerit, non erimus
perfecti Christi servi. Theophil.
who is the Bishop of their souls, 1 Pet. 2. verse the last. We must conform
more to the Canons and Injunction of Christ, then of all Bishops in the world
besides; otherwise, we cannot be the faithful servants of Christ.

CHAP. XXIV. Application of this Aphorism.
1. O Ye Reverend Bezaleels, in that sacred Assembly of Ministers, whom God
has called to finish the whole work of his Tabernable, and has filled with
his Spirit in wisdom and understanding, in knowledge and in all manner of
Church-workmanship: See that you make your Perfume and Confession of sweet
Spices, after the Art of the Apothecarie tempered together, pure and holy, that
God may smell a sweet favor in all our public Sacrifices, Scio enim multos,
qui videntur virtuto ac pictate, ac fide praediti, damnososesse Ecclesiae, and
ron solum sacultates, sed etiam animas perdore Chrysostom.
and may say in his heart. I will not any more curse England for i'ts worship
taught by the Precepts of men. See that all Ministers be Preachers of the
Gospel, and that all Preachers behave themselves like faithful Apothecaties
in their several Shops and Auditories, compounding their Spiritual Physic
according to Art, and their prescriptions from that great College of
Physicians or else take away their Licenses: Be the Physician never so full of
skill or good will, the unskilful or wilful Apothecarie may spoil all.

2. And as for you my Learned Brethren in the Ministry, i'ts not enough for
you to be good Artists, but you must be laborers yea co-labourers with Christ,
2 Cor. 6, 1. Let all your incense be pure, made of sweet Spices, according to
the work and direction of the the Apothecarie, who is to be a Regularist as
well as an Artist at all times, but especially in these Soule-poysoning and
Doctrine-adulterating days. Mind more your Shops, compound more and better
Physic let no weak and qualming-Christian go home sighing and complaining that
you neglect your Shops in the after-noons, which time God has sanctified for
holy uses as well as the morning of the day. But in all your studies and
labors, mind more the Souls then the bodies of your customers, Eccl. 10.1.
and aim more at their health, then at your wealth: and take heed (my
Brethren) that you mind not man's Traditions and Inventions, more then the
Commandments and prescriptions of the Lord Jesus Christ that great Physician
of our Souls; Who came not to call the Righteous, but sinners to Repentance,
Math. 9.13.

3. Before I can conclude this Aphorism, I cannot satisfy my self with
silence in these loquacious times, wherein many Patients think themselves so
skillful, as that they begin to teach the most learned Galens in our Kingdom,
nay, in the Christian World, how to cure not only themselves, but the Sin-sick
Nation.

My Masters, I love not to dip my Pen in that Ink-horne, which has too much
Vinegar mixed with its Ink; yet give me leave in love to tell you, That if the
happ^e Conjunction of those two great Assemblyes in our Kingdom; the one, of
State-Physicians, the other, of Spiritual Pharmacopolists, cannot make a
Composition to please your Palats, I fear you have lost your Spiritual Taste
through the strong distemper of Schism. Think not, that I ^ye God to a
Parliament, or a Synod, or to a General Council; for God is a free-Agent, and
these have and may err: yet the God of Order, for the avoiding of Confusion,
Act. 15.
has tied private spirits more to such General Assemblyes, then them to your
underling thoughts and unlearned opinions.

To conclude (dear Brethren and Sisters) give leave to a few words of
exhortation: For, I say, through the grace given to me, to every man that is
among you, not to think of himself more highly then he ought to think, but
to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of
Faith, Romans 12.3.
and let your words be the words of truth and soberness. I do fear, Act.
26.25.
I cannot but fear, and I pray God I may not say with Job, The thing which I
greatly feared, is come upon me: I say again, I do fear, Job 3.25.
and I cannot but fear, Prove. 18.19.
that a Brother offended will be harder to be won then a strong City, and
that their Contentions will be like the Bars of a Castle. If there be
therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be
like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let
nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let
each esteem other better then themselves. Look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others. Let this mind be in you,
which was also in Christ Jesus, etc. Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And then I make no
question but God will highly exalt you, and give you a Name, if not above, yet
answerable to the best Reformed Churches.

THE EIGHTH PART.
CHAP. XXV. The Apothecaries Shops.
THe Apothecarie Shops wherein this Spiritual Physic is to be had, Parl. Ord.
N.
are the several Auditories and Congregations of the Ministers and Preachers
of Gods Word, as it appears in the Ordinance.

APHORISM 13. The House of God in every Parish is to be like an Apothecaries
Shop.
For the better understanding of this Aphorism, consider wherein it is to be
like it, and wherein not.

First, for the first consideration, the similitude lies in many particulars,
I will name but some.

1. As the Apothecaries Shop is a public and common place for any sick party
to get Physic in, whether he or she live in or without the Town wherein the
Shop is: So is the Temple of God, Auditorium est locus ubi audiuntur
praeceptores, and oratores. Calep.
and therefore is called an Auditorie, and congregation, an Assembly of many
hearers, none excluded in the Ordinance; according to that, Psalm. 122.1, and 6.
Whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of
Israel. I cannot understand this House of God to be that heavenly Jerusalem in
another world, as some of the Ancients do, because David does command us to
pray for the Peace of this Jerusalem in the sixth Verse, and does promise to
seek the good of it in the last Verse: But with some ancient and modern
Writers, I understand the meaning of it to be the Temple of the Lord in
Jerusalem on Earth, Templum Domini in Jerusalem. Vatab. R. Kimki. Justinia.
Campensis.
wherein God was worshipped by his people Israel; and which is the public
place for Gods people to meet in, for their spiritual food.

2. As the Apothecaries Shop has some learned and approved Physician and
Apothecarie belonging to it, (besides the Mistress or Apprentice in it) to
compound and order things for the public good of the Parish and Country
round about: So has the House of God not only its Samuels to administer in
the Priests Office, In divinis non minus, quam in secularibus, fide ac
prudentia opus est. Theoph.
but also its old Elies to give direction, 1 Samuel 3. My Author gives a good
reason for it; Because Wisdom is as necessary in Divine things as in Civil
affairs. Some kind of Prioritie, if not a limited Superiority (for Order
sake) seems to be consonant to the purest Antiquity, M^gdeburg. Eusebius. (...).
when Councels were of more use then only by way of Advice.

Secondly, for the second Consideration, wherein the diss^ilitude lies, I will
give you two things.

1. The Shop is a Mercenarie place; you must pay well (if not too dear) for
Apothecarie stuff: So must not it be with the House of God; its the great Hall
of the great God of Heaven and Earth, wherein he keeps Open-house to all
Comers, and that all the year long: wherein every Minister is like a
faithful Steward to bid every one welcome, Ad omnes quidem fideles pertinet,
sed imprimis eos qui vel doctrina, vel dignitate praesunt, Chrysostom. Theophil.
and to divide them their meat in due season; Comfort to whom Comfort
belongs, as a Cordial and Electuarie; and Terror to whom Terror belongs,
as a Purge, Vomit, or any thing else, in bitter Pills, yet wound up in Sugar
Promises, and gilt with golden possibilities of health and spiritual strength.
Luke 12.42. 1 Timothy 3.3. There the Bishop (not Lord Bishop) is not to be greedy
of filthy lucre, but given to hospitality. The Minister must not say, No
Fenny, no Paternoster; he must do his duty, and rest on God for maintenance,
who takes care for Oxen: yet let people know, their Ministers ought to live to
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14.

2. The Apothecaries Shop its a place for all Comers though they upon a
groundless distaste forsake their grave, learned, and pious Physicians and
Apothecaries in their own Cities, Towns, and Parishes nearer hand. So must it
not be with Gods House, wherein all things are to be done decently, and in
order, 1 Cor. 14.40. Surely, if Ministers are especially to look to their own
flocks, over which the Holy Ghost has made then Overseers, then the people
are especially to look to their Pastors for food. I do not yet know, why the
Minister should be tied to his flock, and not the flock to the Shepherd. Do
but consider Acts 20.28. with Heb. 13.17. and you shall find, that as your
Ministers are to take care to feed the Church of God, so the Church of God is
to take care how to obey their Overseers. Mark the reasons included in the
Text and Exhortation: First, because they have the rule over you, they are
appointed as Watchmen for the good of your souls, and must give an account of
you, and themselves; and therefore it does not become you to be unruly, much
less to run away from them, and to forsake them ordinarily without leave, or a
good occasion: Secondly, because its unprofitable to you though your itching
eats be sati^fied, as you may read 2 Timothy 4.4. For, they shall turn away
thou ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables. If your Minister be
not worth the hearing complain of him where help it to be had.

CHAP. XXVI. Application of this Aphorism.
LEt me speak one word to my fellow Artists; and what I shall now say to you,
God give me grace to practice. Behave your selves like good Apothecaries, and
Masters of your Craft, in your Shops; be well acquainted with Spiritual
Simples, be well versed in the sacred Text, turn over old Bills of former
Patients; Consider what Physic is most suitable to our Malignant humors in the
Body Politic, and make your Compositions with such Ingredients as may be most
successful in these Delinquent times; carry your P^tions to your Patients,
Sermon Doctrinae aluntur animae, sive operum exemplo, quo vivere oporteat,
Archiepisc. Bulga.
persuade them to take the Catholicall Medicine of Repentance, and tell them
its no worse Physic then you take your selves; for you may help to cure
others, not only by your wholesome words, but also by your good example: such
an one, says my Author, is only fit for the Ministry.

Let not your Medicine be so dubious as they have been of old, and also of
late, Pharmacum vocabulum est medium, quod tam pro toxico, quam pro salutifero
medicamento accipi potest, Cajus. M. Cotton, Vial. 1. page 9.
as that men could not tell whether they were wholesome or poysonfull: and that
perhaps is one cause why the Archbishops and Bishops are not so much as named
amongst the Parliament Apothecaries in the Ordinance; sure, something is the
matter.

Let me speak in the next place to the people of God in this Kingdom of
Old-England, as a Reverend Father not long since spoke to the people of God in
New England, and that is by way of reproof, and in his very words.

The use in the second place, serves to reflect a just reproof therefore upon
any that shall despise or neglect the public Ordinances of God in the Church;
To the same purpose speaks M. Hildersham on John 4.
for you see here, what is confirmed in the whole Church, is the great voice of
God, and that without contradiction to the holy Saints and Angels: if therefore
the public Ordinances be undermined and borne-witnesse against by any, that
comes not from the spirit of these Angels, but from some evil root in the
hearts of the sons and daughters of men, the report whereof is a vexation of
spirit to hear. Thus far the said Author.

The same Autho^ ^^yeth down a good ground for what he has said, in the
proof of his Doctrine in his second reason, Page 7.
and its this: A greater power of Gods voice is felt under the public
Ordinances, then in private Administrations.

To conclude, Let me speak to you Brethren as the Apostle Saint Paul did in
his time to the Thessalonians, in these words: Now we beseech you Brethren, by
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him,
that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled by spirit, or by word, or
by letter as from us, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1, 2.

Let me give you the exposition of some part of the second verse, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1,
^ Calvinus.
as I find it in the Commentary of Calvin on that place, who was in his time
not only the Fame of France, but ever since a burning light in the whole
Christian world, who being dead, yet speaks to this purpose, and to good
purpose, if there be not a heart wanting to receive it.

There are three kinds of Cozenage or Juggling in the world, whereof we are to
take heed.

1. The first is by spirit, Per Spiritum.
by spirit he understands fained prophesies, so that the meaning of Paul is,
as if he had said, howsoever Deceivers may pretend the Revelation of the
spirit, believe them not, and he gives a good reason for it, and its taken
from the subtlety of the Devil, which is this: Ut fucum simplicibus facerens.
Its the custom of the Devil to change himself into an Angel of light: This
title impostors steal to themsemselves, that they may make a false painting or
coloring to the simple, and therefore John says, Prove the spirits whether
they be of God, 1 John 4.1.

2. The second Deceit its by word, Per Sermonem.
whereby we are to understand any kind of Doctrine, which false Doctors do
insist on by their reasons, and conjectures, and pretenses, that they may
persuade men to believe their fictions.

3. The third Cheat is by an Epistle, Per Epistol^m.
it was an old custom to bring in a falsehand, and Letter for a testimony.

Think not dear Brethren, that I speak thus to quench the Spirit of God in
you; no, God forbid: the Lord multiply his graces in you, and pour his Spirit
more abundantly on you: but I write thus much unto you, that you may be kept
from the depths of Satan, Rev. 2, 24. who has deceived the whole world, Rev.
12, 9. and deceives it still. Believe it, the Devil is as very a Devil as
ever he was: Therefore with Peter and John, go up into the Temple together, at
the hour of Prayer, A^^^. 1. and forsake not the assembling of your selves
together, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10, 25. Take heed, that under the
pretense of New Light, you fall not into old errors.

THE NINTH PART.
CHAP. XXVII. The ends of prescribing this Physic to the Kingdom.
THe ends aimed at, Parl. Ord. T.
in the giving and taking this Parliament Physic, are three especially.

1. Peace. 2. Glory. 3. Prosperity.
APHORISM 14. The bitter Potion of true Repentance, does bring forth the sweet
fruits and pleasing effects of Peace, Glory, and Prosperity.
For the better understanding of this Aphorism, consider these five things.

1. What Repentance signifies. 2. What Peace signifies. 3. What Glory
signifies. 4. What Prosperity signifies. 5. The Ground of the Aphorism.
First, for the first Consideration, what Repentance signifies. I have given
you before a Parliament definition of it, now I will give you a Grammatical
description of it from the several etymologies and significations of the word
in several languages.

The Hebrew words which signify Repentance are three in the Old Testament.

1. (...).
The first signifies to be wise, as Deuteronomy. 32.28, 29. Prove. 23, 19. O my Son,
hear and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way.

And therefore, usually the Holy Ghost sets forth impenitent sinners who
still lie in their wickedness by the name of fools, as Jer. 4, 22. Prove. 27,
22. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar, yet will not his
foolishness depart from him.

2. The second word signifies alteration and change by sorrow, Nacham.
for some thing committed rashly, after that a man has better bethought and
advised himself, Jer. 8, 6.

3. The third Hebrew word signifies to return, Shobh.
its a Metaphor of borrowed Speech from a man's going out of the right way, for
naturally we walk with our backs toward God, but by Repentance we turn to
God again, and walk with our faces toward him, so that its an inward
returning of the heart of God, Isa. 9, 13. Jer. 3, 1, 7, 12, 14, 22, 36, 7.
Ezekiel. 18, and 33, 11, Turn, turn ye, for why well ye dye O house of Israel?

The Greek words in the New Testament, whereby Repentance is signified, are
likewise three.

1. Metano^o.
The first word signifies to change a man's mind upon good ground, after-wit or
after-wisedome, opposed to Pronota, fore-wit or fore-casting, and providing
beforehand, Math. 3, 2, 4, 17. Act. 2, 38, 8, 12. the wicked thought of Simon
is called Epionoia, the godly change of mind to which Peter exhorts him, is
called Metanoia.

2. Metamelomai.
The second word signifies to change a man's care and affection, as the former
Greek word signified the change of mind or judgment, Mat. 21, 29. 2 Cor. 7,
10.

3. Epistreph^.
The third Greek word signifies and notes an alteration, and Reformation of
the disordered actions of life and conversation, Mark 4.12. Luke 1, 16. John
12, 14. Act. 28, 27, 9, 35, 11, 21. A great number believed and turned to the
Lord.

The Latin words likewise signify to the same effect, and they are especially
three.

1. The first is in the effect, to wax wise again, Resipisco.
after some folly committed, for according to the true verdict of the
Scriptures, the mind of man of it self is, vain and erroneous and full of
folly, for want of the true knowledge and fear of God, Ephesians. 5, 8. Romans 8.7.
Coll. 1, 21.

2. The second word signifies to be greived or pained, Poenitet, quasi poena
tenet.
and so every penitent sinner grieved and pained at the heart for his sins,
Act. 2, 37. They were pricked in their heart.

3. The third word signifies to return, or turn again, Reverto.
for naturally we go astray like lost sheep, 1 Pet. 2.25. and as all, the
Psalmographer says, They are all gone aside, Psalm. 14.3.

Secondly, For the second Consideration, what is meant by Peace, it has
several significations amongst the Gr^m^tians.

1. Pax a pactione. Quum sentent a Senatus inclinaret ad pacem, and soedus
faciendum cum Pyrrho, Cicero de senect.
It signifies sometime a Paction, or Covenant and agreement, or a Pacification
and public tranquillity, when all things are still and quiet, such a peace
God made lately betwixt England and Scotland, blessed be his name for it.

2. It signifies liberty, when men may go up and down without restraint,
(...) fear of molestation by Scouts or Troopers, this is a tranquil liberty.

3. Pax est tranquilla libertas, Tull.
It signifies Propitiation, an atonement, and freedom from Gods anger, 1 John
2.2.

4. Pacemque per aras exposcunt, Virg. Aen. 4. Dum argentum capio, pax nil
amplius, Ter. in Heaut.
It signifies silence, when there is no noise nor crying in our streets, and
on the stage where every man acts his part in our English Tragedy.

All these ways peace may be taken in this Ordinance, for its peace with God
and man, which peace with God is called Propitiation, only procured by the
sacrifice of Christ, who did appease his Fathers wrath by his death on the
Cross, 1 John 2.2. Romans 3.25. And it also taken for peace with man, which is a
Pacification, Liberty and Silence in our streets from the noise of the
Drums, the sounding of the Trumpets, and the rattling of the Armor upon true
or false-Alarms, from which the God of peace deliver us in due time, and send
us a firm and happy peace both with God and man.

Thirdly, Quintil. Is gloria maxim excellit qui virtute plurimum praestat,
Cic. pro Plancro. Gloria est laus recte factorum, and magnorum in Rempubl.
meritorum, Cic. in Phil.
For the third Consideration, what Glory signifies: It signifies Renown,
Advancement, and a good name, and not a famous ill name as some deserve, and it
sometime signifies; which true glory is gotten especially, and was gotten by
our Ancestors, by good deeds, as Plutarch says, and Cicero affirms, that
glory is the credit that belongs to good deeds, and the merits of great men
toward the Commonwealth, (not toward God) this is according to that 1 Samuel
2, 30. Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed.

Thus Glory is to be taken in this Ordinance, The which Glory let the God of
all glory cause to dwell in our Land.

Fourthly, For the fourth Consideration, what is meant by Prosperity,
according to these words in the Ordinance, And the Prosperity of the Gospel,
with all the privileges belonging to it, may Crown this Nation unto all
succeeding ages.

Prosperity signifies, Faelicitas and ad votum successus, Cic. de fini^.
happiness and good success, according to our Votes and wishes, and this is
gotten by the exercise of virtue as Aristotle says, and the same Author though
a heathen man says, its the gift of God, which few men ascribe to him.

So that the Prosperity of the Gospel, Qui virtuti^ usum, cum vitae
prosperitat^ corjunxit. prosperitatemque a Diis habemus, virtutem Deo nemo
acceptam refert. Arist. de Not. Deorum.
its the happy state and condition of it, when it flourishes in its power and
purity, with all its privileges that belong to it, as Peace and Plenty,
according to the Votes (of both Houses) and wishes of Gods Reforming people,
and fighting Forces by Sea and Land. That this Prosperity of the Gospel may
crown this Nation unto all succeeding generations: Lets all, and always pray
and pay, serving our generation according to the will of God as David did, Act.
13, 36. wherein he showed himself a man after gods own heart, verse 22. And
take heed that God says not of us, Virtutem Deo nemo acceptam resert.
as Aristotle did of the prosperous men in his days, They do not acknowledge
God the Author of it; what greater Ingratitude, what greater impiety can there
be in the Christian world? Omnes immemorem benefici^ oderunt. Cic.
All men hate an ungrateful man.

Fifthly, For the last Consideration, what the grounds of this Aphorism are, I
will give you these three.

1. The first is taken from the nature of Repentance, which is not only a
fruitful grace, but also brings forth fruit suitable to its kind; Genesis 1 12.
Now as the fruits of impenitencie are Discord, Civil War, Shame, and
Adversity, Deuteronomy. 28. So the fruits of Penitencie are Peace, Glory, and
Prosperity, as appears likewise in the same Chapter at large.

2. The second ground is taken from the nature of Gods promises, they are not
only fruitful, but also correspondent promises, Psalm. 48, 11. We begin to
feel that Peace is a good thing, Carendo potius quam fruendo, Psalm. 1.3.
such is the nature of man, that he priseth a blessing by wanting it. Every
promise is like that tree planted by the river side, which brings forth its
fruit (according to its kind) in his season. Now God promises peace, Prove. 16,
7. when our ways please him, now we are sure God is well pleased with
Repentance.

3. The last ground is taken from the nature of God himself; Ratio eptima
declinandi poenas, inpoenitentia consistit. Rodolp. Gualterus.
who is so gracious, and of so sweet a disposition, that if a Nation turn from
the evil of sin. God will turn from the evil of punishment, J^^ah 3.10. If
we turn from sin, that is a Peace-breaker, then God will turn to us, who
is a Peacemaker. This Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob found to be true by
experience; so did Joseph and Jeremiah, Jer. 20.3. The three Children and
Daniel could tell you as much, Mordecai and the Jews bate witness to this
Truth.

By the way, think not that when I say, Peace is a pleasing effect, and the
sweet fruit of true Repentance, that I mean such a Peace as the new Irish
Pacification is; which I cannot but apprehend to be very dangerous to these
three united Kingdoms, unless some speedy check be given to their
proceedings and merciless intentions. Believe it they who have committed the
most outrageous and barbarous Cruelties that have ever been heard of in the
Christian world, cannot so soon turn good subjects to King Charles, and true
friends to the Protestant Religion, without either Repentance or submission.

Let Oxford say what can be said for their Irish Assistants, its an ill Omen to
Religion, when the Fox is set to keep the Geese; or to use the sacred phrase,
when Cain is set to be Abels keeper, Genesis 4.9. I do expect the return of
Cains answer; Am I my Brothers keeper?

CHAP. XXVIII. Application of this Aphorism.
EXamine the truth of your Repentance by the former significations of the word
Repentance.

1. Does thy Repentance spring out of the Radix and Root Cha^am? Assimilatur
enim filiquis peccatum, dulcedinemhabens, and asperitatem. Theoph.
Then thou art wiser then before; thou art conscious of thine own former
folly, as the Prodigal was, when he left his Trough and Swines-meat, his
sinful and huskie pleasures, and went to his Fathers Diet, being come to his
right and ripe wits, Luke 15.16.17. This new Diet of the Prodigal, its Bread
from Heaven, Divinis mysteriis, and divino pane communicans. Theoph.
the Mysteries of Salvation, the Word, and Sacraments. Is it thus with thee
(Christian Reader?) Do thou now with the Be, finding an emptiness in all
these Terrene flowers, even in their glory and Spring-beautie and
May-sweetnesse, flee to some other, until it be a better flower, which are the
Promises in the Fields of the Old and New Testament? And from thence do thou
suck the Honey of divine knowledge and consolation, then its a sign thou art
wiser then a natural and impenitent fool.

2. Does thy Repentance grow out of the Root Nacham? Then thy mind is changed,
thy judgment altered, with grief for thy former mad^esse.

3. Does thy Repentance arise from the Root Shobh? Then thou do with the
Prodigal return to thy heavenly Father, Longinqua Regio est oblivio Dei, Aug.
from whom thou did go, into the farre-Countrey of Oblivion, forgetting God,
thy self, and the end wherefore God gave the Talent and Portion which thou
have. If it be thus with thee, then thou art a true Convert, bless God for it:
but if thou art the old man still, a Swearer, a Whore-master, a Drunkard still,
Quam diu male agebat, extra seipsum erat: and non manebat in sua ratione.
rest not contented in serving thy base Swinish lusts, but labor to repent;
for all the while thou live in sin, thou art beside thy self, and live
in Bedlam. It may be thou have high thoughts of thy own wit as the Sluggard,
who thinks himself wiser then seven men that can render a reason, Prove.
26.16. Yet thou art a sluggish fool still, if thou do not arise out of thy
Bed of Security and Idleness, and labor to work out thy salvation with
fear and trembling, by getting the Oil of grace into thy Lamp and heart,
Matthew. 25.

THE TENTH PART.
CHAP. XXIX. The Motives to take this Parliament-Physick of Repentance.
THese Motives are contained within this Ordinance vertually, and inclusively,
though not formally and plainly set down.

APHORISM. Parliament-Physick is alluring Physic.
For the better understanding of this Aphorism, consider these things
following.

First, what it is to allure; to allure, signifies to entice, to move,
Solicitare, qua solo-citare, ve suo loco move
or stir up to any thing. The Apple in Paradise is said to allure Eve to pull
it down and eat it, 2 Pet. 2.18. Hosea 2.14. I will allure her, and draw her
into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her.

Secondly, consider how many ways it does allure.

1. Nulla sp^ solicitor, Plin. l. 9. Epist.
It does allure by fair words, whereby hope is stirred up and quickened in the
soul of a doubting Christian. Hosea 2.14. I will allure her, and speak
comfortably unto her.

So this Parliament-Physick does allure, by speaking comfortably to the
Kingdom, as you have heard; it tells the Kingdom, that there is hope still
in Israel, concerning the matter in hand.

2. Aut spem, metumve ostendendo allicio.
It does entice by foul words, by threatening speeches, by generating fear in
the heart: So Schoolmasters allure their Scholars to their Books even by
threatening them with the Ferula or Rod: So the Lord did entice and draw
Niniveh to Repentance, by threatening their destruction within 40. days.

Thus this Parliament-Physick does more the Kingdom of England, and Dominion
of Wales, to a speedy Repentance, from the dangerousnesse of the Disease its
troubled withal; its Mortal, and has brought the Kingdom near to the gates
of Destruction and Despair: As appears in the Ordinance.

Thirdly, consider what is the similitude betwixt Repentance and a Medicine:
The similitude lies in two things especially.

1. Medicina valetudinis ars est, ^t prudentia est ar^ vivendi, Cic. 5. de
fini^.
As a Medicine is invented for Health-sake, so is Repentance; if Adam had not
sinned, there had been no need of Faith or Repentance.

2. As Physic is more wholesome then toothsome, so is Repentance; its bitter
to the Palate, but its sweet in the Heart: so sweet, as that its Repentance
without Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10.

Fourthly, consider what kind of Physic this is: The Ancients say, there are
three kinds of Medicaments.

1. Medicinae tria genera veteres fecere: quarum primo, victus ratione:
secundo, manu: tertio, Pharmacis, medetur. Deinde singulis medicinam consi^ii,
at que orationis meae si quam potero, afferam, Cicero in Catil.
There is a Pharmacall, or an Herball Medicine; such an one as is compounded of
herbs, and other Apothecarie-Simples.

2. There is a Manual, or Hand-Medicine; such as is the Rod of Correction,
Prove. 23.13.

3. There is a Rational Medicine, when by the strength of reason and good
counsel others are cured, Jam. 5.20.

Now this Paysick is a Rational Potion, and this may be called either
Physical or Metaphysicall.

Physical, that is Moral or Philosophical; such Physic will restore a
sin-sick sinner but to a Moral perfection: and this is the Remedy that mere
civil honest men delight to take, and wherewith they are only cured, and that
is but in part, as Cato, Plato, and other heathens were, who went very far in
natural perfections, as Plutarch testifies in his Lives, This is our common
and Pharisaicall righteousness, which leaves the Soul in a dying and
perishing condition, Math, 5, 20.

Metaphysicall Physic is of more divine and supernatural nature and
operation, able to purge and cure the Sin-sick Soul, and this is compounded
out of Scripture-ingredients, as you have learned before and this only is able
to cure you thoroughly, Jam. 1, 21. And this is the Parliament Physic contained
in this Ordinance, and now commended to your Christian consideration and
friendly acceptance, for thy own personal and private benefit, and the
National and public health of the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales.

Believe it, It will do you more good in one Moment, then the Irish Rebels
will do you all the while they are with you* in Wales, or others in the West
parts of this bleeding Island, though they be acknowledged to be His Majesty's
Subjects, and are furnished with our English Arms.

CHAP. XXX. The Application of this Aphorism.
IF Parliament Physic be allu^ing Physic, I hope I shall not need to
inculcate the constant pra^tice of this duty: yet seeing man's nature is
backward to any thing that is good, Parl. Ord. N.
and that in the Ordinance I am enjoined, earnestly to persuade the public
practice of this gererall acknowledgement and deep Humiliation for the
forenamed and all our National and Crying Sins: Give me leave to spend a
little time in the performance of this task. I might borrow many Motives from
other Authors both old and new; but its needless, seeing there is a
sufficiency of Arguments in this Ordinance, persuading the thing it self. And
therefore, that we may not be persuaded to go on, let us look back like
Janus with two faces, to what has been said in the Division, Explanation, and
Application of the same. Now for a more distinct proceeding in this
Application, Look orderly on every Aphorism, and thou shall find it an
enticing object to Repentance.

1. Cast thine eye on the first Aphorism, page 1. And there the Author of this
Medicine will entice thee. The Author is not an unknown Empiricke, but an old
and well known Physician, who has done many Cures and great ones for thy
forefathers, in Henry the eighth his time, in Edward the sixth, and Queen
Elizabeth's days, Sed harum rerum abusus. N^m plerique his rebus (...),
Evangelium spernunt. Cum contra pauperes, ignobiles, and contempti coram mundo
(...) impedimentis non impl^^antur, Hemming.
and would have done many since, had they not been hindered by many impatient
great ones, who would not help forward, but hinder the work of the Lord,
Nehem. 3.5. By how much the greater many are in place, by so much the lesser
they are in Grace. My Author gives a good reason for their badnesse, which is
the abuse of their greatness; And therefore its observed, that God in all Ages
has done the greatest things, by the most contemptible means, 1 Cor. 1, 27,
28. Psalm. 8.2. My Author on that Psalm faith, That by Babes we are to
understand such as are little in quality, and worldly esteem and credit. This
place, says Hierome, Non pro aetate dicit sed pro qualitate, Gloss. Defensores
enim videntur haeretici, fidei, and Philosophi sapientiae, cum tamen and illi
fiden: and hi sapientiam veram impugnant, Aug. Gloss.
was fulfilled in the 21 Chapter of Matthew. when the children cried, Hosanna to
the Son of David, verse 15.16.

Obj. Many great and wise men seem to be defenders and Patrons of Religion.

Sol. Its true, so they do, and yet many times are the greatest enemies to it.

The Consideration whereof, may serve to take away the scandal of these
Parliament-disgracing times, because but few of the Lords put their necks to
the work of their Lord, Nehem. 3.5.

But to return from this digression, be persuaded to like of this present
potion for the Authors sake; shall I use Motives to this Motive? Then consider
these particulars following.

First, Plus vident oculi, quam oculus.
They are many. Its a College of Physicians, the doubting patient is persuaded
to do more then he did think to have done, when he understands that its the
judgment of the most learned and greatest number of Physicians, that such a
Medicine should be taken.

Secon^ly, They are not only many, but also mighty Physicians, in regard of
power and skill. If you will not take it by fair persuasions, they may compel
an external submission to their Prescriptions, otherwise their power were a
power-lesse power, merely Titular, which were and would prove ridiculous and
unprofitable. They are also skilful, they are not only learned, but well
experienced in the distempers of Kingdoms, especially this Nation, having
been patients themselves about sixteen or seventeene years, in a more then
ordinary manner and measure, witness their own Declarations, they are also on
the top of the Beacon, and have better Intelligence and Cognizance then others,
who have not the same Information for illumination.

Thirdly, They are not only mighty, but also faithful, A sure friend is
tried in a doubtful matter, When others have deserted the cure, desiring the
death of the patient, these have stood to it, even to the hazarding of their
own Estates and Lives. I am confident, that never did any Parliament in
England venture more desperately for the public health of this Kingdom then
this has done, witness the threats of Malignants, and a Popish and a
Delinquent Army on foot in this Kingdom, in opposition to the Parliament, as
appears by the Votes of both Houses at several times, and on several
occasions.

Fourthly, They are not only faithful, but also Religious Physicians, who make
a conscience to keep a good (...) toward God and all men. Maii 5. 1641. Sept.
39. 1643.
This appears by their (...) and late Covenants and by this present Ordinance
(...) Exp^anation and Application. If I may write what I think^, and thou may
read what I write, I am persuaded (and let not my Pen know flattery) this,
this present, though contemned Parliament, is as Pious, Loyal, and charitable
a Parliament, as ever England had since it was a Habitation for reasonable
creatures, Pol. Virg. lib. 1. page 18. Guildas.
which was soon after the Flood of Noah as learned Historiographers think:
they are the more culpable who have persuaded our Sovereign to absent himself
from it, Hinc illae (...) chrymae.
which has caused no little heart-smart in the Loyal breasts of King Charles
his true, though scandalized Subjects.

As I said before, so I say again, these Physicians are Pious, they are not
heathen Physicians, such as Chyro, Aesculapius, Apollo, Hippocrates, or Galen,
Ovid. lib. Motam.
who were the most ancient and inventing Physicians, as their friends call them.

Obj. So are the York and Oxford-Physitians, are not they many, mighty,
faithful, Religious men, and State-Physitians?

Sol. 1. This Ordinance, wherein the only remedy for these present Calamities
is contained, came from the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and not
at York or Oxford, and was Printed at London by Order from the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, as you may see in the beginning of the same.

Sol. 2. Non ea est medicina, quum sanae parti corporis scalpellum adhibetur,
and integrae; carnificina est ^^ta, and crudelitas, Cicero pro Sest.
I will not be tedious, and therefore I will conclude with Cicero, that is no
remedy, when the Surgeons Instrument, wherewith he lets blood, is put to
the whole and health-full part of the body in stead of the part to be lanced:
no says he, this is the Physic of a Cruel hangman.

Fifthly. They are most Loyal Physicians, witness their Protestations,
Covenants, and Messages, They do not only labor to cure the stomach by
purging the head, but likewise to cure the head by cuting the stomach, Parl.
Ord. Prine.
and inferior parts of the Body-politique; witness this present Ordinance,
Ex^orting all His Majesty's good Subjects to the duty of Repentance, that so
at length we may obtain a firm and happy peace, both with God and man. I
know not wherein a Parliament should declare more Loyalty to a Prince, except
they should fall from their own steadfastness and so betray their trust, which
were the greatest Disloyalty in the world.

Sixthly, Nervus quidam a cord ad digitum medicinalem proficiscitur, Macrob.
lib. ult. S^o t Extract. P. 7.
They are most charitable Phystians, witness their sparing Delinquents, even
unto public hazard. I believe their intentions are good I wish the success
may be answerable, yet this Mercy to others must be bounded with public
safety, as appears by the Reasons given to Queen Elizabeth of happy
memory, and that by the Parliament, concerning the speedy execution of the
Queen of Scots. The which Reasons, because they are very necessary for these
times, and not commonly known, Anno 1586. Regni 28.
give me leave to transcribe out as I find them in a short Extract of such
Reasons as were delivered in a Speech by M. Sergeant Puckering Speaker of the
lower Horse, before the Queens most Excellent Majesty; the Reasons are eight
or nine.

1. From the danger of the overthrow of the true Religion.
Its most perilous to spare her, that continually has sought the overthrow
and suppression of the true Religion, infected with Popery from her tender
youth, and bring after that a confederate in that Holy League when she came to
age, and ever since a professed enemy against the truth.

2. A Popish Queen is very dangerous.
She rests wholly and fully upon Popish hopes to deliver and advance her, and
is thereby so devoted to that profession, that as well for satisfaction of
others, as for feeding of her own humor, she will supplant the Gospel, where,
and whenever she may, which evil is so much the grea er, and the more to be
avoided, as that it slays the very Soul, and will spread it self not only
over England and Scotland, but also into those parts beyond the Seas where the
Gospel of God is maintained, the which cannot but be exceedingly weakened by
the defection of this noble Island.

1. As the Lydians said, Unum Regem agnoscunt Lydi, From the peril of the State
of the Realm.
duos autem tolerate non possunt. So we say, Unicam Reginam Elizabetham
agnoscunt Angli, duas autem toletare non possunt.

2. As she has already by her Allurements, brought to destruction more
Noblemen and their houses, together with a greater multitude of the Commons of
this Realm during her being here, then she should have been able to do if
she had been in possession of her own Crown, and armed in the field against
us, so will she still be the continual cause of the like spoil, to the
greater loss and peril of this estate, and therefore this Realm neither may
nor can endure her.

3. Again, She is the only hope of all d^scontented Subjects, she is the
foundation whereon all the evil disposed do build. She is the Root from
whence all Rebellion and Treachery do spring: And therefore whilst this hope
lasts, this foundation stands, and this root lives, they will retain
heart, and set on foot whatsoever their devices against the Realm, which
otherwise will fall away, dye, and come to nothing.

4. Mercy now in this case toward her, would in the end prove cruelty
against us all, for there is a certain Cruell-Mercie, Nam est quae^am crudelis
misericordia.
and therefore to spare her is to spill us.

5. Besides this, it will exceedingly grieve, and in a manner deadly wound the
hearts of all the good Subjects of your Land, if they shall see a conspiracy
so horrible, not condignely punished.

6. Thousands of your Majesty's most Liege and loving Subjects of all sorts and
degrees, that in a tender zeal of your Majesty's safety, have most willingly,
both by open Subscription and solemn Vow, entered into a firm and Loyal
Association, So now.
and have thereby protested to pursue unto the death, by all forcible and
possible means such as she is, by just sentence now found to be, can neither
discharge their love, nor well save their Oaths, if your Majesty shall keep
her alive, of which burden your Majesty's Subjects are most desirous to be
relieved, as the same may be, if Justice be done.

7. Lastly, Your Majesty's most loving and dutiful Commons doubt not, but that
as your Majesty is duly exercised in reading the Book of God, so it will
please you to call to your Princely remembrance, how fearful the examples of
Gods vengeance be, that are to be found against King Saul for sparing King
Agag, and against King Achab for saving the life of Benhadad, both which were
by the just judgment of God deprived of their Kingdoms, for sparing those
wicked Princes, whom God had delivered into their hands, of purpose to be
slain by them, as by the Ministers of his Eternal and Divine justice, wherein
full wisely Solomon proceeded to punishment, when he took the life of his own
natural and elder brother Adonias, for the only intention of a marriage, that
gave suspicion of Treason against him.

Christian Reader, pardon this Digression, and make a right use of these nine
Reasons against Cruell-Mercie: They may cure thy mind of many prejudicate
opinions and thoughts about the present Parliament, for the public safety of
the three Kingdoms. For thou see, that the Parliament of England this year
1643. does no more against Malignants now, then the Parliament 1586. did
against a Popish Queen then; and that upon the very selfsame Reasons, as
appears in their Writings.

Christian Reader, I cannot let thee go, without acquainting thee with the
Queens Answer to these Reasons; much sweetness may be sucked out of every
word: Her Answer is this, verbatim.

As touching your Councels and Consultations, I conceive them to be wise,
honest, and conscionable; so provident and careful for the safety of my life,
(which I wish no longer then may be for your good) that though I can never
yield you of Recompense your due, yet shall I endeavor my self to give you
cause, to think your good will not ill bestowed, and strive to make my self
worthy of such subjects. And now for your Petition, I shall pray you for this
present, to content your selves with an Answer without Answer. Your Judgment I
condemn not, neither do I mistake your Reasons, but pray you to accept my
Thankfulness, excuse my Doubtfulnesse, and take in good part my Answer
answerlesse: Wherein I attribute not so much to my own Judgment, but that I
think many particular persons may go before me, though by my Degree I go
before them. Therefore if I should say, I would not do what you request, it
might peradventure be more then I thought: And to say I would do it, ^ight
perhaps breed peril of that you labor to preserve; being more then in your
own wisdoms and discretions would ^eeme convenient, circumstances of time and
place being duly considered.

Here Christian Reader, thou see how Queen Elizabeth did speak to her great
Council of State, very respectfully, thankefully, and humbly though they did
enter into a firm and Loyal Association and Protestation, without her
knowledge, and did some things against her mind, as elsewhere she declares
unto them. This may teach all the Malignants and Neuters in the Kingdom, to
speak more honorably, to, and of the Parliament, of whom no dishonorable
thing is to be thought or spoken, according to the good and old Maxim and Rule
for Parliament-language.

Seventhly, They are most likely to cure the distempers and soars of this
great-spittle and sin-sick Kingdom. I say, though its possible for them to
err being men, and not guided by an Infallible spirit, yet its more likely
they should not err then other Counselors of State, though very wise and
learned men, because they are not only in their proper place, Matthew. 18.20.
where God does usually meet his Servants that are about his Work; Potestates,
precibus sanstorum tanquam sustenta^ules indigent, Hemming.
but also they are prayed for by the Kingdom more then all in the Kingdom
besides, who are not called to this great Work that the Parliament has in
hand. Now there is great power in prayers, God has sanctified the ordinance of
prayer for the private good of persons, and public good of Kingdoms. 1 Timothy
2, 2. Psalm. 65, 2. Jam. 5.16.

Eighthly, Because they are Authorized Physicians, Ut deinceps quicquid ad Ren
publ. been gerendam, ejusque conservationem deliberandum foret, illud ad
concilium referretur, Pol. Virg. l. 11.
they have the Kings broad Seal to their Writ, by virtue whereof they are
called together; not only to consult how to govern, but also how to preserve
the Commonwealth in health and safety. So that upon the matter, the end of
their meeting is, that the Commonwealth may take no damma^e. I am informed,
that the Writ whereby the Parliament is congregated together, runs after
this manner before mentioned.

To sum up all in a word, Nuxquippe Indica (...) refertae, in societate
servatur, (quam cunens tum temporis gloriabundus, mihi ostendebat) qu^ Regi,
exemplo (...) parabitur Pharmatum, Romes Masterpiece, page 18, 19.
thy Physic must come either from London or Oxford. Now consider with thy
self, but do it seriously, in which is it most likely the best and most
trusty Physicians are to be found, I hope thou will not look for good Physic
from such as would have poisoned Queen Elizabeth, and would have killed King
James, (...) have (...) up his Parliament, I hope thou can not expect it from
Politic Neuters as side with such as have prepared an Indian (...) most
s^^^pe poison for the King after the example of his Father; if he will not
consent to the Papists now in Arms in England and Ireland; O Lord preserve
King Charles, who is now in great danger amongst the Papists, Lord so bless
me, as I desire thee to bless my King.

CHAP. XXXI. An Answer to some Objections, made against this great College of
Physicians.
BEcause discontented men cannot for shame cavil against Parliament Physic,
which is Evangelicall Physic, and men must deny the whole Bible if they
gainsay Repentance; Therefore they fall a cavilling against the Physicians,
being unwilling to take, their Physic, but this shift will not serve their
turn in the day of death and Judgment. Their Objections are many, but to
little purpose, I will name one or two of them, which seem to have most reason
and strength in them.

1. Obj. This Parliament is a Schismatic Parliament, in going about to
Reform that Government in the Church, which other Parliaments did establish.

Sol. For Answer, First, by the same Reason, all the Reforming Parliaments and
Synods in the world may be called Factious, for they did Reform things amiss
established by Law.

Secondly, Solemn League and Covenant, p. 5.
They do but desire to Reform the Church according to the Word of God and the
example of the best Reformed Churches, as they have suffiently declated to the
world upon their Oaths, (...) Schisma, quo (...). Musc. de Schism.
and under their own hands. Now this is a good Schism, whereby a Kingdom is
brought into a nearer Conformity to the will of the great God, for hereby an
evil unity and concord is broken: So Christ was the greatest Schismatic in
the world and his Disciples, as my Author calls them, and his Reason is good;
for says he, They did cut asunder the unity of the Jewish Church: and such a
Schismatic Church is ours and such Schismatic Parliaments were many of
our best Reforming Parliaments, when they did fall off from Rome, and divided
themselves from the Malignant Church of Antichrist.

Thirdly, Though this Parliament has done more then others have done in the
Point of Reformation: yet, what have they done more then other Parliaments
would have done if they might have answered their own desires, and the many
Petitions of the Kingdom of England put up to that great Assembly, still to be
seen? So that this present Parliament do but sweat and fight out what others
have wished and endeavored, though not in the same manner and measure, not
meeting with the same necessities. Rebus sic ^^^^tibus.
And truly my Brethren, to speak what I seriously think, a more through
Reformation is of absolute necessity in this Kingdom, in these regards and
many more.

1. Because many have more knowledge then they had and they cannot swallow what
formerly they have concocted: I wish with all my heart we may not be too
scrupulous; but certainly, there is just cause why the Parliament have done as
they have, in the point of Reformation.

2. Because that many did make use of our Ceremonies as of a Shooing-horne, to
pull on Popery withal. Say what you can for Ceremonies, they are but Romes
Nest-Egge, for the Pope to hatch his Superstition out of. Not to be tedious,
blessed be God for what the Parliament has done, and the Lord finish his own
work he has began. Let God be glorified in his own way, in our day of
Salvation; and there is an end of the Controversy.

Fourthly, and lastly, How that Parliament can be called a Schilsmaticall
Parliament, Defense of Apology.
which medleth but with things that belong to their Power, I am yet to learn.
Jewel, p. 522. Si quid ex antiquis institutis, legibusve tellendum, ac rursus
condendum sit, id de concilii sententia fiat, Pol. Virg. l. 11. p. 188.
Now its well known to such as are not wilfully ignorant, that a Parliament
has power to seek the health and wealth of the Church, as well as of the
Commonwealth; and therefore they may detract and add, as it shall most
conduce to the welfare of both. And to speak truth, otherwise their Power and
Meeting were to little purpose, upon the matter: The which thing to imagine,
were to undermine the Power of both Houses of Parliament, and to tax our
Ancestors of much folly, in the Constitution of a fruitless Remedy for
Politic Maladies.

2. Obj. Never did any Parliament go about to reform and cure a Kingdom, so
contrary to the Judgment of the Lords Spiritual and Tempotall, yea, without
the consent of many of the Commons, and without a Convocation of learned
Divines, as this does at this day.

Sol. For answer, first, in the first place, its a Prerogative of Parliament,
Salus populi, est suprema lex.
not to be tied to former Precedents, but to have a Legislative Power to make
new ones of their own, as occasion shall be offered: for the same Ground
remains, which is Public Safety; that is the Axletree about which all Votes
must turn, and the Center to which all Laws must tend. To this purpose,
remarkable is a branch of King James his Speech in Parliament, His Majesty's
^^^st Speech in ^arl. March 19. Ann. 1603.
which is this: The times for making Laws, are only in Parliament time; As
for the making of them, I will thus far faithfully promise unto you, that I
will ever prefer the weal of the Body, and of the whole Commonwealth, in
making good Laws and Constitutions, to any particular or private ends of mine;
thinking ever the wealth and weal of the Commonwealth, to be my greatest
weal and worldly felicity. A point wherein a lawful King does directly
differ from a Tyrant. His Majesty's reason was this: If we take the whole
People is one Body or Mass, then as the Head is ordained for the Body, and not
the Body for the Head; so must a righteous King know himself to be ordained
for his people, and not his people for him.

Secondly, Jewel, page 520, 521. part. 6.
For answer to this Objection. If you consult with M. Harding, he will tell you
what the Parliament did in the first Reformation of Religion in England, which
consists in these particulars: 1. The Temporal Lords did forsake the House.
2. The Spiritual Lords did likewise except one Bishop, who was counted a fool
for his co-working with the Parliament, and breaking the Unity. 3. Very many
in the lower house and well learned, did speak against the Reformation. 4. The
Convocation of Priests did put up a Bill against the parliaments proceedings.
5. The Parliament chose Divines, and a Solemn disputation was appointed at
Westminster, in the presence of the States of the Realm. 6. Nihil jam dictum,
quod non dictum fuit grius.
The Bishops and Priests did flee from this disputation, and meeting of
Ministers, which was called an obscure meeting of a few Calvinists of one
little ^and, from whence (Christian Reader) thou see that there is great
similitude betwixt this and the first Reforming Parliament, There is no new
thing under-neath the Sun, Eccl. 1, 9.


I will conclude this answer with Bishop Jewels words to M. Harding, Bishop
Jewel, p. 522. part 6.
If any imperfections shall appear in the former Parliaments, we give Gods
thanks for the same that is and trust that for his own Name sakes, he will
confirm that he has begun. The hearts of Princes, and determinations of
Parliaments, are in his hand, Prove. 21, 1. If any thing want, the arm of the
Lord is not shortened, he is able to supply the same.

3. Obj. But this Reforming Physic is given by your great College of
Physicians, without the consent of the Master of that College, yea in the way
of resistance to his prescription.

Sol. For answer, I confess no Objection does lie against Parliament
proceedings, that has so much weight in it as this has, were it not for this
all were nothing.

Yet in all humility, Doct. Reinolds p^ine. (...) p. 585.
and out of the depth of Christian-loyaltie to my Prince, as Supreme Governor
over his Subjects in things Spiritual and Temporal, according to the Laws of
the Kingdom of England; Give me leave to propound (under correction) these few
Considerations, in way of Answer to the former Objection.

1. Consideration, whether the Master of a College of Physicians may not be
distempered in his own brain, though his heart be never so found and full of
life? 2 Samuel 16.1, 2. 1 King. 11, 1, 2.

2. Consideration, Co-ordinata invicem supplant.
whether this braine-distemper (through ill Air, and Diet) may not be helped
and supplied by a College of learned and faithful Physicians that hurt may
not be done to the damage of the patient, according to the ultimate and best
intentions of the Master of such a College, though for the present it be full
ill against his misguided will?

3. Consideration, De principum p^riter, atque cater^ populi commodo, in
concilio agatur, Pol Virg. l. 1^. p. 188.
whether the constitution of our mixed Monarchy does not reserve in its
co-ordination a power of resistance in order to its preservation seeing its
mixture is a Medium to its fuller safety? Otherwise it should want the Office
of a mean co^ducing to its end, which is (Salus populi) the health of the Body
Politic.

4. Consideration, Mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate,
and periculis imminentibus, etc.
whether the Kingdom be not in imminent danger at thi^ very time a^ the King
in his Writ of Summons does te^^^fie, which may cause such a Loyal resistance
as may best stand with the felicity of Head and Body, King and Kingdom.

I know Doctor Fern, and many others, are of a contrary mind, yet who so
looks on Romes Master-peice, and compares it with the carriages of Plots in
these times, will at length be convinced, that Religion lies at the State, and
all that is dear unto us.

Its to me more then a nine days wonder, Bishop Carl. Thank. Rememb. Qualis
causa, ta^is est effectus
that such learned men as cannot be ignorant of the Treasonous Plots of unarmed
Papists in the happy Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, should once
imagine that Armed Papists will fight for King Charles and the Protestant
Religion.

5. Consideration, whether His Majesty's own Acts: First, in helping the
Rochellers (in case of Religion) to resist their King in a more absolute
Monarchy. And secondly, in justifying the Scots in their late resistance, and
of the same nature that Englands is at this present, do not justify the
Parliament in their scandalized proceedings for the public good of King and
Kingdom, in the maintenance of the true Protestant and Reformed Religion.
Greg. Thym. page 11.


Against 1. Jesuits and Professed Papists. 2. Delinquents and Patentees. 3.
Atheists and Libertines.

All which agree in one final end to betray the Protestant Religion, strict
Laws and the just Liberties of the Reforming-Subjects?

6. Consideration whether the old practice of the Ephori in opposing against
the Lacedemonian Kings, Calv. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 20. sect. 31.
the Tribunes of the people which curbed the Roman-Consuls, and the custom of
the Demarchie in bridling the Senate of Athens, do not argue that its in the
power of the States of a Kingdom assembled in Parliament to Act the part of
Guardians for the public safety in case of urgent necessity: All these
Governments, even by the light of nature, did see a necessity of a
selfe-preservation in some cases.

I am not ignorant, Doct. Owen, ^. D.
that a late Writer, who has bestowed much pains in reading and quoting the
ancient and Orthodoxall Fathers for his own ends making them to call out to
Subjects for obedience, and to cry out against the Parliament proceedings in
the three Kingdoms, in these Malignant times.

To which Book I will give this short answer: That not one of all his Fathers
do hit the nail on the head, they speak not home to the prupose, they come
not near the Mark; some shoot over; some wide; some short: which will appear
plainly by these Considerations.

First, That those Fathers when they spoke to Kings and Empeours, Non in sensu
diviso, sed in sensu compesito
did not speak to them as in a Division from their Senators or Laws; but
governing and commanding according to their Imperial power and custom.

Secondly, When they spoke to subjects it was not in a time of Controversy,
whether the States of those Kingdoms might stand upon their own guard, and
seek the public good by force of Arms, being in danger of final
destruction for then they should have spoken against the Power of the Roman
Senate; which M. Doctor- Bach: can never show.

Thirdly, They were ignorant of the Government of England, Politia pacti^nata.
Major pars utriusque concessus, Pol. Virg. lib. 11. page 188. Bodin. de Repub.
l. 1. 6. 8.
which all the world now knows to be a mixed Monarchy and is governed by the
Major part of the three Estates assembled in Parliament.

And therefore (Christian Reader) let not these forenamed, or any other
Cavalier-Cavils against the Anti-Cavalier Parliament of England, cause thee to
distaste their Physic of Repentance, which consists of three parts:
Confession. Humiliation. And Reformation.


CHAP. XXXII. More Motives from other Aphorisms.
2. IN the second place cast thine eye on the second Aphorism, and thou shall
(...) Necessity a Motive to Repentance: Necessity is above all Laws, it
commanded the greatest Conquerours. The all commanding power of Necessity is
better known of late, then in the days of our Ancessours; Necessi^^^ non
habet legem.
otherwise the Kingdoms of England and Scotland would not have done some
things which they have done, for their own and the Kings preservation, as they
have sufficiently declared

Now this Necessity of Repentance is twofold: first, in regard of the (...)
of Englands sickness, its a mortal sickness: secondly, Parl. Ord. P.
in regard of the neerenesse of this mortality, Englands death appears in
the present lamentable face of it. Now therefore, as you desire the life of
this English Mother Church, so be persuaded to take that Remedy which is
prescribed in the Ordinance, and compounded in this Book, for the cure of thy
self, a part of her, and so of her in thy self.

If necessity will not stir and remove thee off thy seat of security nothing
can do it. Necessity will move the sick party to take Physic when no other
argument will prevail. Consider this necessity, Act. 2. Luke 13, 1, 2.

3. In the third place cast thine eye on the third Aphorism, and it will move
thee to Repentance, because Pride is the original cause of Impenitencie. A
proud man is a whole man, and thinks he has neither need of Physic or
Physician, Matthew. 9, 13 Now spiritual pride is the most contemptible thing in
the world and most dangerous: Its the proper sin of the Devil, the first
s^nne that ever was, it cast all the Devils out of Heaven down to Hell,
Damnabitur cum Diabolo, cui non poenites cum Adam^.
1 Timothy 3, 6. And therefore labor to Repent, otherwise the pride that puffs
thee up, with high conceits of thy own righteousness, will cause thee to fall
into the condemnation of (...) proud Devil.

4. Quamdiu spes est resipiscentiae in peccatoribus, cessandum non est ab
officio nostro, Marl^r.
In the fourth place cast thine eye on the fourth Aphorism and there thou
shall espy Possibility, a winning Motive to Repentance. The hope of a cure
does entice thee patient to use any means for his recoverie.

This Possibility is threefold: First, in regard of the Physician, God is
infinite in Mercy: Secondly, in regard of the Physic, its a successful
Remedy: Thirdly, Blasphemant, qui destinata malitia, gratiam and virtutem
Spiritus sancti oppugnant Jun Et certe quisquis cogitabit donum and opus Dei
esse poenitentiam, pl^^sperabit multo Crucig.
of the Disease its curable, no sin incurable but the (...) against the Holy
Ghost, which does hate, despise, and trample under foot, Physician, Physic,
and all that good is, Heb. 10.29.

Say not, were it in my power to Repent, I should have more hope to be saved.
For my Author and truth it self tells thee, that its so much the better for
thee, there is the more hope and possibility of Salvation; For God is more
ready to give Repentance then then art to ask it, Jam. 1, 5. Romans 10, 12. 2
Pet. 3, 9.

5. In the place cast thine eye on the fifth Aphorism, and it will move thee
to take the potion of Repentance, because thou art sick, thou art under the
hands of the Physicians. Indeed if thou were well then Physic might be
rejected, though offered, but its otherwise with thee and the Kingdom at this
time, if the skill of the most learned Doctors in the Christian world do not
deceive them in casting Englands state, which I believe it does not.

6. Sixthly, loo^e on the sixth Aphorism, and it will entice thee to Repent:
because its the only remedy that God has left to Nations brought near to
the gates of Destruction and Despair; its always successful. There are many
Diseases that pose the best Physicians, and are called their shame and
reproach, (...).
not so here. Thou can not be so low brought, but the Receipt of Repentance
will raise thee again. It raised Rahab a Harlot, Abraham an Idolater, Manasses
a Tyrant, Paul a Persecutor, those Magicians called at the birth, and that
debauched thief called at the death of Christ. And as it is in the Ordinance,
it prevailed for Nin^veh, when the sentence seemed to be gone out against her,
and may also prevail for England.

It cannot be said of any spiritual distemper, Hei mihi, quod (...) est
medicapilis herbis. Ovid. 1. Meta. Sea (...) vetat adhibere medicinam. Cicero
ad Attic. lib. 16. Plurimum medicinae contulit Hyppocrates, supremum autem
fastigium Gal^nus imposuit.
as Ovid speaks of love, that its incurable.

Hyppocrates knew not what to do in some desperate Diseases, but this College
or Physicians have found out a Catholicall Medicine for all Natures, Diseases,
and Nations, and its the bitter potion of Repentance. So that it may be said of
other Parliaments and of this, as its said of Hyppocrates and Galen,
Hyppocrates did add much to the Art of Physic, but Galen did go far beyond
him and all others, Prove. 31, 29.

Therefore be persuaded to make trial, what sick person will not do it, if he
were sure his Physic would do him good? I durst assure thee, thou shall have
cause to say, that its rather the Physic of God, then of man, thou shall find
so much good by Repentance.

Its true it will make thee deadly sick upon a Vomit, as thou may see in the
seventh and eighth Aphorisms, Ita sum levatus, ut mihi Deus aliquis medicinam
fecisse videtur. Ci^e. Terentiae. Quia mittitur in Gehennam.
but all will work for thy good, Romans 8, 28. as thou may see in the ninth
Aphorism.

7. In the seventh place look on the tenth Aphorism, and it will move thee to
Repent, because delay is dangerous, and that in a twofold regard:

First, In regard of the dangerousnesse of the Disease, its mortal, Ezekiel. 18,
4. The soul that sins it shall dye; That is, it shall dye the second death
by living in Hell. Hell is the grave of a dead, yet ever-living Soul.

Secondly, In regard of the patient, he has no long time to take this Physic
in; its within the compass of a moment, 2 Cor. 4, 17. Jam paeniten^^ae nullum
est tempus Hyla.
When the houre-glasse of Time is out, thy Physic of Repentance will be
naught, Matthew. 25. it was too late to buy Oil, when the Bridegroom was come:
And therefore our most wise and blessed Physician does exhort all men to watch,
in the use of the means, August. de verb. Domini. Si intra terminum statutum
homines resipiscerent. Par. Non erit ut in vagina spiritus meus, in aeternum.
Pagn.
that we may be prepared to meet him at the day of death and judgment, for he
comes in both, verse. 13.

Thirdly, In regard of the Physician; God will not always, and overlong be
dallyed withal, Genesis 6, 3. God did set the old world a time to repent in,
which if they passed carelessly, his Spirit should be sheathed no longer, like a
Sword in the sheath or Scabberd, but he will draw it out to the destruction of
impenitent sinners, who will not answer his Summons, and upon a Parley come in
while the white Flag hangs out, Prove. 1, 27, etc. Matthew. 23. Eccl. 8, 6. Man's
misery is great upon him, because he will not take Quarter while its offered.

8. In the eighth place cast thine eye on the eleventh Aphorism, it will
allure thee to repent and amend, because every sin is a disease, spiritual
distemper, Salus animae, est salus totius corporis.
and therefore the more dangerous. Men are very careful of their heads, eyes,
and hearts; and shall not men be careful of their souls? Repentance will cure
thy soul, and in curing it, it heals the whole body also. What greater folly
then to take more care for a healthful body, then a sound and halfe-spirit?

9. Ninthly, look on the twelfth Aphorism, and it will entice thee, because
thy Apothecaries, who compound this Potion, are thy near neighbors, who know
thy Aylments, and will labor to do thee as much good as they can, and with as
little pain and charge too, as they are able, if they be faithful Ministers:
If not, complain to that great College of Physicians, and they will take a
course with such soule-poysoning Apothecaries, as they have done with some
already, blessed be God for it. And as they have begun in the Spirit, God grant
they may not end in the flesh: the which thing, I hope those Worthies will
never do, in whose hands God has promised to finish his Work.

10. In the tenth place look on the thirteenth Aphorism, and it will allure
thee with its Propinquitie and neerenesse, thou shall not need to go far for
good Physic; do but frequent the Temple of God, and there thou shall hear
the voice of Wisdom, directing thee what to do, for thy spiritual good,
Prove. 8.34.35. The place of Instruction, its the House of God, and there he is
especially to be found, who is our Life. And therefore (by way of
encouragement) they are pronounced blessed, who hear Wisdom speaking to
them. But mark to whom Wisdom speaks, its to such as watch daily at her
gates, and wait at the posts of her doors: That is, to such as neglect not
the public Ordinances of God. M. Cotton gives a good reason for it, and its
this; M. Cotton on the first Vial. Page 8. 9.
Because the Lord does more clearly reveal himself by his Spirit in the
public Administrations of the Church, there he does delight to pour out all
his fresh springs, Psalm. 87, last verse. For the Lord commanded the blessing,
even life for evermore, Psalm. 133, 3. Eternal life does he give in the
public fellowship of his Saints, there does he confirm their callings to
them; look unto the Lord therefore for his blessing in this way. Therefore if
ever you perceive any vice or Spirit to take off a man from public
Ordinances, and cause him to slight them, then ever look at it, as a manifest
delusion: For ever dispensation of God does but enkindle a more earnest lo^ging
that the Lord should confirm the same by his broad Letters Patent, the
public Word and Sacraments in the Church. Yea so far do the Saints of God
stand hereupon, that whatsoever is in private brought unto them to believe,
they will find much ado to rest satisfied in it, until they see it confirmed
in the public also: As men will not content themselves with the Privie-Seale,
but labor to have the Broad-Seale also. Shall men be so careful for the
world, and for temporal patrimonies, and shall Christians take up every motion
in private, and slight public Ordinances? be not deceived, whatsoever is
brought by the Spirit of God unto you in private, will cause you to seek for
more clear evidence from his loud voice in public; where his voice goes on
more strongly and powerfully, convincing the Conscience, and breaking down all
temptations and discouragements that might hinder the comfort of Gods people.
Thus far and farther goes that exiled Saint.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Conclusion of the whole Work.
HItherto something has been spoken concerning a Personall-Reformation, which
is required in the Ordinance, as it has been declared: wherein let Christians
be very sc^pulous, and herein let them show as much Zeal as they can: this is
the right channel for thee to run in; nothing is lost, but what runs
beside; this is the best Method in Reformation, to begin first with our selves,
and then to proceed on the perfection, Heb. 6, 1. This is according to that of
our Savior, Matthew. 7, 5. and the Ordinance requires a Personal Reformation
in the first place. Parl. Ord. N.


Therefore my counsel is, that every one would labor to walk in all
well-pleasing, Col. 1, 10. First, in all well-pleasing to God, Heb. M. Bis^^^
on Colossi. cap. 1. page 82. ^
12, 28. 1 Cor. 7, 31. Secondly, in all well-pleasing to man, either in the
Family, Church, or Commonweal. Thirdly, in all well-pleasing to our selves;
preserving the rest and goodness of our Consciences, Act. 23, 1. heb. 13, 18.
But for thy more full satisfaction herein, I refer thee, Christian Reader, to
my Author in his learned and Orehodox Comment on the Colossians.

It remains that something be spoken in way of exhortation to a Public and
National-Reformation according to these words in the Ordinance.

And likewise the necessity of a National Reformation, and shall publish this
Ordinance concerning the same.

I have showed you in the 17 Chapter what this Reformation is, and wherein it
consists: now give me leave to use a few Motives to help forward the grand
design this day on foot in the Christian world, but especially in England,
Scotland, and Ireland: I will be very brief.

1. Bonum quo Communius, eo melius.
Apporve of and help forward the much desired Reformation, because its better
then a private Reformation. Every good thing is so much the better, by how much
its more common. Now then if a personal Reformation be good, then a National
is better; for its more common. As he that is an Atheist that denies a
personal Reformation; so he is little better then a Papist that opposes a
National Reformation, in these Cassandrin-dayes.

2. Appolonio ^^^sus ad Reformandum, velut ad re-coquendum se dedit. Quintil.
lib. 12. Quid pro Quo
Help forward the Reformation, because of the nature of it, its to sees
again, or to re-cooke. The spiritual Food of the Church of God was parboyled
in Henry the eighth his time, it was but halfe-sodden; in Edward the sixth his
time, it was reboyled; but in the Marian-dayes as of old, so of late it has
been handled with foul fingers, many poyson^ll Doctrines have been mixed with
the pure Word of God, (...) the pretense of a Purgation, and cooked out after
an Italian and French-fashion; Insomuch that the Papists themselves did brag
and boast that we were come to them, and not they to us and that there was now
a visible Church in England. To speak the truth, and to shame the Devil, In
Came. Where Bishop Wren was Master.
all things in our chancells were prepared even for that abominable Idol of
the mass. I have often thought, that Peter-house-Chappell might have bin
presented to the Pope for a New-yeares gift, with much acceptance in Rome it
self.

This Reformation is a change for the better, Reformare est in meliorem forman
redigere.
otherwise it would prove a Deformation; the word signifies, to polish anew.

Think not that the Parliament of England, with such a learned and Pious
Synod, as England has not known its second, will do any thing as near as
they can, which shall tend to the dishonor of God, or disgrace of Religion.

3. Be willing with a through Reformation, Superstitio damnatur. Aquinas in Mar.
for whatsoever is not of God in his worship, is in vain, and to no purpose.
It will neither please God, not profit the soul, Matthew. 15.9. mark. 7, 6, 7.
In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men.
In which words our Savior does send all Superstition to Hell: all outward
Ceremonies and washings are to no effect, without his Benediction, which only
goes along with his own Ordinances.

What wise patient will lay out his money for, and spend his time in taking
Apothecarie Drugs, that have no healing virtue in them? we use to say, As good
never a whit, as never the better. Consider that place, Col. second Chapter,
verse. 22. Which all are to perish with the using, after the Commandments and
Doctrines of men. Take Samuels council, and turn ye nor aside from God and
his Word, for then should ye go after vain things which cannot profit, nor
deliver, for they are vain, 1 Samuel 12, 22. My Brethren, be willing all things
should be tried by the Touch-sloue, the Word of God, that so ye may hold that
which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5, 22, otherwise you can never abstain from all
appearance of the evil of Popery and Superstition.

4. Help forward a National Reformation, Tam diu (...) Dom^nus, (...)
resipiscatur. (...)
because otherwise we must expect a National Desolation, Levit. 26, 23, 24,
etc. And if ye will not he Reformed by these things, but will walk contrary
unto me, then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet
seven times for your sins: And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall
avenge the quarrel of my Covenant, and when ye are gathered together in your
Cities, I will send the Pestilence amongst you, and ye shall be delivered into
the hand of the enemy. And alter the Pestilence follows Famine; and if
neither Sword, Plague, nor Famine will cause us to Reform, God will chastise
us seven times more for our sins, verse 28. Isa. 1, 20.

God has entailed National and Hereditarie Blessings to through Reformation or
amendment, Jer. 7.5, 7. Nothing can cut off this entailement, but the want of a
Church and Commonweal Reformation. Isa. 1.20. But if ye refuse and rebel, ye
shall be devoured with the Sword, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

5. Co-worke with the Parliament and Synod, in seeking a National Reformation,
because its a Regular and most perfect Reformation which they aim at. Upon the
matter it is this; That God may be glorified in his own way, in our day of
Salvation. Page 5.


This appears plainly by the Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation in
England, Scotland and Ireland; wherein, with hands lift up to the most High,
they swear:

That they will sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in their several Places and Callings, the Reformation of Religion in
the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best reformed
Churches.

What could a Nation expect more from a Parliament of Saints and Angels? They
that will not believe them upon such an Oath, are conscious of their own
Hypocrisies and Perjuries. I know its possible for them to err, and therefore
let us prate less, and pray more. That God would so guide them, that they may
not mis-leade us.

6. Help forward a National Reformation, because without it we can look for
no Pacification. They only fight under the Displayed Banner, and Flying
Colors of a Promise, who labor to please God by a through Reformation. Prove.
16.7. When a man's ways please God, he will make even his enemies at peace with
him.

From which Promise collect this Doctrine, That when a Kingdom does make a
through Reformation, God will make a happy Pacification: God will do it,
first, because of his Wisdom; if God should do it before, he should
strengthen a party against himself: secondly, because of his Fidelity, who
has promised to make peace with man, and for man, Parl. Ord. T. Covenant p. 5.
when man makes his peace with God, and does break it with sin, as it
appears by the Text, and is employed by the Ordinance, as you have heard
before, as also by the late Covenant, in these words:

That we and our Posterity after us, may as brethren live in faith and love,
and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us; who is a Peacemaker,
Isa. 57.19. and is called the God of Love and Peace, 2 Cor. 13.11.

Now the Music of a Pacification is so sweet, that me thinks every one should
be willing to let their sinful engagements fall out of their hands to hearken
aster and follow such tunes.

Obj. We dislike not a Reformation, but we would have it a Restoration to
the Government of Queen Elizabeth of happy memory.

Sol. For answer, in the first place, we praise God for that quiet and happy
Government in the days of that pious and Reforming Princess; and had
succeeding Princes been advised by as Religious, wise, and moderate
Statesmen, as that most famous Lady was, Idolatry and Superstition could not
have taken such footing in this Kingdom as it has done since, to the great
damage of Religion, and subversion of the Fundamental Laws of the Nation.

But withal let my Reader know, that now the true Elevation of things
indifferent is found: And I pray you, how sarre distant is an Archbishop of
Canterbury from the Pope of Rome; a Bishop of Ely, from a Cardinal; a Prelate
from a Seminary Priest; an Altar, from a Sacrifice; a Cross, from a Crucifix;
and a goodly Cathedrall-Service, from a high Mass? If the case stand thus (my
Masters) judge ye, whether it can be a wise act of Commensuration, to weigh
Designs at the old Beam of State-Politiques, and conniving Conveniences? They
that would now place us on old Bottomes, are such in whom the old interests
prevail more then the New; and if we take hold of them to guide us, I fear,
they will bring us back again into as bad a condition as we have forsaken,
yea, into a worse; for State-Relapses are very dangerous and vindicative,
because there is a capacity of Revenging recovered. This is not only apparent
by our own Chronicles, but also by the examples of Pharaoh and Saul. who after
some particular violations grew more implacable and violent; not much unlike
the Sea, when it once begins to make a Breach in the bounding-banks.

Perhaps, some Po-Protestant-Politian may lead us about a while through some
new and pleasing Walks, to take us off from a serious consideration of these
three things: first, whence we came, secondly, where we are; thirdly, whither
we are going: So that we may be led through a Fooles-Paradise into a Spanish
Inquis^tion, before we are aware of it.

For my own part, if I may write my own thoughts, I am persuaded, that it
both sides should lay down their Arms, and embrace each other as Esau and
Jacob did, yet there would be no Peace in England or Ireland, though an
Accommodation may be similingly granted, and plausibly entertained. And my
Reason is this: Sin is a Peace-breaker, an Incendiarie of Watte, an Achan
that troubles our Israel, Joshua 7. Now, unless this Achan be stoned to
death, burnt with fire, and bur^ed under a heap of stones, by a personal and
National Repenting-Reformation, Parl Ord. T.
(according to this Parliament Ordinance) there is no Door of hope left, that
ever we shall obtain a firm and happy Peace with God and man. Hosea 2.14,
15. And therefore, O England, if thou would have glory to dwell in thy Land,
and the prosperity of the Gospel, with all the Privileges accompanying it, to
Crown this Nation unto all succeeding ages; Thou must arise (as Israel did) as
one Man, in a general Commotion, Valles turbationis Montan. Vatab.
and turn this Island into a Valley of Achor, in this thy day of Trouble,
Josuah 7.24, 25, 26. Hosea 2.15. But in this general Commotion, take these two
Directions.

1. Take Josuah, your Deliverer, along with you; go not n confusedly, without
Parliament-direction: If God has placed them as a Pilot, to guide our Ship in
case of necessity, to avoid Shipwreck in this our present Storm and
tempestuous Euroclydon, Acts 27.14. fall to your Tackling at their command.
Josuah 7.24. Its a dangerous thing to suffer every passenger to turn Master in
a boisterous and rough Sea.

2. Take Achan and all that he has, Josuah 7.24. Leave not a Hoof behind,
Exodus 10.26. Non cedie Moses ctiam Regi in his quae ad Dei cultum pertinent,
non paitrurquic qua detrabi verb Dei Sic summ^ study resi^it, ne quid cultui
Dei de^resent, utinam multi talet Moses essent, Fer^s.
Moses would not yield to the King himself, in things that did belong to Gods
worship; he would suffer nothing to be taken away from the Word of God: he did
resist as much as he could, that the worship of God might not suffer any ^^cay
or abatement. O that there were many such Moses. So far (...) Author.

And so far let Englands Parliament, and Assembly of Ministers go in Goas
Name, and with the unanimous consent of the three Kingdoms: yea, let the whole
Christian world say to the Pope of Rome as father Abraham said to the King of
Sodom Genesis 14, 22. I have lif^ up my hand unto the Lord, the most high God,
possesour of Heaven and Earth, that I will not take from thee a thread, even to
a shoe-sachet, and that I will not take anything that is thine, lest thou
should say, I have made Abraham rich.

Which wealth will be like the wedge of gold, and the Babilonish garment to our
Israel, Josuah 7. What reason is there, that the Kings daughter, the Spouse of
Christ, whose clothing is of wrought gold, Psalm. 45, 13. should put on the
menstruous garment of the Whore of Rome?

Believe it Christian Reader God is wise enough to prescribe his own worship,
Christ Jesus the Bishop of our souls, is as fa^hul^ to him that appointed him,
as Moses was in all his House, Heb. 3, 2. 1 Pet. 2,25.

Obj. Many of our Ceremonies are warrantable by the Leviticall service of God,
under the Old Testament, they had Altars and Organs and white Linen garments
for their Priests, etc. and why should we be against them under the Gospel?

Sol. Its true, they had all these under the Old Law, and in their season, they
were useful, but under the New-Law, they are out of date, and useless, like
an old Almanac or weekly Intelligencer, at a months end. And therefore Paul
calls them, weak and beggarly Elements Gal. 4, 9. These Ceremonies and
Rudiments were to continue but until the time of Reformation, In spirituali
intellectu, and non proprie sensu. Dion. a Rickel Carthu. Thcoph Aquin.
Heb. 9, 10. which time is come yea far spent. God does not like we should
worship as the Jews did, but as the Jews should, that is In spirit and in
truth, Joh. 4, 24. That is, in a spiritual way, and not in a sensual carnal
manner, as the Jews did: to whom all things were under a shadow and
representation.

Obj. God has winked at things amiss amongst us all this while, and why may
not the Parliament wink at something things out of Order, Act. 17, 30.
Despiciens. Montan. Hieron.


Sol. Its true God did wink, but in winking he did despise what was amiss,
and the word signifies no less, why should we willingly retain what God
despises, when we may be freed from it? Again, it is true God did wink, but now
his winking time is out he will wink no longer, he calls and commands every
man: every where to repent. God did never put England so fully upon the work
of Reformation as he does this day. Methinks I hear the Parliament crying like
Moses in the gate of the Camp, and saying, Who is on the Lords side? let him
come unto me, and put his sword by his side: O that as then, so now all the
sons of Levi would gather themselves unto the Lords Battle, Exodus 32, 26, 27,
28.

It is supposed by a late and learned Writer, that an Oath of Pacification and
Accommodation on the Queen's Part, may settle the Kingdom in a happy
condition, without any more stir about a Reformation.

Sol. Christian and judicious Reader, do but consider sour particulars, and
so I will leave thee to God, and the Word of his grace, which is able to build
thee up, etc. Act. 20, 32.

Consider first, the frailty and uncertaintie in such foundations as Oaths
are.

Secondly, the Evasions and Machinations of a reconciled Enemy.

Thirdly, the Inconsistencie of our principles and theirs.

Fourthly, the Complexion and Obligation of our late Protestations and
Covenants, and tell me if there can be any Security, but in something beyond an
Accommodation, even in a Personal and National Reformation, which is called
for in this Ordinance, That so god may be glorified in his own way, in our Day
of Salvation, and the Land may enjoy a firm and happy Peace both with God and
Man, etc.

There is an end of the Controversy.

FINIS.
A general Receipt for all Diseases Spiritual, containing the Elixar of
Parliament-Physick for a Sin-sick Nation.
TAke a quart of the bitter water of godly sorrow, and put into it as much of
these four Evangelicall Simples, Humility, Faith, Hope, and Charity, as thou
can get at the Apothecarie-Shops, at any price; b^yle all these together on
the Altar-Coales of a heavenly and well-ordered zeal against sin, till the
black-reeke and fume of thy corruption arise in thy heart, offend thy stomach,
and stink in thy nostrils: then strain all through they white Linen Cloth of
Christ's spotless righteousness, and putting in the powder of Patience, drink
this Potion of Repentance off burning hot next thy heart every Fast Day in the
morning, cover thee warm: all the month after, with as much amendment of life
as thou can bear, walk up and down in thy calling as much as thou can,
until thou vomit up all the Crudities and phlegm in thy stomach, and purge out
all the filth in thy heart: And then through Gods blessing thou shall recover
speedily, thou shall be able to fight under the Banner of Christ manfully, and
for ever after thou shall enjoy thy personal health, if thou can live in the
wholesome air of a National and through Reformation.

Probatum est.


