A Shock of Corn Coming in In its Season.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that Ancient and Eminent Servant of CHRIST
WILLIAM GOUGE, Doctor of Divinity, and late Pastor of BLACK-FRYARS, London,
December the 16th, 1653.

With the ample and deserved Testimony that then was given of his Life,

By WILLIAM JENKYN (now) Pastor of BLACK-FRYARS, London.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Ball in Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

portrait of William Gouge, Professor of Theology EFFIGIES GUIL:GOUGE S.S.
THEOLOGIAE PROFESS: QUI OBIIT ANo. 46. Dui 1653. AEtatis 79. Ministry in Black
fr: Lon:
The Simile used by the Temanite
Of a ripe shock of Corn expressed him right.
How weighty were his ears with worth? and he
Who bent with Age, bowd with Humility.
He (ripe) is reapt this harvest time we mourn,
Here harvest-joy, only befell the Corn.
From the World (the field) to ye grave ye barn he is gone
Yet tho he lost the field, he the Victory won.
Our Corns now bread. for men those works of his
Are bread for God, himself now shewbread is.


A Shock of Corn Coming in In its Season.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that Ancient and Eminent Servant of CHRIST
WILLIAM GOUGE, Doctor of Divinity, and late Pastor of BLACK-FRYARS, London,
December the 16th, 1653.

With the ample and deserved Testimony that then was given of his Life,

By WILLIAM JENKYN (now) Pastor of BLACK-FRYARS, London.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Ball in Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

To my much esteemed and beloved Friends, the Church of God in the Precinct of
BLACK-FRYARS, LONDON.
YOu have (already) a double right to this Dedication; it is yours first as
this ensuing Sermon was preached, next as it is published.

1. This Sermon was preached, as among you and to you, so concerning him who of
late was your worthy Pastor, and by him who is (though unworthy, yet,) your
Pastor.

2. This Sermon is published, though against my own inclination (for I know
nothing by any my services, but what more deserves my blushing for their
weakness, then publication for their worth) yet at the earnest entreaty, as of
many others, so of sundry of your selves.

But there is a third and (that) a better right which I desire you may have to
this ensuing Discourse, and that is a right to it by practicing of the truths
contained in the Sermon, and by embracing the Doctrines, and imitating the
graces of your late eminent Pastor commended in the following Testimony.

My Sermon slights not your patronage, but it earnestly sues to you for your
practice. And it is my desire, that the unreformed who shall read the Relation
of Doctor Gouge's faithful pains among them, may with godly sorrow for their
unprofitablenesse under his ministry, say what Pharaohs Butler did in the
apprehension of his ingratitude to Joseph, Genesis 41.9.
I do remember my faults this day. If the dust of a living Ministers feet, and
the sweat of his brows, shall be a testimony against a gainsaying people, how
loudly will the dust of a dead Ministers grave cry against them! It Is but a
sorry piece of devotion, with the Jews to paint the Sepulchers of the Prophets,
and to commend them when dead, with our lips, whom living, we discommended by
our practice; and yet as Sampson could take honey out of that dead Lion, with
which he fought, and which he slew, when alive, it roared upon him, so nothing
is more ordinary then for the wicked to voice up dead Ministers for sweet and
blessed men, whom in their lifetime for lifting up their voice against their
sins, and laboring to rend them and their lusts asunder, they bitterly
opposed. Though when Moses was dead, the people would have worshipped him as a
God (and this the devil knew and liked when he contended to have had his
Sepulcher made known) yet when he was living, they would have destroyed him,
Jude 9
and he feared stoning by them. Even wicked Joram calls dying Elisha, Exodus 1
the Chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof. 2 Kin. 13.14. The Papists, and
common Protestants, who now speak highly of Christ and call him their sweet
Savior, had they lived in his days, and heard him Preach against their sins,
would have hated him more then now they hate the godly, for having but a drop
of his Fountain, and but a faint reflection of that holiness which much more
gloriously shined forth in him. As it may be a work of much credit, so it is a
work of little cost to extol the deceased servants of Christ. By their voices,
sinners are not molested in the prosecution of their lusts, nor urged to any
unpleasing duties. It is not then the crying up of departed Saints and
Ministers with our words, but imitating of them with our works and the praising
them with the Language of the conversation, Horo andi propt^r imitatio^em, non
ad ^an-di proper religionem. Aug de ver^r l. c. 55.
which shows the sincerity of our love either to God or them; The bark of a
tree may be carried away, upon a man's shoulder without any pains or difficulty;
but it requires strength and labor to carry away the body of the tree; men may
easily run away with the outward shell of good words and professions, but the
heart and life of Religion, which is that of the heart and life, men can hardly
away with. The dint of this dilemma, will not be shunned. If the Ministers
doctrine and life were bad, why are they so much as commended; if good, why not
more then commended, why not practiced and imitated also? If Christ were not a
good master, why did the young man call him so? if he were a good master why
did he not follow him also?

You will not be offended with me for my plain dealing; If I be Jealous lest
this holy man has bestowed his labor in vain upon many survivors; they will
(I trust) remember whose jealousy it imitates, Paul's; 2 Cor. 11.^
and of what nature, he says, his was, a godly jealousy. If I fear the
flattering of some more then of others, it is of those whom I love most: you
have by calling me to be your Minister, laid a strong engagement upon me, to
beware of soothing you into destruction, and to put you in remembrance of
promoting more vigorously the power of godliness, and of setting up Christ
more thoroughly in your hearts, houses, and congregation, in the expectation of,
and supplication for which, I rest, dear and much esteemed Friends,

Black Friars, May the 8th. 1654. Your faithful and affectionate servant for
the good of your souls. William Jenkyn.

Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
WEre Prefaeces and Apologies suitable either to the service of the Day, or the
disposition of the Speaker, I might prefix a large Apology to my ensuing
Discourse. Should I preface my own unworthiness to undertake, or insufficiency
to go through the following employment, I might possibly by some be more
suspected of pride, than commended for modesty. I am not ignorant that a proud
heart, may often lie under a self-debasing tongue. And I have heard of some who
put their praises to usury, they dispraising themselves for a while, Robinsons
Observations.
that so they may receive their praise again with advantage. Touching my self
therefore, I shall only say, that the dear respect which I owe and bear to the
memory of this excellent man, Saint, Minister, Doctor William Gouge, has made
me break through the deep resentment of my own insufficiency to go through this
work; and yet withal, that against this inability of mine, I have these three
things which relieve me (and these I should not mention to the enlarging of a
Preface, which is best when least, did they not tend to the honoring of this
servant of Christ, which is one end of our meeting this day.)

1. First, I look upon that as my (and not my least) encouragement to this
service, which most may think my greatest discouragement from undertaking it,
and that is the eminent worth of this Excellent Man, whose Funeral this day, we
celebrate; were I either to commend some profane person, or some professor
whose worth and unworthiness did hang in aequilibrio, and appear so evenly
balanced, that none could tell which of them outweigh'd the other, I might
wound my conscience, blast my reputation, or (at least) torture my invention,
either to find out matter of commendation, or a fit manner of expressing
thereof. But (Brethren) I think, I have as little cause, as ever had any who
preached in this place, upon the like occasion, either to fear reproofs from my
own heart, or my many hearers, for giving a large testimony to the worth of
this Excellent Man, or to study solicitously for matter of praise, which is (as
it were) Myrrha Libera, Myrrh which drops freely of its own accord without any
squeezing or constraint.

2. Lachrymae auditorum lauds ministrorum.
It is likewise my encouragement, that you (my Auditors) bear a share with me
in this Funeral and following commendation. As the tears of a people are a
Ministers praise, when he himself preaches in his lifetime, so is their
sorrow for him no small commendation to him when another is preaching of him
after his death. I doubt not but very many in this great Assembly come hither,
not to gaze, to see and be seen, but to mourn for the death of this eminent
servant of Christ, and to sprinkle some tears upon his Funeral Hearse. Confident
I am, that could you turn your sorrowful insides, outward, (like that people
who were wont to show their funeral mourning only by turning the inside of
their apparel outward) that mournfullest expressions would be as common among
you, as true mourning is suitable to you, and that Sable would as well cover
the People as it does the Pulpit. If the Angels were so forward to attend upon
a Lazarus when he dyed, as to carry him to his place of rest, what readiness
should there be among Lazarusses, full of the sores of sin and misery, to
respect the Funeral of this dead Angel? I call him Angel, for so he was in his
life time in regard of his Office, (...).
and as an Angel now after his death, I doubt not but he is in Heaven.

3. My third encouragement is this: I am called this day to perform a greater
Work then to praise him, I am to preach the Word to you. God who has called me
unto the greater, to speak from himself to you, I trust will enable me to
perform the lesser, I mean, the speaking concerning this Reverend Man to you. I
know, you long to hear what I shall say of him, and happily some do so, because
they would give vent to their sorrows, though by their Eyes. I shall gratify
your desire when I have first delivered my Errand from God to you, the sum
whereof you shall find written, in

The 5th Chapter of Job, Verse 26. In these words.
Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of Corn comes in,
in his season.
THe words were spoken by Eliphaz to enforce that dehortation given to Job,
Verse 17. Despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty: that is, Cast it not
off with a wearisome aversness, and loathing, nor reject it either as
unprofitable and unuseful, or as disgraceful and dishonorable to thee, nor
slight it as a thing of which no notice is taken, etc. This counsel he backs
with an argument drawn from the benefit that should accrue unto him, by a
submissivenesse under the afflicting hand of God. Eliphaz shows, that at
length, the mercy of God, shall appear for his good; and that both, First, by
preservation from evils (Verse 19. He shall deliver thee from six troubles, yea
in seven, there shall no evil touch thee) and also, Secondly, by the bestowing
of blessings, Verse 23, 24; 25. Thou shall know that thy tabernacle shall be in
peace, etc. Yea he declares that Job shall not only be happy in his lifetime,
but also even at and after his death, in the words of my Text, Thou shall come
to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in his season.

In which words, you have this two parts considerable.

1. A godly man's arival at his Port, or term, Thou shall come to thy grave.

2. The seasonablenesse of this arival, in a full age, like as, etc.

In the former, I take notice of two particulars, 1. What that place or Port
is, the grave. 2. What that kind of passage to it is, which here is promised.
Thou shall come to it.


The Later, the seasonablenesse of the arival; is set out two ways, 1.
Properly, in a full age. 2. Metaphorically, or by way of resemblance, like as a
shock of corn comes in his season.


1. I begin with the former part, and therein with the first particular, the
Port, or place it self, to which even the godly must arive, The grave.

This has been the place where the holiest men have met, Jobs of God, have
come. The grave (I say) is their term, their Center. Genesis 25.8. 1 Kings 2.1.
Zech. 1.5.
The holy Patriarchs of old, Abraham the friend of God. The godly Kings, David
went the way of all flesh. The Prophets live not for ever. The Apostles died;
and thus it is In regard of 1. Themselves. 2. Others.

1. Themselves as they are 1. Men. 2. Sinful men. 3. Good men.



1. They are men. (...). Isid Pelus. l. 1. ep. 65.
bread is called that which perishes. How can such structures, then, stand long?
the truth is their falling begins (as Isidore of Pelusium speaks) with their
very building; and being men they are subject also to the same accidents, and
casualties with others.

2. Sinful men. It Is true sin is in them, and not in them: in them, not as
their love but their load and vexation. And death does befall them, and does
not befall. Does befall them, as afflictive to sense, as a cure of their woes,
as a consequent of sin; but not as a curse, or a wrathful punishment; but yet
this repeated addition (and he dyed) subjoyned to the relation of the long
lives of the ancient Patriarchs, showed the immovable certainty of that
threatening of death against Adams sin, notwithstanding the deceitful promise
of the devil.

3. They are holy men. And to the grave they must come. First, For a resiing
place. Here is not their rest, Romans 7.24. Romans 6.7. 2 Cor. 5.6.8. 1 These. 4.16.
their works at length follow them, and they shall not follow their work any
more. Secondly, They must be perfectly freed from sin, which till death they
cannot be. Thirdly, They must have their Crown of life; and Fourthly, Shall for
ever be with the Lord, who loves his children so well, that he will not always
suffer them to be abroad, and absent from him.

2. In regard of others, they must come to the grave. First, Some are unkind
and cruel to them, and happily they hurry them to the Port of the grave with a
blustering storm and tempest of persecution. The Saints (especially Ministers)
of Christ are set in the forlorn hope, and commonly the bullet soonest hits
them. Secondly, Some idolize them, deifie them: how many, when adored, has God
grownde to powder, as Moses did the Israelites Calf, and removed them from men,
when we have made them equal with God. Its the great sin of the times either
to deifie or nullify men. God loves neither. Thirdly, The living must prize
them, and get much good by them in a little time. He who has a book lent him,
but for a little while, makes the more have to read it over, the Prophets and
Saints of God live not ever, nor are given us to use as long as we please, they
are but lent us, and we must improve them speedily. God has held the candle of
a Saints Life, and a Ministers Doctrine to many idle professors many a year,
and he often puts out this light to punish them for their negligence. Since then,
even the best must come to the grave, let them study to do much for God while
they live. The grave is a place of silence and rest. The living, the living
they praise and are employed for God. Short seasons require speedy services.
The nearness of death should put us upon holy serviceablenesse during life, as
for the preserving of a sweet and precious remembrance of our selves in that
generation which follows so especially for the transmitting by our examples,
holiness to Posterity, that so a seed of Saints may be continued in the World,
when we are dead and gone. And truly as otherwise we shall die while we live,
so hereby we shall live when we are dead, and be like civet, which, when it is
taken out of the box, leaves a sweet savor behind it.

2. Vid Rivet. in Genesis
Let us live as if we were always dying, and yet as such as are ever to live.
Set not up your hopes, your expectations here; the grave will rub off all our
worldly grandeur, as a narrow hole sweepes off all the apples, that the foolish
hedgehog loads her prickles withal. Labor to be taken off from the world,
before you are taken out of it.

3. Thirdly if Saints must come to the grave, 3. Joh. 9.4, 12.35.
get good by them, while they live. Walk and work by the light while you have
it with you. Neglect not to get good by the godly, in hope to enjoy them longer
with you. Thou may bewail thy over-slipt opportunities when it is too late. I
will not let thee go except thou bless me, you know it was the speech of Jacob
to God. O Lord, (say thou) let not not such a Saint go, such a Minister die,
till thou have blessed me by his means, let not his light be put out, till he
has showed me the way to heaven, better.

4. Fourthly if Saints must die, you that live,

5. Lastly must Saints die? they shall come to the grave, they shall die, but
their souls shall never die, the second death has no power over them; they
shall die, but secondly the Church shall never die: they shall die, but thirdly
their works shall never die, these shall follow them: they shall die, but
fourthly, their God shall never die: the Prophets of God, Do they live for
ever?

2. 2. Branch of the first part.
This Port or place of the Saints, the Grave, affords us somewhat more for
meditation. It is a mercy not only to have a house to hide the head of the
living in, but to have a sepulcher in which to hide the head of the dead. It is
a mercy to have a grave. Great was Abraham's provident care to purchase a
burying-place for his dead. God himself buried Moses his dear servant: nor was
the contention of the Angel about the body of Moses, to hinder its burial, but
only to forbid the Devil to be present at it. When the Kings of Judah are
recorded, their burials are also frequently mentioned; and those of the highest
merit were buried in the upper part of the sepulchers of the sons of David, 2 Chronicles. 32.33. Nor was it a small judgment of God inflicted upon Baasha and
Jezabel, to be buried in the bellies of Dogs: Ier. 22 19.
Or upon Jehoiakim, that he should be buried with the burial of an Ass,
contemptibly cast into a ditch. Or upon the king of Babylon, Isai. 14.20.
that he should not be joined with the kings in burial. Neither was that a
slight imprecation, Psalm. 63.11.
Let them be a portion for Foxes. Nor a small threatening, Jer. 14.16. That the
people should be cast out into the streets, and have none to bury them; and
that the bones of the kings, and priests, and prophets, Jer. 8.2.
should be taken out of the grave, and laid open to the sun and moon. Nor a
small complaint, that the enemies of the Church had given the dead bodies of
Gods saints, to be meat to the fowls of the heaven, and their flesh unto the
beasts of the earth. Want of burial is so hateful, that some have been more
restrained from sin by the fear of not being buried, then of dying. And David
commends the burial of a dead Saul: nay Jehu commands the burial of the remains
of a cursed Jezabel. The practice (therefore) of giving the body decent burial
is very commendable Suitable it is, that the body, curiously wrought, Psalm. 139.
should not be carelessly thrown away. Yea, it has been repaired, redeemed, as
well as made by God. It is partner in redemption with the soul, and bought with
the precious blood of Christ: The body is also sanctified for the spirits
temple. The ointment of sanctification rests not only on the head (the soul)
but runs down alrests not only on the head (the soul) but runs down also upon
the skirts, (the body.) The chair where the King of glory has sat should not
be abused. With the bodies of our deceased friends we lately had sweet
commerce; happily they were very beneficial to us. The body of a faithful
Minister was an earthen Conduitpipe whereby God conveyed spiritual comforts
to our souls The body was once a partner with the soul in all her actions, it
was the souls brother-twin; what could the soul do without it? whatever was in
the understanding was conveyed by the sense. The soul sees by its eyes, hears
by its ears, works by its hands; yea, which is more, there is an indissoluble
union between the dust in the grave, and the glorious soul. Churchyards are but
sleeping-places, and (as they were called among the Jews) houses of the living.
A great Heir is regarded, though he be for the present in rags: and which is
more, our very bodies are the members of Christ, and of that lump, whereof he
was the First Fruits.

Hence is discovered, Paulus Fagius, and Peter Martyrs wife; Heathens
themselves have shown greater humanity; witness that of Alexander, in
allowing enterment to the dead body of Darius, Hanibal to Marcellus's, Caesar
to Pompey's. The comfort of Saints is, that God keeps every one of their bones;
and that as he left not one out of his book, when he made them at first, so
that neither shall one be missing when he will remake them. Nor is the
superstitious folly of Papists about the bodies of the dead, less reproveable
then their inhumane cruelty, I mean, their religious reverencing of the
relics of the deceased. Though the Devil could not obtain a license for this
sin (according to some) from Michael, yet has he obtained a command for it
from the Pope. To name this practice is to confute it. Its idolatry, derogation
from the merits of Christ, ridiculousnesse, (for Popish Historians tell us,
that the bones of the worshipped have afterward proved to be the relics of
thieves and murderers and to such a proportion are they increased, that they
are rather the objects of derision then adoration.) Yea lastly, its
injuriousnesse to the saints, who in pretense are honored (whose bodies hereby
have insepultam sepulturam are kept from their honor of rest, and brought into
a condition threatened as a curse) are more then enough to procure our
abhorrence of it. To conclude this; body should not be comparable to that of
the living, ever-living soul: what profit is it for the body to be embalmed,
and entombed richly, and the soul to be tormented eternally? As great a folly
is the respecting of the vile body, joined with the neglecting of the precious
soul, as for a frantic mother only to lament the loss of the coat of her
drowned child, never laying to heart the loss of the child it self. Chiefly
look after thy soul and God will take care of thy body, it shall be embalmed to
eternity, though it should be eaten up with the beasts of the earth.

This for the first, the Saints Port or Place, The second particular in the
first part of the Text.
the Grave But secondly, what kind of passage shall he have thither? Eliphaz
says, He shall come to the grave: And this notes that his passage to the grave
shall be willing, and uninforced. He shall get thither by coming, he shall go,
as it were upon his own feet, he shall not be hailed and dragged, and pulled
thither against his own mind. willing to dye; his soul shall not be required
of him, taken from him by force against his will, as his was Luke 12.20. No, he
shall be one, that is pleased with the thoughts of his departure, and desires
with Paul to be dissolved. 1 Kings 19.4.
One that may say (as Elijah,) Lord take away my soul; and with Simeon, Lord,
Luke 2.29.
now let thou thy servant depart: He will open the door cheerfully, when
his master shall but send his Sergeant Death to knock; he will meet Death (as
it were) half way, Death shall be his privilege as well as his task; with
Peter and John he running to the sepulcher, not being urged, dragged to it
Necessitatis Vinculo, by the bond of necessity, but making toward it Voluntatis
Obsequio, with the holy forwardness of his will. Thou shall come. By death
Saints are freed, from the reach of, as well as hurt by Satan's temptations:
From the evil company of the ungodly, from divine desertion, from the burden of
sin and corruption, from the painful and laborious employments of their places,
from all bodily infirmities and diseases (death is the best physic,) from all
Gods fatherlike chastisements, Minus pie vivis, si minus persecutionem
pertuleris. Gr. ep. 27. l. 6.
from an unkind, persecuting unquiet world (that bed of thorns) they love not
the world, and therefore they linger not in it. They are in love with heaven,
where they shall have the consummation of grace and glory, and enjoy the sweet
soul-ravishing society of their Friend, Husband, Savior, Head; and therefore
as their better portion Christ, so their better part their heart, is there
already. He has perfumed the grave for them, and made that narrow noisome
place, a place of ease and sweetness. Ever since Christ trod and walked upon
the sea of death, they may say (as Peter to Christ) Lord, if it be thou, bid me
come unto thee on the water. Christ by his death has labored, and they when
they dye, do but enter into his labors.

In a word: Sin the strength and only weapon which Death can use, is by the
merit and spirit of Christ, taken away; so that death is now become a
stinglesse Serpent, and a toothlesse Lion; a tame, disarmed enemy, or rather
the bare name and notion of an enemy. The unwillingnesse of Gods people to dye,
is not because they judge that death is not good for them, but because they
think not themselves good enough for death.

How unlike to Christians, come, but must be dragged to the grave, yea, to the
very thoughts thereof, who though they cannot live without misery, yet neither
can they be content with that, which as they cannot avoid, so will put an end
to all misery. Oh how unsuitable is this distemper, to those who both profess
they desire that Gods will may be done, and that they are pilgrims and
strangers upon earth, and that heaven is their country, their fathers house!

2. How excellent is the grace of Faith, Paul speaks of his) is not dear, and
death (as he speaks of his) is desired. Acts 20.24. Phil. 1.22.23.
It was as hard to make Paul patient when he thought of living, as to make
another patient when he expected dying. Faith is the alone mantle which divides
the waters of death: so as that a believer sees he may go through them
dry-shod. That grace which throws the Cross of Christ into these waters of
marah, and thereby makes them not only wholesome but pleasant.

Its our duty to labor for such a spirit, Come to the grave. If it was Christ's
desire to die for us, should it not be our longing to live with him. To this
end, First, clear up thy interest in Christ's death, the death of thy death: the
blood of Christ makes pale death look beautifully. He was a curse, and death is
thereby a blessing: this horn of salvation dipped into the waters of death, makes
them not only poisonless but wholesome: death has left its sting in the sides
of Christ. He that believes in him, shall never die. Secondly, In looking
toward death, look likewise beyond it: even as far, as the benefits which
follow it: view that blessedness which is invisible. Consider not death as it
shows it self to an eye of sense, but as its manifest to an eye of Faith, not
as an enemy to man, but as changed by Christ into a friend, yea the best
friend, next Christ himself. Thirdly, Often meditate of death: let it not
surprise thee unawares: let it be an acquaintance not a a stranger: die before
thou die: death only seems a great business, to those who are to go through
it all at once. Fourthly, Hate sin: the love of sin makes men fear death; and
he who hates sin must needs love death, because thereby sin shall be wholly
abolisht. The love of sin is the arming of death, and an armed enemy must needs
be formidable, Fifthly, Wean thy self from the world: Omnia ista nobis accedant
ut sine ulla nostra laceratione discedant Sen. ep. 74.
an empty traveller, will sing when he meets with the thief; he who looks upon
himself as possessing nothing in the world, fears not a stripping by death: let
not the world cleave to thee, as a shirt which sticks to an ulcerous body, and
so pulls skin and flesh away withal. The loose tooth comes out with ease, but
when it stands fast in the head its drawn out with much pain. If the world and
our affections be fastened, the parting will not be without much difficulty.

I come to the second part of the text, 2. General part of the Text.
and that is the seasonableness of a Saints coming to the grave: and

First, it is set out properly. In a full age. Tremelius renders it, cum senio,
with old age, Pagnine in maturitate, in ripeness. Vatablus in senio. The
uulgar latin in abundantia, in abundance, which some expound of abundance of
honors and riches, others of abundance of years and long life; and indeed the
Hebrew word (...), signifies old age, or a full age which stands in the
abundance of years: and therefore I know no reason why we should by giving
other interpretations, raise a dust to obscure the sense. But yet withal here
is imported a happy, blessed old age, such an old age as is a promise, and is
in scripture frequently called a good old age, and therefore this full age may
include a threefold fullness (to name no more.) 1. Maturitas civilis. Genesis
15.15. 1 Chro. 29.28


First, a Civil fullness, or maturity, and so a full age is an age full of
honor, peace, and riches, so it is said, that David died in a good old age,
full of days, riches and honor, this civil fullness being not only
considered actively when men have set their houses in order, settled their
Estates, when they are ripe, and fit, for death, in regard, they have made
their will, and fitly disposed of their goods (the neglect whereof for fear of
death, being a childish folly, for death is never awhit the nearer, because we
place it before our eyes nor the further off, because we will not see it:) but
passively also, when God has bestowed upon men a full estate, and especially a
good name, when they go not out in a snuff of disgrace, and the sun of their
life, sets not in a cloud, but they are buried with honor, and leave a sweetly
perfumed memorial behind them, their name living when their bodies are dead.
In this respect Jeroboams son died in a full age, being honored with the
lamentations of Israel, and Jehojada who was buried honorably in the chief of
the Sepulchers of the Kings of Judah.

Secondly, here may be recomprehended a Religious fullness, 2. Maturitas
spiritualis.
and that in three respects.

First, when a person is born again, has gotten grace into his soul, and an
interest in Jesus Christ, of whose fullness he has received and grace for
grace, John 1.16. whereby he has a meekness to die: and thus young ones may be
of full age even before they are one and twenty, they may be old young men; as
on the contrary; old sinners, or sinners though of an hundred year old, may be
called young or childish old-men: young Josiah had his full age, Aetas immatura,
pijs matura^ est, et plus illis est annos december vixisse, quam inpijs centum.
inercer. in loc.
in this respect, before he died, and (as Mercer well notes on the text) a
green age is to the godly a ripe age, and they live more in ten years, then the
wicked, in an hundred.

Secondly, when a person not only has grace, but also is beneficial, useful,
does much good in his time, is diffusive of holiness, full of good works,
serves his generation, and has done his work, before he falls a sleep, has his
Dorcasses coats to be seen after his death; it is only our doing good that
makes us called good, we are not called good men, for the good, which we have
within us, but for the good that is performed by us; that blessed Hilarion died
in a good age in a full age who having served Jesus Christ seventy years, when
he came to die said, Go forth O foul. In this sense Elijah says, according to
some) it is enough. Isai. 65.20.
Unlike to others who are infants of days, that have not filled their days,
which are like empty, white paper, having nothing written in them.

Thirdly, when a person is satisfied, and contented with that time, and age
which God has already given him, and is (as the Scripture often expresses it)
full of days, having lived as long as himself desired, or as heart could wish,
accounting (as Elijah speaks) that he has lived enough. Thus Abraham, Genesis
25.8. Isaac, Genesis 35.29. David, 1 Chro. 23.1. Job chap. 42.17. Jehoiada, 2
Chro. 24.15. are all said to be full of days, Rarus qui exacto contentus
tempore vitae, cedat, uti conuiua satur. Hor. sat. 1. Omnino rerum sum satur
praesentium.
to them there was not so much an irksome tediousness, as a fullness and
satiety of life: they were as willing to leave this world, as men are wont to
be to rise from the table when they have eaten their fill. It was an expression
suitable to a godly man when he said; Lord I am cloyd with these present
enjoyments (for indeed they cloy us, but they do not satisfy us) there is the
second, a fullness of age, in regard of a Religious fullness.

Thirdly, 3. Maturitas Naturalis.
there is a fullness of age in regard of a natural fullness, which is the
fullness here principally intended, (though the other be not excluded) and this
natural fullness of age is twofold. First, here is intended senectus sera a
late, long, ripe age, Senectus sera.
in respect of the great number of its years; he shall not be taken away by an
immature, untimely death, when he has lived out but half his days, the candle
of his life shall not be blown out, no, this lamp shall not be put but go out;
all the oil shall be spent, his vital moisture shall be dried up, and gone. In a
word: He shall not be taken away in the midst of his days. There is a
prediction, Psalm 55.23. that the wicked shall not Dimidiare dies, half their
days; juxta editionem vulgata.
i. e. live out half those days, which according to the course of nature they
might reach unto. But Eliphaz here intends that Job shall go, though surely,
yet slowly to heaven, and shall not be as the corn upon the house top, that
wi^hers, before it be grown up, but shall come to his full measure of years,
and live as long as (according to the course of nature) could be expected.

2. In this natural fullness is contained Senectus sana, Senectus sana vegeta.
an hail, youthful old age, sound, strong, vigorous, and that both in respect
of body and mind.

1. Of body. When men are free, for the most part from such bodily infirmities,
and annoiances as old age is wont to be infested withal, and are without,
though not such weakness as necessarily accompnaies the decay of nature, yet
such pains, aches, and diseases, as are wont to annoy that age. Health is a
mercy at all times, even such wherein others are wont usually to enjoy it; but
especially is it a blessing to enjoy it in that age, wherein men most commonly
want it. Health in infectious times is a singular mercy, and so is it in
old age which is subject to so many diseases. It is not so much the decay of
bodily strength, as pains and diseases, which make old age burdensome. How
choice a privilege is it to be fat and flourishing even in old age, (as it is
spoken in another regard, Psalm 92.14.) not altogether unlike to Moses, who
being an hundred and twenty years old when he died, his eye was not dim, nor
his natural strength abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7. Or Caleb, who Josh. 14.11. says of
himself, that he was as strong as eighty five years as he was at forty, for
war. Here was a Spring in Autumn, a good healthful old age, (...): not an old
age, sick, diseased, squalid: the bones (here) are not full of the sins of
youth in regard whereof there are some men older at thirty, then others are at
sixty: they are old, when they are young. in regard of the diseases, they have
brought upon themselves by their intemperance.

2. Of mind. When men are not (though old in years) crazy in their
intellectuals, but the parts of their mind are green and youthful, they being
not (as some) twice children: a great blessing it is for young men to have the
parts of old men in regard of prudence; and for old men to retain their
youthful and pregnant abilities of knowledge, fancy, memory, apprehension; and
the eyes of their mind not to grow dim and dark with old age. Thus this season
of coming of the grave, is set forth properly, in a full age.

2. 2 2. Branch of the 2. Part of the Text opened.
Secondly, it is described metaphorically in these words, Like as a shock of
corn comes in, in his season. These words A shock of corn, may as well be
rendered A heap of corn, the word signifies both; either corn before or after
its threshing. (...)
This corn is said to come in. The word in the Original imports to ascend: and
corn may be said to ascend by bringing, carrying, laying of it up, and it comes
in in its season, when it comes in, in its full maturity and perfect ripeness:
and so a Saint shall come to his grave, in a mature age, like unto a shock of
corn in its season and ripeness. But why is a full age compared unto the fully
mature and ripened corn? In sundry respects.

1. variety of seasons that ripened corn must go through, before it be ripe.
There must be storms, blustering winds, nipping frosts, sunshine, and rain,
go over it, before it come to maturity; and the frost is as good to kill the
worms, as the sun is needful to quicken its growth: and who is there hath-hath
lived to a full ripe age, that is not as ripe corn in this respect; witness
Jacob Joseph, David, Paul, etc. When man of years, but has been a man of
variety of conditions in the world, but has met with his storms and winds,
with his unkind usage, and a troublesome state here below? And its good it
should be so; we should not be willing to be cut down by the sickle of death,
nor long to be taken into the barn, (laid up in the quiet grave) were not the
field stormy and rainy, the world boisterous and unquiet. The world is too much
loved now when it is troublesome; oh how much desired would it be were it
altogether delightful!

2. full age is as a ripe shock of corn in regard of the diversity of ages, and
periods of a man's life.

1. First the corn is sown in the ground, so the seed is thrown into the womb.

2. Secondly, the corn does Herbescere, it is green in the tender blade, and
grows like an herb, and this is as our childhood.

3. Thirdly, the corn does grow to a stalk; it does adolescere grow and shoot
up to some kind of stature, and this is our youthful age.

4. Fourthly, there is a full ear afterward, and that is in the manhood, when a
man is come to some fullness of abilities, and endowments to transact his
calling, to go through his duties, and employments.

5. Fifthly, there is a maturity, the corn comes to be ripe, sear, dry, and
this is old age.

Sixthly, cutting down of the corn, and this is by the sickle of death as this
godly man once said the sickle of death will cut down all my diseases, and
pains and troubles.

Seventhly, born: when we are cut down by death, we are put into our grave,
that is our barn.

Eighthly, threshed and fanned; there will come a day of Judgment wherein there
shall be a disquisition, a sifting, and fanning, of all the actions, that have
been done ini the World.

Ninthly, the presence of glory, they shall be Shewbread in Heaven; they are
for God, and shall be with God, for ever, I am (said Ignatius) to be grownd
with the teeth of the wild beasts, that so I may be as manchet, fine bread for
my Master.

Thirdly, full age is as ripe Corn, in regard of the cost that is bestowed upon
corn, before it comes to maturity; how much labor is laid out! how much pains
do men take to raise the expectation of an harvest! How much plowing,
harrowing, dunging, weeding does corn require before it be carried in! and it
may be, that though it has been a year or two in the fitting and preparing for
a crop, its cut down by 2. or 3. harvest men in a day or two. A Parent has
laid out a great deal of cost, it may be in the Educating of a Child, in the
University, bringing him up in the Arts, nurturing him and polishing him with
choicest Education, and then death comes, and cuts him down with his sickle in
a few hours; when a man is full of wind and swollen with gifts and knowledge,
death comes with a little prick (as it were) of a pin, and lets out all the
wind again, and all man's thoughts perish.

Fourthly, hopefulnesse; the husbandman sowes in hope, every one expects a
harvest, if he has had a seedtime: old age is that which men both covet and
expect. If Satan and security be a man's teachers, he will say, I shall live
long enough, let the Ministers, and examples of mortality say what they will.
No man is so old but he hopes to live one year longer; and the youngest hopes
to live to old age.

Fifthly, full age is like unto ripe corn, in regard of continuation. No tooth
nor foot of the beast has cropped or trod it down. All the blasts that have
befallen it, all the storms that have bin cast upon it, may make it bend, but
yet till the harvest comes, it is not cut down and destroyed utterly: thus it
is, here, till God take us away by death, till our time is come, nothing shall
take us away, when that is come presently we are gone; our times are not in our
enemies hand, for if so, we should not live long enough, they are not in our
own hands, if they were, we should live too long, but they are in Gods hands,
my times (says David) are in thy hands, Psalm. 31.15.

Sixthly, a full age is compared to ripe corn in regard of fitness for the
barn, and for the masters use, ripe corn is only acceptable corn, only good
corn, only such as pleases the tooth of the feeder; they that are ripe in
years, should be ripe in grace; they that are full of days should be full of
Holiness; they should be fit for Heaven; if any, they that have one foot in
the grave should have the other in Heaven; they that have white heads should
not (as the swan which under her white feathers has a black skin) have a black
heart. In a word (we say) toward harvest, corn ripens night and day, (it is a
country proverb:) when a man grows old, he shouldl grow Heavenward might and
day. Oh he should live more in one day then heretofore he has done in a whole
year.

A full age is as ripe corn, in regard of the certainty of harvest, and cutting
down: The corn which has stood longest, meets at last with a sickle: they that
have lived longest must die at length, and be cut down with deaths sickle; the
longest Summers day, has a Sun set; though thy age be a Summers age, yet it
must end. Its possible, corn may be trodden down and devoured by the beasts of
the field, withered with scorching heat, or destroyed with floods, but should
it escape all those dangers, to be sure, it must meet with a sickle at the
harvest. Though a man escape a violent death, and the many diseases incident to
youth and manhood, at length he must have a disease, whereby he must die. A
Nestors a Methusalems age must end. The sails of our Times as well as of Time,
are daily winding up: unto all the descriptions of the great age of the
Patriarchs before the flood, its added, and he died.

8. Lastly, a full age is as ripe corn, in respect of the near approach of its
cutting down: ripe corn has not long to stand; the young- may, the old must
die. How long have I to live (said old Barzillai) that I should go up with the
King? Gray hairs are deaths harbingers, which with their white strokes, mark
and take up lodgings for death, the King of terrors.

And thus! I have opened both the branches of this second part of my Text: the
former setting form the season of a Saints coming to the grave, properly, the
second Metaphorically.

The use that I shall make of this second Part in both its branches, put
together shall be twofold. I shall apply what I have said.

1. To our selves. 2. To the occasion.

For the first, there are then these following inferences that I draw from
hence, if (as I have described unto you) a full age be here promised, and such
as is like unto ripe corn; I Note then in the first place, The difference
between godly and wicked men. The godly man's age is a full age to him, he is
filled with age, and has a satiety of life; Its far otherwise with the wicked.
I read not of any one of them in Scripture of whom its said, that he was full
of days none can be full of Time, but he who has had a taste of Eternity: the
wicked never think they have enough either of the wealth or life of this World.
By their good will they would never die. The miseries and calamities of this
world sometimes indeed may make them impatiently weary of their lives; But the
godly in the midst of all their worldly solaces and enjoyments, health, honor,
wealth, etc. are filled with days. Gen 46.30.
Jacob said now let me die, when he was in the midst of his greatest worldly
rejoicing by the unexpected mercy of seeing both Joseph and his sons. David was
full of days when he was also full of riches and honor. The wicked may be
angry with the troubles of this; but a Saint is enamoured with the Beauty of
the next life, a wicked man may be weary of life, but a Saint is also desirous
of death.

I observe, ^nfulness of shortning our lives; a full age is a blessing
promised, yea a choice blessing, first, then those cowards are hence worthily
reproved who shorten their lives by Duels the greatest cowards in the World,
who being pursued with a disgrace, will run as far as hell before they look
back. Secondly, those that shorten their lives by intemperance that dig their
graves with their teeth, that are felons of themselves, Lascivis brevis est
aetas and rara senectus.
that swallow, not only their estates and lively-hoods, but their lives also
down their throats: these (I say) unkindly prevent this kind and sweet
enjoyment here promised, a full age; they being grown old by diseases, before
their time, making their tumors, rheums, and other distempers to prevent their
old age, to be sure the vigor and vivacity of it. These do that against
themselves, which the very Devils desired to shun, they tormenting themselves
before their time. Luxury is the greatest enemy of health, and hinderance of
old age. How many by being cast away in the surges of riot and drunkenness,
fall short of the Port of a full age?

3. old age, and contempt of old men in their full age, as when men voice them
twice children, silly men, Dotards; these scoffers imitating those children
that called the Propeht baldpate. I remember a smart and fit answer which an
old man once gave to a scoffing youngster; the young man telling the old, that
his memory grew weak and frail; well (replied the old man.) though my memory be
now f^ail, yet know: that I have forgotten more then ever thou did remember.
If he that mocketh the poor, certainly he that despises the aged, reproach th
his Maker. The aged must be both honorable, Prove. 17.5. Lev. 19.2.
and honored, before whom thou must rise up. They who will not honor old
Fathers seldom find their days to be long in the land which God gives them.

4. Fourthly, all the creatures should not only be improved spiritually, but
particularly improved, even to the putting of us in mind of death: even the
shocks of ripe corn, the ripe wheat that is in the field, should make thee
consider, that as that same corn must shortly be carried into the Barn, so thou
must be tumbled into the grave; thy sleep should make thee think of the sleep
of death; the Autumn should put thee in mind of the day of thy fading, falling
leaf: the setting of the Sun, should make thee forecast the setting of the sun
of thy life, the harvest should make thee think of deaths reaping sickle, the
dead creatures upon which thou daily feedest, should convince thee that the
feeder cannot live always; the putting off thy clothes from thy body, should
instruct thee, of putting off (shortly) the clothes of thy body. The blood of
the grape that thou drinkest, was pressed and shed, before thou could come to
the sweetness of it. The skins which clothe us were the cast suits of dead
beasts. When thou put on thy clothes in the morning, thou should think of
being clothed with new robes of the resurrection. Oh could you do thus, you
would not only think of, but expect death in all places, as death expects you
every where: Death may lie under your trencher, may be at the bottom of every
cup. The delights of the creature, should not extinguish the suggestions which
they give us of mortality. The Ancients had their sepulchers in their places of
pleasure, their Gardens: and (of old) some were wont to roll a dead-mans skill
upon their table, after their greatest feasts.

5. old age is a blessing. 1. A full age, like unto the ripe corn is here
promised, as an encouragement to duty, and the contrary is threatened as a
curse. God foretells that there should not be an old man in the house of Eli.
Genesis 15.15. 1 Samuel 2.32. Psalm. 55.22.
Its the curse threatened against the wicked, that they shall not live out half
their days, and be like the corn on the house top, which withers before it be
grown.

2. Secondly, it is labored and contended for, as a great blessing; they that
despise it, yet desire it and would count it a mercy. All thy food is taken but
to patch up thy cottage, that so thou may live till thou art an old man:
Physicians are but Pilots to conduct to the haven of old age. All the physic
that the Apothecary prepares; all the Physicians prescriptions are but helps to
old age; beyond old age thou can not go, to old age thou would fain go.

3. Grace is not only an honor to old age, (as it is indeed to every age,)
But old age is a great honor also to grace; they cast a mutual luster upon one
another. The oldest presons most commend grace in having, because in keeping
it; grace beautifies the youngest, but it is not beautified so much by any as
by the oldest. These show that after all the solicitations of sin and vanity,
grace is (yet) the best, and their best beloved, and that though they have
served Jesus Christ so many scores of years, yet that they esteem him the best
master, and are not weary of his service, but that they account it impossible
to change it for the best of temporals, unless to loss. O how glorious is it,
when there is the silver crown of gray hairs, and the golden crown of grace
upon one head! How amiable a conjunction are the golden apples of grace in the
silver picture of the hoary head!

4. Fourthly, its an age of the greatest growth and perfection of grace, the
bringing of our graces to the greatest fullness in this world. Old men (if
godly) are spiritual hoarders; they have been laying up of grace all their
days, and adding grace to grace, day after day, and year after year; sermon
after sermon, ordinance after ordinance: and a great many littles have by this
time made a mickle. And how comfortable is it for a godly old man to recollect,
that he has not only got much grace throughout his long life to himself, but
instrumentally bestowed much grace upon others: Childrens children are the
crown of old age (says Solomon) Pro. 17.6. but no children are so glorious
golden, and glistering a crown, as those who are spiritual. Oh how happy is it
for a godly old man to be able to say, Lord, I am not only my self thy child,
but I have brought forth children to Jesus Christ throughout my life, and who
(now) are come to a great number.

5. Fifthly, it is in some respect the most advantageous time of doing good:
Levit. 19.32. Dan. 7.13. Prove. 16.31. Prove. 20.29.
its an honorable age, (as marriage) honorable among all men; a kind of
resemblance of Gods antiquity who is called the ancient of days. The gray head
is called beauty, and a crown of glory. Now as our duty to do good, so our
opportunity of doing it to others, follows our receiving or honor from others.
Besides, old age brings wisdom and experience, and therefore makes men more
able to give wise and wholesome counsel to others. It was a good expression of
him who called an old man's head the house of wisdom. Domicilium sapientiae.
(...). Clem. Paed. (...). Seris venit usus ab annis. Ovid. Met. l. 6.
The most prudent Roman Convention, the Senate, was so called from old age;
noting, that wisdom is commonly the endowment of old men. The rash and foolish
counselors of Rehoboam were young men. Old men are sometime as eminent for
wisdom, as young men are for strength. And its as rare to see a young man
prudent, as an old man strong. By grave and good counsel and advice, the
strength of the head, the aged may be more helpful, then the younger may be by
their hands. A few gray hairs may be more worth, then many young locks, and
green heads. The night is the best time for counsel, and so it is best to take
counsel of Men, in the night of their age, when they have past through their
troubles, difficulties and manifold experiences, when as they are quiet, and
sedate, and there is not the noise and hurrying of passions to disturb and
distract them. And then old age is a fit age for the doing of good in regard of
the prayers of old Men, I should ordinarily choose, a young man's strength and an
old man's prayers to be employed for me. I count it a choice blessing to have a
stock of prayers going in an old man's heart, for me; God loves to hear the
prayers of his old servants, when the hands of old Moses were up, his prayers
were acceptable, though his hands were held up; we make much of the words of a
dying man, and God eminently regards them. Hence old men are wont to give their
blessings. i e. to pray for blessings from God: old Jacob blessed Pharaoh, etc.

Sixthly, Old age is highly commendable for its safety. And old Saint has
passed through those dangerous storms and difficulties that a poor young one is
now sailing toward; he has done living almost, the other is now going and
beginning to live; a young Man is happy, that does live well, but an old an is
happier, that has lived well, he is by death beyond the temptations, the
difficulties, the passions, that a young man lies engaged to, and this is the
fourth Corollary, that old age is a blessing.

Use 6. full age, in a age wherein one is like to a shock of ripe Corn, be a
promise, yet is it to be understood rightly; all Gods people do not always die
in full age, in regard either of civil or natural fullness; but yet if even
such a fullness be good for them, they shall have it; and it shall note be
bestowed, if it be not for their good. Honor thy father and thy mother, (as
the Lord thy God has commanded thee) that thy days may be prolonged, and that
it may go well with thee. Mark that Deuteronomy. 5.16. If it shall go well with thee.
Gods people shall have old age, if God see it may make for their welfare, God
sometime sees that old age would tend to the outward trouble and misery of his
servants, by war, captivity poverty, famine, so that it would not be a good old
age; and therefore he in mercy denies it them. Josiah was taken away, 2 King.
22.20.
before he was an old man, that he might not see the evil that should come upon
the place where he lived, or much more if God sees by old age, that they shall
be brought under temptations which (it may be) they are not able to overcome,
he will not suffer them to go out to battle in their old age, as the people
said concerning David, as the Lord lives thou shall not go out to battle, lest
the light of Israel go out: if God sees that thou shall meet with such great
storms and tempests as thou art not able to withstand, he will take thee to
himself, and shelter thee in the grave. In a word, if Gods people be taken away
before they are old, and have a full age, they are taken away unto a full age,
unto the full age of grace and glory in Heaven. God will give them an eternal
life, and is not God in that way, as good as his word in promising a long life,
and are they any losers? does God break his promise in not giving them an old
age in this world, if he give them an everlasting age in the next? If thy
father had promised thee an acre or two of Land lying in a barren Heath, or
Common, and afterward (in stead thereof) gives thee a thousand acres of rich
Meadow, does he break his promises with thee, if the Lord promise to give an
old age, and in stead thereof give thee Heaven and Eternal life, does he not
exceed his own promise as well as thy merit? That man breaks not his word, who
having promised ten pieces of brass, gives instead of these an hundred pieces
of gold: as Herod, when he promised half his Kingdom unto the daughter of
Herodias, if he had given the whole Kingdom to her, he had not broke his
promise, so when God promises not half nor the thousand part of Heaven in
promising long life, he falls not short, but goes beyond his word, in bestowing
Eternity of bliss. Besides, God promises no good to his people in this world
but that which shall be a furtherance to the obtaining of the chiefest good; if
it be a bond to bind them to God, not if it be a snare to entrap and hinder
them from God, and he should be unjust and unkind in bestowing an earthly good
upon thee, if he sees that it would stop thee from that which is Eternal. Ita
disponit de minimo ut non fiat periculum de maximo. God so disposes of thee
here in regard of this, that thou may not be in danger of losing Eternal
life.

In a word remember, the people of God die in a full age, whenever they die!
though they die young, yet they are imbalmed for Eternity.

2. Besides they are satisfied and filled with their days: the wicked never
live out half their days, no when they live to be never so old; the godly live
fully, though they die never so young: they die old, if not according to the
course of nature, yet according to the course of their desires.

Lastly, Old age is not to be abused by the aged themselves, 1. It must not be
abused by ignorance, how shameful is it to see a man whose hairs and wrinckles
speak him an hundred, but his knowledge of Christ speaks him not ten, who is an
alphabetical old man (as one calls him,) who is in the worse sense twice a
child, that does not know his right hand from his left in Religion, that though
he should be a teacher of others, had need himself to be taught the first
principles of the Oracles of God. 2. Abuse not old age by profaneness, oh how
sad is it for a black heart to lodge under a hoary head, for one to be ripe for
the grave, and ripe for hell at the same time. Let old men take heed of
recollecting former youthful follies with delight. O let them be more bitter
to remember then ever they have been sweet to commit, 3. Abuse it not by
unprofitablenesse, and negligence, what art thou almost at thy Haven, and do
thou sail so slowly? art thou in danger of losing Eternity, and do thou run
no faster. For shame, old Christians up and be doing you have but a little
paper to write in, oh write the closer: improve your time; you have but a
little time to work, your candle is almost burnt out. O work the faster; your
sun is almost set, O labor with the more Christian diligence and vigor.

THus I have given you the Application of this part of the Text to our selves,
Port and place even of Saints: here is a Saint, an old eminent Saint, and yet
(you see) the grave is his place to which he is arrived he is laid down in this
his bed, and sleeps in the Lord, his grace could not exempt him from the grave:
And further God has given him a grave, an honorable peaceable burial: he is
not buried as some have been in the bellies of beasts, but laid to rest in the
bosom of the earth: he is not a portion for foxes, but a spectacle of Saints,
I say of Saints, who love his memory, to whom as his Doctrine was profitable,
so now is his memory sweet and Savoury, he has perfumed the world with the
sweet ointment of his preaching and example, and now he is taken out of it, the
Savor is left behind; the great numbers of spectators and tears that attend
his Funeral, speak the honourablenesse of his interment. But then he comes to
his grave too, and so likewise he is the man in my Text* this servant of
Christ, came willingly, he was not pulled and dragged to the grave: death was
his familiar acquaintance, it was his privilege as well as his task; when his
good Sister said to him in his sickness Brother I am afraid to leave you
alone; why Sister (said he) I shall I am sure be with Jesus Christ when I die:
the meditation of death was not more frequent then sweet to him: he chewed upon
this morsel, death, every day: he did not go about to swallow it down all at
once (as some foolish sinners do) when he came to die, for then he would have
found this great morsel too big for him; but by holy Meditation he took it down
daily piece by piece; he looked (as it were) so frequently from the top of the
mast into the sea of death, that at length it seemed to him not only a not
astonishing, but an ordinary, familiar, pleasing spectacle. His soul was upon
the wing, and was bent heavenward, even when it was in the cage of his poor
carcass, and when the violence of his disease began to break open that cage, I
say not how patient, but how joyful was he! much he longed to be with Christ,
and in effect he would say, why is his Chariot so long a coming; well, he is in
the grave, and he is come to the grave. Thus the former part of my text is
applicable to him. But that which I principally intended, was the application
of the second Part of the Text to him: namely, the seasonablenesse of the godly
man's coming to the grave* Come he is to the grave like the man in my Text, in a
full age like as a shock of corn, etc. If you consider his birth, this ripe
shock of corn, Doctor William Gouge brought this day to the barn of the grave,
sprang at first from Mr. Thomas Gouge of Stratford Bow, a Gentleman of eminent
quality, and of Singular piety in his generation. If you look upon him in the
growing years of his youth, he was an Eaton Scholar, and he was there fitted
for the University, and sent to Kings College in Cambridge, where he was so
Studious, and profited so much by his studies, that he was made modorator in
the Sophisters Schools. He took all his degrees in their order, and did
perform all those acts, that were required of him publicly, for the taking
those degrees He was a close Student in the University, and eminent for his
knowledge in the learned Languages, and in the Arts, very well versed in Logic
and Philosophy, of both which he was chosen the Lecturer in his College. Nor
yet was he there less noted for his piety, even in his younger years, he was
not once absent (neither morning nor Evening) from the public and solemn
worship of God in the College performed twice every day, for the space of nine
whole years together. He read fifteen Chapters in the Bible every day, and when
he lay awake in the night, his course was to Meditate of what he had read in
the daytime, so deceiving the tediousness of his waking and depriving himself
also sometimes of the sweetness of his sleeping hours, though by a better and
greater sweetness. Thus you have seen him in his growing years. Next look upon
him in the full ear when he had taken all this pains to furnish himself with
the Egyptian Jewels of University-learning and accomplishments, he was fit to
come into the Canaan of the Church to deck and adorn the spouse of Christ: he
entered into the Ministry, when he was in the thirty second year of his age: an
age suitable to that calling which being so weighty, he durst not undertake
rashly, and unadvisedly, (I wish all those whom it concerns would take notice
of it, and example by him herein:) he laid up, before the laid out, he first
labored to fit himself with endowments, and not till then, did he put himself
upon employment. He was a scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
13.52.
like an ho^sholder which brings forth out of his treasure things new and
old. He succeeded that eminently faithful servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Stephen
Egerton in the charge of Black-Fryars, to which he was unanimously chosen. But
(as I said) I principally look upon him in his ripe and full age And first God
bestowed upon him a Civil maturity and ripeness of age: His Civil maturity or
fullness of age.
First, he had much honor, How great was the confluence of hearers which in
former times not only from all parts of this famous City, but of many parts of
England, frequented his Lectures at Black-fryars (for so great was the flame of
his pains, that he heated those who sat a great way off from it) and when the
godly Christians of those times came to London, they thought not their
business done unless they had been at Black-fryars Lectures: and great was the
benefit which many godly people, and young Ministers professed that they (then)
reapt from his labors. How was this place wherein you honor him at his death
by your unwonted and great numbers, thronged in his life time! and so great
were the Assemblies that here met to hear him, and withal his tender
compassion toward the multitudes of his hearers, that out of this Pulpit he was
wont (before he began his Sermons) to observe what Pues were empty, and to
command his Clark to open them, for the ease of those who thronged in the
Isles. He was worthily not only for his years, but his prudence, and abilities
accounted, a father among the London Ministers, and honored as such: he was
chosen to be a member of the Reverend Assembly of Divines, and was one of those
learned Divines who wrote lately the large Annotations upon the Bible. He was
for his wisdom and faithfulness, worthily chosen a Trustee for buying in
impropriations, wherein he approved himself most faithful and conscientiously
careful to discharge the trust committed to him: nor was he altogether without
the blessing of a fullness in respect of a wealthy and plentiful Estate in the
world. I know there are some who look upon a Ministers wealth as his crime
(when they can epsy no other) who out of covetousness, care not how little
they themselves bestow upon Ministers, and out of envy are ready to voice
them to possess much more then they do, and therefore do not instead of an
hundred set down fifty, but instead of fifty, set down a thousand: many such
back friends, has this reverend man met with; for his Estate, though it were
not so small as either for him or his, to be ashamed of, yet neither was it so
great as for any to envy, or as some have reported. For thus much I can assure
you from those who very well know, that his personal Estate is found short, by
some hundreds of pounds, of his Legacies and gifts, and his real Estate is not
half so much as sundry have voiced it. And yet had he been such an one as some
have maliciously and falsely censured him, an usurer, he might have had, though
less grace, yet more money, and yet as much grace also, as (I fear) most of
those have, who so unworthily have asperst him. This I can assure you from many
who fully knew his course, and Estate (particularly from the mouth of his
eldest son, my reverend brother) who can testify what I am about to say in
this particular upon oath, that in all his lifetime, he never did either
directly or indirectly, neither by himself or any other for him, put any money
to use, and so far was he from doing so, that sundry can testify, he was
scarce ever out of debt; for he had diverse children before the inheritance
which he had by his father came to him, and from the time of his fathers death,
till his children came of age, he laid out, for his brother, sisters, and their
children, above two thousand pounds; yea in those times, wherein he was charged
to have put money to use, he paid interest for six hundred pounds, which with
the principal, he himself paid, though it were another debt: and for these
20. years last past, he purchased not one foot of Land, unless ten pounds per
annum; and he would often say that after his death, the world would know how
much they were mistaken in judging of his Estate. And yet through the bleffing
of God upon him, he was both rich in contentment with his Estate while he
lived, and left a comfortable subsistence behind him for all his surviving
children when he died, and as his children (I trust) shall find the blessing
of the latter, so did he in his lifetime, express the grace of the former, in
refusing great and to him, inregard of his natural disposition (as he often
professed to me) desirable preferment (as particularly that of the Provostship
of Kings College in Cambridge, offered him by an honorable hand) much more
advantageous in worldly respects, then that of his Living of Black Friars, and
this he did for the tender respect which he bare to the souls of his people, to
which God had called him.

But for no fullness was his age so eminent, His spiritual fullness of age.
as for that which principally deserves commendation. I mean spiritual
fullness. This I shall briefly consider, both in respect 1. Of what grace he
had, and 2. What good he did.

1. For the former. In the general, he had received of the fullness of Christ,
that grace for grace whereby he was made meet for glory, particularly, there
were three beautiful graces which eminently shined in this godly man; in which
he seemed higher by the head and shoulders, then other Christians, and then
most Ministers. 1. The first was the grace of humility; though others knew not
when his face did not shine, yet he knew not when it did. And yet he easily
could observe the least glymps or appearance of any worth in another, and would
acknowledge it. He knew not that worth which had a beam-like bigness in
himself, but he easily espied and respected that of good which was but as a
mote in another. This I have always (almost) observed in him since it was my
happy unhappiness to have occasion to be so frequently in his company by
reason of my employment among his people. He was, as its said of Nazianzen,
(...), high in employments and abilities, low in his disposition and resentment
of his worth. So eminent was his humility, that he charged his Executor to whom
he committed the care of his Funeral, that there should be no Green-staff laid
upon his Hearse, though this was the usual respect given to those who in their
lifetime had been Governors of Bridewell (one of which number, yea, and
Benefactor to the house this worthy Doctor was) and that he should not affix
any Escucheons to his Hearse, though he were a Gentleman anciently descended; as
if he had thought that the poverty of Christ was his patrimony (as Ambrose
said) and Coat of Arms, Paupertas Christi meum patrimonium. Ambr.
and his interest in him, his greatest and best achievement, or as if both
living and dead, he would be (as the Apostle speaks) clothed with humility.

2. A second grace which eminently appeared in him was that grace of Faith. I
observed in him as great a study to advance Christ as to debase himself;
frequently (of late) I have heard him say, When I look upon my self, I see
nothing but emptiness and weakness, But when I look upon Christ, I see nothing
but fullness and sufficiency: when the hand of his body was weak and shaking,
that of his soul (faith) was strong and steady. When he could not hold the cup
at the Sacrament, nor evenly carry it to his mouth, by reason of his weakness
and shaking, with what a firm and fixed affiance did he lay hold upon Christ,
and with what a strong and eager appetite, did he apply the blood of Christ to
his soul! And how sweetly have I heard him breathe out joyful thanksgivings for
his refreshment by the blood of Christ, when he was returned to his house,
after the Lords Supper; when he could hardly creep with his body to the place
where it was celebrated, nay, was forced to make use of the strength and
support of others to hold him up, his faith swiftly ran, nay, was upon the wing
in carrying him to Christ. When worldly supports failed him, his health,
strength forsook him, he made JESUS CHRIST the staff of his old age, often
professing as his great misery and impotency without him, so his holy and
humble recumbency upon him.

3. A third grace wherewith this holy man was (even to common observation)
beautified, was that of patience under the hand of God: the truth is, he was of
a meek and quiet spirit toward man. I have not heard that ever he was moved to
anger by any injuries or disgraceful and false reports wherewith he was
asperst. They were as bullets shot against a mud-wall, which there sink and
dye: when dirt was most abusively cast into his face, there never (in my
observation) was blood fetched into his face, by wrath and passion: he was truly
meek in spirit. So amiable was the meekness of his carriage toward his wife,
that for twenty two years (for so long they lived together) there was never
heard any one word proceeding from him toward her, sounding like an angry one.
But for his patience under the afflicting hand of God, I know not whether it
were more admirable or imitable. Though by reason of the bitterness of his
pains by the stone and sharpness of urine, and that Lethalis arundo (as he often
called it) that deadly arrow in his side (which he knew could never be plucked
out of it but by death) I mean his Asthma or difficulty of breathing, which he
got by an excessive cold in attending upon public employment: notwithstanding,
I say, by reason of these, I have heard him groan a thousand times, yet never
did I hear him grumble once. Never did he complain of God for his suffering,
though often of himself for sinning. Never did I hear him say great sufferer! but
often great sinner! and yet he would overtake that expression again, with the
discoursing of, and comforting himself in a great Savior: and in the depth of
his torments he would say, well, yet in all these, there is nothing of Hell or
Gods wrath. His sufferings never were so deep but he could see to the bottom of
them. And as the grace he had was great, secondly, in this spiritual fullness
of his age, I consider the good he did: Look upon him in his family, and there
you will find him both indulgent toward the bodies of his children, and
servants, and yet especially careful of their souls, witness his constant
labor in catechizing them, and daily dropping upon them with holy
instructions. He was the husband of one wife, a widower eight and twenty years,
and he had thirteen children by that his one and only wife, whereof eight
lived to man's and woman's estate: all his sons he brought up to learning,
desiring that they might have all been employed in the Ministry, it being that
calling which to him was as full of pleasure as employment; his labors
wherein, he went through so delightfully, that he often professed to me, that
the greatest pleasure which he took in the world, was in the employments of his
calling, in regard whereof, he has told great persons, and particularly the
Lord Keeper, that he envied not the greatness of his place; and yet he was a
very close (I had almost said a severe) student, and was at his study, every
morning (Winter and Summer during his health) by five a clock in the morning
and always by four in the summer, and often sooner, so that he had done that
which might have been counted a days work, before many began their study. And
indeed it was his desire to perform his secret worshipping of God before
daylight, that so he might have the benefit of the whole day for his study,
and he would often say (as Demosthenes spoke concerning the smith) that he was
ashamed that those of others callings, should be at their work, before he was
at his: so that none could give him that reproof which I have read a certain
Religious man gave to a Bishop who slept too long a mornings, Surrexerunt
passeres et ster^unt pontifices?
the sparrows are up, and chirping and yet the Bishop is in bed and sleeping.
(If he labored to make the sleepy Bishop ashamed by the rising of the
sparro^s, oh how should slothful Ministers be ashamed of their idleness, when
they hear of this painful servant of Christ Doctor Gouge) The Parish of
Black-fryars will be a standing and a constant witness of his delighting to do
good. At his first coming to it, the old Church in regard of the great
thronging from all parts to his Sermons, being found far too small for the
auditory, he procured fifteen hundred pounds by collections at his Lectures and
by Letters written to his Friends, whereby it was enlarged to this Stately and
Beautiful structure without any briefes at all. He was ever very Charitable to
the (especially) godly poor, of which (yet) he would make no report vain
gloriously. In his life time, he set a part as a His own expression.
sacred sto^k, a portion for the poor, proportionable to all his receipts,
which he faithfully distributed. He preached for many years together thrice
(constantly) every week, and how pithy clear, Judicious his Sermons were, not
only the confluence, and applause of his Auditors, but especially the benefit
which they reaped from them will abundantly testify. For five and forty years
together, he did once every month administer the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, not so much as once interrupting that course; and if upon some urgent
occasion, he was necessitated to be from his charge, he would not fail to be
present at it upon the Sacrament-day though his other employments never so
loudly called him off. In a great part of the forementioned long space of
years (during the time of Prelatical Innovations) he was a sweet refreshing
shade and shelter, and even as streams in a dry scorching wilderness, to the
old godly Puritanes (now accounted to be a name of honor, though heretofore a
nickname of disgrace) by admitting them to the Lords Supper at his
Congregation, who could not either at all, or at least purely (in regard of
Superstitious gestures genuflexions, etc.) enjoy that ordinance at home. He
preached to his people by his life as well as by his lip: he was (as one speaks
of John Baptist) all voice, and such in his practice as well as his Pulpit. How
unblameable, temperate, holy, was his deportment in all places! how exemplary
was he to the flock! He was not like some of whom I have heard, that they
preach so well, that its pity they should ever be out of the Pulpit, but they
live so ill, that its pity they should ever be in the Pulpit. He was as of a
most sweet even and peaceable temper himself, so of much forvvardnesse to
compose, and (which is not every peaceable man's happiness) much prudence in
composing all differences among his people, among whom he was (as some of them
have told me) as it were a Justice of Peace, as well as a Minister of Peace. If
he could not (as what man can) hinder dissentions from being born, he would not
suffer them to be longlived.

As it was his contentment and crown laboriously, during his healthful years,
to Preach, so notwithstanding his forementioned pains and infirmities, he did
Preach, as long as he was able to get up into the Pulpit, and this (I question
whither it can be a paraleld) Commendation, I shall add, He Preached so long
as that it was a greater difficulty for him to go up into the Pulpit, then
either to make or Preach a Sermon, and that both because of the growing
weakness of his body, and the constant if not increasing ability of his parts
and judgment, even to his last. In snort, he would have accounted it a mercy,
if he who Preached so much in his life, might also have dyed Preaching. To all
this I might adjoyn his great industry in, and usefulness by publishing in
Print many excellent and pithy discourses. Here I might mention his Printed
Catechism, his clear and judicious Annotations upon that part of the Bible
contained from the first of Samuel to Job. His book called the whole Armor of
God, another called Domestical duties, his Comment on the 116. Psa A Treatise.
Gods three arrows, and his Exquisite (and I question whether to be paraleld)
exposition of the Lords Prayer, and that Elaborate Comment of his upon the
Epistle to the Hebrews which (after many years preaching) he went through in
his Sermons at Black-Fryars, and which he fully prepared for the Press, before
his death, excepting one half Chapter; a work of excellent worth, both
considering the Subject (noble, and difficult) and the great pains and
dexterity of the Commentator; and which being now in the Press shall (I trust)
shortly see the light, though in regard of its bigness the coming forth
thereof cannot be so speedy, as is desired, and as the book will (I am
confident) when published, be useful. To conclude this head of his spiritual
fullness of age, he was one who may be fitly called both one of a thousand, and
also a thousand men in one, for his excellent endowments, for his usefulness
in his employments.

3. Thirdly and lastly, His natural fullness.
for his natural fullness and ripeness of age; he was one to whom my Text is
applicable in that particular also. He was aged seventy nine when he died, so
that he had the full age, which (as I said before) was senectus sera a late,
Senectus sera.
long age. But then I confess, he runs not fully parallel with my Text in
respect of that branch of natural fullness of age, which (I told you) was
Senectus sana, a strong, hayl, vigorous, diseaselesse old age. No; his
forementioned diseases, and bodily infirmities of the Stone and Asthma, here
would make me halt, were it not for this double consideration (in regard of
which I cannot only excuse his crazinesse in old age, but even highly commend
him under it.) 1. His diseases came not upon him, in, much less by any sinful
or unwarrantable courses; envy it self dares not tax him of intemperance, in
eating, drinking, pastimes, (he has been often heard to say he never took a
journey merely for pleasure in all his life;) No, his diseases came either by
his laboriousnesse in studying, preaching, watching, or attending in all
weathers and seasons, upon his work at the Assembly. He received his wounds in
his Masters service, they were all scars of honor, he was not worn with rust,
but whetting. 2. This I shall add as his honor under his crazinesse of body,
that when he was most decrepit and feeble, he had the blessing of a Senectus
sana, Senectus sana.
an hayl strong old age, in regard of his parts of mind, his intellectuals,
which were as vivid, quick, and vigorous in reasoning and disputing as when he
was forty years of age, in the greatest of his bodily strength. And this few
can more fully know then my self, by reason of my frequent occasions of
conversing with him, especially upon the Lords days, when often after the
evening Sermon propounded those Theological doubts to him, concerning which I
desired to draw forth his apprehensions; yea, of this which I now say, the
whole Ministry of London will attest the truth from their own experience, by
calling to their minds that learned, clear, and polite Sermon of his, lately
preached in Latin at Sion College before them all. And the truth is, this
continuance of the use of his reason, and abilities of mind, was the reason
why he adventured so long as he did, to frequent the public Assembly, yea, and
to preach, notwithstanding the crazinesse and weaknesses of his body. I can
study my Sermon, said he, I can preach my Sermon, and shall I forbear preaching
because I am so weak as not to be able to go? I will be carried rather, and
carried he often was. So that indeed the blade of his mind was too sharp for the
sheath of his body, the wine too strong for the cask, and his abilities of
mind too vigorous for his weak diseased carcass. I now draw to a conclusion:
some will say, I have not commended him enough, I confess it, nor can I.
Others that I have in his commendation said too much, I confess it too, but my
meaning is, too much perhaps for their liking, too much (I sear) for their
imitation. But since he who thought that seventy nine years on earth were not,
nay that eternity in heaven, is not too much to serve and praise his and our
Lord, let not us think that half an hour is too much to scatter a few flowers
on his Hearse, they being such as were planted by his own labor, or such rather
which grew out of his own worth.

Errata.
FOr the marg. note page 8. r. the second point of the first branch, p. 14.
marg. r. accedant non adhaereant, p. 15. l. 17. r. comprehended, l. 22. r.
meetnesse, p. 17. marg. r. vulgatam, p. 38. l. 26 r. fifth.

FINIS
These books are lately printed, and are sold at the Ball in Paul's Churchyard.
Mr. Jenkyns second part of his Exposition of the whole Epistle of Jude.

Mr. Kendal of the Perseverance of the Saints, in answer to Mr. John Goodwin.

Mr. Sheffeild of Christ, under that clear and glorious resemblance of the Sun,
Mal, 4 2.

Jus Divinum Ministerii, by the Provincial Assembly of London.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Dr. Hill, Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge, by Dr. Tuckney.


