THE ANGEL OF THE Church of Ephesus NO BISHOP OF EPHESVS, Distinguished in
Order from, and superior in Power to a PRESBYTER.

As it was lately delivered in a Collation before the Reverend Assembly of
Divines.

By Constant Jessop Minister of the Word at Fifeild in Essex.

Imprimatur CHARLES HERLE.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL WILLIAM TWISSE, Dr in Divinity, the Reverend and
Learned Prolocutor, and to the rest of the Religious and Grave Divines of this
present Assembly, summoned by the authority of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament.
Right Reverend and honored Fathers and Brethren,
I Never thought or intended to appear in print in this learned and critical
age, being conscious to my self of mine own insufficiencies: I speak it not in
an humble arrogancy, as the Orator observed some did write treatises against
vainglory, and then in a vainglorious ostentation put their names thereto.
Muchlesse should I have presumed to handle this controversy, which has been
so fully agitated by others both at home and abroad. Not only by those amongst
us, who have distasted the Hierarchicall frame of government, whose arguments
have been by the Prelates answered for the most part no other way then by
suspensions, silencings, deprivations, and proceedings against them as
disturbers of the Churches peace, and contemners of the commands of Authority:
but also by almost all the Divines of note in the Reformed Churches, in their
Polemicall dissertations against Papists, out of whose Magazine our
Hierarchists have borrowed those weapons whereby they defend their own
authority, and oppose their enemies; as is evident to any that shall compare
the writings of the one and of the other, and (to say nothing of this as
objected by the good old Non-conformitans to the Patrons of Prelacie) is
acknowledged by the Papists themselves, witness that short marginall
Annotation of the Rhemists, In John 20.17.
The Protestants otherwise denying this preeminence of Peter, yet to uphold
their Archbishops do avouch it against Puritans. The course of my studies when
once I became a Smatterer in Divinity, was bent another way then to the
handling of Controversies. My principal and chiefest aim being this, that I
might through Gods blessing on mine endeavors be fitted for a Pastoral
employment, whenever the Lord in his due time should call me thereunto.
Wherein I desire in humility and thankfulness to say with St PAUL, 1 Cor.
15.10.
By the grace of God, I am what I am. As for this controversy in particular,
though I had some reason to have pried into it, in regard of my fathers
sufferings more then once under the Prelates, in whose deprivation I and the
rest of his posterity have had our share of sufferings also; yet knowing mine
own inabilities to wade through it, wanting time in regard of other studies
more necessary for the fitting of me for that calling wherein I was, and
observing my fathers own te^perature and carriage, who forbear discoursing of
it in private, or mentioning, much less handling of it in public, merely on
this ground, that he might fulfill his ministry in that remote, barren, (in
respect of the Word) rude, and ignorant corner of Wales, to which the Lord by
his providence removed him, I did also forbear the studying of it. The
practices of the Prelates which caused such commotions in Scotland at first,
and in the issue the abjuration of the Prelacie; the proceedings against Dr
Bastwick here in England for his Flagellum Latiatium episcoporum, and those
high challenges which were made in the Star Chamber Speeches about that time,
did first cause me to enquire into that tenure of Divine right, by which our
Bishops laid claim to their Preeminence. The Oath in the Canons which came
forth afterward did provoke me to set to the work a little closer; which yet I
entered on only for my own private information and satisfaction, and after the
considering of some places of Scripture, I addressed my self to Bishop Halls
Treatise on that subject, conceiving that in him, being the latest that did
write, and withal a man of note in the Church, I should find the substance,
strength and sinews of all those arguments which could be produced in that
cause. Whom when I did peruse, the more I looked into his treatise, the further
off I was from receiving satisfaction by him in that Tenure of Divine right,
and from subscribing to his assertions. Hereupon for my own private use I set
down some short marginall animadversions (and to speak the truth, as far as I
am able to judge, there is room enough in the margent to answer the whole
book) diverse of which are now at the desire of some godly and learned members
of your Assembly presented to public view. Sundry other Collections I had
once, but Sr Arthur Astons upholders of the Protestant Religion, finding my
papers, when they rifled my house at Reading of what they could, soon made an
end of them by fire, and with them of some Treat ses of my Fathers, in this and
other arguments, which (in regard of that employment in the Ministry which lay
on me whilst I was in those parts) I had not read over. Being thus driven from
my habitation, and by loss of my Papers and Manuscripts disabled from dealing
in that controversy, I had quite laid aside the thoughts of it, until that
coming before a Committee of your Assembly, according to an order of the house
of Commons; I was by the Chairman of that Committee appointed to handle before
you this Text, and controversy out of it. Which I persuade my self was done
rather by way of Probation then out of any desire of Information from me, who
am far more fit to be informed, and to receive, then to give information or
satisfaction. Being thus east on a necessity of reviving my former notions, and
reviewing my marginall animadversions with some other observations (which I had
left) I undertook the task, and presented before you those collections and
arguments, which you were pleased immediately to call for. Let that I beseech
you, Fathers and Brethren, now find a second, which found a former acceptance
at your hands, and unto acceptance vouchsafe to add a Patronage. Something I
have indeed now added which was not in my former papers delivered, which I have
done partly by the intimation of him by whose appointment I first did enter on
the discussing of this question; partly because I saw the great confidence of
the Bishop with whom I principally deal in this vexatious dispute, whose
grounds I held it in some respect necessary to consider and examine. If in
these papers there be any thing which may be subservient to the glory of God,
and his great work which he has in hand, I have my desire, and shall therein
rejoice, desiring to return all to him from whom every good gift proceeds.
Give me leave to close my Dedication with the same petitions which closed my
Sermon in your Assembly. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father
of mercies grant that his Spirit of peace and truth may be the President of
your Assembly, that the peace of God may rule in your hearts whereunto ye are
called in one body, and nothing may be done amongst you through strife,
vainglory or contention, but ye may seek the truth, and speak the truth in
love; that so through his blessing on your endeavors, studies, conferences,
meditations, the breaches may be made up which are in the Church, and the Lord
in his due time heal the breaches of our Land, Kingdom, and Nation, which are
exceedingly shaken; which is the hearty desire, and daily prayer of

Fifeild, March 6. 1643. The meanest of your Fellow-helpers in the work of the
Lord, Constant Jessop.

THE Angel of the Church OF EPHESVS NO BISHOP of Ephesus, etc.
REVEL. 2.1. To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write.


IT is not unknown unto you, Reverend and beloved Fathers and Brethren, what
vexatious disputes have been between the Prelatists and Presbyterians
concerning the Angels mentioned in the Inscription of this, and the other
Epistles. Sermon preached at Lambeth, Apr. 17. 1608.
Dr Downham has undertaken to prove the Angels to be Diocesan Bishops, and to
justify their function as lawful and of divine institution and approbation:
but his Gersom Bucer, dissert. de gub. eccl. An Answer to Dr Downham imprinted,
an. 1609. A reply to Dr Downhams defense imprinted, an 1013. The Diocesans
trial by M. Paul Baines, an. 1611.
Refuters both in Latin and English have (as I conceive with submission to
better judgments) made it evident that notwithstanding the Doctors bold
adventure --

-- Magnis tamen excidit ausis, he has come short of his undertakings. Yea
some of the members of this grave and learned Assembly have vindicated this
place from those challenges which the humble Remonstrant made unto it, by it to
uphold the tottering cause of Prelacy. A cause which not long agone in
Scotland, and lately in the Parliament of England, and amongst you has been,
and still is causa conclamata. I doubt not but you are sufficiently satisfied
in conscience and judgment, otherwise you would not in so solemn a manner
have vowed and covenanted with the Lord the extirpation of that Prelaticall
form of Government. It may be the Prelates themselves see their own ruin
approaching, and that the downfall of their honor is at hand, in which regard
being either not willing, or not able by Scripture and force of argument to
uphold it, they will now try whether it may be defended by the dint of sword.
As if they were the Successors of those Prelates mentioned by Quibus adjice
novum eleemosynae modum, quod in mercenarios m^lites, equites and pedites,
borum plurima consumuntur ad pugnas inter Christi fideles concitandas and
continue nutriendas, ^t eos suae tandem subjicere valiant potestati. Defer s.
pac. part. 2. cap. 24. page 358.
Marsilius Patavinus, who found out novum eleemosynae modum, a new kind of
alms to expend those means which were given them for hospitality and
charity to the poor, in the maintenance of soldiers, troops of horses, and
companies of foot, to the raising and prosecuting of wars between Christians,
that so they might at length subject them to their tyrannical power: Or else
the sons of that Martial Pope Ealaeus in Iul. 2. cited by Dr Abbots 2. part
of def. of the Ref. Cathol. p. 11.
Julius the second, who finding that his Bulls and Excommunications would not
prevail, went in his own person to war against the French King, and crossing
the river Tiberis, cast Peter's keys into the stream with indignation, being
resolved to try whether Paul's sword would help him.

I am not now to follow them, or lead you into the fields where trumpets sound,
troops are mustered, and instruments of death to fly abroad, but to enquire (by
your appointment) whether the Inscription of this and other Epistles afford any
solid argument for the pretended preeminence and superiority of a Bishop in
Order, Office, and Power of Jurisdiction above a Presbyter. A late Patron of
Episcopacie is so confident, that he tells us, Bishop Hall, Episc. by divine
right. p. 121.
All the shifts in the world cannot elude it; that St John was by the Spirit of
God commanded to direct his seven Epistles to the Bishops of those seven famous
Churches, by the name of so many Angels. And the Franc. a Sanct. clara Apol.
ep^s c. 5. p 62. Argumentum deniq^isiud apud ortho. loxos non minus frequens
quam efficax, de Epistolis Ioaxnis in Apocalypsi, quas ad septem I cclesiarum A
siaticarum Angelos, seu Episcopos scripsit, originem saltem Apostolicam invicte
dabit.
Romish Apologist for Bishops is as confident as their English Patron, for he
has very boldly delivered it, that the argument drawn from this place will
invincibly prove their original to be at least Apostolical. You hear their
positions. Let us now consider what just ground there is for this their great
confidence.

1. The name Angel does not import any such eminency of Order or Superiority
of power as our Prelates plead for, and would fain wrest from the words of the
Text. You know, Reverend and Beloved, that (...) Angel is a name of Office not
of Order, a title importing Duty not Superiority in Power. It signifies a
Messenger, and in point of Embassage all that are Gods Ministers (unless they
have an immediate call from God, and infallible inspiration, neither of which I
conceive our Prelates will challenge to themselves) are equal. They are all by
their place and Office Mal. 2.7.
Messengers of the Lord of hosts. It is their duty to Act. 20.27, 20.
declare the whole counsel of God, and keep back nothing which is profitable:
(...), 2 Cor. 5.19.
We are Ambassadors for Christ, says the Apostle of himself, and all those
which are entrusted with the dispensation of the Gospel. And from this their
function they have their denomination (...) euim utru^que, significat and
senem, and legatum, test Scapula.
(...). This name of Office, Angel, the Lord is pleased here to make use of
rather then any other, for this reason as I conceive; Though the whole
Scripture be the Epistle of the Almighty God unto his creature, as Regist. ep.
lib. 4. epist. 40. ad Theod. Medicum.
Gregory speaks; yet here are now special Letters to the Churches from the
Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore his Amanuensis St John is commanded to direct
them (...), To the Angel or Messenger, to him that is the Jer. 15.19.
mouth of Jesus Christ to interpret and declare his will. The direction is thus
set down indefinitely, not pointing out any singular or individual person, to
give us to understand that whosoever he be that is (...) by his Place and
Office, an Angel or Messenger, it is his duty to declare the will of the Lord
Jesus Christ in the following particulars to the Church. Let this little
(which, as has been observed, sets forth the Function of that Person which is
invested with it, not any order in that Function,) be duly considered, and it
will cast dirt in the faces of those who so eagerly contend for the
appropriation of it to the men of their order. If the Bishop and he alone is
the Angel, the Messenger and mouth of Jesus Christ, how bad a case had the
Church been in, in these latter days, how justly might England have joined
with Dicit Apostolus Augelu^ Satanae se transfigurare in Angelum lucis. Vtinam
his diehus Angeli lucis non fint transfigurati in Angelos tenebrarum. N^c. de
Clem. tract. de nov. celebrit. non in stit. p. 157. edit Lugd. Bat. an. 1609.
Clement in his desire, Oh that the Angels of light ( i. e. those which should
have been such) had not been in these days transfigured into the angels of
darkness. How truly that observation of Espencaeus concerning the Bishops in
his time has been verified of the most of ours, let the world judge; Espenc.
digres. in ^. ad Tim l. 2. c 2. p 7^. ed t Lu^et an. 1619.
He tells us that heretofore it was accounted a very strange thing to find a
non-preaching Bishop, but in these times, says he, to find a preaching Bishop
plus quam monstrilicae haberetur, would be esteemed more then monstrous. When
the in Apoc. c. 1. v. 20.
Rhemists in their annotations on the former Chapter had observed, The Bishops
are the stars of the Church: our learned Fulke returns them this answer, St
John by the Angels of the Churches means not all that should wear Myters on
their heads and hold Crozier staves in their hands like dead idols, but them
that are the faithful Messengers of the Lords Word, and utter and declare the
same. Had the Inscription been (...) how would our Prelaticall men have
vaunted? you should have heard the same from them -- Invento populus quod
clamat Osyri: We have found it, we have found it, when from a metaphorical
notion, and such a denomination as is common to all Ministers, because used in
the singular number, they do thus triumph. Yet they are not, I persuade my
self, ignorant that not only Angelus, i. e. nuncius Sacerdos Deiverissime
dicitur, quia Dei and hominis sequester est, ejusque ad populum nuntiat
voluntatem, in Mal 2.
Hierome (their back friend, as they conceive) does, as I have done before,
interpret this denomination Angel, and gives his reason for it; but that with
Moral. in Job. lib. 34. c. 7. edit. Basil an. 1564.
Gregory the Great, a Bishop and Pope of Rome, The Inscription Angelis
Ecclesiarum, To the Angels of the Churches, is expounded thus, Praedicatoribus
populorum, To the Preachers of the people. So that in the judgment of these
Divines the Inscription comprehends all those who are sharers in this title of
Office, and are by it differenced, not one from the other joined in the same
Commission of Embassage, but from the Church or people unto whom in the name of
the Lord they are to perform the Office of Angels or Messengers. Thus much is
indeed granted by our Hierarchists, though with some additionall fancies of
their own; for they tell us, that Episc by div. right p. 122.
All the Presbyters of these Churches were Angels in respect of their
Ministry, yet (forsooth) one was the Angel in respect of his fixed
superiority. There were thousands of stars in this firmament of the Asian
Churches, there were but seven of the first magnitude. We hear them say so,
but shill the question is how this is proved, and the assertion made good. In
which regard to this their peremptory assertion, it were sufficient for me to
give at present no other answer, then that short marginall animadversion which
Fascic. ro^um expet sol. 104.
Orthuinus Gratius gives to that silly Friar William of Woodeford (who being
pressed by the authority of Hierome and Armachanus) alleged by Wickliffe,
that before schisms did arise in the Church, matters were governed by common
counsel of the Presbyters, which in that respect were all equal, returned
thereto this answer, That schism began in the Apostles days, (as it is
manifest in the Scripture) He Dicit in Scriptura patere sed nibil probat.
says it is manifest in the Scripture, but proves nothing. And Mirum ubi
legerit author de illo schismate. I wonder where the Author reads concerning
that schism. By the way observe that from this simple Ignoramus the
forementioned Friar, (who undertook to write against Wickliffe, that he might
the better engratiate himself in the eyes of that persecuting Prelate Thomas
Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury) Dr Downham and Bishop Hall our Dr Downhams
Sermon at La^beth, p. 88, 89. Bishop Hall, Episc. by div. right, p. 192.
Hierarchicall Rabbines for learning have borrowed that simple evasion, as if
that Hierome using the phrase of the Apostle, by which he sets forth the
schisms and divisions which were in his time in the Church of Corinth, did
point out the time when this Prelation of a Bishop above the Presbyters began,
to wit, in the Apostles days. Which how vain and weak it is, yea, how
inconsistent with and contradictory unto what is by Hierome delivered in those
places, is sufficiently discovered by sundry Chamier. Panstrat. tom. 2. l. 9.
de Occ Pont. c. 5. n. 16. Whitak cont. 4. q. 1. c. 3. seci 29. Wall. Mess.
dissert. de presh. and episc. cap. 4. p. 242. ad p. 249
Divines; to whom I refer the Reader, if he please to peruse the quotations
in the margent. I return to the application and pressing of the forementioned
short marginall animadversion; and would feign know of our Prelaticall men
where does the holy Ghost intimate this Hierarchy of Angels, some Angels
ministerially, others Angels by a fixed superiority. Where does St John in all
this vision give the least hint of such a distinction of Stars, that some are
stars of the first, some of the second or third magnitude? Or where in all
the Scripture is the name of stars restrained unto Bishops. Is it in St Judes
Jude ver. 13.
(...), wandering stars to whom is reserved blackness of darkness for ever:
or is it afterward in the Revelation, when the holy Ghost tells us the Rev.
12.4.
dragon did draw down the third part of the stars with his tail? Do not our
Prelatists reason almost as wisely and as solidely from this place and notion
for their dignity and superiority of order and of power, as once the Canonist
Hostiensis, and after him Andreas Siculus Barbatias desiring to curry favor
with Bessarion, did, who undertook to prove the Divine Institution of Cardinals
from that place of Scripture, 1 Samuel 2.
Domini sunt cardines terrae. And albeit the Lawyer thought he gave a witty
reason for his conceit, because as the door in its motion is guided by the
hinges whereunto it is fastened, and whereupon it hangs, so the Church of Rome
is governed by the counsel of Cardinals, yet De Invent. rer. lib. 4. c. o. p.
290 edit. Basi^. an. 1555 vide, nonsecus isti Iurisconsulti aliquoties
detorquent sacras literas quo volunt, ac suto^es solent sordidas dentibus
extende^e pelles.
Polydore Virgil gave him this censure, which by the bare change of the name of
the persons censured I shall apply to our present purpose. These Lawyers, said
he, these Prelatists, say I, stretch Scripture as they please, just as the
Shoemaker does his leather with his teeth, to fit it to his Last.

2. It is granted by Bishop Hall as an undoubted truth, that Loc. cit. p. 122.
in each of these Churches there were many Presbyters, as for instance that of
Ephesus; yet but one Angel, says he, that is to say, but one Bishop. But soft
and fair my Lord. The same place of Scripture which makes it unquestionable
that there were many Presbyters in the Church of Ephesus, does as apparently
declare the plurality of Bishops, and so the identitie of Bishops both in name
and office. Thus much is yielded by the same p. 119.
Patron of Episcopacie, that the Elders which Paul sent for from Ephesus to
Miletum, and to whom his speech is directed, were indeed Bishops, which he does
grant from those words of the Apostle; Whereof the holy Ghost has made you
Bishops. But forsooth they were not all Bishops of Ephesus, but of different
Territories, of far dispersed charges, and how is all this proved; we hear
St Paul say; Ye all amongst whom I have gone preaching the Kingdom of God:
very magisterially, and tanquame cathedra Episcopali, Episcopal dictates out
of an Episcopal chair, to which all must yield an implicit faith, and blind
belief. Belike St Paul held now an Archiepiscopall visitation, and albeit the
Archbishops court were to be held at Miletum, yet from Ephesus by some
Gentleman Apparitor, or other the Monitory Summons or Processes were sent forth
to the several Diocesses -- Risum teneatis amici. Who can almost refrain
laughter at the very hearing or reading of such ridiculous conceits. By the way
let us take notice of one thing, that to this Archiepiscopall visitation not
the inferior Ministers, but the Diocesan Bishops themselves were summoned and
cited. The evasion is so weak that I am loath to spend time and tire your
patience in refutation of it. Only give me leave to say somewhat to it. 1. Had
these Presbyters been Bishops of far dispersed charges in Asia and different
Territories, the holy Evangelist and Historian would rather have said (...) Of
the Churches, then (...) Of the Church. We find the Apostle in the like cases
using the plural number. The Churches of Asia, Romans 6.19. The Churches of God
in Judea, 1 These. 2.14. The Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.1. 2. Though it be
not said expressly that these Elders or Presbyters were only the Presbyters
of the Church of Ephesus, yet the circumstances of the text will clearly (as I
conceive with submission to better judgments) evince it to be so. The
Evangelist St Luke describing Paul's journey to Jerusalem, says Act. 20.17.
and seq.
we came to Miletum, For Paul determined to sail by Ephesus that he might not
tarry in Asia, for be hastened if it were possible for him to be at Jerusalem
at Pentecoste. And sending from Miletum unto Ephesus he called together the
Elders of the Church. To these Elders of the Church he does appeal as
witnesses of his fidelity and industry in preaching the word, in serving the
Lord with all humility, tears and in many temptations. Now consider where was
the place of Paul's abode and residence amongst them, was it not Ephesus? the
former passages of the history tell us so in plain terms; that there he Chap.
19.10.
continued by the space ^f two years, so that all they which dwelt in Asia
heard the word of the Lord Jesus both Jews and Greeks. Ephesus you see was
the place of Paul's residence in Asia, here he gathered the Church, in the
planting and settling of which he continued amongst them by the space of two
years, It being the place in which the Church was gathered must be also the
place of residence of the Elders of the Church. 3. If Interpreters either
Greek or Latin, Ancient or Modern be consulted, we shall find them all
accounting these Presbyters to be Presbyters of no other Church then the Church
of Ephesus. By the clear evidence of which place sundry Divines of all sorts
do prove the Identitie and Indistinction of Bishops and Presbyters both in
name and Office in sacred Writ. In which regard I cannot but wonder with what
face our Pretenders to Antiquity for the distinction of their Order from a
Presbyter, do venture to obtrude so novell a fancy on their Readers and
seduced followers. For of how green antiquity are Buckeride and Barlow with
their follower Dr Hall, that their Dictates must bear sway against the current
of Interpreters, not one Divine of note being produced (for ought that I could
yet read or hear) in favor of this ridiculous evasion, which was I am
persuaded never heard of in the Christian Church, till of late Hieromonarchici
nostri, (as Spalatensis styles the Papalines, and we may not unfitly style out
Prelates) vented these their dreams, that by these their groundless fancies
they might the better uphold their own honor and dignities; So that we may
justly retort the Proverb applied by one of them to Mr Brightmans conjectures,
on their own heads. Thus the bells say what some hearers think. 4. There is no
color of reason to obtrude on us such an interpretation of those words, Ye all
amongst whom I have gone preaching the Kingdom of God, as if it must be
understood of Paul's traveling from Diocese to Diocese, for the Text affords
in plain terms another, the Apostle puts them in mind what he had done, that
he. Act 20.20.
had taught them and preached amongst them (...) publicly and from house to
house.

3. Albeit the Inscription be in the singular number (...), To the Angel, yet
that does not prove it to be spoken unto, or meant of one individual person.
He spoke a truth who said, Baines Diocesans Trial, page 15.
Seven singular stars may signify seven unites, whether singular or
aggregative: Seven pluralities of person who are so united as if they were one.
And it is frequent in Scripture to note by an unity an united multitude. Now
for as much as this is gainsaid by our Hierarchists as a ridiculous evasion; I
will therefore confirm it against their contradiction, and endeavor to make
it evident that under one many may be, many are meant. This is the language and
usual style of the holy Ghost. 1. In visionall speeches Daniel in the
narration and interpretation of the Kings dream faith to Nebuchadnezzar. Dan.
2.38.
Thou art this head of gold, after thee shall arise another Kingdom inferior
unto thee. The speech is directed to Nebuchadnezzar in his own person, yet
under one many are meant, for not he alone but all the Kings precedent and
succeeding in that Monarchy are the head of gold, as Interpreters do
unanimously consent. It is said in the verse following, After thee shall
another Kingdom arise, yet all that have any insight in history both sacred
and profane do know that the Persian Monarchy, which is the Kingdom there
spoken of, did not arise immediately upon the death of Nebuchadnezzar the
Great, to whom this dream, and interpretation of it is made known, but upon
the death of Belshazzar his Grandchild. So that under the Person of one, many
of the same order and degree are here necessarily to be understood. The Lord
represents to Chap. 1.18, 19, 20, 21. If any desire more instances of this
kind, for the confirmation of this, I refer him to the reply to Dr Downhams
defense, part 1. l. 3. c. ^. sect. 7.
Zechariah in a vision sour horns which did scatter Judah and Jerusalem, and
four Carpenters which were sent to fray them away, and to repair Jerusalem.
Will any sober man hence conclude the Persons which scattered Judah were
individually four, no more nor no less, and the Repairers of Jerusalem just
four and no more? yet this inference will hold as well as that which our
Prelates make from this vision in the Revelation. Christ holds in his hand
seven stars, which seven stars are the Angels of the Churches, therefore
the Angels of the Churches are just seven and no more. They may with as much
color of reason and truth extort another conclusion also thus: Christ holds
in his hand seven stars of the first magnitude and none but them, which seven
stars are the Angels by a fixed superiority, Therefore Christ has care of
the direction and protection of none but the Bishops, which are the stars of
the first magnitude, the Angels by a fixed superiority. Take one instance more.
When the Apostle speaks of that grand Apostate Antichrist, he speaks of him
in the singular number, ^ These. 2.3.
That man of sin, the son of perdition, now albeit the Bell tib. 3. de Romans
Pent. ^. 2. K. Secudus locus Graeci contrabunt significationem ad unam tem
certam, ut (...) hominem in co^muni, (...) hominem singularem fignificet. Et
sane mirum est nullum adversariorum, qui tamen jact ant linguarum peritiam, hoc
animadvertisse.
Romish Cardinal do from the article prefixed, when he is st^^ed (...), that
maen of sin, the son of perdition, that wicked one, plead for a restriction
to one individual person, and wonder at it that none of the adversaries do
take notice of it, notwithstanding all their skill in the tongues, of which
they so much boast; yet how ridiculous a conceit this is you all know. Our
Polemicall Divines have sufficiently discovered the falsehood and vanity of
this assertion; of which I may truly say as our learned Fulk does in his reply
to the Rhemists (who trod in the steps of their fellow Jesuit forementioned)
in 2 These. 2. ver. 3. annot ^.
This is so false that young children, which have scarce tasted of the Greek
tongue, are able to disprove it by infinite Examples.

2. In other places of Scripture where the speech is directed unto one, yet
under that one others of the same order and society are meant. Our Savior
Christ said to Peter, Matthew. 16.19.
I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; though at Rome
under the Popes nose, in a conclave of Cardinals, the limitation of this to
Peter's person (as Christ's Vicar) would be readily embraced, yet you all know,
Reverend and Beloved, how repugnant this is to Scripture: in which regard he
would be hooted at, as having a Pope in his belly, that should in any Reformed
Church confine the power of the Keys to Peter's person: Yea, de rep eccles.
lib. 1. cap. 7. n. 3.
Antonius de Dominis will tell us, that it would be a monstrous thing indeed to
deny that our Lord did there direct his speech to Peter, and promise him the
Keys, which he did after wards infallibly confer on him; But it would be
monstri majoris simile, more monstrous by far, so to limit this promise and
the execution thereof unto Peter, as that it should imply an exclusion of the
rest of the Apostles. Hence diverse of the Fathers have observed that there
under the Person of One, to wit, Peter, to whom the speech is primarily
directed, is an united multitude, the Church, to be understood. Thus Austin
sundry times speaks. Tract 50. in Evang. Johan. Judas malus Corpus malorum
significat, quomodo Petrus corpus bonorum, corpus ecclesiae, imo corpus
ecclesiae, sed in bonis: nam si in Petro non esset sacramentum Ecclesiae, non
^i diceret Dominus, Tibi dabo claves regni ^oelorum.
Wicked Judas signifies the body of the wicked, as Peter the body of the good,
the body of the Church which consists of the good, otherwise the Lord would
not say to him^ I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. And
elsewhere, Tract. 124. in idem Evang. Ecclesiae Petrus Apostolus prop^er
Apostolatus sui primatum gerebat figurata generalitate personam. Quad enim ad
ipsum proprie pertinet, natura unus homo erat, gratia unus Christianus,
abundantiore gratia ur us idemq, primus Apostolus: sed quando et dietum, Tibi
dabo claves regni coelorum, universam significabat ecclesiam.
Peter in respect of himself was properly by nature one man, by grace one
Christian, by a more abundant grace one and the same a chief Apostle. But when
it was said to him, I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
he did signify the whole Church, etc. So he, more testimonies might be
produced, but these are sufficient; he that desires to see this truth
confirmed by more suffrages of the ancients may consult Loc. cit. n. 4. and seq.
Spalatensis, and receive abundant satisfaction. As then in the forementioned
speech of our Savior under one, a collected body of Apostles and Believers is
understood, so here by one Angel is meant the united body of Angels, and what
is spoken unto one is to be understood as spoken to all of them, as by their
place they are Angels. For the denomination is so used here that it points out
rather the function then the person, as our industrious and learned Country
man Mr Medit. in Apoc. p. 9. edit. Land an. 1587.
Fox has observed. To pass from this Instance to another. When the Apostle
speaking concerning the usefulness of the Scripture, that 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
it is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness, adds this as a principal end of all, that the man of God
might be perfect, is this, think you, spoken concerning the perfecting of one
man of God alone, or of all that are such by their place and calling? When the
same Apostle gives this charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.11.
Thou O man of God flee these things: does he not in the person of Timothy lay
this charge upon all the Ministers of the Gospel, who share in that honorable
title and function? What shall we say then to those which would make us to
believe that what is here spoken to the Angel (a name of Office common to all
the Ministers of Jesus Christ) is to be understood as spoken unto one, a Bishop
and him that sits in the throne. With the same strength of argument, and as
much color of reason might a Romanist infer, because the Lord says in the
singular number of the Priest: Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his
mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of hosts. And Deuteronomy. 17.1^
The man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken to the judgment of
the Priest, that stands to minister before the Lord, that man shall dye.
Though all Priests are Angels or Messengers of the Lord in respect of their
Ministry, yet there is one Priest that is the Messenger or Angel by a fixed
superiority, and at his mouth you must enquire, to wit, the Pope, you are not
(I know) ignorant that thus some have argued, and what our Divines have
answered them their writings do declare; both Dr Reynolds in his Chap. 6. div.
^^ p. 252.
Conference with Heart, and the learned Frenchman Sum. cont. part. 1. q. 8. p.
127, 128.
Rivetus in confutation of Bailie the Jesuit.

3. Let us consider sundry passages in the Epistles themselves; into the bowels
of which if we diligently look we shall find that albeit the inscription be
in the singular number, To the Angel; yet the Angel was more then one distinct
and individual person, and that the denomination is not to be taken (...)
Singularly or Personally, but (...) collectively including an united multitude.
In the Epistle to Thyatira the Inscription is as in the rest in the singular
number, yet afterward the holy Ghost says thus, Revel. 2.^4. (...) etc
But unto you I say and to the rest in Thyatira. In which words the Church of
Thyatira is distinguished, as Habes hic duas ecclesie Thyatirensis parts,
quarum una est Pastorum and Praesidem^u^. Ecclesiae collegium; altera reliqui
corpor is (...) Gers But drssert. de guh. Eccl. p. 203.
Gersom Bucerus has observed, into two parts, The one includes the College
of Pastors and Presidents of the Church; the other the rest of the members,
both are set forth in the Plural number (...) unto you, answering to, To the
Angel; (...) To the rest, answering unto (...) To the Church in Thyatira. The
speech directed to the Angel of the Church of Sardis is in the singular number,
Chap. 3.1.
Thou have a name that thou live, and art dead, compare this with that which
follows, and you shall find that what is spoken of one is meant of many, and
hereby is expressed the general state of the whole Church of Sardis both
Ministers and people; for it follows, Ib. v. 4.
Thou have a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments.
The greatest part of both Ministers and people had but the name of an outward
profession, by which they seemed to live, but in hearts they denied the power
of godliness and so were dead; amongst them all there were but a few that were
living members, sincere and holy. When the Lord Jesus says in the Epistle to
Philadelphia, Chap. 3.11.
Hold fast that which thou have, that no man take away thy crown: If this be an
exhortation to the Bishop alone to constancy in the truth, and a promise made
to none but him, belike none shall wear a crown in heaven but he that has
worn a Mitre on earth, and rather parted with his Mitre here, then with the
truth of Christ. The Epiphonematicall sentence which is added at the end of
each Epistle; He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches, does clearly evince it, that by the Angel is to be
understood the whole Church in all its members. I will add but one instance
more: When the Angel of the Church of Ephesus is blamed, Chap. 2.4, 5.
I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first love, and this
reprehension is backed with a Commination, I will come unto thee quickly, and
will remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent: Can any man
in sober reason imagine that this is the reproose of, and threatening against
one man alone, and that God would for the Apostasy or remissness of love to
the truth in one Prelate cast off a whole Church? We find no such thing upon
record in the whole Book of God, or any other history. That of Hom ^. in Apoc.
Moveb^ candelabrum tuum i.e dispergam populum pro peccatis.
Austin is most consonant to the truth, who does thus paraphrase the
Comminatory sentence, I will remove thy Candlestick. i. e. I will scatter the
people for their sins. In which regard the same Father does afterward tell
us, Angelos ecclesiam dicit, in quibus duas parts, i. e. bonorum and malorum,
ostendit, ut laus ad bonos, Increpatio ad malos dtrigatur. Sicut dominus in
Evangelto, Omne praepesitorum corpus u^um servum dixit, beatum and nequam, quam
venient dominus ipse dividet. Id. ibid.
He calls the Church the Angels, in which Church he shows there were two
parts good and bad, that the praise may be directed to the good, the reproof
to the bad. Thus he, with more to the same purpose. The same truth is
delivered by Arethas and Andreas Bishops of Caesarea Cappadocia, the most
ancient Interpreters of this Revelation. (...).
He calls the Angel of Ephesus the Church that was in Ephesus. And both
confirm this Interpretation from sundry passages in these Epistles: From whence
Sit ergo boc fixum -- hoc argumentum ab Angetis qui Episcopos denotant, nibit
facere ad pr^bandum Episcopos tum suisse in urbibus singulos. Wall. Mess.
dissert. 1. de presb. and epise c. 4. p 184.
Salmasius (in whom the Reader if he please may see this last quotation at
large) draws this conclusion, Let this therefore be an undoubted truth, that
this argument from the Angels makes nothing to prove that there was but one
Bishop in a Church or city. Thus much of the third argument, I proceed to
another.

4. By the Angel in this place is not to be understood a Bishop in Order,
Office, and power of Jurisdiction, distinguished from, and superior to a
Presbyter, for there was no such distinction or superiority settled in the
Church of Christ before, nor in St John's time, nor immediately after the
Apostles days. The truth of this negative assertion I shall endeavor to
confirm by these ensuing arguments.

First, in the Word of God, we find no such difference or imparity in Order
and Power between a Bishop and a Presbyter, as is pretended by our Prelates. In
prosecuting of which undertaken task I will as briefly as I may consider what
is delivered by a late Patron of Episcopacy, who tells us that Episc. by div.
right. p. 91.
This imparity of Government and Episcopal Jurisdiction was founded by Christ,
erected by his Apostles, both by their practice and recommendation. In the
proof of which position when he had spent sundry pages, he concludes with a
great deal of assurance that he has carried all down before him, saying, Page
127.
I am for my part so confident of the Divine Institution of the Majoritie of
Bishops above Presbyters, that I dare boldly say, there are weighty points of
faith, which have not so strong evidence in holy Scriptures. We hear him
speaking with so much confidence, as if he had not only taken the Oath in the
late Canons, but sworn unto, or at leastwise in heart, and by his pen
subscribed to the Si quis dixerit in Ecclesia catholica inon esse Hierar biam
divina ordinatione institutam, quae constat ex Episcopis and Ministris Anathema
sit. Seis. 7. Can. 6.
Anathematisme of the Tridentine Conventicle, in which this Hierarchy of
Bishops and Presbyters is said to be of Divine institution, and an Anathema
denounced against those that shall question or deny it. Yet notwithstanding the
confidence of those Bishops and Friars at Trent, and of our English
Hierarchists how far this was from being embraced as an article of faith
Friar Peter will inform us. History of the Counc of Trent. lib. 8. page 743.
The sixth Anathematisme, says he, was much noted in Germany, in which an
article of faith was made of Hierarchy: which word and signification thereof
is alien, not to say contrary to the Scriptures: and though it was somewhat
anciently invented, yet the Author is not known; and in case he were, yet is
he an hyperbolicall writer, not imitated in the use of that word, nor of others
of his invention, by any of the ancients, and following the style of Christ our
Lord, and of the holy Apostles and Primitive Church it ought to be named not
Hierarchy, but Hierodiaconia, or Hierodantia.

I will therefore, because the Bishop, whom I intend to chase, runs this way,
follow him, and 1. Consider whether our Savior Christ laid any foundation for
this Episcopal Jurisdiction. 2. Look to the practice of the Apostles in which
they say this fabric and frame of Church government was erected. 3. View
their writings, whether in them there is any such distinction of Order and
Power between a Bishop and a Presbyter.

1. As for that foundation which our Prelatists say was laid by Christ, placing
his Apostles above his other Disciples, the Twelve above the Seventie, it has
been sufficiently discovered by sundry Divines (in which regard I shall have
cause to say the less) to be sandy and weak, altogether unable to bear the
weight of that fabric which is by them hereupon erected; yea, some of their
own friends and sticklers in the cause have confessed it, or at leastwise
yielded that which does overthrow it. For, 1. Agnoscit Saravia Septuaginta
discipulos Evang listarum dignitate eminuisse, ac proinde Ordinariis Episcopis
vocationis gradu a^tecelluisse. Gers. Bucer p. 515. ex Sar. de Min. Ev. grad
cap. 4.
Saravia (a professed patron of Episcopacy and Antagonist to Beza, whom our
Prelates look on as their back-friend) does acknowledge that the Seventie
Disciples were Evangelists, and in that respect by the degree of their calling
superior to Ordinary Bishops. How then is there I pray you any foundation for
the imparitie between a Bishop and a Presbyter laid by Christ in this fact of
his choosing Twelve Apostles, and Seventie Disciples, when these Seventie whom
the Presbyters are said to succeed were superior to Bishops themselves? 2.
Peracto hoc primo munere, post quam reversi sunt gaudentes, non legimus eos
amplius a Christo missos in Ministerium verbimeq, novam ill is suisse
replicara^ co^missionem, etc. de rep. Eccl. lib. ^. c. 3. n. 4. Quam
confirmationem quedq^, mandatum, and generalem missionem, quia a Christo factam
72. discipulis non invenio, ne^^possum affirmare in ipsis suisse direct,
proxime and immediate institutum ordinem presbyteralem, etc Id. ^b number. 4.
Spalatensis has observed that these Seventie Disciples were not instituted by
our Savior for the perpetual government of the Church, but only that they
had a temporary Commission Luke 10.
to go before him into every City and place whither he himself would come,
which was not renewed to them after their return with joy, because the devils
were made subject unto them, as the Commission (given to the Apostles at first
with a limitation, Match. 10.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, neither enter into the Cities of the
Samaritanes, but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel) was after
his resurrection repeated and enlarged, Match. 28.
Go teach all nations. In which regard, says he, I cannot, affirm that in
them (the 70. Disciples) was the Order of Presbyters instituted directly and
immediately. Christ's election of the Seventie Disciples affords you see by the
confession of the Archbishop of Spalato himself no sure footing for the
subjection of Presbyters to Bishops; though he would fain claim an institution
of Bishops in the Commission given to the Apostles. But thirdly the Enchir.
Christ. relig. in Conc. Col. p. 169. de sacr. ord. edit. Paris^an 1558. Non est
tamen putan^um Episcopos alium in Ecclesia ordinem a Presbyteris constituisse.
N^m in primitiva Ecclesia iidem erant Presbyteri and Episcopi, quod Apostolorum
Petri and Pauli epistolae div^^ quoque, Hierony nus, ac caeteri sere omnes
veteres ecclesiassici scriptores a^estantur.
Canons of Coleine speak home to the point, and in plain terms deny the
consequence of this, or that hereupon we should imagine that Bishops are a
distinct Order from Presbyters. Albeit, say they, Christ did institute twelve
Apostles, in whose place the Bishops are, and afterward chose seventie
Disciples whose place in the Church the Presbyters do hold. Yet we must not
think that Bishops did constitute in the Church an order different from
Presbyters. For in the Primitive Church Bishops and Presbyters were the same,
which the Epistles of the Apostles Peter and Paul, St Hierome also, and almost
all other ancient Ecclesiastic all writers do testify. In which regard our
learned Junius spoke a truth, and no more but the truth, when he told
Bellarmine, Quam patres Episcopos Apostolis, Presbyteros 7^. Discipulis
succedere affirmaverunt, nunquam d^xerunt ex institute Christi succedere. Quia
nunquam institu^t Christus ut Aposto is secundum gradum in Ecclesia succed^^
etur, quae res si fuisset sam Apostolatus surctio ordinaria dicenda suisset.
Hoc autem verirati and rationi adversatur, Omnes Dei servi in dectrina Apost
olerum successerunt, in gradum little ne mine^^ adoptavit Deus. Sed and 70.
Discipulorum vocatio fuit extraordinaria, postea in ordinariam ^raducti sunt ut
Episcopi and Presbyteri essent in it is ecclesiis, quibus sunt attributi. Quomode
ergo inquio dixetunt Dos illos succedere? ^empe ^umana ac non divina
institutione, analogica ratione quadam, non autem propria, imitatione communi
quadam, non fingulari necessita e ecclesiae. Succedere igitur ex simili non
^utem pari, hos i^^is dixere Patres, qu a gradus in Ec^lesiae non pares, sed
similes, non pleue sed quodommedo ^bservari putabant alii posse, ^^ii oportere.
Siqua autem similitudo est, tantum secu^dum quid and remotissima tamen fim^^uco
est; si vere vera, si imaginary imaginaria. Haec vero secundum quid remota est
and imaginaria simiti^^do, ex qua siqui absolute concludunt al solute fallunt^
^un. controv. 5 lib. 1. cap. 14 not. 15.
When the Fathers said the Bishops succeed the Apostles, and the Presbyters
succeed the Seventie Disciples, they never said they did succeed one the other
by Christ's Institution, but by humane no Divine Ordinance. They said they did
succeed them, because some thought, there might be the like degrees after a
sort, though not fully the like, be observed in the Church. Yet this likeness
is but in some respect a remote and imaginary fimilitude, from which, says he,
if any do infer an absolute conclusion (that it is so, that it ought to be
so) they do absolutely deceive themselves and others. This is the sum of
Junius more large and satisfactory answer. By all which has been said the
Reader may easily discern on how uncertain grounds the faith of the Hierarchy
is built. Of much more which might be spoken in this subject, I will add only
one thing. Our Saviors act incorporating the Apostles into one collegrate body
(as we may style them) investing all and each of them with equal power,
conferring a Superiority or Primacy to none of them above his fellows, does
plainly evince that he laid a foundation for, and gave a plat-forme of an
Aristocraticall not Monarchick Government in the Church. The Monarchy he has
reserved to himself as his peculiar Prerogative; but those to whom he gave a
fixed superiority (as our Hierarchists speak) and commission during term of
life, were all conjoined in an Aristocracy. If any desire a reason why our
Savior Christ was pleased in his Apostles to settle an Aristocraticall
Government, and lay down this as a standing plat-forme for them and their
successors to follow; the Archbishop of Spalato shall inform him, in whom we
have a full and satisfactory reason: Derep. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 12. n. 3.
Albeit, says he, it is true that in humane Commonwealths a Monarchy, but
especially that which is tempered by laws is best, yet in the Church Christ
did not think it fit that way should be given to a Monarchy, though never so
well tempered amengst those that are his Ministers, this he judged to be worst
of all in the Church. Observe I pray you his reason, for it carries a great
deal of weight with it. Salvator ipse satis praevidit quam perniciosa foret in
Ecclesiae haec Monarchia, and quam sacile in tyrannidem illa posset erumpere,
ideoq, ut tyrannis haec vitaretur usus est fimilitudine servorum. etc. --
Sciebat enim Monarchiam banc Ecclesiasticam surtim introductam ad tyrannidem
apertum tandem transitum facturam. Id. ibid. number. 4.
Our Savior himself did well foresee how dangerous it would prove in the
Church; that if once a Monarchy did creep in by stealth it would open a
manifest way to tyranny to which it would degenerate. So Antonius de Dominis,
well known to be a learned and great Patron of Episcopacie. As this reason
given by him serves to overthrow the Papal Monarchy over the whole Church,
so it does effectually conclude against an Archiepiscopall over a Provincial,
an Episcopal Sovereignty over a Diocesan Church. For indeed there are not many
steps between a Pope and a Prelate. Stapleton the Jesuit (if the (...) have
rightly quoted him) has confessed it Qui gravid a est ex Archiepiscopo facise
parere potest Papam. Stapleton.
an easio matter for an Archibishop, impregnated with an ambitious domineering
spirit, to bring forth a Pope; and the practices of our later Prelates have
made it evident to all the world, that a Diocesan Monarch may quickly become a
tyrannical petti-Pope. In a word, suppose it should be granted that the
thrones promised by our Matt. 19.28.
Savior, are thrones Apostolical, and that thereby is meant that power of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which Christ communicated to them his
Extraordinary Delegates and Ambassadors (which yet is very questionable,
Chemnit. har. Ev. c 132. I ansen. conc. Ev. c. 100. Cajet. Par.
diverse Divines carrying it another way, yea, L. cit. cap. 11^=^3.
Spalatensis affirms the quite contraty, that Christ there speaks not a word
of the throne in the Church) yet what is all this to an Episcopal throne, or to
the advancing of a Prelate above the rest of the Presbyters? What affinity is
there between an Apostolical and Episcopal throne, between an Aristocraticall
Government which Christ founded in his Apostles, and a Monarchical Sovereignty
which Prelates have usurped. We read indeed in Scripture of (...), etc. Rev.
13.
a throne which the Dragon did give to the beast on whose head are names of
blasphemy, but we read not any where of an Apostolical throne derived to a
Bishop. True it is as the Patron of Episcopacie has told us that in the
ancients there is mention of (...), The Bishops throne. (...), Orat. 7.
Gregory Nazianzen indeed so styles his Episcopal dignity to which he was
advanced, but withal, he says, he could not well tell whether he should call
it a tyrannical throne or hierarchicall; in his next Oration he calls it in
plain terms Orat. 28.
(...), a tyrannical pre-eminence, and sets down both there in prose, and
afterward in Carm. de vita su^ oper Graecol tom 2. p. 24. and seq edit. Par
san. 1630 and Carm. de div. vitae gen^ad pseudoepisc.
verse the bloody contentions and divisions which the ambition of Bishops
affecting this Episcopal throne caused both in Church and State. I would the
same were not verified in our days, and that we had not cause with him to
complain. (...). Alas for our great sorrows and occasions of grief. Thus much
for the foundation of Episcopal Jurisdiction pretended to be laid by Christ
himself.

We are in the next place to enquire whether it has in the practice of the
Apostles and their recommendation any more solid and firm erection; The only
instance of this, that is produced, is the charge of the Apostle in his
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, wherein in my understanding (says our
forementioned Page 105.
Patron of Episcopacie) the Apostle speaks so home to the point, that if he
were now to give direction to an English Bishop, how to demean himself in his
place, he could not speak more fully to the execution of his sacred Office. In
which assertion we may se^ what is one special ground of this great
confidence; Those acts and offices which have been by degrees limited to the.
Bishops as distinguished from Presbyters, and granted by the Custom of the
Church, those are singled out as if then by the Apostle limited and restrained
to the Bishop. Amidst all that is here spoken out of these Epistles, we have
not the least mention of those qualifications which St Paul requirech in a
Bishop; It is not the (...) but (...) not the work of a Bishop, but the
dignity and feigned Sovereignty for which they now contend and fight, however
they would feign bear the world in hand that Episcopacie is a sacred Order of
Divine and Apostolical institution; so that we may truly apply that to ours
which sometimes Martin Duther first, and Marlorat after said concerning Popish
Prelates; Perinde sunt qui statum episcopalem statum jactitant persectionis,
quum interim nthil agant, quam Satrap as pompa agere, equitare bellos caballos,
nisi quod interdum templa consecrant and aras. Marl in 2 Pet. 2.18. ex Luth.
Like unto them (that speak great swelling words of vanity) are they which
boast that Episcopacie is a state of Perfection, when in the mean time the
only thing they aim at is to be equal to Peers in pomp, to ride on stately
horses, only now and then their Lordships do consecrate a Temple or an Altar.
For, if we should look for the same conditions and qualifications in many of
ours, which St Paul commands to be in those Bishops there mentioned by him, we
shall find that we are Hujusmedi conditiones siquu exact consideret, and
conferat cum nostrae aetatis episcopis, videbitur in novo orb, and in
peregrina aliqua ecclesia, quae Christum and Apostolos penitus ignoraverit, ve
sari, Salm. in Tit. 1. disp. 1. ad 4^^^ dub.
in a new world (as Salmeron the Jesuit once spoke) and in a strange Church
that never heard of Christ and his Apostles. This by the way. From all that is
culled out of these Epistles, the argument by which they must prove Episcopacie
to have been erected by the Apostle labors with an usual fallacy, a
shameful begging of the question. For first of all Timothy and Titus have been
sufficiently un-bishopped, not only by him who has written a particular
treatise in that name, but by all that have waded into this controversy,
Domestic and Foreign Divines, against English and Romish Hierarchists,
neither has there been any sacrilege committed by those which have
unbishopped them, but they have been restored to the Dignity of Evangelists,
from which the Prelates have sacrilegiously degraded them, that so they might
on the ruins of the forementioned Evangelists honor build up their
Episcopal Sovereignty. I might be large in proving this, that Timothy and
Titus were Evangelists, but the work is already sufficiently done by others;
Only, I will (least our Hierarchists should say that this is the assertion of
none but their opposites) put them in mind what Video Timetheum proculdubio
Episcopum generalem, i. e. Apostolum nulli certae sedi adbuc alligatum ab ipso
Paulo vocari suum adjutorem de rep Eccl. l. 2. ca. 3. n 60.
Antonius de Dominis has observed concerning Timothy, long after the first
Epistle written to him, even when the Apostle wrote his Epistle to the Romans
(which was about the time of his last journey to Jerusalem, as is clear by
paralleling those two places of Scripture, Romans 15.25. Act. 24.17, 18.) to wit,
that he was out of doubt a general Bishop, i. e. an Apostle, as yet confined
to no certain seat. So that if Spalatensis speak truth, his Episcopacie of
Ephesus is gone, for he was not yet says he confined to any certain See. And
as he was not then when Paul wrote that Epistle to the Romans, so neither was
he when the same Apostle wrote his second Epistle to Timothy himself.
Consider the charge which the Apostle there gives him; 2 Timothy 4.5.
Do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry; He does not
say, Do the work of a Bishop, then had our Prelatists some color for their
assertions, but of an Evangelist, now it is well known that the Apostle
sets the Ephesians. 4.
Evangelists as Persons whose calling was extraordinary above the standing and
ordinary governors of the Church, Pastors and Teachers. Those are by the
Apostle there styled Evangelists who did Evangelizare sine Cathedra, as in Ephesians
4.
Ambrose speaks, Preach the Gospel up and down not being confined to
Residence on any one peculiar charge. We have St Paul professing that on him
did lie the 2 Cor. 11.27.
Care of all the Churches, and often expressing his desire in his own person to
come to them to confirm and strengthen their faith, which when he could not do
he sent these two (not to mention any more) sometimes to one Church, sometimes
to another, but being now imprisoned at Rome, and having once answered before
Nero already, knowing that he Ac. ^0.
should never see their faces any more, as he said to those Elders of Ephesus,
that ^ Tim. 4.6.
the time of his departure was at hand, as he speaks to Timothy, he puts him
in mind of that Office whereto he was chosen in an extraordinary manner 1 Timothy
1.14. Chap. 4.14.
by the prophesies which went before concerning him, (For these extraordinary
Offices had an extraordinary manner of vocation also (as sundry Vide Bez. Aq.
Lyr. ^spenc. Soto major in loc.
Divines testify concerning Timothy, induced thereto by the forementioned
passages of Scripture) Do the work of an Evangelist, which what it was,
Eusebius does set forth at large, where he speaks of some who performed it
thus; Eusebius. Eccl. hist. ^i. 3 ca. 34. edit Easil. an. 1570.
they did preach Christ to those which had not as yet heard the word of faith,
they delivered unto them the holy Scriptures, ordained Pastors, and committed
unto them the charge of those which were newly received into the Church, and
then they did (...), pass over unto other countries and nations.

Whereas it is demanded, Bishop Hall, ^^^. cit. p. 118.
how should those Works of Ordination and execution of Church censures, Which
are constant and ordinary, and so consequently deriveable to all successions,
to the end of the World, be imposed upon a mere extraordinary agent; this is a
demand so senseless and void of all reason that I wonder it should fall from
the pen of so learned and grave a Divine as Dr Hall; but if he desire an
answer, I will return it him in the words of Saravia (a friend and
fellow-stickler in their cause) who will inform him; that Gradus ministrorom
evangelli itasu^sse did inctos ut majores includerent in erisrum ministeriae.
Sar. ad cap. 1. Bez. de div. gra. Min. Evang.
The degrees of the Ministers of the Gospel were so distinguished, that the
greater did include the Ministeries of the lesser. To the same purpose speaks
Cajetan ( in Ephesians. 4.) so that whatsoever were the acts of an ordinary and
standing Minister of the Gospel, the extraordinary Officer might perform them;
albeit the Ordinary officers might not presume with the execution of those
which belonged to the extraordinary.

2. If the Precepts given here in charge to Timothy and Titus concern a Bishop
alone, then does it concern a Bishop alone to ^ Tim. 4.2.
Preach the word in season and out of season, to Ch 1.6.1. Ep. Chap. 4.4.
stir up the gift of God that is in him, and not neglect it, to take heed to
himself and his doctrine; to flee covetousness, and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love. These with many other precepts belong
also to the Bishop and to him alone. If our adversaries in this cause shall
answer, that these are duties belonging to all Ministers wherein they and
Bishops do participate, but the other mentioned by them belong to a Bishop
distinct from a Presbyter; I shall return them the same reply which Gersom
Bucerus does to Dr Downham, Bucer. p. 283.
Quem istius distinctionis authorem proferemus? Who has taught us or them so
to distinguish; Surely the Apostle has not, for he makes not the least mention
of what belongs to Timothy as a Bishop, what to him as a Presbyter; but gives
all the commands promiscuously without any difference.

3. For as much as those charges given to Timothy and Titus are so much
insisted on, to prove their Episcopal Power, and consequently the Power and
Preeminence of Bishops above Presbyters by the Apostles practice and
recommendation, I will take into consideration some of those which are
material, and see what strength they afford unto the cause.

That command given by the Apostle to Timothy, Lay hands suddenly on no man,
and his appointing of Titus to ordain Elders in every city is strongly urged
by the sticklers for Episcopal Sovereignty, to prove that the Power of
Ordination was in their hands alone. Be there what Elders soever in Ephesus,
there hands without a Timothy will not serve to ordain, his without theirs
might, says Bishop Pa. 113.
Hall; very confidently, but under favor, and with respect to his gray hairs,
very weakly. Who sees not how weak an inference this is, Timothy is commanded
not to ordain any man suddenly, Therefore Timothy alone had power to ordain:
the Consequent may on just ground be denied. The President of a College may be
in a letter charged to take heed he admit not suddenly any man to a fellowship
in the College, will it therefore follow that the power of Election and
admittance is in the hands of the President alone. For as much as this answer
of those which are opposites to the Hierarchy, who say that Timothy and Titus
were to ordain, not by their own power alone, but by way of Partnership and
Society with the Presbytery, joining with them, is rejected by P. 115.
Bishop Hall, as being so palpable, and quite against the hair, that he cannot
think the authors of it can believe themselves: I will therefore endeavor to
confirm it, and make it good.

1. Since the Bishop will not believe what his Opposites say, I would desire to
know whether the Bishop does believe that St Paul would invest Timothy and
Titus with a greater power then he himself, or the Apostles did exercise. Now
it is clear that he did not assume the power of Ordination into his own
hands, to execute it by himself, but in it, though he were as President to
conduct and guide the action, did conjoyne with himself the Presbyters in the
Ordination of Timothy. For albeit in 1 Timothy 1.6.
one place he speaks of the imposition of his own hands alone, yet in Chap.
4.14.
another he mentions the Presbytery as concurring with him in it. Besides, the
Ordination of the Presbyters at Antioch, was not the act of Paul alone, but
Paul and Barnabas at least, or rather by comparing it with other places, Paul
and Barnabas with the Presbyters of Antioch, did join together in the
Ordination. The phrase runs in the plural number, Act. 14.236
when they had ordained them Elders, and had prayed with fasting. From whence
Gersom Bucerus does argue thus, Dosser. de gu^. Eccl. p 321.
If the Hierarchists do on just ground persuade us that Ordination does belong
to the Bishops, because the Apostles, whom the Bishops (as they say) do
succeed, did ordain, by the same reason may Presbyters also ordain, because
the 70. Disciples (whom the Presbyters do succeed, as they inform us) did
ordain. For Barnabas is by many Historians reckoned among the 70. Disciples.
If we look further into the actions of the Apostles, we shall find all their
Ordinations not by their own power, but by the joint consent and concurrence of
the Presbyters and Disciples. When Act. 1. (...). Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Act. c. 1.
Matthias was chosen into the room of Judas, Peter does all by the common
consent of the Disciples, nothing by his own authority, nothing like a Lord or
Prince in a commanding manner, as Chrysostom has observed. So in the
Ordination of the Chap. 6.
Deacons they carry themselves as Presbyters not as Apostles in the action,
permitting the election to the Disciples, concurring with the Presbyters in the
Ordination of them. Add hereunto one instance more out of the book of God. The
command of the holy Ghost concerning Barnabas and Saul, Chap. 13.^.
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have appointed them.
Paul had his call to the Apostleship immediately from the Lord some years
before this; and Barnabas his call to the Ministry, for both of them had
joined together in the work of Chap. 11.26.
Antioch, but being now by the Lords appointment to go to the Gentiles, and
preach the Gospel unto them (for that seems to be the great work here spoken
of by the Lord, as De rep hu. l. 2. c. ^. n. 13.
Spalatensis has rightly observed) they are now commanded to be in a solemn
manner set apart for this work. As the Lord himself by a voice from Heaven
gives them their immediate call, and Authoritative Designation for this Office,
so their External Designation to it they have by his appointment also, not
from any one particular person, either Bishop or Presbyter, but from all those
in the Church of Antioch which ministered to the Lord; for so St Luke sets it
down, Cha. 13, ^, 3.
As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them. And when they had
fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. From all
which by the practice of the Apostles, and by this voice of God from heaven, it
is clear, as far as I can apprehend, that the Power of Ordination or
Deputation to the Ministry, and work of the Lord therein, should not, does
not reside in the hand of any one particular person of what degree soever,
either Bishop or Presbyter, but of the collective body of Pastors and
Presbyters which minister unto the Lord.

2. If the Bishop will not believe his Opposites, such as Parker that proud
Schismaticke, or Cartwright and Ames with their ignorant and malecontented,
followers, some giddy corner-creeping upstarts, Page 60, 61. and 148.
(these are not mine but Bishop Halls titles of honor wherewith he does
bespatter them) if the judgment of Divines of greatest note in the Reformed
Churches will strike any stroke, we have them concurring in this, that The
Power of Ordination is in the hands of the Presbyters, not of any one alone;
that though these charges are given to Timothy and Titus in particular, yet
does it not follow that they alone could do it. I will only mention one of
many that might be alleged. When Pamelius from those places undertakes to
prove the Superiority of Bishops above Presbyters, Gonlartius answers him
thus, Annot. in Cyp. ep. 65.
The argument has not strength enough in it, Presbyters are ordained by
Bishops, therefore Bishops are above them. The ancient Bishops were ordained by
the Clergy and the people, if any shall thence infer, therefore the Clergy
and people are above the Bishops, Pamelius and his Scholars will deny the
Consequence, Ordination does not establish a degree or Preeminence, but only
shows and commends the Discipline of the Church.

3. Besides Protestants, we have Papists assenting to this truth, and
confessing 1. that Presbyters may ordain. Gloss. in did. 66 cap. Porro.
Johannes Semeca in his Gloss on the Canon Law, proves it by this, the
Apostles were but Presbyters not Bishops, yet they did ordain, and in their
days there was no difference between a Presbyter and a Bishop. And Antis San
ap. Apol. Episc. p. 165.
Altissiodorensis has delivered it, that if there were but three Presbyters in
the World, they might ordain one the other, a bishop and an Archbishop, and
gives this reason for it, Presbyters as well as Bishops do receive the Keys
of the Kingdom in their Ordination, for they are the successors of the
Apostles. 2. That Titus was left at Crete to ordain Presbyters no otherwise
then as a Moderator in the action, and as a Consul or Dictator are said to
create Consuls; because they are, they hold, the Comitia or Assembly and
meeting in which they are created. Thus In Tit. 1. d^sp. 1.
Salmeron, as I shall afterward show more at large out of him. By this time I
hope it does appear that this is not so palpable an elusion as the Bishop is
pleased to style it, but rather so manifest a truth, which the Bishop himself
nor all the mitred Fathers of that order are able to disprove. Thus much for
Ordination from those charges, I proceed to the next.

That precept of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.1^.
Against an Elder or Presbyter receive not an accusation, but before two or
three witnesses, is mainly insisted on by Dr Hall and others, to prove that
Timothy was invested with Episcopal Jurisdiction, and so to conclude the
Jurisdictionall Preeminence of a Bishop over the Presbyters, yet the weakness
of this argument has bin already sufficiently discovered, and the place
answered to the full by our Polemicall Divines which have disputed against
Papists, from whom our Hierarchists have borrowed most of their weapons which
they make use of in this quarrel. It shall be therefore sufficient for me to
mention the answer which is given by our Protestant Divines to their Romish
Opposites in this cause. First, our Countreyman Dr Whitakers answers
Bellarmine that this place proves not Timothies power over Presbyters, and from
this place observes that the power of Jurisdiction was not in the hand of one,
but of many that were endued with equal authority. Quod Timotheus jubetur non
temere ^ (...) admittere, hoc non probat Timotheum in Presbyteros potestatem
aut dominatum habuisse. Nam ex Apostoli mente (...) est crimen ad Ecclesiam
deserre, reum in judicium addacere, palam reprehendere, quod non modo
superiore^ possunt, sed aequales etiam atque inferiores. In Romana Repub.
Equites non de populo tantum sed etiam de Senatoribus and Patrioiis judicabant.
Et certe non videtur Timotheus tale consistorium aut forum babuisse, quale post
Episcopis in Ecclesia constitutum suit, nam hi Presbyteri non alii quam
Episcopi fuerunt ut ex Apostolo constat. -- Qualis haec authoritas sucrit ex eo
quod sequitur intelligi potest, Eos qui peccant coram omnibus (...), quod
aequales quoque possunt. Sic elim Ep^scopesiquis Presby^es aut Episcopus male
auauet, ad Senatum Ecclesias^icum aut Synoaum reserebant, ^umque si d^gnus
videretur ^ublico jud^cio damnabant, i. e. cut suspendebant, aut
excommunicabant, aut removebant. Whitak. co. t. ^^^.1. c. 2. sc. 16.
According to the meaning of the Apostle to receive an accusation is to
acquaint the Church with the crime, and to bring the offender into judgment,
openly to reprove which not only superiors, but equals also, yea and
inferiors may do. The Knights of Rome did not only judge the people, but the
Senators and Noblemen also if they were delinquents. Certainly Timothy had no
such Consistory or Court as was afterward attributed to the Bishops. What this
authority was may be understood from that which follows, Them that sin rebuke
before all; which equals also may do. Thus of old the Bishops, if a Bishop or
Presbyter were accused, did refer the matter to the Ecclesiastical Senate or
Synod, and did condemn him if he were found worthy, i. e. they did suspend,
excommunicate, or remove him according to the nature of his offense. Thus that
Divinity Professor of Cambridge in his days. And that this was the manner of
proceeding in administration of Church censures, appears by our Saviors
precept concerning other Offenders though private persons, Matthew. 18.
Dic Ecclesiae, Tell the Church; and the sentence of Excommunication pronounced
and executed on the incestuous person at Corinth; It was not the act of a
Bishop alone or of his Official or Chancellor (these are Apocryphal names
and offices, unknown for some Centuries of years in the Church of Christ) but
it was 2 Cor. 2.6.
(...) a Punishment inflicted by many. 2. I may add the answer of Gonlartius
unto Pamelius objecting this place of the Apostle to Timothy for the proof of
Episcopal Preeminence over Presbyters. Annot. in Cypr. Epist. 65.
An accusation is two ways received either privately or in the Ecclesiastical
assembly which does judge of those crimes. This though it be taken as spoken to
Timothy alone, yet implies, as he there shows only a pre-eminence of Order
in Timothy not of power and authority. Which he thus makes good; if a Bishop
were accused the Presbyters did receive the accusation and judge of it; as he
proves out of Cyprian, who Epist. 65. old. 3 Ep. 9.
writes to Epictetus and the people of Assura commanding them not to admit to
the Episcopacie again Eortunatianus who sometimes was their Bishop, but had
denied the faith of Christ. Other Bishops, says Gonlartius, are not called
together, nor is there any appeal to the Bishop of Rome, but the Assuritan
Church in a convenient order judges their own Bishop. In the Presbytery one
of the Presbyters or Ministers of the Church did fit, for orders-sake only,
until those degrees did arise of which we have elsewhere spoken. Therefore to
receive an accusation against one is not only a note of pre-eminence, but of
order also, and that pre-eminence does not confirm those degrees which
afterward introduced tyranny into the Church, but manifests an eutaxie in
the house of God. This shall suffice to be spoken touching that branch of
Episcopal Jurisdiction; I come to another, and that concerns the Commission
given to Timothy concerning the Doctrine of the Teachers.

Episc by. di^. right. p. 106.
Timothy is charged to charge the Preachers of Ephesus, that they teach no
other doctrine, that they do not give heed to Fables and Genealogies and Page
116.
Titus is commanded (...) to stop the mouths of those false teachers, who
broach doctrines they ought not for filthy lucres sake, and to pass sharp
censures upon them, what can do this but Episcopal authority, says the
Bishop; Page 107.
I may truly say (says he) that both St Paul and Timothy his Disciple do as
truly Lord it here in their Episcopal power, as those Bishops which they (the
Scots) have abdicated.

I will not here Camerinam movere, rake into the sink of the Lordly
tyrannical exorbitancies of our later Prelates, they stink bad enough
already, I will not cause the Reader to stop his nose at those putrid steemes
which would arise if that puddle were stirred. Only I would desire the Reader
by the way to consider that St Paul has professedly disclaimed all Lording it
over the consciences of the Corinthians: 2 Cor. 1.14.
Not that we have dominion over your faith, says he, but are helpers of your
joy; for by faith ye stand. In locum.
Cajetan has well observed that this is here added by the Apostle to exclude a
calumny, which might have been cast on him, because the words of Paul which he
spoke immediately before, viz. to spare you, might seem to imply some
dominion, he presently subjoynes this, Not that we have dominion over your
faith, which words are fitly and fully paraphrased by Beza thus, Ineund. locum.
Not as if I might do any thing amongst you in matter of Religion, What I
pleased by my power in binding and loosing of your consciences, but I am the
Minister of God to comfort you and to cheer your hearts; we are helpers of
your joy, wherein he does secretly oppose the joy and peace of Conscience,
Where of he makes God the author, but himself and his colleagues the
Ministers, unto that tyrannical terror which is caused by those who carry
themselves as if they were Lords over the consciences of both Ministers and
people.

We do not say that either Timothy or Titus were mere Presbyters, and so
compeeres or Equals to the Presbyters of Ephesus or Crete, nor were they
Bishops such as you fancy them, and in that superiority of degree above them;
but Evangelists of an higher Orb then either Bishops, for which you plead, or
Presbyters. Look on them in that degree wherein they were, and they might on
better grounds, with more authority charge false teachers, that they should not
(...) teach any other doctrine then what the Apostles had taught; (for unto
that the Gal. ^.8, ^.
Apostle himself does limit it, doubling his Anathema on the heads of them
whosoever they were that should do it) then any ordinary Bishop whatsoever, if
there had been then any such distinct from Presbyters. The case is clear
concerning them both, they had been the Apostles companions in his travailes,
had been fully instructed in the doctrine which he preached, and in respect of
their familiar conversing with him, they could avouch what truth he had
delivered. That of Paul to Timothy, the pretended Bishop of Ephesus is clear
for him. 2 Timothy 3.10.
Thou have fully known my doctrine, manner of life. Ib. ver. 14.
Continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been assured of,
knowing of whom thou have learned them. As for Titus (touching whom Bishop Page
117.
Hall is pleased to tell us, there is no color to say he was an Evangelist)
not to insist on the frequent use which the Apostle made of him, in sending him
from one Church to another, consider what false teachers they are whose mouths
the Apostle would have in an especial manner to be stopped, they are Tit. 1.10.
those of the Circumcision. Them Titus could more effectually convince and
confound with greater authority then any other man whatsoever. For he could in
respect of his own person declare what privilege St Paul pleaded for, to wit,
exemption from the yoke of Circumcision. Gal. 2.
Titus was not cicumcised by reason of false brethren, who creptin unawares to
spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus that they might bring us
again into bondage; this was done by the interposition of Apostolic authority,
when others would have urged it. Yea, more then this, when Paul himself with
the chosen Elders from the Churches of Antioch went by revelation to confer
with the Apostles Elders and brethren concerning that vexatious question moved
by some false teachers, who pretended the consent of the Apostles with them, in
that which they obtruded on the Gentiles, the necessity of Circumcision, Gal.
2.1.
Titus was one of those who went up with the Apostle Paul to the Apostles at
Jerusalem; him and Barnabas did St Paul take along with him, to be Par. lect
14. in Ep. ad Gal.
witnesses both before the Apostles of his doctrine preached among the
Gentiles, and also to the Churches of his action with the Apostles, and their
concurrence with him giving him the right hand of fellowship. Now consider, I
pray you, what was one special privilege of the Apostles, those whom our
Savior himself made choice of, to whom he did renew and enlarge his
commission after his Resurrection; and you shall find that Titus was a sharer
in a privilege next removed unto it, but one degree below them. They were eye
and eare-witnesses of the doctrine, miracles, sufferings and Resurrection of
the Lord Jesus Christ, as is clear from that Act. 1.21, 22.
speech of Peter (at the election of Matthias in the room of Judas) and what
elsewhere he writes to the dispersed Jews, ^ Pet. 1.16, 18.
We were eyewitnesses of his Majesty; and this voice we heard. The privilege
of an Evangelist was this; these things concerning Christ were Luke 1.2.
delivered unto them by those which from the beginning were eyewitnesses, and
ministers of the Word. As the Apostles were Christ's Attendants, and Chap. 22.28.
continued with him in all his temptations, so the Evangelists were Apostolorum
comites, the Apostles companions in all their travailes and peregrinations,
fellow-workers and helpers in the Ministry. Titus then being an eyewitness
and an eare-witnesse not only of St Paul's preaching among the Gentiles, but of
the Apostles determination and conclusion in their Synodicall decree touching
Circumcision, might with far more authority stop the mouths of those false
teachers of the Circumcision, then any ordinary Bishop or Pastor whatsoever.
By this time, I hope, it is evident that the charge given to Timothy and Titus
makes nothing for Episcopal authority and Jurisdiction. 2. There is no
necessity to limit and restrain that phrase of the Apostles, Tit. 1.
whose mouths must be stopped to an authoritative and judiciarie silencing of a
false teacher, Cajetan extends it unto a Authoritate and doctrina. Cajet. in
loc.
Doctrinall as well as a Definitive silencing by a sentence against him. Sckol.
in loc.
Piscator has observed that (...) is the same with (...), which latter word is
used sometimes to express such a stopping of the mouth and silencing as is the
fruit of a doctrinall conviction; and confutation by evidence of Scripture. So
the Evangelist St Matthew uses it, Matt 22.34. (...).
When the Pharisees had heard that he (Christ) had put the Sadduces to silence,
which was done not by any definitive sentence pronounced in a judiciary manner
against them, authoritatively commanding them to hold their peace and preach
such false doctrine no more, but by testimony of Scripture was their error so
fully discovered that they had not a word to reply for themselves in
maintenance of their erroneous opinions. Ibid.
Ye err, because ye know not the Scripture, nor the power of God. Have ye not
read what God said unto Moses in the bush, etc. Of this kind of silencing or
stopping the mouth the Apostle speaks in this place, as is evident by what
goes before and what follows. Amongst the qualifications of a Bishop, i. e. a
Presbyter, as you shall see anon, this is one, he must Tit. 1.5.
Hold fast the faithful word as he has been taught, that he may be able by
sound doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers. Why is this
required, the words following show the reason, Ver. 10, 11.
For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of
the circumcision whose mouths must be stopped. This stopping of the mouth here
spoken of must be by a Conviction from sound doctrine. Then consider what
follows immediately, Ver. 13.
This witness is true, wherefore reprove them sharply, that they may be sound
in the faith. You see still the silencing is by a conviction, and a doctrinall
confutation, so is the noune used when the Apostle says of the Scripture, it
is profitable 2 Timothy 3.16.
(...) for conviction or confutation, so the compound of the Verb, in that
phrase of the Evangelist concerning Apollos, Act. 18. last. (...).
he mightily convinced the Jews, to wit, by the clear evidence of Scripture
which could not be gainsaid or shifted off by any sophistical evasions
whatsoever. But where the word (...) is used to signify the passing of sharp
censures, I shall not be ashamed to confess my ignorance, but am willing to be
informed by my betters, Bishop Hall or any of his brethren. Seeing the Apostle
here speaks of a doctrinall silencing and confutation, I hope this is not a
privilege fastened to an Episcopal chair, but such as is communicable to a
Presbyter.

Thus much shall suffice to be spoken concerning these charges given to Timothy
and Titus, by which the Doctor has undertaken to prove them to be invested
with Episcopal power and Jurisdiction, but how well, let others judge. There
is one thing more in these pages which will deserve a like animadversion; it is
a passage, which had it fallen from the pen of any other then Doctor Hall, I
should have thought the man had certainly a Pope in his belly; it is this. Page
108.
That House of God which is the Church ( wherein Timothies behavior is so
required) is not some one private congregation, such an one were not fit for
that style the pillar and ground of truth, but the famous Diocesan Church of
Ephesus. Me thinks the phrase here used, and style of some other of late
amongst us, comes somewhat near to that of the Jesuits mentioned by Doctor
Bilsin; Differ. betw. Christ. subject. and unchrist. rebel. p. 224. part. 2.
This is, says he, the right trade of your apology to pretend the Church and
mean the Pope. -- And so you make the Church but a cloak-bag to carry the
Popes titles after him. Our Cathedralists pretend the Church but mean the
Bishops and themselves, and so the Church is made but a cloak-bag to carry the
Diocesans titles of honor after him. But why, I pray you, may not a particular
private congregation be styled the pillar and ground of truth; There is no
Orthodoxe Divine can be ignorant that the Church is said to be the pillar of
truth, Non ratione architect onica, sed sorensi.
not as the notion of a pillar is taken by Architects in building, for that
which does uphold and bear up the roof, or loft that lies on it, as if the
Church did give supportance and stabilitie to the truth, but as a pillar in the
marketplace, to which the Kings Proclamation is fastened, that all his subjects
may take notice of it. Has Christ fastened his truth to a Cathedral only, that
there it is to be found, and no where else? The sad experience of that
ignorance, superstition, and profaneness which reign in places nearest unto
them has verified the Proverb, The nearer the Church the further from God.
Lyra though a popish Friar, and one that lived in times of much blindness, yet
saw so much light that he could say; Lyra in Matt. c. 16.
The Church consists not in men of dignity and power, either Ecclesiastical or
Secular; for many Princes and Popes with other inferior persons have revolted
from the faith: wherefore the Church consists in those persons in whom is the
true knowledge and confession of the faith. I would we had not too much cause
to confess the same of many of our Churchmen, Prelates and their adherents,
the Cathedral Diocesan crew, with others: but albeit there has been an
apostasy in them, yet blessed be the Lord for it, we may truly say of the
Church of England at this day, what once a Dr Potter in his answer to Charity
mistaken.
Cathedralist spoke in favor of the Church of Rome: The errors have been the
errors of the domineering faction in the Court of England, not the errors of
the Church of England. I hope they will give us leave to speak as favorably
of our mother the Church of England, as they of theirs the Church of Rome,
which is with them a true Church. I will shut up all that I shall say
concerning Timothy and Titus, and the pretended Episcopal power committed unto
them, the same as our Hierarchists say, with what they exercise, with the
observation of a Friar, yet an History of the Counc. of Trent. lib. 4. page
332.
Historian of good esteem, It is denied in words that Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction is dominion, as is the secular, yet one knows not how to put a
difference between them. But St Paul did, when he wrote to Timothy, and
repeated it to Titus, that a Bishop should not be greedy of gain, nor a
striker. Now on the contrary, they make men pay for processes, and imprison the
parties, as is done in the secular Courts.

In the next place, according to promise, I come to view the writings of the
Apostles, and to enquire whether in them there be any such Superiority and
Distinction in Order and in Office between a Bishop and a Presbyter, as is
pretended by our Prelatists. If in this Scripture may be judge it is as clear
as the Sun, in my apprehension, that a Bishop and a Presbyter are one and the
same in Order and in Office. For when the Apostle does set down the sacred
orders, we find no other but these, Bishops and Deacons, that which is by the
Hierarchists made a middle order between both, to wit, of Presbyters is not at
all expressed in distinction from the former, which does evidently prove, that
the distinction between a Bishop and a Presbyter is but an institution of man,
not of God, nor has it foundation in the Word of God. Consider the Inscription
of St Paul's Epistle to the Philippians, it is directed to Phil. 1.^.
All the Saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and
Deacons. When Paul directs Timothy how he should carry himself in the Church
of God, that is says a late Bishop Hall, page 108.109.
Patron of Episcopacie, how he must carry himself as a Diocesan, in such a
Church where there would be need of all variety of Church Officers, we have no
other Orders set down then the forementioned, 1 Timothy 3.
Bishops and Deacons, together with the qualifications of the one and the
other. I demand then of our Diocesans now how comes it to pass that the order
of Presbyters is left out. If Presbyters were a distinct order from Bishops,
and inferior to them in place and power, would the Apostle have omitted them
as unnecessary and superfluous in such a Church, as the Diocese of Ephesus,
yea of Asia rather (for of that extent is the Church there mentioned by the
Apostle said to be, by our forementioned Bishop.) Come we from Timothy to
Titus, and view the Epistle directed unto him; Tit. 1.5.
He is left by the same Apostle at Creete, that he should set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every city. Of what rank and
order these Presbyters or Elders were, the verses immediately following will
inform us. The qualifications of those which should be admitted to this order,
and be made Presbyters follow; If any be blameless, Verse. 6.
the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not accused of riot, or
unruly. Why must a Presbyter be such an one, Verse. 7.
the next verse gives the reason; For a Bishop must be blameless as the
steward of God, not selfe-willed, etc. Therefore must a Presbyter be
blameless, because he is Gods steward, a Bishop, an Overseer (as the Greek
word properly imports, and so it is rendered by our late Translators, Act. 20.)
set over the House of God. In a word, if the Apostles had in their days
instituted any such distinct order of Bishops above Presbyters, then surely
either in their last and valedictory speeches to those Presbyters whom they
ordained, and Churches which they planted, or in their Epistles sent unto them,
we should have some expressions tending to this purpose, some charge or other
given either to the Bishop how he should carry himself toward the Presbyters
under his power and Jurisdiction, or to the Presbyters how they should behave
themselves toward the Bishop set over them. But we find not the least
intimation of any such thing; nor of one Bishop set over many flocks and
congregations, but rather of more Bishops then one, which had the oversight of
a flock. The command given to the Hebrews is this, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give an account. He does not say (...), Be
obedient to the Bishop that is over you, but (...), in the plural number, them
that have the rule over you, for they watch for your souls; it is too great a
burden for one to be entrusted with the oversight, and give an account for
the souls in many congregations. The counsel of St Paul to the Thessalonians
runs thus; 1 These. 5.12.
We beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you, and (...),
which are over you in the Lord. However in the writings of the Fathers, as the
Orig. of Episc. page 5.
Archbishop of Armagh has observed, which were somewhat near the Apostles
days, the title of (...) (which is the same with the word here used by the
Apostle) is limited unto one, whom other of the Fathers do peculiarly term a
Bishop (in what respect you shall hear more anon) yet, it is clear by this
pla^^ of the Apostle, that they confined not that Title unto one, nor did they
set up one under that title or notion, Superior to the rest of the Presbyters,
who labored also in the word and doctrine. In which regard Am^^t in ^oc.
Beza spoke a truth, and no more but a truth, when he observed from this and
other places that the Church was governed, a Pastoribus in communi, by the
Paestors in common. or by the common consent and counsel of the Pastors, the
degree of Episcopacie b^ing not as yet invented or found out by the Apostles or
Apostolic men. Let us proceed, St Peter commands the Presbyters to 1 Pet.
5.1, 2.
feed the flock of God which is amongst them, (...) taking the oversight of
them (or being and performing the office of Bishops amongst them) not by
constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. From
which and other places it is clear, that in Scripture phrase (...) is so far
from signifying an Order distinct from, or superior to a Presbyter, that it
imports no other thing then the Office of a Presbyter; a truth which Dissert.
1. de presb and episc. cap 6.
Salmasius has proved at large against Petavius the Jesuit. Yea, the Ibid.
cap. 3. page 172.
same learned Critic has observed that there is as much color of reason to
say that a Senator and Counselor were distinct Offices and Orders, as to say
that a Bishop and a Presbyter are different in Office and in Order. For as the
Senate and the Counsel did not constitute different bodies, but one and the
same assembly was understood by both denominations, so the particular members
of that body were sometimes called Senators, sometimes Counselors. Idem est,
says he, de Presbyterio and Episcopio. The Presbytery and the Episcopium were
but one and the same body, and convention of Bishops and Presbyters.

The light of Scripture is so evident and convincing (unto all those which do
not shut their eyes against it, being prepossessed with other fancies that from
thence (to omit other testimonies of the Fathers, with sundry Divines of note
both Protestant and Popish) Did. 60. cap. Null. ex urb. Papa. Sacros or lines
dicimus diaconatum and Presbyteratum. Hos quidem sotos ecclesia primitiva
habusse dicitur.
Gratian, and Sent. lib. 4. did. 24. tit. 1. Excellenter canones duos tantum
sacros ordines appellari censent, diaconatus scil. and presbytera^us, quia hos
solos Ecclesia primitiva legetur habuisse, and de bissolis praeceptum
Apostolihabemus.
Peter Lumbard have confessed, that the Scripture mentions no other sacred
Orders then of Presbyters and Deacons, the primitive Church is said to have
these only, and we have the precept of the Apostle concerning these alone. As
Gratian in his text of the Canon Law, so Dicunt quidem quod in ecclesia prima
primitiva common crat officium episcoporum and sacerdotum, and no mina crant
communia. did. 95. cap. Olim, and officium crat commune: sed in secunda
primitiva caeperunt distingui and nomiua Presbyter et Episcopus erant prorsus
synonyma, and etiam administratio co^munis erat, quia communi consitio
sacerdotum regebantur ecclesiae. In schismatis ergoremedium (ut bicdicitur)
fact a est praelatio ut unus praeess^t and quoad quaedam sacramenta, quae modo
appropriantur episcopis. Gloss. ikn did. 95. cap. Legimus. verb. Postea.
Johannes Semeca in his Gloss thereon tells us, In the first Primitive Church
Bishops and Presbyters or Priests were all one, both in name and office; the
names and offices began to be distinguished in the second primitive Church;
when for a remedy of schism one was advanced in the Church (which was before
governed by the common consent of Presbyters) in respect of name, and
administration, and some sacraments, which are now appropriated to the Bishops.
Thus Semeca. If any shall desire to know of what extent this first primitive
Church is, none can better inform him then learned Dr USSHER, once Divinity
Professor at Dublin, now Archbishop of Armagh, De succ. and statu Eccles. cap.
1. page 19.
who having observed out of Hegesippus, that during the age of the Apostles the
Church continued (...), a pure and undefiled Virgin, adds in matters of
Religion we are not ashamed to appeal to this first Primitive Church (for so
it has pleased some to distinguish) says he, referring us in the margin to
this forementioned Gloss of Semeca. And truly as in articles of faith and
points of Doctrine, against all Romanists with other pretenders of antiquity,
so in matters of Discipline, and this particular point of controversy
concerning the Parity, or rather Identity of Bishops and Presbyters against all
Hierarchists whatsoever, we are neither afraid nor ashamed to appeal to this
first Primitive Church, the Church in the Apostles days. Before I part with
Gratian and the Canon Law, I shall add this out of it, we find there another
Original of this Imparity and distinction in Order between a Bishop and a
Presbyter, Horum discretio a Gentilibus maxim introducta est, qui suos
Flamines, alios simpliciter Flamines, alios Archiflamines, alios Protostamines
appellabant. Grant decr. par. 1. did. 21. Vide plura distinct. 80. Can. in
Illis.
The difference that now is between an Archbishop, a Bishop, and a Presbyter
was introduced, says Gratian, into the Church from the imitation of the
Heathenish Hierarchy, who so marshalled their Priests that some were
Archiflamines, some Protoflamines, some Flamines. The same is acknowledged for
the substance of it by the Vt Romans veteres olim majores and minores Pontifices,
and inter hos unum summum, qui omnes sacris praecrant, habebant: it a and nos
in Christianismo easdem denominationes servamus: Archiepiscopi dicti sunt
tanquam primores Episcopi, etc. Desacr. Ord. p. 169. edit. Paris. an. 1558.
Canons of Coleine in their Enchiridion of Christian Religion. And were it
needful I could show out of sundry Mat. Park. Antiq. Brit. p. 5. Paggit in his
Christianogr. and Fitzberbert the Ies.
Divines that this form of Church Government was here erected at first in
England in imitation of the Heathenish Hierarchy by Lucius the first Christian
King that embraced the faith. Among those many and pregnant testimonies which
might be produced in confirmation of this truth, against the Divine Institution
of the Majority of Bishops above Presbyters, I shall trouble your patience but
with one remarkable passage in the Council of Trent. HIstor^e of the Council
of Trent. lib 7. p. 619.
When in the Congregation, Oct. 8. All the Spaniards with some others made a
new instance that the Institution and Superiority of Bishops de Jure divino
might be defined; unto the Legates chamber the next morning came three
Patriarchs, six Archbishops, and eleven Bishops, with a request that it might
not be put into the Canon, that the Superiority is De Jure divino. And mark I
beseech you the reasons, for in themselves, but especially proceeding from the
mouths of such and so many persons, they carry a great deal of weight with
them; in regard that 1. It savoured of ambition. 2. It was unseemly themselves
should give sentence in their own cause. 3. Because the greater part would not
have it put in. And whosoever shall peruse that history, and diligently observe
the managing of this business in the Council, shall find that the opinion of
the Spaniards, against which the forementioned Patriarks, Archbishops, and
Bishops did produce their reasons (which I do not find were ever answered or
refuted) was inserted into the Canon, merely on these two grounds 1. In
opposition to the Lutherans, this was the reason given by the Archbishops of
Ib. p. 604.
Granata, in the Congregation held, Oct. 13.1562. and of P. 606.
Zara, as also by the Pa. 607.
Bishop of Segovia in the following Congregations. 2. In favor of the Pope,
for they were afraid that if the Divine institution and superiority of Bishops
were denied, or the Prelates honor did decay, the Popes triple Crown would
soon fall off his head. This made the Bishop of Segovia in plain terms
confess, Pa. 607.
If the power of the Bishops be weakened, that of the Pope is weakened also: and
when the Secretary of the Marquess of Pescara dealt with the Archbishop of
Granata for his stiffenesse in urging the divine Institution of Bishops,
advising him not to touch any thing in prejudice to the holy See; Granata
answered, Ib pa 629.
He never meant to say any thing against the Pope, but thought that whatsoever
was spoken for the authority of Bishops, was for the benefit of his Holiness;
being assured that if their authority were diminished, the Obedience to the
holy See would decrease also, though by reason of his old age he knew it would
not happen in his time. Thus much of the first argument taken from the
testimonies of Scripture.

2. The writings of those which immediately succeeded the Apostles, and lived
in the next age after them, show that in their days Bishops and Presbyters
were all one in name and office, not one preferred above the other in Order and
Superiority of power. Polycarpe was as is confessed the Disciple of St John,
the Epis. part. 2. p. 156.
Angel of the Church of Smyrna, says Bishop Hall, following therein (as in
most others) Dr Downham. Now whether there were any such Order of Bishops
superior to Presbyters in the Church of Christ in his days, let the world
judge from his own words in his Epistle to the Philippians. I will not spend
lines, much less leaves in the praise of the author, or his Epistle; I leave
that to others who make good the Poets saying,

Laudat venales cupiens extrudere merces. Mercator. Nor will I insist on the
Inscription of the Epistle, wherein he does conjoyne with himself the
Presbyters of the Church of Smyrna, though from thence Dissert. de presb. and
episc. cap 4. p. 232.
Salmasius does prove that he was not a Bishop in that restrained sense wherein
the word was used in after ages, for says he, there is no example of an
Epistle written by a Bishop; wherein, when once a Bishop came to be advanced
above the Presbyters, he does conjoyne them in his Inscription as his
Companions and Equals: But take his plain and positive command or counsel to
the Philippians, how they must behave themselves. He requires them to be (...).
subject to the Presbyters and Deacons as unto God and to Christ. By which it
is clear there were then no other orders then these two, none above a
Presbyter to which they must be in subjection. Here is not the least mention of
a Bishop, as Omissa nescie quamebrem Episcopis mentione. ^sp. digress. in 4.
Tim. lib. 1. ca. 1. p. 133.
Espencaeus does acknowledge, though being prepossessed with some fancies of
his own, de ordine Principante, as he calls the order of Bishops, for which he
does contend, he wondreth why they are omitted. Let us proceed, and see what
power and authority these Presbyters had in the Church of Philippi, This we
shall learn from his Injunction unto them; for he commands them to provide
things honest in the sight of God and men, abstaining from all anger, respect
of persons and unjust judgment. He wills them farther to flee all
covetousness, not suddenly giving credit to accusations against any one, nor
be harsh in judgment. These passages I owe to Loc. cit p. 235.
Salmasius, by which it is evident that these Presbyters of Philippi, to whom
he gives this in charge, had then Ecclesiastical Jurisdictive power in their
hands, and none was superior unto them therein in the Church of Philippi in
those days.

Before I proceed I must remove one rub that is cast in the way by the
Archbishop of Armagh, Orig. of Epis.
Patrons of Episcopacie; it is this, Polycarpe was himself a Bishop of the
Church of Smyrrna, as is proved amongst other evidences by the testimony of
Ignatius, who in his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna Epist. ad Symrn.
salutes him under that name, as a person distinct from the Presbytery, and
exhorts all the people to follow their Bishop as Christ Jesus did his Father,
and the Presbytery as the Apostles, telling them that no man ought either to
administer the Sacraments, or do any thing appertaining to the Church without
the consent of the Bishop: and of Li. 3. adv. baer. cap. 3. and in epist. ad
Florin.
Irenaeus, who so styles him, and witnesses that he himself was present when
Polycarpe himself did discourse of his conversation with St John. From all
which it is inferred that he was the Angel or President of the Church of
Smyrna, when St John wrote this his Revelation.

Yet all this makes nothing against what I have delivered, as I conceive under
favor, and with submission to men of greater reading and better judgment: For
1. Sundry passages in that Epistle of Ignatius to Polycarpe are, as Margin.
annot. in epist. Ignat. ad Polyc.
Vedelius has observed, supposititious, thrust into them by some one or other
out of the pretended Constitutions of Clemens, lib. 2. cap. 26. 2. Albeit
Ignatius does in that Epistle salute Polycarpe the Bishop, and the Presbytery,
yet it does necessarily follow that he was a Bishop in order distinguished from
the Presbytery, if he were a Presbyter President of the Presbytery it is a
sufficient reason why in this falutation of Ignatius he should be named in the
first place, and the Presbytery after him. It appears by Ignatius elsewhere
that the Presbyters were Counselors unto and Coassessors with the Bishop in
the Presbytery, for so he does expressly call them: In epist^ ad Troll. (...).
What is the Presbytery, says he, but a sacred Assembly, the Counselors and
Coassessours of the Bishop. In the Roman commonwealth though all the Patricii
or Noblemen were Counselors of State and Senators, yet there were two chosen
out from among the rest, who had for honors sake the denomination of Consuls
appropriated unto them, yet this title of honor did not advance them to a
Place or Dignity of a different Order from or Superior to the rest of the
Patricii, they were all Counselors, but these two the Presidents of the
Counsel; and from this their Orrice they had their name of honor Consules a
consulendo. How weak a ground, the restriction of the name Bishop unto him that
is a President of the Presbytery, to prove his distinction in order from
thence, has been showed before out of Dissert. de presb. and episc. page 232.
Salmafius, who has made it evident that by the same reason, a Counselor and
Senator; The Council and the Senate should constitute different Orders, and
Offices: yea, all that the Primate of Armagh (whom for his Piety and Learning
I shall ever honor) does in plain terms plead for (at leastwise seems unto
me to plead for) and does undertake to prove is only this, that he to whom the
title of Bishop (which was as is confessed by Dr Reynolds, whom he alleges
at first common to all the Presbyters, by whose common counsel and advice all
Church affairs were ordered) is restrained by the Fathers, was a President of
the Presbytery, which may easily be granted without any great advantage to the
Hierarchists, or prejudice to the Presbyterians. But if by reason of
Presidentship it shall be inferred that the Bishop was in Order and in Office
distinct from and superior to the Presbyters; I shall for my part be ready to
assent unto those which say so, on the same conditions that that Old Archbishop
of Fa^etur Armachanus diversam sententiam^ esse magis amicum Doctoribus
ecclesiae, cui paratum se profitetur morem gerere; node e^ divinis differentia
ostendatur oraculis. mich. de Pal. in 4. did. 24. disp. 2. Number episc. fit.
ordo.
Armagh proffered to subscribe to the opinion of the Prelates and Doctors, (who
were well-pleased with their assertions that did say there was by divine
institution a difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter) So that the
difference may be manifested out of the divine Oracles, and what is affirmed be
proved by them.

3. True it is that Irenaeus does indeed set forth Polycarpe under that name
Bishop of the Church of Smyrna, yea and withal does say that he was
constituted Bishop of that Church by the Apostles; yet does it not follow that
he was a Bishop in Order superior to a Presbyter, which I shall prove two
ways: 1. By the writings of the Apostles (which best of all inform us what
orders of Church Officers they did institute) a Bishop and Presbyter are one in
Order and Office. Of this I have spoken before, and therefore will but mention
it: only I will add the judgment of that forementioned old and learned
Archbishop of Armagh in this point; who considering the passages of the Apostle
in his Epistle to Timothy, wherein there is mention of no other Orders but
Bishops and Deacons, delivers it as a Constant quod inter orcinem
Episcopalem, and inter ordinem Diaconatue non est orao medius, quo^iam si quis
esset, non dubium, quia iste Doctor maximus qui suum evangelium recepit a
Christo, ut ipse scrihit ad Gal. 1. suum discctum discipulum Timotheum de illo
ord^ne instruxisset, and ei regulas dedisset, ficut de superiori and inferiori
re^utas dedit. Rich. Armach. lib. ^1. quaest. Armen cap 5. fol. 84.
manifest and unquestionable truth that there is no middle order between them,
for if there were, out of all doubt that great Doctor, who received his Gospel
from Jesus Christ, would have instructed Timothy therein, and prescribed rules
concerning that, as he did concerning the order above and below it. 2. Out of
Irenaeus himself, who Haec dogmata tibi, qui ante nos fuerunt prisbyteri qui
and Apostolorum discipuli ^xtiterunt, non tradiderunt -- Possum coram deo
testificar^ beatum ilum and Apost olicum Presbyterum, si tale quid audiss^t
reclamatum. Iraen. in epist^ad Plorin. Cent. Magd. ent. 2. cap. 10. col. 134,
135.
elsewhere calls both Polycarpe himself, and other bishops of Asia Disciples of
the Apostles Apostolical Presbyters. Under the same notion does he mention
Anicetus, Pius Hyginus, Telesphorus (who are by others called Bishops of Rome)
giving them no other title then this, In Epist. ad victor.
The Presbyters that were before you: Whosoever shall peruse sundry passages in
Iren. lib. 3. adv. haer. cap. 3. compared with ca. 2. ejud lib. and li. 4. cap.
43. compared with cap 44. and 45.
Irenaeus will clearly see that in him the Succession of Bishops is all one
with the succession of Presbyters. I will mention but one and refer the
Reader to the rest in the margent (if he think fit to con^ult the author
himself) Iren. lib. 4. cap. 43.
We must obey, says he, those Presbyters which are in the Church, those which
have a succession from the Apostles, as we have showed. Who together with the
succession of the Bishopric or Episcopacie, have received the gift of truth
according to the good pleasure of the Father. The places are so clear, the
words so plain and evident that from thence Spalatensis did rightly infer,
De rep. Eccl. l. 2. c. 3. n. 44.
In all Presbyters Irenaeus does both acknowledge and confound one and the same
order of Episcopacie, though afterward seeking to avoid the pregnant
testimonies, which overthrow his position, and the position of other
Hierarchists, he gives this childish and slender answer, or rather silly
evasion, that Ibid. n. 42.
He calls those which wore true Bishops by the name of Presbyters, which how
weak it is, let any man of understanding judge. Wherefore until I be
convinced by clearer evidence (to which I shall be ready to yield, if any be
produced) I shall say with Chamier, Paustr. tom 2. l. 10. de Oc^. Pont. c. 6.
in fine.
Ausim asserere, I dare be bold to maintain it, that Presbyters and Bishops are
no where distinguished in Irenaeus. Thus much for answer to that objection. I
proceed to another instance. How little strength to Episcopal Sovereignty over
Presbyters the Epistle of Clemens to the Corinthians does afford (in the
commendation of which Author and Epistle, Bishop Hall, page 129, 130, 133.
one that has lately stepped forth, as another Atlas, to bear up Episcopacie by
head and shoulders, is pleased to spend two whole pages at least) you may
easily perceive, if either you peruse the Epistle it self, or parallel that
passage cited by the forementioned stickler for Prelacie with diverse others in
Dissert. de Presb. and epis. p. 202. ad p. 219.
Salmasius out of the same Epistle. For there you shall find 1. that Bishops
and Presbyters are (...), both denominations setting forth one and the same
order, one and the same office. 2. That the Church of Corinth at that time, and
other Churches also, were governed not by one but by many Bishops, that is to
say, Presbyters. The passages are quoted by that learned Critic at large, I
will in brief but point unto them. First, what the Apostles practice was
Clemens there sets down thus: Preaching in cities among the Nations, they did
constitute the first fruits of them, to be Bishops and Deacons, over them that
should afterward believe. These Bishops are afterward in many places called
Presbyters, Blessed are those Presbyters that went before. It is a shameful
thing to hear that the ancient and firm Church of Corinth should out of
respect unto one or two persons (...) move sedition against the Presbyters.
Afterward he persuades those which had been the authors of the contention to
repent and yield subjection to the Presbyters. From these and sundry other
passages planissime constat, says Page 219.
Salmasius, it is most evident and clear, that that Church was then governed
by Presbyters alone, who were also called Bishops, all constituted in equal
authority, honor and power in the government thereof. Amongst many other that
are remarkable, I will only touch upon one, which seeing the Author is so
highly magnified, and the Epistle commended with a great deal of silken
language bestowed on it, might me thinks make some impression on the Commender,
and others of his Order, as it is very pathetically delivered by Clemens,
Wh^soever he be amongst you that is of a generous spirit, that is of a
compassionate disposition, whosoever is full of love let him say: If for my sake
there be sedition, strife, and schisms, I depart, I am content to be gone
whithersoever you will, and will do those things which are commanded me by the
people: Only let the flock of Christ live in peace with the Presbyters that are
set over it. Whosoever shall do this shall purchase to himself exceeding
great glory in the Lord, and every place will readily receive him. Thus that
holy, that Apostolical man Clemens, whose counsel if it might have found
entertainment in the hearts of our Prelates and their adherents, neither
Scotland of late years, nor England at this day had met with such commotions
and distractions. Or if examples, and the Presidents of those Fathers (in whom
because they were Bishops, our late Bishop Hall, p. 62. It is our glory and
comfort we have had such Predecessors.
Hierarchists do glory as being their Predecessors) are likely to be more
effectual with those which would be accounted their posterity, I could put
them in mind of Gregory Nazianzen, who was content to lay down his Episcopal
honor, and to descend from that throne which he knew not well whether he might
more properly call an hierarchicall or tyrannical throne; nor did he fear to
commit any sacrilege against that holy order, or contract on himself the guilt
of that crime, but Orat. 28 and Carm. de div. vitae genesis ad pseudoepis.
finding the Church wasted by contentions, States and Kingdoms exceedingly
shaken, and like to be overturned by wars about that same (...), that great
and new name, as he calls the Episcopal dignity, he willingly did it, induced
thereunto by a most prevailing argument. Quum certus fit a Deo non excludi
quibus thronus eripiatur. Cent. Mag. Cent 4. c. 10 col. 525. edit. Bas. 2624.
He was assured of this, God would not dis-throne him in Heaven, though he lost
his throne on earth. If the example of one induced thereunto by the hope of
heaven be not sufficient, I could propose to our Prelates for a President the
practice of Lib. de gest. cum Emer. Don. epis. tom. 7. col. 6, 7, 638. edit.
Basan. 1542.
Austin, and almost three hundred African Bishops, whose hearts were so
enflamed with a desire of union and peace in the Church, that they were ready
for the procuring of it to lay down their Bishoprics, which in so doing they
did not account to be lost, but more safely recommended unto God. And whereas
amongst them all there were but two found to whom this motion was displeasing,
the brotherly exhortation and reproof generally of all the rest, did make them
change their minds and confent to do, what the rest of their brethren did.
The exhortation is very ponderous, and full of moving arguments. Give leave, O
ye Fathers of the Church, unto a poor Presbyter to represent before you, what
once your Predecessors spoke unto them, who were loath to part with their
dignities for the Churches benefit. They propose in the first place that of our
Savior, Who so humbles himself shall be exalted; and from thence infer,
Why should we doubt to offer to our Redeemer the sacrifice of this humility?
Has he descended from Heaven into humane members that we might become his
members, and are we afraid to descend from our seats that his very members be
not torn in pieces by cruel division? There is nothing more sufficient for us
then that we be faithful and obedient Christians. This we are still. But we
are made Bishops for the Christian people, therefore let us do that with our
Episcopal honor, which may conduce to the Christian peace of Christian
people. If we be profitable servants why do we envy the eternal gain of our
master for our temporal preferment? Our Episcopal dignity will be more
fruitful unto us, if, being laid down, it may rather collect, then being
retained scatter the flock of Christ. Austin the Bishop said, My brethren, if
we have the Lord in our thoughts, this higher place is the watchtower of the
vine-dresser, not the top of honor for him that is proud. If whilst I retain
my Bishopric I scatter the flock of Christ, how is the damage of the flock
the honor of the Shepherd? With what face shall we in the world to come hope
for the honor promised by Christ, if our honor in this world does hinder
Christian unity? Thus far the African Bishops. -- Sed Cynthius aurem. I
return unto, and proceed in the proving of our Proposition laid down before.

3. In Christian Churches which were of Apostolical foundation, and others
after them, we find two Bishops in a Church or City, both in, and after the
Apostles days; not one advanced before the other. Which being duly considered
we may invert that argument which is used by our Hierarchists for the
maintenance of their Episcopal Monarchy. You know who has laid down this
amongst his Postulata: Episc. by div. right. part. 1.. 12. p. 50.
We may not entertain so irreverent an opinion of the Saints and Fathers of the
Primitive Church, that they who were the immediate successors of the Apostles
would, or durst set up a form of government different from that which was
fore-designed unto them. Let this be granted, the position may easily be
retorted on their own heads thus, If the Apostles had instituted one Bishop
only in a Church, and placed him in superiority of power and order above the
Presbyters, can we think that the Saints and Fathers of the primitive Churches,
or the Churches themselves, would have so soon swerved from the rule and
practice of their first founders, and have set up or admitted two Bishops where
the Apostles had ordained but one. The truth of this assertion touching the
plurality of Bishops in a Church may be easily proved by variety of examples.
Dissert. de gub. Eccles. p. 302, 303.
Gersom Bucerus has proved it by no less then ten examples out of Scriptures,
and others out of Ecclesiastical history. I will only mention some few.
Narcissus and Alexander both Bishops of Jerusalem, not by succession one after
the other, but both at the same time, as is proved out of Eccl. hist. li. 6.
ca. 9. and 10.
Eusebius. Ignatius and Evodias both Bishops of Antioch at the same time, the
one ordained by Peter, the other by Paul, as the forementioned Gers. Buc. p.
439.
foreign Divine has proved by the confession of Clemens, Constit. l. 7. c.
46. and Baronius, tom. 1. ad an. 45. At Rome Linus and Cletus, or Anacletus
were Coepiscopi Fellow-Bishops in Peter's days, and afterward as Platina In
vita Sancti Petri.
has acknowledged, and before him Ruffinus, in praefar. ad lib. Recognit. as
Pan. tom. 2. l. 13. c. 4.
Chamier has observed out of him, and the Cent 1 part. 2. c. 10. in Lino.
Centurists of Magdenburge after them both. Liberius after his return from
exile was conjoined with Felix in the Episcopal See at Rome, by the decree of
the Synod of Syrmium, as I have learned from Cat. test. ver. l. 4. col. 255.
Illyricus and Gonlartius out of Lib. 4. c. 14.
Sozomen: which Synod was held no less then fifty six years after the
Council of Nice, which first made a Canonical constitution to the contrary,
prohibiting that there should be two Bishops in one city: as Lib. 1. c. 6.
Ruffinus has set down that Canon: yea, later then this Austin was made Bishop
of Hippo in the days of Valerius and joined with him as his Colleague in the
Episcopal honor and Function, albeit Austin was very unwilling, yet the Dum
id fieri solere ab omnibus suaderetur, atque id ignare transmatinis and
Africanis Ecclesiae exemplis probaretur, compulsus atque ^^^ctas succubuit, and
Epi scapatus curam and majoris loci ordinationem suscepit. Posslid. in vita
Aug. c. 8. Quod quidem quia tanta ejus obaritate, tantoque populi studio
dominum id velle credidt, nonnullis jam exemplis praecedentibus quibus mibi
omnis excusatioi^laudehatur, veheme^ter timuiexcusare. Aug. ep. 34. ^d Pausin.
Primate of Numidia Megatius Calamensis, and Valerius together with all the
rest Bishops that were present persuaded him thereunto, and by variety of
examples in the African and transmarine Churches proved it to be a thing so
usual, that Austin was left without all excuse, and yielded to undertake
coepiscopatus sarcinam, as he calls it, the burden of Coepiscopacie with
Valerius: for the prohibition by the Nicene canon was not yet come to the
knowledge of Valerius, nor to the cares of Austin, as he does Ep. 110. Quod
cone liio Nieeno prohibitum, saisse nesciebam nec ipse sciebat.
else where profess. This is a truth so clear, and which has such variety of
instances for the confirmation of it, that the Neq, fuit tanta valigie priscu
illis Episcopis l^cum sibi interdum ascicere aliquem, ex suarum Ecclesiarum
Presbyteris, qui and ipse tum furisdictione and ordine, u uque pleno
Episcopalis propriae porestatis tum etiam nomine in eadem Ecclesia simul esset,
and diceretur Episcopus. de rep. Eccl l 2. c 9. n. 14.
Archbishop of Spalato does confess, The ancient holy Bishops made no scruple
of making one of their Presbyters their compani^n, who both in Jurisdiction and
Order, and full use of power properly Episcopal should be their Colleague and
Fellow-bishop in the same Church. Yea, Idem est juris in part quod in toto,
and in parvis quod in magnis, sed in eodem episcopatu possunt simut esse duo
episcopi, Cause 7. q. 1. c. Non est autem. and C Peristi and C. Quia vero. Ergo
consimiliter propter necessitatem vel utilitatem possent esse snnut plures
summi Pontifices dial part. 3. tract. 1. lib. 2. c. 25. sol. 202.
Occham proving out of the Canon Law it self that there may be two Bishops in
a Bishopric or Diocese, does thence infer that by the same reason there may
be also two Popes, Fideles propter necessitatem vel utilitatem sufficienter
moventem constituendo plures Pontifices non facerent conditionem Ecclesiae
deterivem, sed meliorarent came. cap. 26. sol. 203. ad septimum
as the government of one and the same Church by more Bishops then one
conduces to the benefit thereof, so the regiment of the Church Catholic by
many Popes. Loc. cit. cap. 15. paulo ante finem.
This he maintains might be done in both, without any rent or division in the
Church, without the breach of that unity which the Apostle does require, for
among all those things which he reckons up as grounds of union, and motives to
the conservation of it, Ephesians. 4.
One faith, one Baptism, etc. Vnum Apostolicum minime ponit, says he, the
Apostle makes no mention of one Apostolical either Pope or Prelate. In a word;
the practice of governing a Church by more Bishops then one was for a while so
common and usual (though by degrees it did begin in some places sooner to grow
out of use then others) that if Epiphanius his observation be right, it was
anciently proper to Alexandria alone to have one Bishop, whereas other Churches
and Cities had two. His words are clear and express for it; Haer. 68. de
Milet. (...).
For Alexandria had not anciently two Bishops as other cities had. This
testimony of Epiphanius concerning Alexandria I first lighted upon in in Aug.
de haer. haer. Acrian.
Danaeus, and since I met with it in him, I have often times wondered, that in all
the quotations out of the Fathers for Episcopacie, our Hierarchists take no
notice of it. From the same Danaeus I have learned one thing more touching the
forementioned City, where the Episcopal Monarchy first had footing, to wit,
that out of the same Ibid.
Church proceeded the Monastic life, and diverse other things which were the
bane of the Church. Perhaps in this regard our Prelates are ashamed of this
their original, and would therefore fain bewitch the minds of men with an
opinion of another descent from Christ's institution and his Apostles. Dealing
herein as wisely for themselves, as the old Romans did, who being ashamed of
the spurious and incestuous birth of their first Founder Romulus, pretended a
Divine pedigree from Mars in a wood. But for my part I love them both so well,
that I shall desire, that as Bishops and Monks did rise so they may fall, as
they did come so they may go together, and the Christian world be rid at once
of them both, which have proved Ecclesiae pestes the bane of the Church.

Before I pass from this, one thing I must crave leave to add, it concerns
the Succession of Bishops, which the Historians that did set it down, so
mention, as if there were but one in a Church at once: yet this does nothing
contradict what has been spoken touching their plurality Simul at one and the
same time in the same Church. For 1. Diverse of those Historians in their
expressions and narrations had reference to the custom of those times in which
themselves lived. For as much as in their days the custom of governing by
many was changed into a government by one, and the name common at first to all,
limited and restrained unto one, hence they speak but of one, though indeed
(as has been showed) there were at the same time more Bishops then one in a
City. 2. When there were two or more equal in name and Office, he that was
the Surviver is reckoned as the Successor, whereas indeed he was not Successor
properly, but only a Colleague living longer then his fellow-bishop. Thus does
Exercit. 8. in Ignat. epist. ad Mariam, cap. 3. number. 6. constant Linum and
Cletum ante Clementem ^bitsse, quibus defunctis solus. Clemens superstes, solus
etiam Episcopt nomen retinuit, tum quia inter adjutores Apostolorum solus
restabat, etc.
Vedelius reconcile the difference which is between historians concerning those
three Bishops of Rome, Linus, Cletus, and Clemens, showing that the name of
Bishop was given to the last of these who was the surviver in that Church,
where through the whole Chapter he discovers the vanity of those answers
which are given by Bellarmine, Baronius; and others. Lest our Hierarchicall
Monarchy should think to elude this and blow it away as the fancy of a
Disciplinarian of the Geneva cut, I will back it with the suffrage of Antonius
de Dominis the Archbishop of Spalato, whom for his pains in patronizing the
Episcopal cause they cannot but respect. De rep. Eccl. l. 2. c. 3. n. 63.
Quoniam ex his tribus Collegis, says he, Because of these three that were
Colleagues Linus died first, Cletus next, and last of all Clemens, and each of
them governed that Church with full authority, hence it came to pass that some
of the ancients reckoned Linus the first Bishop of Rome, Cletus or Anacletus
the second, and Clemens the third, as if they had been differenced in time one
from the other, and one succeeded the other, when as indeed there was no proper
succession at all.

4. As most Churches had more then one Bishop, so some for diverse years
together long after the Apostles days had none at all, but were instructed in
the faith by Presbyters alone without a Bishop over them. The Forbes. lren.
lib. 2. cap. 11. p. 159.
Scortish pacificator in his Irenicum has observed out of Ibo. Mail. li. z. de
gest. Scto c. 2.
Johannes Maoior that the Primitive Church of Scotland flourished in the faith
two hundred and thirty years at least without any government by Bishops, being
instructed in the faith and governed only by Priests and Monks. The same is
recorded before them both concerning that Church by Scoticbron. l^. 3. ca. 8.
ap. lacob. Armach. de pri. Eccl. Brit. p. 800,
Johannes Fordonus, who adds that the Presbyters did govern the Church, ritum
sequentes Ecclesiae primitivae, following the custom of the primitive Church.
Add unto this one thing more which is remarkable; The Fathers in the second
Council of Carthage, which was held, an. 428. did observe that Council. Cart^.
2. can. 5.
until that time some places never had any Bishops at all, and thereupon they
did ordain, ut tales in posterum non haberent, that such places as had none
before, should not have any for future time. From which Canonical Constitution
I may with Diss. de gub. Eccles. p. 307.
Gersom Bucerus argue thus, If those Fathers had conceived that the government
by Bishops was appointed by the Lord Christ, or his Apostles, they could not,
they would not by an Ecclesiastical Canon have established, or permitted to
the Churches the violation of Christ's. Institution, or the Ordinance of his
Apostles.

5. When after the Apostles days the distinction between a Bishop and a
Presbyter began, yet that difference which was then put was no advancement to a
distinct order, but only to an higher degree in the same order, nor did it
bring along with it any superiority in power or Jurisdiction over and above the
Presbyters. The truth of this position may be easily made manifest, and
confirmed by these particulars.

1. The name of Bishop (which together with the office was common to all the
Presbyters) was now limited and appropriated unto him that was the eldest
Presbyter. The name being thus restrained, there was a prioritie granted him,
to whom in respect of age and years, in respect of his longer standing in the
Presbyteriall calling, and consequently in regard of wisdom, gravitie,
experience, or Endowments, reverence was due from his Colleagues, being his
Juniors, and in that regard after a sort Inferiors. That of Ambrose, in 1 Timothy
c. 3.
Is Episcopus est qui inter Presbyteros primus, He is the Bishop who is the
first among the Presbyters is a clear testimony, confirming what has been
delivered. For it does declare manifestly, as Paust. tom. ^. l. 9. de Oec.
Pont. c. 5. n. 8. nihil abud quam inter Presbyteros is qui plures ann^s in eo
muncie Presbyteratus ministriasset.
Chamier has well observed, what was the degree of a Bishop in the first and
purest times of the Church; that it was no more then this, He was accounted the
Bishop, who among the Presbyters had ministered longest in the office of a
Presbyter. Hence the forenamed French Divine does conclude, Ibid.
that at first there was no other difference between a Bishop and the
Presbyters, then what is between the Deane and Canons in a Cathedral. In
reference to this, Sum. contr. tract. 2. q. 22.
Rivetus does conceive that Tertullian speaks, when he says Praesident
probati quique, Seniores; Approved Elders do sit as Presidents, who have
obtained that honor not by price but by testimony: In testimony of that
reverence and respect which age and Senioritie in the Ministry did bespeake at
the hands of his fellow. Presbyters, was the (...) the chief seat in the
Ecclesiastical Senate assigned unto him, to whom the name of Bishop began now
to be restrained on the forementioned grounds. Like as in the more public
conventions of Bishops and Presbyters assembled in a Council, the chiefest
seat was deputed for him that was the ancientest and most venerable. On this
ground as Eusebius reports, says Rivetus, Hist. l. 5. c 22.
when the Bishops of Pontus met together, Palmos was made President, because he
was antiquissimus and maxim venerabilis; the Eldest and most reverend amongst
them. Hence Hom. 3. in Act. Apost,
Chrysostom does compare the Preeminence of the Bishops over the Presbyters to
the Preeminence of the Eldest brother or firstborn over his younger brethren,
who has indeed a certain preeminence over them, but it is a brotherly
preeminence, not a Lordly or Jurisdictionall prelation, as Fraternam quidem non
despoticam neque jurisd^ctionatem Spal de rep. eccl. l. 1. ca. 5. n. 13.
Spalatensis does express it, the rest of his brethren being by ordinary right
his equals in all things, excepting age, and that honor which is due to him in
respect of it, the precedencie of primogeniture, which does not invest him with
any commanding power over them, or put them in subjection unto him. The name of
Bishop being thus limited to him that was the Elder Presbyter occasioned the
mention of one alone in the writings of those who set down the succession of
Bishops. Learned Salmasius has illustrated this by two examples. Dissert. 1.
de presb. and episc. ca. ^. p. 274.
When Athens was governed by nine (...) or Riders, the first of them only gave
the name to the year, whence he was styled (...). The Roman Emperors did
oft-times make many Consuls in a year, which were called Consules per
suffectionem, yet these though they had full Consular authority were not
registered among the Consuls, but only those which were created int he
beginning of the year, because they were the Eldest, the first Consuls.

2. That Primacy which was granted unto him which was the first and eldest
Presbyter, and was now peculiarly called the Bishop, was only at first a
Primacy of order, no Superiority of power, or Jurisdictive dominion, that
Church affairs should be ordered by him alone without the consent and counsel
of the Presbyters. Observable to this purpose is that expression of Pius bishop
of Rome in his second Epistle to Justus bishop of Vienna, Presbyteri and
Diaconi non ut majorem, sed ut Christi ministrum te observent. ap. Sal. p. 275.
Let the Presbyters and Deacons observe you not as one greater then they, but
at the Minister of Christ: in which, you see, he does in plain terms deny that
Justus the bishop was greater in point of power and authority then the
Presbyters and Deacons. You know, Reverend and Beloved, what was the resolution
of Ad id quod scripserunt mibi compresbyteri nostri Donatus and Fortunatus,
Novatus and Gurdius, solus rescribere nibil po^ui, quande a primordio
Episcopatus mei sta^uerim nihil sine consilio vest^o, and fine consensu plebis
meae, privata sententiagerere. Ep. ^. exedit. Gonlart. aliis. lib. 3. ep. 10.
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, from the first entrance to his Episcopacy he
determined to do nothing in the managing of Church affaines of his own head
without the counsel of the Presbyters, without the consent of the people,
which he lays down as a reason, why he alone could not return an answer to
that wherein Donatus and the rest of the Compresbyters did consult him. Nor did
Cyprian entertain this resolution, and observe it in his practice merely out
of a voluntary humility and condescension, as De Pent. Ro^. li. 1. c. 6. in
resp. ad tertium arg.
Bellarmine would bear the world in hand, and by this shift elude this
pregnant testimony; but he acknowledged himself by his place and Office to be
bound thereunto, even by that relation wherein he stood to the Presbyters, and
the Presbyters to him, Sed cum ad vot per Dei gratiam venero, tunc de iis quae
velgesta sant, vet gerenda sicut mutune bonor poscit, in commune tractabimus,
id. ib.
by virtue of that honor which they mutually owed one to the other. As the
Presbyters and people did owe this honor to the Bishop that without his advice
and consent they ought not to do any thing; so the Bishop owed the same honor
unto them not to do any thing of his own head without their counsel and
consent. What Cyprian professes concerning himself, the late learned Daven.
det. quest. q. 41.
Bishop of Salisbury confesses was in all likelihood observed by the rest of
the godly Bishops in those days. How exorbitant from this rule the practices
of our Prelates have been, the Christian world does know full well; and he that
should go about to reduce them unto it, might deservedly be accounted Augiae
stabuli repurgator, as Annot. in cypr. loc. cit.
Gonlartius speaks, the purger of Augias stable so full of dung and filth,
that it would be an Herculean labor for to cleanse it. True it is that when
the title of Bishop was restrained unto one of the Presbyters, there did within
a little after begin to be a kind of reservation and restriction of some of
those acts and Offices which were before common to all the Presbyters. This was
done for orders sake, pro bono pacis, for the preservation of the Churches
peace, and for the honor of the Bishop, who being chosen by the consent of the
Presbyters and people, had now a Presidentship over them, and so after a sort a
Majoritie of administration Majoritas administrationis, quae quidem
administratio a jurisdictione pender, ex consensu suljectionalt partim
constu^^tur. s^^ut dicunus ^lectum in cligences (ex eo quod habet
administrationem ordinariam) habere jurisdictionem Conc. Carth. l. 2. c. 13. p.
7.7. ed. Bas cum priv. Cas Majest. ex off. Henrici-Petrina.
ex consensu subjectionali as Cardinal Cusanus has it, from the free and
voluntary act of those who consented to the prelation of the Bishop, and
subjecting themselves unto him.

Ordination is one of those acts, the power whereof the Bishops do challenge
as one of those Prerogatives which belong to their Order, yet if you look into
the Quamvis. Chorcpiscopis and presbyteris ministerterum communis sit
dispensatio quaedam tamen ecclesiasticit regulis sibt prohibita noverint: sicut
est presbyterorum and diacomnorum. ^ut virginum consecratio, sicut conss i^utio
altaris, ac benedictio velur^ctio Syn. Hispal. 2. sub Stsekulo can. 7. ap. Cent
Maga cent. 7. c. 9. col. 142.
Canons of the second Council of Hispalis, which was held at least 600. years
after Christ, you shall find this reckoned up among other particulars, which
the Presbyters are there commanded to know are prohibited them by Imperial and
Ecolesiasticall constitutions. And mark I pray you the reason why they might
not meddle with this and other acts, Quoniam quamquam consecrationem habeant,
Pontificatue tamen apicem non habent; quem satis deberi episcopis ^^thoritate,
canonum praecipitur, ^^ per hoc. and disc^^^io graduum, and dignitatis
sast^gium summi pontificit dem^ns^^etur. Ibid.
the name and title of Bishop is by the Canons of the Church limited unto one,
and by the same power are these Offices limited also, that so the difference of
degrees (which the Church had put between a Bishop and a Presbyter) and the
honor of the Bishop might be manifested. So the Fathers in that Council. The
same is acknowledged in the Solum propter authoritatem sum sacerdeti
Clericorum ordinatio and consecratio reservata est, ne a multis discipline
ecclesiae vindicata co^cordiam soiveret, scandala generaret. Concit. Aquisgran.
ap. Eocbel. decret. Eccl. Gald. 5. tit. 8. ca. 88. page 784.
Council of Aquisgran, an. 816. in the days of Ludovicus the first.
Ordination is reserved to the Bishops only for authority, or as an ensign of
his honor, and for the prevention of scandals and divisions in the Church, but
as for a difference out of the word of God between a Bishop and a Presbyter,
they prove at large from the Apostles words to Titus, Timothy, and Act. 20.
that there is none, but Bishops and Presbyters are one and the same; yet did
not this reservation by an Ecclesiastical canon put the power of Ordination
into the hands of the Bishop alone, so as that he might do it without the
concurrence of his Presbyters. But as the Presbyters were by the Canon of the
Church prohibited to ordain, so was the Bishop by the same Canonical
constitutions prohibited to do it without their consent. Episcopus sine
concilio clericorum suorum clericos non ordinet. Conc. Carth. 4. can. 22.
Let not a Bishop ordain Clergymen without the counsel of his Clergy,
says the Canon of the Council of Carthage, registered by Did. 24. ca. 6.
Episcopus.
Gratian in the Canon Law: which who so will be pleased to consult shall find
that his Glossator Glossa in locum. Vide etian^ did. 67. cap. 1. and Glos in
ver. Sacerdotes.
Semeca does answer an objection made to the contrary, and proves that the word
solus, where it is said the Bishop alone may give honor, and alone may take it
away, does exclude other Bishops, but not his own Clergy. So that a Bishop
with his own Clergy might ordain, without the consent of other Bishops, but
not do it alone by his own peerless power, without the rest of his Clergy
consenting to, and concurring with him in the action. In this regard it was
decreed in the eleventh Council of Toledo in Spain, Did. 23. cap. Presbyter.
When a Bishop does lay his hands on the head of him who was to be ordained,
let all the Presbyters who are present lay on their hands also by the hand of
the Bishop. Presbyters have you see a share with the Bishop in the imposition
of hands at Ordination, which they do, Iren. Forb. lib. 2. cap. 11. page 163.
not only as consenting to the ordination, says Forbesius, (for the consent of
the people was also required, yet never were they sharers in this Act of
Imposition of hands, and Ordination whereby an Ecclesiastical power is
conferred, as both he and De rep. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 2. n. 51. p. 187.
Spalatensis have observed, but by suffrage did they manifest their approbation
of the person elected, or their election of him that was to be ordained)
Tanquam ordinantes, seu ordinem conferentes, and ex porestate ordinandi
diviritus accepta, gratiam ordinate, boc adhibito ritu, apprecantes. Forb. ubi
supra.
but as those which were Co-ordainers with the Bishop, and by the power, of
Ordination received from the Lord, praying for grace to be conferred on the
person ordained by them and the Bishop. This Canonical restriction of
Ordination to the Bishop did no more invalidate the power of Presbyters to
ordain by virtue of their Presbyteriall order, then if a Canon should have
been made to inhibite a Presbyter to baptize, to preach, to administer the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the presence, or without the consent of the
Bishop, it would be of force thence to conclude that a Presbyter as a
Presbyter, by virtue of his order might not perform these Presbyteriall acts
and offices. It is not unknown that long agone even in the days of Dandi
quidem [Baptism] habet jus summus Sacerdos qiuest Episcopus, debinc Presbyteri
and Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi authoritate, propter Ecclesiae honorem Quo
salvo, salva pax est. Tertull de ^ap. c. 17.
Tertullian there began to be a reservation of Baptism to the Bishop, that
Presbyters and Deacons might not do it without the leave of the Bishop, all
which was done (on the same ground that Ordination was, as has been showed
before) for the honor of the Bishop, to whom the Church had conferred honor,
and for the Churches peace: yet none did ever infer from thence that this did
properly belong to the Bishop, and that a Presbyter might not do it, except he
had a Bishops license. But if the Veteres a Baptismo a^i ordinationem
argumentatos suisse patet ex Magistro. l. 4. did. 25. Sadcel. resp. ad ^urr
Sopb. ^ ^40.
Master of the Sentences may be believed, albeit Ordination was limited to the
Bishop, yet did the ancients argue from the power of administering Baptism to
the power of Ordination; Presbyters might baptize, therefore they might
ordain. Thus did they reason for the power, even then when the execution of
the power was by canonicall-constitution restrained and shut up, sub certis
terminis positivis propter melius, as Conc. Cath. l. 2. c. 13.
Cusanus speaks in the like case, within certain positive limits and bounds,
and that for the good and benefit of the Church, as it seemed unto them which
first made, and afterward continued those limitations and restrictions. Thus
much for Ordination.

Jurisdiction is the next thing wherein the Bishops do claim a peerless
power; this respects either Presbyters subjected to censure and power of
Jurisdiction in case of delinquency, or the people, in the sentence of
Excommunication. The field is very large, I will not expatiate, but only tender
some few gleanings which I had gathered in the course of my studies in this
argument; I will not insist on that Episcopus nullius causam audiat absque
praesentia clericorum, alioquin irrita erit sententia episcopi, nifi clericorum
praesentia confirmetur. Conc. Carth. 4. can. 23.
Canon of the Council of Carthage which prohibiteth the Bishop to meddle with
the hearing of any cause but in the presence of his Clergy, and pronounces
the sentence of the Bishop void if it were not by them confirmed. Concerning
which Canon Dr Downham himself thus speaks. Defense of his Sermon, ti. 1. p.
179.
Seeing good laws arise from bad manners: It is to be imagined that the
Presence of the Clergy, and Assistance of the Presbyters (who were the Bishops
Coassessors, and from the beginning were appointed Judges of causes as himself
does Ibid. p. 177.
acknowledge) was neglected; and this neglect gave occasion to the making of
this Canon. What is by the Fathers in this Synod decreed concerning the
Cognizance of causes in general, is afterward (for that Council was held
about the year 401.) by Si quid de quocunque clerico ad aures tuas pervenerit,
quod is just possit effendere, non facile credas; nec ad vindictam te ret
accendat incognita, sed praesentitus senioribus ecclesiae tuae diligenter est
veritas perscrutanda, and tunc si qualttas rei poposcerit, canonica districtio
culpam scriat delinquentis. Greg. regist. epist li. 11. indict. 6. epist. 49.
prout citatur apud Great. sed in edit. eper Greg. an. 1615. est epist. 51. ad
I^han. Episc. Panermit.
Gregory the Great mentioned and commanded in particular to be observed in the
cause of a Presbyter, against whom accusations are brought, or fame is raised;
for he commands the Bishop to whom he writes that in such cases he should in
the presence of the Seniors of the Church make diligent inquiry into the
matter, and then proceed to a Canonical censure as the quality of the crime
should require: Yea In epist. ad Cler. Eccles. Tornac. apud Cat. test. verit.
l. 9. col. 1000.
Hincmarus the Archbishop of Rhemes prescribes the same course to be followed,
citing the very words of Gregory for it. I will only touch on some Canonical
Constitutions which have regulated the power of the Bishops in point of
Jurisdiction over the Presbyters. Who so will take the pains to consult Cause.
15. q. 7. Cap. 1.
Gratian, the Compiler of the Canon Law shall find sundry Canons of more then
one Council of Carthage (to wit, Carthag. 1. can. 11. and Council. Carthag. 2.
c. 10. and Council. Carthag. 3. can. 8.) ordaining that in case any crime were
objected against a Presbyter, the cause should be heard by six Bishops, the
cause of a Deaon accused, should be heard by three, besides his own Bishop.
This order in one of those Councels is thus ratified, Carth. 2. can. 10.
Ab universis episcopis dictum est; veterum statut^ a nobis debere servari. It
was said by all the Bishops, that we ought to observe the statutes of the
ancient Fathers. Whereunto may be added this, that when in the Council of
Hispalis complaints were made that this rule was broken, it was by the Fathers
in that Synod ordered that Statutum est juxta priscorum Pa^rum decretum.
synodati sententia, quod nollus fine concilii exam ne dejiciendum quemtibet
presbyterum, vel Diaconum au leat. Na^ multi suni qui indiscussos potestate
tyrannica, non au^boritate canonica damaant. Syn. Hisp. a. act. 6. Cent. Magd.
cent. 7. cap. 2. col. 142.
no Bishop should presume to put down a Presbyter or Deacon without examination
before a Council. The contrary practice of some was adjudged to be the
exercise of a tyrannical power, not of Canonical authority. I will not tire
your patience with repetition of the same decree revived and confirmed in
another Council. Tribu. an. 895. ca^. ^. ap. Cent. Magd. cen. 9. c. 9. co^. 262.
Council almost 900. years after Christ. Only this I will add; that, This
ancient order of the Council and consent of six Bishops in the case of a
Presbyters deposition from his place, was not neglected by any regular
allowance, until the Apostasy of Antichrist so far prevailed, that the Gospel
in the sincere and Orthodoxe Profession thereof was persecuted under the name
of heresy. In this case Gregory the ninth (whose Decretals were published, an.
1230.) gave a Quaniam Episcoporum unmerus ad degra dationem Clericorum a
Canonibus constitutus, non p^^est de socili convenire: Concedtmus ut
sacerdotem, vel alium clericum in sacris ordinibus constitutum (cum pro heresi
suerit curiae seaulari relinquendus aut perpetuo immurand^^) ^onvocatis
Abbatibus, altisque praelatis ac Religiosis personis, ac literatis s^^^
Diocesis, de quibus expedire videbatur, suus solus possit Epis ^opiu degradase.
Sext. decret lib 5. tit. 2. ca. 1.
dispensation, that the Diocesan Bishop alone in the presence of his Abbots
with some Priests and other religious or learned persons of the Diocese might
proceed to the sentence. In all cases heresy excepted, the forementioned
Ordinances of a Synodall audience for the Deposition of a Presbyter stood in
force in succeeding ages, as that learned Canonist Instit. Iur. Can. lib. 1.
tit. 20.
Paulus Lancelotus has observed. By this which has been spoken let the
indifferent and impartial Reader judge of the practices of our Prelates, how
strangely exorbitant, that I say not tyrannical in a very high degree they
have been, in their proceedings, and execution of that Jurisdiction which they
have usurped.

Excommunication is another branch of Jurisdiction, which is claimed also by
the Bishops as properly belonging unto them. Davenant, abi. supra. Mucro
episcopalis, and fulmen epis^opale.
They tell us this Ecclesiastical censure was always accounted the Bishops
sword, and the Bishops thunderbolt: and indeed since they have taken the power
thereof into their hands, and as they have managed it, it has been an
Episcopal thunderbolt, that is to say, brutum fulmen, a thunderbolt which does
neither fright nor hurt any; the denuntiation of this sentence, being much
corrupted (that I say not quite altered) from the practice of the Apostles, and
the Church in former days, when no punishment was imposed without great
lamentation of the multitude, and greater of the better sort, says the Lib. 4.
p. 330.
Author of the History of the Council of Trent; which he does prove from those
expressions of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.
Ye have not lamented, to separate such an one from among you. And 2 Cor. 12.
I fear that at my coming I shall lament many of those who have sinned before.
But as for those amongst us which have challenged this power, and taken it into
their hands, they have rather carried themselves like Salomons fool or
madman, which casts arrows, firebrands and death, and yet says, Am I not
in sport. Concerning this, you are not ignorant what Hierome said of old,
Presbytero licet, si peccavero, tradere me Satanae. in Ep. ad Heliod.
A Presbyter may deliver me to Satan if I offend. However this power has been
by the Prelates wrested out of the hands of Presbyters, yet there have not been
wanting those, who, when Prelates were in the height of all their pride, and
darted out their thunderbolts as it pleased them, have maintained that the
power of denouncing and executing that sentence did belong to the Presbyters. I
will only produce a witness or two in this, and proceed. Defensor pacis part.
2. cap. 15. page 256.
Marsilius Patavinus disputing concerning the order of Priesthood, or of a
Presbyter (for they are all one) and the power of the Keys to bind and loose,
observes out of the forementioned Father, the Church has these Keys in the
Presbyters and Bishops, and gives this reason why Hierome speaking of this
power of the Keys, does mention Presbyters before the Bishops, Preponens in
boc pretbyteros, quoniam authoritas baec d^betur presbytero in quantum
presbyter, primo and secundum quod ipsum.
because this authority belongs to a Presbyter as a Presbyter primarily and
properly. From the same Author I first took notice of this, Cap 6 page 165 in
init.
albeit Timothy (a Bishop as our Hierarchists say) was then at Corinth when the
Apostle gives charge to excommunicate the incestuous person, yet we hear not a
word of command to the Bishop to do it, but a mandate unto others. When ye are
gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, to
deliver such an one unto Satan. The charge is given to the Presbyters of
Corinth, it was not the act of one, but of 2 Cor 2.6.
many who did denounce and execute the sentence on him. Had it been proper to a
Bishop St Paul would not have so much forgotten himself, as to lay the blame
and burden upon others, and omit the mention of him. I find also that Glos.
in cause. 2 q. 1. ca. 11. verbo Excommunicet. Ecclesiarum praelati de jure
communi possunt excommunicare, licet episcopi jam praescripserint contra multos
praelatos.
Bartholomaeus Brixniensis and Johannes Semeca both Glossators of the Canon
Law, do maintain and prove even out of it, that by right Presbyters may
excommunicate, though the Bishops by custom and Prescription have taken the
power out of their hands. The same Interpreters of the Canon Law agree in this
also. Non debet Episcopus revocare sententias excommunicationis just lat as ab
eorum praelatis, sine little consensit. Gloss. in did. 50. cap 64. verb.
injungere.
A Bishop ought not to revoke the sentence of excommunication which a Priest
has on just ground pronounced, without the Priests consent which did pronounce
it.

By this which has been spoken, it is evident I hope, that though there were a
Primacy granted, yet at first the Bishop had no Superiority of power, much
less was the power of Ordination or Jurisdiction put into his hands alone: you
are not ignorant that Calvin, Bucer, Bullinger, and Zanchie have maintained
that the Bishop was at first no other then a President of the Presbytery, his
Act and Office in their meeting, as of the Consul in the Senate, to propound
matters, to gather votes, and declare the resolutions of the Presbytery: With
what scorn this is rejected by our Episcopal Monarchs you all know, as if
they were the mere fancies of Calvin's brain, and the testimony of the rest
(which confirm their assertions by pregnant passages out of antiquity)
slighted, because they are Disciplinarians of the Geneva cut. If Protestant
Divines be not regarded, let us see whether the judgment of a Friar, and
consent of a Jesuit, will be of more weight with our Prelates, there is good
reason to expect it, considering that Papists and Prelates were so linked
together in their votes, (whilst they had any) Jesuits and Bishops are at
this day (as all the world sees) so nearly conjoined in their designs. The
Friar is Petrus Suavis that Historian of note, who discoursing at large
touching the Original of Episcopal power, and Church censures, as they were
anciently administered, tells us, Hist. of the Council of Trent. lib. 4. p. ^3^.
The judgment of the Church, as is necessary in every multitude was to be
conducted by one, who should preside and guide the action, propose the matters,
and collect the points to be consulted on. This care due to the more principal
and worthy person, was always committed to the Bishop. Judge now, I pray you,
Fathers and Brethren, whether this be any more then to be a President of the
Presbytery, or Senate Ecclesiastical. How the Bishops power came afterward
to be ampliated, you shall there find set forth to the full; the passages are
all of them too large for me to repeat, or transcribe; they are worth his
reading that shall take pains to peruse them. I shall only mention one, Ibid.
pa. 331.
The goodness and charity of the Bishops (mark this, I pray you, he does not
say the Superiority and power, but the goodness and charity of the Bishops)
made their opinion for the most part to be followed, and by little and little
was the cause that the Church, charity waxing cold, and not regarding the
charge laid upon them by Christ, did leave the care to the Bishop; and ambition
a witty passion, which does insinuate it self in the show of virtue, did cause
it to be readily embraced. This and much more that Friar in the same place. The
Jesuit is Salmeron, who expounding the words of the Apostle to Titus, I left
thee in Creete to ordain Elders in every City, positively affirms Nec hoc
loco permisit Paulus Tito ut praefi^iat omnibus ecclesiis ministros: baec enim
regia esset potestas, and ju^ eligendi tolleretur ecclesiis,and Pastorum
collegto judicium adimeretur. Sed hoc tantum jubet Apostotus ut omnibus
electionibus praesit tanquam moderator, and electos orat^one, jejunio, and
impositione manuum consecrare^, u^ habes, Act. 6. 13, 14. Ob id enim Titum
prius a se ordinatum Episcopum reliquit, ut alios ipse constitueret: sicut
d^^itur Consul aut Dictator Consutes alios creasse, quia Comitia de eis
eligendis babuerunt, Salm. in Tit. 1 disp. 1.
Paul did not in that place permit Titus alone to set Ministers over the
Churches, for this were to invest him with a Kingly power, and by this means
the right of Election should be taken away from the Churches, and the judgment
should be taken away from the College of Pastors. But the Apostle does only
command him this that he should be President at all elections as a Moderator,
that he should by prayer, fasting, and Imposition of hands consecrate those
that were chosen, as the Apostles themselves did, Act. 6.13, 14. For this cause
did he leave Titus, ordained a Bishop formerly, that he should ordain others,
as the Consul or Dictator is said to create Consuls, because they held the
Comitia, the Assemblies for the election and creation of them. This being a
truth so clear, confirmed, as you see, by testimonies on all hands, I wonder
with what face it is spoken against, Episc. by div. right. pa. 120.
and another passage out of Hicrome, Tanquam imperator in exercitu, as the
General in the Army, brought in obtorto collo quite against the hair. For
Hierome In Epist. ad Evagr.
in that place speaks not concerning the power which the Bishop had over the
Presbyters, but concerning the manner of his prelation, to wit, by the free
election of the Presbyters of Alexandria, who did choose one out of their own
company, whom they placed in an higher degree, and called Bishop. This form of
prelation, by election, he does there illustrate by two examples, 1. Quomodo si
exercitus imperatorem sactat, aut Diacone eligant de se quem industrium
noverint, and Arcbidiaconum vocent. ibid.
Of soldiers in an army making choice of a General and Commander in chief
over them; but the Father does not say the Bishop carried himself as a
General in an army, or had power given him answerable to the power of a
General. Nay on the contrary he tells the Bishops in plain terms they Sicut
ergo Presbyteri sciunt se ex ecclesiae consuetudine, ei qui sibi praepositus
suerit subjectos esse: ita Epis^opi nover^^^ so magis consuetudine, quam
dispositionis Domini^ae veritate Presby^e^u esse majores: and in communi debere
Ecclesiam regere: in Epist ad Titum. ca. 1.
ought to govern the Church by the common counsel of the Presbyters, above
whom they are by the custom of the Church advanced. 2. He instanceth in the
fact of Deacons, making choice of one whom they know to be industrious, and set
him to be Archdeacon over them. This latter passage is cunningly omitted, the
former misalleadged and fraudulently perverted, because the one cuts the comb
of Episcopal Dominion, the other, as it is wrested, seems at first sight to
uphold or favor it. Indeed the execution of Martial Law has well pleased
them which are now turned Martialists. It is too well known how they have
hanged up Ministers ad placitum at their pleasure, by their suspensions,
excommunications, deprivations, Conc. Hisp. 2. act. 6. ap. cent. Magd^cent. 7.
cap 9.
by a tyrannical power, not canonical authority, as was complained of old
against some Prelates, in the second Council of Hispalis. But ab initio non
fuit sic, from the beginning it was not so. The College of Presbyters granted
unto the Bishop the chiefest seat in their public meetings, and gave honor to
him as to their Senior, and he was commanded to carry himself toward them as
toward his Colleagues, by the Episcopus in quolibet loco sedens stare Presterum
non patiatur, Conc Carth. 4. can. 34. Episcopus in ecclesia and consessu
presbuterorum sublimior sedeat, Intra domum vero collegam se Presbyterorum
cognoscat. can. 35. ap Great did. 95.
Canons of the fourth Council of Carthage, unto which Canons registered by
Gratian this Summarie or title is prefixed, Episcopus non dominum, sed Collegam
se presby^erorum cognoseat
Let the Bishop know that he is not a Lord over, but Colleague of the
Presbyters. In this regard in the same Canonist, the Episcopi se sacerdotes
esse noverint non dominos, bonorent clericos quasi clericos, ut and it sis a
clericis quasi episcopis honos. eseratur, Great. did 95. ca. Es^o subjectus ex
Hier. ad Nepot. epist. 2.
Bishops are commanded to honor their Clergy as Clergymen, that so the Clergy
may reciprocally honor them as their Bishops. And the forementioned Hoc est
contra supercilium Episcoporum, qui subdiros appellant si^ios, cum debeant cos
appel. lare fratres. Cause. 8. q. 1. cap. Quid autem. vol soci^s cause. 10 q. 3.
cap. Cavendum. Gloss. in verb. quasi clerices.
Glossator Semeca has observed that this does sharply reprove the pride of
those Bishops who account them their subjects and underlings, whom they ought
to reckon of and call their brethren, and companions.

Last of all, when the Bishop began to be distinguished in name from the
Presbyters, and the forementioned Presidentship and Priority was granted him,
yet was he not thereby advanced to an order distinct from, and superior to the
order of Presbyters, but only to an higher degree in that Order. This is clear
by this, that at the first distinction of a Bishop from the Presbyters, there
was no new consecration or ordination of the Bishop. Antonius de Dominis, a man
Prelaticall enough, does confess, induced thereunto by the clear testimony
of Ambrose, De rep. eccl. lib. 3. cap. 3. n. 2.
at the beginning, whenever a Bishop dyed, and the Episcopal throne was
vacant, there was not so much as an election of him that was to succeed (much
less any new ordination) but the eldest Presbyter came prosently in the room
of the deceased Bishop. The words of Ambrose are express for it. Primi
pretbyteri Episcopi appellabautur, ut recedente co, sequent ei succederet. in 4
ca. ad Ephesians.
The first Presbyters were called Bishops, so as that when he (to wit the first
or eldest Presbyter) departed, the next did succeed him. Thus it was at first,
the reason why this order was changed, that Episcopacie should be conferred by
Election, not by Succession, is there given by the same Father. Quia caperunt
sequentes Presbyteri indigul inveniri ad primatus tenendes, immatata est ratio,
prospiciente Concilie, ut non ordo sed meritum crearet Episcopum, multerum
Sacerdotum judlcio constitutum, ne indigum temer^ usurparer, and esset multis
scanlalum. id. ibid.
Because the Presbyters which followed were found unworthy to hold that
Primacy, the manner of prelation was purposely changed, that worth not order
should make a Bishop, being appointed by the judgment of many Presbyters, lest
an unworthy person should rashly usurp the place and honor, and so prove
scandalous to many. Yet did he that was named the Bishop remain still a
Presbyter, as the same Post Episcopum diaconi ordinationem subjicit. Quare?
nisi quia Episcopi and diaconi una ordinatio est, uterque enim est sacerdes,
sed Episcopus primus; ut omnis Episcopus Presbyter sit, non omnis Presbyter
Episcopus Hic enim Episcopus est, qui inter Presbyteres primus. Ambr. in ^ Tim.
cap. 3.
Ambrose testifies, though he was accounted the Bishop who was the first of
the Presbyters, and in that respect the chiefest. As for the Bishops of
Alexandria, they had no other Ordination then the free election of their
Presbyters, as is evident from the formerly alleged passages of In Epist. ad
Evagr.
Hierome. Whence our learned and laborious Willet does acknowledge, Syn. Papis.
cont. 5. q. 3. p. 177.
the special consecration of Bishops was ordained only for the dignity of
that calling. So that what was in the first institution of it devised and
ordained merely for the dignity and honor of that Episcopal function, that
is Episc. by div. light. page 105.
now made use of as an argument to prove from thence a distinction of order. In
a word De Invent. ver. l. 4. cap. 6. p. 276.
Polydore Virgil does confess, that anciently in the consecrating of a Bishop,
there were no other ceremonies then these that the people met together to give
their testimony and suffrage in the Election, both Ministers and people did
pray, and the Presbyters gave imposition of hands. Which does manifestly prove
that both Bishop and Presbyter were one order not distinct, even then when
there was in some respects a difference made between them. And long after this
distinction began, Johannes Parisiensis in lib. depotestate reg^^ and Papali,
quem So^bona approbavit, assicaat Presbyteros non esse Pontisiribus inferiores,
quod ad essentralem ministerii dignitatem attinet. Idque consirmat ratione hac,
quod eorum ordinatio conslet iisdem verbis quibus and Episcooporum, and
Apostolorum, viz. Accipite Sp sanctam. and Quodcunque tigaveritis in terra,
erit ligatum in c^. ^. Test D. Plesseo libd^ eccl. ca 12. p 252.
Johannes Parisiensis in a treatise of his concerning the power of the King and
of the Pope (which was approved by the Sorbon of Paris) maintains that
Presbyters are not inferior to Bishops, which he does prove by this, they have
one and the same ordination, as that noble Frenchman Philip Morney has
observed. Now admit we yield unto our Hierarchists, that the Angel here spoken
of is in the forementioned sense and kind a Bishop, the Senior of the
Presbyters, and President of the Presbytery, as In locum.
Beza takes it, and Conference with Heart, chapter 8. div. 3. p. 535.
Doctor Reinolds, whose judgment of this place the Archbishop of Armagh has
published with some additions of his own out of antiquity; yet what is all this
to a Bishop in order distinguished from, and superior in power to the
Presbyters. Our learned countryman Dr Reinolds does not say, that this Angel or
President of the Presbytery was such a Bishop, nor does the Reverend Primate
of Armagh say that he was of a different order; but only that the name of
Bishop was limited to him that had the Presidentship. Who that was has been
expressed before by the clear testimony of Ambrose, to which Austin does
agree, Tom. 4. quest. exutroq. mixt^m cap. 101.
saying, Quid est episcopus, nisi primus Presbyter, hoc est summus sacerdos?
Much less does Dr Reinolds affirm that he which had the President^hip had it
by divine right, or undertake to prove or infer from hence a distinction in
Order between a Bishop and a Presbyter by the word of God; for if so he should
contradict himself, having expressed his judgment to the contrary, and proved
it both by Scriptures, and by variety of other authors In his letter to Sir
Francis Knollys, which was reprinted about the same time that the Archbishop of
Armagh published this piece of Dr Reinolds with his own Additions.
Whether this be not a weak inference, or rather a strange Non sequitur; The
Angel of Ephesus was a President of the Presbytery of Ephesus, therefore he
was a Bishop differenced in order from and superior in power to the Presbyters
of Ephesus, let any reasonable man judge. It is well known that the Speakers of
both Houses of Parliament are Presidents, as it were, yet not by their
Presidentship advanced to an higher order, the one is a Peer, the other a
Commoner, though as Speakers they are in some sort differenced from the Peers
and Commons. The Prolocutor in a Convocation as it stood formerly was by order
a Clarke, and no more, though as Prolocutor he had a Presidentship over the
Clarks of the Convocation. Such was the preeminence of him that was President
of the Presbytery. In which regard Beza, though he grant the Angel here to be
the President, yet might justly and on good ground maintain, Hinc statui
episcopalis ille gradus posteae humanltus in ecclesiam Dei invectus, certe nec
potest nec debet. Beza in loc.
that from hence that Episcopal degree, which was afterward by men brought
into the Church of God, neither may nor ought to be established.

Thus have you, Fathers and Brethren, some of my thoughts concerning this
argument of Episcopacie, contracted into as narrow a compass as I could.
Wherein I have endeavored to prove, that the Angel in my text is not a Bishop
distinct from a Presbyter in Order, Office, and fixed Superiority, and so to
disprove their Institution de Jure divino. Concerning which their pretended
original, I cannot but assent unto the judgment of a learned Divine amongst
us, one that is well known to be a man of great reading, and insight in
antiquity, as also to be no Puritan, M. S. deschismate.
They but abuse themselves and others, that would persuade us that Bishops by
Christ's Institution have any Superiority over other men, farther then of
reverence, or that any Bishop is superior to another further then positive
order agreed upon amongst Christians has prescribed. For we have believed him
that taught us, that in Christ Jesus there is neither high nor low, and in
giving honor every man should preserre another before himself: which sayings
most excellently cut off all claim to superiority, by title of Christianity,
except we can think these things were spoken to poor and private men. Nature
and Religion agree in this, that neither of them has an hand in this heraldry
of Secundum, sub and supra. All this comes from composition and agreement of
men amongst themselves. Wherefore this abuse of Christianity, to make it a
Lackey to ambition, is a vice for which I have no extraordinary name of
Ignominy, and an ordinary I will not give it, lest you should take so
transcendent a vice to be but trivial. Thus the forementioned Divine clearly
overthrowing their superiority by Divine right; from which if our Prelaticall
men be beaten, let them not wonder that they should be cashiered as Usurpers
and Intruders. For, not to insist on their doom out of the book of God, we
will be content to take them at their own word, if they dare stand to it, and
let them have their option. You know what a Bravado the Humble Remonstrant has
made, as being willing to put it to this issue, if they be not able to prove
their Divine Institution, they are content to be hissed out of all Christian
Congregations. The like brag and challenge is made by a late Bishop Hall, part.
2.. 10. p. 129.
Patron of Episcopacie, who seems to be very near of kin to the
Remonstrant in confidence and silken language. As for continuance in their
places and dignities Jure humano by the Law of man. First, of all they scorn
(you see, and all the world knows it) that tenure, and therefore it is not fit
that they should have the benefit of it. Secondly, Though they should be
willing to stick to it, yet it is neither convenient nor necessary, that they
should here plead custom and prescription, at leastwise that the plea should
be in force inviolably against an alteration. Ludovicus Arelatensis in his
speech against Panormitan in the Council of Basil having proved out of the
Fathers that by the Word of God there is no difference between a Bishop and a
Presbyter, has foretold the Si pront Hieronymo placet, Episcopt sunt sola
confuetudine praelati pres. byteris, utique fie ri potest ut consuetudinem
toltat contraria consuetudo. Aen. Syl lib. ^^ de gest. con^ Basil. ap Orth.
Gra. in fascia rer. expet. fol. 12.
Possibility of changing this frame of government brought into the Church
merely by custom. Especially when the inconveniences of that custom, which
came in by degrees, and was embraced at first under a plausible pretense of
good and benefit, shall be discovered, and the burden of it become
insufferable. This is that which Beza does intimate upon my text, that the
(...) or President should not have been perpetual; however Bishop Hall, loc.
cit p. 125.
one of late looking on his words with an Episcopal pair of spectacles,
blesses himself at the reading of them, as if some foul feind or other did
fright him, threatening to pull the Mytre off his head, the Rochet off his
back, and wrest the Crozier Staff out of his hands. Let the impartial and
unprejudicated Reader peruse his Imone perpetuum quidem istud (...) munm esse
necessario oportuisse, sicut exortae inde ^yrannis ol^garchica (oujus apex est
Anticbristians bestia) certissima cuns totius non ecclesiae ^^do, s^d (...)
^rbis pernicie, nunc tandem declarat. Bez. in Ap^c. 2.1.
words, and if I mistake not, you will find no more but this, he shows by the
evil consequents which followed, viz. the tyranny of Prelates, and promotion
of Antichrist, to the ruin of the Church and confusion of the whole world
almost, which followed upon that perpetual Presidentship, that it should not
have been perpetual; he does not question whether it were perpetual or not,
nor say it was not, as the Prelate does wrest his words; but says it appears
now at length it ought not to have been, for as much as it proved in the end of
such dangerous consequence, and so pernicious unto both Church and States. If
on the forementioned, and other grounds which might be named, we all agree to
renounce it, and cast it off, we herein do no more, then what we have a
dispensation for from a great Master of the ceremonies (yet one whom for his
learning, and elaborate pains against the Papists I shall ever honor) who,
having maintained the Position of Protestants concerning the indistinction of a
Bishop and Presbyter by the Word of God, by the testimonies of Papists
themselves (as his usual course is) and vindicated it from the imputation of
Aerianisme and Heresic Absit ut praxin Ecclesiasticam, quae ad tollendum
schisma instituta suit, per schisma perrunpere velimus, and non potius came
sancte and humiliter colamus: dummodo (quod in esclesia vestr^ Patres
conci^orum graviter dolebant) schismatis remedium non pariat venenum tyrannidis
Morto^. Apo. Cath. lib. 1. cap. 33. in sine.
, does indeed dislike a schismatic opposition against Episcopacy, and the
practice of the Church therein, desiring it should be observed holily and with
humility, yet with this Proviso, So that the remedy of schism do not produce
the poison of tyranny. So that by his own concession, when once the remedy is
turned into poison, and so become not only as bad, but also worse then the
disease, it is then by all means lawful and possible to be expelled. If this
satisfy not, but our Hierarchists will still quarrel and complain of
schism, faction and disorderly proceedings; I shall return them the same
answer which Dr Bilson, a man sufficiently Hierarchicall, gives the Jesuits,
who complained that matters of Religion were in Queen Elizabeth's days
established by a Lay-Parliament (who were not to meddle with Church affairs)
without consent of the Prelates and their popish Clergy. D^ffer. betvv.
Christ. subject. and unchrist. rebel. part. 3. p. 299. caii. Land. an. 1586.
The Christian Princes, take which you will, that first received, and after
wards restored the faith in their Empires and Kingdoms, tied not themselves to
the voices and suffrages of their Clergy which were in present possession of
their Churches, but eft-times removed them without counsel or common
consultation. And a little after, Why restrain you truth to the assemblies and
sentences of Popes and Prelates, as though they must be gently entreated and
fairly offered by Christ, before he might attempt or should recover his own.
When the Jesuits reply, We would have things done in order. The Doctor
returns them this answer, Call you that order where Christ shall stand
without doors till your Clergy consent to bring him in? Afterward, when the
Jesuits urge a Commission and lawful authority; Page 300.
He that is sent to preach (says the Doctor) may not hold his tongue till my
Lord the Pope (you may think if you please on him, who would feign be
reinvested in that title, which once his Predecessor had, being accounted,
alterius orbis Papa, the Pope of the other world) and his mytred fathers can
intend to meet, and list to consent to the ruin, as they coceive, of their
dignities and liberties. Despise you Councels? say the Jesuits: Page 301.
By no means, says the Dr, so long as they be Councels, that is sober and
free conferences of learned and godly teachers: but if they wax wanton against
Christ, and will not have truth received till they have consented, which is the
disposition of our Prelates and their adherents at this day, we reject them as
conspiracies of the wicked, which no Christian ought to reverence. Thus far
Doctor Bilson. The conclusion of Clemangiis in his complaint of the
exorbitancies of Prelates shall close up my discourse, Tract. de Prae^ulib.
Sim. in sine. p. 166.
Expergiseere Domine tandem aliquando; Awake, O Lord, at length, look down
upon us, pity us and visit thy Church with thy salvation. Heal her, for there
is none but thou can cure her, Power into her wounds the wine of reproof,
and oil of consolation. Take thy fan into thy hand, and thoroughly purge thy
floor which is contaminated with so great, and such impure defilements. Purge
thy vineyard which is exceedingly over-growne with thorns. Make as of old a
whip of small cords, drive the money changers out of the Temple, cast out the
buyers and sellers, and exterminate out of the limits of thy Church all the
wicked merchants, unless they repent, amend and reform; Smite the Gehazites
with leprosy. Cast down and dash in pieces the Simonites, with their master
Simon, which are flowne so high, and by the ministry of Satan mounted up, so
that none can pull them down unless thou be pleased to do it. Or if we must
have an English Letanie to be used in all Collegiate and Cathedral Churches
and Chapels seeing our Prelates are grown so brazen-faced as to tell us, their
Jurisdiction is no other but charitable, Episc. by div. right, p. 137.
as charity managed the censures before so charity does it still; (yet I
think you all know, and so do others also, that their proceedings have been so
charitable, that we may truly say of them, what once Non ambigimus de rugitu
Leonu^^, quando viderimus Principes ecclesie ita in subditos populos detonare,
and vo^e tyrannica plebem conterere ut non pastore mingrege, sed Leonem inter
oviculas putes frendere. Hier. in Zeph. 3.
Hierome did of the Bishops in his days, they were more like to Lions roaring
among the sheep, then like shepherds set over the flock; or what Didacus Stella
of the Prelates in his time, when in charity they have come to visit, Non eo
ten lust animo (Praelati ad visitandum dioecesos suos) ut infirmis medeantur,
nec ut same pereuntes alique auxilio rest aurentur, sed ut eos exeuterent and
diviscerent. Admodum similes by praelati sunt reorum custodibus, qui damnatos
and in carcere detentos visitant, non ut aliquod solatii gonzs eis praestent,
sed ut dolorem augeant, catenas atque compedes fortius comprimendo. It a
nimirum, etc. Enar. in Luc. tom. 2. in cap. 10. p. 5. edit. Antwerp. an. 1622.
they come as the Jailer does to visit his Prisoners, that he may extort his
sees, see whether they be fast bound or not, and to lay more bolts on their
heels) were I fit to give advice to so grave and learned an Assembly, I
should desire this might be one branch of the Letanie, if we have any: From
Papal tyranny, and Prelates Charity, Good Lord deliver us. With this
directorie; Let all the people say, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 3. in marg. (...). ibid lin. ult. Clement. lege Clemangiis. p. 4. line 7.
licae. ^ loco. p. 14. l. 23 Hierodantia. l. Hierodoulia. p. 18. in morg. (...).
ibid. lia. 14 (...). p. 24. l. 26. Kingdom in. l. Kingdom of Heaven in. ib.
in m^rg. San. l. Sum. lb. lin. 30. because they are, they hold, l. because they
hold p. 38. l. 12. does necessarily, l. does not necessarily.

As for the rest, if there be any literal mistakes or such like errors, the
courteous Reader will e^^ly observe and correct them.


