A RECANTATION of Judge JENKINS, A Reverend and learned Father of the Laws,
delivered at Westminster the 10. of April 1647. to Mr. Corbet the Chaire-man of
the Committee of Examinaton, with his name subscribed thereunto. Wherein he
humbly submits himself to the power assumed by the two Houses of
Parliament, in opposition to the Kings Authority; together with a vindication
of the Negative Oath imposed by the power and Authority of the two Houses.
Published for the satisfaction of tender consciences, who pretend the
unlawfulness of taking the said negative Oath.
Gentlemen,
J Stand committed by the House of Commons for high Treason, for not
acknowledging, nor obeying the power of the two Houses by adhearing to the King
in this War: I deny this to be Treason: For the supreme and only power by the
Laws of the Land is the King, if I should submit to an Examination derived
from your power, which by the negative Oath stands in opposition to the Kings
power, I should confess the supreme power to be in you, and so condemn my
self for a Traitor, which I neither ought nor will do.

I am sworn to obey the King, and the Laws of the Land, by which Laws you
have no power to examine me, without the Kings Writ, Pattent, or Commission, if
you can produce any of these, I will answer the questions you shall propound,
otherwise I cannot answer, without the breach of my Oath, and the violation of
the Laws, which I will not do to save my life.

All the Members of this Parliament have, or ought to have sworn that the King
is our only and supreme governor; your Protestations, your Vows and Covenant,
your declarations all of them published to the Kingdom, that your scope was the
maintenance of the Laws: those Laws must be derived to us, and inlivened by
the only Supreme Governor, the fountain of Justice, and life of the Law, the
King.

Parliaments are called by his writs, the Judges sit by his Pattent, so of all
other Officers: All Cities and Corporate Towns, are Governed by the Kings
Charters, therefore I cannot be examined by you, unless your power were
derived from his Majesty, neither will I: Nor ought you to examine me upon any
question: But if as private Gentlemen you shall be pleased to ask me any
question, I shall really and truly answer every such question as you shall
demand.

April the 10. Anno. 1647. Vos habetis multos Milites: ego habetos multos
Annos; id Est. You have multitudes of Soldiers, and I ^ave many years. DAVID
IENKINS: Prisoner in the Tower of London.


