THE Return of the Sword OR A DIVINE PROGNOSTIC Delivered in a SERMON at
Newcastle: Manifesting that breach of Covenant is a Prognostic of the return
of the SWORD.

By ROBERT JENISON. Dr. of D.

LEVIT. 26.25. I will bring a Sword upon you, that shall avenge the Quarrel of
my Covenant.

EZEKIEL. 17.18, 19. Seeing he has despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant
(when lo he had given his hand) he shall not escape. As I live, says the Lord,
surely mine Oath that he has despised, and my Covenant that he has broken,
even it will I recompense on his own head.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for LUKE FAVVNE, at the sign of the Parrot in
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXLVIII.

To the indifferent Reader.
THese Sermon notes, lying by me, having been delivered on the day of a solemn
Thursday April 30. 1646
Fast, kept, as by the Kingdom of SCOTLAND and by their Garrison here, so by
us, who sympathizing with them, conceived their dangers and fears to be ours,
and who (for that one time) made our day of solemn humiliation theirs, which
yet we kept (for the place) alone by our selves; and finding that in all
likelihood, they may be as useful at this time, as then, and may tend to our
warning, by way of prevention; howsoever, to Gods glory and the justifying and
magnifying of his ways, whether of justice or of mercy: I conceived it would
conduce to those ends, if, transcribing, and, here and there, enlarging the
same, I made them, in this juncture of time, more public; as being a word or
two spoken in season: and that the rather because I have for my part been for
diverse years so unusefull to the Public and a stranger to mine own Nation,
though my willingness and endeavors were not wanting to have assisted in more
public employment with others; unto which being assigned, upon notice of a
time then set for the sitting of the Assembly of Divines, I undertook a long
and tedious as also hazardous From Dantzigk to London in July, 1642.
Voyage: but arriving and finding that then the Kings consent to their
assembling was expected and relied upon, and it very unlikely to be got; upon
leave obtained, I hastened to return unto my poor flock at Dantzigk, and was
content with some expense of time and money to undergo the same hazards: which
makes me now, as occasion offers, to be as serviceable to the public as I
may, according to my poor mite. My aim is, as the good and warning of such as
God intends good unto, so above all Gods Glory, in the acknowledgment of which
I hope they will join with me, whether it be in a way of Justice or Mercy.
Thine in the Lord

R. J.
Newcastle, March 23. 1647/8.
THE Return of the Sword, OR A DIVINE PROGNOSTIC.
JEREMIAH 34.22. Behold, I will command, says the Lord, and cause them to
return to this City, and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it
with fire, and I will make the Cities of Judah a desolation without an
inhabitant.


THis prediction and threat be to the enemies of God, The occasion of this Text.
of the King, and of all these three Kingdoms. Yet that it be not to us either
of this place, or to these three Kingdoms, let us take warning by it, and that
in better manner then those ^id to whom it was here uttered. It is not above
eight months (I take it) that this town, Septem. 1645. Newcastle.
with the adjacent Counties, were in great fears, by reason of the prevailings
of the E. of Monross and his party, who being at that time Master of all
Scotland made his approaches very near to England (his Scouts, as is said,
being then come within it:) though, upon the fears and prayers of his people of
both Kingdoms, by a miraculous providence he was met withal, routed, By Major
General middle^^^.
scattered, and himself sent back to his mountains: A mercy, by us of this
place, and (as may be thought, April 1646.
by others also) too soon forgotten. And now we hear of a dangerous and
seditious Band, under the name of an humble Remonstrance, etc. tending to the
violating and subvertion of our Covenants (say our brethren of Scotland in a
late Declaration of the (...) of the general A^^^mbly (...) Scotland And causes
of the Fast of this day.
Declaration of theirs) raising and fomenting jealousies ( in Scotland) and
between both Kingdoms, prolonging of the unnatural wars, and impeding the
intended uniformity in Religion. They hereupon, calling it and looking upon it
as a banding Remonstrance, a Divisive Band, and seeing their Land threatened
with a new Breach from the North, and in consideration of the late shameful
backsliding and compliance of many with the Enemies, of their want of
Reformation, and not taking warning by late judgments of sword and pestilence,
of their senceless ingratitude for drawing back his hand of pestilence, and for
giving a little breathing from the cruel insulting Enemy, and confessing it
just with God to send new troubles, etc. They hereupon, I say, have appointed a
solemn Thursday April 30. 1646
Fast to seek God, and that God, in the might of his power, would crush this
cockatrice egg, that it break not forth into a fiery flying serpent, etc.

Now they, and we, especially in these Northern parts of England, April 29.
being upon the like grounds, in the same ship of danger, (and the day of our
own monthly Fast calling on us for like duty) we cannot but sympathize and
join with them, and with their garrison here, And how we are conce^ned in it.
in regard of our common interest. And, though the storms be laid in the West
of England, yet, seeing new clouds to arise, in and from the North, we are not
to rest secure, but to look to keep our vows, promises and Covenant better then
we do or have done, and to maintain, what in us lies, peace and unity, first
with God, and then (according to our n^tional Covenant) with our neighbors, and
one with another; that so being Inseparable, Si^ Jacob Ashley.
we may also be Insuperable: seeing, as was said by the Commander who was last
taken and routed, and after the Kings last game was played, our, or the
Parliaments and (two) Kingdoms work was done, if we did not fall out among our
selves.

These things have occasioned this text at this time, which I shall very
briefly run through, and insist only, though not largely, on one chief
observation.

In this Chapter is the effect of two Sermons of the Prophet J^remy. The
occasion of these words


The first from Verse 1. to 8. where Jeremy prophesies the captivity of King
Zedekiah and the City Jerusalem, etc. at the time when they of Jerusalem were
in some distress by the Caldean forces, who fought against it, and against all
the Cities thereof.

The second from and with the 8. Verse to the end, when the siege was for some
space of time broken up upon the approach of some aid from Egypt, Verse 21. The
return of the Sword threatened.
whereby they were more hardened: For having in their danger, when the enemy
was at hand, made some show of remorse and repentance, renewed their Covenants
with God and the people, and made (by Covenant) some kind of Reformation by
proclaiming liberty to their Hebrew servants, whom, Exodus 21.2-11
against the Law of God and the limited time of six years, they kept in
service; now when their danger seemed to be over, they reassumed them contrary
to the Covenant of God, hoping the Caldeans would never return again to the
siege, from which they were gone, Jer. 37.5. Now for this their breach of
Govenant, they are here reproved, verse. 12, 13, etc. and threatened, ver^. 17,
18. and especially as here in my text;

Behold, I will command, etc.

From this coherence, we note, The coherence. Note how apt men are to make vows
and then to break them.
how ready men are in their straits and present dangers to vow and promise
largely both to God and man, yea and to do somewhat for present ease and
safety, but yet how forgetful to perform with either God or man, when their own
turn is served, and they delivered. An usual thing in all ages; See Judges
10.11, 12, 13-15, 16. Hosea 5.15. and 6.1. with 4.

The Reason hereof is the Deceitfulness, of men's hearts, Jer. 17.9. A notable
example of this we have Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. where the heart is not right
with God, men cannot be steadfast in his Covenant.

Use 1. There is no trusting such promises as men make to God

2. be wary and very considerate in vowing, promising and covenanting, as
knowing we have deceitful hearts, of which we should be jealous: Neither is it
to presume on our own strength for performance, as not in promising and vowing
to look to any low end, or to aim lower then Gods glory some way or other. If
we do ought of this nature by compulsion, or in our straits, it commonly holds
not longer then our own ends are attained: but then we break with God, and
provoke God to break in upon us one way or other, and to bring the evil upon us
which we feared, and for the preventing and avoiding of which we were so
forward to vow, as here in the text.

In which words we have this one thing chiefly to consider, namely the
hainousness and hatefulnes of this sin of breach of Covenant with God. Of which
in the last place.

But first, briefly to hint only other things, and not to handle them;

We have here first, Parts of the Text. 1, A Denun^^ation o^ judgment. 2. The
Success thereof. before which a note of attention (...)
A fearful Denunciation, whereby Jeremy gives King Zedekiah and his Princes
into the hands of his and their enemies for their disobedience and breach of
Covenant.

Secondly, Certain effects and success of it. 1. Against Jerusalem, which are
three. 2. Against the Cities of Judah, which is Desolation. Before all which is
premised a note of Attention.

Behold, I will command, etc. This called on them, 1. to look back, to call to
mind and view their sins, first and last, as the just provokers of Gods wrath,
that so, if possible, and if it were not too late, they might be brought back
to repentance; or howsoever, see and be convinced of the righteousness of Gods
judgment thus denounced against them. 2. To look forward, and to expect certain
wrath from God, etc.

Note; Note.
Gods Word, and threatenings by his servants, and all signs holding forth his
wrath, would diligently and attentively be observed by us, and warning thereby
taken: Herein King Zedekiah failed, ^ Ch^o. 36 1^
as not humbling himself before Jeremiah the Prophet, speaking from the mouth
of the Lord.

This may be of Use to us. To them it proved an irrevocable sentence, In the
Den^nc^ation.
such as we also may expect, if in time we behold not such things to purpose.

1. In the Denunciation; take notice,

1. Of the Authority by which the Prophet denounces this evil: -- says the
Lord,] so verse. 1^, 13. The Authority by which the Prophet (...) it Doct^.
It was the Word of the Lord which came to ^r^miah from the Lord himself, etc.

Note: In (...) our reproofs and Denunciations, we Ministers must do all by,
(or according, at least,) to Gods Word, so showing what God will do, but doing
nothing on our heads or in our own names. Our words, if not so taken, will
(...) be but as wind, Jer 5.12, 13.
and lose their weight and authority: which concerns the people also to look
unto, that they receive Gods Word as his Word: 1 These. 2.13.
otherwise no profit will redound to them from it, as not to young Samu^l, till
he left running to old Eli, and acknowledged God speaking to him: nor to Eli
himself, but as he saw God speaking to Samuel; and so he believed Samuel,
though a very child, telling him from God of the destruction of his house, 1 Samuel 3 7, 8, 10, 11, and 18.
and so humbly submitted to the will of God, saying, It is the Lord; let him do
what seems him good.

Quest. But yet concerning us in these days it will be asked, Quest. With what
certainty Ministers now f^retel of judgments. With more then conjectural
certainty.
what certainty is or can be in our like denunciations? Me thinks I hear some
say, as once Satan to the exorcists, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, and Samuel
I know, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah I know, but who are you? Can you so plainly and
peremptorily denounce judgments, and particularly the Sword to us now? To this
I answer; what we, as Gods Ministers, can do in this kind, may in good part
appear by that which has been already done in this our Nation. The Prophets of
old were b^d to proph^^y and say, Thus says the Lord, say a sword, Ez k 21 9,
10 12 etc.
a sword is sharp^ed and also fourbished, etc. It shall be upon my people, etc.
And it was upon that people. Even so, deny it who can, of latter years, Upon
what grounds.
before the sword came on England, the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, as
with one mouth throughout the Land, denounced the judgment of the sword and
forewarned our people of it, and lo, Isaiah 44.26
behold it is come: for God has now, as well as of old, confirmed the word of
his servant, and performed the coun^el of his m^ssengers. And we, upon as good
and probable grounds, forewarn you of the Return of the Sword (whether from the
North, or from among our selves again, or from foreign Nations;) God opens our
mouths to speak of such things; and we find like grounds in Scripture (by which
now he chiefly speaks to us, Heb. 1.11.) Op^^ge de sul^^^ consuitant qu^ (...)
futu^^um ea^mp^aex prat^^itis ^ament.
from like threats for like sins, which he has fulfilled; and so from like
examples of like wrath (as here) for the same and like sins, as we see; as
particularly here we have the Return of the Sword denounced for men's return to
their former sins by breach of Covenant with God and man: And so, going upon
such grounds, and seeing God is ever and in all ages like himself, we, though
no extraordinary Prophets, yet as Prophets in a larger fence, and interpreters
of Gods mind and will made known to us in his Word (and to us more then to
others) do still and can give warning, and foretell according to the rules of
Scripture, and method which there God uses (and partly by experience) what God
will do with such a people, nation, yea and person: for we see and observe
there how God uses to second and follow former and lesser judgments with
greater; and at length, in case of impenitency, to cut off: Not to say, how
God, minding to destroy a Nation, or to bring evil upon a place, seldom, if
ever, does it indeed till he give warning by his Prophets, and by a more
peculiar providence both inlighten and excite them to take and give notice of
the same, that so if men perish they may not say it is because God took them at
the worst, or watched for occasion against them, but that he fairly warned
them, and that their perishing is on their own head; according to that, --
shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3 6, 7.
Surely, the Lord God Will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto his
servants the Prophets.

So that by more then bare conjectural Application, we can show men what will
be, and give warning thereof according to our duty, and in so doing we may and
ought to say, Thus says the Lord.

And God thus confirming his Word, spoken by us weak men, does both honor his
own truth, holiness and justice, Psa. 145.17. Ezekiel. 14.23. as also his faithful
servants and Ministers; thus both proving and approving of them as true
Prophets, and all other to be time-servers, ^ust (...) take warning being
threatened and not to s^ost.
Jer. 28.8, 9.

It will father concern us all of this Nation, from the experience we have had
of the truth of such forewarnings of the Sword, now fulfilled and come to pass,
(whereby he has confirmed the word of his servants and vouched them to be true
Prophets, though for their faithfulness in this kind, their mouth have been
stopped, and they forced by the tyrannical power of the high Commission and
otherwise to keep silence for any public discharge of their duty,) I say, now
that the evils foretold are come to pass, and the mouths of Gods faithful ones
are opened again, as Ezekiels was upon the taking of Jerusalem, or the news of
it, it will concern us to give more diligent heed to such forewarnings as are
given us by them of the Return of the Sword, or of the continuance or renewing
of it; and to seek by renewing and keeping our Covenants with God and man, to
prevent the same, lest otherwise, as Ezekiel, having formerly foretold the
taking of Jerusalem, and thereupon had his mouth stopped, yet when upon the
news of taking the City his mouth was opened, as God had foretold him, See and
compare Ezekiel. 3.25, 26, 27. with Eze. 24.26, 27 and chapter 33.21, 22, 24, etc. to
the end
he prophesied the destruction or desolation of the whole Land, and Gods
judgments upon such as mocked him and made light of his prophecy; which
accordingly came also to pass; so Gods true Prophets now having by his mercy
their liberty of prophesying restored, and foreshewing further judgments, the
Lord, by confirming their word, and when such things indeed come to pass, do
make it fully known, and convince such as are now secure and incredulous, that
he has not been wanting to them, neither first nor last, but that a Prophet
has been among them.

This need not be so strange to us, Especially if guilty of like sins.
that Gods further displeasure, in the continuance or renewing of the Sword,
seems to threaten, not the City only, but the whole Land (especially in these
Northern parts) when we consider our great security and self-confidence,
especially upon former good successes, whereby, among other sins of mocking and
despising, if not misusing the Prophets of God and faithful Ministers of
Christ, who are daily less esteemed then before, etc. We stand upon our
multitude, and upon our sword (as the Jews did) though otherwise we stand still
guilty of many pollutions, licentious living, yea doctrines, Ezekiel. 33.24, 25,
etc.
careless performance of vows, promises, covenants with God and man, if not, in
a manner disavowing the same: So that in this our present case of impenitency,
and that we fully turn not to him that has smitten us: We, without presumption
or rashness, may say, that the anger of the Lord is not (yet) turned away, but
his hand is stretched out still: Seeing Gods method of proceeding with a Nation
or City is such as where we profit not by former or present judgments, we must
expect greater wrath till we perish, as Isa 9.11, 12, with 13. and as I more
fully show in Divine Preach^d 1625, 1626
'Prognosticks on that text.

Only in case of a Nations returning to God by Repentance, and Humiliation, 2
Upon taking warning to hope the evils threatened will be^al o^ enemies.
together with Reformation of life and conversation, of Church and State
according to Gods Word, and true submission thereunto, we can both hope and
also assure you (in the name of God) that God will take the cup out of our
hands, and make the enemies, (the Popish and Antichristian party especially)
drink the dreggs of it, by turning the dint of the sword, and by making war
against the beast: that, as we were the last (being with Ireland the remotest
Westward) who felt the fury of the beast (as it was only the last of ten
persecutions, sc. that under Dioclesian, which found us out in this Land, and
reached us:) for we only, for a long time, looked on and were spectators of the
troubles, wars and combustions in all other Kingdoms: so, if once we were but
truly humbled and reformed, by occasion of our late troubles and the sword
amongst us: The devil, beast and false prophet, having spit out their whole
malice throughout the Christian world, and ending with us, should soon fed the
power of Christ or the wrath of the Lamb; and be consumed (more then ever) by
the same, whilst we should enjoy peace with the Gospel in the purity and power
of the same, and become a quiet habitation; which we also dare assure Gods
people of, when once (or it may be, after and upon some new and sharp handling)
we shall be sincerely humbled and purely purged from our dross.

This doubt removed concerning the authority by which the Prophet did denounce
this judgment; The Authority by which the judgment comes.
We may, secondly, take notice of the authority by which this judgment of the
sword comes, or of that sovereign power by which the sword comes again upon
them, or of the Original or efficient cause of war, begun or renewed, and
whence it is that enemies were to return again. To which I answer;

Answ. Negatively.
It is not from Enemies themselves, who cannot, though they were most
malicious, yea powerful, The sword comes not by man's will. Non enim passant
quod non sivumur essicere.
(as is Satan him elf) do what they would, but what God wills,: they must do
all by permission, yea commission from God: so that if God be ours, and we in
Covenant with him, and he with us we need not fear what men or devils can do
unto us; neither should they brag of their power, or threaten, or tell us what
they will or can do. Only if God be not with us, or that we return not to him,
or keep not close with him, its not for us to trust to our own strength,
policy, yea goodness of our cause in the general, or to ^ormer good success:
Why? It is God we have to deal withal, who if he be not our friend, we can want
no Enemies. It is he that commands and orders the battle. All must and shall be
as he will, and according to his appointment and command. And therefore it is
here said, But secondly, by Gods command.


I will command, says the Lord, and cause them to return to this City, etc.
Now God does this by his secret providence, so procuring and ordering things,
and so disposing of the thoughts and counsels of Enemies, as if he had given
them some command so to do. So he is said to bid Shimei curse 'David, 2 Samuel
16.10. See 2 Kings Chap. 24. Verse. 1, 2, 3. 2 Chronicles. 36.17. Jer. 49, 14. and
50.21.

Note: God, the Lord of hosts, Note. God, commander in caief of all ^rmies.
Deuteronomy. 28.50, 51, 52.
is Commander in chief of all the Armies under heaven. He is that great
Centurion, who, at his only pleasure bids go and come, and is obeyed. It is
only the Lord that sends a Nation against his people. The Lord shall bring a
Nation against thee from far, and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until
thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustest, etc.

This was the case of Newcastle.
this place a while ago: and may it not be so again with us and other Cities
and Towns? God is the same still in his judgments where men are the same in sin:
He therefore is also said to call for sword, Jer. 25.29. to give the sword a
commission, and to say, -- sword go through the Land, Ezekiel. 14.17. to muster
the host of the battle, Isa. 13.4. The Lord appoints it for all circumstances,
beginning, continuance, Jer. 47.6, 7. Has. 11.6. and ending, Psa. 46.9.

It will be our wisdom then not to provoke this great Commander and glorious
God, from whom there is no fleeing, as no resistance against him, Amos 4.11,
12, 13. Its good having him on our side, Us^. Not to provoke him.
and (having any way provoked him) betimes to meet him, or to send before us
our prayers, tears, etc. while he is yet far off, and so to agree with him our
Adversary, which is the way to prevent the sword, or, if it be upon us, to
quiet it, which will not be till God discharge it, Jerem. 47.6, 7.

But what does God command, What does God command. The return of enemies.
and do?

I will cause them (the Chaldaeans) to return. Note. 1. When one danger is
past, it is not safe to be secure: it, or the like, yea, much worse may and
will, in case of impenitency, return. Danger is not always past, when it seems
over: Many are for present respited, Note. 1. Dangers return to the impenitent.
reprived, preserved from common danger; but where pardon is not timely sought
by them, or the same, or other sins returned unto, their Preservation proves
but their Reservation to greater and more remarkable judgments. The former may
be from Gods Patience, and other See my Newcastles Call, in the Preface.
ends; the latter from Gods Justice and Holiness.

Use. 1. It Is not for any then to dally with God, or to presume on his
Patience, by abusing his sparing mercies; his pardoning mercies in Christ would
especially be sought.

2. We are neither simply to beg a removal of the evil which presses us, nor
to take the removal of it as a mercy, unless sin be first or withal removed.

2. How fa^ Gods providence is in evil men's actions.
I will command and cause them to return, etc.] Surely these Babylonians had no
intention to fight Gods Battles, or to serve under him, but had ends base and
bad enough, different from Gods; as Isai. 10.5, 6, 7. we might here note, how
far generally God ^ath an hand in evil men's actions, and how far they do his
will, when he sends them to an hypocritical nation, to be his executioners. For
in war Gods Intentions and Purposes are one, and men's grounds, ends and ayms
another. God by them may justly punish an unthankful people for their sins
against him, when they shall sin by taking up arms against such as have done
them no wrong, out of their own ambition, covetousness, contrariety and madness
against the Truth of God professed outwardly by his people. And sometimes God
intends good to his people by so scourging them a while, to bring them to
repentance, amendment, and Reformation, and so in the end, to beautify them by
deliverances, to make them for midable to all about them, as 2 Chronicles. 17.11. --
and 20.29, 30. to bind them the more in thankfulness to himself, yea, for his
own greater glory, and the greater shame and confusion of his, and his peoples
enemies. Psalm. 9.16, 17, 18. Romans 9.17. or Exodus 9.16. Josh. 11.19, 20. Enemies
by Gods just Providence often rise up against Gods People, that they may fall
before men, etc. As then the wise Physician applying his Leeches to the
Patient, intends health thereby, whereas the Leeches seek only to glut
themselves with blood; so God lets his people blood by war, for their good, and
his own glory, though the other think not so.

3. To this City.] i. Jerusalem: to this City, not that; Gods judgments come
with choice.
at least to this now, and not to that till a fitter time.

Note: God sends the sword with choice, as to Jerusalem of Judah, and not, as
yet, to Rabbath of the Ammonites; see Ezekiel. 21.19, 20, 21, 22. So other
judgments; as that of drought, Amos 4.7, 8. etc. So that where Gods judgments,
in any kind, and specially this of the sword, are in any place, as suppose in
this City or Town, not that; in this house, not that; in this Kingdom, not
that; there is some special Reason in Gods Counsel for it, which would so far
be searched out, specially by that place, etc.

2. Now secondly, Second part. The effects of this Denunciation; With respect
the effects and success of this Denunciation would, in a word only, be taken
notice of.

1. Against Jerusalem; and they are three.

1. They shall fight against it.] Not only barely look on, or threaten it, as
in good King Hezekiah's time, to Jerusalem. Enemies shall
when not an arrow was shot against it, Isai. 37.33. No, King Zedekiah must
look for no such favor. See Jer. 21.1, 2, 3. etc. Sinners must not look to
find as Saints. fight against it.


2. And take it.] That's more. Before, they fought against Jerusalem, but the
seidge was raised. Take it. Our confidences shall fayl.
But now the Jews looked for their help, (the like help from Egypt) but in
vain, Lament. 4.17. When God indeed will punish, all our confidences shall be
removed, or fayl us.

God thus speaks to this people, -- The Lord has rejected thy confidences,
and thou shall not prosper in them. Jer. 2.37.
And Job thus speaks of God; (...) 9.3.
If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers (or helpers of pride or
strength) ^o stoop under him.

It is therefore good having God for our help and hope; Use.
see Psalm. 146.5, 6.

Again, Judgments, thou; (...) un (...), will betall.
The taking of Jerusalem might seem Incredible, Lament. 4.12. But when our sins
are ripe, God can do that which we cannot conceive, and far beyond that which
any, the oldest in his time, has seen, Joel 1.1, 2. etc.

3. It Is no to trust in (...) ward st^n^th ^t means.
Let none then (whilst God is an enemy) flatter themselves or trust in any
confidences of their own; not in their Allies and Confederates, not in the
outward Ordinances, whilst they walk not according to them, Ier. 7.4. etc. Not
in horses, men, though Princes, Psalm. 20.7. and 146.3, 4, 5. Not in their own
strength, in their strong or high walls, as is said, etc. Deuteronomy. 28.50, 51, 52.

3. Burn it.
And burn it with fire.] This is yet worse, being threatened, Amos 2.4. Many
towns are taken, yet not consumed with fire; that is counted barbarous in
enemies, as of late in our barbarous Cavaliers, and Popish and Irish
especially, who burned the towns they took, such especially as they could not
keep: And it is severe and sore in God, and should deeply humble such as have
found it so with them; but make us of this place more thankful both to God and
man; who, (deserving as ill as any) though the town was taken by storm, yet
scarce felt the smell of fire.

Now, From all these Note. Gods gr^daal proceedings in his judgments.
note from all these three, and the order of them, how God commonly proceeds by
degrees in his judgments, from the lesser to the greater, till he at length
utterly cut off and destroy. He first tries them, as by diverse other lesser
evils, as by d^arths, inundations pestilence, etc. So by the sword, which he
first threatens, Lev. t. 26.25. Then by a seige only, as in King Hezekiah's
time. If this do no good, then by sighting against their Cities, as here in the
first seige of Jerusalem, which upon their ew rening of their Covenant with God
and some Reformation was removed. Next, by taking of their Cities and no more;
or, it may be, by taking and also plund ring the same, or spoiling their goods;
as it was with King Rehoboam, and his Princes, who repenting at the preaching
of S^^masah, were delivered from destruction, but not from spoil: God would
grant them some deliverance, 2 Chronicles 11, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
(or a little while) and no. pour ^^t his wrath upon Jerusalem by the hand of
Sl^shak; So he took away the Treasures of the House of the Lord, and the
Treasures of the Kings House; he carried away also the shields of gold which
Solomon had made. Lastly, when none of these will reform us, then he gives the
Cities, and goods in it, to the fire, and the men or evil doers in it to the
sword, to Captivity, Famine, yea to Destruction, and that (without repentance
intervening) of soul eternally, as well as of body temporally.

Oh gracious and merciful God, Use. This his longsuffering is a mercy. And
should hasten our repentance.
full of long-suffering and patience, both to cut off finally till there be no
remedy! How should this his manner of proceeding with us lead us to repentance!
How, if we were wise, should we be warned by his bare threats? Howsoever when
he comes nearer us by some lesser evils. See the different carriage of two
Kings, King Hezekiah, and King Hoshea; both were alike threatened by the Prophet
Micah, who preached both to Samaria and Jerusalem, and threatened Zion and
Jerusalem as well as Samaria, Micah 1.1. and 3.12. But King Hezekiah took
warning, feared the Lord, and besought the face of the Lord, and the Lord
repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them, Jer. 26.18, 19.
But did King Hoshea so? No, He did evil in the sight of the Lord, (yet not as
the Kings of Israel that were before him:) Yet the King of Assyria went up to
Samaria and beseidged it, -- and after three years seidge took it, and carried
Israel away into Captivity, etc. So that Kingdom came to an end. And we have
heard how, though at another time, King Hezekiah was beseidged with a mighty
and an insolent enemy, yet he seeking to the Lord was miraculously delivered.

Oh that we could be thus wise, or, at least, so wise as was King Rehoboam,
who, upon repent ance, escaped with a plundering. Only, so it was with many of
late in this our Nation, and with us also of this place, who were only gently
for the most part plundered. What may seem to be next, if we and other Cities
make not better use of the mercy, as well as of the severity? what? but
destruction.

2. With respect to other Cities of Judah.
And I will make the Cities of Judah a desolation without an inhabitant.] This
is the effect of this Denunciation against the Cities of Judah; of which I will
say no more but this, that like as is the Mother, so are the Daughters, both
for sin and punishment. Other lesser Cities commonly follow the fashions of the
Mother City, both in good, but especially in evil. Great Cities and Towns
should see to give good example to others; otherwise (so far) they become
guilty, not only of their own, but of others sin, and causes, at least
occasions of their punishments.

Such general Desolations are the fruit of sin persisted in against former
mercies and lesser chastisments from God, Desolation. Which is a fruit of
ha^dness of hea^. Psalm. 107 34.
unto which senc^less sinners are at length given over. God is provoked at
length to turn a fruitful Land into barrenness for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein: As sin dispeopled the whole world in the flood; and the paradise
of the world, the Land of Judah; for now was accomplished that wrath ^olong
foretold, by the Prophet Is^^^, in the desolation^o this people for their
obstinacy. Their hearts were made fat, -- to that the word in the Ministry of
it had no saving effect on the most of them, Isai. 6.10, 11, ^^ 13. (...).
which their obstinacy was to continue so long, until their Cities be wasted
without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly
desolate, desolate with desolation; and the Lord have removed men far away, and
there be a great forsaking in the Land.

Such desolations must they expect at length who neglect lesser warning, and
who harden themselves against the word, mercies, judgments, and forget their
vows, promises and Covenants with God and man. For this is that sin here which
(added to their former sins) made them ripe for destruction, and for which this
great desolation, by the return of the Babylonish Army, came upon them.

Now from the whole Verse, observe;

Doctrine. Breach of Covenant is an heinous sin, which God will by no means
pass by in his people unpunished.

It causes, The main Doctrine from the whole verse.
as here, irrevocable judgments: Where I speak not of unlawful or sinful
Covenants, which are better broken by repentance, and pardon begged of God for
that rashness which was in the making of them: Such was that of those Jews,
who, more then forty of them, Breach of Covenant punished by the sword.
banded together -- to kill Paul, Acts 23.12. But of lawful Covenants, whether
only

1. Civil, Whereby men engage themselves one to another in civil respects only;
as when Abimelech and Abraham covenanted and swear one to another at Beersheba,
Covenants distinguished.
or the well of the oath, Genesis 21.27. -- 30.31. And when Jacob and Laban
covenanted at Galeed, Genesis 31.44. -- 52.

Or 2. Religious, To yield obedience to God according to his will, or to seek
God; as when Iehojada made a Covenant between him, and between all the People,
and between the King, that they should be the Lords People, 2 Chronicles. 23.16. And
so when Ezra made a Covenant for himself, and the people, with God, to put away
all their strange wives, etc. Ezra. 10.3. See also Nehem. 9.38. and 10.1. etc.
29.30. etc.

Or 3. Mixed, Such was that also of Iehosaphat, which was made, not only between
the Lord, the King and people, -- but between the King also, and the people, 2
Kings 11.17. And of this nature is our national Covenant.

Now God will severely punish the breach of all these sorts of Covenants; And
God puni^heth breach of Covenants of all sorts.
for so he has done.

1. For Civil, As that made Ezekiel. 17. between the King of Judah, and the King
of Babylon, Civil.
against whom (after he had taken an oath) he rebelled, in sending his
Ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses, and much people. But
what says God? Shall he prosper? Shall he escape that does such things? Ezekiel.
17, 15, 16, 19.
Or shall he break the Covenant and be delivered? As I live, says the Lord
God, surely in the place where the King dwells that made him King, whose oath
he despised, and whose Covenant he brake, even with him, in the midst of
Babylon, he shall dye, etc. See also 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, 3. etc. with Josh. 9.15.

2. For Religious Covenants. Thus Isai. 24.1, 2. Religious.
the Lord threatens doleful judgments to fall upon the Land: Behold, the Lord
makes the earth empty, and makes it wast, and turns it upside down, and
scatters abroad the inhabitants thereof, etc. The Land shall be utterly
emptied, and utterly spoiled, etc. But why is all this? Isai. 24, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6.
Because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinance, broken the
everlasting Covenant; therefore has the curse devoured the earth, and they
that dwell therein are desolate. So the Army of Israel could not prosper at Aj,
nor stand before their enemies, though Gods promise was to be with them; Why?
Josh. 7, 11, 12.
Because Israel (says the Lord) has sinned, and they have also transgressed
my Covenant; -- and yet it was but one man Achan (with his family) that had
taken of the accursed thing, and stolen, -- who accordingly were destroyed. So
for profanation of the Sacraments, (signs of the Covenant) and of holy things:
see how God takes such wicked ones up; Psalm. 50.16.17.
What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth? etc.

3. So for Mixed Covenants. Mixed.
In King Asa his days, they bound themselves by a renewed Covenant to God, and
one to another, that they would seek the Lord God of Israel, and so by mutual
covenanting (to destroy Idolatry, and the groves and superstitious worship)
they bound themselves, and submitted to the penalty of death, 2 Chronicles. 15.13,
14. etc. So acknowledging, that not only Idolatry, and breach of men's general
Covenant with God deserved death; but that they, by virtue of this their
covenanting one with another (which they did to show their thankfulness to God
for that late great victory) were bound, without any pity or partiality, to see
Gods Will and Law, 'Deut. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. etc. in such case, executed and
fulfilled.

But especially, the Instance in my Text is remarkable: King Zedekiah had made
a Covenant with all the people which were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty
unto them; as Jer. 34.9, 10. But afterward they turned, and caused the
servants and handmaids whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them
into subjection, etc. verse 11. Therefore, thus says the Lord, -- verse 18. I
will give the men that have transgressed my Covenant, which have not performed
the words of the Covenant which they had made before me, -- even the Princes of
Judah and of Jerusalem, the Eunuchs and the Priests, and all the people of the
Land, which passed between the parts of the Calf; I will give them into the
hand of their enemies, and of them that seek their life: -- And then, as in my
Text, I will command and cause them to return to this City, and they shall
fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire, etc. Where we may
observe, God, verse 18. calls that his Covenant, which the King and Princes had
made with their servants before him, i. in his presence, taking him to witness;
so when men Covenant one with another, by oath especially, and sacrifice, that
Covenant is called Gods, Covenant; so that breaking it, we are truly said, yea,
and by God taken to br^^k with him. Where we must know, that a Covenant may be
said to be Gods Covenant, two ways; either when men immediately bind themselves
unto God, Per modum Obligationis.
and when he is the party covenanted withal, as in such Covenants as are
merely Religious and Sacramental. Or when men bind themselves one to another,
according to God, Per modum Attestationis.
though to an Heathen and Infidel, yet in the name of God; and, as in his
sight, he being taken and called to witness, to judge and to avenge the breach
of it. This God accounts his Covenant. Reasons hereof.


Now why or whence is it that the Breach of Vow, Oath and Covenant is so
hateful, heinous, and so plagued and punished? I answer: first, By our breach
with God, we set God loose from his promise of protection, which is conditional.
(especially if we speak of the former sort of Covenants, merely religious) we
can have no security from his wrath, or hope of freedom from any evil by virtue
of any Promise or Covenant of God, further then we keep Covenant with God,
seeing his promises as they are propounded generally, so conditionally* and
howsoever, in regard of the Elect, the promises of God are sure, though
conditionally propounded, yet as concerning them, his promise is more absolute,
yea such as undertakes on their behalf for the conditions too, (as elsewhere in
a Gods cortain performance of his conditional promises as concerning the elect.
Treatise published on that argument is fully showed;) yet seeing they are not
(usually) made good to any but in a conditional way, Gods performance on his
part cannot be expected, unless there be a performance on our part, 2 Chronicles.
15.2. -- if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. Indeed, whilst we keep
Covenant with him, he is pleased to bind himself, so fast to us, that he gives
us power (in a manner) to command him, to grant or do what we would have him to
do for us, according to his Word. Thus says the Lord, -- Ask of me things to
come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of mine hands command ye me.
Isai, 45, 11
And hereupon thus spoke Joshua to the Lord, -- and he said in the sight of
Israel, Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of
Ajalon. And the Sun stood still, Josh. 10, 12, 13
and the Moon stayed, until the people had avenged themselves upon their
enemies. It was not thus, as we heard, when the people, at the siege of Aj
transgressed Gods Covenant, where God fought, not for, but against Israel. In
like manner where people (having broken Covenant and transgressed) do renew
Covenant with God, promise and truly intend to depend wholly on God in their
straits for protection and safety, there they have God, (who otherwise was
ready to destroy them) renewing his promise to them of protection, according to
that, Hosea 14.1, 2, 3, 4. And so Gods people, whilst they keep or otherwise
renew Covenant with God, they (as it were) hold Gods hands, as Moses did, and
keep off wrath from themselves and others: (for so it pleases him to bind
himself to his people:) but when they break Covenant with him, and continue in
so doing, they set him free, and let him loose, and make Gods Covenant void on
his part, as for any performance they, in their transgression and impenitency,
can expect from him by virtue of any promise of his unto them, which was only
conditional; And so they must accordingly look to know his breach of promise
(as he is pleased to speak) or the altering of his purpose, Numb. 14.34.
or his breaking off with them, as the Israelites in the wilderness did find
it, whose carcasses accordingly fell in the wilderness. In a word, the breach
of Covenant with God, or enmity against his Covenant or against the people of
his Covenant, procures the Sword, which is sent to avenge the quarrel of the
Covenant. Lev. 26.25.


Another Reason, Gods name is thereby polluted.
why breach of Gods Covenant and our own is so severely punished, is, because
God thereby is the more dishonored: Every sin is a dishonor and disobedience to
God, but this a pollution of his name, though it be of a Covenant merely civil,
Such Covenants though made with Infidels being Gods Covenants.
made with Infidels, or mixed, being made before him or in his sight and
presence, as witness thereunto. Hence, as we have heard, God calls such a
Covenant his Covenant; so King Iehoiakims Covenant with the King of Babylon, is
called; and therefore is so severely threatened and punished: for, Therefore
thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely mine Oath that he has despised, and
my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head,
Ezekiel. 17.19. and Verse 20. -- I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with
him there for his trespass that he has trespassed against me: and yet it was
against the King of Babylon that he rebelled, whose Covenant he brake, and
whose Oath he despised, as Verse. 13, 14-16. What Covenant we make with others
in Gods name (as when we swear it must be only in the name of our God, its part
of his honor) God accounts his: and so the dishonor is his also, when Covenants
with men are broken: yea it is the greater because his name is thereby
polluted. So the Lord speaks here in this instance of King Zedekiah, Verse. 15,
16, 17, 18.
-- ye had made a Covenant before me in the house which is called by my name.
But ye turned and polluted my name, etc. Therefore I will give the men that
have transgressed my Covenant -- into the hand of their enemies, etc. This is
because Gods name comes thus to be blasphemed, evil thought and evil spoken of,
not only by the Heathen, but by the prophaner sort of common professors,
especially if Covenants made in the name of God, be not kept with them. And
therefore does God, in zeal to his own honor, which is engaged in all such
Covenants, punish with greater severity the breach thereof. This circumstance,
that such whether only civil or mixed Covenants are Gods, brings a greater guilt
upon the breach thereof. The marriage contract is Gods Covenant and is
therefore punished by Gods Law with death, not only of the body, but eternal.
Prove. 2.17, 18
The strange woman which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the
Covenant of her God, it is said, her house enclineth unto death, and her paths
unto the dead. 2 Samuel 5, 11 1 Kings 5, 1, 9 and 9, 13.
Davis and Solomon made a civil Covenant with Hiram King of Tyrus, and the
breach of it is punished in Tyrus: For three trangressions of Tyrus and for
four I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they delivered up the
whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not the brotherly Covenant, or the
Covenant of brethren: But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, which shall
devour the palaces thereof, Amos 1.9, 10. I would conclude this reason, by
remembering you of that notable and famous instance of latter times, (mentioned
by so many, yet minded by a few only) in that famous battle of Varna, fought
November. 10.1444. between Amurath the sixth, and Vladislaus King of Hungary, who
having made a League or Covenant of peace with the Emperor of the Turks, was
afterward persuaded by Julian the Popes Legate to violate the League, and to
make war upon the Turk, who fared accordingly in the end. When Amurath was
almost put to the worst, he plucks out of his bosom the writing which contained
the late League, and holding it aloft in his hand, his eyes lift up to heaven,
he utters these words; Behold thou crucified Christ, this is the League thy
people in thy name made with me, and now have violated without a cause: If thou
be a God, as they say thou art, show thy power, and pour out thy wrath upon
this perjured people. Hereupon (though this Turk in thus speaking blasphemed
the name of Christ,) yet Christ to vindicate his own honor, will do a Turk
right and justice; the battle turns, the perfidious Christian King and many of
his chief Commanders slain, the whole Army routed, great part of that Country
lost. Lo, the fruit of the violation of Faith and Covenant for politic
advantage, etc. and lo, how zealous Christ is of his name, that it be not
blasphemed by the Heathen or any other.

The third and last Reason, Thereby more bonds are broken.
is, because the breach, or not observing the Covenant of our God is a sin
against more bonds, not only against the bond of nature, of Gods mercies and
benefits, and of preservation and redemption both temporal and spiritual, which
tie and bind more naturally, by a natural kind of obligation: but against a
more voluntary and deliberate Act of a man's own doing and yiedling to: so that,
though God seem to pass by other sins for a long while, And therefore though he
pass by other sins, yet he will not pass by this.
yet he will not pass by this. Thus God did bear with many provocations and
murmurings of his people, coming out of Egypt, five at least, or six; But when
once they, but so much as, yielded to the terms of the Covenant, they were
then, A large instance.
and ever after sensibly punished, till at length when, (in all) they had
provoked him ten times, their judgment became irrevocable, so that he swear in
his wrath, they should never enter into his rest, Exodus 14.11, 12, 13.
Numb. 14.21, 22, 23. They murmured, 1. At the red sea, yet not a word of
reproof, only Moses comforted them, saying, fear not, stand still, see the
salvation of the Lord, etc. 2. At Marah, and 15.24, 25, 26.
where the waters were bitter; but so was not God: The Lord showed Moses a
tree, which, cast in, made the waters sweet. 3. At Sin, where they wanted
bread, etc. would God we had dyed in Egypt, etc. But the Lord said, I will
rain bread from heaven for you, and 16.2, 3, 4, 5
etc. 4. They tempted God twice about Manna: 1. In reserving it till the
morning, contrary to Gods command: and verse. 19, 20
only Moses was wroth with them. 2. In seeking it on the Sabbath, and v. 26,
27, 28 29.
when God told them there should be none: where they escaped only with a gentle
chiding from the Lord. 6. At Rephidim, for want of water; where, as they chide
Moses, Moses also chides them. Exodus 17.1, 2, 3, etc.
But when once the Law was propounded to them, and they had yielded to the
terms of the Covenant, saying, Exodus 19. 5.8
All that the Lord has spoken we will do, (though alas they wanted power and an
heart so to do;) and when once at the Mount they, in Moses absence, (who was to
bring them the Covenant in writing) had made the golden calf, the Lord takes
special notice of it, owns them not for his people, saying to Moses, Thy people
-- have corrupted themselves -- they so uncovenanted themselves, Exodus 32.7, 8,
10, 11, 14. and v. 27, 28, 35
and God takes notice how quickly they had turned aside out of the way which he
commanded: Hereupon threatens to consume them: And though seemed to spare them
a while at Moses request, yet Moses, at Gods command, causes the idolaters
(about three thousand men) to be slain, -- and the Lord plagued the people --
This was their seventh provocation: This and their after sins brought all their
former provocations into remembrance, being looked on as breaches also of
Covenant: so that eighthly, when at Taberah they complained upon weariness,
Numb. 11.1.
The Lords anger was kindled, and the fire of the Lord burnt among them in the
uttermost parts of the camp: and v. 4, 5, 6, 33.
and when ninthly they fell a lusting for flesh and loathed Manna at
Kibroth-hattaavah, Psa. 1^6 15.
quails were given them in wrath, leanness was sent into their souls; and while
the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord
was kindled against the people, Psa 78.30, 31
and the Lord smote the people with a very great plague. Lastly, when in Pharan
they murmured upon the news of the spies, and believed not God, but rebelled,
and would needs return to Egypt, distrusting both his power and promise, which
made the tenth provocation, and was an high breach of their Covenant with God,
being disobedience, contrary to their promise, and distrust, Deuteronomy. 1.26-32
for in that thing they did not believe their God. The Lord came to a
peremptory resolution, even to swear, that because they had now tempted him
these ten times -- surely, says he, they shall not see the Land -- neither
shall any of them that provoked me see it, save Caleb and Joshua. Numb. 14.1,
2, etc 21, 23.
Where we see that when men in special Covenant with God persist to provoke
him, every new sin is thence aggravated, and old sins called to remembrance,
Use. fourfold. 1. To justify God in his judgments. Psa 145 17. Lev. 26 25.
A^p^^c^tion to us of this Nation.
and so at length, sooner or later, certain and irrevocable sentence passes.

Use 1. This may serve to justify God in all that has befaln us, or which may
or shall befall us hereafter, teaching us to say, The Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works: Seeing he does but thus avenge the quarrel
of his Covenant, broken by all sorts. 1. Our general Covenant made with God in
Baptism requires of us all, true faith, and the obedience of faith, repentance,
mortification, a forsaking of the devil and all his works; the world in the
pomp and glory and covetous desires of it; the flesh in all the carnal desires
of it. Who keep not Covenant with him.
And men generally would needs be admitted Christians under the signal of the
Cross; binding themselves manfully to ^ight under Christ's banner against all
these Enemies, and to continue Christ's faithful soldiers and servants. F^ther
General.
Now how we have kept this Covenant in this our nation generally, whether
better then those hypocritical and carnal worshippers who had made a Covenant
with God by sacrifice, against whom God himself became judge, testifying against
them for their hypocrisy in worship, for their disobedience in practice, and
for profaning his Covenant, and casting his words behind them; the whole
world, that knows how it has been with us, especially of latter years, and
our own consciences can easily witness and judge. How light have we made of
Christ the Lord who was given us by a Covenant? of his faithful Ministers, the
messengers of his Covenant, and of their m^ssage and ministry, whom we
silenced, As doing contrary to the practice of the good (...) of Israel. 2
Chro. ^ 4.2, 3, 5 and chap. 15.8, 16.
molested, banished? what some godly Kings of Judah did by way of Reformation,
when in thankfulness for great mercies they renewed their Covenant with him,
and with one another, we were such as did the quite contrary. King Asa with his
covenanting, demolished Idolatry, as formerly in Judah, so also in Israel --
yea deposed his own mother because she had made an Idol. We have sought to
bring Idolatry and Popish superstition into the Land again, and have given way
too far to the practice of it by Papists and such as were Popishly affected.
King Asa restored Gods true worship in both Kingdoms, Chap. 14.4. and 15.8.
Israel and Judah, renewing the altar of the Lord: We sought to pull down and
corrupt Gods true Worship in both Kingdoms, England and Scotland, and to rear
and set up Idolatrous altars to a breaden God. Chapter 15.3. with verse. 8, 9.
He set up in Israel a teaching ministry, as other good Kings and Governors
did, 2 Chronicles. 17.4, 6, 7, 8, 9. We have endeavored, yea actually have pulled
down and taken away many Lectures and afternoon Sermons, and silenced or driven
away such Ministers as were most faithful, painful and constant in preaching,
yea even in that regard. And was it not time for God, by sending the sword, to
avenge the quarrel of his Covenant? Not to speak of the profaneness of most men's
lives contrary to their Covenant in Baptism, as if indeed they had made a
covenant with the devil, to do all his works instead of forsaking them; with
the world to follow the vain pomp and glory and covetous desires of it, and
with the flesh to be led by the carnal desires of it? And (the sword being
come) how have men sided, (not only Papists but others) in forsaking the banner
of Christ, and fighting for Antichrist; and under color of fighting for Queen
Elizabeth's Religion, have fought for Queen Mary's Religion, and against the
true, orthodox and sound Religion and Worship? Was this that which their
Baptism under the sign of the Cross bound them too? Oh! Its a dangerous thing
either to forsake the Covenant of God, Ier. 22.7, 8, 9. or to oppose it, by
fighting or being against it, as was Antiochus Epiphanes; Dan. 11.28-30.

And howsoever our Parliament has given us and does still give us good hopes,
of a Reformation according to Gods Word, and a bringing us back to the Covenant
of our God both in matter of doctrine, discipline and a more holy life; yet
whilst this main work of God goes so slowly forward, whilst discipline is
not yet settled or so bounded as it should be, and whilst such connivence, if
not, (in effect) a toleration is suffered for men to speak, hold, write, and do
what they list, that men may make themselves vile, and yet, (at least as yet)
by no law established, or executed, be restrained or frowned upon by such as
should restrain them; we have no cause to be secure, but to fear the return of
the sword out of some quarter of the world or other, or from within our selves,
as formerly. God will not be dallyed withal. And if God so judge us, as he did
old Eli and his house, 1 Samuel 3 13, 14
and that our sins be not purged with sacrifice or offering, and that our
monthly Humiliations prove rather (as they are kept) provocations, we have
none to blame but our selves: Gods ways and judgments will ever appear to be
righteous.

2. And if we look to particular Vows and Covenants daily broken by all sorts,
must not all justify God, 2. Particular.
as holy and righteous in such evils as have befaln them, or may yet befall
them? Oh what vows and promises do men make to God in time of their troubles,
fears and dangers, and yet how soon broken and forgotten when these are over?
What protestations, imprecations, taking heaven and earth to witness our
sincere intentions, and yet how little conscience made of performance? Are not
men yet sensible of these things? If God make such men yet to smart, must he
not be acknowledged just? What cause even the better party in the Land have to
be humbled, and to fear sharper rods, upon this ground of careless keeping our
late Covenant and national League, we shall enquire into and examine anon.

2. In the mean time, 2. To be excited and encouraged to keep Covenant with
God. 2 Ch^^. 13 9, 10, 11, 12.
it would be much to the abatement of our fears, and to our encouragement and
hopes of good success in all our undertakings, especially when we have to deal
with a Malignant party, (and these are such as we have most cause to fear) if
we could truly reason as King Abijah against King Jeroboam, making War with
him: -- have not ye cast out the Priests of the Lord the sons of Aaron and the
Levites, and have made you Priests after the manner of the Nations of other
Lands -- But as for us the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken him, and
the Priests Which minister unto the Lord are the sons of Aaron (neither Baals
Priests, nor Priests of their own making;) -- We keep the charge of the Lord
our God, but ye have forsaken him -- And behold God himself is with us for our
Captain, and ver. 17, 18.
-- ^ight ye not against the Lord God of your fathers, for you shall not
prosper. Neither did they prosper -- there fell down slain of Israel five
hundred thousand chosen men, The blessings hereof.
etc. and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the Lord
God of their fathers, and kept the Covenant made with their fathers. Howsoever,
God would be some way or other with us, if we were with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. At
least, whatsoever our case should be, we might hence be comforted in our
troubles, and in like integrity, say and appeal to God, Psa. 44 17, 18
as the Church, Psalm. 44 -- All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten
thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant: our heart is not turned
back, neither have our steps (or goings) declined from thy way.

3. Be we then exhorted, 3 use. Exhortation, to renew Covenant with God; as
others have done upon like grounds.
if not to enter, yet to keep or renew our Covenants made with God, and with
one another in the presence and sight of God. We have as good cause thus to do
as ever nation had, and the same or like occasions. What moved King Asa with
Judah, and many of Israel, solemnly to Covenant with God, and one with another,
and that upon the forfeiture of life, if any kept it not?

1. Was it not a mercy, and a great deliverance? 2 Chronicles. 15. 2 Chronicles. 15.10,
11, 12.
for which thus they would show their thankfulness, and bind themselves to a
through Reformation? 1. By occasion of mercies and great deliverances,
Now comes England behind in mercies of this nature, or does it not go before
all other Nations in remarkable deliverances? Asa was delivered from a mighty
Army of the Ethiopians, and Israel from Egypt, for which he renews, and they
are called to enter into Covenant with the Lord, and urged to keep it, and that
because of such deliverance and mercies; as Exodus 19.1, 2. etc. 5. etc. and
20.2. Already received.
I am the Lord thy God which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. Thou
shall have no other Gods before me, etc.

The remembrance of which mercy is urged by Ioshuah, to make them renew, and
firmly to keep Covenant with God, Josh. 24.2, 3.-6.7. etc. 14.15.-25.26, Now
our deliverances have been from spiritual enemies also, as from spiritual
Egypt, as from the tyranny of Antichrist, that spiritual Pharaoh; and from
spiritual Babylon, and from Popery, by a child, King Edward, and a woman, Queen
Elizabeth; which, when Judah was delivered temporally, made them resolve,
saying, Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, etc.
Isai. 50.5. Since we have been miraculously delivered, both from spiritual and
bodily bondage, as from the Popish, Spanish Navy, in 1588. from the Popish
powder plot, Anno 1605, and especially from late designs of the Popish and
Malignant party, and for the discovery and prevention of plots against
Parliament and City, tending to the utter subversion of Religion, and of our
Liberties, which occasioned the National Covenant between England and Scotland,
and their joining in Arms for the Vindication and Defense of their Religion,
Liberties and Laws, against the Popish, Prelatical and Malignant party, as in
their Declaration they have published: Besides many (no less then an hundred)
successes, deliverances or victories obtained one after another without
interruption, till the power of the Adversary was wholly broken; in remembrance
whereof, have we not as much cause as ever any had to make, keep and renew
Covenant with God, and among our selves? Especially, if withal we consider
other hoped mercies, and the benefits of keeping our Covenant firm with God,
and with our neighbour-Kingdoms; for thus we become strong, yea invincible; God
and good men being in league with us, we shall in the end, at least, be the more
prevalent party; such a cord is not easily broken. Otherwise, being divided
from God by breach of Covenant made with him, or in his name, Other good
redounding hence.
by unbelief and impenitency; and among our selves by Faction, Schisms etc. we
shall surely in the end fall. Thus also the unsound are discovered, and we know
our enemies, at least, whom to suspect and to put no trust in: Otherwise,
invisible enemies are most dangerous. When once the Lord causes us to pass
under the Rod, and brings us into the bond of the Covenant, then, says he,
Ez^k. 20, 37, 38.
I will purge out from among you the Rebels, and them that transgress against
me. Yea, the best come thus to be more purged, at least, to walk more closely
with God in all good conscience of our duty: whereas, till we bind or take our
selves bound fast to God by Covenant, whether made directly with him as a
party, or with others in him as a witness, or both, we walk more loosly and
carelessly, ready to break with God and man upon small occasions: As one being
with a Master upon trial, and before he be bound to his Trade by Indenture, is
re^dy to break away without fear of any penalty. I wish these our loose times
made not this good: we should not then play fast and loose, as we do, both with
God and man.

2. Another ground or cause of covenanting with God, Former corruptions to be
covenanted against.
and of keeping it, we find to be when a land or people has been polluted with
Idolatry and Superstition, and has been kept in ignorance of the true God, his
pure Worship, his Laws and Word, in a lawless liberty of sinning, transgressing
his Sabbaths, etc. For which see 2 Chronicles. 15.3.-8.-16. and Nehem. 9.34, 35.-38.
with cap. 10.29, 30, 31. etc. Ezra 10.2, 3. etc. 2 Chronicles. 23.3.-16. with 17.
and 29, 5, 6,-10. and 34.21,-25, 31.

And have not we then like cause? Have we not declined, and been corrupted in
doctrine, worship and manners, Gods Sabbath turned to play-day, Masks and
Plays, instead of afternoon Sermons, and that even at Court? And were we not
almost quite grown, not only slavish, but profane, Popish and Superstitious?
And was not this one ground, at least, of our covenanting, namely, to restore
Religion to her purity, Preface to the Covenant.
and to preserve her in it, and keep it from^^tter ruin? How can we else be
thankful for our freedom from such corruptions, but by keeping firmly our
Covenant, with God, of a more pure and holy worship, and walking with him?

Lastly, Evils inflicted, and evils feared or threatened, Evils. 1. Fel^.
have occasioned a new covenanting with God. 1. Inflicted, as we have seen,
Nehem. 9.36, 37, with 38. So in King Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.8, 9, with 10. He
exhorting the Levites, and recounting the evils which for sin befell Judah and
Jerusalem; for Lo our Fathers have fallen by the sword, etc, Now, says he, it
is in mine heart to make a Covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that his
sierce wrath may turn away from us. 2. So for feared wrath; Feared.
King Josiah having read in the book of the Covenant, what wrath was due to
such sins as his people were guilty of; and Huldah having Prophesied the
Destruction of Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 34, 29, 30, 31.
though respited in his days, he gathered together all the Elders of Jerusalem
and Judah, Priests, Levites and people, and read in their ears all the words of
that book, and made a Covenant before the Lord to walk after the Lord, and to
keep his Commandments -- with all his heart, etc. This turned away wrath in his
days. Now, if either of these have been sufficient cause to renew Covenant with
God, have not we had and have we not still the same cause or like? He must
needs be either a child, or of no observation, that remembers not what the case
and condition of these three Kingdoms was a few years ago, and how we were
under, not only sensible wrath, by plague, and other outward evils, but more
insensible, and not so visibly observed by all, that is, in a manner, bought
and sold, and betrayed into the hands of Rome, by such treacherous Trustees, as
who, especially in our own Land, had the chief power delegated to them: upon
the prevention of which, by Gods mercy, arms were taken up between the
Kingdoms, and (after a short pacification) renewed again, which occasioned that
bloody civil War among our selves, that bloody Antichristian, Inhumane Butchery
and Massacre of the poor Protestants in Ireland, intended to have been followed
home to our doors also in Scotland and England, by which means all three
Kingdoms were in great hazard to have lost, besides lives and goods, our
Religion, Laws, Liberties. By the combination of enemies.
Now the combination of all sorts of Malignants, Papists, Athiests, Profane,
cold and lukewarm Protestants, against the sincerer sort, and against the
Parliament, was thought ground and cause sufficient to unite, and enter into a
most solemn League and Covenant according to God, and as in the presence of the
Almighty, with hands lift up to him, for Reformation and defense of Religion,
the honor and happiness of the King, the Peace and safety of the three
Kingdoms, and to join with all their power in the defense of this cause against
the common enemies, etc. After the example of diverse godly Kings of Judah, etc.
Yea, for this our Nation, to seek God by solemn monthly, and other occasional
humliations, Our need of keeping our National Covenant.
by fasting and prayer. And as this our Covenanting was then so occasioned, is
there not still the same cause to continue the union, and inviolably, and in
conscience to keep close to our Covenant, unless we will say our own turns now
are served by it, and that it is to be looked upon as an Almanac out of date;
which, if we should generally so think, to me argues, that such entered into
Covenant, not in a religious, but only civil and politic respect, which, if I
have any sense or judgment in matters of that nature, should be an horrible
profanation of the holy Name of God, and a dallying with holy things, to the
just provocation of Gods displeasure (who is a party in it) against the
violators of the same.

But is there indeed no further use of that our so solemn a Covenant? Have we
not still the same common Enemies? Are not our dangers and causes of fear as
great now as ever? Is not Religion, for the truth, purity and power of it, in
as much danger as ever? Do not such as are Enemies to both, and all the
Kingdoms, hope, if not seek to divide us? Are not their hopes and our fears
occasioned by the jealousies, mistrusts, and m^^prisions we have one of
another, which, if God be not merciful, and chief counselors on both sides,
wise for prevention, may break out into a new and greater flame. Howsoever, we
have less cause now then ever to be secure, whether we look homeward or outward
to other foreign Nations; and more cause to maintain the union of the
Kingdoms, and to keep inviolably and stick close to God and our Covenant, and
to look upon our conscionable keeping of it as a strong ^edg to keep us (under
God) safe from foreign and domestique Enemies, and in the purity of our
Religion and Worship, against the licentious doctrines, and practice of the
times.

Lastly, Then seeing our fears are not yet over, 4 Use. Examination.
but that (though in the South and West of England storms are calmed, and all
in a manner done there) and that for the present, Clouds seem again to be
gathering, especially in the North, What cause we have to fear the return of
the sword.
from the Malignant and ill-effected party there, howsoever, the Return of the
Sword, (from what coast soever) not without just cause, doubted and feared: It
will concern us wisely to consider and enquire into the true causes thereof for
a timely prevention; seeing prevention is ever better then medicine, and
Repentance is but the fruit of Improvidence.

I will enquire no further then my Text gives the occasion. Our careless
keeping of our solemn Covenant.
The Army of the King of Babylon was threatened to return, and indeed did return
to Jerusalem, fought against it, took it, and burnt it with fire, and made the
Cities of Judah desolate: But what is given as the special cause of it? They
were long, and often threatened for many of their other sins, but that here
mentioned is, That whereas they had made a Covenant before the Lord in the
house which is called by his name, they turned, and polluted his name, Verses
15, 16,-18, 22.
-- transgressed his Covenant, and not performed the words of the Covenant
which they had made before him. We then see, and have seen, what an heinous
sin, and how grievously punished is the sin of Breach of Covenant, when made
before God, and according to his Will; and when men perform not all the (very)
words of it.

It was punished in Judah and Jerusalem, with the taking and burning of the
City, and in Israel or Samaria (as partly also in Judah) with the loss of their
King, or of their Kingly Government; I will cause to cease the Kingdom of the
house of Israel. Hosea 1.4. and 10, 3, 4.
-- And elsewhere; now they shall say, we have no King, -- and why? Because we
feared not the Lord; What then should a King do to us? They have spoken words,
swearing falsely in making a Covenant. These two together made their misery
complete, and both of them the fruit of this sin.

Now for us of this our Nation; we might doubtless be much more secure, and in
safer condition, both in regard of our peace, and also Government; if our
Covenant, both with God, as we are Christians, and with our neighbor Nation,
as we are under one King, were on all hands, Application.
both entered into without such opposition made against it, or more
conscionably, zealously and better kept by such as have entered into the same
(of both Nations.)

First, 1 To such as s^ m^d^ rends to our na^onal Covenant.
For us, who have so solemnly entered into this League, as with God, so one
with another: If (as by a new act in this bloody Tragedy) war come upon our
stage again, or that old enmity (between the Nations) return, that God send an
evil Spirit, or that a fire break out to the hazard and hurt of both Nations,
as once between Abimelech and the men of Shechem, (which God in mercy avert and
turn from us by converting and turning us both to him;) whom can we, for our
parts, blame, or what may probably be thought the cause thereof, unless it be
that we have not performed the words (much less the matter) of the Covenant
which we made before the Lord. Did we not all, and each one of us for himself,
Main articles of (...) not observed by us.
with hands lifted up to the most high God, swear, and Covenant to endeavor,
as the preservation of the reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government against our common enemies; So the
Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the Word of God, and the
example of the best Reformed Churches. How is it, that the very words in this
last clause, and some others, being otherwise plain enough, will not be
understood much less performed, as if some Monster were hid in them! Why is not
the Reformation in seven years perfected, or Discipline established, made free
and authorized, though often ordered and ordained? And have we not in like
manner covenanted to endeavor, without respect of persons, the extirpation as
of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, so of Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and
whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of
godliness? etc. But to consider how Heresy, Schism, and Licentiousness, both
of doctrine and l^fe, grow and increase almost beyond number, being also many
of them so abominable, blasphemous, dishonorable to God, The increase of
Schi^m, and Heresies, etc.
pernicious to men's souls; and that even since we would seem humbled in solemn
manner for the increase and growth of Errors, to see how these, and how
looseness of life also, are connived at in some, and unpunished in all or most;
For my part, I must profess, it amazeth me and strikes astonishment in my
heart; wondering at the patience of God, as not able almost to conceive any
reason why God does not from heaven visibly and remarkably show his vengeance
not only on the Heretics, Schismatics and profane Libertines themselves, but
on such as have more power given them of God to restrain at least such evils
then they use, or then they will use, Not restrained.
whereby at least a secret and implicit, if not open toleration is allowed to
all sorts, to think, hold, spread and practice what every one pleases, and
that without any visible or real endeavors to restrain them. The theme is too
large and unpleasant to dilate on: Only I will say (referring to what Mr
Newc^men and M^ Case in their Sermons
others have said in this kind and charged home upon the Parliament in their
Applications to them more fully) that all my wit and charity cannot extend so
far, as to conceive there can be any true zeal of Godsglory, hearty love to the
truth of God or to the true establishment thereof, or yet any true Christian
charity to men's souls, if such a general toleration be permitted as is feared.
Neither shall I ever wonder or complain, if God bring upon the Nation as great
judgments as any he has brought upon others in like case, or unheard of and
new plagues, for such reviving of old Heresies and broaching of new, being
especially so winked at, to say no more.

Secondly, To such as stand out against it.
For such as yet are professed enemies to this national Covenant (who commonly
are such as are loose enough in their Covenant with God, as Christians) I
wonder what peace they can expect from God, whilst either they join not in so
needful a contract (as the times are) and side not with God and his cause and
people against sin, the world, flesh and devil, as yet by Baptism they seemed
to covenant with him; and against Antichristian doctrine, discipline and
devotion and also practices; or that they oppose and fight against those that
have so covenanted: They may remember how Irelands Parliament declaring
themselves against the covenanters in Scotland had the sword at their heels
presently, in the breaking out of that hellish, barbarous, popish Rebellion and
Missacre there; and what has befaln that party in England which seconded them
(to their power) by taking up Arms against the contents of that Covenant; or
what those may yet expect who persist in that enmity still, or otherwise
retract or would make themselves free of that their Obligation and Vow.

For us all of both parties I say only this: I wish, To all of both parties.
that as we have still cause to expect greater evils, so the true cause were
not specially found in our breach of Covenant with God and man: (...) have
heard how with other evils it threatens change of Government, The Kingdom
threatened (...) cease.
and brought upon Israel, and then upon Judah, a ceasing of the Kingdom: when
they shall say, We have no King. Now when should they say this, and why? I take
it is not so much meant of Zedekiah, 2 Kings 24.15 16, 1^, and 15 (...)
when he was carried away captive into Babylon, as of the King of Israel,
namely King Hoshea, the last King of the ten trib^s: And why? because he kept
not Covenant with him, 2 King. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. after whom was no appearance
of any royal Government, (as partly was in Judah presently after the captivity,
and in the times long after, till Christ their spiritual King came;) but if we
refer it to Manasseh the last Kin^ of Judah, then the words may relate to that
his Covenant in this 34 of ^eremy; which he turned from, and that caused the
return of the Babylonish army, as we have heard. I make no application: only
the Lord give grace and wisdom to all of this our Nation, of all sorts, that
our averseness to, or looseness in our keeping our Vows with God and man bring
not like evils upon us. Amen*

FINIS.

