ALLOTPIOEPSKOPOS The Busy Bishop. OR The Visitor Visited. By way of Answer to
a very feeble Pamphlet lately Published by Mr J. G. called Sion College
visited, In which Answer, his Cavils against the Ministers of London for
Witnessing against his Errors touching the holy Scriptures, and the power of
man to good supernatural, are answered, and the impertinency of his quotations
out of the Fathers, Martin Bucer, and Mr Ball are manifested.

By WILLIAM JENKYN Minister of the Word of God at Christ-Church London.

Cum ex Scripturis arguntur haeretici in accusationem convertuntur ipsarum
Scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant, neque sint ex ^utoritate, and qu^^ vary
sint dictae and quia non possit ex his inveniri veritas, ab his qui nesci. ant
traditionem.

Iren lib. 3. adv. haeres. cap, sc. Haeretici Scripturarum Lucifugae

Tert. de resur. carn. cap. quadrag. sept. -- nec habet quilquam quo surgere
possit
Ad vitam sacro nisi ^ursum nascitur or^u.
Pro^p. de ingrat. cap. 15. -- non moribus illi (scil. gratiae)
Fi^mora, non causis anceps suspenditur ullis.
LONDON, Printed by A.M for Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Paul's. Church
yard, and Tho. Under hill at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1648.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER: More especially to the REVEREND AND LEARNED
SUBSCRIBERS Of the late TESTIMONY to the TRUTH of CHRIST within the Province of
LONDON.
Reverend and Beloved,
SHould the witnesses to truth want enemies, they might justly question the
truth of that to which they witness. The Father of lies was not well pleased
with your late testimony to the truth; He has expressed his dislike of it with
much rage, though (blessed be God) with more weakness: Never was an Overseer
so overseen, as was this Bishop in his late visitation of Sion College, His
Pamphlet speaks him busy, but yet more blind then busy: He might with less
disgrace have contained himself within his darker diocese: I mean the alley
where he preaches his errors. His weaker eyes like those of the night-bird
would have well endured that shady refuge: but adventuring upon the wings of
his late Pamphlet, to oppose his feeble sight to the Sun of truth shining forth
in the testimony; he discovers such a dazeled and unable eye to guide the
course of his wings, that I accounted it a matter of no difficulty for any to
chase and catch him in an answer. His ambition made him so eager of putting out
an answer to many men, that he took no care at all to put out an answer to one
question; His other writings are below the most, but this last piece was below
himself. Account it not therefore ambition (Reverend Sirs) that puts the
weakest of your numbers upon undertaking him. For the most of you, ^^ have
performed this task, I should have accounted it an act of (not to say too)
great condescension. I find not to my remembran^e throughout his papers, one
quotation taken out either of Scriptures, Fathers, or modern writers,
pertinently applied: nor any thing like an argument to prove the thing he
undertakes to show viz. why his opinions should not be charged as erroneous.
But this his double defect he supplieth with abundant rage in opposing Christ
in his Scriptures, grace, Ministers, government, his rage against the two last
reaching up to heaven, out of multitudes of instances that might be given, take
but two, out of his Pamphlet.

1. Concerning the government which the subscribers approve of, he says, That
the best success which with any color of truth, Sion Col. visited p. 26.
we can entitle the Presbyterian government unto, is to snipp and keep under
thriving branches: I know he means not branches that thrive in heresies, but
clearly intends such branches as thrive in holiness: The Lord smite his
conscience, and touch his heart for this expression before it be wounded so as
it will be beyond cure.

Concerning the Reverend Ministers of Christ in the city, Sion Col. visited p.
19.
he says, They Foment divisions, Multiply distractions, Obstruct the quiet
composure and settling of things in the land (speaks not my Lord just as if he
were in his visitation) and recompense no degree of all this unworthiness with
any considerable good, would any Atheist in England have said more? The genuine
paraphrase is, The Ministers are the troublers and Traitors of the Kingdom,
All their labors though never so successful in converting and building up of
souls, amount not to the least considerable good. The Kingdom might well be
without them, and they do more hurt then good; And all this because they cannot
conform to his apish inventions.

That dear respect which I bear to your calling and graces, to your late
testimony for the truth, I might add to that sweet and gracious converse I have
enjoyed and do frequently partake of from you (particularly some of you that
are members of that Classis where providence has cast me) Especially (if my
heart be not the greatest liar in the world) The love I bear to the Lord Jesus,
who has loved me and given him self for me, and who is the greatest sufferer
of us all, by this impure Pamphlet, put me upon expressing my self in this
endeavor to serve you, I know not whether this busy Bishop intends to afford
us a second visitation, If he does, I hope he will come without invitation and
be entertained without welcome even as a busy-body. As for the reproaches of
his merely misled followers, whether I escape them, or sustain them, I shall
labor to bless God and love them being assured should I have their stroke it
would bein the dark by reason whereof a friend is sometimes struck in stead of
afoe; but when they have (I say not a new but) their old light) they will love
me both again, and the more for such a blind unkindness. Some of them I know
and affectionately love for whom my hearts desire is that they may be saved: I
desire them to know that I desire to say I can die, I cannot be silent, when
the truths are struck at which I wish not to outlive; My hearty request to
them is like that of Moses to the People, that they would depart from the tents
of this man, if his Preaching be like his writing; that they would not feed
upon chalk and coals in corners when the Lord Jesus has provided them Pastors
after his own heart, and remember that under Praelacy they hated those
doctrines as hell which now they advance to Heaven, and that then they spent
days of fasting against those opinions which now they spend Sabbaths in
hearing.

For acrimony if any they find, I desire them not to be offended,1 Its less
then he deserved,2 more then ever I did besto^ upon all the men in the world
besides him self put together,3 upon the using of it this charitable
construction may be put, that I looked not upon him (though some do) as past
recovery, My work in this short Treatise, was to answer h^s accusations against
the Ministers, for their transcribing his Errors, in their Testimony. My book
would have swollen into a large volume, had I handled the Points according to
their own extent, and according to the helps afforded by our Divines. But I
hope I have done enough, to show that he had no cause to complain of the
Ministers transcriptions, and that all his pretended allegations out of the
Fathers, Bucer and M^ Ball, help him not at all, but rather speak against him.
My multiplied occasions have hindered me from so speedy and large an Answer as
may be expected, but as it is, Reverend and beloved friends, you have it and my
self to serve you in the things of Christ

WILLIAM JENKYN.
From my Study at Christ Church Load:
Errata.
Page 4. marg. read Paul^s voluit. p 8. marg. l 30. read de Christo l. 35. c.
(...) p. 8. l 23. r upheld p. 20. l 23. r. wherein (you say) etc. p ^^. l ult.
r. tells m^ it is to, etc, p 23. l. 34. r. it is from God, written. p. 31.
marg. r abijcere possit p. 41. l. 24 r. (and that truly) l. 11. r. you did
speak to, etc. p. 45. l. 33. ^^jutorium. p. 48 marg r. contendunt. p 52. marg.
r Bacer. in Job 6.44. p. 5^. l, 32. r with, the fathers, p. 52, marg r. etesiph.

ALLOTPIOEPSKOPOS OR The Busy Bishop.
RELIGION never had greater enemies then those of her own house. Sion Coll.
visited. p. 1.


And a little after.

It was never well with RELIGION, since the Ministers, etc.

Answ. Your work is to kill Religion, but your way to do so, kiss it. You seem
to make toward the lips of Religion, but your aim is at her fifth rib: You
advance her head in your Preface, but it is to break her neck in your book. In
the pretense of your Preface you raise up Religion to the clouds: In the
performance of your book you lay it among the clods; for must not Religion
needs fall to the ground when her foundation upon which she stands is plucked
away? And takes not ^e away the foundation of religion, who denies the
Scripture to be that foundation? Div. Authority of the Scriptur^^ p. 18.
And does not John Goodwin deny the Scripture to be that foundation of
Religion? What else is the English of these words, in terminis, his own, viz.
Questionless no writing whatsoever, whether translations or originals are the
foundation of Christian Religion; Away with your hypocritical exclamations
against the enemies of Religion, and your Crocodiles tears in that Religion
cannot be well for the Ministers; were your wit but hair to keen as your will,
we should in a short time neither have Religion nor Minister left among us.

But to your stuff.

The greatest enemies to Religion are in her own house. Sion Col. visit. p. 1.
Answ.


True, For of your own selves (says Paul) shall men arise speaking penverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them. Act, 20.30. And if of all that are
in Religions own house, heretics be her greatest enemies, What will become of
John Goodwin?

It was never well with Christian Religion, since the Ministers of the Gospel
(so called by themselves, Sion Col. visit. p 1.
and so reputed by others for want of knowing better) cunningly vested that
privilege of the Church of being the pillar and ground of truth in themselves.

First, Lectio. Your meaning, I suppose was, and had not rage against the
Ministers made you write nonsense, you would have said thus; The Ministers
cunningly vested themselves in or with the privilege of the Church, and not as
you do, The Ministers vested the privilege of the Church in themselves; A man
may be vested in, or with a privilege, but it is very improper to say a
privilege is vested in or with a man, as improper as to say a garment is
vested in the man that wears it: twere better to say the man is vested in the
garment; Its a sign your pen is drunk with madness, it does so stagger and
stammer; These faults of pure weakness, I should not regard, did I observe
either humility in you, under the sense of greater in yourself, or ingenuity in
you, in passing by smaller in others. But why find I fault with the vest, the
phrase of your book? The dusty clothes of your words, are good enough for the
crooked carcass of your matter; This is Titubare in limite.
for I may well call the matter crooked; if to be true be to be straight, for I
find two abominable falsities within the space of two lines.

1. That the Ministers of the Gospel, are only so reputed by men, for want of
knowing and considering better.

2. That they have vested themselves with the privilege of being the ground
and pillar of truth.

1. You say these Ministers of the Gospel are only so reputed for want of
considering better.

Answ. 1. It Is your sorrow to see, that they are so much as reputed Ministers,
But Sir, it is your sin to say, they are no more then Ministers reputed. If they
be no Ministers, why disprove you not their calling? Why bring you not an
argument in stead of a scoff against them? But you may write thus with much
praise from your deluded followers, and little pains to your feeble self.

2. Tell me of one man, either Minister, or private Christian, differing from
the subscribers only in the point of Independency, who dares say thus with you?
I have heard sundry of the Synodicall dissenters preach, and profess the
contrary.

3. Or are you now got a step or two above Independency? acknowledge you any
Ministers of the Gospel at all, whether your self, or any other? I observe,
that you, who were wont to style your self, The Minister of a Church (such an
one as it is) in Colemanstreet; now in this last Pamphlet, as if you had a mind
to be looked upon under another consideration, word your self only John Goodwin,
a servant of God and men, (I am sure of men, I doubt whether of God) happily the
Delilah of a Congregation has entised you, to be tampering with the lock of
our Ministry; you have yielded already to cast off the word Minister, by the
next you may have cast off the thing too.

4. If you do account your self a Minister, I pray tell me in your next, which
way you had your Ordination, whether by that way which the Ministers of London
had theirs, who you say are no Ministers at all, or whether you had it by a
Culinary (...) in one of your allies. You tell the subscribers afterward, of
sacred unction in a jeer, but know that no unction is the less sacred, for not
coming out of the kitchen.

Secondly, You say, The Ministers have vested themselves with the privilege of
the Church, of being the ground and pillar of truth, and it was ^^ver happy
since.

Answ. I know not whether you who subvert the whole Scripture, intend not also
to pervert this. 1 Timothy 3.15.
By the Church her being the ground, and pillar of truth, all the Orthodox
agree to be meant, the Church her maintaining and holding forth the truth; now
the Church holds up, and holds forth the truth, either in a way common to all
Christians, mutual exhortations, a way of profession, and practice, etc. or in
a way peculiar to ^ome, a ministerial way, of preaching the Word,
administration of the Sacraments, etc. If you say the Ministers have vested
themselves with the privilege of being the pillar and ground of truth the
first way, it is ridiculously false, profession of the truth being common to the
community, every one in the Church. If you mean (as you must needs) that,
Ministers have vested themselves with the privilege of pillars, in the second
respect, viz. of Ministry, it is odiously false, for the Lord Jesus himself,
and not themselves, vested them with the privilege of holding forth truth by
way of Office: Christ gave some Pastors, and teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. God has set
some in his Church. 1 Cor. 12.38. And if in this respect, you intend that
religion is so miserable, because all in the Church may not preach the Word,
administer Sacraments, and because Ministers do, etc. Speak out, Sir; It
follows not, because the Church holds forth the truth, therefore that all may
hold it forth as Ministers in it. Learned Calvin Galest is sapientia soliue
E^clesiae ministe. vio censerva tur. Quantum ergo onus past^o vibas incumb t,
quitam inaesti mabilis thes^u ^icus^odiae pr^esunt? Pau^u^ volnit prop^sita
off^^^ magnitud^^e, admoaito; esse pastores qua^td illu^ side, diligentia,
reveren ia almini, lrare debeonr.

Etenin quam borribilis sutura est ultio si eorii cu^pi intercidat veritas;
Ecclesi^ enin ideo col^^na est veritatis, quia suo ^inisterio can tuetur, as
propagat. Ergo elogium boc al ministeriun verbi refertur quo sublato concide^
Dei veritas* Sustinetur Dei veritas p^ra Evangel^^ praed cattane. Calv. in 1
Tint. 3.15.


upon this place, 1 Timothy 3.15. will inform you better, by whom, and what the
Church, in that place of Timothy, maintains and preserves the truth; Weigh the
quotation, Quantum onus ergo etc. how great a burden (therefore) ^^eth upon the
Pastors, who are to keep so inestimable a treasure as the truth! Ecclesia ideo,
etc. Therefore is the Church the pillar, and ground of truth, because she
defends it with the Ministry of the word. And ^logium hoc, etc. This
commendation is to be referred to the Ministry of the word, which being taken
away, the truth falls. The truth is sustained by the pure preaching of the Word.
And the subscribers their ministerial zeal for the truth both in press and
pulpit, is the occasion of your rage against them; I confess you may have a
further aim, viz. to gratify your deluded followers, whose design is to raze
and level the Church of Christ, and to preach, as well, as John Goodwin (as
indeed they may soon do;) but the main ground of your rage against these holy
men, is, because they discover your errors. You strike at the lanthorn,
because of the candle in it. At the pillar, because of the proclamation, the
Gospel that hangs upon it. At the shepherds because they defend their flocks.
Were it not for these Ministers, you would do well enough (you think) with the
people; mean while remember, Omnis Apostata est osor sui ordinis, Religion
never had greater enemies then renegadoes

The Ministers of the Gospel claim Nebuchadnezzars preregative among men, over
the truths of God, Sion Col visited p. 1.
Whom he would he slew, whom he would he saved alive.

The Nebuchadnezzars are among your selves. Palace, A Babel, for such is your
way, His property, pride, far surmounting your Palace, and take heed, even you
in particular, lest his portion be also yours; The heart of a beast given unto
you by God, for abusing the heart of a man, For the truths of God slain by the
Ministers, I know none, unless you mean old heresies, lately vampt in your
alley, for new truths, where, what ever is strange, is true. O the patience of
the God of truth, to suffer you to voice prodigious heresies, the truths of
God* so entitle the true God to so many untruths against God, Those which you
call truths, and yet say are slain by the ministers, will continue errors,
till you prove the contrary; And whereas you say that the Ministers slay them,
did the word spare them the Ministers would do so too, who dare do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth, and for their saving some errors alive,
I pray prove what those errors are, and the next edition of the testimony will
not be wanting in due severity.

I wish nothing to the Ministers but good. Sion Col visi. p 1. Ans.


Devout soul that can curse and bless in one breath! Two lines off you blasted
the Ministers with the title of murderous Nebuchadnezzars, and here you bless
them with desires of all good to them; but whereas you say, you wish nothing in
your prayer, but good to the Ministers. I fear you do nothing in your
preaching, but hurt to the people.

I wish the Ministers had been in print without their own knowledge, or
consent. S^on Col. visi. p. 1. Ans.


Your grief is not that the book was printed with their, but without your
consent: however the Ministers are bound, to interpret charitably, this wish of
yours, that they had been in print without their consent, because you your self
have sped so well, by being in print without your consent, when your Church set
forth that (...) ridioulous paper, in commendation of you, wherein they extold
you to the clouds (where, indeed, you always are, when you write) Then you
were in print against your consent; the verses put under your effigies, which
say, that you have the perfections of ten thousand men gathered in you, this
was against your consent too I warrant you; I take care how the Author will
get into your favor again.

So I might maintain honorable thoughts of their persons, Sion Col. visited p.
1.
which I have always labored to do, my witness is o^ high.

Is your witness on high?

Though I am still opposed by them in my way. Sion Col. visited p. 2. Ans.


You cannot say that you have been opposed by them in Gods way; and it is a
mercy for you to be opposed in your own way; your way is the way of Balaam, and
it was an Angel that stopped him in his way.

The Image stamped upon the Testimony, and the men whose names are affixed, Sion
Col. visited p 2.
are very unlike: the names subscribed are learned and pious, but it bears the
Image of weak and unworthy ones.

If the subscribers be learned and pious, I fear they are as unlike you,

But if their Testimony be not for piety and learning like themselves, truly
friend this your work is for impiety and ignorance, just like you, a thing upon
which, John Goodwin fecit, need never be written; And yet the first side in
your late book, against the Authority of the Scriptures, in my apprehension was
very unlike you. I mean the verses under your picture, which are a very jeer to
you. The verses say, that in you are gathered the perfections of ten thousand
men, with their gifts and graces, etc. when as many know, that you have more
heresies and errors, met in you, then are dispersed among some thousands in
the world, and if your heresies (unles you are lately impoverished) could be
bequeathed to ten thousand sectaries, they might every one have a childs
portion, and have sufficient to live like such men, when you are dead and gone.
It was therefore a passage, as pernicious, as proud, which dropped from your pen
in your Epistle, to your book called, The divine Authority of Scriptures, where
you say, that you will endeavor, when you are gone, that your followers may
have your spirit among them* A single portion of it would be far too much. Rom
12.2.
'Twere better it might be transformed while you live, then be transmigrated
when you die.

The Ministens book is a Testimony against the truths of Josus Christ, It
testisieth against this precious truth of Jesus. viz. Sion Col visi. p. 2.
No writing whatsoever, whether originals or translations, are the foundation
of Christian religion, wheneas this is asserted for a truth by the great
Apostle. 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man lay but Jesus Christ.

It Is a mercy that since you have so little of integrity, Christ is the only
foundation, therefore not the Scripture. But does the one hinder the other? May
not Christ be the only foundation in point of mediation, and the Scripture in
point of manifestation and discovery? May not Christ be the foundation upon
which, I build for salvation, and the Scripture the foundation upon which I
ground the knowledge of this Savior? I pray answer; Whether do you ground your
knowledge, and belief that Christ is the only foundation of salvation, upon
this your cited place, 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation, etc? If you do not, why
do you allege it to prove that Christ is the only foundation? If you do ground
your belief of Christ his being the only foundation, upon this place, why do
you bring this Scripture to prove, that Christ his being the foundation,
hinders the Scripture from being so? Is it possible, that the known distinction
of ^ssendi, and eng^oscendi, principium quod, and quo, or a foundation
personal, and scripturall, should be bid from the eyes of this seducer in
chief? Therefore do I acknowledge the Scriptures to be the foundation of
religion, because they are appointed by God for the sole manifestation of his
will, concerning our salvation by Christ: we building our confidence that
Christ is the only Savior, upon the Scripture which says so. Is my dependence
upon a friend for a favor, any hinderance to me from building my confidence
upon his word also? nay do I not therefore build any hopes upon him, because
upon his word, his word revealing his will? you do wickedly therefore and
weakly to oppose Christ, and his word; Give me one protestant writer that ever
argued thus with you, The word is not our foundation, because Christ is so, I
am sure the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.20. that we are built upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles (that is, their doctrine) and yet Christ was the
corner stone for all that. If you doubt whether by the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, be meant their doctrine concerning Christ: Consult our
learned and judicious expositours of that place. Quin fundamentum b^^ pro
doctrina sunatur min^e dub^um est, neque euim patriarch as nomin at aut p^o^
reges, sed ^o^ solos qui offi^^u^ habehant docendi^^aque locet Poulue fidem
Ecclesie in ^ac doctrine debere esse fundatam, Calv. in loc. Doctrinam
Apostolorum and prophetarum fundamento aedificij compara^ P^sc in^oc. Nos
affirmam^^ sundamentu^ illud quo nitititur ecclesiae fides esse doctrinam
prophetica^ and Apostolica^ de Ceristo Rolloc in loc. (...), etc. (...). Chryl
^n lo. Paulus per Apostolorum fundamentum, doctrina^ Aposto. lorum intelligit
Wh^t. Q 2. con. 4 de Monarch Pet. p 55^. Vid Chamier, de Canone. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Calvin's words are Quin fundamentum hic pro dectrina sumatur minime dubiumest:
and there is no doubt (says he) hut the foundation of the Prophets, and
Apostles, is here put for doctrine: Paul names not here the Patriarchs, or
godly Kings, but those only who had the office of teaching, and the faith of
the Church is founded upon their doctrine. Thus far Calvin.

In like manner, Piscator, who says, that Paul compares the doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets to the foundation of a house. See also what that learned
Scot, M. Rolloc says upon the place: We affirm that the foundation upon which
the faith of the Church is updeld, is the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets
of Christ, To the same purpose also Chrys^stome; and in their Controversies,
the learned Whitaker and Chamier, who will inform you, if understood.

You complain that this passage of yours is ranked among infamous, and
pernicious errors, viz.

That it is no foundation of Christian Religion, to believe that the Scriptures
are the word of God. Believing (you say) of the Scriptures is an act of man,
Now no act of man is the foundation of Christian religion; Only Christ is the
foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11.

1. In that place of Hagiom. out of which this infamous error is taken, you
deal craftily, or (which is most like) cloudily, for your aim was to prove him
guiltless, who denies the being of the Scriptures, and not that forbeareth
the believing of them. For your argument, Christ is the foundation, and
therefore not any act of man, as the believing of the Scriptures, it is very
false and feeble: for though no act unto which man is enabled by God (such as
believing) is a foundation in that sense in which Christ is upon whom we build
the hope of our salvation to be obtained by his mediation, Yet, believing of
the Scriptures as it is an assenting to a main and prime Credendum, viz. that
the Scriptures are by divine inspiration, Arg lib 1. de doct. Christ. cap. 37.
Ti^ubabit sides si scripturarum divinarum vacollabit autheritas.
is a necessary foundation for other subsequent graces that are required in the
Christian Religion, and without which foundation all godliness and religion
would in a short time fall to the ground; no theological grace can be without
says, and faith cannot stand, if the authority of the Scriptures fall.

If believing can be no foundation of Christian religion, why does the holy
Ghost give to faith the name of foundation, Heb. 6.1. In these words, not
laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works and of Faith toward
God, none will deny that the believing the Scriptures to be the word of God, is
both the ground and an effentiall part of a right faith toward God. And
therefore if the Apostle calls faith toward God a foundation, he must needs
imply that faith toward the Scriptures is a foundation.

You cavil at the Ministers for saying they testify to the truth and to their
solemn league and covenant; Sion Col. visited p. 3.
do they mean (say you) that they give the same testimony to their solemn
league and covenant which they do to the truth?

I observe your scornful estranging expression, Their Covenant: You disclalm
it, it seems, you had as good to throw it off in your lines as in your life:

The Covenant is the Sectaries Shiboleth, he cannot speak it plain; you deal
with the Covenant as the Spaniel with the water, when you were swimming for
your lives, it did bear you up, but now you are got to shore (safe as you
think) you shake it off. Why is it that throughout this Section you do so
undervalue the covenant? Is it for the good it has done to the kingdom, or
the hurt you fear it may do to you? or do you desire to make it break because
you cannot make it bend, and change as often as your interest does?

But to your question, do the Ministers give the same testimony to the Covenant
that they do unto the truth of Christ.

I suppose you love to testify much alike to both. As for the Ministers, you
cannot enforce an equalizing or a prelation of either to other out of these
their words. And to our solemn league and covenant: AND was wont to be a note
copulative not comparative. And yet I suppose the Ministers testify with the
same integrity and unfainednesse to the one with which they do to the other.

But note this zealot Paramount for the truths of Christ, he who by denying the
Scriptures fears not to destroy the word of truth, thinks his ears defiled when
with the covenant the Ministers do but name the word (Truth) Like the
hypocritical Pharisees who feared not to be murderers of Christ, and yet were
afraid of defilemen^ by going into the Hall, Joh. 18.28.

I know not what testimony the Covenant is capable of, Sion Col visited p. 4.
unless they will call a regular, full, and through observation of it, a
testimony to it, the best part of this testimony consisting in going before one
another, in a real, not a verbal reformation.

You answer your self,

Secondly, Does a real observation of the covenant hinder a verbal testimony
to it, nay does it not enforce it; I might deservedly question my reality for
God and his cause, If I would not express that reality in words upon occasion
given.

It Is possible indeed for the verbal profession to be without the real but
not possible for the real to be without the verbal; but you say the covenant
is not capable of a verbal testimony to it; Alas poor Covenant! It seems thou
may be well thought of, but not well spoken off? Thou may be capable of a
verbal opposition and denial, as of being called an old almanac out of date,
but not of a verbal approbation. Thy wound is broader (it seems) then thy
plaster.

But Thirdly, How is it that you plead so much for the real observation of the
Covenant? I fear, not to further the real, but to hinder the verbal; I dislike
your p^ng of zeal for a real reformation; you plead for it only to get the
greater advantage against it; your heat of zeal for the covenant is like that
of some herbs, hot in the mouth cold in the stomach.

To enrich their title, they add, Sion Col. visited p. 4.
As also against the errors and heresies, etc.

Tell not the Ministers of loving rich titles, The richly ^nointed, A Preacher
to the two greatest Congregations in England; A heart the best headed, and a
head the best hearted of all the sons of men: A man that has the gifts and
graces of ten thousand rare men met in one? Men who look upon the word of
Christ as impartially as men made of flesh and blood are like to do in any
juncture of time that may fall out. Are not these swelling words? these are
enriched titles; Mat. 21.28. Phil. 2.3.
does this savor of the spirit of Christ and his Gospel? he was lowly in
heart, and bids each to esteem other better then themselves?

But they add against errors.

They had need, for you are daily adding to errors. But this touching of
errors, is the touching the apple of your eye, and the gainful occupation of
your silver shrines; It Is observeable that all along in your book, you give not
the Reader the least intimation of a dislike of any particular error (though
never so damnable) mentioned in all the Catalogue. Only in your (...) age you
tell the world, that errouts are a great grief to (...) heart, and that you
oppose them in your Ministry ('it is a good to believe it, as to go where it is
done) you dare not come near an expression of dislike to errors by twelve
score, and now the Ministers express their zeal against them; how does your
render nature make you weep for Tammuz?

But there is no further matter if consequence in these words, against the
errors, heresies, Sion Col. visited. p. 4.
and blasphemies of the times, etc. then in the foregoing words, A testimony to
the truth of Jesus Christ, Therefore these passages are broadly Tautologicall.

To rectify you; The Ministers in testifying for the truth, etc. owned the
Confession of faith, and the doctrines of truth he^d forth in the Scripture;
and in saying against the errors, beresies, etc. they disclaim and discover
the things that are opposite unto them; they have not the Sectarian art to be
friends to truth, and to be silent when errors that destroy truth are
broached; to look toward heaven and earth at the same instant. The two
forementioned branches are therefore as far from being Tautologicall, as you
from being either Logical, or Theological. Sion Col. visited p. 4.


Heresies are imperiously sentenced, as if the chair of Papal Infallibility,
were translated from Rome to Sion College.

Name one of those errors in the Catalogue which the Scripture (and that
writing we cannot as yet deny to be the foundation of religion) condemns not:
Ex imperio but Ex officio to discover them, and for your scoff of the Chair of
Papal infallibility, know that the Ministers are as far from being for the
chair of infallibility, as for the Chair in Swan-Alley.

In the next impression mollify your title, Sion Col. visited p. 5.
say not against errors and heresies, but use this Christian and soft
explication (as we account and call them errors and heresies).

Tenderhearted Sir, Peter was called Satan for bidding Christ to pity himself,
but what would Christ have called him, had Peter desired Christ to have pitied
Satan? The heretical devil must not be used gently, It Is a cruel kindness
to truth to do so; Diabolus non est leniter palpandus (says Luther) when you
had to do with M Edwards (of blessed memory) then 'twas (...), Pereat Pap^,
pereantimp^ magestrat^ per^aut im^io^u^n dogma^u^n patreni pereat totu^ mu^d^
and salve^ur Deo su^gloria su^^ verbu^ su^ E^tlesia, su^^ cul. (...).
with you, rebuke them cuttingly, but when we have to do with heresies it must
be (...), gently, must it? yes, use mollifying expressions (I pray deal gently
with heresies for I.G. his sake) but heresies have more need of Corasives then
lenitives, of iron then of oil (was Augustine called Malleus Haereticorum for
using mollifying expressions?) had you given us the advice of Luther, we would
have thankt you. Let the pope perish, ungodly Magistrates, The Patrons of
ungodly opinions, of errors, let all the world perish, only let not the glory
of God perish, his Church, his Worship. But why speak we of Luthers spirit?
your advice is more unsuitable to the spirit of the Scripture. Rebuke them
sharply (says the Apostle) that they may be sound in the faith. Earnestly
contend for the faith. Damnable heresies. Reprobate concerning the faith,
filthy dreamers, Cursed children, Ungodly men, bruit beasts, Clouds without
water, Tit. 1.13. Jude. 3.4.12. 2 Pet. 2.1. 2 Timothy 3 8. Jude, 8. 2 Pet. 2.14. 2
Pet. 2.12. etc, And yet forsooth, we must be all for softness and mollisying.
The Lord pardon our sinful softness formerly. The time past may suffice to
have connived at you: Shall you be bolder to sin then we to speak? God forbid.

But wherein must the Ministers express their softness? he tells us, for he
gives us direction, as well as exhortation, though he is more wicked in
prescribing the manner of doing, then the thing to be done.

Say not a testimony against Errors and Heresies, but say, as we account and
call Errors and Heresies.

His plain meaning is, Be doubtful whether those damnable Errors and Heresies
be such or no: Be Scepticks, Seekers, Expectants, Dubitants, never believe any
thing. When men deny the Scriptures to be the foundation of faith, say, This is
an heresy, as we think: when men deny the Divinity of the Son and holy Ghost,
say, These are heresies (as we conceive) when heaven and hell are denied, say
this is an heresy, as we account, and so of the rest, Non est hoc Christiani
pectori^ n^n delectari ass rtionibus Toll assertiones and Christianismum
tu^sti Sanctu^ Spiritas non est. scepticus, nec opiniones in cord ^us nostris,
sed assertiones. ^psa vita and omni experient^d certiores produc^t. Luth.
Though the Lord has not withheld you from giving, yet for his Christ's sake,
he keep us from taking this advice; We who teach others to believe, shall we
believe nothing our selves? if we may not be so certain as to write against
errors, how should we be so certain as to die in opppsition to errors? Should
one lay down his life for he knows not what? Did those blessed Martyrs in Queen
Mary's days say, That Transubstantion was an error, as they thought? Besides,
are there any things in the world so certain as the matters of faith? The
Apostle speaks, Col. 2.2. of a fullness of assurance of understanding, (...)
etc. Famous is that speech of Luther which in the margin I give you in his own
words, Non est hoc Christiani pectoris non delectari assertionibus, etc. It
savours not of Christianity, when men are not delighted with positive
assertions, Take away assertions, and thou have taken away Christianity. The
holy Ghost is no Sceptick, nor does in produce opinions in our hearts, but
certain assertions more sure then life it self, and all experience, etc.
Certainly if I may know any thing to be a truth, I may and must upon that
ground know the contrary to be an error; as if I know that this is a truth,
That Christ is God, I certainly know that this is an error, to say, He is not
God; and therefore by your putting us to believe nothing for an error, you
will constrain us to believe nothing for a truth. And if this be so, to what
end serves preaching? Do Ministers preach, and people hear fables or truths?
Further, if nothing be to be certainly known, for an error, with what zeal can
any way by you be opposed, when as you are and must be uncertain, whether you
strike a friend or a foe, a truth or an error? And if so, How can you declaim
against the way of Presbytery? for ought you know it may be a truth, How or why
against the restraint of herecicks, denial of liberty of conscience? And where
are you then, Sir? But are you so undoubted, and certain, and positive, as you
seem to your self to be, when you oppose the truth? and must we be purely
doubtful, when we are opposing of errors? Did not you blasphemously deny the
Scripture to be the foundation of faith, with that astonishing expression going
before it, [Questionlesse] no writing whatsoever is the foundation of Christian
Religion? Though in this last Pamphlet your own conference (I hope) would not
suffer you to put it in. Must you say questionless for errors, and must we
come with an (as we think) against errors?

You extend your title against a toleration of errors also. Sion Col. visited
p. 5.
Now a toleration is a mere non ens, a thing not in being, and therefore you
testify against that of which God made the World.

If a toleration be not no thank to you, Chaos out of which God made the worid:
and ^f God made the world of it, I am sure you have marred the world by it. But
it is so far from being that of which God made the world, that it is rather that
for which God may destroy the world.

If I had a captious pen, there would be no difficulty to find a calumniating
insinuation against the Parliament. Sion Col. visited p 5. Ans.


For the calcumniating insinuation against the Parliament, where lies it? turn
not Sycophant, but give me leave to show you your calumniating insinuation
against the Parliament: for this testimony of the Ministers has been in many a
wise Parliament man's hand; and for you (a mean man in comparison) to dare to
find out a calumniation against them, which they could never find out against
themselves, what is this but for you to prefer your sufficiency to theirs, and
to show that they cannot cousult, without your assistance? But if there be a
toleration, if does not follow the Parliament is to be blamed; perhaps it is a
toleration not given, but taken. It Is not from Parliamentary license, but
Sectaries their licentiousness.

This present generation is fairly acquitted from being the authors of these
errors, Sion Col. visited p. 6.
because these errors are said in the testimony to be the spawn of old,
accursed heresies; dead and buried long ago, and now by seducers revived. Now
revivers are no authours^*

Answ. I am confident the Sectaries of these times will give you but little
thanks for taking from them the honor of being the authors of the mentioned
errors; John Goodwin, sins more inexcusably, then Pelagius (whose soul seems
by a strange metempsuchosis, to be transmigrated into M. Goodwin; save only
that it meeting with Arminius by the way, sifred into him all the flour of wit,
and brought nothing, but the bran of heresy to M. Goodwin) because M. Goodwin
though he be not guilty of the invention of the errors, yet of the publication
and propagation of them against the counsels and writings of all the Orthodox
since Pelagius his time. For your acquitting therefore of this generation, you
go too far, though you are an advocate to plead for errors, yet you must not
be a judge to acquit them, and to acquit a whole generation at one clap, is
with the most; the sea of your charity gains so much toward heretics, that
its quite dried up toward the Orthodox. You are such a prodigal of charity
toward the one, that when you should contribute to the other, you will be found
a beggar. But take heed, least if you acquit this generation from heresy, the
next generation condemn your self for heresy. Judicium melius posteritatis
erit.

The age to come,
May pass your doom.
There are several Ministers of Christ to my knowledge in the Province of
London (no Independents) commensurable for worth with the tallest Subscribers,
Sion Col. visited p. 6.
though not to some of them in Church livings, by two or three, for whom God
provided some better thing then to suffer them to fall into the snare of so
unworthy a subscription.

You said even now, Ministers of Christ, for want of men's knowing better, and
now you say, They are the Ministers of Christ to your knowledge; you want a
better memory for so little honesty. You add, That these Ministers have not
subscribed the Testimony: but now you see many of their names subscribed in
this last Edition of the Testimony, Will you say, they are Ministers? You find
that they love not to be disgraced with the praises of your pen for abstaining.

You say that the subscribers exceed the rest in two or three Church livings.
These are exceeding days only for Sectaries, The Orthodox have but short
commons* they are rich in imploiments and poor in paiments. You are quite
contrary, you are paid for being a hearer of your people, but it were well with
the Orthodox, if they were paid for preaching to their people. You are the
Preachers under worldly glory, The Orthodox are under the cro^^, however I
desire to be as far from envy at your condition, as imitation of your own
opinions; Your gains would be my joy, were not religion the looser.

You scraple together a few saying or passages out of several men's books,
whereof some are fair truths, etc. Sion Col. visited. p. 7. Answ,


For the fairness of your truths, there is not one of them, but has a face of
soot, and of a blackmore, but I believe they are accounted fair in their own
Country, in Errour-alley, but in an orthodox region they are very deformed.

To reproach men's opinions without answering any one reason or ground upon
which they build their assertions, Sion Col. visited. p. 7.
is the Way for propagation of them.

There is not one mentioned error in all the Catalogue, reproach, and its own
refutation: And the frequency of your being braid in the mortar of an answer,
has made hitherto but little of your folly to depart from you. A confutation
would add too much reputation to the errors. Besides, when Sectaries see that
their errors deserve disputation, they thereby think, that they deserve
estimation; it is their custom to turn truths into controversies, and
controversies into truths. And at all disputations you still go away with the
victory, but especially, when you are able to say nothing. The present work of
the Ministers, was discovery: Refutation, if judged convenient may follow.

You rend a parcel of words out of the body of a large discourse, Sion Col.
visited. p. 8. Answ.
which may carry some face of an unsound saying.

It seems your fair truths, of which you even now spoke, have but a foul face;
surely the best part of all your errors, is the face; if Satan intended to
limn any part well, it would be that; and for the rending the parcel of words
out of the body of the discourse; If you have a desire that the whole body
should be seen; the Reader is in the margin referred to it, and yet if any
parcel of a passage seemed to make for you, the Subscribers set down that too,
but indeed commonly the whole passage was a wrapped complication of errors.

You show not in what part of their sayings the error lies. Sion Col. visited.
p. 8. Answ. There Is (...). Sion Col. visited. p. 9.


Show you in what part of any saying almost the error does not lie; commonly
the disease is epidemicall over the whole passage.

The night is too far spent for them to think, that men will judge error or
truth by their magisterial votes.

Why make you not a right use of this departure of the night? Is it not a shame
to hold such ungodly opinions in the day of the Gospel Light? They that are
drunk with heresy, are drunk even in the day. TO was bad to be so in the night
of Popery; it is abominable, in the day of Reformation; what a brazen brow has
heresy to out-look the light of the Scripture, nay to put it out. Oh that I
could hear more of you say to your errors (as the angel to Jacob) let me go
from you for the day appears Well, take heed, if you still go on to commit
night sins in the day time, lest you shorten Englands day of grace, and hasten
her night of Woe; If ever a generation threatened such a night, heretics do: I
assure you, Sir, Your new light has in a manner put out your old heat.

For your saying, That the night is too far spent to judge errors by the votes
of Ministers. We bless God that the night is so far spent, as that we see how
to judge your errors by the light of the Scriptures; a light that you would
fain eclipse, for fear of discovery; a light, which if you loved, you would
abominate these errors of darkness; love the Scriptures, and hate the
ministers, if you dare, if you can.

Men have put away those childish things, Sion Coll. visit. page ^. Answ.
to believe as the Church believes.

And in stead thereof Sectaries put it away as a childish thing, to believe as
the word believes; you have made a fair change.

There is not so much as any one syllable in the Covenant that engages any man
to the Presbyteriall Government. Sion Col. visit. p. 10. Answ.


But are there not many syllables in the Covenant, that engage, 1. To a
Government. 2. To a Government according to the word of God.

If to a Government, What will then become of Independency? which any further
then it shapes it self to Presbytery is the very negation of Government, and as
used by you, stands upon no other leg then a necessary violation of the
Covenant, by a Toleration of all errors, heresies, and ungodly opinions in the
world.

2. If the Covenant engages to a Government according to the word of God, and
the example, etc. tremble to quetch against Presbytery, the most agreeable
Government to the Word, and if it be not so, Answer the many learned and pious
Tractates, that have been put out for it, both by Scots and English. Answer the
learned labor of the Assembly, Mr Ruther surds, Mr Gillespies books, and the
book entitled, Jus divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastic^ but you have a compendious
way of Confutation, you blow away whole books with the dictates of three or
four lines.

Was it in the integrity of your hearts, Sion Col. visit. p. 11.
to discharge your duty conscientiously, that you charge him with errors
against the Divine Authority of the Scripture, who has bent himself with the
u^termost of his end^avours for the vindication of their Divine Authority, and
^ho has labored in this argument as much, and with as much faithfulness as any
of you all.

Was it from the lowliness of your heart, Subscribers? Or was it from the
logic of your head, that you form such a childish argument, viz. You may not
be taxed with errors about the Authority of the Scriptures, because you have
written in vindication of them? Did not Faustus Rhegiensis write a Treatise,
Baron, Annal. Ton. 6 an. 490. Sect. 31. Vid. ^^id Hispal. de Script. eccl. cap.
14. Sune Scriptura Prophetica and Apostolica, ^t verbum De^recipienda? ^^qua^
quaestionem indignam alioqui qu^ tractetur apud theolo^os Christ^anos, peperit
nobis hoc tempore Swenkfeldij deliratie, etc De verb Dei, l. 1 c 1.
De gratia and libero arbitrio, against the Pelagians, and yet, Dum captiose
videri vellet pugnare contra Pelagianos, compertus suit 'Pelagio favens, and
novus dogmatista. It matters not what men say, that themselves do, but what
others that are wise and holy men, see that they do; May not Bellarmine be
charged with errors, about the Authority of the Scriptures, that has labeured
in the justifying of their Divine Authority against the Schwenckfeldians with
incomparable more sinews and strength, than you have ever done in your way?
When did your pen ever, as his did, drop such a passage as this, that the very
question, Whether the Prophetical and Apostolical writing is to be received
as the Word of God, is unworthy to be handled by any Christian divine, had it
not been made necessary by the deliration of Swenckfeldius, and the Anabaptists
denying it? Whereas your work is to preach and write against all Prophetical
and Apostolical writings, whether Originals or Translations. Remember with
what consident heat you rose up for the most horrid heretics, Antiseripturists
and Antitrinitarians, etc. In your Hagiomastix, and then consider whether your
saying that you bear the errors of the times, as a burden upon your soul, is
to be believed; must this your saying, that errors are your burden, excuse you
from erroneousnes, when you say, that this opinion, that God is not one in
three persons, is not contrary to any manifest word of God; and this you say
(in that place) that your opponents neither have proved, Hag. p. 35.
nor can prove; Though you say that errors are your burden, must you not be
blamed for saying, That you know holy and heavenly Christians, Hag. p. 36.
who deny that God is one in three persons. Must your own titles and pretenses
upon, or in any book exempt you from a Charge, when as the matter couched under
them condemns you? Nay, ought you not to be the more blamed for your cloaked
impiety; and for your real enmity to the Scriptures under appearances and
seeming friendship, Tuta frequensque via --

Do I not plainly, Sion Col visited, p. 11.
clearly, and distinctly enough declare unto the world in my Treatise
concerning the Divine Authority of the Scripture; In what sense I hold the
Scriptures, whether Translations or Originals to be the word of God, and
consequently the foundation of Christian Religion; and in what not? Let the 13
and 15. pages of my said book be looked upon. Therefore you complain that the
Subscribers barely cite these words from your pen [Questionlesse no writing
whatsoever, whether Translations or Originals, are the foundation of Christian
Religion] without citing those other words of yours, page 13. wherein in a true
sense you assert them to be the Word of God.

Your self is the first man that ever I heard to commend you for clearness,

At your command, I shall consult the pages, wherein you would be thought to
say, The Scriptures are the Word of God. In the former, as also page 17. where
you seem to be most full in declaring your sense, You say to this purpose; That
you grant the matter and substance of the Scripture, The gracious counsels, to
be the Word of God, as, That Christ is God and man, that he died, that he rose
again, etc. (You are come to a high pitch of ingenuity, I assure you.) These
things you having said, you think you may lawfully charge the Ministers with
craft and wickedness, for setting down barely that conclusion of yours, page
18. Questionles no writing whatsoever, whether Translations or Originals, are
the foundation of Christian Religion.

1. But what will please you? The Subscribers are in some strait how to content
you, when they only set down the conclusion and result of your words, you say
they deal wickedly, because they express no more, and when they cite a whole
page, you say, they do it, that they may represent you to the Reader for a man
of monstrous and prodigious errors, one of which cannot be expressed or
contained in fewer words then would fill a whole page: Yet on the other side,
If they pitch only upon the error, you say, they cite your words barely, and
suppress craftily your sense.

2. Though the Subscribers did set down this your Conclusion without reciting
your long-winded passages, which you premise, yet deserve they not this your
reviling, Div. author. of Scrip p. 18.
as if they had wronged you: For the conclusion being the result of the
premises, if your conclusion be crazie and heretical, your premises must
needs be so too, and therefore the setting of them down would not have helped
you at all: and if the conclusion be not heretical, why do you not defend it
against the accusation of the Subscribers, which you neither do, nor dare to
do, but only send the Subscribers to the thirteenth page, leaving the poor
eighteenth to mercy.

3. Suppose you had in the thirteenth page written the truth, therefore ought
you not to be blamed for writing errors in the eighteenth page? Nay, ought you
not the rather to be blamed? Suppose that found truths were laid on the top of
your book, might you not be blamed for laying rotten errors at the bottom:
Satan knows that the one must make the other vendible, and the Subscribers did
but labor herein to spoil his market.

4. I suppose the subscribers did not set down your sense concerning the divine
Authority of the Scriptures in the thirteenth page, because it had no relation
either clear or doubtful to the passage in this eighteenth page. For in the
thirteenth page you say you assert the Scriptures to be the word of God; and
here in the eighteenth page, you come with your Questionless no writing
whatsoever, whether translations or originalls are the foundation of Christian
Religion.

But you seem to complain that you who have granted the Scriptures, i.e. the
gracious counsels, matter, substance of them to be the word of God, should be
blamed though you say Questionless no writing whatsoever is the foundation of
Christian religion; but mistake not, for though you have granted what no
Papist, nay, what no christian (in a sense) did ever yet deny, yet upon what
ground have you granted even this, you give the reader nothing to show for this
grant but only your good nature and ingenuity: you tell me page 13. that you
believe the precious counsels, matter and substance of the Scripture to be of
divine authority, but though you believe so, yet what ground give you me to
believe so with you? none I am sure p. 10. Div. Autho. where you deny both the
English Scriptures and the Hebrew and Greek Originals themselves to be the word
of God. Div. Autho. p. 10.
Nor give you me any ground to believe with you that the counsels of the
scriptures are the word of God, in p. 12. when you say, That they who have the
greatest insight into the original languages, yea and who believe the
Scriptures unto salvation; Div. Autho. p. 12.
cannot upon any sufficient ground believe, any original copy under heaven
whether Hebrew or greek to be the word of God, with a world of such stuff; Nor
give you any ground to believe the matter, counsels etc. of the Scripture to
be the word of God, p. 18. where you say, Questionless no writing whatsoever
whether translations or originalls are the foundation of Christian religion,
much less in that of Hag. p. 38. where in regard of the mortality of words,
you make the meaning of the originalls impossible to be certainly understood;
nay by all these passages of yours you hinder me from beleving (as much as in
you lies) that the matter, substance, counsels, etc. of the Scriptures are
the word of God, for how can any believe the matter, substance etc. of the
Scripture to be the word of God, when as he must be uncertain whether the
written word or Scriptures wherein that matter is contained are the word of God
or no? I suppose when you say that the matter of the Scriptures, represented in
translations and originals is the word of God p. 17. you suppose that it should
be believed for such; but upon what ground ought I to believe it? I hope you
will not say because a province of London-Ministers says it is to be believed,
nor barely because the spirit tells me is to be believed for the word of God, 2
Pet. 1 19.
for the spirit sends me to the written word, and bids me by that to try the
spirits, and tells me I must believe nothing to be from God, or for my own
eternal good, but what I find written; I therefore desire to go to the
written word as reveal^d by God, for the building my confidence upon the
counsels and matter of the Scriptures (as pardon through Christ. etc.) But
then J. Goodwin tells me this written word is not Gods word, nor are any
writings in the world Originals or Translations, to be looked upon as such; If
so, they must be the word of vain man, and so I have no more to show for the
precious truths, that Christ died for sinners and lost man etc. then man's word;
I pray consider, what are become of your disciples (to use your own phrase)
their soul provisions, their hope of eternal blessedness, when as thus you
deny the written word? How does my soul pity your poor deluded followers who
have such a soul starving or soulpoysoning shepherd set over them, the Lord
knows I hardly write these things with dry eyes. Whereas therefore you send the
subscribers and readers to your pages alleged, I shall do the like, and desire
them to take notice that you make no distinction between the res credenda, and
the ratio credendi, the matter to be believed, and the ground of believing that
thing, the objectum materiale and formale fidei; the matters to be believed,
are those precious truths of God, which you name p. 13. and such like. the
ground of believing them is the revelation of God in his written word Nor can
any one believe those truths with a divine faith as the truths of God, Hoc
verbum quod multis vicib is multisque mod^^olim Deus proserre volu^t, visum est
ei lem literis and libris ad Ecclosie suae usum consignare, un^ and codem sem.
per manente verbo etsi non uno modo tradito, Riv. Cat. Oath. Par. 9.^.
unless he first believes that they are revealed and made known by God: This
Revelation of God has always been the foundation of faith, and (as the
Apostle,) Heb. 1.1. says (...); God has afforded this at diverse times, after
diverse manners, to his Church sometimes by a lively voice, at other times by
writing, the authority of the revelation being the same, the manner of
revealing diverse. * But now since the truths of God were expressed in writing,
what is the grouad of your faith, but this it is, written, and if you deny the
(...) of the words and say that they are not from divine inspiration,, you must
of necessity also deny the (...) of the matter and hold that the matter which
you say is only the word of God, is unworthy of a Christians belief: I pray
what course took Christ and his Apostles to prove their doctrinall assertions,
Mat 44.6.7.10 Mat. 1.2. Mar. 9.12. Mar. 11.17. Luke 18.31.22.37. 24 44 46. Joh.
10.34. Act. 13.33. 15.85. Romans 3.4. 10.81. 9.13. 11.26. 12 19. 14 11. 13.9.^^.
1 Cor. 1.19. 1 Cor. 1.31. 1 Cor. 2.9. 9.9. 1 Cor 15.54. 2 Cor 9.9. Gal. 3.13.
4.22. Heb 10.7. 1 Pet. 11.6. Mar. 15.28. Act. 8.32.35. Romans 9.17. 10.11. 11.2
Gal. 4.^0. 1 Timothy 5.18. 1 Pet. 2.6. Mat. 21.42. 26 56 Luke 24.27.45. Act. 17.2
11. 18.28. Romans 1.2. 16.26. 1 Cor. 15 3.
and the matters they taught, but by the Scriptures, and when they would render
them (...) fit for belief, they evermore tell how it is written. Consult with
the places in the margin, and you will find that the matter, substance,
precious counsels etc. contained in the Scriptures are proved to be credenda
things to be believed, because they are written, deny then the written word (as
you do in terminis) to be the word of God, and what formal object has faith?
poor faith without a written word! Yield your self to that evident Scripture,
Joh. 20.31. These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the
Christ the son of God, and that believing ye might have lift through his name:
God makes these matters, Christ is the son of God; and life is to he had
through his name, to be the objects and matter of my belief, but God makes the
ratio or ground of my believing of these matters to be their revelation by
writing: See also Act. 14.24. Paul says he believed all that was written in
the Law and the prophets, So, Romans 15.4. Things were written aforetime that
through the patience and comfort of the Scriptures, we might have hope. So if
you believe not Moses writings, how shall you believe my words? Joh. 5.47.

6. Therefore does not your sending me only to the counsels, matter, substance
of Translations and Originals, as the Word of God, and your denial that the
written Word is such clearly show, That you send me not to that Word of God,
which the Scripture every where speaks of, but to some other, the Scripture
using to call the written Word of God, the Scripture (and very often, though in
a Translation) The command of Christ, Joh. 5.39. is to search the Scriptures,
and were not they the written Word, How read thou? Luke 10.26. Understand
thou what thou read. Act. 8.30. and what Scriptures were those the Apostle
calls (...) given by inspiration of God? means the Apostle neither
Originals nor translation? or both rather?

It were easy to show how in this point of your denial the Scriptures for the
foundation, as faith and Scriptures oppose you, so likewise sundry holy and
learned writers that have had occasion to touch upon the subject.

Let these following (asserting the Scriptures for the word of God, and so the
foundation of faith, and Christian Religion) suffice for the vindication of the
written word from the contempt you cast upon it.

Quo before and impressius tam ipsum, quam dispositiones, and voluntates
adiremus, instrumentum adjecit literaturae, si quis velit de Deo inquirere, and
inquisitum invenire, and invento credere, and credito deservire. Tertul. Apol.
cap. 18.
That we might go to God, his counsels, and will, more fully, and vigorously,
he added the instrument of writing, if any would enquire of God, find him,
believe in him, and serve him. Tertullian.

Non per alios salutis nostrae dispositionem cognovimus, quam per eos per quos
Evangelium pervenit ad nos, quod quidem tunc praeconiaverunt postea per Dei
voluntatem in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt fundamentum and columnam fidei
nostrae futu^um. Irenaeus. Advers. Here Is lib. 3. cap. 1 vide lib. 3. c. 2.
We know not Gods disposal (or ordering) of our salvation, but by those, by
whom the Gospel came to us, which they formerly preached, afterward by the
counsel of God delivered to us in the Scriptures to be the foundation, and
pillar of our faith, Irenaeus.

Singuli Sermones, syllabae, apices, puncta, in divinis Scripturis plena sunt
sensibus. Hier in cap. 1. ad Ephesians.
The several speeches, syllables, tittles, points in the divine Scriptures,
are full of sense. Hier.

Persuasisti mihi Domine Deus non eos qui crederent libros tuos, quos tanta
omnibus sere gentibus authoritate fundasti, esse culpandos, sed eos qui non
crederent, nec audiendos esse si qui forte mihi dicerent unde scis illos libros
unius veracissimi Dei spiritu, esse humano generi ministratos, id ipsum enim
maxim credendum erat. Aug Conf lib. 6.
O my Lord God, thou have persuaded me, not that they who believed thy books,
which thou have founded with so much authority, in almost all nations, were to
be blamed, but those who believed them not, and that those were not to be
heard, who might happily say to me, whence do thou know that those books were
administered to mankind by the Spirit of the only most true God? for this
thing was chiefly to be believed. Augustine.

(...). Chry. hom. 1. in Mat.
If it be blameworthy to stand in need of the writing of the Scripture, and
not to embrace the grace of the spirit; how great a fault is it, after the
enjoyment of so great an help, not to gain by it, but to despise the writings,
as if they had been laid before us in vain, and thereby to draw upon our selves
greater punishment. Chrysostom.

Homin's qui intra Ecclesiae pomaeria sunt, de scripturae authoritate non
quaerant, est enim p^incipium. Quomodopossunt esse discipuli Christi si
doctrinam Christi velint in dubium vocare? quomodo verae Ecclesiae membra si de
fundamento Ecclesiae dubitare velint? Quomodo id sibi probari petent quod ad
probanda alia semper assumunt? Gerb. loc. Com. Tom 1. de S. ser. p 7 Sect. 10.
Men, that are within the pale of the Church, make no question of the authority
of the Scripture; for it is a principle. How can they be the Discioles of
Christ if they will call the doctrine of Christ into question, how can they be
members of the Church, if they will doubt of the foundation of the Church? How
can they desire to have that proved, which they make use of to prove all other
things by? Gerhard.

In fidei controversi^s dijudicandis nec ab Hebraeis nec a Graecis pendere
volunt Papistae, multiplicatis quaestiunculis quaesivit Iesuita omnem sacrae
scripturae fidem a judicio huma^o suspendere and de (...) scripturae qu^^
habemus dubitationem omnium mentibus ^^j^^unt, ut his athe^mi radimentis
hom^^es a vert Dei cognitione abstract^s facilius Antichrist dominationi
subjiciant. Andr Rivet. Q 4. de scrip Tom. 1.
In determining of controversies of faith, the Papists (note this M. Goodwin)
will not stand, either to the Hebrew or greek originals; and (Baily the
Jesuit) by multiplying questions has sought to make the belief of the holy
Scripture to depend upon man's judgment and they cast doubts into all men's
minds, about the authority of the holy Scriptures which we have; that by these
rudiments of Atheism, they might subject those men to the power of Antichrist,
whom they have drawn from the knowledge of the true God. Andr. Rivet.

I shall conclude with desiring you in the fear of God to consider whether that
complaint which the learned Rivetus makes of Albertus Pighius suit not too
evidently with your self; whom as Rivet says, uttered such blasphemous
expressions as these; explicent scripturarij Explicent scripturarij isti unde
nobis certum est haec esse Moysi scripta que sub ej^^ nomine legimus and si
viderem^^ qui^ ce^tos r^d deret M^ysi tam multis seculis mortui, esse
scriptama^^? haec and fimilia querebat a n^bis proph^us iste, quae quorsu
(...). nemo potest ignorare nifi qu^ sponte vult decip^ Rivetus ubisupra; and
he says that the Papists are herein worse then the tradi. tores. who for fear
delivered their Bibles to the Heathen to be burnt. Sion Col. visit. p. 12.
isti etc. let these that stand so much for the written word, tell us, how we
can be certain that these are the writings of Moses, which we read to go under
his name, and how can they assure us that these things were written with Moses
his own hand who died so many years ago? -- He concludes with calling this
Albertus Pighius a profane fellow and says, that he that sees not whether
these things tend is willing to deceive himself; I verily fear (and without any
breach of charity) that these scripturarij especially of the presbyterian
judgment shall not find that favor from Joha Goodwin that a Sectarian
Antiscripturist has found in his Hagiomastix in which calendar he was highly
Sainted.

Was it in the integrity of your hearts, and to discharge your duty
conscienciously: that you must needs make it an error or heresy, to say that
it were needless for Satan to blind the eyes of natural men if they had not
eyes to see, and to receive the glorious light of the Gospel, when it is
declared unto them?

But there you stop; you do not proceed to the next words, which have a most
horrid aspect, Men are not blind for want of eyes, but for want of light, and
when light, or truth is discovered to them, they have faculties suitable, fit,
and apt to receive it; But what kind of blindness call you that, to be in
the dark, and to have good eyes: it is a blindness that can neither in a
spiritual or a natural respect be called a blindness, the blindness of a
natural man is such, as argues a perishing of the power of spiritual seeing,
or discerning (according to the Apostle he cannot know the things of the Spirit
of God. 1 Cor. 2, 14) Conversion is the restoring of sight, not of light only;
the opening of the eyes, not the bringing of light to them who have eyes
already. Act. 26.18. raising up, and putting life into a dead man, and not the
unbinding, or the unfittering of a living. Ephesians. 2.

The words, which you deny to be an error viz. It Is a needless thing for
Satan to blind if they have not eyes to see, are very false, for
notwithstanding Satan's making us blind, we are blind of our selves, according
to Scripture, which says that natural men cannot know the things of the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. and yet that the God of this world has blinded
them, 2 Cor. 4.4. when the Scripture says, that a natural man is carried
captive by Satan, 2 Timothy 2.26. does it therefore follow, he is not a slave to
sin because to Satan? Satan may keep men in blindness, and slavery, and make
men more to please themselves in both, but its certain that we are both slaves
to sin, and blind in sin also.

Where or in what clause or phrase of this ensuing period, Sion Coll. visted.
p. 12, 13.
lies the error or heresy -- If God should not make men capable of believing,
I mean indue men with such principles, abilities or gifts of reason, judgment,
memory or understanding, by the diligent improvement whereof they might come to
be convinced of a readiness and willingness in God to receive them into
favor, upon their repentance ( upon which Conviction, true repentance and
turning to God, ALLWAIES follows) they which are condemned would have their
mouths opened against God and furnished with an excuse. The Parenthesis I
suppose is innocent. The consequence, If God should not make men capable etc.
is built upon this principle, that a plea for want of power for performance, is
an excuse in the case of nonperformance.

You have in the setting down of your innocent parenthesi, shown your self very
nocent, and deceitful; for, as if your conscience had taken your former
assertion ill at your hands, you left cut that word, ALLWAIES, in your late
Pamphlet, which word the subscribers charged you with in their testimony, and
would clearly have carried the sense thus, grace and conversion infallibly
follow upon man's improvement of his natural abilities,

First, For your consequence that if God should not make men capeable of
believing (upon that principle that a plea for want of power for per formance,
Tum omnis responsandi ansa praeciditur Israelitis, cum statuitur potentiam
serendi fructus per gratiam internam ipsis esse colla tam contra vero tam diu
ma net respan an^i materia, quam diu non statui tur Israelita^ a Deo accepisse
potentiam fructus serendi^ accepesse, ^qu^^, ca^^ per grat^^ internam u^po
tequae (...) e^ con^ertur Act. Synod. p. 92. Art 3.4.
is an excuse in the case of nonperformance) they that are condemned would
have their mouths opened against Gods proceedings, and be furnished with an
excuse.

Let the reader take notice, that you in this as in that which follows lovingly
join hands with the Arminians, the Remonstrants, who say thus: Then is the
mouth of the Israelites stopped, when it is granted that they had power given
them by the internal grace of God to bring forth fruit, but on the other side
so long will the mouth be open, as it is not granted that the Israelites had
received of God power to bring forth fruit, I say, had received it by internal
grace, by which only it can be conferred; It Is plain you join with the
erroneous; but you ask, where lies the error? I answer, I shall tell you
where there lies something as bad, I mean blasphemy. Your mouth (to be sure)
is widely opened against God, for the English of this assertiom ( If God should
not make men able to believe they might accuse God) is but this, that God is
unjust in commanding man in his fallen estate to perform the things which he
has voluntarily disabled himself to perform; by which opinion you must needs
make Gods sovereignty to be impaired with man's ability, and to be limited to
man's sinfully, and voluntarily contracted impotency; or if God will not suffer
it so to be, the holy commands of God are by J.G. openly charged to be worthy
of having our mouths wide open against them; Is not every man, as a man, a
debtour to God, and a creature tied to obedience? and does his making himself
insufficient to discharge the debt discharge him from payment? and it would
follow, if such impotency excused from duty, and from the obligation of the
command, that those men were most excusable, that were most sinful, and had by
long accustoming themselves to sin, made themselves most unable to leave and
forsake sin; nay, if by reason hereof, God did not command obedience from them,
it would follow, that such did not sin at all (for where there is no precept
there is no transgression) and so according to you, by a man's progress in sin,
he should make himself cease to be sinful.

Nor did Pelagius himself ever utter any sentence more to the swelling of
nature, or prejudice of grace, then your self have uttered in your parenthesis,
wherein you say that by the improvement of nature, a man may attain to such a
conviction as upon which saving conversion ALLW AIES follows; what place is
here left for grace? what agreement with the Apostle. 1 Cor. 4.7 Who makes
thee to differ from another? Vt Episcopius.
(Mr Goodwins answer; my self by my improovement of nature made me to differ,
would have fallen little short of blasphemy.) What agreement with Christ. Joh.
15.24. Now they have both seen and hated (for all that) both me and my father;
The principles of nature after the fall improved to the utmost, are so far from
carrying a man to God, that they leave a man dead in sin, and his very highest
and most refined part, his carnal mind is enmity to God, Romans 8 7. And again
the Scripture testifies that the world cannot receive the spirit of truth Ioh.
14 17. And Rom 5.6. Christ died for us being, as ungodly, so without strength;
So Phil. 1.29. Unto you it is given, etc. to believe; and Phil. 2.13. It is God
that works in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.

Your good friend M. Bucer you say is no Arminian, and I say he is far from
being like you in this point, Hear him upon that of our Savior, Ioh. 12.39.
Therefore they could not believe, etc. What could be said more fully and
plainly (says he) for the predestination of God that ordains all things, and
against that which some ascribe to free will, Quid patentius, and apertius dici
possit, pro Dei omni^ ordinantis praedestinatione, and contraid, quod quidam
libero arbitrio trib^unt, nempe bo minem ex sua virtute credere posse.
that a man may by his own improvement believe in Christ, etc. You go on.

You cite a whole page together, consisting of three, or four and thirty lines
under the name, and notion of one and the same error etc.

The subscribers have not (as yet) the art of pleasing you; even now they cited
your words too sparingly, now too copiously; you are ever complaining; you will
pardon them; so crooked a piece cannot easily be fitted; and it was the first
time that ever you employed them; you conjecture many reasons why they should
cite your passage so fully, even to the filling of a whole side in quarto with
34. lines. but you meet not with the right reason among them all; It was
briefly this, you have such a long-winded style, and such a foggy conceptus,
that you cannot write a slieght notion which may be couched in four lines,
under thirty four lines, as in the forecited instance is plain, and that made
the subscribers, rather to condescend to your expressions, then to be indulgent
to their own inclinations, Be quicker hereafter.

But you complain of their want of conscience in transcribing a whole page
under the name of one error.

Are you angry because they found but one Error in 34. lines? You have rather
cause to praise their candor, then to blame their computation. Had they been as
severe in reckoning your Errors as you are exact in numbering your lines, you
would have spared this charge.

The passage according to your arithmetic being 34. lines, I shall not here
transcribe it; but the sum of it is.

That if God should deprive men of all power to believe, and yet should
persuade them to believe, with that affection wherein he expresses himself in
the Scriptures, even to those that perish, this would be harder then injustice
it self; God would be like a King, that causes a man's legs to be cut off for
a fault, and yet urge him to run a race with those that have their limbs.

The Arminians were your Schoolmasters, when you learned this lesson;
Remonstrants and you meet again.

Their very words are these. If a man have lost his ability, because God has
taken it away in his just judgment by a deserved punishment, truly the man is
made excusable, Si potentiam amisit, quia came substraxit Deus justo judici^ per
panam promerita^, profecto ex^usabilis redditur homo, si cum De^^ astum deinde
postulat abillo quem fic punivit. i.e. Impotentem ad actum praestandum per
substractionem gratia reddidit actum illum non exerceat. Act, Syn. 3, 4 page
145. Et certe number De^^ hominem in aeternanco^demnationem abijecere possit, etc.
Is qui cum homine ita agit, tyrannus saevissimo Phalaride immanior, etc. Ibid.
Pone oculis militem esse multatum, etc. ibid. page 108.
though he perform not the command; And they leave it to the consciences of
Divines to judge, whether God can with justice cast such a man into eternal
damnation. Nay he that so deals with him would be a cruel tyrant (say they.) If
a General command a blind soldier, though one who has lost his eyes for
some grievous offense, to stand centinell, and threaten him if he do not, etc.

You appear not yet heart-smitten notwithstanding your review of this passage
in the Testimony; but you say it is a truth of God: and since you do so; you
are put upon proving in the next.

1. That they who perish have power to believe, and repent. The Scriptures deny
it; when they say that the world cannot receive the spirit, Joh. 14.17. men by
nature are dead in trespasses, and sins, Ephesians. 2. Without strength. Romans 5.6.
God works in us to will, and to do, our sufficiency is of God.

2. If man has not power, prove, that this impotencie is merely paenall, as
inflicted by God, so involuntarily induced by man (for that is the nature of a
punishment properly so called) the Scripture says man has found out many
inventions, Eccles 7. and that all his imaginations are evil, Genesis 6.5. and
verse. 12. that all flesh has corrupted its way.

3. Prove that God has not punished man's rebellion with this impotencie. What
death is that which is threatened upon the eating of the forbidden fruit, Genesis
2.17. and how extensive is it?

4. That upon these praemisses it would be injustice and dissimulation in God,
to command men to believe. Until these things are proved, know that the large
transcription of 34. lines, is from the crown of the head to the sole of the
foot all rottenness.

Sir, Your friend, and (as you pretend) your patron, Martin Bucer, salutes you
in these words. They that for the asserting of the justice of God, before the
tribunal of their own reason, fly to this, Qui his moti^tat Dei justitian
asserant apud ^^^unal ratio nis sue, illo confugiunt, ut dicant aliquid vir^um
nobis superesse, quibas vocati ado nino and gratil ej^ aljuti, ad rectam vitam
pervenire p^ssumus, si non ultro averti nos ab illa patiamur: praeterquam, quod
boc commento, rationi minime satisfaciunt; eo praeterea adducunt se, ut si
tueri istud suum commentum velint, necessario negent Deum esse. Bucerus. in
Romans 9.
that they say we have some strength left, by which being called by God, and
assisted by his grace we may come to a righteous life, besides, that they
satisfy not reason by this fiction of theirs, they also bring themselves upon
this strait, that if they will defend their fiction, they must deny there is a
God; Though Bucer be in your books now he is dead, yet you would have been far
from being in his, had he been living.

You say that this doctrine is most assuredly asserted by Paul and Peter; Sion
Coll. vi^it. page 15.
viz. That wicked men would not be obnoxious to the judgments of God if they
could plead any tolerable excuse -- now of all excuses for not doing a thing
commanded, there is none more reasonable then this, to say that he was not able
to do it.

Remonstrants will not part, Hoc unum ad excusationem hominis abunde sufficient,
quod facere, necpotest, nec potuit, quod non fecerit, quia obligationis ratio
tum maxim omnium cessat, cum praetenditur saciendi id quod mandatur
impotentia. Act. Synod. Art. 3, 4. 142.
do what I can; Their words are these. No man is without excuse for not doing
that which he has not power to do. Nay this thing alone is abundantly
sufficient for his excuse, for a commandment does most of all cease to oblige,
when a man alleges that he is impotent to do it.

I have proved for you that this is the Arminians doctrine. Now in requital I
pray prove to me that this is Paul's, and Peter's doctrine; Take heed of laying
the brats of Satan at the doors of Peter, and Paul; In your next tell me in
what places Peter, and Paul assert, that a natural man's impotencie excuses
him from doing his duty, whether in Romans 9.19, 20. where we are forbidden to
dispute against God. Or in Romans ^3 19. -- Every mouth must be stopped. In the
mean time, your old friend Mr Bucer sends you word by me, That our impotencie,
and want of strength to do any good at all, will prove a vain excuse. And
again, when God shall arraign men in their own consciences, Nequicquam subit
excusatio nostraram virium quod ex illis nihil bont existere possit. in Romans
1.20. p. 86. Vbi homines ad serium judicium sui ipsorum exciverit ibi
evanescunt cavillationes ejusmodi cunctae in Romans 9. page 399.
all these cavils will fade and vanish, and men shall then condemn none but
themselves. The Saints if at any time their reason stumble at the judgments of
God, suppress it with that, Who art thou, O man?

Sion Col. visited. p. 16. Ans.
They represent it for an Error in me to say, Doubtless men are natural men
before they are spiritual, and yet these are the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
15.46.

You complain of the subscribers for rending and tearing your sayings; but
never was there a wretched passage so pitifully torn by any, as this your own
passage is by your self; Are you a bedlam that you tear your own flesh? out of
pity to you I shall endeavor to heal the body of this your passage; and give
it you entire in your own words, as the Ministers have set it down in their
Testimony.

It is this. Natural men may do such things as whereunto God has by way of
promise annexed grace and acceptance; and immediately follows that astonishing
expression. ( This is as dangerous an Error as Paul uttered, when he said That
they were no gods which were made with hands, Act. 19.26.) for doubtless men
are natural men before they are spiritual: and supernatural, and spiritual
they cannot be made but by believing, and unto believing God has promised
grace and acceptance; Your conclusion is. If it be possible that natural men
may believe, then may they do such things whereunto God has by way of promise
annexed grace and acceptance.

The Reader now sees, what it was in this passage that was represented as an
Error, not the words collected out of the Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.46. [
Doubtless men are natural before spirituall] but that which went before, [
natural men may do such things whereunto God has by way of promise annexed
grace, because they may believe, etc.] Friend, Fear you not God? Did not your
hand shake, and your heart tremble when you wrote that the Ministers set down
these words for the Error, Doubtless men are natural before they are spiritual?

For your position that natural men may do such things whereunto God; has by
way of promise annexed grace: how should I rejoice could I hope that the reason
why you conceald it in Sion Coll. visit. was remorse. I observed a little
before that you left out the word always; in setting down that Error (the same
with this in other words) cited by the subscribers in their Testimony; A
natural man by his natural principles may attain that conviction which
conversion always follows; I add to what there I said; I suppose by your
natural man, who you say does things to which God has annexed acceptance;
you mean the same man that the Apostle speaks of, Romans 8.8. The man in the
flesh: now that man cannot please God, Opera Anglica na contra jungu^. page 8.8
Fateor non param nihi do uit dogma plane imptum and a perte Pelogia number obtru^i
nostrae scholae, etc. sed. Hominem posse ante justificatione a dum adhu^ a
Christo do nino est al^^us and impius, facere bona opera quae fint Deo ita
grata, ut bis operib^ Deus moveatur ad co^ creadum plenam ad se co^versi^en,
Rivet. Disp. page 155.
though your natural man does things acceptable to God; Invert not Gods and
natures order, first let the tree be good, and then the fruit. But know if you
still remain obdurate, that your good friend Mr Bucer has no more patience
toward you; but in down right terms calls you Pelagian; for says he, it is an
impious and a Pelagian opinion, that a man before justification, and while out
of Christ, should be able to do good works so acceptable to God, that by these
works God should be moved to bestow conversion upon him. Only I confess the
learned Rivet. p. 155. of his disputations, with a little more moderation calls
you among the rest a pargetted Pelagian, If I rightly English his words,
incrustantes Pelagianismum. And I pray consider how little you want of meritum
de congruo.

But you prove your position, That natural men may do such good works, etc.
most lamentably; because it is possible (say you) they may believe. But how then
(say I) can they do things accep^able to God before they believe, if you make
believing the reason of their acceptance? And who knows not but that natural
men may believe; viz. that they are such subjects as God works upon, so as to
make them believers? but prove that they are able to believe while they are
natural men. Help him logic; let fallacia a been divisis ad male conjuncta be
well heeded; how should, your poor people know your fulla^ies, when you know
them not your self?

They make me an Erroneous offender, Sion Col. visit. p. 16.
for saying, that to believe, first that God is, secondly that he is a rewarder
of all those who diligently seek him, is all the faith which the Apostle makes
absolutely necessary to bring a man to God, Heb. 11 6.

your self: but the Subscribers know how to distinguish between these two, the
holy Scriptures and your heretical scriblings. Your self, not the Subscribers,
make you the Erroneus offender, but not for these words, viz. To believe that
God is, and that he is a rewarder, etc. is all the faith which is necessary to
bring a man to God, but for your saying immediately going before (which you
were afraid or ashamed to repeat,) viz. That all the world, even those that
have not the letter of the Gospel, have yet sufficient means granted them of
believing these two, viz. That God is, and that he is a rewarder, etc. You
affirming that they who have only the heavens, the Sun, Moon, and Stars to
preach the Gospel unto them, they also have reason sufficient to judge the same
judgment with them who have the letter of the Gospel; for they have the Gospel
(say you) the substance and effect of it, the willingness of God to be
reconciled to the world, preached unto them by the Apostles aforesaid, the Sun,
Moon, and Stars.

What stuff is here!

Have all the world sufficient means of believing these two: 1. That God is,
Heb. 11.6.
2. That he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him? Had you understood
that place of Scripture you would not have said so; for the faith or belief
there spoken of, is evidently such a faith as whereby a man may come to God
with acceptance. The words are set down by the Apostle to prove that without
faith no man can please God; For faith he, No man can (acceptably) come to God,
unless he believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek
him; strongly inferring that whosoever does believe that God is, and that he is
a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, does come to God in a way of
pleasing him. Judicious Calvin tells you thus upon the place. Haec est ratio
cur citra fidem null a Deo placeat, quia nullus unquam accedit nisi qui credit
Deum esse, and statue^ remuneratorem esse omnibus qui eum quaerunt.
And a little after he says, the Apostle means not that men should be
persuaded that there is some or a God, but he speaks this of the true God. De
vero Deo hoc praedicat, and this reward is not to be referred to the dignity of
works, but to faith. Haec remuneratio non ad operum dignitatem vel pretium, sed
ad fidem refertur. Calv. in loc. And Paraeus upon that place will inform you
that those two heads of faith, That God is, and that God is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him, are not to be understood Philosophically, but
Theologically; that the eternal God is Father Son and holy Ghost, and that he
is a rewarder of them that seek him Evangelically by faith in Christ, with the
benefits of the Gospel, pardon, adoption, sanctification, glory, etc.

And can Heathens by the Sun Moon and Stars do this? can they by the light
of nature believe a trinity of Persons in unity of Essence? if they do, they
are better then your godly persons, Hag. page 36
who you say are holy and walk with God, and yet believe not that God is one in
three persons. Ad co^nitiene^ De^per createras ex naturae lumine non aliter
ducimur, nisi quatenus Deus est earum principium and causa non au^em earum
^ausa, nisi per divinam, suam cirtutem omnil us (...) ^o^warem (...) per
creaturas cognitionem consequinon valemus nisi eam quae patri and (...) and
spi^^^i ^^^cto s^t communis quo^^^: per^reaturas ad cognoscendam personarum
(...) non poss^m a p^r^^^gere. G^^^. de Trin.
None (says Gerard) can be led to the knowledge of God by the creatures, but
only so far forth as God is their cause; Now God is their cause by a divine
power common to the three persons; therefore by the creatures we can only
attain to knowledge of those things which are common to the three Persons,
wherefore certainly by the creatures we can never attain to the knowledge of
the distinction of persons. Name one heathen who did most diligently search
into nature, that did by the inspection of the creature, know there was a
trinity of persons.

And can the heathens by the works of creation have the discoveries of a
mediator? and have Christ made known to them? and believe in him? I am sure you
never learned this of the Apostle, Dicimus fide^ in Christum non semper requiri
ad justificationem, sed fid^^ s^^pliciter, ut restatur Apo stolus, Heb. (...)
in quo et^^n additur, (...) ^idem (...) dam req^^^ credere qu^^ Deus sit and
quod sit rem^nera ^t illoru^ qui ipsum quaerunt de fide vero in Christum nulla
vel ^inima fit (...). R^fot. lib. de sat. Christ^ cap. to. p. 17^.
who says that faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. Or are you of Smalcius his
judgment, who faith that faith in Christ is not always required to
justification; but faith simply, and he proves it out of this very Scripture
that you have here alleged, Heb. 11.6. for the faith of heathens; Sir, blame
me not if I be jealous of you, as of one that favors socinianisme; Sure I am,
you must either hold that heathens must attain faith in Christ by the enjoying
of sun moon and stars; or that the faith of the 11. of Heb. 6. which (you
say) the heathens do attain by the sun moon and startes, is not a faith in
Christ, and then welfare Smalcius; In your next, I pray manifest your judgment
herein.

Or of whom learned you this opinion, that they who have only the sun moon and
stars, Impossible est pervenire ad sidem, pervenire ad aeternam vitam, nisi
audieris evargelium, idque adminis^ratum per hominem, nam de praedicatione
Evangelij Paulus hic l^quitur quam dominus per Apostolos suos ado. inistravit.
Bucer. in Romans 10. Act. Synod. Artic. 2. Col. Hag. art. 2. Ad Arg. 5. page 179.
Sion Col. visi^ p. 17. Ans.
etc. to preach the Gespel unto them, have sufficient means of believing?
Certainly Mr Bucer never was your Master, who on Romans 10. says, It Is
impossible to attain to says, to aeternall life, unless thou hear the
Gospel, and that admi^istred by man, for Paul here speaks of the preaching of
the Gospel which God administered by his Apostles; But whose scholar are you
now? Friend you are to blame to put me out of my old way, for I would fain have
found a schoolmaster among the Arminians for you, but the truth is you have now
outgon your Masters; They indeed say that God calls all with a common calling
by which men may be made fit to hear the Gospel, in which salvation is offered,
etc. but they never dreamed of a Gospel by Sun, Moon, and Stars, nay, when
pressed at the conference at Hague, to show the universality of the preaching
of the Gospel, though they have many shifts and cavils, yet this of your
Preachers never came into their mind.

Let all my sayings be drawn together, and the rigidest extraction made, there
will be found the same spirit of error (if yet it were error) in Mr John
Ball, Entitled, A Treatise of the Covenant of Grace. -- page 44. of (...)
^^^course.

I cannot wonder that you who would fain father your errors upon Scripture,
are in this kind industrious also to abuse holy and learned Mr Ball; lay not
your eggs of error in Mr Balls nest, thinking that by the warmth of his
reputation to have them hatched.

The words of Mr Ball are these. No man is hindered from believing through the
difficulty or unreasonablenes of the command, or through his own simple
infirmity, as being willing to believe, but not able, which inability deserves
pity, but he does not believe because he will not.

What is here, that gives you the least countenance in your errors? Mr Ball
says and that truly, that unwillingnesse to believe hinders a man from
believing, but he does not say that any man of himself can be willing; for page
226. having asserted that man is unable to believe, and in the same page, that
it is of grace to be enabled to believe, he presently adds, that mands not
further from believing then desire to believe. Mr B. grants that it is man's
fault that he dissents from grace calling him, but where, says he, it is in
man's power to consent to grace calling him: and if he will not say so, he
cannot be of your faith, who maintain that man has ability to believe, and may
so improve his natural abilities that conversion always will follow, and if
man had not power to believe. God were unjust to command it. Mr Ball blames
man's unwillingnesse to believe, and you like an acute logician thence conclude
man's sufficiency. 'Twere easy to show as great a dissonancy between you and Mr
Ball in this point, as there is an harmony between you and the Remonstrants:
Take it in these four or five passages. 1. You say, Div. Auth. p. 168. That if
man should be deprived of all ability to believe, and yet God should be still
moving and persuading men to believe, this would be harder then injustice it
self; As for a King to cause a man's legs to be cut off, and yet command him to
run a race. And you say that man's inability to do any thing that God commands,
is a very fair and reasonable excuse for not doing it, Div. Auth. p. 201. But
Mr Ball says, page 245, 246. of the Cou. of Gr. That an impossible thing to
us, may be, and is the object of Gods command, and of his desire. Nay (in the
same place) the Lord commands and desires the conversion of many obstinate,
impenitent persons who have the means of grace, whom for their present
contempt, he does blind and harden; If impossible be not the object of Gods
will in this fence, viz. impossible in respect of man; he that by custom in
evil has contracted an habit that he cannot but sin, should not offend, and he
that is carried with the most violence of mind to evil, should be least evil,
page 247. he says, that God may justly withhold the graces of his spirit from
those that are invited in the Ministry, and page 248. The Lord does earnestly
again and again call upon impenitent and obstinate sinners to repent and
believe, when as yet in his just judgment he hardens their hearts that they
cannot repent.

And whereas you call man's inability a fair excuse for not doing: Mr Ball
says, page 249. that though God do not enable men to come to him, yet if men
reason thus, Why does he then entreat us and persuade us? etc. they may as well
plead against the foreknowledge of God, If God foreknew that men would not
return, why does he entreat us? and he concludes that these are ignorant and
blind imaginations.

You say page 26. Div. Auth. Natural men may do such things as whereunto God
has promised acceptance; and upon improvement of natural abilities grace
always follows, p. 200.

Mr Ball says, p. 237. That they who use well their supernatural gifts, shall
be enriched with an increase, but he says also, that men unregenerate cannot
use their natural gifts so as to procure acceptance.

You hold that they who have only the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the goodness
of God in guiding of the world, have sufficient means of believing granted to
them, etc. But Mr Ball says; God exacts of the Gentiles given up to the vanity
of their minds, that they should seek him in the way wherein he will be found,
if they would be saved, when they have not means sufficient to bring them to
the knowledge of the truth. And page 247. Many Infidels have departed this
life, before they had means to come to the knowledge of Jesus Christ; and God
denies to some both means and grace.

Your erroneous writings are as repugnant to Mr Ball, as if you had laid his
book before you not for citation but contradiction.

For the opinion which this grand subscription voteth an error in me about a
natural man's power to good supernatural, Sion Col. visit. p. 20.
I desire the whole covent of two and fifty, with all that dogmatize with them,
to know that it is no new doctrine in the Reformed Churches.

Think you that the Subscribers take you to be the author of this error? this
generation from the invention of it and the other errors, by the lamentable
subterfuge of only a revivall of them? who knows not that the Church has been
anciently disturbed with your doctrine about freewill to good supernatural?
The Centurists observe that very early was the faith of Christ corrupted in
this point; The error of Pelagius was born before John Goodwin; may it was
confuted and condemned in many counsels, it rebreathed in the Massilians, was
entertained by some Schoolmen, and varnished over by Arminius, before ever you
were a well willer to it. Instead of denying the strangeness of it, you should
have proved the truth of is; and instead of pleading that it has been in the
Church, have proved it the doctrine of the Church; But why shun you novelty?
This is the way to loose your Athenian Proselytes, who love novelty better then
truth; And how prove you it is no new doctrine? Sioa Col visi. p 21.


You say that There is not an hairs breadth of power to supernatural good more
attributed by me to natural men, then is clearly asserted by Paulus Testardus
Pastor of the Reformed Church of Blois.

But of what standing was Testardus? his Treatise printed 1633* speaks him but
of yesterday, and too young to be the author of an old doctrine.

2. Who was this Testardus, that his authority is so praevalent with you?
Vinlicie Redemptionis. Ep. to the Reader.
Though you so highly prize him, yet my Reverend friend M Stalbam, whose
judgment in the matter of Discipline though I am not fully informed ost, yet
for modesty and learning he much exceeds you; and he so far abhors these
opinions of yours, that he asserts concerning this Testardus (upon through
examination of him) that his colors are the colors of grace, while he fights
for nature, and of a covenant of grace, while he sights for a covenant of works
and nature; That he finds the universalists of this time: have lighted their
candle (after Arminius was stinking in the snuff and socket) from this
Testardus; Nay he conceives also, that even Oats that infamous Sectary sucked
several errors from Testardus. The very time of the edition of Testardus was,
when we were pestered with a number of such Testardusses, when the good work
carried on, was the advancement of Arminian and Popish dictates above the
Scripture; and I know not whether it was long after that time, that your self
began to dogmatize and sow your tares in your parish of Colemanstreet.

3. You say that Testardus his book was approved by two of the order of
Presbytery; but if the authority of a province of Ministers be (as you say
truly) a weak support for the judgments of men in matters of doctrine, surely
the testimony of two Ministers is none of the strongest grounds to build your
assertions upon.

4. Did not your heart smite you when you wrote that the doctrine of Testardus
is the received doctrine of the Reformed Churches in France, and asserted for
Orthodox by a province of Ministers in France. Spanhem de gratia univers. p.
31. Anatome Arminianismi enoda tio gravissimarum quest.
Why cite you not the confessions of the Gallicane churches? Are you a stranger
to the synod of Dort, confirmed by the Synods of France? to the writings of
Pet. Molinaeus the most noted Minister of the French Churches, and designed by
them as their delegate to that Synod? -- And whence have you it that the
province of Ministers in Orleance approved of Testardus his writings? Did you
never read that it was prohibited in the Synod of Alenzon, Spanhem de gratia
univers. page 1.
to publish any such tractates as this of Testardus: and what hindered that
there was no more severity used? and with what face can you aver that treatise,
approved by a Synod in France? whereas therefore you scoff at the subscribers
for saying that the Confession of faith advised by the Assembly of Divines, is
agreeable to the Confessious of other Churches; You are desired in your next to
show in any of these points whereof we are now speaking, any material
difference between their confessions and ours: The confession of faith
presented by the Assembly to the Parliament, agrees to the Confession of the
last named Churches, though not to the semipelagian Theorems of a dough-baked
Testardus.

I shall add no more but this, to tell you, that when you went about to make
Testardus your Patron, you spoke to the whole College or Covent (as you call
it) of the 52. and all that dogmatize with them against your opinion, In which
passage you bring in (and that truly) the whole number of 52 as testifying
against you, whereas page the second, you say, that neither Dr Gouge, nor Mr
Calamy, nor M Case, nor Mr Cranford, nor sundry others were either the Authors
or subscribers of the Testimony. A crazy conscience, Sion Col. visie. p. 23.
and a brittle memory are very ill companions.

For the proof of your doctrine about natural man's free will, and power to
good supernatural, you cite a passage out of Bucer on Romans 2, 14. and you say
that the passage is fuller of the spirit of that opinion which the subscribers
reckon among heresies,

I have proved that Bucer shakes you off, as a bold beggar, is ashamed of you,
and calls you Pelagian, and there is nothing in this passage of Bucer like your
opinion, with what engines did you draw your conclusion from Bucers premises?
Bucer says not A natural man has power to bel^eve, That the Sun, Moon and
Start are Preachers of the Gospel: or that if natural men be unable to
believe, they are excusable, or that God should be a tyrant in commanding men
to do that, which they have not ability to perform. What does he say that looks
this way? If any thing could have been wrested from this place that agreed with
you, yet you show nothing but extreme ignorance or impudency to allege an
author for you, the whole strain of whose writings are so directly opposite
unto you.

But in this place which you allege, had Bucer countenanced your opinion, you
would have told the Reader wherein the agreement between you and Bucer steed,
or have grounded an argument upon some of Bucers words for your opinion, but
alas! you do none of all this, you say that your doctrines and Bucers agree,
but here is not a syllable to prove how or wherein; Reader I pray observe the
harmony between Bucer and I. G. Bucer says here, that God in no age left men
destitute of the doctrine of salvation (as you translate it) which he
understands of the Law, which is in it self doctrina salutaris Professi^
doctruae salutaris, boc est recte viven^i, Bucer. enar. sect. 4. Romans 2.
, and of which the Apostle speaks in that place, Romans 2.14. on which Bucer
comments, but you assert the Gospel to have been known to the Gentiles.

Bucer says here, that God so bedeweth nature with his light, that they only
remain strangers unto righteousness, who willingly put it from them:

But you, that man has power willingly to embrace this righteousness, and not
to put it from him; to which Bucer speaks, expressly contrary in the same
Chapter, They have (says he) light enough to enfirce self-condemnation for
Walking wickedly, but not sufficient to glorify God as they know Deus certa
per^io^e lu^em quibusvis ^or talibus impertit tam ampla qu^dem ut qui ^ra ve
vivu^t seipso^ tande^n coademnare cogantur, at nendum suffi cieme eo, ut Deum
sicut cognoscunt ^^a etiam queant giorificare. In Romans 2.23. Veru^n qurdem
tslu: reminem posse, nisi Deo lucem suam insundente essioncius, eoque agente ad
se and trabente homi number an^mus. in Romans 1.30.
.

Bucer says, Did the Gentiles not voluntarily put away the desire of
righteousness, they should sooner be taught by an Angel, then be suffered to
be ignorant of Christ,

You say, that they have ability to do what is righteous and to believe (which
Bucer as you heard even now flatly demeth) And for an Angel to reveal Christ,
that would be according to M. Goodwin, superfluous, the Sun, Moon and Stars are
Apostles, and all to them the Gospel is to us, in Mr Goodwins opinion.

And (where indeed lies your miserable mistake of Bucer In this place) you
said even now, Soli^ babentiiut el^ttionu donum scientta vitae commun^catur,
and ab ijs qui cocareant per praedi. calum etiam hoc quod divi. nae cognitionls
videntur habere auforetur quia reprobi post coxtemptum verbum (quod nequeunt
recipere) magis excaecantur. Bucer. in Mat. 13. S^o^ Col. visited p. 23.
that conversion always follows upon the improvement of naturals, Bucer though
he says that God would send an Angel to instruct those that did not put from
them the desire of righteousness, yet holds that from the gift of Gods
election only, and not the improvement of naturals, this manifestation of
Christ, and salvation through him to proceed, and from them who want that gift
of election, shall that which they had by the word preached be taken away;
because (says he) the reprobate after the word contemned (which they cannot
receive) are more blinded: by the way, tell me in your next, whether Bucer
makes not God a cruel tyrant, in saying that the reprobate contemn the word,
and cannot receive it, though God command them to do it.

You still labor to make your own face clean by throwing dirt in Bucers. You
say that Bucer conceives that Paul offered this to the consideration of the
Jews, that the Gentiles even before Christ was revealed unto them, were
partakers of true righteousness. And this you say is a saying ten degrees
beyond the line of any of yours.

Your aim is here to make Bucer seem a Giant, that you,

The Papists were not so cruel by a thousand parts in digging up of Bucers
body, when dead, and buried, as you in laboring to bury his name, while it is
yet living, and rather then his name shall want a burying place, to make your
own throat an open sepulcher.

You desire that the reader should believe it was Bucers judgment, that the
Gentiles could be justified without Christ, (...) Legis (...) generaliter
accipit praossi (...) justitiae quae lex dece^. Buc. in loc.
because Bucer says, they were made partakers of true righteousness, before
Christ was revealed to them (and if this be not the opinion which you desire to
affix to Bucer, it is so far from being ten degree beyond yours, that it is a
thousand degrees short of yours) but by righteousness Bucer only understands
the duties of righteousness commanded in the Law.

But you do wickedly to seem willing, that the reader should believe, Apostolus
praecipue o^nu^but wodis laberat ostendere extra Christum nullos non perditot
esse non minus julaeos quam Gentes, Enar. Sect 4. cap. 2. Romans
that Bucer did ever imagine any could be justified out of Christ, you may
consult him in the Enar. Sect. 4. cap. 2. on Romans where he asserts that all are
lost out of Christ. If Bucer be a friend to your opinions, I know not who is an
enemy; And I am consident the Ministers of the Province of Babylon, that
condemned Bucer, as you say, for an heretic, and a man of rotten judgment,
dig'd him out of his grave, and made a sacrifice by fire of his dead, and
buried corpse, unto the Genius of their bloody Religion, would have suffered
your bones to have rested in their grave, if they had not rather been digd up,
to be reserved as holy relics, to be enshrined according to the Genius of
their foolish superstition.

It were easy to fill many pages with passages from other Orthodox Authors,
Sion Col. visit. p. 23.
who have delivered many things fully consonant with what I have written.

You have a good faculty at filling of pages; Ball and M. Bucers mind, you
will but abuse them and they will accuse you; for you have brought these two to
bless your self, and curse the subscribers, whereas they have done the
contrary altogether.

Nor were it a matter of much more difficulty to bring antiquity it self, Sion.
Col. visit. p. 24.
and particularly those very authors who were the greatest opposers of
Pelagius, as Hierom, Austin, Prosper, with their mouths wide open in
approbation of the same things, for which I am arraigned at the Tribunal of
Sinon-Colledge.

For your scoff of Sinon College, Aus.
If it be Sinon-Colledge, it is so since you visited it, nor did it ever favor
of a Sinon till your Bishops foot stepped into it. I know none, that deserve to
be called Sinons, but Traitors to a City, and who they were you may find out
without coming to Sion-Colledge.

You come to the fathers for patronage, being cast of, both by Ball, and Bucer,
But they afford you no relief, only every thing would fain live, yet you find
no more help from them then a man near drowning by a deep and violent torrent,
does from a fearther in the water departing from him.

You say the Fathers approve of, and cousser^ the same things for which you are
arraigned at the Tribunal of Sinon-Colledge. Sion Col. visit. p.24.


There Is not one of the passages quoted out of the fathers, word Liberum
arbitrium, in some of them which may be used against you as well as for you.
You quote the fathers for your patronage, and asserting the same things with
you, but what is in the fathers that is, but like those your passages A
natural men has power to believe: If God did command men to believe, they not
having abilities, God should be (...) tyrant. The want of ability is a law
full excuse for now-performance; man may so improve his naturals, as that true
conversion shall always fellow: That the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are Preachers
of the Gospel, etc. Let the Fathers sayings, and yours be compared; but herein
you deal with the Fathers, as before with Bucer, when you alleged him; you
tell me that Antiquity is on your side, and set down barely two, or three
broken ends of sentences, grounding no argument upon those passages for your
opinions as indeed you cannot; you seeming rather ambitious to be accounted
able to read a piece of the Fathers writings, then able to understand them.

As you have cited the Fathers most impertinently, (which by and by shall fully
appear) so most imperfectly and ma^^edly as if you did not like an ingenuous
guest expect a meal from them but like a beggar their scraps and ^^agments
only. Jer^m says M^^^chaeorum est hominum damdare naturum, and liberum au^erre
arbitrium, The Manishees take away free will but why leave you out that
whichfollows, and adjutorium Deitollere and take away the help of God? Is it
because your masters the Remonstrants do so, or because you would make way for
your accusation, following against the Ministers by obscuring the Manichees
doctrine.

Why leave you out rusumque, apertissimae, est insaniae hoc hominem dicere
esse, quod Deus est, Its madness to say that man is what God is, in which
words Hierom rejects the opinion of the P^lagians, which is also years, -- In
the next quotation out of H^e^om why break you off at these words Damnetur ille
qui dam. not, and add not Caeterum non differimus a b^utis quod liberi arbitrij
conditi sumus, sed ipsum liberum arbitrium Dei nititur auxilio, we differ not
only from beasts because^ we were made with free will, which h^ speaks in
opposition to the Manichees, but in that the help of God in all things sustains
it. Exeo quod no^ add^listi videru^negare. Here, advers. Pelag. lib. 1.
Which he utters against the Pelagians, you express the one and conceal the
other, and if Hierom may be heard, in as much as you add it not, you seem to
deny it.

Why do you so mangle Austin, why break you off at Q^^ hoc nescit? Aag de Great.
and lib. Arbitr.
who knows not this? God would not command that which he knew man could not
perform; Who knows not this? and add not with him, sed ideo jubet, etc. but God
therefore sometimes commands some things which we cannot do, that we might know
what to beg of him; Was it to conceal his judgment in what sense the Law is
impossible? namely, although possible to Grace, yet impossible to corrupt man?
Or was it to make way for the next passage you allege out of him. We execrate
the blasphemy of those who affirm that God enjoins any thing that is
impossible; as if you had a minds to have the reader think that Austin voteth
Christ a blasphemer for saying Mat. 19. It is as easy for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle, etc. or the Apostle a blasp^emer for saying, Romans 8.3.
That which was impossible to the law.

And whereas you pretend, that Austin and Hierom defend you against what is
laid to your charge about free will, you most grossly mistake, either through
weakness, or wilfulness. For the fathers assert the being, and nature of
free will only, and not its power to supernatural good, in all the passages,
which you allege (and you might to that purpose have produced an hundred more)
out of them. I might acquaint the reader, that your thredbare quotations are
commonly made use of, by the Jesuits, and Arminia^s, even usque adnauseam (out
of the latter whereof by comparing your writings with theirs, I have cause to
think you borrow these passages) But to let that pass, though Austin, and
Hierom against the Manichees maintained the nature of freewill, will, yet it is
as true, that against the Pelagians, they denied the abilities of free will to
good supernatural, as being captive, and dead; of this latter you wisely take
no notice at all, as making directly against you, though there are hundreds,
not to say thousands of instances to that purpose to be found in them; And thus
the learned and orthodex divines of the reformed Churches abroad understand
both Austin and Hierom when alleged by Papists and Arminians as writing for
free will. Thus also Abbot and Prideaux, Abbot against Bishop. Pridea. Lect. 4.
de conversionis modo. Si non est liberum Arbitrium quomodo Deus juditat mudum.
Aug. ad val. ep. 46. Vid Riv. To. 2. p. 183.
Rivetus and Walleus two famously learned writers among the Protestants shall
suffice for instancing; Baily the lesuite objected out of Augustine to prove
free will, that very place against the Protestants which you allege against
the Ministers ( Baily the Jesuit is more your Patron then either Ball or
Bucer) The place is this, If there be no free will, how shall Godiudge the
world? This place Rives understands of the natural being of free will; For
(says he) If man were turned into a stone or a black, or a bruit creature, he
should be exempted from Gods judgment, but since when he acts out of
deliberation, he chooses and wills what pleases himself, he deservedly gives
an account to God of his actions: But Rivet proves at large from many places
which he cites out of Augustine, that this place alleged both by you and
Baily, makes nothing for free will to good supernatural, as from that place in
Austin where he says, man has lost his free will to love God, by the
greatness of the first sin, and from that place free will was once given by
God, which being by our own fault lost, cannot be restored but by God, and he
concludes that Sexcenta, many hundreds of places might he alleged to that
purpose out of him.

Molinaus being charged by that angry Arminian Corvinus for destroying
free will, Wall. oper. p. 95. Tom. 2.
and joining hands with the Manichees and the Priscillianists (an imputation by
M. Goodwin laid upon the subscribers in this Pamphlet) Walleus returns him this
answer. We say with Jerome (says he) Thou do in vain persuade the ignorant
that we condemn free will, nay let him be condemned that condemns it, but
immediately he gives the reason why and how both Jerome and himself did allow of
free will, not in regard of its abilities to good supernatural, but because
(says he) he denies man to be created according to the image of God, who
denies him to be adorned with this natural faculty of free will.

In your next I pray cite Rivet, Sion Col. visited. p. 45. Aug. contr. duas ^p
Pelag l. 1. c. 2 Hierom. al Ctesip. ep. c 3. Iesuitae manicheismi insimu^nt qui
cuor sanctli illis viris loquuntur quast cum mamcheis sentirent qui liberum
arbitrium ad bonil supernaturals amissun conteeduat. Riv. Tom. 1. p. 177. Col
1. Quod porro subjung is nostros essentiam uberi arbitrij todere cum Ma^tchae
is solita ^alu maia est Walleus de Praed. p 65. Springlius de Hodiern baeres.
par. 1. lib. 2. Calumni^ and Blasphemia est gratiam veram liberum nostr^^
arbitrium ad omnemalu^n procl^ve corrigentem, arguere Manichaeis^^i omne libe
um arbi^rium tollent^^. Sion Col. visited p 25. Answ.
and Wall^^^ for patrons of free will also.

Your accusation that we confute Pelagianism: by pure Manicheisme, as a worn
calumny. It Is as old as Pelagius he did cast it upon Austin, Reclamabis, and
dices nos Manichaeorum dogma sequi; you will say that we follow the opinion of
the Manichees, and upon Hierom, who says, Hoc non mihi sed Apostolo imputa,
Lay this imputation (says he) upon the Apostle, not upon me. And of the
frequency of this accusation of Manicheisme, against the holy man Augustine
Read at large in Rivetus his Catholicus Orthodoxus, Tom. 2. de lib. Arbitr. Nay
the Jesuits cast the same reproach upon the Protestants, and the Arminians
upon the learned assertours of grace against free will, which John Goodwin does
here upon the Ministers. The Jesuits faith Rivet charge those with
Manicheisme, who speak, as the fathers (those holy men) spoke. And they suggest
that they who contend, that freewill is lost as to good supernatural, do
agree with the Manichces, And the learned Wallaus tells Corvinus the Arminian
that its an old reproach; I shall add, that this abominable calumny against
the faithful servants of Christ, either proceeds from unparalleld impudency,
you speaking against your conscience, or inexcusable ignorance that you
understand not what you say, or whereof you affirm, I mean, know not what
Manicheisme is,

But Springlius de hodiernis haeresib, has sufficiently answered this
imputation. Truly asserting that it is blasphemy to accuse the true grace of
God working in us, and amending our will which is only prone to evil, of
Mauicheisme, taking away all our free will, If God have not given you over to a
spirit of error, you will say so too, or more in your next, in which I desire
you to prove this your odiouslly false accusation,

The question between Pelagius and the Fathers, was not whether man had
freedom of will in respect of good or evil, but whether men notwithstwnding
their freedom of will did not still stand in need of the adjutory of grace,
both for the performance of, and perseverance in what was good.

Your mistake here is pitiful, not to say palpable; for the great question
between Hierom, Austin, and Pelagius, was not whether the will did stand in
need of the adjutory of grace, for the performance of good; but what kind of
adjutory it was, Liberum arbitrium babere not dicimus, quod in omnibus bonis
operibus divino semper adiuvaiur ouxilio* cont. Pel, lib. 1 6.31. Liberum sic
consitemur arbitrium, ut dicomus no^ semperindigere Dei auxilio Ibid cap 33,
Nos ownino nibil boni facere possumus sine Deo ib, c. 35. It a bominis laudamus
naturam, ut Dei semper gratiae addamus auxilium. ib c. 37. Anathema, quisentit,
vel docet gratiam Dei, non solun per singulas boran and per singula momenta,
sed etiam per singulos actus nostios non esse necessariam, and qui banc
conantur anserre, poenas sortientur aeternas 10. cap. 1.
of which the will did stand in need, and wherein grace was an adjutory to the
will, was the question controverted; For Pelagius himself granted the necessity
of the adjutory of grace, therefore this could not be the question.

We say (says he) that we have a free will which is always in all good things
assisted with the help of God. Aug. cont. Pelag. and Caelest. lib. 1, cap. 31.

We so confess free will, as that we say we always stand in need of the help
of God, ibid. cap. 33.

We can do nothing without the help of God. ibid. cap. 35.

We so praise nature as that we always add the help of the grace of God. cap.
37.

Nay he did not stick to pronounce Anathema to every one, who thinks, that
the grace of God is not only necessary every hour, and every moment, but to
every act of ours, and they that go about to deny it, shall be punished for
evermore. ibid. cap. 2.

And Augustine notwithstanding these plausible expressions of Pelagius, for the
necessity of grace, as to its being an adjutory, Diligenter interrogandus est
Pelagius quam dicat gratiam, qua fateatur homines adjuvari ep, 95. ad Innocent
Quaerimus qu^ auxilio dicat liberum adjuvart arbitriu^? qua graria con, Pelag,
and Caelest, l, 1 c. 31.
Is not at all satisfied, But says that Pelagius is * diligently to be asked
what grace he means, and with what grace he acknowledges (if at least he
does acknowledge the help of grace) that men are helped, against sinning, and
to live righteously, Ep. 95. And we demand (says he) what that aid, and
succor is, with which free will is helped, and with what grace. And because
Pelagius would not acknowledge the adiutory of grace, by way of an invincible,
and indeclinable working of good in us, Austin truly tells Pelagius, that he
attributes no more to Gods working, notwithstanding all his assertions, that
grace is an adintory to good, then he will allow to Satan, in exciting men to
evil by his sinful suggestions. And the same father says, that there is a
twofold adiutory to good, the one without which a good work is not done, Cur
non dix. is^i ho^^inem ^ei gratia in bon^m excitari si^ut dixisti diaboli
suggestionibus incitari. Cont. a. ep. P^l. cap. 19. Aliudest ad. jutorium sine
qu^ aliqu^d non (...), and altud est adjut^rium quo aliquid fit. Cor. and gra.
cap. 1^. Sion Col. visited p ^5. Ans.
the other by and through which a thing is done. The Pelagians in granting the
former, never satisfied Austin, because denying (as I fear you do) the latter.

These men have exchanged the fathers adint^rium into their own compulsorium,
for me I never denied, but always have asserted the necessity of grace, by way
of adiutory, only the necessitation or compulsion of grace is no article of my
Creed.

1. You here falsely and impudently accuse the subscribers (for those I suppose
you understand by that venerable title of these men.)

2. With the same integrity and modesty you excuse your self. A word or two to
each.

1. For your accusation brought against the subscribers of exchanging (as you
word it) the fathers adjutorium into their own compulsorium first, for the
lectio In what garden of authority did you gather that flower of elegancy, to
exchange one thing into another, had you said they have exchanged the adi^t^ry
for the compulsory, or thus, they have changed the adjutory into the
compulsory, though the matter had been base, yet the sense had been current,
but now this expression of ( exchanging into) makes the whole sentence not of
so much worth as brass silvered over, 'Twas a mistake of permutare for mut^re,
and I should advise you to study that easy work, where you shall find Nil
permumbis Emesve, before you adventure again upon the Fathers, had another
taken you in this gross nonsense, he would have sent you to the Children, but
I spare you.

2. That you might blast and disgrace, the infallibility of the working of
grace, you charge the Ministers with owning the compulsion of the will; but
this is refuted by being recited, so notoriously false is it; though your
calendar will not speak them Saints, yet your School accounts some of them
leearned; Think you that they would all (for now at last you have taken in the
whole number of 52.) speak such a contradiction, That men are willing, and yet
compelled? name one of the subscribers, nay any one protestant writer, that
does not assert the freedom of the will of man in his threefold estate of
creation, corruption, and reparation, comprehending both gr^^^ and glory; They
will not (I am confident) more deny freedom of will in man, then they will
reason in man, Which of the Ministers ever held, that the motions of man in any
actions, either natural, moral, or supernatural were either from natural
necessiity, or external coaction? Or that all men good, and bad, hoc ipso that
they will, do not will freely? the will would cease to be it self, should it
cease to be free.

To whatsoever object it is carried. it is not without the preceding counsel
of the practical judgment; The will being a rational appetite, never moves
but per modum judicij, upon apprehension of some goodness to which it moves;
Necesse est ut cum volumus libcro veli^us arbitrio Arg. de Civ. Dei l. 5. c.
10. Liberum arbitrium usque ade^ in peccatore^on perijt, ut per illud peccet,
maxim omnes qui cum delectatio^ ne pec^an^, ^d cont. 2 ^p, Pet, l. 1, ^. Spec.
Schol, Or, tho. c. 19. Par, 6
Nor is it in any motions compulsorily over-swayed, but works according to
its own proper motion, and to the condition of its own nature.

The most wicked man living is so far from being without freewill, that by his
free will he sins, especially th^se that sin, with delight, as says Augustine
and the more sinful men are the more freely they sin;

As for the motions of the will in renewed persons to any thing that is
supernaturally good, they are so far from being without freedom of will, that
if their wills did not work freely they should not work holily, their works
could not be good, If their workings were not free and the better any action is
the more free it is.

The Theorem then of Paulus Ferrius is approve,d who says, Liberum arbitrium
non corrumpitur quoad agendi radicem, sed quoad ^erminum; That there is in man
the nature, and being of free will is one thing, but that this natural
free will, unles renewed is able to will a supernatural good, is another
thing. That the spirit of grace does not take away the liberty of the will,
which comes by Gods creation is certain: and that it does and must take away
the pravity of the will which arises from man's corruption, before ever a man
can will, holily, is most certain.

The will in moving to supernaturrll good moves freely, but to this it must be
enabled by the efficacious communion, and adspiration of the spirit of liberty.
Enabled (I say) not violently compelled, for compulsion would destroy it, nor
barely entreated, For suasio moralis (poor moral persuasion) cannot reach it.

Nor dare the subscribers maintain such a freedom of will, as that, putting
all the operations of grace that may be put, or need to be put into the
balance, a man's natural free will, must turn the scales, and determine the
case, whether a man shall be converted, or no; accept of grace, or refuse
grace, for this were to attribute more to man's will then to God in conversion,
Man should be a convert, not because God made him so, but because he would be
so: God only persuading, and helping, but man obeying and consenting.

Certainly in this respect, as free will has no ability to move a man to be
converted, so neither when God affords his effectual grace, has it any
strength to hinder a man from conversion; but is brought on, as solely, so
irresistibly by the power of grace; It Is well expressed by your Patron Mr Bucer,
God does by his spirit so demonstrate life to the minds of men, that they
cannot but yield themselves to God with willingness; they are so freely drawn,
that they cannot be carried to any thing with greater ardency, and yet so
powerfully, that they cannot but follow most willingly; In your next I pray let
me know wherein all this while we lay a compulsory upon the will. Nay this
efficacious determination of the will by grace, is a most happy adiutory to it,
taking nothing away, but the pravity and rebellion of it, but preserving, and
restoring its true liberty. Gratia non mactat, sed s^nctificat, non tollit, sed
attollit liberum arbitrium: Grace slaieth it not, but sanctifies, takes not
away, but elevateth freewill. Grace only slaieth the Ram the pravity of the
will, but it saves the Isaac, the natural liberty alive. The Holy Spirit,
tempering its working to the disposition of the will, that it may act with such
liberty, as becomes its own nature, and by grace never be destroyed, but
perfected; Now if this sweetly efficacious insluence of grace be the compulsory
you charge the subscribers the fathers Augustine, Hierom, Prosper, Bernard,
etc. were for a compu^^ory too; It would make a volume to cite all the passages
that might be taken one of them to this purpose. Let a few suffice.

Au^ semel ^ tor potestate quae mibi data est ^t liber^n servetur arbitrium aut
si alteriu op^ indig^o destruetur in me libertas arb^trij; Qui be dicit qua^
no^ excedit bla^phe miam que bereticorun venena non sapera^^^^er. ^d etesiph. c
3.
He who says that the help of grace, upon the will, destroy^ the liberty of
the will, exceeds a blasphemer: and is the most poisonous of all bereticks,
Hierom.

Subventum est infirmitati Voluntatis humanae, ut divina gratia
mdeclinabiliter, and inseparabiliter ageretur. Infirmis serva^ vit, ut ipso
donante invic^issime quod bonumest vellent de cor. and gra. cap 12.
Man's infirmity was so relieved, that it should be acted indeclinably, and
inseparably by the grace of god, He reserved for those that were weak, that
they should by his gift will what is good most invincibly. Aug.

Haec gratia a nullo duro cord respuitur ideo quippe tribuitur ut cordis
duriti^ primitus auseratur. de Praed. cap. 8.
The grace of God is rejected by no hard heart for it is given to this end that
the hardness of the heart may be first taken away. Id.

Voluntas humana gratia non tollitur sed ex ma^a mutatur in b^nam. Aug. degr.
and l. ar c 2^.
The will of man is not by grace taken away, but by grace, of evil, changed
into good. Id.

Deus operatur non tantum veras revelationes, s^d and bon^s voluntates, de
great. cap. 20.
God does not only discover what is true to us, but makes our wills to be good.
Id.

Ex nolen^bus ^fficit volentes. cont. a. ep. Pel l 1. c. 9
Of unwilling he makes willing. Id.

Certum est voluntatem nost um requiri ad hoc ut been operemur, sed illam non
h^bemus ex nostris viribus, sed Deus operatur in nobis ut v. limus. Aug. de
Great. and lib. cap. 2.
Our will is required to our working well, but we have it not from our own
power, but God works in us to will. Id.

Certum est nos velle cum volum^s, sed ille facit u^ velimus etc. praebendo
vires ^fficacissimas voluntati. de G^a, and l. c. 16.
Its certain that when we are willing we areso, but God it is that makes us
willing, etc. by affording most effectual strength to our wills, etc. Id.

Deo volenti lasvum facere nullum humanum resistit arbitrium de Cor. and Gra c.
14.
When God wills a man's salvation, no free will of man is able to resist him, Id.

Non moribus illi (scil. gratiae) fit mora non causis anceps suspenditur ^llis,
Prosp. de in Great. c. 1^.

Gratia -- mutans int^s mentem, atque reformans* Vasque novum ex fracto ^in^ens
virtu^e creandi Prosp. de ingrat. cap 14.

^une it^que affectum, quo fumunt mortua vitam, quo teneb^ae fiunt lumen, qu^
mund^ ni^escunt, Nemo al^j dat, nemo sibi, cap, 15. -- Nec habet quisquam quo
surg^^e pos^i^. Ad vitam sacro nisi ^ursum nasc tur ortu.

Omnes hanc ^acultatem in ^llo amisimus in quo omnes peccavimus unde al^^
creatione alio que principio renovar^ egemus in Christo in quo sumus nova
creatura* Prosp* Resp, ad ex^. Gal. cap. 6.


It would be endless to cite all that pertinently might be taken to this
purpose, out of him, as also Prosper and Bernard, the former whereof tells us
that grace cannot by any causes whatsoever be suspended, or be made uncertain.
That it changes the mind. That it fashions us anew by a power of creation.

I should gladly be informed what the Ministers hold tending more toward a
compulsory then these fathers here, Immittendo honam cogitativnem nos
praevenit, immutando etiam m^^^m voluntatem sibi per consensum ju^git, Betn,
Tra^^ de Great. and lib. Arb. Sion Col. visited p. 25. Aus.
and in hundreds of other places have written.

Thus you see how I have made Prosper speak; you could not.

2. You labor to clear your self in these words, for me I never denied, but
always have asserted the necessity of grace by way of adjutory.

Pelagius (as has been showed you) said so too, and with much more seeming
fervency then, and (for ought I know) with as much integrity as your self,
Think not by pretending the name of grace, to overthrow it in the efficacy, and
truth of it, only for avoiding more detestation among men, as Pelagius did;
Grati^ voca^ bulo frangens invidiaw, ossensionemque declinans. Au^, cont. Pel.
and Caelest, l, 1. c. 37
I expect a more clear and distinct expression of your self, then barely to
say, I acknowledge that grace is an auxiliary, or adjutory, what kind of
adiutory mean you? I desire to know whether you mean that grace is an adjutory
by way of influence into the will, or by way of concourse unto the work only,
as two men that between them both carry a burden, yield assistance to each
other, neither of them contributing strength unto the other* And if you do
acknowledge, that grace is an adjutory to the will by way of influence into it,
whether mean you that this influence is moralis, suasory by way of entreaty
that the will would move, Or, Physica, that is properly, really and
efficaciously operative upon it. and if you grant the latter, express whether
grace be an adiutory uncertain, and resistible, so that the will has power
either to accept of grace or refuse it, or whether grace be an invincible,
infallible, determinating adiutory to the will, so that it has no power to
render the motions of grace in effectual to it self, all the requifite motions
of grace being afforded. If you grant, that grace is certain, infallible, and
determinative in its operation upon the will. I desire lastly to know whether
you mean that this invincibility, and infallibility of the working of grace, be
only to be looked upon as such respectu eventus, in regard of what does fall
out, and de facto does come to pass, or whether the certain determination of
the will by grace, proceeds from the powerful nature of that grace of God
which as Austin says, no hard heart is able to refuse: until I clearly
understand your mind in these particulars, the pretending of the adjutory of
grace in the general, renders you but suspected in the thoughts of the most,
and truly satisfactory to none.

The residue of the soil in your Pamphlet is so light and sandy for the subject
(as for the manner of handling any subject it is such all over) that now my pen
will plough apace.

I first meet with a long winded sentence, consisting of above ten lines, which
is a complication of falsities, reproaches, and nonsense: If I can discern any
thing through a fog of words, Sion Col. visited p. 25, Answ.
it has something like these particulars.

It is the calamity of these times to judge truth, and error, commensurable
with the votes of the Ministers.

The calamity of the times is, in that we do not judge truth and error
commensurable with the vote of the Scripture, Such sectaries as your self have
thrown away that measure, that so you might trade in your warehouse with the
greater advantage, and instead thereof you make use of a false measure, your
own imagination, My soul pitties your cheated chapmen! But how is it you will
not have truth, and error commensurable with the vote of the Ministers? If M.
Goodwins vote be not the standing measure of truth, and error, for his
followers, what is? I am sure (according to his principles) the written word
cannot be it; Sion Col. visited. p. ult.
for that is not the word of God; Name a third measure Sir, but if it should
happen to be an Enthusiasme, I shall expect but a faint prosecution of your
engagement against quaerisme (as you call it) or seeking which (you say) you
are now opposing in your public Ministry) And I believe that you are doing
so, as truly as you are opposing Antiscripturisme, and Manicheisme, the former
whereof you patronize, and the latter you understand not, as I have proved.

They have engrossed the honor and reputation of being Orthodox unto
themselves. Sion Col. visited. p. 25. Ans.


You grieve that others should be reputed Orthodox alone, without you, but why
do you not grieve that others should be Orthodox alone, with you, Reality is
better then Reputation, and it is better to be then to be accounted Orthodox:
And as for honor, that will fly from you, as long as you fly from honesty,
Entreat God to give you the heart of an Orthodox Minister, and you will soon
have the honor of such an one; otherwise know that your present dishonor is
nothing to your future shame, either to posterity, or eternity. Think upon it
in time, it is friendly advice,

They (the Ministers, Sion Col. visited p. ^5.
still) square their votes concerning truth' and error by the traditions of
the Elders (he means the Fathers.)

If you be not for traditions, written word. For ought I know tradition is the
best flower in your garden; but charge not the Ministers with being for any
traditions, but written; and for these I confess they are so zealous, that for
your opposing them they have deservedly placed you in the forlorn of the
erroneous. And scoff not too much at the Elders. I knew the time (even when you
were writing the preceding page) that you would fain have been beholding to
them; And could you then have persuaded those Elders to have blessed you with but
one tradition, you would not now have blasted the tradition of the Elders: But
now you are like a beggar who when he cannot prevail for an alms, goes away
railing; But I marvel how the younger, I mean Bucer and Ball, escape your
reviling. They were as far from pitying you, and as forward in chastising you
as the Elders; I shall add, Some of Pelagius's friends may happily take it ill at
your hands, that when you were shooting reproaches among the Elders, you did
not desire your Patron Pelagius to stand aside; Sir, to be short with you; the
Ministers sometimes use but never depend upon the traditions of the Elders, One
of the best traditions that ever I learned from any of the Elders was from
Tertullian, and it is this, Custom without truth is but the antiquity of error.

Your next passage breaths a malice ranklie savouring of atheism, Your book
goes out like a snuff, and now fumeth with nothing but reproaches against the
government of Christ, Profanation of Scripture, and elevation of your self.

The Ministers of the Province of London, Sion Col. visited p. 25.
cannot but be full of this information that there was more of the truth and
power of Religion in England, under the Praelaticall government then in all the
reformed Churches besides, The best success unto which they can with any
color of truth, entitle this government, is but the success of gardiners
sheers, which prosper only by the snipping off, and keeping under those
thriving branches which else would out-grow their fellows.

You say that travelers have filled the Ministers of London, information, but
there is one that I fear has filled you with this (among a great deal of other)
false information. I fear it is he that is the greatest traveller, and the
greatest liar in the world. The Lord rebuke thee Satan.

For your telling us that the praelaticall government was more blessed with the
power of religion, then any reformed Church: Qui^^^^ in cathedra ^^gebit
ingebe^n^.
I know not why you mention it, unless it be to make Satan sport, as if you
were his jester, Or to give aquavitae to Antichrist in his fainting fits.

Was the power of religion more under praelaticall govornment then in any
reformed Churches?

Here Is a good commendation (in the mean time) for Independent Churches, for
praelaticall government had more religion, you say then ALL the Reformed
Churches; And if so, I say then Independent Churches too, unless you will
evade my argument by saying that Independent Churches were not then formed, or
if they were formed, were not reformed, so well as the praelaticall but so as
you may scratch Presbytery, you care not though you wound your self.

2. Why tell you not the reader that the power of religion decayed in the days
of no government, as well as it thrived in the da^es of praelaticall
government, you were afraid the Reader would have drawn this conclusion thence.
Its better with Religion when people are suffered to do no more then the
Praelates will, then when they are suffered to do as much as themselves will.

The speaking of the whole truth would have laid your way as low, as it raises
praelacy ^igh.

3. What (...) informed you of such a decay of the power of religion, in all
the reformed Churches, as that England did so much exceed them? I bless God
for what I have seen in Exgland; and I magnify his name for what I have read
and heard from other reformed Churches.

If we went before them in some things, happily they might have the precedence in
other; I suppose it is with Churches as with Christians, God variously
dispenses his graces, he bestows upon some an eminency in one, upon others in
another happily they might hold forth a clearer torch to discover Antichrist then
we, and peradventure it might burn hotter then ours, And its likely on the
other side that for practicals, many of ours at home might excel them, and our
walkings might be more even. I have observed sometimes that a man who follows
a torch, walks more steadily and not in so much danger of stumbling, as he who
carries it, Sir, I should not much contend about your commendation of the
power of religion, under prelacy; did I but see you so to recollect the former
power of Religion as to be humbled for the present weakness of it, and to
resolve that weakness into its proper cause, I mean, a toleration of all
ungodliness and abominable opinions.

4. You that commend prelacy as being blessed with the power of Religion, I pray
tell me, whether was this power of religion, upheld and preserved by any
goodness in the pralaticall government, or did God only make it an occasion to
drive his people closer to himself by their persecutions and unquietness in
outward respects, and happily by sinful impositions; If the latter be true, that
praelacie only were such an accidental occasion of the power of religion, you
might as well for ought I know have commended the greatest enemies of the
Church, and have commended the fitness of Potiphars house for Joseph: but why
do you compare Praelacie to a governmnt that God has blessed, even when it
has been (in a manner) under persecution, and savoured only of Ecclesiastical
mildness, not meddling with the purse or the body, but tending to recover the
soul and oppose sin.

If the former be true, that the power of religion was from the goodness of
praelacy as its cause, you have then quite undone Independency which is never
like by Anarchy the quite contrary to Pralacy, to produce the same effect of
the power of religion.

For that your horrid expression that the only success of the Presbyteriall
government, is to snipp off forward branches; I told you even now who the
traveller was that filled you with this information. A falsehood ordinarily
palpable makes its refutation easy, but when in falsity it is astonishing, the
hearer cannot but a while suspend his reply. It fared thus with me in reviewing
this passage; Is it possible (thought I) that a man who pretends not only to be
a Christian, but a Minister, should thus far throw off both? but I looked upon
you as the non-such of your way, and so I recollected my thoughts into the way
of an answer, I would know who are the forward branches that the sheers of
Presbytery snipp off? Are they fruitful branches, or are they not rather
suckers, who draw away that nourishment from others which might make them
fruitful and convert it into thriving in heresies, in Atheism, and unholy
opinions. If so, I see no reason but the throwing away the sheers would be the
overthrowing of the plant. Sion Col. visit. p. 6. Ans.


An evil eye upon the Parliament is no dissenting character of the Genius of
the Ministers of London

Me thinks these words are hardly sense, but I have taken you tripping so
often that I shall not now be rigid. Your meaning is, The London. Ministers
have an evil eye upon the Parliament.

The Parliament has suffered (with grief I speak it) ever since Sectaries
would needs be their advocates. It was better with them when you wrote your
Theomachia, Accuse not the Ministers of an evil eye, toward the Parliament, If
your eyes be good toward them, I am sure they are lately cured, The Reader
knows by what eye salve.

What remains of this weak Pamphlet consists of nothing but three or four
prophanations of Scripture, Sion. Col visit. p. 26.
and some four or five nauseous commendations of the Author and book.

For the former you say that the reason why your pen moved against its accusers
rather then your fellow-hereticks, was because Christ says the stones would
cry if the honor of Christ should not be vindicated: you were loath that the
stones and tiles should take this honor from you.

There Is not an error transcribed out of your books, but tends to the high
dishonor of Christ, the denial of his Scriptures, of his grace, and for your
persisting in these, The stones indeed might speak, though not for you, but
against you. It Is a miracle the stones and tiles of the houses do not speak
about the ears of one so profane and erroneous.

I bear my charge upon my shoulder, with more then patience, Sion Col. visit. p
26.
even with joy.

I admire more the patience of God in forbearing to punish you,

The two thieves had not suffered death, Sion Col. visited p ^^.
but to color over the crucifying of Christ, and no testimony had been given
at this time against the heresies of the other, had not the 52. judged it
expedient that my name should be blasted.

I doubt whether the comparison between your self and Christ, Anws.
savours not of blasphemous arrogance; A parallel between your
fellow-heretickes who have robbed God of his glory, and thieves would have held
good; had it been between your self and them, it would have been better: but
could you make it between your self and the penitent thief, it would be best of
all. I wish that what you write in the end of your book among the erra^^, could
admit of this charitable construction of your repentance, The words are these,
For Excusabilis you desire the Reader to read Inexcusabilis, however I shall
add this, the truest sentence in all your book is this which you place among
your errors. *

FINIS.

