Doctor HAMMOND his (...), or A greater Ardency in Christ(...) love of God at
one time, than another PROVED TO BE UTTERLY IRRECONCILABLE With 1. His
fullness of habitual grace. 2. The perpetual happiness, and 3. The
impeccability of his soul.


By HENRY IEANES, Minister of Gods Word at Chedzoy in Somersetshire.

OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL, Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for THOMAS ROBINSON.
1657.

Doctor HAMMOND,
1. I Was very willing to hearken to the seasonable advice of many, and to
wholly withdraw my self a foro contentioso, to some more pleasing, and
profitable employment; but discerning it to be the desire of the Author of the
Book, entitled, A mixture of Scholasticall and Practical Divinity, that I
should reply to his examination of one passage of mine against Mr Cawdrey, I
shall make no scruple immediately to obey him; not only because it may be done
in very few words, but especially because the doctrine which he affixeth to me,
seems (and not without some reason) to be contrary to the truth of Scripture,
which I am to look on with all reverent submission, and acquiesce in, with
captivation of understanding, and so not assert any thing from mine own
conceptions, which is but seemingly contrary to it.

2. The proposition which he affixes to me, is this; That Christ's Love of God
was capable of further degrees, and that he refutes as a thing contrary to that
point (a truth of Scripture) which he had in hand, viz. The dwelling of
fullness of all habitual Grace in Christ.

3. By this I suppose I may conclude his meaning to be, that I have affirmed
Christ's Love of God (meaning thereby that habitual grace of divine Charity) to
have been capable of further degrees, so as that capacity of further degrees,
is the denial of all-fulnesse of that habitual grace already in him.

4. And truly, had I thus expressed my self, or let fall any words, which might
have been thus interpretable, I acknowledge I had been very injurious not only
to the verity of God, but also to my own conceptions, and even to the cause
which I had in hand, which had not been supported, but betrayed by any such
apprehensions of the imperfection of Christ's habitual graces.

5. This I could easily show, and withal how cautiously and expressly it was
fore-stall'd by me; But to the matter in hand, it is sufficient, that I
profess I never thought it; but deem it a contrariety to express words of
Scripture in any man who shall think it, and in short, that I never gave
occasion to any man to believe it my opinion, having never said it in those
words which he sets up to refute in me, never in any other that may be
reasonably interpretable to that sense.

JEANES.
Whereas you term your compliance with my desire, that you should reply unto
me, Obedience; I look upon it as a very high Complement; (for what am I, that
my desire should have with you the authority of a Command?) and shall not be so
uncharitable, as to think it a scoff, though some of my friends have
represented it to me under that notion: but suppose it were meant in way of
derision, yet this shall abate nothing of my gratitude for your reply, which is
a favor, and honor, of which I willingly confess my self to be unworthy.

The best testimony I can give you of my thankfulness is, to assure you, that
if in the exceptions, which you shall condescend to return unto this paper,
you can prove that I have done you any injury, you shall find me very ready to
make you satisfaction. But if on the contrary you shall fail in such proof, I
hope you will be so much a friend unto the truth, as to retract your mistake.

You acknowledge, that to affirm, that Christ's habitual love of God was
capable of farther degrees, is a contrariety to express words of Scripture.
Now this proposition, which you thus disclaim, is the natural, and
unavoidable sequel of that which you in this your reply. 21 confess to be
your opinion; to wit, that the inward acts of Christ's love were more intense
at one time than another: and this I shall make good by an argument, which I
shall submit unto your severest examination.

Intension and remission are primarily, and per se, only of qualities; so that
an action is not capable of degrees of intension and remission, but
secondarily, and mediante qualitate; in regard of that quality, which it
produces, or from which it proceeds ratione Collegium Compl. De generat. and
corrupt. disp. 4. qu. 5.. 11. n. 4^. Scheib. Metaph. l. 2. c. 12. number. 35.36.
termini, or ratione principii. The intension and remission of actions
therefore must be proportioned unto that of those qualities, which they regard,
either as their terms, or principles; now you acknowledge in terminis, that
the inward acts of Christ's love were more intense at one time than at another;
and hereupon it undeniably, and unavoidably follows, that either the
terminus, some quality that was the product of these inward acts of love, or
else the principium, some quality that was the principle of them was more
intense at one time, than at another.

If you say, that the terminus, some quality, that was the product of these
inward acts, was more intense at one time, than another; why then, first, you
must tell us what this quality is, and in what Species of quality it is placed;
it cannot with any color of probability be ranked under any other of the four
species of quality than the first; and if it be put there, it must be either
dispositio or habitus; now dispositio is such an imperfect and inchoate a
thing, as that I am very loath to think so dishonourably of my Savior, as to
ascribe it to him. If you make it an habit, then you will run upon that opinion
which you disowne; for it can be no other than a moral habit, and therefore in
Christ it must be a virtuous and gracious habit. To affirm therefore that this
quality was more intense at one time than at another, will be by just
consequence to affirm, that a gracious habit in Christ was more intense at one
time than another. 2 Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate: and
therefore I shall reject this quality e numero entium, unless you can by
convincing arguments prove a necessity of asserting it. I am not ignorant, that
it is a common opinion, that omnis actio habet terminum; but how it fails in
immanent actions, you may see (if you will vouchsafe to stoop so low) in
Schieblers Metaphysics l. 2. c. 10. t. 3. ar. 3. pun. 1.

If you take the other way, and say that the principle, the quality producing
these inward acts of Christ's love of God, was more intense at one time than at
another; why then you grant that which you seem to deny; for the principle of
them is nothing else but the habitual grace, or habit of divine love; and
therefore if you aver that to have been capable of farther intension, you
aver that the habitual grace of Christ was capable of farther intension, and
thus you see what the reason was that induced me to charge you with this
opinion.

Doctor HAMMOND.
6. First, I said it not in those words, which he undertakes to refute; These
are p. 258. of his Book thus set down by him.

This point may serve for confutation of a passage in Dr. H. against Mr. C. to
wit, That Christ's love of God was capable of farther degrees.

7. These words I never said, nor indeed are they to be found in the Passage
which he sets down from me, and whereon he grounds them; which, says he, is
this:

Dr. H. p. 222. In the next place he passes to the inforcement of my argument,
from what we read concerning Christ himself, that he was more intense in
Prayer at one time than another, when yet the lower degree was sure no sin, and
prepares to make answer to it. viz. That Christ was above the Law, and did more
than the Law required, but men fall short by many degrees of what is required.
But sure this answer is nothing to the matter now in hand, for the evidencing
of which, that example of Christ was brought by me, viz. That sincere Love is
capable of degrees. This was first showed in several men, and in the same man
at several times, in the several ranks of Angels, and at last in Christ
himself more ardent in one act of Prayer than in another.

8. Here the Reader finds not the words [Christs love of God is capable of
further degrees] and when by deduction he endeavors to conclude them from
these words, his conclusion falls short in one word viz. [further] and it is but
this,

That the example of Christ will never prove D. H. his conclusion, unless it
infer, that Christ's love of God was capable of degrees.

9. This is but a slight charge indeed, yet may be worthy to be taken notice of
in the entrance (though the principal weight of my answer be not laid on it)
and suggest this seasonable advertisement, that he which undertakes to refute
any saying of another, must oblige himself to an exact recital of it to a
word, and syllable; Otherwise he may himself become the only Author of the
Proposition, which he refutes.

10. The difference is no more than by the addition of the word, [further.] But
that addition may possibly beget in the Readers understanding, a very
considerable difference.

11. For this Proposition [Christs love of God was capable of further degrees]
is readily interpretable to this dangerous sense, that Christ's love of God was
not full, but so far imperfect, as to be capable of some further degrees than
yet it had; And thus sure the Author I have now before me, acknowledges to have
understood the words, and accordingly proposes to refute them from the
consideration of the all-fulnesse of habitual grace in Christ, which he could
not do, unless he deemed them a prejudice to it.

12. But those other words, which though he finds not in my papers, he yet not
illogically inferres from them [that Christ's love of God was capable of
degrees, more intense at one time than at another] are not so liable to be thus
interpreted, but only import that Christ's love of God had in its latitude or
amplitude several degrees, one differing from another. See magis and minus,
all of them comprehended in that all-full perfect love of God, which was
always in Christ so full, and so perfect, as not to want, and so not to be
capable of further degrees.

13. The Matter is clear; The degrees of which Christ's love of God is capable;
are by me thus expressed, that his love was more intense at one time than at
another; but still the higher of those degrees of intensnesse, was as truly
acknowledged to be in Christ's love, at some time, viz. in his agony, as the
lower was at another, and so all the degrees, which are supposed to be
mentioned of his love, are also supposed, and expressly affirmed to have been in
him at some time or other, whereas a supposed capacity of further degrees,
seems at least (and so is resolved by that Author) to infer, that these
degrees were not in Christ (the direct contradictorie to the former
Proposition) and so that they were wanting in him, and the but seeming
asserting of that want is justly censured, as prejudicial to Christ's fullness.
Here then was one misadventure in his proceeding.

JEANES.
1. He that says that Christ's love of God was more intense in his agony than
before, affirms, that his love of God before his agony was capable of
farther degrees, than yet it had; but you affirm the former, and therefore I
do you no wrong to impute the latter unto you: The premises virtually contain
the conclusion, and therefore he that holds the premises, maintains the
conclusion. I shall readily hearken to your seasonable advertisement, that he,
which undertakes to refute any saying of another, must oblige himself to an
exact recital of it to a word and syllable; but notwithstanding it, I shall
assume the liberty to charge you with the consequences of your words, and if I
cannot make good my charge, the shame will light on me.

2. If there were any mistake in supplying the word [farther] it was a mistake
of charity, for I was so charitable, as to think that you spoke pertinently to
the matter you had in hand: I conceived that your scope in your treatise of
will worship was to prove, that there be uncommanded degrees of the love of
God, that those large inclusive words thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, with all thy soul etc. do not command the highest and most intense
degree of the love of God; so that a man may fulfill this command, and yet
there may be room or place for farther and higher degrees of the love of God.
Now this proposition, Christ's love of God was capable of degrees, which you
confess to be not illogically inferred from your papers will never reach this
point, unless you understand the word farther, and therefore your censure of
my supplying the word farther as a misadventure in my proceeding is groundless.

Dr HAMMOND.
14. But this is but the proemial part of my Reply, there is a more material
part of it still behind, which may yet seem necessary to be added, viz. to
mind him of (what he well knows) the distinction between habits and acts of
virtues, or graces; and that love, the Genus, y does equally comprehend both
these species, and that his discourse of all-fulnesse belonging to the
habitual grace of Christ, I speak distinctly of another matter, viz. of the
degreess of that grace discernable in the several acts of it.

JEANES.
The distinction between the habits and acts of virtues or graces I very well
know; but that love as a genus does equally comprehend the habit and act of
love, is a thing which I confess that I am yet to learn* and if it be a
matter of ignorance in me, you must blame my Mr Aristotle, for he has
misguided me herein. He tells me lib. 1. top. c. 15. n. 11. that if a word be
predicated of things put in several predicaments, that then it is homonymous
in regard of them, (...). Now the habit of love is in the predicament of
Quality, the act of love in the predicament of Action, and hereupon I cannot
but conclude that the predication of love, concerning the habit, and the act,
is only equivocall, and consequently love no genus to them. No genus can
equally comprehend those things which do differ toto genere, and are therefore
termed primo diversa, rather then differentia; but now such are the habits and
the acts of the love of God, and therefore love as a genus does not equally
comprehend them as it is species.

Dr HAMMOND.
15. This distinction I thought legible enough before, both in the Tract of
Will Worship and in the Answer to Mr Caw.

16. In the former the Refuter confesses to find it, page 259.
reciting these words of mine, It is possible for the same person constantly to
love God above all, and yet to have higher expressions of that love at one one
time than another. Where the expressions at one time, and at another, must
needs refer to the several acts of the same, all-full habitual love.

JEANES.
The distinction, which you thought legible enough before in your tract of
will worship, in which you say that I confess to find it, is such a
distinction between the habits and acts o^ love, as that love equally
comprehends them both as species. Now I utterly deny, that there is any such
distinction in those words of yours, which I recite: It is possible for the
same person constantly to love God above all, and yet to have higher
expressions of that love at one time than another: and the reason of this my
denial is, because love, as a genus, does not comprehend the expressions of
love equally with the habit. (1) Nothing can as a genus be equally predicated
of things put in several predicaments, but the habit of love, and expressions
of love are put in several predicaments; therefore love, as a genus, does not
equally comprehend them both. (2) The habit of love is formally and
intrinsecally love; the expressions of love (that is, as you expound your
self. 21, the outward expressions of the inward acts of love) are termed love
only by extrinsecall denomination from the inward acts of love; and therefore
love does not as a genus equally comprehend the habit, and the expressions of
love. Raynandus in Mor: discip. did. 3. N. 144. make smention out of Gab. Biel
of a distinction of love into affective, and effective: and what is this
effective love but the effects and expressions of love? but now, that he does
not take this to be a proper distribution of a genus into it is species,
appears by what he says out of the same Author concerning the division.
Effectivum dicit ipsum illius amoris eliciti effectum. Translato quippe causae
nomine ad effectum, is dicitur amare effective, qui non ostentat in fertilem ac
sterilem amorem; sed cum se dat occasio, erumpit in fructus dignos amoris. Quam
esse admodum impropriam amoris divisionem fatetur Gabriel, quia amare proprie
est in sola voluntate tanquam in subjecto: ea autem productio effectuum amoris
in aliis facultatibus cernitur, estque actus transiens, non immanents volunt at
is. (3) No one word can as a genus equally comprehend the efficient and the
effect; the habit of love is the efficient cause, and the sincere and cordial
expressions of love are the effect; therefore love is not predicated of them
equally as a genus. (4) That which is predicated properly of one thing, and
tropically of another cannot equally comprehend them both as a genus; but love
is predicated properly of the habit of love, tropically, viz. Metonymically of
the expressions of love, by a metonymie of the efficient for the effect;
therefore love as a genus cannot equally comprehend them both.

D. HAMMOND.
Only I guess not what temptation he had to choose that expression, which he
there makes use of, viz. [That there D. H. minceth the matter, and speaks
more cautelously] adding [that what he there says is nothing to the matter now
in hand.] Whereas 1. those of Will Worship being the First papers written on
that subject, are sure very pertinent to ascertain him of the meaning of the
latter, written in defense of them.

JEANES.
That your first papers written on this subject are very impertinent to
ascertaine me of the meaning of your latter is easily discernable unto any man,
that will compare both together; however I shall offer unto your consideration
two reasons, to prove the impertinency of them for that purpose. (1) In your
first papers you speak only of the expressions of love (i.e.) as you interpret
your self, the outward expressions of the inward acts of love: in your latter
papers you speak of love it self: now the outward expressions of love are
termed love only extrinsece, denominative, and participative, from the inward
act of love, as some say the imperate acts of the will, are said to be in this
sense only free or voluntary. 2ly, That your first papers are very short, in
explaining the meaning of your latter, is apparent by this your reply, wherein
you extend the love of God, which you affirm to be capable of degrees, beyond
the outward expressions, unto the very inward acts of love.

Dr. HAMMOND.
And 2ly, the early cautelous speaking there, might have made further latter
caution unnecessary.

JEANES.
I had thought that in polemicall writings, it had still been needful for a
man to continue on his caution, for otherwise he may expose himself unto
blows, and knocks, which he never dreamed off. Early cautelous speaking is no
salvo unto after unwariness.

Dr. HAMMOND.
And 3ly, I could not be said to mince, (which to vulgar ears signifies to
retract in some degrees, what I had said before,) and again speak more
cautiously, when that was the first time of my speaking of it.

JEANES.
I am very loath to enter into a Contest with so great a Critic, touching the
meaning of a word, however I shall adventure to say thus much, that a man may
be said to mince a matter, and speak more cautiously at the first time of
speaking of it, than afterward at a second time of speaking of it: neither
shall I be beaten from this mine assertion, by your bare and naked affirmation,
that to mince, to vulgar ears, signifies to retract in some degrees what has
been said before: for I appeal to both vulgar and learned ears, whether or no
we may not say truly of diverse erroneous persons, that in the first broaching
of their errors they mince the matter, and speak more cautelously than
afterward, when they are fleshed and encouraged with success.

Dr. HAMMOND.
17. Mean. while it is manifest, and his own confession, that there these were
my words, and those so cautious, that this sense of the words which he
undertakes to refute, could not be affixt on them. And this I should have
thought sufficient to have preserved my innocence, and forstalled his Use of
Confutation.

JEANES.
Suppose that in your tract of will worship, these were your words, and withal
that they were so cautious that this sense of the words, which I undertake to
refute, could not be affixt on them, yet this is nothing at all unto the
purpose, and contributes nothing to the clearing of your innocence, and
forestalling my use of confutation; and the reason hereof is very evident,
because that which I undertook to refute, was affixt by me, not on these your
so cautelous words in your tract of will worship, but on a passage in your
answer to Mr. Cawdrey. Indeed I censured those your words in themselves
impertinent unto your matter in hand, and withal proved them to be so. But if
you had gone no farther then these words, you should not have heard from me
touching this subject; for time is more precious with me, than to wast it, in
meddling merely with the impertinencies of any man's discourse.

Dr. HAMMOND.
18. But the answer to M. C. which occasioned it was, I think, as cautious
also, 1. In the words recited by the Refuter, viz. that Christ himself was
more ardent in one act of prayer than in another. 2. In the words following in
that answer, but not recited by him, viz. that the sincerity of this or that
virtue expressed in this or that performance, is it we speak of, when we say it
consists in a latitude, and has degrees; where the [this or that performance]
are certainly Acts of the virtue, consisting in a latitude, and the having
degrees (viz. in that latitude) no way implies him that has virtue in that
latitude (viz. Christ) to want at present, and in that sense to be capable of
farther degrees.

19. I am willing to look as jealously as I can on any passage of my own, which
falls under any man's censure; and therefore finding nothing in the words ( set
down by him as the ground of the Refutation) which is any way capable of it, I
have reviewed the whole section, and weighed every period, as suspicioously as
I could; to observe whether I could draw or wrest that consequence from any
other passage, not recited by him.

20. And I find none in any degree liable, except it should be this in the
beginning of the Sect. Where setting down the argument, as it lay in the Tr. of
Will* worcester. I say it is possible for the same person which so loves God (i. e.
with all the heart) to love him, and express that love more intensely at one
time than another, as appeared by the example of Christ.

21. And if this be thought capable of misapprehension, by reason of the [and]
disjoyning love from the expressions of it, and so the expressions belonging to
the acts, the love be deemed to denote the habitual love; I must only say,
that is a misapprehension, for that by loving with all the heart, in the first
place, I certainly meant the sincere habit of Love, by love in the latter
place, the inward acts of love, and by the expressions of love, the outward
expressions of those inward acts, and o^ those acts only I speak, and of those
expressions, when I say they are more intense at one time than another.

JEANES.
I shall here briefly represent unto you that which made me think you guilty of
detracting from the all-fulness of Christ's habitual grace, and refer you for
confirmation here of unto what I have said in the beginning of this my
discourse. The undeniable consequence of what you say in answer unto Mr.
Cawdrey is, as I have proved, that Christ's love of God was capable of farther
degrees. Now hereupon I thus reasoned in my mind, you were to be understood
either of the habit, or of the inward act of love, for as for the outward
expressions of love, it is without dispute, that they cannot be said to be love
properly, but only by a trope; if you should have said that you spoke of the
habit of love, then you would have expressly impugned the all-fulnesse of
Christ's habitual grace; and if you should say, as you now do, that you meant
the inward acts of love; why then I concluded that you would even hereby
implyedly and by consequence have opposed the perfection of Christ's habitual
grace, because the intension of the inward acts of love proceeds from the
intension of the habit of love, and is therefore proportioned unto it: but of
this more fully in the place above mentioned. Thus having showed you what
invited me unto my use of confutation, I shall pass over the three other
sections, which you your self I presume would have spared, if you had been
privy unto that which I now acquaint you with.

Dr. HAMMOND.
22. The word love, as I said, is a genus, equally comprehending the two
species, habitual and actual love, and equally applicable to either of the
species, to the acts as well as the habit of love. And so when (...) say love
is capable of degrees, the meaning is clear, The genericall word love
restrained to the latter species, is considered in respect of the ^cts of love,
gradually differenced one from the other, is in that re^pect, capable of
degrees, both inwardly and in outward expressions: that ^ct of love, that
poured out and expressed it self in the more ardent prayer, was a more intense
act of love, than another act of ^he same habitual love, which did not so
ardently express it self.

JEANES.
That love is not a genus equally comprehending habitual and actual love, as
its two species, I have already proved by ^his argument, because they are in
several predicaments; ^abituall love in the predicament of quality, and
actual in the ^redicament of action. There are, I know, diverse great
Philoso^hers and Schoolmen that make all immanent acts, and conse^uently all
inward acts of love to be qualities; they are, say ^hey, only grammatical
actions, not metaphysicall actions in ^he predicament of action; but this
opinion is untrue in (...) self, and no ways advantageous unto your cause in
^and.

1. It is untrue in it self; and to confirm this, I shall offer (...) your
consideration two arguments out of Scheibler, which ^earely prove immanent acts
to be true, proper, and ^redicamentall actions, in the predicament of Action.
(...) universum id sine incommodo potest dici actio, quod sufficit (...)
constituendam causalitatem efficientis: Atqui dantnr causae ^ficientes, quibus
non convenit alia causalitas, quam que (...) actio immanens: Ergo actio
immanens vere est actio. ^ropositio patet, quia praedicamentum actionis ponitur
ad ^candam causalitem efficientis causae in genere entium, ut ^ipra disputatum,
explicando divisionem praedicamentorum. ^t confirmatur quod actio sit adaequata
causalitas effi^entis ut supra visum est, lib. 1. c. 12. Assumptiopatet. Nam
^mo absolute est causa efficiens in quantum denominatnr ^dere aut intelligere.
Et tamen isti sunt actus immanen^^. That which is the causality of an efficient
cause is y a true and predicamentall action in the predicament of actions but
immanent acts are the causalities of efficient causes, and therefore proper and
predicamentall actions. Deinde ad actus immanentes sunt potentiae activae, sed
potentiae activae sunt per ordinem ad veras actiones, ergo actus immanentes
sunt vere actiones. Et si hi solum titulotenus sunt actiones Ergo etiam
potentiae illae activae titulotenus sunt potentiae activae. That which
terminates and actuates an active power is a prope^ and predicamentall action:
but every immanent act terminates and actuates an active power; and therefore
every immanent act is a proper and predicamentall action, Met. lib. 2. cap 10.
n. 27. You may perhaps slight Scheibler, as a trivial author, but I urge his
reasons, not his authority, and if you can answer his reasons, you may speak
your pleasure of him and o^ me for alleging of him. But I can press you with
the authority of an author far greater than Scheibler, our great Master
Aristotle, of whom you make somewhere in your writings ^^^norable mention; he
l. 10. Ethic. c. 3. tells us roundly, that the o^perations of virtues, and even
happiness it self, are not qualities* (...), but these are immanent acts, and
therefore in his opinion immanent acts a^^ not qualities. But, secondly,
suppose this opinion were true i^ it self, yet will it no ways advantage your
cause, for the patrons of it rang immauent acts under the first species of
quality and then they are either dispositions or habits. If you say the^ are
dispositions, as most of the above mentioned schooleme^ hold them to be;
against this I object, that however the^ may be so in other men, yet they
cannot be so in Christ for a disposition carries in it is notion inchoation,
and imperfection, and therefore to attribute it unto Christ (...) to throw an
apparent dishonor upon him. If you sa^ they are habits, why then, you cannot
deny them to be gracio^ habits, and so you will fall upon that opinion, of
which in the reply, you so studiously endeavor to acquit your self, vi^ that
the same habits of grace in Christ may be more intense y at one time than
another, and consequently that his habitual grace was not always full and
perfect.

Dr. HAMMOND.
23. I shall explain this by the Refuters own Confession. The death of Christ,
says he, was an higher expression of Christ's love of us, than his poverty,
hunger or thirst. To this I subjoyne, that such as the expression was, such was
the act of inward love, of which that was an expression: it being certain that
each of these expressions had an act of internal love, of which they were so
many proportionably different expressions; And from hence I suppose it
unavoidably consequent, that that act of internal love, expressed by his dying
for us, was superior to those former acts, which only expressed themselves in
his poverty, and so the same person that loved sincerely, did also love, and
express that love more intensly at one time than at another, which was the
very thing I had said in another instance. But this I have added ex abundanti
more than the Refuters discourse required of me.

JEANES.
If you had repeated that which you call my confession full and entire, as it
lay in my book, the impartial and unprejudiced reader would soon have
discerned that there was in it nothing that made for your advantage: my words
at large are these, There may be a graduall difference in the expressions of
the same love for degree. Christ's death for us was an higher expression of his
love of us, than his poverty, hunger, thirst etc. and yet they might proceed
from a love equally intense. Now Sir have you said any thing to prove, that
they could not proceed from a love equally intense? you seem indeed, most
vehemently and affectionately to affirm that they could not; but you must
pardon me, if I entertain not your vehement asseverations, as solid arguments,
as if they were propositiones per se notae. Pray Sir, review this section, and
put your argument into some form; if you can make good that it contains any
disproofe of what I have said, unless begging of the question be
argumentative, you shall have my hearty leave to triumph over me as you please;
however until then, I shall take your words asunder, and examine every passage
in them.

D. HAMMOND.
To this I subjoyn that such as the expression was, such was the act of inward
love, of which that was an expression, yet being certain that each of these
expressions had an act of internal love, of which they were so many
proportionably different expressions.

JEANES.
That each of these expressions had an act of inward love, of which they were
so many different expressions, is an obvious truth, but impertinent unto the
matter in hand, unless you can prove that they were of necessity equal in
point of intension; and the proof of this you have not hitherto so much as
attempted.

Dr. HAMMOND.
And from hence I suppose it unavoidably consequent, that that act of internal
love, expressed by his dying for us, was superior to those former acts, which
only expressed themselves in his poverty, and so the same person that loved
sincerely, did also love, and express that love more intensly at one time than
at another, which was the very thing I had said in another instance. But this I
have added ex abundanti more than the Refuters discourse required of me.

JEANES.
From hence: whence I pray? if from the words immediately foregoing, then your
argument stands thus. Every of these expressions had an act of internal love,
of which they were so many proportionably different expressions: therefore that
act of internal love expressed by his dying for us, was superior to these former
acts, which only expressed themselves in his poverty. And here I must profess
that the reason of your consequence is to me invisible, and I shall never
acknowledge your inference legitimate until you drive me hereunto, by reducing
your Enthymeme unto a Syllogism; but perhaps there may be some mystery in the
word proportionably, and your meaning may be, that these different expressions
in regard of intension must be proportioned exactly unto their inward
respective acts of love equal or parallel unto them; and if this by your
meaning, then your argument is guilty of that fallacy, which is called petitio
principii. It is my desire and purpose to have fair wars with you, and my pen
shall not drop a disrespective syllable of you; but yet I am resolved to
swallow none of your proofelesse dictates: seeing you have entered the lists
with me, you must not think me irreverent and saucy, if (as the soldiers
speak) I dispute every inch of ground with you, and be so bold as to call upon
you for the proof of whatsoever you assert touching that which is in
controversy betwixt us.

Dr. HAMMOND.
24. It now only remains, that I consider whether this Refuter have in the
process of his discourse added any thing, wherein I may be any whit concerned.

25. And 1. says he, the falsehood of such an assertion is evident from the
point there handled and confirmed, the absolute fullness of Christ's grace,
which by the general consent of the Fathers and Schoolmen was such, as that
it excluded all intensive growth.

26. But to this the reply will be easily foreseen, from the premises, that as
the point by him handled and confirmed was distinctly the all-fulnesse of
habitual grace in Christ, so his proofs of it by the consent of Fathers and
Schoolmen belong still to that fullness of habitual grace.

27. Witness one for all, Aquinas ^^r. 3. qu. 7. art. 12. ad secundum. Licet
virtus divina possit facere aliquid majus and melius quam sit habitualis gratia
Christi, non tamen -- though the divine power may make somewhat greater and
better than is the habitual grace of Christ, yet -- so it is plain he speaks of
the fullness of the habitual grace. And ad tertium. In sapientia and gratia
aliquis proficere potest dupliciter; uno modo secundum ipsos habitus sapientiae
and gratiae augmentatos, and sic Christus in eis non proficiebat. Alio modo
secundum effectus, in quantum aliquis sapientiora and virtuosiora opera facit,
and sic Christus proficiebat sapientia and gratia; sicut and aetate, quia
secundum processum aetatis perfectiora opera faciebat, -- and in his quae sunt
ad Deum, and in his quae sunt ad homines. One may increase in wisdom and grace
two ways, one way according to the habits of them increased, and so Christ
increased not; another way, according to the effects; when any does more wise
and virtuous works; and so Christ increased in Wisdom and Grace, as he did in
age, because according to the process of his age, he did more perfect works,
and that both in things belonging to God, and men also.

28. And thus are the Schoolmen understood by the Refuter himself, in his
producing their testimonies, as appears by the express words [ habitual
grace p. 260. lin. penult and holiness, and the Image of God in him] p. 261.
lin. 13. And so it is most clear, their consent belongs not, even in his own
opinion, to the matter I had, and have in hand, no way denying but, asserting a
capacity of degrees among the acts of Christ's love of God, and the expressions
of it.

JEANES.
1. They that can so easily foresee this your reply, may with as little
difficulty foreknow the objection against it, to wit, that the intension of
Christ's actual grace is exactly proportioned unto that of his habitual grace;
and therefore your denial of the perpetual all-fulnesse of Christ's actual
grace, is a virtuall and implied denial of the all-fulnesse of Christ's
habitual grace: and how you are provided of an answer hereunto, the event will
show. It is not then so clear as you pretend, that the testimony of the
Schoolmen belongs not, even in mine own opinion, to the matter you had and
have in hand.

2. As for that place you quote out of Aquinas, it is plain that therein by
the effects of wisdom and grace are meant such as are outward, for these are
most properly termed works. And besides, an intensive increase in the inward
acts of wisdom and grace would argue and presuppose an intensive increase in
the very habits themselves.

3. Whereas you say, in the close of Section the 28, that the consent of the
Schoolmen is no ways denying, but asserting a capacity of degrees amongst
the acts of Christ's love of God, i. e. of the inward acts thereof. There will
be little sense in your words in themselves, and less pertinency unto the
matter in hand, unless your meaning be, as you elsewhere express your self,
that the inward acts of Christ's love of God were more intense at one time, than
at another: and if this be your meaning, I must needs assume the boldness to
tell you, that no such matter is visible unto me in any of the Schoolmen. But
perhaps you may mean such Schoolmen, as such a Puny, as I, never saw or
heard of; however you cannot expect belief, until you produce their
testimonies: And I shall entreat you to allege such, as may be had in
Pauls-church-yard, or at least in the Library at Oxford.

Dr HAMMOND.
29. Secondly, he will hear the Doctors objection, and consider of what weight
it is.

Objection? against what? against the fullness of habitual grace in Christ?
sure never any was by me urged against it. And he cannot now think there was.
The degrees of intensenesse observable in the several acts of Christ's love,
his praying more ardently at one time than another, was all that I concluded
from that text, Luke 22.44. and that is nothing to his habitual love.

JEANES.
That this objection was not intended by you against the fullness of Christ's
habitual grace, upon your protestation, I readily believe; but, that by
consequence it reaches it, I thus make good. That objection which is urged
against the perpetual allfulnesse and perfection of Christ's actual love, the
inward acts of his love of God, strikes against the perpetual allfulnesse and
perfection of his habitual love; because the degrees of the inward acts of his
love of God are commensurate unto the degrees of his habitual love. For they
have no degrees at all, but secundario, in regard of the habit of his love: but
now this objection is urged by you against the perpetual all-fulnesse and
perfection of his actual love, the inward acts of his love; for it is brought
to prove that the inward acts of Christ's love were more intense at one time
than another, and a greater intension presupposes remission and imperfection;
for intensio est eductio rei intensae de imperfecto ad perfectum, as Aquinas
very often. Therefore this objection strikes against the perpetual fullness
and perfection of Christ's actual love of God, and so consequently against the
perpetual fullness and perfection of his habitual love.

Dr HAMMOND.
30. But even to this he is pleased to frame Answers (though I hope his
doctrine of the fullness of Christ's habitual grace be no way concerned in it)
and to these I shall briefly attend him, as my last stage in this no very long
voyage.

31. And 1. says he, the vulgar translation renders (...), prolixius; and if
this version be good, then there is no place for the Doctors objection.

But though I seek no advantage by that vulgar reading, yet thinking it a duty
of reverence to that version, to take leave civilly whenever I depart from it
(wherein I have the suffrage of Protestants as learned in both the Languages
Hebrew and Greek, as any) and that I may to the utmost observe the Refuters
steps, I shall not utterly reject it.

32. It Is certain (...) does primarily signify extension, and that properly
belongs to length, and so the comparative (...) to a greater degree of that
length. And if it be granted that it so signify here, there will yet be place
equally for my conclusion.

33. For in every act of Prayer, be it but the shortest ejaculation sent out by
Christ, I suppose (and my Refuter must not doubt of it) there was some degree
of ardency or intension; And then sure according to the multiplying of those
acts lengthening that prayer, there must still in Christ, (I say not in every
one of us) be a proportionable multiplication of those degrees, and so parallel
to a greater length, a greater intension.

JEANES.
The answer here is very easy and obvious; the intension of the degrees of the
inward acts of Christ's love of God may be said to be greater either in regard
of the number, or in respect of the intensive perfection and excellency of
those degrees; according to the lengthning of Christ's prayer there is a
multiplying of inward acts of his love, and proportionably a multiplication of
the degrees of his love, and consequently a greater intension of those degrees,
in regard of their number, but not in respect of their intensive perfection, or
excellency. For in Christ let them be never so much multiplied, they may be and
still are of an equal intensive perfection, and excellency, one is not more
intense than another; and so if this reading be retained, there will be no
place for your conclusion; That the inward acts of Christ's love are more
intense at one time than another, unless you will make inte^sion to be a mere
coacervation of ho^o geneous degrees (i.e) degrees altogether like: the
absurdity of which you may see in Suarez Met. dis. 46. and Pet. Hurtado de
Mendoza. de Gener. and Corrupt. disp. 5.. 6.

Sir, here I am very confident that you presumed very much on my ignorance,
otherwise you would never have gone about to have imposed upon me so poor and
sorry a sophisme, as is in the equivocation of the word greater, which is
easily discoverable by a fresh-man: for that you your self should be ignorant
of such an ordinary homonymy, I am loath to harbor such dishonorable thoughts
of your abilities in philosophy as to imagine.

Dr HAMMOND.
34. This is clear, and I need not add, what else I might, that the very
multiplication of more acts of any virtue, supposing it equally sincere in the
habit, and such is the length of prayer, when it is in Christ, is more valuable
in the sight of God, and that argues it more excellent, than the smaller number
of those acts would be, and proportionably more abundantly rewarded by him, who
rewards every man not only according to the sincerity of his heart, but also
secundum opera, according to the multiplied acts or works, the more abundant
labor proceeding from this sincerity. And so that will suffice for his first
answer.

JEANES.
1. This is an utter impertinency unto that which is in debate between us. For
suppose that the very multiplication of more inward acts of any virtue in
Christ is more valuable in the sight of God, and so more excellent than the
smaller number of those acts would be; yet this supposition will never bring
you to this conclusion, that one inward act of Christ's love of God may be more
intense than another; and my reason is, because in all these inward acts of
Christ's love of God (and we may say the same of the inward acts of other
virtues and graces) there may be no graduall dissimilitude.

2. A great part of the Schoolmen will tell you, that the moral value of one
single act of any virtue in Christ was infinite, and in the multiplication of
more acts there is but an infinite value: now one infinite cannot be greater
than another infinite in the same kind, wherein it is infinite, and hereupon
they conclude that the multiplication of acts makes nothing in Christ unto an
intensive addition of value* the value of one act is intensively as great as
that of more acts* The first act of Christ (says Albertinus) habet totam
latitudinem intensivam valoris moralis, ct si non adaequet totam latitudinem
extensivam: Corol. tom. 1.150. n. 61. And of this you have a reason. p. 145.
this act is a persona divina, tanquam a forma intrinseca; quae intrinsece
denominatur operans, ab(...) ipsa operatione quae est in natura humana, et ut
sic est illimitabilis aconditionibus actus. Unto Albertinus I shall subjoine
Suarez who speaks to the same purpose in tertiam par. Thom. Tom. 1. disput. 4.
sect. 4. page 49. Plura opera Christi sunt quidem extensive plura merita;
intensive tamen non est plus valoris in multis quam in uno; ut, si essent
plures calores infinite intensi, essen^ quidem plures, non tamen efficerent
unum intensiorem; and part ratione, si in uno opere Christi, quod successive
per parts fiebat parts cum toto comparemus, intensive tantus valor erat in
qualibet part, sicut in toto opere, and in uno momento, sicut in longo
tempore; quia forma a qua erat valor, tota erat in toto, and tota in singulis
partibus.

Dr HAMMOND.
35. But then, 2. Says he, suppose we stick unto our own transtation, yet the
place may fairly be so interpreted, as that it may no ways advantage the
purpose of the Doctor. For (...), more earnestly, may be considered in
reference unto either the object unto whom he prayed, God; or the matter
against which he prayed, the evils with which he conflicted in his agony.

1. Then, says he, he did not in his agony pray more earnestly than at other
times, if we consider his prayer in reference unto the object, unto whom it
was, God. The religion, and inward worship of his prayer, was for degrees
always alike equal. His trust and dependence upon God, love of zeal and
devotion toward God, from which all his prayers flowed, were not at one time
more intense than at another.

But now 2. He prayed more earnestly in his agony than at other times, in
regard of the matter, against which he prayed. the evils which he encountered
with, which if they were not greater, then those that he deprecated in the
former prayer, v. 42. yet at least they made a greater impression upon his
humane nature; for they put him into a bloody sweat. Being in an agony he
prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were drops of blood, falling
down to the ground.

36. These are the words of his second answer, and they are in the second part,
the very distinct confession of all that I pretend in this matter (and
therefore I need not make any reflections on the first part of them) For
whatsoever, or how great soever the occasion of the increase of his intension
was (which I am willing to believe proportionable to the degree of the
intension, a very weighty occasion that thus inflamed his ardency) yet still,
it is confessed, that on this occasion, he now prayed more earnestly than at the
other times, that which now approached made a greater impression on his humane
nature; which what is it but a proof of the point by me asserted, that Christ
himself was more ardent in one act of prayer (this in his agony) than in
another.

37. As for the greatness of the occasion, so profestlie great as to cast him
into that prodigious sweat, falling (...), as it were drops of blood, that may
testify, but it cannot prejudg the ardency which was occasioned thereby.

38. It Was not in Christ, he will easily suppose with me) as it is often
discernable in many of us, that those which really have no sincerity of love or
zeal to God, can yet, like the Mariners in the tempest, by some pressing fear
or danger be awaked to, but formal, and, be they never so loud, but
hypocritically zealous prayers.

39. The ardency in Christ was sincere ardency, accompanied with acts of love
and trust of the same temper, and the heightning it (...), was an addition of
degrees to that act of ardency, and so of prayer, and proportionably of love
and trust in God, above either what there was, or what there was occasion for,
at other times.

JEANES.
1. First you pretend in Sect. 21. of this your reply that the inward acts of
Christ's love of God were more intense at one time than another. Now this is not
contained expressly, nor can it by any logic be inferred from the words of the
second part of my second answer, that he prayed more earnestly in his agony
than at other times, in regard of the matter against which he prayed, etc. and
therefore this second part of my second answer is not the very distinct
confession of all that you pretend in this matter; and therefore
notwithstanding them, you must make reflections on the first part of my answer,
or else you will never reply thereunto.

2. That the ardency in Christ was a sincere ardency, is not doubted of; all
the question is, what ardency it was in Christ that was heightened: there was,
as I plainly intimated in my answer, a twofold ardency in Christ's prayer, one
regarding God, unto whom he prayed, and this was seated in the acts of love and
trust tanquam modus in re modificata: Another respected the matter against
which he prayed, and the res modificata of this ardency was the acts of fear
of, and grief for those evils with which he encountered. I readily grant the
heightning of this latter ardency, so that there was in his agony an addition
of degrees unto his fear of, and grief for those evils against which he
prayed, above either what there was, or what there was occasion for at other
times: but as for the former ardency regarding God, and placed in the inward
acts of his love of God, etc. that was incapable of further heightning: for his
actual love of God was in termino, as they say, was always at the highest,
and most intense; and this I shall not barely dictate: but prove by three
arguments, which I present unto you to be examined, as rigidly as you please.

1. The all-fulnesse and perfection of Christ's habitual grace.

2. His perpetual and uninterrupted happiness.

3. His impeccability.

1. The first argument, which has been already so fully insisted upon, is the
all-fulnesse and perfection of Christ's habitual grace; the habits of all
graces and virtues in Christ were always full and perfect, most intense and
not capable of farther or higher degrees, and therefore so were the inward acts
of those graces and virtues too, and particularly the inward acts of the
habitual grace of divine charity. The consequence of this Enthymeme has been
already sufficiently proved, and therefore I shall add nothing for further
confirmation of it, but the testimony of some few Schoolmen. Aquinas, as
Capreolus quotes him lib. 1. did. 17. qu. 2. fol: 306. has this passage.
Nihil inquit aliud est qualitatem augeri quam subjectum magis participare
qualitatem. Non enim aliud est esse qualitatis nisi quod habet in subjecto, ex
hoc autem ipso quod subjectum magis participat charitatem vehementius operatur,
quia unumquodque operatur in quantum est actu. Aquinas thought (you see) that a
greater vehemence in the operations of love, argued a greater participation in
the subject of the habits of love. And again secunda secundae qu. 24. art. 4.
ad tertium. Similiter charitas essentialiter est virtus ordinata ad actum, unde
idem est ipsam augeri secundum essentiam, and ipsam habere efficaciam ad
producendum ferventioris dilectionis actum. Unto this I shall add a third
place out of Aquinas quoted by Capreolus lib. 3. dis. 27, 28, 29, 30. page 209.
Cum actus and habitus speciem habent ex objecto, oportet quod ex eodem ratio
perfectionis ipsius sumatur. Objectum autem charitatis est summum bonum; igitur
perfecta charitas est, quae in summum bonum fcrtur in tantum in quantum est
diligibile. The habit of love is then perfect, when it is carried toward God as
the chief, when God is loved so far forth as he may be loved, to wit, by a
creature: when God is not loved thus intensely, the habit of love (as Aquinas
thought) was imperfect. With Aquinas also Scotus accords l. 3. dis. 13. q. 3.
Possibile est anima^ Christi habere summam gratiam, ergo summam fruitionem.
Consequentia probatur, quia actus naturaliter elicitus ab aliqua forma,
aequatur in perfectione illi formae. Unto these two great Schoolmen, I shall
add the testimony of a Philosopher of great subtilty and repute Pet. Hurt. de
Mendoza. De An. dis. 16. sect. 8. p. 672. Intensio actus secundi supponit
aequalem intensionem in actu primo, cum actus secundus supponat primum.

A second argument is drawn from the perpetual and uninterrupted happiness of
Christ: it is resolved both by Aquinas 3 a.q. 34..art. 4. Scotus lib. 3. disp.
18. and their followers, that Christ in regard of his Soul was even here in
this life, from the very first moment of his conception, all his life long unto
his death perfectus comprehensor; and therefore he enjoyed in his soul all
that was necessary unto heaven happiness: and I find learned Protestants
herein consenting with them; now it is the unanimous opinion of the Schoolmen
that a most intense actual love of God, an actual love of God for degrees as
high, as ardent, as fervent, as is according to Gods ordinary power possible
unto the humane nature, does necessarily belong to the heaven happiness of
men. The Scotists place the very formality of happiness solely herein, and
Suarez with others think it essential unto happiness, though he supposes the
essence of happiness not to consist wholly or chiefly in it. And for the rest
of the Thomists, who hold that the essence of happiness stands only in the
beatificall vision of God, why even they make this actual most intense love of
God a natural and necessary consequent of the beatifique vision. By this that
has been said it is evident, that whereas you aver that the inward acts of
Christ's love of God were less intense at one time than another, (for so you
affirm in saying they were more intense at one time than at another) you deny
Christ to be happy and blessed at those times wherein his inward acts of love
were thus less intense, and that this is propositio male sonans, harshly
sounding in the ears of Christians, that are jealous of their redeemers
honor, will I hope be ingeniously confessed by your self upon a review of it.
Add hereunto that the Schoolmen generally consent, as unto a proposition that
is piously credible, that the happiness of Christ's soul did even during the
whole time of his abode here, far surmount that of all the Saints, and
Angels in heaven: but if the inward acts of his love of God were less intense
at one time than another, the bliss of his Soul would have come far short
of that of the lowest Saint in heaven; for the actual love of the lowest Saint
was not, is not more intense at one time than another, but always full and
perfect; and therefore incapable of further and higher degrees.

The third and last argument, is fetched from Christ's impeccability; it was
impossible for Christ to sin: but if the inward acts of his love of God had
been less intense at one time than at another, he had sinned; for he had
broken that first and great commandment, thou shall love the Lord thy God, with
all thy heart, with all thy Soul, with all thy mind, with all thy might, and
strength. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Matthew. 22.37. Mark. 12.30. Luke 10.27. For this
commandment enjoyneth the most intense actual love of God, that is possible;
an actual love of him tanto nixu and conatu quanto fieri potest (i. e.) as
much as may be; what better and more probable gloss can we put on that clause,
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy strength or might, (...), then
thou shall love him with thy uttermost force and endeavor: suitable hereunto is
that interpretation which Aquinas gives of those words thou shall love the
Lord with all thy heart (i. e.) says he ex toto posse tuo, with as high a
degree of actual love as thou art able to reach unto. Deus est totaliter
diligendus, potest intelligi ita quod totalitas referatur ad diligentem: and
sic etiam Deus totaliter diligi debet; quia ex toto posse suo homo debet
diligere deum, and quicquid habet, ad dei amorem ordinare; secundum illud
Deuter. 6. Diliges dominum deum tuum ex toto cord tuo, 2 da 2 dae, q. 27. art.
5. But now Christ man had in him as great abilities for the actual love of God
as Adam in Paradise, as the Saints and Angels in heaven; for an all-fulnesse of
the grace and virtue of love dwelled in him, and therefore if the inward acts
of his love were less intense at one time, than another; then sometimes when he
actually loved God, he did not love him as intensly, as ardently, as fervently
as he could, he did not love him with all his might, and strength, ex toto
posse suo, and so consequently he fulfilled not all righteousness; for his
obedience unto this commandment would have been by this your opinion imperfect
and sinful, which, but to imagine were blasphemy. But you will be ready to
tell me, that you have prevented this charge, by that exposition of those large
inclusive words, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all
thy Soul etc. which you have given in your treatise of will worship, which I
shall transcribe and briefly examine.

Once more, if it be objected that what ever is thus performed, is commanded by
those large inclusive words, [thou shall love thy God, with all thy heart, with
all thy Soul etc.] nothing being of such latitude, as that the (with all)
should not contain it. I answer, that that phrase denotes two things only.

1. Sincerity of this love of God, as opposed to partial divided love, or
service.

2. The loving him above all other things, and not admitting any thing into
Competition with him; not loving any thing else in such a degree. Treat:
wil-worsh. p. 24.

Here you barely dictate, that that phrase, [Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, with all thy Soul etc.] denotes only those two things,
you mention, whereas your reader has just reason to expect a confirmation of
what you say.

1. Because this very answer is the shift of Papists in several controversies
between them and us, Bellarm. Tom. 2. De monachis. lib. 2. cap. 13. Tom. 4. de
amissione gratiae, and Statu peccati lib: 1. cap. 12. etc. And was it not fit
that you should acquaint us, what those cogent reasons were, that necessitated
you unto this compliance with Papists?

2. Those protestants, that have dealt in the controversies betwixt us and the
Papists, have proved this your sense to be too narrow, and with-all have given
another exposition Nimirum huc tandem res redit, ut sciamus ita imperari nobis
amorem Dei, ut nullus sit amoris gradus, intra summum, cui quisquam debeat
acquiescere. summum autem dico non tantum comparate ad res alias, quae sub
amorem cadunt: sed etiam, and quidem praecipue comparate ad nos ipsos, ut ne
ultra possimus amare: Ita enim vere totum cor erit tota anima: men's tota vires
omnes, etc. Chamier. Tom. 3. lib. 11. cap. 16. sect. 22.
of the words which they have confirmed and vindicated from the exceptions of
the Papists. Now of all this, it had been equitable for you to have taken
notice, and not to have troubled your reader with that which has been so
abundantly refuted by Protestant pens. But to take a sunder this answer into
its parts.

The phrase denotes 1. sincerity of this love of God, as opposed to partial
divided love, or service; Unto this I shall reply. 1. In the words of Ames unto
Bellarmine: Bellar: Enervat: Tom. 2. p. 154. Hoc aliquid est, sed non totum
quod his verbis praecipitur, tum enim illi etiam qui minimum gradum verae
charitatis, quamvis tepidi fuerint, hoc preceptum perfect implerent. This is
something, but it is not all that is commanded in these words, for then those
that have the least degree of true charity, although they were lukewarm should
perfectly fulfill this command.

2. To Ames his words, I shall add those of the Dr. Francis White (one that
was far from Puritanisme) in his reply to the Jesuit Fishers answer: If the
precept, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart etc. bind men no
further than to an unfeigned or sincere love of God, and the observance of his
commandments without breach of friendship, then it binds them not to the
shunning of venial sins. But according to Austin and Bernard, it binds man
to the avoiding of all sin, both venial and mortal. But proceed we on to the
second part of your answer. That phrase denotes Secondly, the loving him above
all other things, and not admitting any thing into competition with him: not
loving any thing else in such a degree. The Schoolmen tell us that God may be
loved above all things three manner of ways, objective, appretiative, and
intensive: now which of these ways it is that you embrace, or whether you
embrace all of them I cannot determine, and therefore I shall wait until you
declare your self, and accordingly shall shape mine answer. But in the mean
while, that this commandment enjoineth a most intense actual love of God, a
love of God with as high a degree as is possible unto the humane nature, I
shall evince by these following reasons.

1. It cannot be denied but that the intension, and dedegrees of love fall all
under the commandment of love it self: for as Aquinas notes secunda secundae
quest. 44. art. 8. Modus, qui pertinet ad rationem virtuosi actus, cadit sub
precepto, quod datur de actu virtutis. This premised I thus argue: Either the
lowest degree, or some middle degree, or the highest degree of actual love, is
here commanded; if the lowest, then that is a perfect fulfilling of this law,
and the lukewarmnesse of love can be no sin; if you say some one of the middle
degrees betwixt the lowestand the highest, it concerns you to determine, and
specify what degree this is, below which all degrees of love are sin full, and
beyond which all degrees of love are a voluntary oblation and uncommanded
worship; and if you cannot do this (as I know you cannot) I shall conclude,
that the highest degree is commanded in our love of God.

2. A most intense love of God, a love of him with the utmost of our forces and
endeavors is due unto God debito connaturalitatis, and debito gratitudinis, 1.
debito connaturalitatis, by an obligation of congruence, for it is very fitting
that we love him as much as we can, who is infinitely good in himself, and
therefore the chief good, and supreme end of man. The Protestants are brought
in by Bellarmine de Mon. Lib. 2. cap. 13. thus objecting against their popish
evangelicall counsels of perfection, that he that is unwilling to love God as
much as he can, does hereby deny, to wit virtually and interpretatively, that
God is the chief good of man; and whereas he is so bold in his answer to
affirm, that non requiritur ut quis summum bonumtam ardenter amet, quam forte
poss et: Ames has hereunto a very round and acute reply, tum non requiritur
(says he) ut in bonum omni ratione summum feramur, affectu omni etiamratione
summo.

2. This most intense actual love of God is due unto God by an obligation of
gratitude, for hereby (as Dr Francis White against Fisher out of Bernard) we
are indebted and owe to the almighty, omne quod sumus, and omne quod possumus,
whatsoever we are, and whatsoever we are able to do.

For the further confirmation of this point, Protestants allege the
testimonies of diverse of the Fathers, particularly Austin and Bernard, as also
of the ancient School men, who say that this command cannot be fulfilled in
this life; because it commands such a perfection of love, as is impossible to
be attained in this life. I shall not clog the readers patience with
transcribing the several quotations, because I believe he may have them almost
in every writer of controversies betwixt us and the Papists: only I shall
trouble him with what I conceive to be most remarkable in Aquinas and Scotus
concerning this matter. 1. Aquinas secunda secundae qu. 44. art. 6. intendit
deus per hoc praeceptum Deuteronomy. 6. ut homo deo totaliter uniatur; quod fiet in
patria, quando deus erit omnia in omnibus, 1 Cor. 15. and ideo plene and
perfect in patria implebitur hoc praeceptum. And again. qu. 184. art. 3. Non
autem dilectio dei and proximi cadit sub praecepto secundum aliquam mensuram,
it a quod id quod est plus, sub consilio remane at; ut patet ex ipsa forma
praecepti, quae perfectionem demonstrat; ut cum dicitur, diliges dominum deum
ex toto cord tuo: totum enim and perfectum idem sunt sec. Phil. 3. phys. and
cum dicitur, diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum: unusquisque enim se ipsum
maxim diligit. Et hoc ideo est, quia finis praecepti charitas est, ut
Apostolus 1 Timothy 1. in fine autem non adhibetur aliqua mensura, sed solum in
his quae sunt ad finem, ut philosophus dicit 1. polit. Sicut medicus non
adhibet mensuram quantum sanet, sed quanta medicina vel diaeta utatur ad
sanandum. Thus also Scotus lib. 3. did. 27. dico igitur quod illud praeceptum,
Deuteronomy. 6. non potest impleri in via, quantum ad omnes conditiones, quae
exponuntur perillas additiones ex toto cord, and ex tota anima, etc. quia non
potest esse in via ista tanta recollectio virium, ut amotis impedimentis possit
voluntas tanto conatu ferri, quanto possit, si vires essent unitae, and non
impeditae, and quod ad talem intensionem actus expulsis impedimentis, and
recollectis viribus debet intelligi dictum Aug. et magistri, quod praeceptum
illud non impletur in via; nam pronitas virium inferiorum pro statu isto
impedit superiores ab actibus perfectis. The first that Bellarmine has to
evade these testimonies is not unknown unto me, viz. that they are to be
understood of the command quatenus indicant finem, non quatenus praecipit
medium; if you think fit to adventure hereupon, I must needs entreat you to
remove first out of your way the replies of Chamier and Ames unto it.

Thirdly you seem in the latter end of section the 39. to intimate, that in
the time of Christ's agony there was more occasion for the heightning of his
love of God than there was at other times. What you mean by these ocasio^s of
heightning Christ's love of God that you intimate, I will not undertake to
guess; but this I am sure of, that at all other times he had sufficient
causes, grounds, and motives to induce him to love God with as heightened
degrees of Actual love as the humane nature could reach unto; he injoied the
beatificall vision, a clear, evident, and intuitive knowledge of the divine
essence, that had in it all the fullness of goodness, and so was an object
infinitely lovely and amiable: Now such an Object thus known, thus seen,
challenges such a measure of actual love, as that it leaves no place for a
farther and higher degree. The Thomists generally maintain that this most
intense love of God is a natural, and necessary sequel of the beatificall
vision, necessary quo ad exercitium, as well as quoad specificationem actus;
now that which works naturally and necessarily, works as vehemently and
forcibly as it can. Omne agens de necessitate, necessario agit usque ad ultimum
potentiae suae; therefore the inward acts of Christ's love of God were always
as ardent, and fervent as he could perform them, and therefore some were not
more intense than others; for if we speak of a liberty of indifferency, and
indetermination, he had no more liberty toward the intension of the inward
acts of his love, than he had toward the acts themselves.

Dr. HAMMOND.
40. Of this I shall hope it is possible to find some instances among men (of
whose graces it can be no blasphemy to affirm, that they are capable of
degrees) suppose we a sincerely pious man, a true lover of God, and no despiser
of his poor persecuted Church, and suppose we, as it is very supposeable, that
at some time the seas roar, the tempest be at its height, and the waves beat
violently upon this frail brittle vessel, may it not be a season for that
pious man's ardency to receive some growth? for his zeal to be emulous of those
waves, and pour it self out more profusely at such, than at a calmer season?
I hope there be some at this time among us, in whom this point is really
exemplified; if it be not, it is an effect of want, not fullness of love. But I
need not thus to enlarge, It is not by this Refuter denied of the person of
Christ, and that is my entire (...) in reference either to Mr. C. or to him,
the utmost that I undertook to demonstrate then, or to justify now.

JEANES.
This Section your poor refuter had passed over as a digression, had he not
found himself named in the close of it; it is not by this refuter denied of
the person of Christ. I suppose the antecedent to the relative is in these
words, may it not be a season for that pious man's ardency to receive some
growth? for his zeal to be emulous of those waves, and pour it self out more
profusely at such than at a calmer season? And then there be two things that
you affirm, that I deny not of the person of Christ.

1. That a tempestuous time (a time of affliction) was a season for Christ's
ardency to receive some growth.

2. That it was a season for his zeal to pour it self out more profusely at
such, than at a calmer season.

As for the first sentence, a time of affliction was a season for Christ's
ardency to receive some growth, if by ardency you understand the ardency of his
love of God, I deny that it did receive any growth; for to ascribe growth unto
it is to charge it with imperfection. Charitas, quamdiu augeri potest (says
Austin) profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est. And I am very
confident that besides this replyer, no learned man either protestant; or
papist has ascribed any such growth unto the ardency of Christ's actual love
of God.

As for the second sentence, that a tempestuous time, a time of Christ's
affliction was a season for his zeal to pour it is self out more profusely
than at a calmer season, this is not (I grant) denied by me, if by this more
profuse pouring out of his zeal you only understand the outward expressions of
his zeal; but I cannot but extremely wonder that you affirm this to be the
utmost, that you undertook to demonstrate to Mr. Cawdrey, or to justify now
against me etc.

For 1. in your answer to Mr. Cawdrey, you affirm by consequent, that Christ's
love of God was capable of farther and higher degrees, but love is predicated
of the outward expressions thereof only analogically, analogia attributionis
extrinsecae, sicut sanitas dicitur de urina.

2. In this your reply unto me you expressly aver, that the inward acts of
Christ's love of God were more intense at one time, than another Sect. 21. and I
hope you have more philosophy, then to confound the inward acts, and the
outward expressions of love.

That which has herein occasioned your mistake is, I believe, a supposall that
the inward acts of love, and the outward expressions thereof are, if they be
sincere, always exactly proportioned in point of degree; but this proposition
has no truth in it, as you will soon find, if you attempt the proof of it,
who almost but may easily conceive how it is very ordinary for the outward
expressions of love to be gradually beneath the inward acts thereof? he is no
hypocrite in expressing his love, that loves inwardly more than he expresses
outwardly; the degrees then of the inward acts of love may not only equal, but
also transcend the most sincere expressions of love. It may be so in all men,
and I shall allege two reasons, why in Christ the inward acts of his love
were always equally intense, though the outward expressions thereof were
gradually different.

The first reason agrees unto Christ in common with other men. Christ as man
was always obliged unto the most intense, ardent, and fervent inward acts of
love of God, but he was not always obliged unto the most intense expressions
of these inward acts; the reason of the difference between his obligation unto
the intension of the inward acts of his love, and his obligation unto the
intension of the outward expressions thereof, you may fetch from what is said
by Aquinas 2 da 2 dae, q. 27. art. 6. ad tertiam. Nec est simile de interiori
actu charitatis and exterioribus actibus. Nam interior actus charitatis habet
rationem finis, quia ultimum bonum hominis consistit in hoc, quod anima Deo
inhaereat, secundum illud Psalmi, mihi adhaerere deo bonum est. Exteriores
autem actus sunt sicut ad finem, and ideo sunt commensurandi, and secundum
charitatem, and secundum rationem.

The second reason is peculiar unto Christ above all other men: Whilst he
lived here upon earth, he enjoyed the beatificall vision; and the natural, and
necessary consequent thereof is a most intense actual love of God, and
therefore the inward acts of his love of God were equally intense at all times:
but as for the outward expressions of these acts, Christ had to them a proper
freedom, taking the word [freedome] for an active indifferency, in sensu
diviso, and therefore they might be more intense at one time than another; but
of this you may, if you please, see further in Suarez in tertiam partem Thom:
dis. 37. sect. 4. where the question debated is quomodo voluntas Christi ex
necessitate diligens deum, in reliquis actibus potuerit esse libera.

Dr HAMMOND.
41. And so I shut up this hasty paper, hoping that he which invited and
promised it a welcome, in case it were given in a fair and Scholasticall way,
having nothing to accuse in it' as to the first Epithet, will abate somewhat in
reference to the second, and allow it a friendly, though being unqualified, it
pretend not to a more hospitable reception.

JEANES.
Unto this your hasty paper (as you call it) I have given a deliberate answer;
and I hope it may contend with your reply for civility, and fairness in
carriage of the controversy between us. As for the Scholasticallnesse of either
paper, it were a vain thing for me to say any thing of it; for we must be
tried by the learned readers, unto whom we both have, by thus appearing in
public, appealed; and unto their judgment I shall contentedly submit my
self. And thus your refuter, for the present, takes his leave of you, hoping,
when your more pleasing and profitable employments shall permit, to hear
further from you; in the mean time he shall rest: Your most humble servant

HENRY JEANES.

FINIS.

