A TREATISE Concerning THE FVLNESSE OF CHRIST, Considered ACCORDING UNTO 1 His
relations. 2 His Natures, Divine and Humane. 3 His twofold state of Humiliation
and Exaltation.


OXFORD, Printed by H. H. for Th: Robinson. 1656.

UNTO HIS HONORED FRIEND COLONEL HENRY HENLY, A worthy example of personal
piety, and public affections, HENRY IEANES, With his unfeigned prayers for the
prosperity of him, and his, devoteth this part of his labors.

THERE DWELLS IN CHRIST ALL FVLNESSE.
COLLOSS: 1.19. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness
dwell.


FRom verse the 15th, unto the 20th, we have a full, and pithie description of
our Redeemer, Christ Jesus; and that by his inward, by his outward relation.
First, by the intrinsecal relation he bears unto his Father, in the beginning
of the 15th verse; who is the Image of the invisible God. As for his
extrinsecal relations; they are either unto the creatures, in general, or else
unto the Church, in special: Unto the creatures in general, he carries the
relation* 1. Of first borne; the first borne of every creature: the latter part
of the 15th verse. 2. Of Creator and Preserver, verses 16th and 17th. Unto the
Church in special he is referred, as head, verse 18th. And he is the head of
the body, the Church. Of which relation we have an amplification, a
confirmation.

1. An amplification from two other titles dependant thereon, and resulting
therefrom: Who is the beginning, the first borne from the dead, that in all
things he might have the pre-eminence: Who is the beginning; that is, the cause
and principle unto all his members of their resurrection; of their spiritual
resurrection from the death of sin here; of their corporal resurrection from
the grave, the death of nature hereafter. The first borne from the dead; the
first that was borne from the dead; that is, the first that rose by his own
power, unto a present and plenary participation of glory: That in all things he
might have the pre-eminence, In that he was not only a Creator, and Preserver
of the living, but also a raiser, and restorer of the dead. Of this relation of
headship unto his Church we have 2 a Confirmation, from his fitness, and
qualification for it. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness
dwell Upon which words we may look 1. according to the reference they have of a
proof unto the foregoing. 2. as they are in themselves.

1. According to the reference they have of a proof unto the foregoing, which
is implied in the particle, (for.) Here to clear the Apostles meaning, we must
know, there is wanting this proposition: He, in whom all fullness dwells, is
to be the head of the Church. This is to be supplied, as necessarily
understood, and then we have a full, complete syllogism to prove Christ the
head of the Church. He, in whom all fullness dwells, is to be the head of the
Church, because qualified, and fitted for it; but in Christ dwells all
fullness, and that by his Father's decree* therefore he is the head of the body,
the Church. In the head of the Church, you see, there resides all-fulness. Were
it not so, the Apostle had reasoned but weakly, in inferring Christ's being
head of the Church, from the dwelling of all-fulness in him. If any one want
this fullness, it will go well with him if among the members of the Church he
can find a place; of head, the name, and honor, he cannot challenge, without
the just imputation of excessive, both pride, and folly. I cannot but marvel
then, how it comes about, that the Popes of Rome have for a long time laid so
eager claim unto this title: for what fullness, save that of sin, and Satan,
can be ascribed unto the greatest part of them, since their arrogant, and
sacrilegious usurpation of this incommunicable attribute of our Redeemer. We
may say of them as Paul of the Gentiles, Romans 1.29: they are filled with all
unrighteousness fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousnes, full of
envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity: and of this, the miserable face of
almost whole Christendom is too palpable an evidence. Antichrist is styled in
scriptures that man of sin, 2 These. 2.3. For this reason perhaps, because he is
not only full of sin, but the fullness of sin dwells in him. Satan has
filled his heart, as Peter spoke of Ananias, Act. 5.3. And good reason there
is, Satan should communicate unto him a double portion, the greatest portion
of his spirit, for he is his eldest son, the son of perdition, 2 These. 2.3.
his vicar general, the most powerful and universal agent he has here upon
earth.

Thus you see stands the context. If we look upon the words, as they are in
themselves, so for the better unfolding of them, we must know, that in Christ
there was a manifold fu^ness according to the diverse considerations of him;
and considered he may be either relatively, or absolutely.

1. Relatively, and so again three ways.

1. As an object of all promises, and prophecies delivered under the law: and
also as an antitype unto legal types and ceremonies. And so there was in him
that fullness of truth, of which the Evangelist St. John speaks, John. 1.14.
The word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, full of grace, and truth. He is
said to be full of truth, because he is the performance of the promises, the
fulfilling of the prophecies, the fulfilling of the typical prefigurations, of
the whole ceremonial law. Quia plenus gratiae, says Bonaventure, tulit
peccata; quia plenus veritatis solvit legis promissa: because full of grace,
therefore he bore our sins in his body on the tree, and so suffered the curse
of the Law; because full of truth, therefore he accomplished all the promises of
the old Testament. In him all the promises of God were yea, and Amen, 2 Cor.
1.20. Now, I say, that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers, Romans 15.8. Full
he was of truth, because in him were fulfilled all the prophecies, that ran of
the Evangelical Church, and therefore he is said Dan. 9.24. to seal up the
vision and the prophecies. Quoniam Christus est signaculum omnium prophetarum,
adimplens. omnia quae retro erant de eo nunciata, as Tertullian contra Judaeos
observes upon the place. Because Christ is the seal of the prophets,
fulfilling whatsoever was foretold of him. Full he was of truth, because he
made good the prefigurations of the whole ceremonial law. In them there was an
emptiness; they were but shadows, figures, Col. 2.17. A fullness then there
must be in Christ, who is the body of those shadows, the substance of those
figures: In him they were to be filled full, fulfilled, perfected, and
accomplished. And so the new Testament, whereof he is the substance, is said,
by Aquinas, to fill up, or fulfill the old, because whatsoever was promised, or
prefigured in this, is really, and truly exhibited in that, 1 a 2^ ae quaest.
107. Art. 2. Whereas it is said, Col. 2.9. that in him dwells all fullness of
the God head bodily, Lombard thinks that bodily, is as much as completive: So
that he understands by the words, Christ's fulfilling the signs, and ceremonies
of the law: For as they are said to be shadows of things to come, not in a
proper, but metaphorical sense, and in reference to them God was said to dwell
in the material Temple, made with Hands, only umbratiliter, after a typical,
dark, umbratile, and latent way: Even so the fullness of the Godhead is said
to dwell in him bodily, only metaphorically, in opposition to legal shadows,
because God by him accomplished whatsoever they prefigured, or shadowed.

Hence then we may infer the plucking away of Moses his vail, the abrogation
of all Levitical sacraments, sacrifices, observances, all typical ceremonies
whatsoever. When we have Christ the Antitype, there is no need of the
ceremonies, the Types: they are as the bones, Christ as the marrow; and
therefore the perverse Jews are fitly by Jerome compared unto dogs, in that as
dogs they do as it were only gnaw the bones, dote on the bare types, and in
the mean while neglect Christ Jesus, the marrow, Mannah hidden in them. The law
was given by Moses, full of types and shadows, void and empty of grace, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, John. 1.17. As grace to pardon the
breaches., to remove the curses, to enable for obedience unto the precepts of
the morral law; so truth to abolish the types, and resemblances of the
ceremonial law. Whereupon he is termed the end of the law, Romans 10.4. to note,
that all the ceremonies of the law had in him their perfection, and
accomplishment, and consequently period, and abolishment. They were but
figures, and presence of the truth nullifies all figures; they were but
shadows, and presence of the body, and substance evacuates all shadows: they
were but obscure glimmerings, weak and faint representations, dark and misty
prefigurations of the day spring from on high, that is, a light to them which
sat in darkness, a light to enlighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of the
people Israel. When this light therefore is risen upon the world, they must
needs vanish, it is brightness and luster cannot but dim tapers, and candles
in comparison of the sun of righteousness: and approach of the sunn makes all
lesser lights useless. Bernard in his first Homily super missus est, tells us,
that the promises made of Christ unto Abraham, Isaacke, and Jacob were as the
seed, the types foreshadowing him as the blossoms, Christ himself as the
fruits.

Answerable unto which is that of Aquinas prim. secun. quaest. 107. Art. 3:
that the new Testament, where of Christ is the sum, is contained in the old,
tanquam frumentum in spica, tanquam arbor in semine. Now prodeunte fructu, flos
decidit; quia veritate apparente in carne, figura pertransit: when the fruit
appears the blossom falls off; when the truth appears in the flesh, the
figure thereof passes away. All Levitical rites were but promissiva signa, as
Austin terms them, predictions of Christ to come, and therefore farther
observation of them would be a flat, and real denial of Christ's coming in the
flesh. But now this cessation of the ceremonies was not at once, in an instant,
but sensim, paulatim, says Austin, leasurely by degrees, by little and little.
As the mystery of our redemption signified by them, had it is inchoatum in the
cratch at the birth of Christ, it is consummatum on the cross, at the death, and
passion of Christ. Even so the ceremonies of the law themselves began to cease
upon Christ's coming, but were together with the sins of the world to be
utterly cancelled upon the cross, Ephesians. 2.15,16. Col. 2.14. Aquinas prim.
secun. quaest. 103. Art. 3. upon the first breaking out of the light of the sun
of righteousness upon the world, all shadows began to wast and lessen: Upon
the initial promulgation of the Gospel in Christ's own personal preaching, nay,
upon the very proclamation of Christ's approach by his forerunner, John Baptist,
the ceremonial law was in the waine; and therefore it is said, that the
Prophets, and the law proph^sied until John, Math. 11.13: because, however the
ceremonial law was not abrogated by John, or as soon as John preached, yet
aegrotare tunc caepit, as Maldonate has it, non multo post Christi mortem
moritura; it thereupon began presently to languish, weaken and sicken; and upon
the cross it actually gave up the Ghost: To which purpose some have observed,
that the last character of the Hebrew Alphabet was a plain figure of Christ's
cross, to show, that his sacrifice thereon ended all legal sacrifices, and
ordinances whatsoever. But now, however ceremonialia presently upon Christ's
death became mortua, dead, void of all efficacy, and power to bind, yet were
they not mortifera, deadly, until there was a plenary promulgation of the
Gospel. And therefore the Apostles gave them an honorable funeral by
observation of them, even after their power of obligation was quite expired in
Christ's death.

From this abrogation of Jewish ceremonies some of the ablest patrons of humane
ceremonies of mystical signification, do allow us to dispute against the
pedagogy, and school of them, whereby the mysteries of faith, and doctrines of
the gospel are wrapped up in new shadows, which God had freed from the old,
which were of his own institution, and meant to have published plainly by the
preaching of the Gospel, and Sacraments, a cleerer kind of teaching; and not
again to be adumbrated by new shadows: for this were to turn us back to our
spelling book. So Doctor John Burges in his rejoinder to Ames page 265. 267 268.

But the old Non-conformists were not content with this, but argued hence
farther for the abolishing of all significant ceremonies of humane institution
whatsoever, not only those which Doctor Morton terms Sacramental, which
signify some grace conferred by God, but also those, which he calls moral,
which signify man's spiritual duty, and obedience toward God; such as the
surplice, cross, etc. Neither is this inference so irrational, as the
Prelatical party have heretofore represented it. To make which appear, I
shall desire you to take notice of that, which the judicious Mr. Bayne
observes on Col. 2.17.

The Papists (says he) may hence be in part answered: they object, that their
ceremonies are not here condemned, but such as signified Christ to come. Though
in other regards they are taken away then of signification, yet they must know
signification respecting Christ is twofold. 1. Of that, which concerns his
own individual person, as his manifestation in the flesh, suffering, etc. 2. Of
that which represents any thing to be done in the body of Christ mystical, to
be done spiritually of Believers. And that Christ is to be taken here in this
latitude If that of the Fathers may go for current, that distinction of ^l^ven
footed beasts, and such as chewed the cud, did teach, that Christians must be
discreet, and given to meditate on the word, though it is liker that the
permitting them only pure creatures, did signify, that we must desire the
sincere milk and food of the Gospel: or creatures of middle nature d^d
admonish us, how our spiritual food of knowledge though it be far higher then
the world; yet it is far inferior to that we shall be fed with when we walk
by sight.
he does not barely affirm, but prove. Indeed that diverse Jewish ceremonies
were only moral signs, signifying unto us moral duties, is affirmed by most
expositors, upon the books of Exodus and Leviticus. That the ceremonial
difference betwixt meats enjoined, Levit. 11: had a moral signification, the
Fathers generally held, as you may see in Bishop Veteres plerumque moralem
illam significationem consectantur in suis commentariis; and sigillatim
ostendunt in prohibitis animalibus affectus and mores pravos esse fugiendos.
Sic Origines, Hom. 7. in Levit. Sic Tertul. de cibis Judaic. unde non pigebit
quaedam adscribere; ut homines mundarentur pecora culpata sunt, scilicet ut
homines qui eadem vitia haberent, aequales p^coribus aestimarentur. Et paulo
post in 15. animalibus mores depinguntur humani, and actus, and voluptates;
mundi sunt fi ruminent, id est, in ore semper habeant praecepta divina, etc.
Cum suem edi prohibet lex, reprehendit caenosam, and luteam, and gaudentem
vitiorum sordibus vitam. Haec and multa plura Tertul Eandem rationem sequitur
Theodoret quaest. 11. in Levit. Et Augustinus totam rem paucis hisce verbis
complectitur, Quos cibos, inquit, Judaei vitabant in pecoribus, nos vitare
oportet in moribus.
Davenant, in his Commentary on Col. 2.17: where he alleges diverse sentences
out of them, wherein they explain, what they thought it to be. In the first
seven days of the Passover, the Jews were by the ceremonial law to eat
unleavened bread, and to put away leaven out of their houses, Exodus 12.15.

Now that the duty of Believers was shadowed by this ceremony, appears by
Paul's application of it, 1 Cor. 5.7,8. Purge out therefore the old leaven,
that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our passover
is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the feast not with old leaven,
neither with the leaven of malice, and wickedness: but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth.

Thus you see clearly proved, that many legal ceremonies did only shadow out
some duty to be performed by Believers, who are the body of Christ. And this
place, Col. 2.17: is to be extended unto all legal rites whatsoever, and
therefore all of them are to be abolished, not only those, which signified
Christ to come, but also those, which taught the Church by their signification.
Now from this ground the Authors of the abridgment of that book, which the
Ministers of Lincoln Diocese delivered to King James, page 41.42. conclude,
that all humane ceremonies, being appropriated to God's service, if they be
ordained to teach any spiritual duty by their mystical signification, are
unlawful. It is much less lawful for man to bring significant ceremonies into
God's worship now, then it was under the Law. For God has abrogated his own,
not only those that were appointed to prefigure Christ, but such also as served
by their signification to teach moral duties, so as now (without great sin)
none of them can be continued in the Church, no not for signification. Of this
judgment were the Fathers in the Council of Nice, and Austin, Martyr,
Bullinger, Lavater, Hospinian, Piscator, Cooper, Westphaling, and others. And
if those ceremonies that God himself ordained to teach his Church by their
signification, may not now be used, much less may those which man has devised.
This reason our Divines hold to be strong against popish ceremonies, namely,
Calvin, Bullinger, Hospinian, Arcularius, Virel, D. Bilson, D. Rainolds, D.
Willet, and others. Yeae this is one maine difference which God has put
between the state of that Church under the Law, and this under the Gospel, that
he thought good to teach that by other mystical ceremonies, besides the
ordinary Sacraments, and not thiis. And of this judgment is Calvin, Bullinger,
Chemnitius, Danaeus, Hospinian, Arcularius, our book of Homilies, D. Humfry, D.
Rainolds, D. Willet, and others. All which Divines do teach that to bring in
significant ceremonies into the Church of Christ is plain Judaisme. This
argument so pinched Bishop Morton, and after him D. John Burges, who undetook
in his behalf to rejoyne unto the reply of D. Ames, as that to avoid the force
of it, they both affirmed, that the use of some Jewish rites with a mind or
intention not Jewish, is lawful; and they instance in circumcision, as it is
used under Prester John, not as a Sacrament or as necessary, but as a national,
and customary rite. The falsehood and danger of which assertion, you may read at
large confirmed by D. Ames in his fresh suit against ceremonies, page 274, 275,
276, 277.

Lastly, we may hence learn, what a gracious mercy of God it is unto us to be
reserved until this time of Reformation, as the Apostle terms the time of the
Christian administration of the Covenant of Grace, Heb. 9.10. wherein we have
fully, and really exhibited that, which was but promised, and foreshadowed unto
the Jews. Of his fullness have we received grace for grace, John. 1.16. that
is, (as Chrysostom expounds the words) for the grace of the old Testament, the
grace of the new; for dark figures, and resemblances, the things figured and
resembled, for obscure shadows, the very truth and substance: for the paschal
lamb, the Lamb of God. For typical sacrifices, the true expiatory sacrifice
of Christ Jesus himself: for typical high Priests, a great high Priest, that
is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, Heb. 4.14. For a Mosaical
Tabernacle, a true, a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands,
that is to say, not of this building, Heb. 9.11. For that antiquated, and
abrogated way unto the Sanctuary, the blood of beasts, or the material vail,
which was dead, uneffectual, unable to bring to everlasting life, we have a new
and living way, which Christ himself has consecrated for us, the flesh, the
humanity of Christ, Heb. 10.20.

Those words of our Savior, Mat. 13.16,17. Luke 10.24: however they be chiefly
to be understood concerning the Apostles, and such disciples as bodily
conversed with our Savior, yet they may be extended in some degree, and
proportion unto all Believers, after the manifestation of Christ in the flesh.
It may be said unto every one of them, Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and
your ears for they hear. Blessed are the eyes, which see the things that ye
see: For many. Prophets and Kings and righteous men have desired to see those
things, which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye
hear, and have not heard them.

Indeed the Church before Christ, as our Savior said of Abraham. John. 8.56:
saw the day of Christ, his coming in the flesh afar off, through a vail, or
cloud of ceremonies, and by the faith of prophesy, Heb. 11.13. But we see it by
the faith of History. Unto them Christ was, as a Kernel hidden in the ground,
as contained within God's promises. Unto us he is as a branch grown forth,
Isai. 4.2. Diodati.
Hence it is, that the ceremonies of the old Testament were Prophetical,
prenunciative of things to come; the Sacraments of the new Testament
Historical, commemorative of what is past. As therefore the truth of History is
held to be more real, then the trurh of prophesy; because it is a declaration
of a real performance of that, which was promised. So the Christian
administration of the Covenant of grace may be said to contain in it a fullness
of truth: that is, a more real verity, then the Levetical, or Mosaical.
According to the which difference, as is observed by the reverend Morton, in
his book of the institution of the Lord's Supper, page 213. St. John the
Baptist was called by Christ, a Prophet, in that he foretold Christ, as now to
come; but he was called more then a Prophet, as demonstrating, and pointing him
out to be now come, Math. 11.9. Joh. 1.15,29. The ceremonial law, says the
Apostle, had a shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of the
things, Hebr. 10.1. In which words Calvin, Pareus, Cornelius Alapide, and
others, conceive that there is an allusion unto the custom of Painters, whose
first rude or imperfect draught is termed a shadow, or adumbration, upon which
they lay afterward the lively colors, and so draw the Image unto the life
with all its lineaments. The rites of the old Law were but a rough draught, but
obscure, and confused shadows in respect of the ordinances of the Gospel,
which are a lively, and express Image, a distinct and perfect picture of Christ
and his benefits. Thus you see Beloved, that God has respited us to live in a
time of greater light, and fuller revelation then the Patriarks lived under. O,
let us not receive so great a grace of God in vain, but walk suitably
thereunto: let us improve this privilege unto the best advantage of our souls
by making use of it, as an engagement unto a greater eminency in knowledge and
piety, then was in those days. O! it were a shameful and ungrateful part, that
the Saints of the old Testament should see farther, better, and more
distinctly, through the cloud of ceremonies, a light that shone in a dark
place, 2 Pet. 1.20: then we through the clear mirror of the Gospel, in which
we may with open face, behold the glory of Christ shining, 2 Cor. 3.18. that
their souls should thrive, grow fat, and full with the shadows of the Law,
and ours be lanke and lean with the more solid, and substantial ordinances of
the Gospel.

2. Christ may be considered under the relation of an head unto his Church; and
so the Church belongs unto him, as his fullness. The Church, which is his
body, the fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. This assertion
at the first blush, seems very strange. For if in Christ dwell all fullness;
all the fullness of the Godhead, bodily, Col. 2.9. If he be all in all, if he
fill all in all, how then can either the Church triumphant, all whose members
owe all their perfection unto his influence, or the Church militant, which,
alas! is but a company of poor creatures, and sinners, empty of all good, save
what flows from him, be possibly imagined to be his fullness, any ways to
fill and perfect him? why the very proposal of the doubt in some sort cleares
it. That which in the text seemingly contradicts the Churches being Christ's
fullness (he fills all in all) insinuates after what manner it must be
understood: for from Christ's being of himself so full, as that he fills all
in all, the inference is not only easy, but necessary, that the Church is not
his inward fullness, serving to supply his defects, and inwardly to fill and
perfect him; but only his outward fullness, serving to magnify his mercy, and
outwardly to fill and honor him; and from her he has indeed an external
filling glory, and perfection. Even as a King receives glory from his
subjects, in the multitude of the people is the Kings honor, Prove. 14.28. or
as a husband is honored by a virtuous wife, She is a crown to him, Prove.
12.4. A Father credited by his offspring, Childrens Children are the crown of
old men, Prove. 17.6. Or as a Gentleman is graced by his numerous retinue.
Aquinas upon the place says, that the Church is Christ's fullness, even as the
body may be said to be the fullness of the soul: And the body may be so termed,
because it is for the service of the soul, because the soul works in, and by
it; and without it cannot put forth many of it is operations. So the Church is
for the service, praise, and glory of Christ, Isai. 43.21. Christ exercises,
and manifests the power and efficacy of his spirit in her: She is, as it
were, a vessel, into which he pours his gifts, and graces. Without a body how
can the operations of the soul be visible? And if it were not for the Church,
how could the power, and efficacy of Christ's grace be discernable? As a
general, or Commander may be said to be filled, when his army is increased, his
conquests enlarged; so Christ, when Believers are added unto the Church, Acts.
2.47. The illustration is not mine, but Hierom's. The expression will not seem
harsh, if we consider the titles of the Church in the old Testament. She is the
glory of God, Isai. 4.5. Even as the woman is the glory of the man. 1 Cor.
11.7: a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the
hand of God, Isa. 62.3: the throne of his glory, Jer. 14.21. that is unto him a
name of joy, a praise, a glory and an honor before all the nations of the
earth, Jer. 13.11. and 33.9.

For the further clearing of this text, we will consider Christ, personally,
essentially, mystically.

1 Personally, as he is Son, the second Person in the Trinity, having in the
Godhead a subsistence distinct both from that of the father, and Holy Ghost;
and so he is full of himself.

2. Essentially, according to his natures, both Divine, and humane, as he is
God, as he is man; and so also he is full by himself, full and perfect God,
full and perfect man. So then the Church is not his fullness.

3 Mystically, as he is head of his Church: and so he is not perfect without
her, being his body mystical. So then the Church is his fullness. Can the head
(says the Apostle) say to the feet, I have no need of thee, 1 Cor. 12.21.
Christ has deigned to be our head: how then can he be full and complete
without us? As a King, the head politic, though for his own particular person
he be never so absolute, and excellent, yet as a King, he cannot be complete
without Subjects: without them he may be a complete man, but not a complete
King. So Christ, though as Son, as God, as man, he be every way full by
himself, yet as head he accounts himself maimed, and incomplete without his
members; without them he may be a complete Son, God, man; not a complete head.
For want of the term, which a relation respects, brings even a nullity of
the relation: It being impossible to define, or conceive relations, but in
reference to their terms. No man can be a father without children; a King
without subjects: Even so nothing can be a head, which is destitute, of a body,
and members.

The ground of this is the near, and expresseless union between Christ, and
his members, which is such, as that the members of the Church are said to be
partakers of Christ, Heb. 3.14.

And the Church has a kind of subsistence in Christ, and consequently in the
Deity. The Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God the Father, and in the
Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 1.1.

Nay, hereupon the name of Christ is communicated unto the Church, 1 Cor.
12.12. As the body is one, and has many members, and all the members are of
that one body, being many are one body: so also is Christ.

Where under the name of Christ not only the head, but the whole body of the
Church is comprised. Jesus and all his members make but one Christ, one body,
one person mystical.

Whether ^or no this be the fullness in the text, is not much controverted.
Indeed Theodoret with some few others have been of the mind that it is, but
their gloss has little color from either the words or scope of the text.

For, 1. the fullness spoken of in the text is an all-fulness. Now the Church
(as Cornelius Alapide observes) is barely styled the fullness of Christ, never
the all-fulness of him.

2. Zanchy alleges another reason, which I for my part shall wave. The
fullness of the text dwells in Christ-Now the Church (says he) dwells not
in Christ, however Christ dwells in the Church, and in the hearts of all his
members by faith.

But I cannot sufficiently wonder at the incogitancy of so learned and
judicious a Divine, when I consider these following places of Scripture, Joh.
5.56. 1 John 3.24. 1 John 4.16. Psalm. 90.1. Psalm. 91.1. Psalm. 101.6. Isai
33.14,15.

3. But there is a third reason, which together with the first, is of a
convincing nature. The all-fulness that is here said to dwell in Christ, is
brought by our Apostle as an intrinsecal qualification, in order of nature
antecedent unto his relation of head unto the Church, his body. Whereas the
Churches being Christ's fullness is consequent thereunto, and resulting
therefrom.

And besides, if we would speak properly, and strictly, it is not so much an
attribute given unto Christ, as unto the Church.

I should therefore dismiss any larger prosecution of it, and proceed; but
because I intend to speak some thing of every branch of Christ's fullness, I
shall therefore briefly hint the use and application, that may be made of this.

Use 1. Of information.
1. Is the Church the outward fullness of Christ, considered as head, we may then
be informed, what is the nature, and quality of her true members; that they are
effectually called, and truly sanctified, linkt unto Christ with an internal
union by the bond of the spirit on his part, and of faith on theirs. Indeed as
in the body natural there are hairs, nails, evil humors, and many other
things, which yet belong not integrally thereunto, as proper members: So if we
regard not the inward, and invisible essence, but the visible state, or outward
manner of the Churches being, there adhere unto her many uncalled, unjustified,
and unsanctified persons, but its only as excrements, or ulcers: For every true
member of the Church is a part of Christ's fullness, and therefore must receive
of his fullness grace for grace, must be endowed with all saving, and
sanctifying graces, otherwise how can it concur to the making of Christ full,
and complete.

2. Refutation.
Whence 2. may be inferred the gross error of the Papists, in avouching, that
external profession, and conformities, outward subjection to the Pope of Rome
are sufficient to constitute one a true member of the Catholic Church,
although he be a Reprobate, an Unbeliever, an Hypocrite, so gross as Judas, or
Simon Magus, a professed, and notorious impious wretch, that is utterly devoid
of all spiritual life, and grace whatsoever. If he take up a room in the
Church, it matters not with them, though he neither do, not can perform vital
actions, yet he shall pass for a true part thereof.

This bold and unreasonable assertion receives a plain overthrow from this
text. The Church being Christ's mystical body, is his fullness, and so every
member of the Church is a part of his fullness, which cannot be affirmed of a
Reprobate, unbelieving, hypocritical and graceless person, who is so far from
either filling, and honoring Christ, the head, or beautifying the Church, his
body, that he highly dishonours him, and disfigures her. Spalato therefore
confesses that Reprobates have a place in the Church, only presumtive, not
veraciter. Nay, so clear is the evidence of this truth, that it wrung from
Bellarmine, even whilst he was opposing it, these following confessions, that
Reprobates, Unbelievers, Hypocrites, and wicked persons are only exterior
parts, dry, dead, and rotten members of the Church, appertaining thereunto
only as hairs, nails, evil and corrupt humors do unto the body of man: that
they are knit unto the Church only by an external conjunction, not of the
Church, nisi secundum apparentiam, and putative, non vere: that they are not of
the soul, but merely of the bulk, and body of the Church visible. Why, what
could we our selves say more in defense of our, and confutation of their
opinions? He grants them to be but dry, dead, and rotten members of the
Church; and should we admit such to be true, and proper members of the Church,
what a corrupt, stinking, and carrion-like body should we attribute to our
Scripturae clare docent sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, quae Christi corpus
mysticum appellatur, ex solis electis, vocatis, justificatis, and sanctificatis
constare; Quia Ecclesia sancta* catholica, non modo (...) sed (...) Christi
dicitur, ad Ephesians. 1.23. jam cogitare apud vos, utrum membra mortua and putrida
rectius dicantur complere corpus cui agnascuntur, an corrumpere, and deformare.
Certe doct^ssimus Augustinus putavit speciosam columbam, id est, Sanctam
Catholicam Ecclesiam, tali membrorum peste non ornari aut compleri, sed
turpari; quia illa multitudo improborum Ecclesiae adjacet forin^cus, and super
numerum, ad quam Ecclesiam vere pertinet certus sanctorum numerus
praedestinatus ante mundi constitutionem. Quandoquidem igitur soli pii and
sideles persiciunt hoc corpus Christi, impii autem and infideles potius
insiciunt, manifestum est ex impiis hoc corpus non constare. Tetrum ergo illud,
tabidum and cadaverosum corpus, quod maximam ob partem ex mortuis and putridis
membris coalescit, licet vicarium illud caput sibi unire baud dedignetur, verum
tamen caput viva membra solummodo tan quam sua agnoscet and amplexabitur.
Davenant. Determinat. quaest. 46. page 217.
Savior? Is it probable, nay is it possible, that such a body should be the
fullness of him, that fills all in all? God forbid, that ever we should be
guilty of such blasphemy either in thought, or word. I appeal to any
indifferent man's judgment, and conscience, whether or no, dead and rotten
members perfect the head, complete and adorn the body, to which they are
joined, or do not rather, as I said before, dishonor the head, infest and
cumber the whole body. He confesses that they are united to the Church but by
an outward conjunction; and was ever any man so deprived of common sense and
understanding, as to call a wooden leg a part of the body to which it was
annexed; as to term wennes, worts, and moles, sores, and botches, members of
the body, in which they were? To conclude this use, the Church is Christ's
outward fullness, and therefore every true member of the Church externally
perfects, and helps; as it were, to complete, and fill up Christ taken
mystically, as head of his body mystical, the Church. Now I shall demand any
ingenuous adversary, whether or no Christ be made the fuller, and compleater by
damned castaways, cursed hypocrites, whom unquenchable fire awaites, desperate
impenitents given over to a Reprobate sense, and hardened Unbelievers, who are
condemned already, upon whom the Wrath of God already abides. Should Christ
lack one of these, would he esteem himself maimed? were his body incomplete
without them? or rather would it not remain the more complete, when all such
are quite cut off from it? Thus you see, all that are in the Church, are not of
the Church, do not belong thereunto as genuine and proper members. And thus
much for information, and reformation of the judgment.

I shall next proceed on to practical uses, and they are either of
reprehension, exhortation, or consolation,

Use 1. Of Reprehension.
1. To begin with those of reprehension.

1. Is the Church Christ's fullness? then are they much overshot and deeply to be
blamed, who stop their ears, and harden their hearts against Gods gracious and
loving calling of them out of this wicked and miserabe world unto the glorious
society of the Church. How would they canvass to be admitted into many other
societies? Why, they are earnestly entreated, and wooed to be of this, by which
yet true and greater honor would accrue unto them, then the Empire of the
whole world could yield. For the Church is the fullness of him, that fills all
in all; Every member of the Church is a part of that f^lness; and yet they like
fools, shall I say, rather like madmen, scorn the privilege, turn the deaf
ear to all his invitations.

Had the Churches being Christ's fullness but it is due meditation, it would work
a more thankful acceptance of this so gracious an offer. But alas! this is hid
from most of our eyes.

Use 2. Of Reprehension.
2. Is the Church Christ's fullness? then are they sharply to be taxed, who
contemn, jeere, and flout the true members of the Church, making them as the
filth of the world, and as the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 5.13.
bestowing upon them many unbeseeming terms of derision. Why! know they what
they do? They durst not thus abuse the reteyners of a great man; How then dare
they adventure to injure in this manner the members of the Church, which is the
body of Christ, the fullness of him that fills all in all? If they are not
ashamed, yet me thinks, they should be afraid hereof, seeing the wrong in an
high measure reflects upon Christ himself, and he in point of honor must
needs be sensible of it. What? Vilify his body which he has been pleased so
highly to honor, as to esteem his fullness. Can such an affront pass
unpunished, unrevenged? What? abuse the members of the Church, without whom he
accounts himself incomplete, and maimed: and yet not fear a thunder bolt,
but rather hug and applaud themselves in their Atheistical Sarcasmes.

2 Exhortation.
As for the exhortations that may be drawn hence, they concern either Aliens
from, or members of the Church, considered mystically, as the body of Christ.

1. Of Aliens from the Church.
1. Then, all that are as yet Aliens from the Church may from the Churches being
Christ's fullness be instructed to labor after a place in her, I mean, the
place of a living member of her, which has spiritual combination with, and
quickenance from the head of the Church, Christ Jesus; and is not only
externally tied unto him, by sacramental admission into his body or Church
visible, by a bare outward profession of him. How vainly are men ambitious
after places of credit in great men's houses, and Princes Courts: why to be a
member of the Catholic Church is a place of high honor, and unspeakable
dignity. What? Be a part of Christ's fullness! As it were perfect, fill and
complete him, who fills all in all? Why this is a privilege, that humane
expressions cannot reach. O therefore, do your utmost to attain it, and with
all diligence, care, and constancy apply your selves to the use of those
ordinances, which God has sanctified for communication of this favor.

2. Of Members of the Church.
A second second sort of exhortations concerns such, as have assurance, that
they are members of the Church; and they may hence be exhorted unto three
duties, one regarding God, another respecting the Church, and a third
themselves.

1. The first regards God, and it is thankfulness unto him for his advancement
of them unto an honor and privilege so great, as that by means thereof they
become parts of Christ's fullness. The blessing is great in it self, but made
far greater by the condition they were in, when God called them thereunto, to
wit, in open defyance with, and rebellion against him, Their father was an
Amorite, their mother an Hittite, they were polluted in their own blood, and
yet then was the time of Christ's love unto them, then spread he his skirt over
them, and covered their nakedness, Ezekiel. 16. took them so near unto him, as
that he made them one with himself, a part, and portion of himself. Surely,
it would raise them to an high degree and measure of love, and gratitude, but
duly, and thoroughly to consider, that he who is so high, as that he is over
all, Ephesians. 1.22: as that he is far above all principality, and power, and
might, and dominion, and every name, that is named, not only in this world, but
also in that which is to come, verse. 21; should descend so low, as to reckon
himself made full, and complete by weak, and unworthy men, rather worms and
no men: that he who is so full, as that he fills all in all, should yet be
pleased so far to humble himself, as to call his members his fullness, who,
alas! are naturally empty of all spiritual good, and full of sin, and misery.

A second duty unto which we may hence be exhorted, respects the Church: Is the
Church Chrift's fullness? then compassionate her sufferings, do and suffer your
utmost for her delivery.

To see the fall of great men, the funeral, or ruin of great cities, works in
those, that either see, or hear of it, a kind of relenting or commiseration.
Why the Church of God, his body, his fullness, is all in flames, and shall not
this command our most serious passions, our sincerest, and heartiest prayers,
and our utmost endeavors for her deliverance!

A Third exhortation regards themselves; and it is to walk worthy of their high
relation, not to discredit it, but to adorn it rather in an holy conversation.
The misdemeanors of favorites reflects upon their Princes: And do not the
evil lives, and actions of the Churches members redound unto the dishonor of
Christ, the head of the Church, especially seeing he has taken them into so
straight, and intimate a fellowship with him, as that he has made them of his
body and fullness. As they that honor him shall be honored, so they that cast
any disgrace upon him, or his body, shall be sure to meet with shame and
dishonor at the last. Let them therefore be exhorted not to receive so great a
favor, as exaltation to be a part of Christ's fullness, in vain, but to walk
fittingly to the excellency of so high a condition, as becomes the members of
him, who fills all in all.

Lastly, those that after an impartial examination of their relation unto the
Church find themselves not only to be in her, but of her, as true, proper, and
living members, may upon this their assurance ground diverse consolations, and
that especialy in these five following particulars.

Use 1. Of consolation.
1 If you are members of the Church, and so consequently parts of Christ's
fullness, why then you may rest confident of all true blessings, all spiritual
honor, and advancement. He will be unto you a sun, and a shield: he will
give you grace, and glory, no good thing will he withhold from you, Psalm.
84.11. You are his own, and therefore he is nearly interested in your good,
your bliss, and prosperity: and consequently will be as careful of promoting
it, as you your selves will, or can be. For, who will not use his utmost care,
and fidelity in his own concernments? All the members of the Church are one
with Christ, in a very near relation, so that he, and they, make but one
Christ: they are as parts, and portions of himself: they are his fullness, and
therefore in all their advancements he is honored, and after a sort farther
filled. Whereupon diverse Interpreters translate (...) in Ephesians. 1.23. passively,
and render the words thus; qui omnia in omnibus adimpletur; which is filled all
in all, that is, is filled in all his Saints, according to all graces, and
virtues requisite unto their eternal salvation.

By conferring then any grace, or virtue, or any other blessing upon them, he
conferreth it as it were upon himself, he honors, and fills himself: and
on the contrary, if he should deny blessings unto them, he should deny them
unto himself, which is a thing not to be imagined.

Because the Church is Christ's fullness, because the members of the Church are
said to be parts and portions of this fullness, therefore as the Apostle
phraseth it, Hebr. 3.14: they partake of Christ: they partake of all his
communicable perfections.

1. Of the satisfaction and merit of his death and sufferings, Phil. 3.10. 1
Pet. 4.13. (2) of the graces of his spirit, Joh. 1.16. (3) of his glorious
dignities, privileges and relations. We are by him a royal Priesthood,
spiritual Kings and Priests, sons and coheirs with him. Nay (4) We shall reap
from him not only relative, but real glory, when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, 1 John 3.2. and that not only in our souls, but in our bodies, Phil.
3.21. It is said of him, that at the day of judgment he shall be glorified in
his Saints, 2 These. 1.10. There is says D. Sclater upon the place, a personal
glory of the Mediator, Joh. 17.5 And there is his social glory, as I may term
it, resulting unto his person, from the glory, which he communicates unto his
Children. And of this the Apostle here speaks. Conjunct with the glory of
Saints is the glory of Christ: so nearly, at that in their glorification,
himself is glorified. Every Saint then may warrantably be assured, that Christ
will take all possible care for his glorification.

2 You may hence find great cause of consolation in, and against the forest
afflictions. For being parts of Christ's fullness, whatsoever evil befalls you,
he will deeply resent it, he will be most tenderly affected with it, nay
exceedingly afflicted in it. In all their afflictions (says the Prophet) he
was afflicted, Isai. 63.9: that is, he compassionates their afflictions, and as
it were sympathizeth with them. He is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, Hebr. 4.14. Zech. 2.8. Judge. 10.16. Psalm. 106 44.
Hereupon is it, that Christ looked upon Readiness persecution of his members, as
reaching himself; and therefore cried unto him from heaven, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me. I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, Act. 9.4,5.

Thus when the foot is trodden on, the tongue in the head complains, why
treadest thou on me? linguam non tetegit: compassione clamat, non attritione,
says one Clemens Monilianus, speaking of this passage of Saul. The party
complained of touches not the tongue at all, and therefore this cry and
complaint of the tongue is not so much out of Hinc autem Theologi quidam putant
ostendi, sanctorum passiones fidelibus prodesse ad remissionem poenarum, quae
vocatur Indulgentia. Ex hoc tamen Apostoli loco nobis non videtur admodum
solid statui posse; Non enim sermoiste, quo dicit Apostolus se pati pro
Ecclesia, necessario sic accipiendus est; quod pro redimendis peccatorum
poenis, quas fideles debent, patiatur. Estius in Col. 1.24.
pain or passion, as sympathy, and compassion.

Now the ground of Christ's thus sympathizing with his members is their
mystical union with him. As Christ the head, and his body make one Person
mystical, one full Christ: so the passions of the head, and of the body, and
members make one complete mass, or body of passions: with such difference for
all that between the one sort, and the other, as that the passions of the head
are satisfactory and meritorious for the redemption of the Church; the
afflictions of the members only for the edification of the Church, 2 Timoth.
2.10. 2 Cor. 1.6. Phil. 1.12,13,14. As the Church then is Christ's fullness, so
the Churches sufferings are in some sort the fullness of the sufferings of
Christ; and therefore Paul calls his sufferings, the filling up of that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ, Col. 1.24. Which words are not to be
understood, as if Christ's personal sufferings were not sufficient for the
satisfaction of God's justice, and the working of our redemption.

Such a sense of the words, even Quod ergo noster interpres dixit, ea quae
desunt passionem Christi, non sic accipien^ dum quasi Christus sit ad
rede^ptionem nostra^ ideoque supplmento Martyru^ opus habeat; quod impium est
sentire. Certe Thomas eum sensum haereticum esse pronunciat, eo quod Christi
sanguis sufficiens sit ad redemptionem etiam multorum mundorum. Estius in locum.
Estius a Papist, confesses to be impious: and Aquinas censureth it to be
heretical.

We must therefore with Lyra upon the place, distinguish of two sorts of
Christ's sufferings, they are either, in corpore proprio, or in corpore mystico.

His sufferings in corpore proprio, in his natural and humane body, had the
lasts words of Christ, upon the Cross, to bear witness unto the fullness of
their measure, and merit.

By the afflictions of Christ therefore, the remainders of which Paul's
sufferings were said to fill up, understand we his general sufferings, in
corpore mystico, in his Church, as a member with the rest: for as head, he will
suffer even to the end of the world in his faithful Ministers, and members.

It is usual to attribute the wounds of the hand, or feet, unto the whole man;
and therefore the Apostle, because he is a member of the body of Christ, may
very well call his afflictions, the afflictions of Christ: for Christ, and his
members make but one Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12: and therefore that which the
poorrest and meanest of his members suffer, he also suffers.

When his hungry and thirsty members are not relieved with meat and drink; when
his members, that are forced to flee from City, to City, and to be strangers
unto their native soil, are not taken in, and hospitably entertained; when his
naked members are not clothed, when his sick and imprisoned members are not
visited, and ministered unto, be interprets the neglect, and omission of these
offices of love toward his members, as reflecting upon himself. He shall at
the last day say, verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of
the least of these, ye did it not to me, Math. 25.42,43,44,45. Well therefore
droop not under any condition, though never so sad, and seemingly desperate,
under any want and distress, though never so great, and in the eye of sense and
carnal reason never so remediless. For if you are members of Christ, Christ you
see has a share in all your miseries, and pressures, and therefore you may
assure your selves of his presence to sweeten them unto you, and of his spirit
to strengthen, and support you under them.

3. We may hence infer the stability of the Church in general, the
perseverance of every member of the Church in particular.

1. The stability of the Church in general.

The Church is Christ's fullness, and therefore it shall never fail.

What man would suffer himself to be mutilated, and dismembered, if he were
able to hinder it? And will Christ then, think you, suffer any thing to
prevail against his Church, which is his fullness? What were that but to mayme
and imcompleate him? For the preservation of the Church Christ has a twofold
influence upon her; and that perpetual, irresistible, and uninterrupted, the
influence of his truth, and the influence of his power.

1. The influence of his truth to teach and enlighten her, Joh. 16.13.

2. The influence of his power to guide and protect her, so that the gates of
hell shall never be able to prevail against her, Mat. 16.18.

2. We may hence infer the perseverance of every member of the Church in
particular. If you are members of the Church, and so parts of Christ's fulness,
why then rest assured of perpetual preservation in that state of union and
fellowship, you enjoy with him. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be
removed, Isai. 54.10. But you shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever, Psalm. 125.1 For as members, you make Christ, your head,
more full; and so loss of you would be a great blemish, and as it were mayming
to his body mystical, which that he should not hinder, we cannot so much as
imagine but with infinite wrong, unto either his power, or wisdom, Joh. 6.37.
Jer. 32.40. 1 Cor. 1.8. 1 Pet. 1.5. John. 10.28,29. Math. 16.18. Romans 8.38,39.

4 The members of the Church may hence be comforted against the fear of death.
Is the Church Christ's fullness, why then every member of the Church may be
assured of a resurrection unto a glorious, and immortal life: for Christ will
not suffer any part of his fullness to be overwhelmed with corruption, but will
assuredly raise them, and set them in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2.6. But of this I
have spoken at large, page 149, 150: and therefore thither I shall refer the
Reader.

Fifthly, and lastly, you may hence be comforted against a low degree, and a
low esteem.

1. Against a low degree, state, or condition. Suppose you are of never so low
degree, why to be a part of Christ's fullness, is a more true, real, and greater
honor then the dignity of the greatest Potentates, who are without Christ in
the world.

Lastly, if you are members of the Church, here is wonderful comfort to you
against that base and low esteem, which Aliens have you in. The swaggering
gallant perhaps scorns your company, Drunkards make songs upon you, all the
world derides your profession, reckoning you to be but as the offal and refuse
of all things.

But what of all this, Christ accounts more honorably of you, so honorably
as that he holds not himself complete without you. If men have the favor and
good oppinion of the Prince, they will contemn the snarling of the multitude.

Why the King of the Church, the King of heaven and earth, Christ Jesus, God
blessed for ever, highly loves, and honors you, esteems you as parts and
portions of himself, as parts of his fullness. Me thinks then you should
extremely slight whatsoever these Rakehels think, or say of you.

I proceed unto the last relative consideration of Christ. Lastly therefore he
may be considered according to the relation he has of a cause toward our
salvation. And so there dwells in him a fullness of office, and authority, an
all-fulness of sufficiency to accomplish it.

1. An all-fulness of office and authority: For the opening of which, I shall
at large handle those words, Math. 28.18. All power is given to me, in heaven,
and in earth.

Here by power may be understood, either a physical power of efficacy, or a
moral power of authority.

1. A physical power of efficacy, and that is, say some, the omnipotency of his
Godhead, or else as others determine, a spiritual power of his manhood.

1. Some take this all power for the omnipotency of his Godhead: and they are
again subdivided.

1. Diverse Orthodoxe writers affirm that omnipotency is given unto Christ, as
he is the eternal Son of God.

Others 2. as the Vbiquitaries, hold that it is given unto him, as man.

1. Diverse Orthodoxe writers aver, that omnipotency is given unto Christ as
he is the eternal Son of God; and that again two wa^es. 1. By eternal
generation. 2. In respect of the declaration thereof at his resurrection.

1. They affirm that omnipotency, together with all other divine properties
are communicated from the Father unto the Son by eternal generation; and
whereas perhaps some may think it strange that any thing should be given unto
the eternal Son of God; to satisfy such they allege John. 5.26. As the Father
has life in himself, so has he given unto the Son to have life in himself.
That is, as the Father has the divine essence, or Godhead independently: So
has he given unto the Son, to wit, non gratuito dono, says Cajetan, sed
naturali^generatione, to have it also without dependence on any. The learned
Gillespie in his Aarons rod blossoming, etc. page 217. 218. Undertaketh to
prove this interpretation to be agreeable, as unto the analogy of faith, so
also unto the cohesion and dependence of the words. Christ (says he) being to
give a commission to the Apostles to go and preach the Gospel to all nations,
he first anticipateth a great objection, which might arise in the Apostles
minds; they might think, how shall we be able to carry the Gospel through the
nations? We shall have all the powers of the world against us.

To remove this fear he said, all power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth; as if he had said; Do you believe that I, who send you out, am the Son
of the living God? Then know assuredly, that my divine power and sovereignty
shall be for you, and I will so overrule all the Kings, and Potentates, and
States of the world, as may be most for my glory and your good; fear not
therefore, but go, and preach to all nations.

The same Author adds, that all power in heaven and in earth may be said to
be given unto Christ, as he is the eternal Son of God, in another respect,
namely, in respect of the Declaration thereof at his resurrection. He was
declared to be the Son of God with power, by the resurrection from the dead,
Romans 1.4.

This sense, he tells us, Gomarus, and others give in answer unto the
Vbiquitaries, as also that they clear it by Augustin's rule. Aliquid dicitur
fieri, quando incipit patefieri. And this is no more strange, then to say, That
Christ was begotten that day, when he was raised from the dead, Act. 13.33.

Unto both these interpretations I oppose these following particulars.

1. (...), as Beza urges upon the text against the Lutherans, signifies
properly not might, and ability, but right and authority; And why shall we
recede from the proper acception of the word, without some cogent reason, which
to me is yet invisible.

2. A gift, to speak properly, is free and arbitrary; Whereas the communication
of omnipotency unto the Son, by eternal generation, is natural and necessary,
and therefore cannot be said to be given, unless by a metaphor. And then as for
manifestation of this omnipitency by the resurrection, that is said to be a
donation thereof only metonymically.

Now why should we hunt for tropes, as long as the words may fairly be
interpreted in their native, and proper sense.

3. In all probability, the power that is here given unto Christ, is for it is
general nature, the same, which in the following words he Loquitur hic, non de
qualibet potestate, sed ea, quam Apostolis dabat, id est, de potestate regni
sui spiritualis acquirendi, colligendique, quam ad rem Apostolos mitt^bat.
Maldonat in locum.
communicates unto his Apostles: But this is a power of office and authority, a
power to teach, and baptize all nations; and therefore unlikely, that the
former should be a power of efficacy. And these exceptions I make against both
interpretations jointly.

Against the first I shall yet farther argue in particular; And my arguments
shall be drawn 1. from the ground. 2. From the Antecedent; and 3. from a
comparison of this donation.

1. From the ground of this donation, Gods free love and grace, Joh. 3.35.
Because God loves the Son, therefore he gives all things into his hands.
Phil. 2.9. God has given him a name, which is above every name.

The word (...) signifies has given freely, and frankly out of grace.

But now the communication of the Godhead, and it is properties, and
consequently omnipotency unto the Son, is not by grace, but by nature. For
the Father did not beget the Son freely, as freedom implies indifferency, and
is opposed unto not only coaction, but also intrinsecal and natural necessity:
Because it was not in the power of the Father to forbear the begetting of his
Son; he could not but beget him: and therefore the Fathers generation of the
Son was not, say the Suarez de Deo uno and Trino. tract. 3. de trinitate lib.
6. cap. 4. page 445, 446. Raynaudus de liberate page 52, 53.
Schoolmen, voluntary causally, but objectively: He willed it not with an
antecedent will, by way of a cause, or principle, but with a concomitant will*
He willed it not with a will of desire, but with a will of most perfect
complacency, or approbation: Whereupon he is termed the Son of his love, Col.
1.13. the Son in whom he was wel-pleased, Math. 3.17: he was well pleased with,
and delighted in the communication of the Godhead unto him.

2. From the Antecedent of this donation, etc. which is Christ's humiliation,
and obedience unto the death of the Cross, together with his resurrection, as
appears by Phil. 2.7,8,9,10. and Ephesians. 1.20,21,22: which are places
generally looked upon by Interpreters, as of the same importance with this in
Matthew.

But now the communication of omnipotency unto the Son, by eternal generation,
can have no such antecedent.

3. From a comparison of this donation of all power unto Christ, with the
sending of him by the Father: for the Syriack Interpreter, as Beza informs
me, quotes Joh. 20.21: as a place parallel unto this. As my Father has sent me,
so send I you. He thought, it seems, that this giving of all-power in heaven
and in earth unto Christ was the same, with the Father's sending of him; And
his Fathers sending of him was not his generation of him, for it is connexed
with, and compared unto his own sending of his Apostles, which was a proper
sending by way of command, or commission.

Besides, the generation of the Son cannot be the mission of him, because the
mission of a divine person, say the Suarez de Deo uno and Trino, tract. 3. de
Trinitate lib. 12. Becanus Summae Theol. Scholast. partis primae Tom. 1. p.
514. 515. Franciscus Amicus Cursus. Theol. Tom. 1. disp. 27. Sect. 2.
Schoolmen, is always in time: for however it includes materially, and by way
of presupposal, the proceeding of one person from another; yet formaliter, and
completive, it signifies some temporal operation, manifesting the eternal
procession. God sent forth his Son in the fullness of time, Gal, 4.4.

In a second place the Lutheraus hold that omnipotency is given unto Christ, as
man, by dispensation of the personal union.

Now we grant a communication of omnipotency, and other divine properties unto
the manhood, expressed concretively. For we may truly, and safely say, the man
Christ is omnipotent. But this communication of omnipotency, is an immediate
consequent of the personal union, and therefore not the donation of all-power
in heaven and earth, here spoken of: for this, as I shall show hereafter, is a
consequent of his humiliation, and a branch of his exaltation, his sitting at
the right hand of God, Luke 24.26. Hebr. 1.3.

Besides, the Lutherans will not be satisfied, unless we yield unto them a
communication of the omnipotency unto the manhood, expressed abstractively.
Unless we say, the manhood it self is omnipotent:

And against such a communication our Divines usually oppose these following
arguments.

1. Omnipotency, is a reciprocal property of the Deity, and therefore
incommunicable unto the humanity.

For any one to aver that such a property may be communicated, is to say,
that may be communicated, which is incommunicable, then which what
contradiction can be more gross?

Yea but says Eckard, the divine properties are communicated to the humanity,
not transitively, but intransitively, and if my memory fail me not, Martinus
in lectures of his against Keckermans Legick, distinguishes of an inhesive,
and possessive communication. The divine properties are communicated, (says
he) not inhaesive, but possessive. I confess it was a long time since that I
read the book, when I was a Boy. But I suppose, I am not mistaken. But sure I
am that the Gerard depersona and officio Christi cap. 12.
generality of them has the same thing for substance.

The Divine properties (say they) are communicated unto the manhood, not by any
physical, and real transfusion, or subjective inhesion; but by a real donation,
by which the Divine properties do so become the attributes of the humanity,
that it may freely use them.

As for example, the divine omnipotency does so become the omnipotency of the
humane nature, as that it denominates the humane nature to be omnipotent; and
the humane nature may work omnipotently with it, no less then the divine nature
does it self. But all this is but gibberish, and unintelligible nonsense, and
I cannot find any tolerable explication of it, though I have diligently
searched for it in their books. And for reply unto it, I shall only say, that
omnipotency is not an extrinsecal denomination, but an intrinsecal attribution,
and therefore cannot denominate the manhood, without it were formally, and
actually in it; Even as it is impossible for the wall to be white by a
whiteness that is not seated in it. Add hereunto out of M. Bayne upon the
Ephesians page 189. That this opinion touching the communication of divine
properties by way of real donation, makes the divine properties become
instrumentary faculties, as it were, to a finite nature.

Again, omnipotency is really the same with the essence of the Godhead, and
with all it is other attributes, particularly with it is simplicity, eternity,
and infiniteness.

Now of things which are really the same, one cannot be communicated, without
the other be imparted also. For otherwise, as my learned friend M. Barlow
argues against Gerard, in his Exercit. Metaph. 6: it might come to pass, that
a thing might be communicated, when it is not communicated it self. If so be
then omnipotency be so communicated unto the manhood of Christ, as to
denominate it in abstracto omnipotent; Why then the very essence of the God*
head may be communicated also thereunto to denominate it God; and all the other
attributes, particularly, eternity, simplicity, infiniteness may be
communicated unto it in like manner; so that we may say of the manhood
abstractively, it is simple, eternal, infinite.

But now the most rigid Lutherans will deny, that the humanity of Christ is
God, that it is of a simple, and uncompounded being, from everlasting, and
infinite: and yet they may by equal anology of reason say this, as well as they
do that it is omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient. D. Field in his fifth book
of the Church, c. 15. minceth this horrid tenet of the Lutherans, and speaks
very favorably of it. I am persuaded, (says he) that howsoever some of them
have used harsh, doubtful, dangerous, and unbefitting forms of speech, yet
they differ not in meaning and judgment from the Orthodoxe and right believers.

That which led this great Scholar into this mistaken charity was his
mis-interpretation of that usual saying of Divines, that the subsistence of the
Son of God is really communicated unto the nature of man, in Christ.

But this communication of the subsistence of the second person unto the
humanity is not (as Baron: philosophia. Theol. Ancil. Artic. 12: and after him
M. Barlow in the forementioned place, very excellently show) by way of real
inhesion, or denomination, but only by way of sustentation: And this is no
advantage unto the Lutherans communication of divine properties.

Look as when a subject does communicate it self unto it is Accidents by way of
support, it does not hereupon follow, that it inhereth in them, or does
denominate them. So though the person of the Son do assume, receive, and
sustain the humanity of Christ, yet it does not hereupon follow, that the
subsistence of the Son is formally in the ^hood, or that the manhood is a
person, as is proved at large by those two mentioned Authors.

2. Others in the next place understand the words, concerning a physical power
of the manhood; But these I shall confute, when I come to examine what fullness
of power dwells in the manhood of Christ.

By what has been said, you see the place is to be understood concerning a
moral power, a power of Authority.

Now there agrees unto Christ a twofold power of Authority, essential, and
official.

1. Essential or natural, which belongs unto him as God, Psalm. 93.1,2: and
95.3. and 22.28. and 59.13. and 103.19. Isai. 6.5. Dan. 4.34,35.

Now this is common unto the Father, and Holy Ghost together with him; and is
potestas innata, not data, therefore not here meant.

2. Official, dispensative, or donative, delegated unto him, as Mediator, and
head of his Church, and therefore termed a mediatory power, and this is the
power spoken of in this place.

But now say our Divines against the Papists, Christ is Mediator according
unto both natures, not only as man, but as God, and man.

The divine authority then of Christ is mediatory, not as it is common unto
every person in the Trinity, but as it is appropriate unto him, the second
person. Thus speaks the learned and pious Bayne on the Ephesians, page 187.
This person as God receiving by voluntary dispensation this honor from the
Father, that he should in an immediate, and appropriate manner, execute
government over all the creatures in heaven and earth: And again page 183. So
that though the Father and Spirit have a right and sovereignty over the
creature, yet they do not immediately execute this, in such sort, as the Son
does; which makes Christ say, Joh. 5.22. The Father judges none, but has
given all judgment unto the Son.

But now it may be objected, that as every person executes government over all
creatures both in heaven, and earth, because it is an outward work of the
Trinity, and therefore common unto every person; so also they do it in an
immediate manner, immediatione tum suppositi, tum virtutis, as all divine works
are done; and therefore Christ's execution of the sovereign dominion of God
over every creature immediately, makes nothing unto the appropriation of this
sovereign dominion unto his person.

A solution of this doubt you may gather from what D. Field page 43. answers
unto a like objection, against his being a mediator according unto both
natures concurring in the work of mediation; His words I shall insert at large.

If it be alleged, that opera Trinitatis ad extra are indivisa, that is, that
there is nothing that one of the persons of the blessed Trinity does toward
the creatures, but they all do it, and consequently, that those things which
Christ did in his divine nature, pertained not to the office of a Mediator,
being common to all the persons.

We answer, that as the persons of the blessed Trinity, though they be one and
the same God, yet differ (...), in subsistence, and the manner of having, and
possessing the Deity, and divine nature; so though their action be the same,
and the work done by them, yet they differ (...), in the manner of doing it:
for the Father does all things authoritative, and the Son subauthoritative, as
the Schoolmen speak; that is, the Father, as he from whom, and of whom all
things are; the Son, as he by whom all things are, not as if he were an
instrument, but as principium a principio, that is, a cause and beginning of
things, that has received the essence it has, and power of working from
another, though the very same that is in the other. And in this sort to
quicken, give life, and to impart the spirit of sanctification to whom he
pleases, especially with a kind of concurring of the humane nature, meriting,
desiring, and instrumentally assisting, is proper to the Son of God manifested
in our flesh, and not common to the whole Trinity; and therefore,
notwithstanding the objection taken from the unity of the works of the divine
persons, may be a work of mediation.

In these words he lays down two grounds of the appropriation of works of
divine power and authority to Christ, as a Mediator.

The first is the order and manner of his, both subsisting, and working; but
this, if I mistake not, is impertinent, and unsatisfactory unto the Objection.
For it would have agreed unto him as the Son of God, if he had never been
Mediator.

But the second ground, the instrumental concurrence of the humane nature,
comes home, and fully satisfies the doubt.

For though all the persons have an immediate influence upon all works of
divine power, and Authority; yet the Son only produces such of them at
least, as relate unto his Church by the instrumental association, and
concurrence of his manhood, personally united with him.

To perform them simply as God, is common to the whole Trinity: To perform
them as God man, is appropriate to Christ as Mediator. As ascribed unto him,
they are, say Divines; Theandrical, that is, divinely humane. And this
occasioneth me to interpret that place alleged by M. Bayne, John: 5.22. The
Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son.

Here the Father judges no man in the same sense, that it is committed unto
the Son; now it is committed unto the Son, as he is Mediator, God incarnate,
God manifested in the flesh, subsisting in the form of a servant, that is, the
nature of a man; and thus the Father judges no man. Thus Judicare describitur
aliter pa^ris quam filii. Describitur enim pater non judicare, ea ratione, quia
non exerce^ personam sensibilis judicis: quia pater non est homo, non est judex
sensibilis: deill^ enim judicio est sermo, quo mundus est judica^dus.
Cajetan expounds the words. The Son alone shall exercise the part of a
Judge, which may be perceived by the senses of the body: He alone shall set
upon an external Tribunal, and pronounce an audible sentence.

But this appropriation of Divine authority unto Christ, is not this donation
of all power unto him in heaven and earth.

For that (as you may see in D. Field page 434.) is an immediate consequent of
the personal union: Whereas this is a sequel of Christ's passion, and
resurrection. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into
his glory, Luke 24.26. When he had by himself purged our sins, he sat down on
the right hand of the majesty on high, Heb. 1.3.

2. Christ's judiciary power is one branch of that universal power given unto
him in heaven, and earth. Now, says Christ, the Father has given the Son
authority to execute judgment, because he is the son of man, John. 5.27. or
rather as Beza renders it, as the Son of man; so that (...) is as much, thinks
he, as (...) or (...).

In the foregoing verse, as you may see in Cajetan, Christ shows, how that
the Father has given unto the Son, as he is the Son of God, to have life
in himself, without dependence on any other; not by any gratuitous gift, but
by natural generation: and here in this verse he declares, how he has given
him Authority to execute judgment, as he is the Son of man, by a gratuitous
gift.

3. The giving of all Authority to Christ in heaven, and in earth, is by the
general consent of Divines, included in the placing of him at the right hand of
God.

Now however Damascene stretches the expression of his sitting at the right
hand of God, to signify his equality with the Father, from all eternity, in
point of divine majesty, yet as Bishop Davenant on the Colossians, page 263.
observes, it is spoken of Christ properly, and chiefly, according unto his
humane nature. He is styled by the Psalmist, the man of God's right hand, Psalm.
80.17. To denote (think some) that as man he sits at the right hand of God.

This may be farther proved, not only from the Creed, commonly called the
Apostles Creed, but also from Ephesians. 1.20. For from hence I thus argue, Christ
was set at the right hand of God, in regard of the same nature, wherein he was
raised from the dead: But it was his humane nature that was raised from the
dead; and therefore it was in respect of that, that he was placed at the right
hand of God; and consequently, unto that all power was given in heaven and
earth. That shall be the observation which hence I shall pursue.

Observe.
All mediatory power was dispensed unto Christ's humanity after it is
resurrection.

This I shall explain, confirm, and apply.

1. For Explication: Christ's power of Authority as Mediator, is twofold. 1.
Special, over his Church. 2. General, not only in the Church, but out of the
Church, over all creatures in heaven and in earth.

1. Then, Christ as Mediator has a special and direct power, over his Church.
And that this power is comprised in the text, though not only, is agreed unto
on all hands. Concerning it, we have in the Text these particulars remarkable.

1. The kind. 2. The cause, or original. 3. The fullness, or extent of it.

1. For the kind of it, it is a spiritual power over the souls and consciences
of men, Joh. 18.36. Romans 14.17.

2. For the Original of it, it is given, and that in a twofold sense.

1. It is data, or dispensatoria, in opposition to ingenita, or nativa; it is
not a natural, but donative, dispensatory, or delegated power.

2. It is data, in opposition to rapta; it is given, not usurpt, therefore a
just and lawful power.

3. Next, we have the fullness or extent of it, and that 1. intrinsecal. 2.
Extrinsecal.

1. Intrinsecal, He has all sorts, and kinds of spiritual power, the
Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly power.

2. Extrinsecal. His power as Mediator, extends unto all places. All power
is given unto him in heaven and in earth: In heaven the Church Triumphant; in
earth the Church Militant.

Here he has power to distribute grace, there he has power to confer glory.

Unto these particulars expressed in the text, I shall add the limitation, or
restriction of this power, in regard of time; and that 1. in regard of it is
first collation. 2. in respect of it is whole duration.

1. In regard of it is first collation. Our Savior (says Maldonat) so speaks,
as if he had not this power before the resurrection: For he speaks as of a new
matter. Now all power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: and therefore
now I give you your full commission; Go ye therefore, and teach all nations,
baptizing them, etc. And for this he quotes Athanasius.

But now this is to be understood, not so much concerning his commission, or
Authority in it self, as of the plenary execution thereof.

Thus Lyra. Although Christ, (says he) as man, from the very first moment of
his conception had power in heaven and earth authoritative; yet he had it not
executive, before his resurrection.

The Baptism of Christ was (as you may see in Theol. med. lib. 1. cap. 21.
Sect. 32, 33, 34, 35.
Ames) his public inauguration to the public performance of his office.

Therefore in it, as he there shows at large, the three offices of Christ are
affirmed, and confirmed.

But yet notwithstanding all this, there was an enlargement of all his offices,
after his resurrection, in point of execution.

Thus first, there was an enlargement of his Prophetical office. The first
commission that he opened unto his Apostles, was only to go to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel, and to refrain the way of the Gentiles, and the Cities
of the Samaritans, Math. 10.5,6.

But now he enlarges their commission, and commands them to disciple, baptize,
and teach all nations. Besides, by his inspired instruments, he has completed
the rule of our faith, and manners, not only in respect of essentials, for so
it was before, but also in regard of all it is integral parts.

2. There was an enlargement of his Priestly office; for now he interced's not
so much in an oral, as in a real way, not in the humble posture of a supplyant,
as it were with bended knees, with strong cryings, and tears, as in the days
of his humiliation, Heb. 5.7. But in an Authoritative way, gloriously
representing unto his Father those things, which he has done and suffered for
his Elect. When we say, that Christ now interced's in a way of Authority, our
meaning is not, that he has authority to command the Father: For, to affirm
that, were blasphemy; but that he has a right unto whatsoever he interced's
for, as having amply merited it at the hands of his Father, so that his
intercession is virtute pretii, in virtue of the price that he has paid, and
purchase that he has made, in the behalf of all the Elect.

3. There was after his resurrection an enlargement of his Kingly office, in
poin^f execution.

1. The institution of all ordinances, and all offices in his Church, or
Kingdom, whether extraordinary, or ordinary, was fully completed, Ephesians.
4.11,12,13. During his forty days converse with his Apostles after his
resurrection, he spoke with them of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of
God, Acts. 1.3. And then doubtless gave them full directions for his worship,
as also for the present, and future government of his Church; and shortly
afterward he powered on them miraculous gifts, and graces of his spirit, to
qualify them for the propagation of his Gospel or Kingdom.

2. The borders of his Kingdom were enlarged; for before they were confined
unto Judah, and Israel, Psalm. 76.1,2: and such few Proselites as joined
themselves unto the communion of that Church; but now he has the heathen for
his inheritance, the utmost parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8:
the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and his
Christ, Revel. 11.15.

2. We have a limitation or restriction of this power, in regard of the time of
it is whole duration. 1 Cor. 15.24. When the end comes, then he shall deliver
up the Kingdom to God, even the Father: that is, he shall surrender up to his
Father his mediatory power, and Kingdom, which he now administreth, and which
he received for the gathering, protection, and salvation of his Church, and
subduing of all his, and our enemies. And this is all that I shall say at
present, touching Christ's special power, or Authority, that he has in his
Church. Diverse are of the opinion, as you may see in M. Gillespies Aarons rod
blossoming, page 214, 215, that this only is the all-power meant in the text:
But I rather incline unto those, that understand it in such an extent, as that
it takes in his general Authority, sovereignty, or dominion, that he has as
man, over the whole Universe: For 1. this exposition contains a truth in it
self, as I shall make good in the proof of the point.

2. It is the more comprehensive sense, and includes the former.

And 3. It makes most to the advancement of Christ's glory, and honor*

And 4. The same thing is asserted in places, that are by the consent of most,
that treat of this subject, parallel unto this: as Ephesians. 1.20,21,22. Phil.
2.9,10, (...) Especially considering, that there is nothing of moment in the
context against this interpretation.

There be several objections I confess, against this universal dominion of
Christ, as man; but they will vanish, when once I shall have explained it by
it is end, by a distribution of it, by the extent, and lastly by the manner of
it is influence.

To begin then 1. with the end of this universal authority: We have it briefly
expressed in D. Ames Med. lib. 1. cap. 19. n. 22. Christ's Kingdom is
universal, in respect of all creatures, as they do in any sort pertain to the
furthering, or beautifying of men's salvation. And it may be made good out of
Joh. 17.2. thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many, as thou have given him. That distinction betwixt a
direct and indirect power, which is mis-applied by Papists unto the Pope, may
rightly be applied unto Christ.

His power directly is only over spirituals in his Church; but he has
authority over temporals out of his Church, over all creatures, in heaven and
earth, indirectly, and, in ordine ad spiritualia, in subserviency unto his ends
about his Church.

To proceed 2. unto a distribution of this power. There is one branch of it
absolutely general, which regards all creatures whatsoever, and that is
Authority of disposal, use, or application. Christ, as Mediator, can do unto,
and dispose of all creatur^ as pleases him.

There is 2. Another, that is General only respectively, in such a kind, over
all rational creatures, and that is a judiciary power. The Father has
committed all judgment unto the Son, Joh. 5.22. Act. 17.31. and here give me
leave to transcribe an excellent passage out of Ames Med. lib. 1. C. 41. Number.
20.21. Judicium ul^ number exercetur a Christo, tanquam a Rege: potestas enim
Judicandi est pars muneris regin Respectu fidelium provenit a gratia, and est
func^io regni gratiae, Christo Medi tori esse^tialis, sed resp^ct^ in^delium
est potestatis tantum ac dominii a patre concesli, spectans quidem ad
media^ionis aliquam perfectionem, sed non essentialem, Ames lib. 1. cap. 41.
Number. 20.21.
The last judgment is exercised by Christ, as by a King: for the power of
judging is part of the office of a King. In respect of the faithful it comes
from grace, and is an office of the kingdom of grace, essential to Christ, the
Mediator: but in respect of Unbelievers, it is an office of power only and
dominion, granted of the Father, belonging to some perfection of mediation; but
not essential to it.

3. A third thing remarkable touching this his universal authority, as
Mediator, is the extent of it is influence. It is not over all motions, and
actions of all creatures whatsoever at all times, but only in casu, when he in
his wisdom judges any of them serviceable, and contributary unto his Church
designs. And his Godhead doubtless reveals unto his manhood in it is
glorified condition all the exigences of his Church, and how, and wherein any
of the creatures may be subservient to the true good thereof, and the
manifestation of his own, and his Father's glory. I do not think, that every
clap of thunder, every flash of lightning, every shower of rain is a fruit of
Christ's mediatory authority. Yet I am verily persuaded, that the thunder and
lightning, that dashed the Germans, and Sarmatians, and that abundant rain, that
refresh't the army of Marcus Aurelius, which was ready to perish for thirst,
upon the prayers of the Christian Legion in the army, that was afterward for
this surnamed the thundering Legion, proceeded from Christ, as he was a
Mediator, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 4 cap. 5. In the time of the massacre at
Paris, there was a poor man, who for his deliverance, crept into a hole, and
when he was there, there comes a spider, and weaves a cobweb before the hole;
when the murderers came to search for him, says one, certainly he is got into
that hole: no, says another, he cannot be there, for there is a cobweb over
the place, and by this means the poor man was preserved. Spiders webs have
seldom relation unto the designs of Christ, as Mediator; Yet, I believe in
charity, that this poor man did ascribe this spiders web, which was
extraordinarily instrumental in his preservation, unto the gracious, powerful,
and authoritative mediation of his Savior Christ Jesus. When the Protestants
attempted to relieve Leyden besiedged by the Spaniards, behold a great South
west wind (which they might truly say came from the grace of God (for it was
upon the extremity of their affairs) with so great a Springtide as in eight
and forty hours the water was risen about half a foot, by which the
Protestants were enabled to come unto the relief of the town. The town was no
sooner delivered, but the wind, which was south-west, and had driven the waters
out of the sea into the country, turned to the northeast, and did drive it back
again into the sea, as if the South-west wind had not blown those three days
but to that effect. Wherefore they might well say, that both the wind, and the
seas had fought for the town of Leyden. See the general History of the
Netherlands, etc.


Now, I suppose that every spirit amongst them, that was truly Christian, did
look upon this motion of the sea, and wind, and their deliverance thereby, not
only as an effect of common providence, but as a mercy coming out of the hands
of a Loving Mediator, whom God for the good of his Chosen has made his
Lieutenant, and Vice^roy over all nature, unto whose commands, the most
boisterous winds, and the most tempestuous seas are obedient.

The last thing I propounded for explication of this universal dominion, or
sovereignty of Christ, as man, is the manner of it is influence, which I shall
only mention. It is not physical, for it is impossible for Christ's manhood
being in heaven to have a physical influence upon every occurrence in the
earth, relating unto his Church and glory, Joh. 18.36. But only moral, by way
of intercession, Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. If
Christ, as man, but ask of the Father, all creatures shall be subject to him,
and he shall do to them, and fulfill upon them, all the good pleasure of his
will, Math. 26.53.

Here comes in that Question, whether or no the power of the temporal
Magistrate, as such be so derived from Christ, not only as God, but as
Mediator, so that he is his Deputy, and Vicegerent. The neg^tive may be made
good by these following arguments.

1. The power of Christ's Deputies, as Mediator, is only ministerial, the
power of servants or Hera^lds, (not counted Luke 22.25,26. Math. 20.25,26,27:
as Protestants prove against Papists in the controversy touching the supremacy
of the Pope. But now the power of magistrates may be imperial, and monarchical,
and therefore it is not derived from Christ, as he is Mediator, unto his
Deputies.

2. All the Deputies and Vicegerents of Christ, as Mediator, are obliged to
promote the Kingdom and Gospel of Christ. But now heathenish magistrates, that
never heard, nor could hear of the name of Christ, are not bound to promote
Christ's mediatory kingdom, and gospel: for they are invincibly ignorant
thereof, and there can be no obligation without revelation, Joh. 15.22. Romans
2.12. Therefore they are not the Deputies, and Vicegerents of Christ, as
Mediator; and therefore no magistrates as such: for, a quatenus ad de omni
valet consequentia.

3. All the Deputies, and Vicegerents of Christ, as Mediator have their
commission from the Gospel: but now temporal magistrates have their commission
at least from the secondary Law of nature, the Law of nations. But now the Law
of nature, and nations dictates nothing of a Mediator, or any thing relating
unto him, as such.

I should send the Reader unto M. Gillespie in his Aarons rod blossoming, lib.
2. c. 6, 7: to see farther of this subject, but because Mr. Baxter thinks Mr.
Rutherford a more able disputant, then Gillespie, I shall refer unto him, in
his Lex, and Rex, etc. quest. 42. from p. 422. to p. 433. As also his divine
right of Church government, a p. 600: usque ad p. 642. Where he prosecutes
these, and other arguments at large, which if the judicious and impartial
Reader will seriously examine, I am persuaded, he will not much weigh what Mr.
Baxter has unto the contrary against M. Tombs. p. 227. usque ad 234. page 276.
277, 278. I confess Mr. Baxter quotes a short passage for the opposite opinion
out of Mr. Rutherford, His due right of Presbyteries, and withal tells us, that
it was Mr. Rutherford's judgment upon second thoughts, which usually are the
wisest. Whether they were his second thoughts I cannot determine, but sure I
am, if the titles of the books do not deceive me, that the Divine right of
Church Government, which I use for the negative, was printed 1646. And the due
right of divine Presbyteries, which he quotes for the affirmative, bears date
1644. Besides, in his due right of Presbyteries, he speaks of the matter only
incidenter, upon the by, and very briefly, in a very few lines, and not so
clearly, and fully home unto the affirmative, as Mr. Baxter pretends. Whereas
in his divine right of Church government, he handles the question ex professo,
and resolves for the negative, and spends forty pages in the proof and
clearing of it.

There is but one thing more, and I have done with the explication of the
point. How can this general authority, sovereignty, and dominion, be said to
accrue unto him upon his resurretion, seeing the government was upon his
shoulders when he was a child, I sai. 9.6. He was from his conception anointed
with the Holy Ghost, and power, Acts. 10.38. He was borne, and conceived heir
of all things, Heb. 1.2.

For answer, we must distinguish between his title unto, and his plenary and
glorious possession, and exercise of this Authority.

He had a title unto it from the very first moment of his incarnation: But the
plenary and glorious possession and exercise of it, was deferred until his
exaltation. Indeed the greatest and fullest act of it will be at the day of
judgment, when he shall put down all rule, and all authority, and power, when
he shall put all enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.24,25.

1. He took not a full, glorious, and visible possession of it, until his
exaltation. His aseension day was his coronation day; and the Father's setting
of him at his right hand, was the placing of him on his throne.

2. There were some initial actings of this universal sovereignty in miracles,
which he wrought in his state of humiliation. But in his exaltation the
exercise of it may be said tobe enlarged in reference both unto his Church, and
unto himself.

1. In reference unto his Church. In his humiliation, he exercised it only in
reference unto the Jewish Church, and such Proselytes as adjoined themselves
thereunto. But now he exercises it in order unto his Catholic Church
dispersed successively through all the world.

2. In reference unto himself. In his humiliation he was so far from
actually fully reigning over all creatures, as that he voluntarily subjected
himself unto the annoyance, and violence of many of them: But now in his
exaltation is become impassible, and so beyond the reach and assaults of the
whole creation. No creature in heaven, earth, or hell, can hurt, or annoy him.

To proceed next unto the confirmation of the point; and here I shall prove 1.
That Christ had this fullness of authority, all power in heaven and earth given
unto him. 2. That it was a consequent of his resurrection.

1. That he had this fullness of Authority, All power in heaven and earth given
unto him, and that 1. Specially, in the Church. 2. Generally not only in, but
also out of the Church, over the whole Universe.

The first sort of proofs shall be to prove, that Christ has a fullness of
Authority over his Church, and they shall run 1. in a general way. 2. more
particularly, concerning each of his offices apart.

1. To begin with those proofs, which speak of the fullness of Christ's office
and authority in a general way. He is called, Heb. 3.1. The Apostle, and
High Priest of our profession: to show that he has enclosed in his office the
eminency, the perfection, and dignity of the highest callings, the chief
offices, both in the old and new Testament, both in the Jewish and Christian
Church: for the High-priest-hood was the highest office in the old Testament
and Jewish Church, and the Apost leship was the highest office in the new
Testament, or Christian Church.

Christ also in regard of this his fullness of office is compared unto the chief
corner stone in a building, Psalm. 118.22. Math. 21.42. Acts. 4.11. Ephesians. 2.20.
unto a foundation, Isai. 28.16 Which place is by St. Peter applied unto Christ,
1 Pet. 2.6. Every corner stone in a building contributes more unto the support
thereof, then other ordinary stones. Whereupon the rulers, and chief of a
people, are styled in scripture their corners, 1. Sam. 14.38. Isai. 19.13.
Zech. 10.4. But now Christ is the head of the corner, or the chief corner
stone; that is, the ground stone, the foundation, in whom all the building
fitly framed together g^oweth unto an holy Temple in the Lord. As the ground
stone in the corner, because it bears up the joints, and couplings of the
whole edifice, is therefore the chief stay thereof. So Christ upholds the chief
weight of his Church, because he is a prop unto the salvation of every soul
therein, as a Prophet by his word, as a Priest by the satisfaction and merit of
his sacrifice, and by his constant, and uninterrupted presentation thereof unto
his Father in his intercession, and as a King by his power and spirit.

But now the chief corner stone, though it be a foundation stone, yet it is but
a part, though a principal part of the foundation.

But now Christ is not only a principal, but the total, sole, and entire
foundation of his Church; that is, of her salvation, 1 Cor. 3.11: for other
foundations can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, Acts.
4.12.

Yea but the Prophets and Apostles are at least a secondary and ministerial
foundation. Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20.

But 1. Some here by foundation understand Christ himself, who is said to be
the foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, objectively, the fundamental
object of their doctrine, the foundation, which they laid in their ministry
both by preaching and writing.

But suppose 2. that these words, the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles
be, as Estius says, expounded intransitively, and thus paraphrased: which is
the Prophets, and Apostles. Why then the Prophets and Apostles are taken not in
regard of their persons, or successors, but metonymically in regard of their
doctrine, which they left behind them in scripture: for they declared it with
such infallible certainty, as that it is unto the Church a doctrinal
foundation, and serves as an instrument to lay every Believer on the personal
foundation Christ Jesus.

But 2. I shall prove the sulness of each of his offices, his Prophetical, his
Priestly, his Kingly office.

1. There was in him a fullness of the Prophetical office, Mal. 3.1. He is the
Angel, or messenger of the Covenant; to wit, of grace, and reconciliation: the
chief Ambassador from the Father, for the revelation, offer, and confirmation
thereof unto the Church.

He is the Apostle of our profession; the Gospel, Christian doctrine, faith, or
Religion, which we profess: and he is so termed (...), because he is the
supreme of all the Ambassadors, whom his Father has sent for the
promulgation thereof. Thus also is he termed by way of eminency the faithful
and true witness, Revel. 3.14: Because he alone has fully and effectually
revealed the truth and will of God by himself and his ministers. He is the
word of the Father, because he alone has fully disclosed his mind.

Math. 23.8,10. One is your master, even Christ, he only teaches with
authority and efficacy, and therefore he alone has the mastership amongst all
the teachers of the Church, between whom there is a brotherhood, and equality.
One is your-master, Christ, and all ye are Brethren. No Teacher is an under
master unto other Teachers.

One part of Christ's pastoral office, is his Prophetical office, to feed his
sheep with the sound and saving doctrine of his word, to make them to lie down
in green pastures, to lead them beside the still waters, Psalm. 23.2.

And the pastoral office agrees unto him in all fullness. 'He is the one
shepherd, Eccles. 12.11. The chief shepherd, 1 Pet. 5.4: The great shepherd of
the sheep, Hebr. 13.20.

2. There was in Christ a fullness of the Priestly office, such an unspeakable
superexcellency of Priesthood, as is incommunicable unto any other of the
Sons of men. And therefore the Apostle Paul styles him emphatically a great
high Priest, Heb. 4.14: an High Priest of good things to come, chap. 9. verse.
11: an High Priest over the house of God, chap. 10. verse. 21: the High Priest
of our profession, chap. 3. verse. 1: a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech, Heb, 7.17: he has (...), Heb. 7.24: an intransmissible
Priesthood, which passes not from one unto another, as it is varied in the
margent; which cannot pass from his own person unto any Successors, or Vicars,
and Substitutes.

3. And lastly, there was in him a fullness of the Kingly office. The
government, to wit, of the Church, shall be upon his shoulder, Isai. 9.6: and
that this Government is supreme, and regal, is plain by verse. 7: where it is
described to be upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom. He is the Lord
of the vineyard, Math. 21.40. He is in his house not as a Servant, but as a
Son: that is, as Lord, and master, Hebr. 3.5,6. He is the King of Saints,
Revel. 15.3. He is Michael, the great Prince, which stands for the Children
of his people, Dan. 12.1. and 7.14. Christ is the Lord of all, Acts. 10.36:
that is, as appears by the foregoing verse, of all, that in every nation fear
God, and work righteousness. He is the Lord, as of all persons, so of all
ordinances in his Church. The Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath day,
Math. 12.8. All things are dilivered unto me of my Father, Math. 11.27: that
is, as Beza restraines the place, all things appertaining unto the salvation of
the Elect: And indeed this his restriction is warrantable by the particular
instance, which he brings for examplification of this general. Neither knows
any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal
him. The Son only has delegated unto him from the Father authority to call
and enlighten the Elect, and reveal the Father unto them.

This fulness of Christ's Kingly office, is set forth in Scripture, by his
Head-ship over his Church: for as head he has such a full influence upon his
Church internal, and external, as that he needs no viceroy, no
ministerial, or visible head on earth. And that to be head of the Church, is a
dignity proper unto Christ, and incommunicable unto any other, the incomparable
Cartwright proves, as by others, so especially by these two following
arguments, in his confutation of the Rhemist annotations on the New Testament.
page 487.

1. By the same reason, that you may give this title of head unto a mere Man,
you may also give him the name of the first begotten of all creatures, and the
first begotten of the dead: considering, that the Apostle fastneth this unto
the Crown of our Savior Christ, as well as he does the other. Col. 1.15,18.

2. This is further strengthened, by the demonstrative Article, whereby the
Scripture is accustomed so to appropriate a thing unto one, that it shuts
forth all other from communication therewith: for when he says, that he is the
head, it is as much, as if he would say, he and none other, Col. 1.18.

This fulness of Christ's Kingly office is further signified, by his power of
the keys. (...).
The keys of an house, town or city, are a badge of power, and Authority; And
therefore in the yielding of places, the keys are rendered unto the
conqueror. In Garrisons the keys are every night deposited with the
Governor. The Steward of an house has the keys of it committed unto him.

Thus it is said of Eliakim, the Steward of Hezekiahs palace: Isai.
22.20,21,22. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my
servant Eliakim, etc. And I will commit thy government into his hand, etc. And
the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder: so he shall open,
and none shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open. 2 Kings 18.18. That
herein he was a type, and figure of Christ, the principal steward of Gods
house, is evident by the holy Ghosts application of the words of the place unto
Christ. Revel. 3.7. He has the key of David, he opens, and no man shuts;
and shuts, and no man opens: that is, says Diodati, he is the sovereign
Lord, and governor of his Church, whose power is sovereign and absolute, not
subject unto any contradiction, diction, opposition or hinderance. Indeed
Christ gives unto Peter, in the behalf of all the ministers of the Gospel,
the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, Math. 16.19. But that (as Durand. l. 4.
did. 18 q. 1. notes) is only a key of ministry. The key of excellency (says
he) is Christ's prerogative: as the key of Authority belongs principally unto
God.

Lastly, the fullness of Christ's Kingly office may be proved from the fullness
of his pastoral office: for the duty of a shepherd is, as to feed, so to
govern, and protect his flock; and hereupon Kings are termed shepherds of
their people. Now what proofs we have for the fullness, and perfection of
Christ's pastoral office, you may read above, touching his Prophetical office.

I come unto a second sort of proofs, that confirm Christ's Fullness of
Authority as Mediator, as man, not only in, but also out of his Church, his
Universal sovereignty, and dominion over all Creatures in Heaven and Earth,
Heb. 1.2. He has appointed the son heir of all things.

Estius observes, that there is a Catechresis in the word heir, very usual
in Scripture, Psalm. 89.27. Gal. 4.1. For properly an heir succeeds a dead
father. But the Apostle terms him an heir, because his father has made him
as an heir, Lord of all things: He is the heir, the Lord, not only of all
things in the Church; but also of all things in the world. He is the heir, the
Lord of all persons, Angels and men, elect and Reprobate: He is the heir, the
Lord not only of all persons, but of all things whatsoever, and that not only
by nature, as God, but by appointment, as mediator, according unto the nature,
which he assumed. Whom he has appointed heir of all things.

John 3.35. the father loves the son, and has given all things into his
hand. Non apponitur hic conjunctio enim, quia non referuntur haec verba ad
immediate praecedentia, sed ad illa, qui de caelo venit supra omnia est. Et ut
penetres contextum adverte, quod quum dixisset illa duo (scilicet, qui de caelo
venit supra omnia est, and quod vidit and audivit hoc testatur) prosecutus est
prius secundum: subjungendo and testimonium et reliqua spectantia adtestimonium
ejus, and modo prosequitur primum: scilicet, qui de coelo venit supra omnia
est. Et assignat rationem quare Jesus, qui de coelo venit supra omnia est, ex
paterna dilectione. Pater inquit diligit silium.
Cajetan fetches the coherence of the words not from those immediately
foregoing, but from those in, v. 31. he that comes from Heaven, is above all.
Here the Baptist assigns a reason of this his supremacy, It is from his
fathers love: the father loves the son, etc. And because love is the ground,
and reason of this his supreme Authority, Formalis sermo cogit ad inteligendum
quod de filio incarnato est sermo. Nam dilectio qua pater diligit filium, ratio
est quod incarnato omnia tradita sunt, and non est ratio quod filio, prout est
ab aeterno genitus, tradita sint omnia; Quonia^ non dilectione, sed generatione
omnia tradita sunt unigenita Dei, sed eidem unigenito filia hominis, ex paterna
dilectione omnia tradita sunt.
Cajetan concludes, that it is to be understood of Christ, as he is incarnate,
the son of man: for all things are given into his hands, as he is the only
begotten son of God, not by dilection, but by eternal generation.

John 5.22. The father judges no man; but has committed all judgment unto the
son: that is, say some, he has committed unto him all kingly power, power to
govern the world, and to dispose of all things therein: for judgment by a
Synechdoche, may stand for the whole duty of a king; and consequently,
judiciary power by the like trope, may be put for all the power of a king.

John. 13.3. Jesus knowing that the father had given all things into his hands,
and that he was come from God, and went to God. Cajetan amongst those all
things comprizeth the Devil, the heart of Judas, and every machination of the
Jews against Christ: And that this sovereignty over all things agrees here
unto Christ as man, is evident from the following words, where we have two
grounds of it. 1. His incarnation, that he was come from God. 2. His
exaltation, that was at hand; and went to God.

The chiefest creatures in heaven, and the chiefest creatures in earth, are not
exempted from his dominion: for the chiefest in heaven are the Angels, and he
is the head of all principalities, and dominion, Col. 2.10. Angels are made
subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3.22. The chiefest creatures in earth are men; and his
dominion extends unto all men. Thou have given him power over all flesh, Joh.
17.2. Where by all flesh is understood all men, and so it is frequently used in
Scripture. Isai. 40.6. Genesis 6.12. The most renowned, and glorious of all the
sons of men are potentates, the Kings, and Princes of the earth, and even
they are subject unto his disposal, however they may resist his commands. He
is the Prince of the kings of the earth, Revel. 1.5. He has on his vesture,
and on his thigh, a name written, King of kings, and Lord of Lords, chapt. 19.
v. 16. and 17.14. He can prevail with his father, for the deposing,
uncrowning, and dethroning of whom he pleases, for the propagation of the
Gospel: he can depresse a Maxencius, and a Licinius, and raise a Constantine
unto the Imperial throne. But this his Authority reaches unto more powerful
Princes, then any earthly Monarch whatsoever, unto death, the king of terrors,
Job. 18.14. unto Beelzebub the prince of Devils, Math. 9.34. the prince and God
of this world, John. 14.30. and 16.11.2 Cor. 4.4. the prince of the power of
the air, Ephesians. 2.2. For he has the keys of Hell, and death, Revel. 1.18. He
has the keys of hell: he can cast the Dragon, that old serpent, the Devil,
and Satan, into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him,
that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be
fulfilled, Rev. 20.3. He has the keys of death, and one day will unlock the
graves of all men.

In a second place, we are to prove, that Christ's fullness of Authority, the
all-power that was given to him in heaven and in earth, was a consequent of his
resurrection, and this I shall make good by four places of scripture.

The first is; Ephesians. 1.20,21,22. Where we have Christ's, sovereign authority,
or dominion set forth unto us a comparatis, ab object o principalitatis or
perfectionis, and lastly, a distributione. 1. By a comparison of similitude. 2.
By the chief objects of it. 3. By a distribution of it.

1. A comparatis, by a comparison of similitude. It is as it were a placing of
him at Gods own right hand in the heavenly places, v. 20. At the right hand of
majesty on high, Heb. 1.3. at the right hand of the throne of God, Heb. 12.2.
For what is this his sitting at the right hand of God, but the highest degree
of his exaltation, whereby he enjoys the highest glory of his mediation, and
that is properly, and formally a kingly glory; which does also redound unto
other of his offices, so that he exercises a kingly priesthood, and a kingly
prophecy, as you may see in Ames. Med. lib. 1. cap. 23. Number. 32, 33, 34. The
phrase is metaphorical, in allusion to the custom of great potentates, who
placed at the right hand of their thrones, their most inward and powerful
favorites; or their heirs, and successors; or such great persons as were next
in dignity, and office unto them. Solomon to honor his mother seated her on
his right hand, 1 Kings 2.19. Upon the kings right hand did stand the Queen in
gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45.9. When the mother of Zebedees Children desired that
her sons might sit the one on the right hand, and the other on the left hand
of Christ, in his kingdom, what did she crave, but the two chief dignities in
his kingdom, Math. 20.21. Eccle: 12.12, 1 Esdr. 4.29. By Christ's sitting then
at the right hand of God, is understood, as the unspeakable glory, and dignity,
so also the imperial and sovereign Authority, or dominion, which Christ has
as man, next under God, over the whole creation; And unto this interpretation
of the phrase we are guided by the scripture it self: The Apostle in his
quot^tion of that of David, Psalm. 110. v. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit
thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies my footstool; thus varieth
the words. 1 Cor. 15.25. he must reign, till he has put all enemies under his
feet. From which variation we may observe, that with Paul, for Christ to sit at
the right hand of God, and toraigne, are all one: Thus Peter also having in his
sermon Act. 2. v. 34, 35. cited the very same place of of the Psalmist, in v.
36. he expounds it by Gods making Jesus Lord, and Christ. The same exposition
also he gives of it, 1 Pet. 3.22. He is gone into heaven, and is on the right
hand of God; Angels, authorities, and powers, being made subject unto him. To
be at the right hand of God, is to have Angels, authorities, and powers made
subject unto him: The largest comment that we have in scripture upon the
phrase, is in the place now under debate: Here the Apostle having affirmed, v.
20. that the working of Gods mighty power, set Christ on his own right hand,
etc. In, v. 21, 22. he fully explaineth, what is meant by his sitting at Gods
own right hand; why! to be far above all principality, and power, and might,
and dominion, and every name, that is named, not only in this world, but also
in that which is to come. To have all things put under his feet, to be given to
be head over all things to the Church.

2. We have Christ's kingdom, sovereign authority, or dominion set forth here
unto us, ab objecto principalitatis, or perfectionis, from it is chief or
principal objects. 1. The most powerful. 2. The most renowned of it is objects.

1. The most powerful of it is objects: far above all principality, and power,
and might, and dominion. Cartwright upon the place
Where it is evident, that the Apostle heapeth up diverse words of one and the
same signification thereby the more effectually to set forth the supereminent
power of our Savior Christ above all. A great deal of Curiosity there is in
interpreters touching the distinction of these terms, some understanding them,
partly of things in earth, and partly of things in heaven; Others only of
things in earth: others only of things in heaven: and here the Papists, with a
great deal of Confidence, talk out of a counterfeit or forged Dyonysius,
concerning the distinction of the Orders of Angels, as if they had with Paul
been rapt up into the third heaven, and there exactly mustered all the heavenly
Hosts.

Hilary, Augustine, and Bernard do here with a great deal of modesty, and
ingenuity, confess their Ignorance herein. Indeed there is no ground in
Scripture for the several signification of every of these words. And for men
in interpretation of Scripture to flee unto groundless conjectures, would
bring in a strange, if not a mad kind of Divinity. Diverse learned expositors,
both Papists, and Protestants say, that if the terms be not Synonyma, but have
several significations, that then the Apostle speaks of them, not by way of
assertion, but by way of concession, or supposition; in reference, say some,
unto the Jews, say others, unto the Gnostics, both which might hold such a
distinction between the celestial spirits, or else with relation unto the
fables of the Greek Poets, their Divines, who maintained perhaps, such a
difference betwixt their Imaginary Deities; as if the Apostle should have said,
Suppose, though not grant, this distinction of principality, and power, and
might, and dominion, yet Christ is advanced far above them all, in dignity, and
authority.

2. We have the kingdom or supreme dominion of Christ illustrated from the
most renowned of it is objects; Every name; that is, every person of name, or
renown. Famous, or renowned persons were termed by the Hebrews, Apud Hebraeos
viri celebres dicuntur (...) id est, viri nominis, quos graeci vocant (...):
quo modo etiam in vernaculo nostro sermon loquimur. Beza.

Cornel. Alapide has also the same note: but he fetches it out of Beza, as it
will appear to any one that will compare them together.


persons of name: and here we have a distribution of these famous, or
honorable persons from their places; that is named in this world, or that
which is to come; that is, renowned here on earth, or in heaven, in the state
of heavenly bliss, which is said to be future, or to come, not because it does
not now exist, but for that it is to come unto us that live here in this
present world.

Lastly, we have a distribution of this sovereign authority, or dominion of
Christ. It is 1. general, over the whole Creation And has put all things
under his feet, v. 22. 2. special, over the Church. And gave him to be the
head over all things to the Church.

1. General, over the whole creation, and has all things put under his feet.
Zanchy, by all things here understands the enemies of Christ, which shall be
subjected unto him by way of conquest; he shall in a victorious manner, as it
were, tread upon them, and trample them under his feet: As the Captains of the
men of war with Joshua, did tread upon the five kings, that were taken, Josh.
10.24. For this Qui de ecclesia non sunt subjecti sunt Christo, ficu^ quae sub
pedibus habemus, nempe ut vilia, and digna quae conculcentur et conterantur.
Zanchius.
restriction of the phrase to wicked men, and the enemies of Christ he gives
this reason: the sheep* the members of Christ are in his hand, not under his
feet. no man shall pluck them out of his hand, Joh. 10.28.

For answer, the Scripture indeed mentions a twofold putting under the feet
of Christ, penal, or obedientiall. 1. There is a penal, and disgraceful way
of putting under the feet of Christ by way of punishment, or contempt, but when
the Scripture speaks of that, there is allwaies express mention made of
enemies. Psalm. 110.1. 1 Cor. 15.25. But putting under the feet of Christ, when
it is used simply by it self, without any such addition of enemies, signifies
that which is obedientiall, and denotes the general subordination of all
creatures whatsoever unto Christ. If any differ herein from me, I shall desire
him impartially to consider that place in Heb. 2.5,6,7,8. Where the Apostle
has a large discourse of this very subject. And out of this place I shall draw
three arguments to prove, that the putting all things in subjection under the
feet of Christ, is so comprehensive, as that it takes in not only enemies, but
all the creatures.

1. v. 5. He has put in subjection unto him the world to come: that is,
heaven; the inhabitants of which are the glorious Saints, and Angels.

2. v. 8. In that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing, that is
not put under him. The Apostle (we see) is peremptory, and express, that no
creature whatsoever is excepted, or exempted from this subjection; and
therefore it would be sauciness in any man, to restrain it only unto enemies.

3. The 8th Psalm, out of which this phrase is applied unto Christ, makes
mention of all sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field, the fowls of
the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passes through the path's of
the sea's, Psalm. 8.7,8. that were put under his feet. Now these creatures are
not capable of any enmity, or hostility against Christ; and therefore the
phrase does not here signify the special subjection of enemies by way of
victory and triumph.

2. We have here the second branch of Christ's dominion, that special
sovereignty, and supreme authority, which he has over his Church, Gave him to
be an head over all unto his Church. that clause, over all, as is noted by Mr
Bayne, may be understood either in regard of Christ, or the Church.

1. In regard of Christ, and so it denotes the perfection of his glory, and
authority. Gave him, who is over all things, to be the head unto the Church:
and so here is not only signified the excellency of Christ, but farther, the
greatness of the gift or benefit herein bestowed by God upon the Church, in
that he has given her a most eminent, glorious, and powerful head: But of
this, the Apostle speaks so fully in the foregoing words, as that to insert it
here again so suddenly would be little less then a tautology.

I conceive therefore that the words are meant in regard of the Church, so that
in them is couched a comparison of the greater with the less, of Christ's
head-ship unto the Church, with his domination, which he has above all other
creatures. Christ may be said to be an head unto the whole universe, He is the
head of all principality, and power, Col. 1.10. But he is an head unto the
Church, in a more singular, and eminent manner then he is unto any other of the
creatures, then he is unto the Angels. He was unto the Angels only a mediator
of confirmation or preservation; unto us also a mediator of redemption; and
therefore now being at the right hand of God, he presents unto him in our
behalf, the satisfaction of his death for the remission of our sins, the
merit of his death for the supply of all our wants, and in such a manner he
does not intercede for the elect Angels, who are free from both sin and
indigency: Besides, there is not such a suitableness of nature between him and
the Angels, as there is between him, and the Church of the redeemed. For he
took not on him the nature of Angels: but he took on him the seed of Abraham,
Heb. 2.16.

Zanchy expounds the words, as of the singularity of Christ's love unto the
Church, so also of the extent, and universality of his influence upon her. So
that over all things with him sounds as much, as in all things, in all mercies,
and benefits needful unto the Church his body, in all duties belonging unto
him, as the head of his Church: He communicates unto her all good things, grace
and glory, Psalm. 84.11. he is present with her in all her streits, and
supplieth her in all her wants: He discharges for her, and unto her, all the
offices of an head: he illightneth, quickneth, governs, and protecteth her.
But this interpretation may be thought to be strained, and therefore I shall
acquiesce in the former touching the specialty of Christ's headship, Bayne.
or sovereignty over the Church. It is more intimate, communicative and
beneficial, then that over any other Creatures, though never so great, and
glorious.

A second place is, Phil. 2.9,10,11. Where we have of Christ's exaltation 1. an
emphaticall affirmation. 2. a large, and lively description.

1. An emphaticall affirmation. God also has highly exalted him: It is not
barely said, that God exalted him, but (...) super exaltavit, highly exalted
him: Exalted him above all highness. Exalted him unto the greatest height of
honor, and power, that the humane nature is advanceable; so highly he exalted
him, that all Creatures whatsoever from the highest heavens unto the center of
the earth, are far below him, as it were, under his feet.

2. We have a large and lively description of Christ's exaltation. 1. from the
antecedent. 2. from the parts, or branches thereof.

1. We have the antecedent of it, Christ's humiliation: He humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, etc. Not only Papists, but diverse Protestants, as
Peter Martyr, and Zanchy, are of the opinion, that, (...), quapropter,
wherefore, denotes a meritorious cause, and not only a bare antecedent. Doctor
Featly to compose the controversy, distinguishes of Christ considered as a
mediator, and as man. Albeit, says he, as mediator, he merited for us, yet
as man he might also merit for himself. I should rather say, that by his
humiliation, he merited his exaltation, not for himself, but for us, in our
behalf, and for our behoof: He merited it, as it was the exaltation of a
public person, the head of the Church. The first light of this, I confess, I
had from Mr Cartwright, in his answer unto the annotations of the Rhemists upon
Philippians 2. v. 9. Whereas the Rhemists had alleged, Revel. 5*9. Thou art
worthy to take the book, etc. for thou have slain, and have redeemed us, v.
12. The place (says Mr Cartwright) is nothing to this question. For the
worthiness there spoken of, is not considered in regard of that, which Christ
was worthy to receive for himself, but in regard of that, which he was worthy
to receive for us. Now he was worthy for himself after the personal unity,
to know all mysteries, and to receive all glory, without regard of any work
that ever be did: But to be worthy to receive it, that we might be partakers of
it, could not be (with safety of Gods justice) but by his obedience, and that
to the death of the Cross. And this is the worthiness, which the Angels do so
dignifie, and commend in Jesus Christ, v. 12.

2. Christ's exaltation is here made to consist in two particulars,
Transcendency of renown, v. 9. Supremacy of Authority verse: 10, 11.

1. Transcendency of renown. Gave him a name; which is above every name.

The Lord rold David, 2 Samuel 7.9. the type of Christ, that he had made him a
great name, like unto the name of the great men, that are in the earth. But
here we see, that he has given Christ the Antitype, a name far surmounting
that of the greatest men upon the face of the earth; A more glorious, a more
unspotted, a more powerful name.

1. A more glorious name. How narrow is the fame of the most renowned of the
sons of men, in comparison of that of Jesus Christ, which is like the
circuit of the sun, universal successively unto the whole world. Has the
persons of any men been adored, and worshipped with that Zeal, and sincerity,
as Jesus Christ has been by his Saints? What mortal wight, or immortal
Angel has been so much upon the tongues, and hearts of men, as he? Whose life
has been read, or heard with that assent, that admiration, and those
affections, as his? No name, you see, has been so celebrated, and magnified,
as his. And indeed none deserves the praise, and glory, that his does. For
what are the conquests of the greatest warriers, unto that victory of his over
our spiritual adversaries on the Cross? Where he spoiled principalities and
powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it, Col. 2.15.
No scepter like unto the rod of his strength, Psalm. 110.2. no earthly throne
like to his on the right hand of the majesty on high. The exploits of the
greatest conquerours by the most formidable armies, are but trifl^, compared
with his achievements by the ministry of a few weak despised men.

2. Christ's name is more unspotted then any other name whatsoever, and
therefore in this respect it out shines all other names, far more then the
light of the sun does that of the dimmest taper. The greatest chieftaines in
the world have had some blot, some odious but or other, upon their names, that
have darkened all their glory. Thus the name of Alexander the great, was
sullied with pride, drunkenesse, and Luxury; the name of Hanniball stained with
cruelty; the name of Julius Caesar spotted and blur'd with ambition, and
tyranny. But the name of Christ is, as a most glorious, so a spotless name,
Heb. 7.26. which is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. In a
third place: It is a most powerful name, that has all the world at a beck,
and that unto the very end of it. The power of men's names has seldom
outlived their persons. Those, that in their life time have most flourished in
military glory, whose very names has awed not only their own, but bordering
kingdoms; yet we see their authority has died with them. After death their
names have had a weak influence upon those of their servants, and subjects,
whom they have most obliged. In the Charnell house the greatest coward may
tread upon the dust of the greatest conqueror. The great name of Alexander
could not secure his mother, sister, wives, concubine, posterity, from violent
and untimely ends. The great name of Three days the corpse of this great
Monarch is said to have lain neglected, while his servants attending to
imbeazle his movables: in the end his youngest Son Henry, had it conveyed to
the Abbey of Cane; where first at the entry into the Town, they who carried
the corpse, left it alone, and ran to quench an house on fire: afterward brought
to be intombed, a Gentleman stands forth, and in stern manner forbids the
interment in that place, claiming the ground to be his inheritance, descended
from his Ancestors, and taken from him at the building of that Abbey; appealing
to Row, their first founder for justice: Whereupon they were feign to compound
with him for an annual rent. Such ado had the body of him after death (who
had made so much in his life) to be brought to the earth; and of all he
attained, had not now a room to contain him, without being purchased at the
hand of another, men esteeming a living dog more then a dead lion. Daniel.
Hist. England. p. 50, 51.
William the conqueror could not procure him in his own dominions, a
respectfull, quiet, and undisturbed funeral. But now the name given unto
Christ in his exaltation was no empty, and powerless thing; but accompanied
with the vast empire and authority. (...) signifies, as Beza notes,
dignitatem, and celebritatem nominis, cum re ipsa conjunctam. He gave him such
a name, that thereat every knee should how, of things in Heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth: and that every tongue should confess, that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, v. 10, 11.

In which words we have the supremacy of Christ's authority set forth unto us by
three particulars; a correlato, ab adjuncto occupato, and a fine.

1. From the general subordination of all creatures unto it. 2. From their
external confession of it. 3. From the reference of it unto its end, the glory
of God the Father.

1. A correlato, from the subordination of all rational creatures unto it,
expressed in a borrowed speech, by the bowing of the knee: that at the name of
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth. The words plainly have reference unto Isaiah 45.23.
which place Romans 14.10,11,12. is brought as a proof of the last, and general
judgment, we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ: for it is
written, As I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue
shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall give account of himself
to God.

Now all rational creatures, and only rational creatures, shall be judged,
and therefore they, and only they, are here meant. However they may here in
this world make head, and opposition against the kingdom of Christ Jesus, yet
at last, in the day of judgment, they shall submit thereunto, if not
voluntarily, yet by constraint: and from this bowing and bending, this
submission of all intellectual creatures unto Christ, we may also argue by way
of comparison from the greater unto the less, for the universal subjection of
all other creatures in their kind, unto his authority.

2. Ab abjuncto occupato; from the confession hereof, which shall be not only
internal in the conscience, but some way or other external, that every tongue
should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord. The good Angels and the glorious
Saints in Heaven together with the Devils, and damned ghosts in hell, have
neither bodily knees, nor fleshly tongues, as men have, yet they have some
means whereby they can, and shall, will they, nill they, testify their
subjection unto the Lordship and dominion of Christ.

3. We have this supremacy of Christ's authority explained from it is end. To the
glory of God the Father. The Kingdom Authority, and dominion of Christ has
relation unto the glory, that is, knowledge, worship, and service of the Father,
and was conferred upon him purposely for the promoting thereof. Now is the Son
of man glorified, and God is glorified in him, John. 13.31.

The third place, is Romans 14.9. For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and
revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. That this is spoken
of Christ as man, is evident, because the procurement of this dominion was the
end of Christ's death, resurrection, or revivall. Two things here are to be
considered. 1. Who are the dead and living here spoken of. 2. How his death and
resurrection conduced unto his Lordship over these dead and living.

1. Who are the dead and the living here spoken of. He that expounds this of
some only of the dead, and living, dares pervert Scripture from it is plain
sense; says Mr Baxter against Mr Tombs, page 229. To say nothing of Estius,
and other Papists, that so interpret it, my poor plundered study affords five
Protestants, that so expound it, Aretius, Pareus, Piscator, Diodati, and
Dickson. The holiest and most learned of men may mistake in the sense of a
place of Scripture: but sure (me thinks) it is somewhat too severe a censure
so say of such learned, reverend, and godly men, that they dare pervert
Scripture from it is plain sense. Such toothed expressions we must account but
keenenesse in Mr Baxter. But if such a passage had dropped from the tongue, or
pen of others, very wise, and pious, men would have charged it at least with
the appearance of scorn and arrogance. But this exposition has countenance
from the coherence. Whereas Mr Baxter says nothing for the justifying of his
sense; only in a magisteriall way he passes a very bitter censure upon those,
that dissent from him.

The dead and living here are, as appears by comparison of this verse with the
foregoing, such as live unto the Lord, and such as die unto the Lord. And if Mr
Baxter will say, that all the living live unto the Lord, and all the dead die
unto the Lord, he will make very bold with Scripture to maintain his prejudice:
and some perhaps may think as hardly of him, as he does of those worthies
above mentioned, that he dare pervert Scripture from it is plain sense. The
scope of the Apostle is to take off believers from despising and judging one
another, v. 3. and the argument which he brings to persuade hereunto, v. 7, 8,
9. is, that all believers are the Lords servants: They all live and die unto
him: for to this end, Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be
Lord both of the dead, and of the living. And if this be the scope of the words
as Diverse, men of great ability and piety, suppose, why then the living and the
dead spoken of, v. 9. are not all the living and dead, but only such as are
believers, and the Lords servants.

In a second place, we are to enquire how Christ's death, and resurrection
conduced unto this his Lordship over the dead, and the living. Why he died that
he might purchase this Lordship over the dead, and the living, Revel. 5.12. and
he arose and revived, that he might as man actually notandum est non dicit, ut
fiat dominus, scilicet ut accipiat jus and potestatem dominandi: sed ut
dominetur, id est, ut exerceat acceptae patestatis et dominii usum. Nam
Christus a primo instanti suae incarnationis, ratione unionis Hypostaticae,
fuit dominus omnium, sed post mortem hujus dominii plenum exercitium accepit.
Cornel Alapide.
exercise and administer it, that he might Lord or rule it over the dead, and
the living: and indeed if he had not risen, and revived, he could not have, as
man, actually exercised this Lordship, etc; because if he had not risen, he had
ceased to have been man. In triduo mortis, as Aquinas resolves and proves it,
Dicendum, quod Christum vere fuisse mortuum est articulus fidei: unde assercre
omne illud, per quod tollitur veritas mortis Christi, est error contra fidem.
Propter quod in epistola Synodali Cyrilli dicitur, fi quis non confitetur Dei
verbum passum carne, et crucifixum carne, et quod mortem gustavit carne,
anathema fit. Pertinet ad veritatem mortis hominis velanimalis, quod per mortem
definat esse homo vel animal: mors enim hominis vel animalis provenit ex
separatione animae, quae complet rationem animalis vel hominis. Et ideo dicere
Christum in triduo mortis hominem fuisse simpliciter, et absolute loquendo,
erronecum est.
par. tert. quaest. quinquages: Art. quart. He was not man. He had not been
able as man to have saved unto the uttermost, unless he had lived for ever to
make intercession for such as belong unto him, Heb. 7.25.

The fourth and last place is Col. 1.18. He is the beginning, the first borne
from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.

But this place I have already handled, page 150, 151, 152. and therefore
thither I shall refer the reader.

To come in the last place unto the use and application of this fulness of
Christ's Authority: and here I shall make application 1. Of the fullness of his
office, and authority over the Church. 2. Of the fullness of his authority in
general over the whole universe.

1. Of the Fullness of his office, and authority over his Church.

1. Then they are here to be reprehended, that wrench out of Christ's own hand
his fullness of office, and intrude upon his mediatory power, which is
incommunicable unto either men, or Angels. To which of the Angels said he at
any time, sit thou at my right hand, Heb. 1.13. unto the Angels has he not put
in subjection the world to come, chap. 2. v. 5. There is but one mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timoth. 2.5. There are differences
of administration but the same Lord, 1 Cor. 12.5. there is no Lord like or
master-like power in any, but in Christ; unto us there is but one Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6.

Two sorts of men have herein been especially faulty, Papists, and Prelatists.

1. Papists, and hence the Pope is termed the Antichrist, because he is an
antagonist, not so much unto the natures, or person of Christ; as unto his
unction, and office: and indeed he has been injurious unto him in all his
offices.

1. Unto his Priestly office, as by their massing priests, and mass sacrifice
to propitiate for quick and dead, so by communicating unto the saints here on
earth a power of satisfying, and meriting, and unto the saints and Angels in
heaven a power of interceding.

2. Unto his Prophetical office, by assuming unto himself authority to supply
Scripture with unwritten traditions; as also by arrogating unto himself
infallibility in the interpretation of Scripture and decision of all
controversies of religion ex Cathedra.

Lastly, he has most sacrilegiously detracted from the fullness of Christ's
Kingly office, by usurping the title and office of a visible and ministerial
head or viceroy in the church, without any the least warrant, or commission
from him, the head and King of the Church: as also by taking upon him a vast,
and almost unlimited power, of making laws concerning ecclesiastical matters,
obliging the conscience per se, of themselves, from his mere will, and
authority.

This fullness of Christ's office has 2. been prejudiced by Prelatists, in their
institution of diverse Church officers, as also of diverse ceremonies of
ordained, and mystical signification: appropriate unto the worship and service
of God, without any license from Christ himself. Herein they have trespassed
against his Kingly and Prophetical office.

1. They have invaded his sovereignty, or Kingly office: for he is, as the
chief, so the only lawgiver in his Church, and has committed unto her (as
Ames shows out of Junius in his reply to Bishop Morton) no authority of
appointing new things, but a ministry to observe and do such things, which
Christ has appointed with order and decency unto edification.

Indeed the 1 Cor. 14.40. is much used by the Patrons of our ceremonies, to
prove that the Apostle does grant a general license, and authority to all
Churches, to ordain such ceremonies as ours. But that herein the place is
abused, is evinced by the said Ames med. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 13. Sect. 36. by
two arguments. Neque quicquam Authoritatis in istiusmodi ceremoniis
instituendis ex co possunt homines fibimet arrogare, quod ecclesiis omnibus
mandatur, ut omnia decenter et ordine faciant, 1 Cor. 14.40. Neque enim
ordinis, neque decori ratiopostulat ut res aliquae sacrae de novo instituantur,
sed utillae, quae a Deo sunt institutae, er modo adhibeantur, qui earum
dignitati est consentaneus: neque pertinent ordo and deco^um ad res sacras
tantum, sed etiam officia civilia, in utrisque enim confusio and indecorum sunt
vitia opposita debito illi modo, qui requiritur ad eorum justum siuem et usum
consequendum.
Neither (says he) can men take to themselves any authority in ordaining such
ceremonies, from that, that it is commanded to all Churches, that all things be
done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. For neither the respect of order, nor
decency requires, that some holy things should be newly ordained, but that
those, which are ^ordained by God, be used in that manner, which is agreeable
to their dignity; neither do order and decency pertain to holy things only,
but also to civil duties; for confusion and indecency in both are are vices
opposite to that due manner which is required to the attaining the just end,
and use of them. Nay he undertakes to manifest, that this Scripture being
rightly understood does not only not justify, but plainly Reply to Norton, page
9.10.11.12. Freshsuit against Ceremonies, etc. The dispute a page 56 usque ad
81.
condemns them: and this argument he has managed so well, as that he has
quite beaten out of the field Bishop Morton, and his second, Dr John Burges.
And none of the Prelaticall party has hitherto dared to take up the cudgels
against him: A great Scholar, I confess, of these times, Dr Hammond in his
view of the Directory. page 19. has made a new attempt from the place. I shall
transcribe what is argumentative in his words, and (I hope without offense unto
the Doctor) examine them. I conceive (says he) the clear importance of that
grand place to be, that all be done in the Church according to custom and
appointment. The former implied in (...), (custom being the only rule of
decency, etc.) And the latter in plain words, (...), according to order, or
appointment (for so the words literally import) and then upon these two grounds
is uniformity built, and necessarily results, where all, that is done in the
Church, is ruled by one of these, by custom, or by law, which being here
commanded by St Paul, is a proof of the more then lawfullnesse of (...)
prescription of ceremonies in a Church, and of uniformity therein.

This sense is, I believe, received by few interpreters, and therefore we might
reasonably expect, that he should back it with very good arguments: Whether he
has done so, let the reader judge. That the importance of the former part of
the words is, Let all things be done according to custom, he thus goes about
to prove. The former is implied in (...) ( custom^ being the only rule of
decency, etc.) He dares not affirm, that this is the immediate sense of the
place, but only that it is implied. It cannot be denied, but that decency does
imply such customs, the omission of which necessarily infer undecency: But
that the omission of such ceremonies as ours, does infer undecency, the
Doctor and all his party can never make good. What undecency can the Doctor
prove to be in the administration of Baptism without the Cross, as also in
public prayers and preaching without a surplice. But of this see further in
Ames, in the places but now quoted. The Dr may perhaps look upon him as an
inconsiderable Adversary. But we shall think his arguments considerable,
until the Dr, or some other of his party, give a satisfactory answer unto
them. In the mean while, let us examine the proof, that the Dr brings for
this sense: and it is, because custom is the only rule of decency.

This proposition, though very strange, is proofelesse: and therefore we might
as well reject it, as the Dr dictates it. But I shall add a confutation of it
from these following arguments.

1. If custom be the only rule of decency, then nothing else can be a rule
thereof, besides custom; but this is false: for the light, and law of nature,
is also a rule thereof, and that infallible.

2. Nothing can be undecent, that is agreeable unto the only rule of decency.
But diverse things are undecent, which yet can plead custom: and this is so
evident, as that I will not so much undervalue the Doctors judgment, as to
endeavor any proof thereof. It is impossible, that the only rule of decency
should be undecent. But yet it is very possible, that many customs should be
undecent, and therefore I shall conclude, that custom is not the only rule of
decency.

3. Lastly, unto custom, as you may see in both (...). Arist. Rhet. lib. 1.
cap. 11. Actus maxim multiplicati consuctudinem efficient. Thom. 1 a. 2 ae. q.
97. Art. 3.
Aristotle and Aquinas, the frequent usage of a thing is required. But now
there may be decency or handsomnesse in the first usage of a thing; and of this
decency custom is not the rule, and therefore it is not the only rule of
decency.

As for the other part of the words, Let all things be done in order; Ames in
the place forementioned, shows, that order requires not such ceremonies as
ours; and he gives this reason, because order requires not the institution of
any new thing, but only the right placing, and disposing of things which are
formerly instituted: and this he makes good from the notation of the word, from
the definitions of order, which are given by Philosophers and Divines, etc.
from the context of the Chapter, and from the usage of the word else where. But
the Doctor, that the words may give some countenance unto our ceremonies,
adventureth upon a new interpretation of them.

The words, (...) (says he) literally import, according unto appointment,
(...) sometimes signifies to appoint, as, Math. 28.16. Act. 22.10. and 28.23.
And we may hereupon argue a congugatis, that (...) may be sometimes rendered
appointment. But because it may sometimes be rendered appointment, will it
therefore follow, that it must be so rendered in this place.

We may say as well as the Doctor, that the words (...), literally import,
according unto order, as order is taken strictly for the right placing, or
ranking of things, one before, another after: and this we have confessed even
by Dr John Burges in his rejoy nder unto Ames, page 78. a book published by the
special command of the late King. Moreover this sense is favored by the
coherence: for, 1. verse. 31. we have a particular instance of order, in this
acception of the word: Ye may all prophesy one by one, etc. and not all, or
many speak at once. 2. We have the oppositite of order taken in this sense,
verse. 33. confusion. Let all things be done in order then is as much, as let
all things be done without confusion. And I hope confusion may be avoided in
the worship of God, without such ceremonies as ours.

But we will for once suppose, though not grant, that the clear importance of
the words, is, that all be done in the church according to custom, and
appointment. Yet the Doctor has a hard task to perform, before he can come
nigh his conclusion, that the words of Paul are a proof of the more then
lawfulness of prescription of such ceremonies as ours in a Church: For he must
prove, that custom, and order here are taken in such a latitude, as that they
include, not only the customs and appointments of the Apostolical Churches,
but also of all the Churches of God in succeeding ages: and the performance of
this he will find not to be so easy, as he may imagine. I am sensible, that I
have by this discourse provoked a very learned and formidable adversary; but it
is only love of the truth has engaged me in so unequal an encounter, and
therefore I hope the Doctor will pardon and excuse my boldness. If he can by
dint of argument prove the truth to be on his side, I shall not be sorry, or
ashamed to be overcome by him.

2. Their institution of Symbolicall ceremonies, that teach spiritual duties
by their mystical signification, is a derogation from the fullness of Christ's
Prophetical office. This the abridgment of that book (which the ministers of
Lincoln diocese delivered unto King James, December 1. 1605.) makes good,
page 41. Christ (say they) is the only teacher of his Church, and appointer of
all means, whereby we should be taught and admonished of any holy duty, and
whatsoever he has thought good to teach his Church, and the means whereby, he
has perfectly set down in the holy Scriptures; so that to acknowledge any
other means of teaching and admonishing us of our duty, then such as he has
appointed, is to receive another teacher into the Church besides him, and to
confess some imperfection in those means he has ordained to teach us by.
Unto them I shall take leave to add the words of Ames in his fresh suite
against ceremonies, p. 210, 211. Only this, by the way, I would learn how we
can acknowledge and receive any means of religious teaching with faith, except
it appear to be appointed by an authentic teacher and lawgiver. And how our
Prelates in appointing means of spiritual teaching, which Christ appointed
not, can be accounted (therein) ministerial teachers under him, as their, and
our only authentic teacher? As also, if Christ be our Authentic teacher in
all good that we learn about religion, who taught our Prelates such good
manners, as to put fescues, of their own making, into his hand, and so appoint
him after what manner, and by what means he shall teach us?

2. From this fullness of Christ's office, and authority, we may infer the
derivation of all ministerial ecclesiastical power from him. Indeed the
Church, and her officers may be Non latebat Bell^rm. distinctio illa, quam
Thomas tradit in. 1. did. 12. q. 1. a. 3. Et contra Gentes. l. 3. c. 70. de
mediato et immediato: dici scilicet haec vel ratione virtutis mediatae et
immediatae, vel ratione suppositi. Immediatio (ut loquuntur) virtutis est,
quando inter virtutem causae and effectum nulla alia virtus intercedit, aut
alia causa proprie dicta iltius effecti: quamvis intercedat suppositum aliquod
tanquam instrumentum: hoc sensu, omnes very ministri vocantur et constituuntur
in ecclesi a immediate a Deo, immediatione scilicet virtutis. Ecclesia tamen
intercedit inter Deum et ministros in illa vocatione tanquam instrumentum ejus:
Et hoc sensu, mediate vocantur a Deo per Ecclesiam: Bellarm. ipse l. 2 cap. 17.
non male hoc explicat, si loco Papae, ponatur in ejus verbis pastor. In pastore
sunt tria: Pastoratus ipse, qui est quasi forma quaedam: persona, quae est
subjectum ejus: et conjunctio unius cum altero. Prima est a solo Christo.
Secunda designatur ab electoribus: tertia est a Christo, mediante actu
electorum. Electores igitur non dant porestatem, neque sunt causa potestatis
illius quam habet Pastor. Ames Bellar. Ener. tom. 1. page 250,
isntrumental in setting apart of particular persons unto the office of a
minister, 1 Timothy 4.14. But as for the office it self, and the spiritual
power, or authority, whether of order, or jurisdiction, which is annexed
thereunto, that is only and immediately derived from Christ himself: it is
purely his ordinance, and therefore we should only act from, and under him,
dispense all ordinances in his name, that is, by his authority, in his room
and place. What the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.20. speaks of preaching the word, is
appliable unto the administration of all other ordinances: We may say, we
Baptize, administer the Lords Supper, and execute discipline in the stead of
Christ, vice Christi, as Christ's representatives, and deputies, Math. 18.20.
Luke 24.47. Act. 4.17.18. and 5.28.44. and 9.27. Act. 2.38. and 8.16. and
19.5.1 Cor. 5.4. To perform the work of the ministry in the name of Christ,
is to perform it by commission, power, and authority from Christ. But this is
not all that the phrase comprehends. That a thing be done in the name of
Christ (says Ames) there is indeed required the authority of Christ as the
efficient cause. But moreover there is as well as that required, In nomine
Christi ut aliquid fiat, requiritur quidem Authoritas Christi, ut causa
efficiens: sed simul etiam requiritur, ut materia, forma and finis actionis fit
Christo, and voluntati ejus conveniens, ita ut tota natura actionis talis fit,
qualem Christus probat and agnoscit pro sua. Ames. Bellarm. Enerv. Tom. 2. l.
1. p. 1.
that the matter, form, and end of the action be agreeable unto Christ, and
his will; so that the whole nature of the action be such as he approves, etc.

But to speak of this somewhat more fully, and distinctly. To do a thing in
the name of Christ, is to do it 1. in a manner suitable unto his dignity. 2.
According unto his command and warrant. 3. for his glory. 4. with dependence
upon and 5. with invocation of him for success. And thus all Christ's
ordinances must be dispensed by us, and received by the people, and that
because the dispensation of them, is by the authority and commission of Christ.

1. We must dispense them in such a holy, devout, and reverend manner as is
suitable unto the dignity of Christ's Person, and office. Parker de politeia
Ecclesiastic. lib. 3. cap. 4. page 21. informs us, that with some, in the
name of Christ sounds as much as in the fear of Christ. And indeed if we did
but seriously consider the fullness of his office, how great a Prophet he is,
how high a priest, how glorious a King; we could not but tremble, when we
speak either from, or unto him, we could not but use all possible caution, and
preparation in the administration of all his ordinances. I appeal unto those
that make as slender provision for the Pulpit, as for a table discourse; and
there vent such raw, loose, indigested and uncoherent stuff, as makes their
auditors even nauseate the good word of God; Whether this be to preach in the
name of Christ; whether they that thus preach, have a due regard unto the
honor of Christ, whom they represent: This command of ministers to administer
ordinances in such a manner, as is agreeable unto the great worth of their
institutive cause, is a virtuall and implied command of the people, to be
observant of the like manner, in the receipt of them. If ministers are in their
preaching to handle the word, as the word of Christ, in such a meet manner, so
boldly faithfully, sincerely, preparedly and decently, as it is fit the word,
the Embassy of the high Priest, and Apostle of our profession, the King of
Saints, and head of the Church should be delivered, why then ^he people are to
receive it, as the word of Christ, with such holy, heavenly, teachable and
tractable affections, as are due thereunto, and not at any hand to trifle and
dally with it. But it is strange, how unapprehensive men are of the relation,
which the word has unto Christ: for men come with as unprepared, unreverent,
unawfull, and undevout thoughts and affections to a a sermon, as to a play.
Here their maine errand was to pass away their time, to censure the poets
abilities, to judge of his play, it is plot, language, and fancy: And there what
is their business, but to spend the hour, to censure the ministers gifts of
prayer, and preaching, his matter, his notions, and expressions, to compare him
with others, to see how far he falls short of those, whose persons we have in
admiration. Oh! Beloved, as you tender your souls, think what you are a doing.
You are about an ordinance brought unto you in the name of Christ; Think with
whom you have to do; It is with him that has all power given unto him in
heaven and in earth.

2. Because power to dispense ordinances is by the authority, and commission of
Christ, therefore ministers and people in the administration of them should do
all in the name of Christ: that is, they should keep exactly unto his command
and rule, and not deviate therefrom, or add thereunto. God has placed Christ
in such an eminency over the Church, as Joseph was set over Egypt; and Pharaoh
said to Joseph, thou shall be over my house, and according unto thy word shall
all my people be ruled: Without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in
all the land of Egypt, Genesis 41. verse. 40, 44. Thus Christ is over the house,
the Church of God, which must be exactly regulated, according unto his word:
nothing must be imposed by the minister, or embraced by the people in Gods
worship and service, without his warrant.

Thirdly, both ministers and people in the managery of Christ's ordinances, are
to do all in the name of Christ, that is, for the glory and honor of Christ,
for his names sake, Math. 19.29. Psalm. 31.3. for this acception of this form
of speech, Math. 18.20. Chamier quotes Chrysostom, Salmeron, Lucas Brugensis,
and interpreters generally conceive also that it is comprehended, though not
only comprehended, in Col. 3.17. Whatsoever ye d^ in word or deed, do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus.

If all our actions are to have this reference, then much more our sacred
actions, our acts of worship and religion; Men would never make them
subordinate unto inferior ends, if they were duly mindful of that
supereminent authority, from which they have their institution: there is a
strange tradition of King Henry the seventh, that for the better credit of his
espials abroad with the contrary side, he did use to have them cursed or
excommunicated at Paul's (by name) amongst the bed-roll of the Kings enemies,
according to the custom of those times. What was this, but to bow heaven unto
earth, and make religion stoop and lackey unto policy; Sir Francis Bacon.
but though Atheistical and Machivilian politicians have thus served their
turns upon the ordinances of Christ, it would be very strange that the
Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God, should be thus
unfaithful: Who can we expect should be careful of promoting Christ's glory
in his ordinances? if they, who by special commission be entrusted with their
dispensation, be neglective thereof, and make their principal aim in them the
furtherance of their private designs, the showing of their parts, venting of
their passions, winning of applause, filling of their purses, ingratiating, or
ingrandizing themselves with the great men of the world. All the authority,
that we have in spiritual, and Ecclesiastical matters, is only by commission
from Christ, and therefore we should be, if not ashamed, yet afraid to employ
it any otherwise then for him; and yet there have been some ministers in all
ages that have abused their calling unto his disservice, and dishonor, their
chief end in the work of the ministry has been their own advancement in
temporals, and therefore they have made the Gospel bend unto the vain and
sinful humors of men, upon whom their preferment in the world has depended,
they have wrested and perverted the word of Christ unto the patronage of their
erroneous prejudices, and base lusts; Knowles his Turkish History.
the Grecian Bishops were wrought upon by the flattery and large promises of
Andronicus, to give him a general absolution from the perfidious perjuries,
and bloody murders he had committed, which obtained, he had for a while the
same Bishops in great honor, but shortly after in greater contempt; as men
forgetful of their duties, and calling. Herein I believe Basilius, the then
Patriarcke of Constantinople led the dance unto them, of whom Mr Fuller gives
this character. He and Andronicus were a Patron and Chaplain excellently met,
For what one made law by his lust; the other endeavored to make gospel by his
learning. In stating of any controversy Basilius first studied to find out what
Andronicus intended or desired to do therein: And then let him alone to draw
that Scripture, which would not come of it self, to prove the lawfullnesse of
what the other would practice. Thus in favor of him he pronounced the legality
of two most incestuous matches; And this Grecian Pope gave him a dispensation
to free him from all oaths, etc. which he had formerly sworn to Manuel or
Alexius. King Philip the second of Spain, had a counsel of conscience, for
the direction of his enterprises, which often stretched their consciences to
bring him out of many difficulties, and free him from the bands of his
promises, but these, and all others of the like stamp, have left but an
infamous memory behind them; for men generally refuse to pay any respects unto
their names, that have been disregardfull of the name and honor of their
heavenly Master. Michael Paleologus, to assure the Greek Empire unto himself
and posterity, acknowledged, against the light and dictates of his conscience,
the supremacy of the Pope of Rome, and did his utmost to unite, and conform
the Greek Church unto the Latin; but this his politic device, (as is gravely
observed by the author of the Turkish history) yielded him not so much, as the
credit of an honorable funeral, but dying in this attempt, not far from
Lysimachia, was there, by his son Andronicus his commandment, for whose
advancement he had stained, both his faith and honor, obscurely buried in the
field a good way from his ca^p, as unworthy of a better sepulcher, for
betraying that religion, which in his own judgment was most agreeable unto the
will, and mind of his Savior.

Fourthly, Ministers and people should approach all ordinances in the name of
Christ, that is, with dependence upon him for their success and efficacy; thus
the form of speech is used concerning God, Psalm. 20.5. In the name of our God,
we will set up our banners. In the name of God, that is, depending upon God for
assistance: and why may it not have the same sense applied unto Christ? our
confidence in prayer, preaching, Baptizing, administering of the Lords supper,
exercise of discipline should be only upon the assistance of Christ, and not
upon the ordinances in themselves, or upon the parts, gifts, and graces of any
Ministers whatsoever; for what are the ablest and holiest ministers, but
instruments? and therefore whatsoever they act toward the Salvation of men's
souls, is in the virtue of Christ their principal agent.

Without the concurrence of his Spirit, the sacraments will prove but blankes,
or empty and naked signs, the word, otherwise the power of God unto salvation,
will prove altogether powerless, or else the power of God merely unto
conviction and condemnation; the delivery of a man unto Satan will but
irritate, and exasperate, and contribute nothing unto the salvation of the
Spirit in the day of the Lord Jesus. Mahomet the great Turk^ hearing that
Scanderbeg would cut helmets, head pieces, and pouldrons clean asunder with
his Scymitar, he sent to him for it, thinking that there had been some
extraordinary virtue in it, and when Scanderbeg had sent it, he put it into
their hands, who had the strongest arms about him, but perceiving no such
wonders as was reported of it, he sent it back with scorn, saying that he
could get as good for his money out of every cutlers shop, and that he credited
not what was related to him thereof, but Scanderbeg, in the sight of the
Messenger, having made strange and admirable proofs of it, bad him tell his
master, that it was not the virtue of the sword, but the strength of his arm.
To apply this unto our present purpose, the word of Christ is quick and
powerful, and sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, Heb. 4.12. But now
this is not by any virtue inherent in it, but by the power and Spirit of Christ
concurring with it, actuating, applying, and mightily enforcing of it. In Isa.
53.1. The Gospel is referred to the Prophets and Apostles, in regard of
ministry and dispensation, our report; but it is referred to the Lord, only in
point of efficacy and operation, the arm of the Lord. Upon the Lord Christ
therefore let us depend, and to him let us repair for the success thereof,
which brings me to the last particular.

Fifthly, Ministers and people are, in the ordinances of Christ, all acts of
worship, to do all in the name of Christ, that is, with invocation of his name,
calling upon the name of God through his mediation; and this to be included in
the phrase, as it is used Col, 3.17. is the consent of most interpreters on the
place, by this it is, that as all creatures, and actions in general, so all
ordinances in a more special and peculiar manner, are sanctified unto us.

How can we, with any probability, expect a blessing from Christ upon our
public assemblies, on the Lords day, when we rush unto them from our beds, or
worldly business, without so much as imploring such a blessing in our families
or closets. If we do not seek Christ in our home devotions, in a way of
preparation unto our public; I believe we can hardly be said to be gathered
together in his name, according to the full import of the expression; and
without this, it will be but presumption to flatter our selves, that Christ
will be in the midst of us. Does a minister preach in the name of Christ, when
he does not before hand so much as open his mouth for Christ's assistance in his
study, and concurrence in his pulpit? Do people hear in the name of Christ,
when all the week long they do not put up so much as one petition unto him, to
enable their minister for his work, and to bless it unto them? And if we do
not meet together in the name of Christ, we may justly fear, that Christ will
be a stranger unto our meetings.

Lastly, This fullness of Christ's office bespeaks our due respects; it
challenges faith in him, obedience unto him, and worship of him. All Saints
should obey the King of Saints; the members of the Church should follow the
full direction of their head, both inward, and outward: servants should be
ruled by the son, and Lord of the family: sheep should be guided by their
shepherd: the stones in the spiritual building should be regulated unto the
foundation: Not to hearken unto the messenger of the Covenant, how can it be
interpreted any other, then a refusal of the Covenant. To slight the high
Priest of our profession, what is it, but a vertuall renouncing of the
Christian religion. To be disobedient and disloyal unto the King, and head of
the Church, what is it, but an interpretative disclaiming of his sovereignty
over the Church. Consider the Apostle and high Priest of our profession Christ
Jesus, Heb. 3.1. The Greek word, (...) (as Pareus notes) is very emphaticall:
for it signifies not barely to understand, apprehend, or behold a thing, but
farther; with very great and earnest endeavor to bend and apply the mind unto
the consideration of a thing, to consider it diligently, and heedfully.
Consider the Apostle and high Priest of our profession is as much, as ponder
the perfection of Christ's office, with all possible diligence and attention,
with all your heart and minds. But now words of knowledge, in Scripture, imply
the affections and practice; Consider the Apostle and high Priest of our
profession, etc; that is, attentively and deeply weigh the fullness, and
dignity of his calling, and accordingly fear, love, worship, serve and obey
him. Give him all honor, and glory, throw all your faith and hope upon him,
seek for your salvation only in him, and carefully decline all offense of him.
The Apostle Peter having proved, 1. Epistle, Chapt. 2. verse. 6. out of the
Prophet Isaiah, that Christ is the chief corner stone, elect, and precious,
which God has laid in Zion, the spiritual house of his Church: he infers
hereupon, verse. 7. that he is of great price and excellency unto every
believer: unto you therefore which believe he is precious. Here the abstract
(...) is put for the concrete (...); and the putting of Abstracts for their
Concretes usually increases and heightneth a matter, and puts weight and an
emphasis upon it. Unto you that believe, he is an honor: that is, he is or
should be very honorable, and exceeding precious in your eyes; and indeed whom
should we esteem, reverence, and honor, if not the foundation of our
salvation that by the faithful, and full discharge of his office, upholds
every one of our souls, from sinking into the very bottom of hell and
damnation. Can we have too high an estimate of such a person? Who would not
come unto him, and by faith lean upon him. Saint Peter exhorts hereunto, and
backs his exhortation with many motives, He is a stone, a chief corner stone,
verse. 4, 6. and therefore you may safely rely upon him. He is a living stone, a
vital foundation, and therefore quickneth whom he will, Joh. 5.21. He makes
every member a lively stone.

Those therefore that are not built upon him, are spiritually dead and
livelesse. Indeed not only the Jews, but the generality of men reject all his
offices, refuse to build and rely upon him. But though he be disallowed of men,
he is chosen of God, God from all eternity designed him unto this office of
foundation, and in the fullness of time actually called, sent, sealed,
sanctified, qualified and enabled him, for execution thereof. He is a stone as
of great strength, so of great price also: he is a precious stone, precious in
regard of the infinite dignity of his person, precious in respect of the
incomparable value of his satisfaction, and merit; and precious also in regard
of the riches of the gifts, and graces, wherewith his humane nature was
adorned. Thus you see, that here is stability, an enlivening efficacy, the
decree and call of heaven, unspeakable beauty and excellency, inviting to come
unto Christ: come unto him, because he is a stone, a living stone, a stone
chosen by God, a precious stone. You may see farther, how that by coming unto
him, great and ineffable benefit, comfort, and honor, will redound unto us. It
will be a profitable, a comfortable, or honorable Course.

1. Then it will be very beneficial and advantageous unto us; if we come unto
him, as unto a living stone, we shall as lively stones be built up a spiritual
house, v. 5. for an habitation of God through the spirit, Ephesians. 2.21. And
without dependence upon him, as our foundation, by faith, there will be no
place and existence for us in the spiritual structure.

2. It will be very comfortable unto us, Behold I lay in Zion a chief corner
stone, etc; and he that believes on him, shall not be confounded, v. 6, that
is, shall not be disappointed of his hope: all other foundations will fail
men, and prove but as a Spiders web, Job. 8.14. so that whosoever relieth on
them, shall be covered with shame, and confusion of face: In the words, I
believe, there is a litotes, by denial of Confusion and shame, is understood
the affirmation of extraordinary comfort, and confidence. He that believes on
him, shall not be ashamed or confounded: that is, he shall lift up his head
with a full joy, triumph, and unshaken confidence, whereas others shall hide
their heads, and not be able to look the lamb in the face, as being utterly
abashed at the vanity, and deceitfulness of those foundations, upon which they
have built, and relied.

From this in the third place, the Apostle infers the honor, and glory of
those that by faith lean upon him, as a foundation. He that believes on him,
shall not be confounded; unto you therefore which believe he is an honor, v.
6, 7. and indeed for a man to have his expectation concerning the eternal
happiness of his soul fully answered at the last day, when the hopes of the
great, and wise men of the world shall be utterly frustrate, must needs make
much for a man's honor in the sight of men, and Angels. Unto you which believe
he is an honor, because you have honored him, received his testimony, set
your seal as it were to his veracity, therefore he will honor you, derive
unto you his honor and glory, make you in and together with him the Sons of
God, heirs of Heaven, spiritual Kings and priests, Revel. 1.6.

To conclude what I have to say at present, touching this fullness of Christ's
office over the Church. Submission unto it is a thing, from which we are of our
selves averse: The resolve of the Jews is the natural language of every
carnal man's heart, We will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14.
Well therefore, let us humbly implore the overruling influence of heaven to
work us unto an unfeigned acknowledgment of, and sincere obedience unto the
full authority of Christ: for no man (says the Apostle) can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. It is an easy matter formally and
verbally to profess it, but to acknowledge it cordially and affectionately out
of a true faith, and full persuasion of heart, impossible, unless we be
taught, swayed, and acted by the Holy spirit.

2. I shall proceed to that use and application which may be made of the
fullness of Christ's authority in general over the whole universe, wherein I
shall not wholly exclude his fullness of authority over his Church, but shall
sometimes have reference thereunto.

1. Then for information, we may hence infer the dignity of the members and
ministers of Christ.

1. The dignity of the members of Christ, they are the servants, subjects,
friends, favorites, brethren, nay spouse of him that has all power in heaven,
and in earth: and to be so nearly, and intimately related unto a person of
such power, and authority, is in heavens Herauldry a far greater honor, then
to be absolute, and universal monarch of the whole earth. This is an
unspeakable comfort unto all true believers in their lowest condition, and
should be a strong engagement to walk suitably unto the height of such
relations, as becomes the servants of so great a master, the subjects, nay
friends and favorites of so redoubted a king, the spouse of so powerful and
glorious a husband.

2. We may hence infer the dignity of the ministers of Christ. They have
their office, and commission from him, that has a commission from the father
to govern all creatures in heaven and in earth: They are the only Ambassadors
of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the keepers of his great seals, the
sacraments; the stewards, and rulers of his house, 1 Cor. 4.1. Heb. 13.17.

And from this dignity of the ministerial function, we may press both
ministers and people, unto their several, and respective duties.

1. The Dignity of ministers should mind them of, and move them unto their
duty, not to walk beneath the eminency of that relation, which they have unto
their great Lord, and master, the prince of all the Kings of the earth. His
name is above every name, and therefore they who are chosen vessels to bear
his name, Act. 9.15. should be very careful not to cast any reproach, or
dishonor upon his name: not to occasion the blasphemy thereof by any either
indiscretion, or scandal in their conversation. It would be a very great, and
foul incongruence, if whereas Christ, who has a fullness of all authority,
has given them an office worthy of double honor, yet notwithstanding they
should render their persons vile, and contemptible.

2. The dignity of ministers should be a powerful incentive unto their people
to give them all due respect, double honor, as the Apostle phraseth it, 1
Timoth. 5.17. I cannot enforce this use better, then in the words of one of the
best of our English Prelates, Bishop Lake. He that looks upon the persons of
ministers only, will not much esteem either them, or their words; but add
whose ministers they are, and that requires reverence to be yielded to their
persons, and obedience to their doctrine. Especially, if we consider, that all
those to whom they come, are at his mercy from whom they come; for he has
power over them all; and such power he must have that sends: so it is not a
message sent by a King to a neighbor King, but by a King to his vassals; the
more are they to be respected, and their words heeded. States, and Princes in
all ages have had a very deep resentment of injuries done unto their
Ambassadors. How severely did David revenge the disgrace that Hanun put upon
his messengers, 2 Samuel Chapters 10, 11, 12. And the Romans extinguished
Corinth, though the eye of Greece, for violating their Ambassadors, and yet
the violation was so small, as that Florus could not tell, whether it were
voce, or manu. What severity then may they expect in the day of retribution,
the greatest part of whose religion is to heap indignities upon the messengers
of Christ Jesus, whom he has sent with the offer of peace, and pardon unto the
sons of men. For if earthly Potentates be so tender, and touchy in the point
of their Ambassadors honor and safety, can they dream, that Christ, who has
all power given unto him in heaven and earth, should be so tamely insensible of
the affronts, that are offered unto his Ambassadors, as without repentance to
suffer them to pass unpunished and unrevenged? Does not he himself tell us,
that a bare contempt of his ministers, much more all violent and other
injurious treatings of them, reflect in the upshot upon himself, and his
father? He that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me, Luke 10.16. They have their commission from him,
and he has his from his father: He sends them, and his father him. As my
father has sent me, even so send I you, Joh. 20.21. If then we slight, wrong,
or violence them, both he and his father may justly interpret it, as done unto
themselves.

2. Here is an use of terror unto all the enemies of Christ, whether open and
professed, or secret and dissembled. Can there be a point of greater folly,
then for impotent dust and ashes to be against him, that has all power in
heaven and earth, all judgment committed unto him, authority to sentence all
his enemies unto eternal flames, and torments? All opposition of him is like
the dashing of an earthen vessel against a great stone, or rock: for he is the
head of the corner, and whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken:
but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder, Math. 21.44. All
his enemies, all unregenerate and unbelieving persons whatsoever, may be said
to fall on him: Unto them he is a stone of stumbling and rock of offense, 1
Pet. 2.8. And they shall all of them be broken either to their conversion, or
destruction. But now as for reprobates, such as die in final unbelief and
impenitency, Christ is an enemy unto them, he falls on them, as a great stone
from an high place, and therefore he shall grind them to powder: they shall
utterly, and irrecoverably be destroyed. What King (says our savior) going to
make war against another King, sits not down first and consulteth, whether
he be able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty
thousand? or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an
Embassage, and desires conditions of peace, Luke 14.31,32. These foolish
souls that wage war against Christ, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, if
they would consult their own safety, so far as to consider how unable such
poor worms as they, are to cope and encounter with him, that has all the
hosts of the Lord under his command, They would speedily lay aside all farther
thoughts of hostility, and send their tears and prayers as Ambassadors, and
desire conditions of peace upon Christ's own terms. It was a vain brag of
Plutarch.
Pompey, that as often as he did but stamp with his foot upon the ground of
Italy, he should bring men enough out of every corner, both footmen and
horsemen. But much more may truly be averred of Christ, he has heaven, earth,
and hell, at a beck, and can whenever he please, arm the whole creation
against all that oppose him, or his.

But indeed his justice does not go always in the same path, or pace. His
patience many times grants a reprive unto his greatest enemies, during their
lives here on earth. Latter ages have hardly afforded a more bloody, and cruel
adversary unto the Church of Christ, then the Duke of Alva: and yet Christ
suffered his hoare head to go down to the grave in peace. But there will come
a day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, and Christ.
And then Christ will put all his enemies under his feet: His father will make
them all his footstool. Then the stoutest, and proudest of his enemies shall
be sufficiently sensible of their Impotency, and when it is too late, repent
their mad and successelesse assaults of his kingdom. And the kings of the
earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the
mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman, shall hide themselves in
the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains; and shall say to the mountains
and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sets on the
throne, and from the wrath of the lamb, Rev: 16.15,16.

How will the boares out of the wood, that have wasted the vineyard of the
Lord, and the wild beasts of the field, that have devoured it, Psalm. 80.13. The
Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the vines, the tender grapes, how I say,
will they be filled with despair and confusion, when they shall come to be
censured for this by the Lord of the vineyard? How will they be able to look
in the face the Lord of the harvest, whose chief design has been to hinder
the sending of laborers into the harvest; and to obstruct their work, and
labor there in? how will those Tobiak's and Sandallat's, etc. be confounded,
who have used all their interest and power in the world to oppose the building,
repairing and reforming of the house, the Church of God, when for this they
shall be called unto an account by the son, that is Lord of the house? When
those that have all their lives long been obstinate profaners, and impugners of
the sabbath, and all other ordinances, when they shall see their judge, the
Lord of the Sabbath and all other ordinances, how unspeakable will their
horror, and amazement be? One great part of the torments of those, that have
waged war against the saints, will be, that the doom of the everlasting
state of their souls is to proceed out of the mouth of the King of Saints. No
tongue can decypher, no heart imagine the terrors that will overwhelme those
wolves, that have worried the sheep of Christ, when they shall see themselves
dragged unto the tribunal of the great shepherd of the sheep. At that last day
the lot of all Christ's enemies will be fatal, and dismal, and Christ himself
gives so comprehensive a character of his enemies, as takes in all, that in
the Church visible are not active for his cause, and glory; all that concur
not with him in promoting the salvation of men's souls; all that endeavor not
according to their callings to gather in unto his Church. He that is not with
me (says he) is against me: and he that gathers not with me scatters
abroad, Math. 12.30.

But now the condition of none of Christ's enemies will be so unsupportable, as
that of those, who are visibly subjects, and yet cordially enemies, who
profess service and subjection, and yet practice nothing but enmity.

It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sydon, for the land of Sodom, for
infidels, Turks, and Pagans, then for such, because they add unto their
hostility, falsehood, treachery, and mockery: They deal with Christ, as the
soldiers that said unto him; Hail, King of the Jews: but it was in a way of
scorn, for they crowned him with thorns, and smote him with their hands, Joh.
19.2,3. How bitterly did Christ himself expostulate with such hypocrites? Why
call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? Luke 6.46. If men
were but duly sensible of Christ's sovereign authority they would tremble at
their hypocrisy in professing, that Christ is their King, when in the mean
while they are wholly swayed by the worst of his enemies, the basest of their
lusts. As for those citizens of Christ, the members of his Church visible, that
hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, we will not have this man to
reign over us, how solemn and dreadful is their execution. Those mine
enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay
them before me, Luke 19.14,27.

But now Christ will handle none of his enemies with more rigor, then those,
that take a commission from him. If the builders reject the head of the corner,
the chief corner stone, what can they expect, but either to fall on this
stone, or to have this stone fall on them, and so to be broken in pieces unto
perdition, to be ground unto powder, to perish utterly by the highest degrees
of punishment. What Prince or state but would most severely punish the
perfidiousnesse of such Ambassadors, as being sent to pacify a rebellion
should underhand animate unto it? Oh, what does more encourage, and harden men
in their rebellion against Christ, then the disobedience of those, whose office
it is to take them off from it? Rebels against Christ are unmeete orators to
persuade unto loyalty, and submission unto him, because altogether unlikely to
prevail. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us,
we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. But the
Rhetoric of our Pulpits will never woo men hereunto, when our lives speak a
contradictory language. It is altogether improbable, that we should persuade
men to be reconciled unto Christ, when they see us our selves unreconciled, and
in defiance of him; what more treasonable almost in war, then for
commission-officers to give assistance unto the enemy. Our ministry is a
warfare, 1 Cor. 9.7. and is it not high treason then, for ministers by their
doctrine, or example, to give succor unto, or to cooperate with the enemies of
Christ Jesus, the sins and errors of their people.

For a captain to exhort his soldiers to fight valiantly, and presently to
run over unto the enemy, will add scorn and derision unto his treason: and we
may say as much concerning ministers exhortations of their people unto a
spiritual warfare; if when they come down from their pulpits, they run over
unto the tents of sin, Satan, and the World, and march under their colors. I
shall conclude this use with Math. 24. verse. 48, etc. unto the end. Where we
have the Character, and the punishment of a wicked minister. 1. the Character,
his sin against Christ, his fellow ministers, and his flock or people. 1. His
sin against Christ, is, unbelief of his judiciary power, one branch of his
sovereignty: that evil servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his
coming, verse. 48. (2) We have his malignity against such of his fellow
ministers, as are pious, and painful: and shall begin to smite his fellow
servants, verse. 49. (3) We have his participation of, and fellowship with the
sins of his people: And to eat, and drink with the drunken: verse. 49. Lastly,
we have Christ's punishment of him for this: The Lord of that servant shall come
in a day, when he looks not for him, and in an hour, that he is not ware of:
and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites:
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, v. 50, 51.

Use 2. of Consolation.
A second use is of Consolation. A great comfort it was to Joseph's Brethren,
when once they were reconciled unto him, that their brother was the second
person in the Kingdom, and governor of Egypt, and all the house of Pharaoh.
So it is an unspeakable consolation unto all that are reconciled unto Christ,
that the very humanity of Christ their elder brother is second in authority
unto the all powerful Trinity, and that for these two following reasons,
because they are assured 1. of communion in it, and 2. benefit by it.

1. They are assured of communion with Christ in it, by way of analogy and
resemblance. To sit at the right hand of God is Christ's incommunicable
privilege, Heb. 1.13. To which of the Angels said he at any time, sit on my
right hand, etc. But yet the Church sits at Christ's right hand. Upon thy right
hand does stand the Queen in Gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45.9. To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame,
and am set down with my Father in his throne, Rev. 3.21. And he that
overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over
the nations: (and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a
petter shall they be broken to shivers) even as I received of my Father, Revel.
2.26,27. The words are to be understood of the faithful, sitting with Christ
in judgment over the nations at the last day, as asessors, assenting unto, and
approving of his sentence against them. Jesus said unto his disciples, verily,
I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the
Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Math. 19.28, Luke 22.30. Do you
not know (says Paul) that the Saints shall judge the World, 1 Corinthians. 6.2.

2. They may be assured of benefits by Christ's universal jurisdiction over all
Creatures in heaven and earth; and that 1. Negative, nothing shall hinder their
Salvation. 2. Positive, all things, if need be, shall be serviceable unto their
salvation.

1. Then, if Christ as mediator has all power given unto him in heaven and
earth, his members then may be confident, that nothing shall hinder their
salvation; not sin, nor Satan, nor wicked men.

1. From Christ's authority they may be comforted against sin, against the
guilt and power of sin.

1. Against the guilt of sin. The father would never have thus highly
advanced him, given him such a vast and boundless dominion, if he had not
fully satisfied his justice, and cleared the debts of all his members. We read
in the relation of the proceedings against Sr Walter Rawleigh at the Kings
bench bar at Westminster 1618. October 28, that when he was demanded, why
execution should not be done upon him, according to the judgment pronounced at
Winchester against him: His answer was, that he was told by his counsel, that
in regard his majesty since the said judgment had been pleased to employ him in
his service, as by commission he had done, it made void the said judgment, and
was a verification unto him, and gave him as it were, a new life, and vigor.
This plea, though just and agreeable unto reason, and unto law too, as I have
been informed by those, that are very well skild in the laws of the land, yet
could not save the life of this worthy Gentleman with his partial, and
prejudiced Judges. Yet this we are sure of, the commission which God has given
unto Christ over all creatures in heaven and earth, may secure all true
believers from the curse, and condemnation of the law: for it was a real
acquittance and full discharge unto him, their surety, and so a virtuall pardon
of them: Hence the answer, or apology of a good conscience unto the cry of
sin, the accusation of the law, and the concurrence of this answer unto our
salvation, is made by the Apostle Peter to depend upon the resurrection of
Jesus Christ, his going into heaven, and his being there on the right hand of
God, and the subjection of Angels, authorities, and powers unto him, 1 Pet.
3.21,22. Hence is it also that the Apostle Paul infers the non-condemnation
of the elect rather from Christ's exaltation, then his death; because his
exaltation is a clear and full evidence, that his death is abundantly
satisfactory unto the justice of God. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ
that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us, Romans 8.34. many, sin, Satan and the
law, may be ready, and very forward to accuse, but none of these have any power
to condemn: for it is Christ that died for us. And in the death of such a
person, as Christ, there cannot but be a fullness of satisfaction. But of this,
without his resurrection, we could have had but little assurance; and therefore
that, with the following parts of his exaltation, the Apostle makes the chief
ground of his confidence: yea rather that is risen again. He haith paid the
utmost farthing; for he is delivered out of prison. He is risen, nay, he is
exalted unto a throne, a crown, a Kingdom: He has all power given unto him,
in heaven, and earth: He is sat down at the right hand of God; and there he
has authority to make intercession in the behalf of all the elect for
whatsoever he pleases. If he were not disburd'ned of the guilt of our sin,
God would never have thus highly exalted him, never suffered him to have been
thus near him, to have had such power, and prevalency with him. Because the
father has committed all judgment unto the son, Joh. 5.22. the son
himself concludes the freedom of all believers from condemnation. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, He that Hears my word, and believes on him that sent
me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation: but is passed
from death unto life, Joh. 5.24.

Thus you see, how the fullness of Christ's sovereignty, and dominion, exempts
believers from the guilt of sin. Now, It is only guilt that makes men afraid
of death, and hell: it is the sting of death, it is that, which puts us into
danger of hell fire, and therefore being freed from guilt, we may be confident
to be delivered from the wrath to come: we need not fear the arrest of death,
or imprisonment in hell. Christ, our mediator, has the keys of death, and
therefore unto his, death shall not be a prison, but a bed, or a withdrawing
room, a place of repose: He has the keys of hell, and therefore he will
suffer none of these to be cast into it, for whom he has prepared a mansion in
his fathers house.

Secondly, The fullness of Christ's authority may comfort all his members
against the power, rage, and reign of sin, what complaint more usual with
believers, then that of the violence of their lusts? Oh, say they, our
corruptions are so powerful and vigorous, as that we are afraid they will
sometime or other break out unto our either disgrace, if not undoing: why! if
they would but look off from themselves upon Christ Jesus at the right hand of
his Father, they might behold him invested with authority to mortify their most
violent lusts, to subdue their most headstrong corruptions. He gave his
Apostles power against unclean spirits to cast them out, Math. 10.1. and to
heal all manner of sickness, and all manner of diseases. He gave the seventy
disciples power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the power of
the enemy, Luke 10.19. So he gives unto his disciples and members, power to
cast out unclean habits, and every serpentine lust, which are the spawne and
brood of that great Serpent. Indeed no wind so boisterous and impetuous as the
unmortified passions of men, no sea so tempestuous, so rough or restless, as
the hearts of unregenerate men, Isa. 57.20. The wicked are like the troubled
sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up wire and dirt. The sea is calm
sometimes, but there is a perpetual tempest in their bosoms, their lusts are
always raging, they are like a troubled sea, when it cannot rest, they cast up
nothing but mire and dirt: All their words and actions are not only sinful,
but sins, mire and dirt. But now Christ is such a manner of man, as that he can
easily rebuke both, the very wind and seas obey him, Mark. 4.41. He has such
authority from his father, as that he can in all the elect with a word as it
were, still the wind of passion, and calm the sea of sin, and stay it is
proud waves.

Secondly, The fullness of Christ's power and authority yields comfort against
the strength, malice, and temptations of Satan. Christ has the keys of hell,
and therefore they that have interest in Christ, have no reason slavishly to
fear all the Devils in hell: Satan indeed is the prince of the power of the
air, but what is the power of the air in comparison of the power of our
mediator, All power in heaven and earth? Satan is compared to a strong man
armed, Luke 11.21. but in the next verse we find, that Christ is stronger then
he, able to overcome, and bind him, to take from him all his armor wherein he
trusted, and to divide his spoils, Math. 12.29. Luke 11.21,22. The Seed of the
woman is able to overpower the seed of the serpent, the utmost mischief that
the seed of the serpent, the Devil, and his instruments can do, is, but to
bruise the heel, and that is no mortal wound, for it is far from either
head or heart: but the seed of the woman, Christ Jesus, shall bruise the head
of the serpent, that is, destroy the power, the Kingdom, and works of the
Devil, 1 Jo. 3.8. It is true, we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
this world etc. Ephesians. 6.12. But let us be strong in the Lord Jesus, and in the
power of his might, for it is a power far above all principality and power
and might and dominion, etc. Ephesians. 1.21. Christ is the head of all principality
and power, Col. 2.10. And therefore Paul had good reason to be persuaded, that
neither Angels, principalities, nor powers shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Lastly, The fullness of Christ's authority is a support, and comfort unto all
that belong unto him against opposition of men, whether violent by persecution,
or fraudulent by heresy, and schism. Why should any member of the Church be
diffident, and distrustful of it is own, or the Churches safety? seeing the
head of the Church, who has the key of David, opens, and no man shuts,
and shuts, and no man opens, that is, governs and protecteth his Church
irresistably: if we take the word (irresistably) in opposition unto a final,
complete, and victorious resistancy, why should we fear the malice and enmity
of weak men, as long as we have the love and favor of so potent a Savior? if
he be our friend, no matter though we have all the world for foe, If he be with
and for us, who can be against us, Romans 8.31. In that terrible invasion of
Israel by Shalmanaser, which ended in the utter ruin, desolation, and
captivity of the whole nation, described Isay. 8. ult. to be a time of trouble
and darkness, and dimnesse of anguish, far surmounting their former troubles,
though very great and grievous cap. 9.1. yet the prophet goes to support the
sinking spirits of the believing and penitent party with the promise of comfort
and liberty, v. 2, 3, 4. the ground of all which he makes to be Christ's
sovereignty verse. 6. though the remnant of Christ's people amongst the captived
Israelites walked in darkness, and dwelt as it were in the shadow of death,
yet they shall see a great light verse. 2. the light of sprituall comfort and
deliverance shall shine upon them, they shall joy according to the joy of
harvest verse. 3. they shall be freed from the bondage of their spiritual
enemies; the yoke of their burden, the staff of their shoulder, the rod of
their oppressors shall be broken, as in the day of Midian, verse. 4. for unto
us a child is borne, unto us a son is given, upon whose shoulders the
government of the Church and the whole world is cast verse. 6. And this
government is managed, as by unconceivable wisdom, He is the wonderful
Counselor, so by unspeakable love, the Zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform this. And the ground of this assertion is his relation unto us, He is
our everlasting Father, v, 6. If the Church be full of disorder and Confusion,
1 Cor. 14.32. if the Spirits of the prophets be not subject to the prophets, 1
Cor. 12.17. if the whole body affect to be the eye, and the hearing, why! his
government is upon the throne of David and his king dome to order it; if the
Church be in a weak and tottering condition, his government is upon the throne
of David, and upon his Kingdom to establish it, verse. 7. We find Psalm: 80.
that when the hedges of the Church of Israel were broken down, the hedge of
discipline, the hedges of God and the Magistrates protection, verse. 12, 13. so
that all they which pass by the way did pluck her: The Bear out of the wood
did wast it: and the wild beast of the field did devour it. Why then! the
alone refuge and Sanctuary of her genuine members was, the exaltation of
Christ, verse. 17, 18. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: upon the
son of man whom thou made strong for-thy self; So will we not go^ back from
thee. As if the Psalmist should have said, if our blessed Savior be highly
exalted, and a name given him above every name, and has all power given unto
him in heaven and earth, why then we may wax confident of our perseverance, for
he will employ this his power and authority to preserve us from Apostasy and
defection, the shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, so that we shall never
draw back unto perdition, Heb. 10.39. And this will satisfy and compose our
spirits, let the world go how it will, let all things be turned topsy turvy,
so as we go not back from thee O Lord of Hosts, so long as there is not in us
an evil heart of unbelief, we hope we shall possess our souls in patience.
Though the vineyard of the Lord be burnt with fire, and cut down, though there
be scarce left among us so much as the face of a Church visible, men may throw
us out of our earthly enjoyments, they may shut us up in a deep and dark
dungeon, and there exclude the light of the Sun from us, but in such a
condition the power of our Mediator should uphold our spirits; He has the Key
of David; and opens and no man shuts, if he open heaven gates unto us, not
all the men in earth, not all the Devils in hell, are able to shut, or bar
them against us. If we be cast upon a time of trouble, such as never was since
there was a nation even to that same time, why at that time Michael shall stand
up, the great Prince which stands for the children of thy people, and at that
time thy people shall be delivered every one, that shall be found written in
the book, Dan. 12.1. This place of Daniel you may expound by Revel. 12.7.
where we have a war raised in heaven, that is, in the Church of God, by the
Dragon and his Angels, that is, Satan and his adherents, but they are
encountered by Michael and his Angels, who give them a total rout and
overthrow, verse. 8. They prevailed not, neither was their place found any more
in heaven. They had no more power to tyrannize over the Church. And it is
observable, that the Instruments of this great victory are none but poor
martyrs; for such as these were the Angels of Michael, that is Christ,
described to be, verse. 11. They loved not their lives unto death. The strongest
weapons of their warfare are their sufferings. The victory that overcomes the
world is the faith and patience of the Saints, 1 John. 5.4. The shedding of
their blood draws blood from their adversary, and their death puts life into
the cause which they dye for; so that we may say of them as of the King of
Sweden at the Battle of Lutzen, they conquer when they are killed. If that
befall our Church which Paul foretold of the Church of Ephesus, that grievous
wolves enter in among them, not sparing the flock, Act. 20.29. If foxes spoil
the vines and tender grapes, Cant. 2.15. If heretics, false teachers, seduce
weak Christians, especially new converts, why he is the great shepherd of the
sheep, and is able to repress them and chase them away: If never so malicious
and pote^t adversaries assail the house, the Church of God, why Christ is the
Lord of the house, and he is faithful to him, that appointed him, Heb. 3.2.
and therefore there is no need of any other garrison for it is protection, then
his power, and care, Psalm. 2.1,2,3,4,9. the Kings of the earth set themselves,
and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his
anointed, saying. Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords
from us. He that sits in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them
in derision. Thou shall break them with a rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in
pieces like a potters vessel. If ten Kings that have one mind, and have given
their strength and power unto the Beast, make war with the Lamb, the Lamb
shall overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Rev. 17.13,14.
To conclude this first branch of this use of consolation. The Apostle Paul
having spoken largely of the Sovereignty conferred upon Christ in his
exaltation, Heb. 2.5,6,7,8. in the end of the eight verse he moves a doubt
against it, but now we see not yet all things put under him; we see it indeed
with an eye of faith, but not with an eye of sense, and carnal reason; we may
say of that as the Apostle does of the future state of the Saints of God, it
does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know, that when he shall appear,
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, Joh. 3.2. but though it
does not yet appear, yet we believe it, and faith is an evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11.1. And the Apostle in his answer unto the doubt lays down a
very good argument for the strengthening of our faith herein. But we see Jesus
who was made a little lower then the Angels for the suffering of death crowned
with honor and glory, verse. 9. seeing he is crowned with glory, and placed at
the right hand of God, and then has all power given unto him, in heaven, and
earth, he will exercise this his power, and authority, for the good of his
Church and overthrow of his enemies, and at the last day he will put all,
either persons or things, that oppose him, absolutely under his feet, he will
subdue them and trample upon them as upon a footstool.

It is said of him, Heb. 10.12,13. He sat down on the right hand of God, from
henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool. If he our
Sovereign waits patiently till this work be done, it would be very bad
manners in us his subjects to be impatient, and not contented to wait the Lords
Leisure.

I proceed unto a second benefit accrewing unto believers by the fullness of
Christ's authority, and that is positive, subserviency of all things to their
salvation, seeing he has all power in heaven and in earth, therefore he can
make all creatures in heaven and earth to promote the glory and happiness of
his people. Are not the Angels all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister
for them, who shall be heirs of salvation? All believers are joint heirs with
Christ, Romans 8.17, Now he is the heir of all things, Heb. 1.3. therefore they
share with him in this his inheritance, and are, in a way of subordination to
him, heirs of all things too, All things are yours Nota, omnia vestra sunt,
non quasi omnia bona sint commania, uti erant in statu innocentiae, aut quasi
justi omnium rerum sint proprie domini, etc. sed vestra sunt, non possessione,
sed fine and usu, quia scilicet vobis in ministerium and auxilium salutis
deputata and data sunt, ita Anselm. Amb. Theodoret. S. Thom. Chrysostom: data,
inquam, ad usum vel realem, vel mentalem, qui est in omnibus creaturis
agnoscere, and laudare creatorem, and hoc est quod vulgo dicitur, fideli totus
mundus divitiarum est. Corn. a Lapide in Locum.

Universalem enumeratione illustrat, Vestri sunt omnes ministri, summi, infimi,
etc. Vestrae sunt omnes res, totus, inquam, mund us, etc. Vestra omnis
conditio, vita and mors, etc. Vestri denique omnes eventus, presents in hac
vita, prosperi et adversi, vel futuri in altera vita. Omnia, inquit, vestra
sunt. Anabaptistae abutuntur hoc loco ad (...) facultatum probandam Apostolus
vero non loquitur de possessionibus civilibus, sed de ordine divino, quo omnia
debent servire utilitati Ecclesiae, quia omnia sunt condita ad piorum salutem
and communicationem officiorum charitatis, quae non tollit justitiam, sicut nec
Evangelium tollit politias. Nec loquitur Apostolus de omnibus individuis, sed
de omnibus speciebus rerum. Pareus in Locum.

See also Reynold's vanity of the creature. page 27, 28.


says the Apostle (speaking of believers) 1 Cor. 3.21. not in regard of
propriety or possession, but only in regard of end or use, that is, All things,
so far as their need and occasion shall be useful, helpful, and serviceable
unto the salvation of your souls: and this is that which is meant by that
usual saying, quoted out of Aug. fideli t^tus mundus divitiarum est. The
Apostle illustrates the universal by an enumeration of particulars verse. 22.
whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours. Of which words I shall out of Pareus
give you this short following Paraphrase, All ministers are yours, the highest
and the lowest, Paul, Apollo, Cephas. All things are yours, the whole world.
All conditions are yours, life and death: All events are yours, present and
future, things present, or things to come, things present in this life, whether
prosperous or adverse, Romans 8.28. And we know, that all things work together
for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his
purpose. Things to come, that is, all the glory of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.

Lastly, upon this fullness of Christ's authority we may ground exhortations
unto several duties, and that regarding either God, Christ, or our brethren.

First, we may hence be exhorted unto thankfulness toward God, for that he
has vouchsafed such dignities unto our nature in the person of his son,
Psalm, 97.1. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice: let the multitude of
Isles be glad thereof. When the multitude saw the cure of the man sick of the
Palsy, they marveiled and glorified God, which had given such power unto men,
Math. 9.8. How should we marvel, and glorify God for the giving of all power
in heaven and earth unto the man, Christ Jesus, for that his head is as the
most fine gold, Cant. 5.11. Aynsworth.
that is, his head-ship, regiment, and kingdom is most glorious, like
splendent gold. Because he is the head of the corner, the Psalmist, and our
Savior himself, would have us to acknowledge the Lords doing, and that it
should be marveilous in our eyes, Ps. 118.22. Math. 21.42. The Apostle Paul
entertains it with stupor, and admiration, what is man! says he, (that is, the
man Christ Jesus) that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man, that thou
visitest him: that thou crownest him with glory and honor, and did set him
over the works of thine hands, that thou put'st all things under his feet,
Heb. 2.6,7,8. In Cant. 3.11. we have an exhortation unto an heedfull, and
grateful observation and contemplation of Christ in his exaltation. Go forth,
O daughter of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the crown wherewith his
Mother crowned him in the day of his espousalls, and in the day of the
gladness of his heart: Diodati.
according to the letter this is meant of Solomon, who was the figure of
Christ; for when Solomon was married he had no father; and his mother was she
that did set the regal crown upon his head ( having procured it for him 1.
King. 1.16.) and put on his nuptial garments. But in respect of Christ, by
Mother is meant the Father, who crowned him, as Cant. 8.5. Ps. 110.1. Phil. 2.9.

Secondly, we may hence be exhorted unto diverse duties, regarding Christ,
faith in him* fear and confession of him, obedience, prayer, and conformity
unto him:

First, faith in him, our Savior having mentioned the doctrine of his
Sovereignty, all things are delivered unto me of my father, Math. 11.27. He
draws from it verse. 28. this exhortation: Come unto me all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest: that is, believe in me, and I
will give you the rest of satisfaction and consolation. John the Baptist having
Ioh. 3.35. spoken of the extent and universality of Christ's dominion, he
presently subjoyneth verse 36 the reward of faith, and punishment of unbelief:
first the reward of faith; He that believes on the Son has everlasting life:
that is, as Cajetan expounds it, habet eam velut in semine, he has eternal
life seminally, he has the root and cause of it, a promise of it, an interest
in the purchase of it, a possession of the beginning and first fruits of it.

Secondly, we have the punishment of unbelief, and that, as the but now
mentioned Cajetan analyseth the words, is twofold, poena damni and poena
sensus, the punishment of loss, and the punishment of sense: first the
punishment of loss, he that believes not the Son, shall not see life: that
is, shall not enjoy life. Secondly, the punishment of sense or Torment, The
wrath of God abides on him: where again, as the same author observes, we
have the perseverance and dominion of the punishment of unbelievers.

First, the perseverance, or permanency of their punishment, the wrath of God
abides, Isa. 54.8.

Secondly, the dominion of their punishment, the wrath of God abides on them;
dominium poenae significatur ex praepositione super, says Cajetan, It shall
not be in the power of the damned to divert their thoughts so much as one
moment from the consideration of their torments. Christ Jesus having told the
Jews that the father had committed all judgment unto him, John 5.22. he
presently deduceth herefrom the safe and happy condition of all such as believe
in him verse. 24 Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation: but is passed from death unto life.

Secondly from this fullness of Christ's authority we may be exhorted unto a
fear of him; If Christ be our Master where is his fear, Mal. 1.6. whom should
we fear, if not him that has all power given to him in heaven and in earth,
that has all judgment committed to him, who is able to destroy both soul and
body in hell Math. 12.28. And this use the Apostle Paul makes of this doctrine
Phil. 2.9,10,11,12. God has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc. and
that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord etc. wherefore, my
beloved etc. work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, with a
fear of reverence and humility toward God, the author of salvation; with a
fear of care, caution, prevention, and eschewall toward hell, and damnation,
the opposite of salvation.

Thirdly, from hence we may be exhorted unto a bold and undaunted profession of
him, why should we be afraid, or ashamed to confess him, who has all power
given unto him in heaven and earth. The Apostle Peter deriveth the answer of a
good conscience from Christ's exaltation, his resurrection, ascension into
heaven, sitting at the right hand of God, and the subjection of Angels,
authorityes and powers to him, 1 Pet. 3.21,22. And some think, that this answer
of a good conscience is the answer of confession, of which the Apostle speaks
before, verse 15, 16. Sanctify the lord God in your hearts, and be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
etc. having a good conscience etc.

Fourthly, we may hence be exhorted unto obedience to him, for he is a Lawgiver
able to save and destroy, and has in a readiness to revenge all disobedience,
2 Cor. 10.6. Joseph's exaltation was, think many, a type of Christ's, Genesis 41.
v. 41, 42, 43. Pharaoh set Joseph over his house or Court, and over all the
land of Egypt. God has set Christ over his house, the church, in a special
way; over all the world, in a general way. The putting of Pharaohs signet upon
Joseph's hand, the araying of him with vestures of fine linen, the putting a
gold chain about his neck, were but dark and weak figures of that surpassing
glory and honor wherewith in his exaltation his humanity was crowned. Pharaoh
made Joseph to ride in the second charet. Christ's humanity is next and second
in authority unto the Deity. There were certain officers that cried before
Joseph bow the knee: And it is the duty of all ministers of the Gospel to cry
before Christ unto their people to bow and bend the knees of their heart unto
him; but if they should be silent and remiss in their duties, the greatness
of his authority invites and bespeaks such a submission; for he has all power
given unto him in heaven and in earth: how obedient were those soldiers, which
were under the Centurion in the Gospel, I am, says he, a man under authority,
having soldiers under me: and I say to this man, go, and he goes: and to
another, come, and he comes: and to my servant, do this, and he does it, Math.
8.9. Christ, even as man, is under the authority of no creature, but has a
general jurisdiction over all creatures in heaven and earth, but if he say to
this man, go, he stands stock still, if he says to another come, he never
moves out of his place, he says to us his servants do this, and we obstinatly
omit it; The Apostle Peter asserts the dependency of the answer of a good
conscience, upon Christ's resurrection, ascension, and sovereignty, 1 Pet.
3.21,22. and by this answer of a good conscience some understand the readiness
of a renewed and sanctified conscience, to conform unto the commands of God;
and indeed is it not fitting for every good conscience to be subject unto him,
unto whom Angels, authorities and powers are made subject, to say unto him as
Samuel was directed by Ely, Speak Lord for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3.9. or
as David expresses himself, Ps. 27.8. When thou said, seek ye my face, my
heart said unto thee, thy face, Lord, will I seek, Ps. 40.7,8. Then said I, to
I come, etc. I delight to do thy will, etc, yea thy law is within my heart.
Because all things were delivered to Christ of his Father, Math. 11.27.
therefore hereupon Christ himself exhorts as unto faith in him, come unto
me, etc. ver. 28. so also unto obedience to him, Take my yoke upon you, and ye
shall find rest to your souls, verse. 29. however your bodies and estates may
be liable unto trouble, the Father has committed all judgment to the Son: that
all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He that
honors not the Son, honors not the Father, which has sent him, John.
5.22,23. Indeed the divine excellency, the infinite perfection of the Deity, is
the alone formal object, principal ground, reason, or inducement of divine
worship; but yet the judiciary power delegated unto Christ, as mediator, and
man, may be a great and powerful motive hereunto: For by our obedience unto
him, we shall consult for our own indemnity: for his power, if we do not bow
unto it, will break us; if we do not yield him an active obedience, he can
extort from us a passive obedience; if we do not do his will, we shall suffer
his wrath; if we do not prostrate our selves at his feet, in a way of
reverence, service, and worship, we shall be put under his feet, in a way of
conquest, and triumph, as a footstool to be trampled upon: as he has power to
condemn for disobedience at the last day, so he has authority to chastise it
here in this life with removal of his ordinances, He walks in the midst of
the golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.12,13. And therefore he has power to remove
them where he please, he has in his right hand the Stars, verse 16. the
ministers of his Church, and therefore he can suffer an Eclipse of them, he can
rightfully permit the removal of our teachers into a corner, Is. 30.20. and
the going down of the Sun upon our Prophets, Mic. 3.6. He is the Angel of the
Covenant, and therefore he can upon neglect, contempt, and refusal of it,
withdraw his ambassadors from any place whatsoever: He is the Lord of the
vineyard, and therefore upon its unfruitfulnesse, he can expose it unto
desolation by the boar out of the wood, and unto devouring by the wild beasts
of the field, he can suffer it to be burnt with fire, to be cut down, he can
make it to perish at the rebuke of his countenance, Ps. 80.13,16. Math. 20.8.

Fifthly, Because Christ has all mediatory power given unto him in heaven and
in earth, this may encourage all his, to make their addresses in prayer unto
God, by him, in his Name, through his mediation, for may they not with
boldness and confidence approach the holy of holyes, as long as their access
is by him, who alone has power of intercession with him. It is his office to
receive, and present all the prayers of all the Saints Rev. 8.3. and therefore
every Saint may be confident of a gracious return into their bosoms of all
their prayers, brought unto him. When the people cried unto Pharaoh for bread,
Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, go unto Joseph, and what he says unto
you* do, and Joseph opened all the storehouses, Genesis 41.55,56. If we cry unto
God for bread, for any mercy, he sends us to his Joseph, who opens all the
storehouses of his special, and rich mercies, belonging any way to the
covenant of grace. All such mercies are handed, and delivered out unto us by
his mediation, Every good, and every perfect gift, as it comes down from the
father, Jam. 1.17. so it comes by Christ, as a mediator; if we want private,
or personal mercies, unto whom should we run for them, but unto him, who is
now ascended up far above all heavens, and has all power given him, to
distribute gifts unto men, and to fill all things; that is, all his members
with his spirit and grace, Ephesians. 4.8,10. If we want any measure of light, and
knowledge, we should beg it of him; for he himself having Mat. 11.27.
affirmed his sovereignty over all things in general, All things are delivered
unto me of my father; He forthwith instanceth in his power of saving
Illumination, as one of the principal flowers of his crown, and chief
branches of his royal prerogative, neither knows any man the father, save
the Son, and he, to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. None has authority,
savingly to reveal the Father, but the Son; He alone has power to pour out a
spirit of Wisdom and Revelation; if the whole Church visible, if any
particular Church want a mercy and deliverance, who so able to relieve and
supply her, as her head? if the vineyard be overrunne by wild and savage
beasts, the Bear out of the wood, and wild beasts out of the field, cruel and
bloody enemies, unto whom should we make our prayers in her behalf, but unto
the Lord of the vineyard? So the Church in the Psalmist, Return we beseech
thee, look down from heaven, and behold, and visit this vine, and the
vineyard which thy right hand has planted, Psalm. 80.14,15. He is the Lord of
the house his Church, and therefore beseech him to look unto the ruins, and
dilapidations thereof. He is the Lord of the harvest, and therefore let us
petition him, to remove loyterers, and send forth laborers into the harvest,
and withal to furnish them with abilities for their Labor, all gifts
requisite for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ: Let us entreat him to pour upon them a
spirit of prayer, and supplication, to open unto them a door of utterance, to
speak the mystery of Christ, that they may make it manifest as they ought to
speak Col. 4.3,4.

Use 6. of Exhortation.
Sixthly, from the greatness and fullness of Christ's authority, we may be
exhorted unto a diligent endeavor after conformity unto him, in all his moral
actions, that have a moral ground, or reason. For whom should Saints imitate,
if not the King of Saints? whom should rational and spitituall sheep follow,
but that one chief and great shepherd of Souls? what pattern should
disciples propound, but that of their Master? whose example should Soldiers in
this spiritual warfare eye, but that of the victorious captain of their
salvation? whom God has given for a leader and commander unto his people,
Isaiah. 55.4. A governor that shall rule his people Israel, Math. 2.6. How
apish have men been in all ages, to imitate men of great place, power, and
authority. The Courtiers of Alexander held their necks awry, because his was
naturally so. And I have read, that whereas a mischievous Eunuch, Eutropius,
having the ear and heart of his Master, the then Emperor, he would never give
way by his good will, to the preferment of any unto any great place, or office,
but such as made themselves Eunuchs; whereupon some ambitious fools castrated
themselves, and so that they might be great men in power, and place, they made
themselves monsters, and no men. Shall men be thus forward to imitate the
defects, and deformities of powerful personages here on earth, and shall not
we be very diligent in our imitation of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
who has all power given unto him in heaven and earth? Our Savior himself
makes the extent, and universality of his dominion, a motive, as unto faith in
him, obedience to him, so unto imitation of him. All things are delivered into
my hands, etc. therefore learn of me, and he instanceth in two particulars,
that more especially deserve to be imitated: for I am meek, and lowly in
heart, which brings me unto the third sort of duties, unto which, from the
fullness of Christ's authority, we may be exhorted; and they are such, as relate
unto our Brethren, meekness, and humility.

Use 1. of Exhortation.
First, from the fullness of Christ's authority, compared with his meekness, we
may all be exhorted unto meekness. All things were delivered unto him of his
Father, and yet he was meek, Math. 11.27,29. His carriage unto even his most
insulting, and provoking enemies, was full of meekness in his greatest
sufferings: There never dropped from him so much as one impatient word, or
syllable: who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously. 1 Pet.
2.23. and yet he could have taken upon the greatest of his adversaries a most
speedy, and easy revenge; to see such power matched with such patience, should
make us all blush at the excesses of our anger, and the rage of our impatience
toward all those almost with whom we converse. Not only private, but even
public persons, those of greatest place, may very well in the execution of
their places propound unto themselves this matchless meekness of their
Savior, and carry their government, as Christ did, upon their shoulders in
patience; that is, so far as they may, without prejudice unto justice, bear
with the weakness, and way wardnesse of their charges. Magistrates may hence
be instructed to carry their people in their bosom, as a nursing father
bears the sucking child, Number. 11.12. ministers may hence learn to be
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, and
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken
captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.24,25,26. Aaron carried the twelve tribes
in his brestplate next to his heart, to show, that in care he was to bear them,
Exodus 28. ver. 29. But he had them also engraven in two Onyx-stones, ver. 12.
and those set upon his very shoulders, to show, he must otherwhile bear them
in patience too. And it is not only Aarons case, and other high Priests, under
the Law: The Moral is applyable unto all ministers of the Gospel, they are to
bear their people, as in their breasts, by pastoral care and affection, so on
their shoulders, in great patience, and long-suffering.

Use 2. of Exhortation.
Secondly, from a comparison of the fullness of Christ's power, with the
greatness of his humility; all men, the greatest of men may be exhorted unto
humility, toward even the meanest of their brethren. All things were delivered
unto him of his father: and yet he was lowly in mind, therefore learn of him,
Math. 11.27,28. In John 13. we have his actual knowledge, or consideration of
his sovereignty, connexed with an action, wherein was the very depth of
humility, verse. 3, 4, 5. Jesus knowing, that the Father had given all things
into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God; He rises from
supper, and laid aside his garments, and took a towell, and girded himself,
after that, he pours water into a basin, and began to wash his Disciples
feet, and to wipe them with the towell, wherewith he was girded. Some might
interpret this action of our Savior to proceed from incogitancy, or
inadvertency, and think that he forgot himself, and did a thing unbecoming
his dignity. To prevent this, the Evangelist makes his notice of, and
meditation upon the fullness of his authority, the preface unto this his great
example of humility, knowing that the Father has given all things into his
hand, etc. he arises from supper etc. and began to wash his Disciples feet,
etc. The washing of feet was a civility, with which, at those times, in those
hot Eastern countries, strangers were entertained, especially in the evening,
and therefore perhaps might be usual toward superiors, and equals, but that
he that had all things given into his hands by the Father, he that was come
from God, and was forthwith to go to God, should wash the feet of his own
disciples, of which some were poor fisher men, is an unheard of condescension;
who can be proud and look upon so humble a Savior? whose pride should not so
lowly an action of his beat down? what power is there that should swell the
spirit of any mortal wight, when he that has all power given unto him in
heaven and earth stoops unto so low a service? who should refuse to write after
such a copy of Lowliness? Especially seeing our Savior himself exhorts
hereunto verse. 13, 14. Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well: for so I
am: If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash
one another feet. In washing of the feet there is Synecdoche Speciei, the
special is put for the general, washing of the feet being a base, and abject
service, stands for all offices, or duties of love, though never so low and
mean, unto such offices all men are obliged, even superiors, unto their
inferiors. In una itaque specie officii, totum genus officiorum intelligimus.
Ita quod explicando debitum abluendi pedes, comprehe^ditur debitum cujusque
officii tam corporalis, qua^ Spiritualis: quia and ipsa ablutio a Jesus
corporalis quidem exercitata est, Spiritualis vero sermon exposita. Intendit
ergo ad literam-Iesus, ut ab ip sius exemplo cognoscamus nos debitores invice^
ad mutua officia, quibus opus est ta^ ad corpus quam ad Spiritum. Mutua
siquidem praecipit dicendo alter alterius. Sed intellige proportionaliter; ut
non dedignentur superiores exercere officia sibi congrua tam ad corporis quam
ad Spiritus aliorum utilia: ex quo Jesus Dominus non horum aut illorum sed
omnium, and magister non horum aut illorum sed omnium, dignatus est sponte tam
vile exercere officium lavandi pedes piscatorum, etc. Exemplum enim dedi vobis.
Ne facta a Jesus domino and magistro admiranda potius quam imitanda acciperemus,
explicat imitanda. Cajetan. in locum.

Speciem ponit pro genere, nam per lotionem pedum, quod omnium ministeriorum
humillimum est, omnia exempla, omnia ministeria intelligit humilitatis.
Maldonat. in locum.

Quod ad externam pedum ablutionem attinet, minime fuit Christo propositum
talem ritum sacrum in Ecclesia instituere, sed secutus morem, illis temporibus
and regionibus ab ultima vetustate consuetum, ablutionis pedum, ad viatores
praesertim vespere excipiendos (ut ex quamplurimis Scripturae locis apparet)
hoc genere sermonis mutuam verorum Christi Discipulorum omnium inter se
conjunctionem ad quid vis muruae aedificationis causa praestandum commendavit,
non verbo tantum, sed suo quoque ipsius exemplo. 1 Cor. 9.19.1 Tim. 5.10. Luc
7.44. Generalis est ergo haec praeceptio, mutuam Christianorum omnium inter se
charitatem omni officiorum genere testandam complectens, and quidem iis
inprimis conveniens, quos Dominus caete^is and doctrina and omni verarum
virtutum exemplo praefecit, inter quas excellit profecto (...) tantopere ipsis
commendata. Mat. 20.27,28. Beza in locum. Vide Piscatorem in locum


The holiest of men have Christ for their Master, the greatest and most
powerful have him for their Lord; his washing then the feet, not the head of
his Disciples and servants, should be a forcible inducement unto any man
whatsoever, to serve even the meanest of his brethren, in the most
condescending and self-denying acts of love, especially seeing he himself
tells his disciples, that this his practice was not so much for admiration, as
imitation, verse. 15. for I have given you an example, that ye should do, as I
have done unto you. This example of Christ obliges all Christians, for he
speaks unto his Apostles, not only in the notion of Apostles, or Ministers,
but also under the capacity of Christians, and believers; but yet there may be,
and no doubt is, an appropriation of the obligation unto ministers, so that it
concerns them in a more especial manner, then it does others, and so much
may very probably be gathered from the last words of the next verse, neither is
he that is sent, greater then he that sent him. They that are sent by Christ,
as Ambassadors, should not, above all men, disdain the doing that, of which
they have a president in him, their great Lord and Master, but should make use
of the meditation hereof, as a powerful incentive unto an affable, and humble
carriage and behavior, and that unto both their fellow ministers, and their
brethren.

First, unto their fellow brethren of the ministry, no kind of eminency
whatsoever, can put such a distance between ministers of the gospel, as there
was between Christ and the Apostles, for he had all things delivered into his
hand, and them amongst the rest, and yet, though he knew this, he performed
unto them an act of such servility, as that when he addressed himself unto the
performance thereof, Peter was transported with a just wonder, and utterly
refused it, as he thought then, out of a devout reverence, because he judged it
no way suiting with the relation he had unto Christ, for he was his Lord and
Master, and therefore he thought he should much forget himself, to receive
such service from him. Peter says unto him, Lord, do thou wash my feet, thou
shall never wash my Tu mihi? quid est tu? quid est mihi? cogitanda sunt potius,
qua^ dicenda, ne forte quod ex iis verbis aliquatenus dignum concepit anima,
non explicet lingua. Aug. Oration est abominantis remabsurdam, and indignam: nam
interrogando quidnam faciat Christus, quasi manu^ illi injicit Calv. in locum.
Interrogatio admirantis and detrectantis tanquam rem absurdam minimeque
decentem. Piscat. in locum.
feet, ver. 6, 8. would some ministers but seriously and sadly ponder this
servile act of our Savior, unto his disciples and servants, they would not
look with such an eye of scorn and neglect, as they do, upon their poor
brethren, over whom they are advanced in this worlds lottery, either by others
ignorance, or their own confidence and Pragmaticalnesse, rather then any true
desert and ability. This point of the humility of ministers toward one
another, our Savior enforces from the scope of his whole humiliation, and
from the last and lowest act thereof, his death and passion, Math. 20.28. Even
as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
his life a ransom for many. Seeing Christ, who is the King of Kings, has for
our sake subjected himself, as a servant, taken upon him the form and nature
of a servant, done the work of a servant, and dyed the Crucifixion was a death
that commonly servants were sentenced unto, seldom times freemen, whence it is
many times noted out by the name of servile supplicium by Tacitus Godwin Romans
Ant.
death of a Servant, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even
the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. There is a great deal of reason, that as
all Christians, so all ministers should serve one another by love, Gal. 5.13.
Look upon the words foregoing those but now quoted out of Matthew, and you may
see, that Christ brought this his example, as a motive, whereby first he backs
his prohibition of all affectation of Prelacy, or domination in his ministers.
verse. 25, 26.

Secondly, he presses them, either unto humility, diligence and faithfulness,
in discharge of the work of their ministry in general, or else more
particularly, as some think, unto an humble submission unto their fellow
servants in the ministry, for the furtherance of that, which should be the
common design, the salvation of men's souls; and in this only he places the
eminency of a minister verse. 26, 27. whosoever will be great among you, let him
be your minister: And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your
servant. Those ministers, that otherwise have been of great parts and learning,
have not left behind them so precious a name, in the Church of God, as those
despised ones, that have made it their study, by submissive service of their
brethren, to further the common work. Mr Dickson has another interpretation
of these last words, with which I have not met in any other, and therefore I
think it not amiss to acquaint the Reader with it, If this command do not
prevail with the ambitious party, but he must needs bring forth his ambitious
desires, then the rest of the Ministers are warranted to diminish of that man's
estimation, and to account the less of him, by so much, as he is ambitiously
inclined to a principality and majority over the rest, for so do the words
bear, let him be your Servant, that is, let him be so esteemed of, and no
more. If any one among you affect to rule the roast, to be a Dominus fac totum,
and expect that his ipse dixit should carry all in your meetings, without
dispute, or contradiction, you should not give place to such by subjectio^ (to
borrow of the expressio^ of the Apostle) so much as for an hour, that the truth
of the Gospel might continue with you, Gal. 2.5. resist the pride of such a
man; express but little respect unto him; and this by Gods blessing may humble
him: however it is the likeliest course you can take, to free your selves from
the unhappy consequent of his domineering humor, if you comply therewith, and
submit thereunto: If such men as these would but provide for their own credit,
and the entertainment of their opinions (whether true or false, we dispute not)
why they have no such way or means, as to frame themselves unto an affable
humility; for the progress of both truth and error, is hindered by the morose
pride of their assertors; nothing so much distastes our Antagonists, and
renders them averse from compliance, as our superciliousnesse, of which we have
a remarkable instance in our English Holingshed page 151, 152.
Chronicle. When Augustine the Monk, sought to reduce the Britains unto the
jurisdiction of the Church of Rome, the Monks of Bangour asked the advice of a
certain wise and devout man among them, who made this answer; If he be the man
of God, follow him; then said they, how shall we prove, whether he be so, or
not. Then said he, the Lord says, take up my yoke, and learn of me, for I am
meek, and humble in heart. If Augustine be humble, and meek in heart, it is
to be believed, that he also bears the yoke of Christ, and offers it to you
to bear, but if he be not meek, but proud, it is certain that he is not of
God, and his word is not to be regarded: And how shall we perceive that, (said
they) find means (said he,) that he may first come to the place of the Synod,
with those of his side, and if he arise to receive you at your coming, then
know, that he is the servant of God, and obey him. But if he despise you, and
arise not against you, whereas you be more in number, let him be despised of
you. They did as he commanded, and it chanced, that when they came, they found
Augustine sitting in his Chair; which when they beheld, straightwaies they
conceived an indignation, and noting him of pride, labored to reproove all his
sayings, and gave a plain answer, that they would not receive him for their
Arch-Byshop; for they laying their heads together, thus thought, if he refuse
now to rise unto us, how much more will he contemn us, if we shall become
subject to him.

Secondly, the unexampled humility of Christ, compared with his magisteriall
power, and Lordly dominion over all things, should provoke all ministers of the
Gospel unto humility, and all the possible expressions thereof unto their
people, their power is but subordinate unto Christ's, and ministerial, and
therefore none of them should dare to Lord it over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3.
to assume a dominion over the faith of their people, 2 Cor. 1.24. but they
should profess and acknowledge themselves the servants of the Church, for the
Lord Jesus sake Non dicit autem servos Jesus, quod consequenter videbatur
dicendum, quia Iesum dixcrat Dominum, sed i dicit, quod est long inferius
atque humilius, servos vestros. Attamen ne nimis abjecte de suo ministerio
l^qui aut sentire videatur, add it per Iesum, vel ut habent Graeca and Syriaca,
propter Iesum, quemadmodum etiam legunt atque exponunt Ambrofiaster and
Selulius. Videtur autem in hac part non repetendum verbum, quod praecessit,
praedicamus. (non enim in eo versabatur Apostolorum praedicatio, ut
annunciarent se esse servos hominum) sed aliud quippiam supplendum, velut,
exhibemus, fatemur, aut profitemur, aut quid simile, ut sensus sis:
Nosmet-ipsos autem vobis exhibemus ut servos, palam fatemur nos non aliud esse
quam servos vestros propter. Iesum Dominum, a quo ministerium hoc nobis in
junctum est; servos, inquam, vestros quia more servorum nos totos impendimus
utilitati and saluti vestrae procurandae. Aestius in Locum.
2 Cor. 4.5. Indeed we are not to serve the wills, humors, and desires of men,
for if we pleased men, we should not be the servants of Christ, Gal. 1.10. but
the service that we owe unto our flocks, is in order unto the salvation of
their souls, and for that we should spare no pains, no labor of love, no
labor in the word and doctrine: there were lately in the Church of God amongst
us, a generation of men, that thought the feeding of Christ's sheep, by constant
preaching, a thing beneath those high places of dignity, in which they sat,
and I am afraid that there are now among us too many, that look upon the
feeding of Christ's lambs by catechizing, as a thing unbecoming the greatness
of their parts and learning; are there not others that apply themselves wholly
and altogether unto those that are either knowing or rich in their
congregations, as if the poor and ignorant were below their pastoral care; O
would these men but meditate, as they ought, upon the depth of Christ's
humiliation, together with his supreme sovereignty over all things, and
consider, how that he came down from heaven, to minister unto, and to die for
the weakest, poorest, most ignorant, and sinful of the Sons of men, they would
with Paul in the 1 Cor. 9.19. make themselves the servants of all, that they
might gain the more, they would confess themselves, as he did, Romans 1.14. to
be debtors to the unwise, as well as the wise, unto the most illiterate and
ignorant under their charge; the greatest poverty and misery would exclude none
from their ministerial affections, they would not disdain to exercise their
ministry, as the famous Perkins did, unto a prison; and yet such places are the
sinks of a nation. They would stoop unto any course of teaching, though never
so low, plain, and elementary, if thereby they might feed any of Christ's,
either sheep or lambs. They would deny their wit and learning, to the weak
they would become as weak, that they might gain the weak; they would be made
all things, unto all men, that they might by all means save some, 1 Cor. 9.22.

There is one use or inference more behind, which I must not pass by, because
our Savior himself makes it; All power is given to me in heaven and in earth,
go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
things, whatsoever I have commanded you, Math 28.18,19,20. The words were
spoken unto the Apostles, but the substance of the charge belongs unto all
ministers, and that unto the end of the world, ver. 20. The Prophet Malachy
taxes the Priests of his time, that they were partial in the Law, chap. 2.
ver. 9. we may allude unto the expression, and say of many ministers in our
days, that they are partial toward the ordinances of Christ. Some will
preach, but at no hands meddle with the Sacraments. Others will preach, and
baptize, but then they wholly lay aside the Lords Supper, as if the
administration of it were become a thing scandalous in a minister. Another sort
are diligent in preaching, and forward in dispensation of the Sacraments, but
then they have no care at all of discipline. Why! are not all these, preaching,
Sacraments, and discipline, the ordinances of him, that has all power given
unto him in heaven and earth? How dare these men so far transgress their
commission from him, as to neglect any one of them? The command of ministers,
to administer all ordinances, is a vertuall, and implied command of the people
to embrace, and receive all ordinances. If it be our duty to teach them to
observe all things, whatsoever Christ has commanded, verse. 20. They are not
then left at liberty, to observe what they please. Christ's power should awe
them, as well as us, unto universality in their obedience. For if they refuse
but one ordinance, they interpretatively deny his Sovereignty: whereas a full,
and universal conformity unto all his ordinances, exalts him; now he sits upon
his throne, crowned with glory and honor. Cant. 3.11. Behold King Solomon with
the crown, wherewith his Mother crowned him, in the day of his espousalls, and
in the day of the gladness of his heart. Believers in whom Christ is formed,
Gal. 4.19. who do the will of his father, Mat. 12.50. are the mother of Christ;
and submission unto his scepter, and government, is all the crown they can set
upon the head of him, whom God has already made their King. And from this
submission, no power or greatness whatsoever is a privilege or exemption: for
what a bubble is any earthly power, in comparison of all power in heaven and
earth? what poor worms are the greatest Monarchs, in respect of the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, and therefore the Psalmist exhorts the Kings, and
Judges of the earth to kiss the Son: that is, to do homage unto him, Ps.
2.10,12. Canutus, a King of this land, with his own hands set his crown upon
the head of the image of a Crucifix in Winchester. His superstition herein was
abominable, but the intent of his action, which I Judge in charity was to
express his acknowledgment of Christ's sovereignty, was very laudable. What
honorable mention does Ecclesiastical story make of such Princes, as have
submitted unto the discipline, as well as doctrine of Christ? and how famous
have they been in all succeeding ages? witness what is said of Philippus, the
first Christian Emperor, for his being content to stand amongst the number of
the penitents, who made confession of their sins: as also the praises of
Theodosius, for that he confessed his fault, against the inhabitants of
Thessalonica, in sight of the people with tears. How is John Ducas the Greek
Emperor commended for his patient acquiescence in, and penitent submission
unto, the bold severity of Blemmydes, who shut the Church doors against his
beloved Concubine Marcesina, though she was in all her glory, attended with
most gallants of the Court? The public acknowledgment, which the King of
Navarre, afterward King of France, made of his fault, in vitiating the
daughter of a Gentleman of Rochell, would have rendered him as renowned, as any
of those, if his other Apostasy, like a dead fly in the ointment of the
Apothecary, Eccles. 10.1. had not sent forth a stinking savor, and eclipsed
the glory of all his former actions. Thus, you have seen how the supreme, and
lordly power of Christ over all things, should stir up ministers unto a
discharge of their function.

It may in the last place serve further, as a motive to observe a due manner in
the performance thereof, to do it with diligence, and with confidence.

1. With diligence: for how can they but expect to be cursed, that do the
work of so powerful a Lord negligently? what can they look for, but
condemnation, that are lazy, and slothful in the service of him, that has all
Judgment committed unto him, and has authority to throw them into hell, as
well for idleness in their callings, as profanesse in their lives. The Lord of
the harvest will punish all loyterers, and reward none, but such as have been
diligent, and faithful laborers in the harvest. When the Lord of the vineyard
shall in the even of the world, the day of judgment, take an account of those,
that he has sent to labor in his vineyard, what will become of those, that
have been unmindfull of their errand, and have stood all their lives long idle,
wholly neglecting the dressing, pruning, and fencing of the Lords vineyard? what
answer can those pastors make unto the great, and chief shepherd, that have
taken no care at all to secure their flocks from wolves, and foxes, Heretics,
and Schismatics? Ministers are but as the ushers of Christ, that one master,
the principal teacher of his Church: and will he (think you) take it well of
them, that are not industrious in the instruction of his disciples. The doom
of the slothful, and unprofitable servant, that laid up his talent in a
napkin, or hid it in the earth, was to be thrown into utter darkness, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 25.24,25,26,27,30. In war, it is
death for sentinels to be taken sleeping: and if in the Church, the watchmen of
Christ, the porters of the house, be supine, remiss, and drousy, do you
think that Christ the master of the house will hold them guiltless. Ezekiel.
33.7. Mark. 13.34,35.

2. From the fullness of Christ's authority, ministers may be encouraged to
discharge their function with confidence, and that touching the protection of
their persons, success and reward of their labor.

1. They may hence gather confidence, touching the protection of their persons,
so far as Christ judges it convenient: for he that has all power given unto
him in heaven and earth, is able easily to put a restraint upon the greatest
power on earth, so that, if he think convenient, it shall not make the least
opposition.

2. Ministers may hence learn to be confident, touching the success of their
labors: for he has the key of the house of David, and can open unto them a
great and effectual door, though there are many adversaries. 1 Cor. 6.9. If he
set before the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia an open door, no man can
shut it, Rev. 3.8. If he give the Gospel a passage, no man can hinder it.

Lastly, Ministers may depend upon Christ's sovereignty, for the reward of their
labor. The recompense they have from the most of men, is contempt, affronts,
and abuses of all sorts. But when the chief shepherd shall appear, he is
able to give them a crown of glory, that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4.

2. There dwells in Christ, considered as the cause of our salvation, an all
fullness of sufficiency, an all sufficiency to effect it. Wherefore he is able
to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives
to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. In which words we have Christ's
sufficiency to carry on the work of our salvation, affirmed, confirmed, and
amplified, from the qualification of those to whom it is actually effectual.

1. Affirmed: he is able to save unto the uttermost, (...); the phrase may
denote three things, the perpetuity, the perfection of the salvation, which he
works, or else the perfection of his influence, or causality in the working
of it.

1. It may signify the perpetuity, and indeficiency of that salvation, which he
works: He is able to save unto the uttermost of time, for evermore. He is not
as Joshua, Othniel, Ehud, Shamgar, etc; a temporary, but an eternal Savior;
he is able to save unto all eternity.

2. It may import the absolute perfection, and fullness of the salvation, which
he works: He is able to save unto the uttermost degree of salvation: he does
not save by halves, but fully and perfectly, from every degree of evil,
whether of sin, or misery. And indeed there is not the least degree in the
salvation of true believers, that he leaves unaccomplished. He is the author
and finisher of their faith, Heb. 12.2. able to keep that, which they commit
unto him, against that day, 2 Timoth. 1.12. as he has begun a good work in
them, so will he perform, or finish it, Phil. 1.6. he will establish their
hearts unblameable in holiness before God, 1 Thessalonians. 3. ult. he will preserve
their whole spirit, soul, and body blameless unto his coming, 1 These. 5.23.

3. The form of speech may denote, (think some) the perfection of Christ's
influence in the effecting of our salvation: He is able to save unto the
uttermost, that is, all manner of ways, as a moral, as a physical cause of
salvation.

1. He is the moral cause of our salvation, by the merit of his humiliation,
by the prevalency of his intercession, and by the light of his Doctrine and
Example.

1. By the merit of his humiliation he has purchased our salvation, 1 Cor.
6.20.1 Pet. 1.18. and so is the meritorious cause thereof.

2. His intercession for our salvation cannot but be prevailing, because it is
in the virtue and strength of the all-sufficient merit of the sacrifice of his
obedience for it. It is nothing else but the continual presentation thereof
unto his father, and therefore is termed by some a presentative oblation.

Lastly, He is the moral cause of our salvation by the light of his Doctrine
and Example. 1 In his Doctrine, he has so fully taught the way unto salvation,
that it is able to make wise unto salvation through faith in him, 2 Timothy 3.15.
2 By his Example, he has as our forerunner, guide, as the captain of our
salvation, so fully chalked out unto us the way unto salvation, as that if we
follow him therein, it will bring us infallibly thereunto.

But now in the next place, he is not only a moral cause of our salvation by
his merit, advocation, and example, but also a physical cause, by his
omnipotency: for by this he will remove all impediments, level all mountains
of opposition, and notwithstanding them, put every believ^ into, as the
actual, so full and complete possession of happiness, and salvation. It will
in the conclusion make such a final and through conquest of all corruption
whatsoever, as that it will present his Church unto himself, without blemish,
glorious, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any ^uch thing, Ephesians. 5.26,27.

2. We have in this text Christ's sufficiency and ability to work our salvation
confirmed by two reasons; one drawn from the incommunicablenesse, the other
from the last act of his Priesthood, his intercession.

The first; from the uncommunicablenesse of his Priesthood: this man, because
he continneth for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, (...), an impassable
priesthood, which passes not from his own person, unto any other: wherefore
he is able to save unto the uttermost. They that make Christ's Priesthood
communicable, and derivable unto any successors or Vicars, do in effect deny
that Christ is able to save unto the uttermost those that come unto God through
him.

The Second reason is from the last act of his Priesthood, his intercession for
us, which implies, and presupposes the first, as being a continual tender
thereof unto his Father: He is able to save unto the uttermost, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them. But the Angels live for ever, and we
shall live for ever, and yet no Saint, or Angel, is able to save, so much as
one soul. Christ's life therefore is the cause of our salvation, not Causam
breviter inserit salvificae Christi potentiae, quia semper vivit. Sed et Angeli
semper vivunt, and nos semper vivemus: videtur igitur causa (...) minime. Vita
enim Christi non absolute, sed relate ad suum sacerdotium est nobis causa
salutis. Vivit enim (...) semper, non otiosus, nec sibi tantum beatus^sed
sacerdotio and regno suo defungens, s^que invigilans. Sic Romans 5.10. in
perpetua Christi vita fundari docet salutem nostram: and cap. 6. v. 8. vitam
Christi nostram vitam facit. Additur igitur finis perpetuae vitae (...): ut
interpellet pro nobis. q. d. vivit non sibi, sed nobis, nostrae salutis causam
asserens in Dei conspectu. Tacita subest occupatio: Potest servare: At a posse
ad esse non est firma consecutio. Imo non potest solum, sed and vult: quia
voluntatem interpellatione testatur. A posse autem and velle ad effectum been
sequitur. Et potest igitur and vult Christus nos servare. Potest, quia sacerdos
semper vivens: vult, quia interpellat pro nobis. Idem tribuit Christo Romans
8.34. Heb. 9.24.
absolutely (says Pareus) but in relation unto his Priesthood. He is able to
save unto the uttermost: seeing he ever lives to act and discharge the part,
and office of a Priest for us, to make intercession for us. He died to merit
our salvation, and he lives for ever actually to confer it upon every soul,
that comes unto God by him. If he had not risen from his grave, if he had not
lived, or if he had lived, as Lazarus to die again, we had been irrecoverably
buried in the graves of our sins, but he lives for ever. Christ being raised
from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6.9.
and therefore (as the Apostle argues, Romans 5.10.) if when we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life.

His exaltation, and raising of himself unto a glorious and immortal life, is
a sufficient argument, that he is able to save unto the uttermost. But can we
conclude our salvation from his bare ability to work it? In the next place
therefore he is not only able, but willing to save unto the uttermost: and we
have an undoubted testimony of this his will, his continual intercession for
our salvation, seeing he lives for ever to make intercession for them. The
eternal life, unto which Christ is raised, is not for himself, but for his
members, those that come unto God by him, to promote the work of their
salvation: He lives for ever purposely to make intercession for them. He
lives for ever, to act as a public person, as high Priest of his Church,
continually to solicit the salvation of their souls, that approach him by
faith. He cannot, you see, be unmindfull of the salvation of his people, but he
must withal be forgetful of the end and design of his exaltation: He lives
for ever to make intercession for them.

Lastly, we have the qualification of those, unto whom this ability, and
sufficiency of Christ to work salvation, is actually effectual. They must be
such, as come unto God by him. He will save unto the uttermost, all such, and
only such: and this affords matter for two uses to be made of this head, one of
consolation, another of exhortation.

Use 1. of Consolation.
The first of consolation: He will save to the uttermost every soul that comes
unto God by him, though before conversion rankt with Paul amongst the chief of
sinners; 1 Timothy 1.15. There is no snare of Satan so strong, but he can break
it, no wound in the conscience so deep, but he is able to cure it, no disease
in the soul so inveterate, but he is able to heal it. His blood is so
satisfactory unto Gods justice, as that it can wash away the blackest guilt, so
meritorious is it, that it can purchase a spotless holiness, an eternal
weight of undefiled, and unfading glory. Such is the sufficiency of his grace,
as that it can subdue the most raging, and resistlesse lusts, it can resist the
strongest, and most restless temptations.

2. Of exhortation.
2. Here is an exhortation to come unto God by Christ for salnation: for he will
save unto the uttermost only those, that come unto God by him: that is, by a
true faith, and unfeigned repentance, Heb. 11.6. John 6.35,37. by communion
with him in worship, and by all acts of new obedience, Exodus 16.9. Levit. 10.3.
Micah. 6.7,8. Heb. 4.16. Heb. 11.6. These alone are the persons, which count
the full salvation, which Christ has wrought, worthy of all acceptance. As
for those who draw nigh unto God, only by profession, in the usage of outward
ordinances, when all the while in their hearts and lives, by their unbelief,
impenitency, and profaneness, they keep a great distance from God, and
Christ, They are great undervaluers, and scornful slighters of his ability to
save unto the uttermost. We may apply here that saying of the Apostle, Heb.
2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great a salvation? How shall we
escape damnation, if we neglect such an all sufficiency of salvation, as is
treasured up in Christ Jesus? And do we not neglect it, if we will not so much
as come unto him for it? nay, do we not refuse and reject it, if we walk in,
and be delighted with those paths, and ways, that are opposite unto
salvation, and lead directly unto hell, and damnation.

This text gives little hope of salvation unto Pagans, and Papists: for the
former cannot come unto God by Christ, because they are utterly ignorant of the
name of Christ. And the Papists will not come unto God by him alone, they dare
not adventure their salvation upon his ability, unto which the scripture gives
such a clear, and full testimony, but will depend in great part upon their own
satisfactions, and merits, as also upon the intercession of saints, and Angels,
which are but Chimaera's, idle and lewd fictions, and therefore cannot a jot be
helpefull unto their salvation, but may indeed promote their damnation; nay the
assertion of them throws such a dishonor upon the fullness of salvation in
Christ, as that I am sure, it deserves in a very high measure damnation. But
though I am thus peremptory touching the desert of their doctrine, yet I shall
leave the final state of their persons unto the doom of their judge.

There are diverse formal, loose, and profane Protestants, whose salvation is
as (if not more) hopeless, then that of Papists: for God, and Christ, and
unmortified lusts, unsubdued sins, will never associate, and therefore if we
live, stay, and wallow in these, without repentance, we have not as yet drawn
nigh unto those. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness?
and what communion has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with
Belial? 2 Cor. 6.14,15. God, and Christ then are unapproachable as long as we
are in a state of unrighteousness, in a state of darkness, and ignorance,
utterly unacquainted with God, and Christ, as long as we are sons of Belial,
and Children of disobedience.

Besides, coming unto God by Christ for salvation is ever accompained with
self denial, and therefore excludes all dependence upon any thing either in
our selves, or any other creature. It is joined also with humiliation, and
self abhorrency, a due sight, and deep sense of our lost, and lapsed
condition, our liablenesse unto hell, and damnation. It is the apprehension of
danger, that makes men run unto a remedy. Men will never be duly, and
deeply sollicitous for salvation, whose eyes are not opened to apprehend, that
if their souls be not saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, they are undone for
ever, and miserable beyond all imagination; and that without a Christ there is
an absolute and utter impossibility of such salvation. Such thoughts as these
will quicken the address of a soul unto God by Christ for salvation, put
life, vigor, and Zeal into it, Acts 16.29,30. and make a man contemptive of
all infortunities in comparison of the loss, and damnation of his soul. For
could we weigh, as the matter deserves, what an unvaluable loss that is, we
would with patience brook the greatest miseries, of which our outward man is
here in this life capable, so we could be assured, that our spiritual part
might be delivered from the wrath to come, so our souls might be saved, our
darling, our only one be delivered from the power of the dog, the snare of
Satan.

Lastly, we may hence be exhorted unto zeal, and constancy in our worship and
service of, and obedience unto Christ. He has saved us to the uttermost, and
therefore it is but equitable, that we should serve him unto the uttermost of
both our power, and time, with all our souls, might, and strength. He has
done, nay suffered his utmost for our salvation, and still he imployeth all his
power, and interest, in heaven and earth for the promoting of this end. We
should then be very ungrateful wretches, if we should not do, and suffer our
utmost, if called thereunto, for the advancement of his glory, especially
seeing the utmost, that we can do, and suffer for him, is a poor
inconsiderable nothing, in comparison of what he has done, and suffered for
us. For our glory and happiness he has, and will lay out his whole time, even
from his Incarnation unto the day of judgment: Unto us a child is borne, unto
us a son is given, Isai. 9.6. This was the scope of his humiliation and
exaltation, Romans 4.25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised
again for our justification: and for the completing, and accomplishing of
this work, he lives for ever to make intercession. Now unto such a peerless
love the least return we can make, is to be very careful to mis-pend none of
our time unto the dishonor, and disservice of such a Savior, to redeem a
good part of our time for his worship, to employ all our time for his glory,
Col. 3.17.

I have been the briefer upon this fullness, because it is grounded upon some
other fulnesses of his, which follow, the fullness of the Godhead, of grace, of
power, of Satisfaction, merit, and of glory, unto the handling of which we are
in the next place to betake our selves.

2. Christ secondly may be regarded absolutely, as he is in himself, without
relation unto any other thing, and so either according unto his natures, or his
twofold state of humiliation, and exaltation.

1. Christ may be looked upon according unto his natures and that both Divine,
and humane.

1. According unto his divine nature, as he is God, and so there is in him all
fullness absolutely, without respect, or comparison: so considered, he is as a
mighty sea of being, and perfection; without bank, or bottom, in which are
either formally, or eminently all possible, and conceivable perfections: So
considered, he is all-fulnesse, and that is more then the dwelling of
all-fulnesse in him. But this is not the fullness here meant: for the fullness
agreeable to Christ, as God, is underivative, without a cause: He being possessed
of it, not by voluntary dispensation, but by natural necessity, and so is not
the fullness in the text; that has a cause, the decree and pleasure of the
father. It pleased the father, that in him should all fullness dwell.

If we consider Christ, as man, so there was in him a threefold fullness, the
fullness of the Godhead, the fullness of grace, and the fullness of power.

1. The fullness of the Godhead. In him dwells all fullness of the Godhead
bodily, Col. 2.9. There be but two orthodoxe interpretations of these words,
that can pretend unto any probability, and the difference of them is grounded
upon the various ^acception of the word (...), rendered bodily, for that may
signify, either completive, truly and really, in opposition to the Arc and
Temple, and other ceremonies of the law, in which the Godhead was typically: or
else 2. personally, to distinguish the inhabitation of the Godhead in the
manhood of Christ, from accidental, essential, and integrall unions.

The First exposition is insinuated by De ipso vero Capite nostro Apostolus
ait: Quia in ipso inbabitat omnis plenitudo Divinitatis corporaliter. Non ideo
corporaliter, quia corporeus est Deus, sed aut verbo translato usus est,
tanquam in templo manufacto non corporaliter sed umbraliter habitaverit, id
est, praefigurantibus signis. Nam illas omnes observationes umbras futurorum
vocat, etiam ipso translate vocabulo, Summut enim Deus, ficut scriptum est, non
in manufactis templis habitat, etc.
Austin in the latter end of his 57 Epistle Ad Dardanum, and it is, that by the
dwelling of all fullness of the Godhead bodily in Christ, is meant nothing
else, but that in him were fulfilled the Ceremonies of the law. And countenance
unto this interpretation they fetch from verse. 17. where Christ, as a body, is
opposed unto the shadows of the law Which are a shadow of things to come, but
the body is of Christ. Under the Old testament, God, his name, and honor,
dwelled in the Sanctuary, in the Tabernacle, and Temple, in the Arc and
propitiatory, between the Cherubims, Deuteronomy. 12.11. 1 Samuel 4.4. 1 Kings 8.13. 2
Kings 19.15. Psalm. 26.8. Psalm. 80.1. Isay 37.16. but this his dwelling was
only typical, and umbratile, in shadows and prefiguring signs. In the
manhood of Christ he dwelled bodily: that is, in it were fulfilled all the
ceremonies and shadows of the law.

Against this exposition I have these three following objections.

1. These words, as is clear by the particle (for) are a proof or argument,
to back, or enforce the exhortation of the Apostle, in the foregoing words:
Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: For
in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

But if the meaning of them be only, that Christ fulfilled the ceremonies of
the law, why then, they will not be an home, and adequate proof. For they will
only conclude against the ceremonies of the law, the rudiments of the world,
and not reach Philosophy, and the traditions of men. This exposition then
suites not with the coherence.

A Second objection is made by the solid and judicious Insanctis inest per
gratiam and habitat in eis, suum spiritum in illis exerens, unde illud 2 Corinthians. 6. inhabitabo, and inambulabo in eis, sed nunquam vel in ipsis, vel in
Angelis, (...): Ergo aliud significat haec vox, quam vere: quasi umbris
ceremoniarum opponatur bac veritas. Nam vere etiam, and non (...) habitat in
sanctis.
Zanchy. The fullness of the Godhead, is never said in scripture to dwell
bodily in the saints or Angels: but it may be said to dwell in them truly, and
not typically: and therefore bodily does not signify truly in opposition unto
the shadows of the ceremonies under the law.

3. This exposition, as it is made to clash with the second, is needless: for
as our new Annotations on the place: the meaning is much at one, in whether of
the two senses we take the word. For God is said in the Old Testament, to dwell
in the tabernacle, Arc of the Covenant, and Temple, but only as in the
shadows, and figures of Christ's humane nature, which he should take on him in
the fullness of time, to dwell in the same personally, or really, and
substantially with all his fullness.

There is a third exposition, that makes bodily, to express the house, or
Habitation, in which the fullness of the Godhead dwells: it is not only the
soul, but the body also. Whereupon his body is termed a temple, to wit, of the
Deity, Joh. 2.21. The personal union is not only with the soul, but with
the body, the flesh of Christ. The word was made flesh, Joh. 1.14. but (...),
being an adverbe, denotes not so much the subject, as the manner of this
inhabitation, and therefore I shall say nothing farther of this sense.

The second exposition is that I shall stick unto, which renders bodily,
personally; now to clear this, I shall prove first, that (...) may be so
expounded, secondly, that it must be so expounded.

1 That (...) may be expounded personally. That (...) signifies with the
Greeks a person, Bishop Davenant proves out of diverse approved Authors, and
our English tongue uses frequently body for a person. Thus some body or no
body is as much as some person, or no person; a good, or naughty body, is a
good, or naughty person. Bodily peril is personal peril. And others tell us,
that (...), Romans 12.1. is as much as persons. If (...), a body, may signify a
person, then it will follow a conjugatis, that (...) may signify personally.

In a second place we are to evince, that it must be here interpreted
personally. We may here presuppose with the consent of all the orthodoxe, that
in these words, we have a description of anunion of the Godhead with the
manhood in Christ. Now this union must be either accidental, or substantial.

It cannot be accidental, and extrinsecall, as the Nestorians affirm, only
by the Godheads love of, operation in, and outward relation unto the manhood.
For where two c Duae substantiae integrae accidentaliter unitae non denominant
se substantialiter sed tantum denominative: ut homo dici^ur vestitus, non
vestis. At in nostro casa denominatio est substantialis, quia Deus dicrtur
homo, and non tantum humanatus and vicissim homo dicitur De us and no tantum
Deifer, ut Nestorius dicebat Becan. Sum. tom 5. Cap. 6. q. 2.
entire, perfect, and complete substances are united only accidentally, there
they are predicated one of another only accidentally, and denominative. As for
example, there is only an extrinsecall, and accidental union betwixt a man,
and his garment: and the garment is predicated of the man, only denominatively.
Homo dicitur vestitus, non vestis. We say only that a man is clothed with his
garment, not that he is the garment it self.

But now the Godhead, and manhood, as appears by collation of this place with
other scriptures, are predicated of one another substantially.

We may say concerning Christ, that God is man, and man God: And hence we may
infer, that the union betwixt the Godhead, and the manhood in him is
substantial.

But now a substantial Union is again threefold, integrall, essential,
personal.

The union betwixt the Godhead, and manhood of Christ, is not integrall, or
essential, therefore it is personal.

1. It Is not integrall, for that is of material, and quantitative parts. Now
the Godhead is spiritual, and therefore impartible; and besides, on the
manhood^ part, it is not only with the body, but with the soul; and the soul
being a spiritual substance is incapable of such an union, or composition.

In the Second place, it is not essential, for all essential union of two
natures, that is physical, and real, is of the form with the matter: But now
no such Union can have place in the two natures of Christ, for the Godhead is a
pure act, immutable, and independent; therefore it is blasphemy to ascribe such
imperfection unto the Godhead, as to make it either the form or matter of the
manhood. Besides, the result of an essential union is a third nature, arising
out of two partial and incomplete natures, but the Godhead and manhood of
Christ, are two entire, perfect, total, complete natures; and therefore there
can be no essential Union betwixt them. It remains then that the Union
between them is only personal, and hypostaticall, the bond whereof is the
subsistence or personality of the word: For the person of the word subfisteth
in both natures; it is but one person, that is God man.

For the farther proof of this personal union betwixt the two natures of
Christ, I shall allege but one Argument out of Becanus Duae formae, quae in
abstracto non praedicantur de se invicem, non possunt etia m de se invicem
praedicari in concreto, nisi propter conjunctionem in eodem supposito, ut patet
in calore, and luce. At humanitas and Divinitas sunt distinctae formae; nec una
dealtera praedicatur in abst racto: Ergo nec in concreto possunt de se invicem
praedicari, nisi uniantur in eadem persona. In Christo autem praedicantur de se
invicem, quia recte dicimus, Deus est homo: and homo est Deus: ergo in Christo
uniuntor in eadem persona. Sum. Theol. tom. 5. cap. 6. q. 2.
and so proceed. Two natures, forms, or beings, which cannot be predicated of
one another abstractively, cannot be also affirmed of one another in a
concretive way, unless it be by reason of an hypostaticall conjunction between
them in one subsistence: But now the Godhead, or manhood of Christ are two
distinct forms, natures, or beings, whereof one cannot be affirmed of the
other in an abstractive predication. We cannot say, the Godhead is the manhood,
or the manhood the Godhead; but now we find in scripture, that in Christ, God
is man, and man God, and therefore the Godhead and manhood are united in one
person.

For the fuller unfolding of this union, I shall desire you to observe these
two things in the text concerning it, the extremes and the manner of it.

1. The extremes of the union, the terms united; the manhood implied in the
pronoune, in him; the Godhead expressed unto the full, all the fullness of the
Godhead.

2. We have the manner of the union, and that set forth ab adjuncto, and a
genere.

1. By it is Adjunct, permanency, dwells.

2. By it is sort, or kind: it is no common, but a personal inhabitation:
dwells bodily; that is, personally.

1. Then we have the extremes of the union, the terms united, the Godhead and
the manhood; the former implied: the latter expressed. The former implied in
the pronoune, (...), in him. For though it immediately signifies in his
person, yet it signifies his person, as denominated after the humane nature,
and so in the upshot implies the humane nature. For proof of this, I shall
make use of an argument, that is used by Nisi plenitudo Deitatis in Christo eo
modo habitare dicatur, ut in ipsius carne habitet, toliitur discrimen inter
inhabitans, and habitaculum, ac dicetur divinitas (...) in ipsa. In Deo omnia
sunt essentialia, seu in ipsa essentia, ergo illius respectu inhabitans ab
habitaculo distingui nequit. Quicquid de Christo praedicatur, vel secundu^
divinam tantum, vel secundum hum anam tantum, vel secundum utra nque naturam de
ipso praedicatur. Sed in ipso habitare totam plenitudinem Deitatis, non de
divin^a tantum natura accipi potest, in ea enim nihil habitat, sed essentia
divina identificat sibi omnia, quae sunt in ea, nec de utra que, ergo de humana
natura accipiendum, sensu sc: eo, quod divinae naturae habitaculum proprium sit
natura humana assumta. Scopus Apostoli est confer Christum, qua hominem, cum
aliis Sanctis, quod long alio modo, quam in reliquis sanctis plenitudo
Deitatis habitat, videlicet personaliter. De Persona and ^ficio Christi. p. 452.
Gerhard to another purpose. Whatsoever is predicated of Christ, agrees unto
him, either according unto his divine nature, or according unto his humane
nature, or according unto both natures. Now none will affirm, that the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in Christ according unto both natures.

Neither can it be said to dwell in him, according unto his divine nature. For
then the Godhead would dwell in it self, and there would be no distinction
between the dwelling, and the dweller. Whatsoever is in the Godhead is
essential thereunto, is it is very essence, and therefore cannot be said to
dwell in it. For nothing can be said to dwell in that, with which it is really
the same. It remains therefore, that the fullness of the Godhead dwells in
Christ according unto his humane nature. His Humane nature is the habitation,
as it were, of the Deity, being assumed into a fellowship of subsistence with
it, in his person. Besides, (as the same Author urges,) the scope of the
Apostle is, to compare Christ with, and to distinguish him from the holy men of
God, who were inspired by the holy Ghost'; and to show that he dwells
otherwise in him, then in them. In him he dwells personally; In them only in
regard of assistance, and energy. And from this scope of the Apostle it is
evident, that the words are to be understood of Christ, as man. In them there
may be a prolepsis, a prevention of an objection, that might be made, by the
enemies of Christ, against the Apostles prohibition of all additions unto the
Doctrine of Christ. Why must we, might they object, keep so close, and exactly
unto the rule of Christ. Was he not a man? A man that was crucified? that died,
and was buried? Had he not a soul and body, like us? Are there no men his
superiors, or equals? Are not the Philosophers as wise and learned as he? Are
there not diverse men as holy as he? why should their traditions be rejected,
and his precepts so inviolably observed? Had not Moses immediate communion with
God? what authority then has he to abrogate that law, which Moses received
immediately from the mouth of God? Yea, but says the Apostle, though he were a
man, yet he was not a mere man. Your eyes are not open; and therefore you see
in him nothing, but his manhood. But we that have faith, the evidence of things
not seen, can behold the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in this man;
that is, in his humane nature, which is so abject, and despicable in the eyes
of unbelieving men. Though he took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men, and found in fashion, as a man, humbling
himself, and becoming obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, yet
being in the form of God, he thought it not robbery to be equal with God,
Philip. 2.6,7,8.

I proceed unto the second extreme, or term of this union, which we have
expressed unto the full: All the fullness of the Godhead. Here we may take
notice of three gradations, the Gods head, the fullness of the Godhead, All the
fullness of the Godhead. The latter still being more emphatically, and fully
expressive of the perfection of his Deity, then the former.

The first signifies the Fuisse autem and esse verum Deum docet primum illa
voce, Deitatis, cum verbo inhatandi, (...), and cum adverbio (...), conjuncto.
Significat enim ipsam Dei essentiam perpetuo and inseparabiliter non
simpliciter inesse, sed inhabitare in Christo, quatenus homo est, non ut in
sanctis hominibus per gratiam, and (...), neque ut in beatis Angelis, per
plenitudinem gloriae; sed (...), id est, (...) inhabitare. Qui igitur verus est
homo, eundem, id est, eandem personam esse verum Deum. Deinde, idem demonstrat
Apostolus, cum addit plenitudinem (...); perfectum enim esse Deum, eoque patre
ad Deitatem quod atti^et, minime minorem: ficuti etiam liberi nostri non minus
homines sunt, quam parents. Quid ita? Quia plenitudo humanitatis, tam in ipsis
est liberis, quam in parentibus.

Amplius etiam aliquid tradit: nempe Christum esse unum eundem que Deum cum
Patre. Quomodo? Quia non tantum (...), sed etiam (...) in co inhabitat (...).
Non igitur una plenitudo Deitatis est in patre, and altera in filio, sed eadem
and tota plenitudo est in Christo, quae et in patre: eoque Pater and filius
(...), ^us idemque Deus sunt; alioquin non (...) esset infilio: quia aliquod
aliud (...) esset in Patre: ita duo essent Dii: sicuti etiam aliud (...)
humanitatis crat in A damo, and aliud in Eva, and ideo licet specie unus essent
homo, numero tamen non crant, sed duo homines. Nunc autem (...) est in filio,
ait ^postolus. Ergo nihil est Deitatis in Patre, quod non sit etiam in filio.
Quare non solum verus and perfectus Deus est Christus, sed etiam unus and idem
cum Patre Deus. Zanchius inlocum.


verity of his Godhead.

The second shows the equality; and the third, the Identity thereof with the
Godhead of the father.

The first signifies the verity of his Godhead. He was not only partaker of the
divine nature, (...), 2 Pet. 1.4. but the very Godhead dwelled in him.
Praeterea non dicit (...), id est, Divinitatem, sed (...), id est, Deitatem, ut
magis etiam express loquatur. Quamvis enim (...) saepe synonyma su^t, and
Divinitatis nomen consueverit naturae ipsi divinae significandae adhiberi,
tamen novorum Euty^hianorum pravitas huc nos ad^git ut haec duo discernamus,
quod (...) id est, Divinitas, attributa, and quidem in iis, qui propterea
divini vocantur, creata, potius quam divinam naturam, essentialiter declaret:
Quamobrem etiam usurpare malui parum alioqui Latinum nomen Deita^, quam de
sententia Apostoli quicquam detrabere. in locum.
Beza observes, that it is not only (...), the Divinity, which may signify
created gifts, and endowments, but (...) the very nature, and essence of God.

But now because the Arians, and other Heretics have affirmed, that Christ is
but a secondary God, inferior unto the father, therefore it is added in the
second place, to show the equality of him, in regard of essence, with the
father, that not only the Godhead, but the fullness of the Godhead dwells in
him. Whereupon it follows, that he is perfect God, coequall with the father.
Even as amongst men, the Children are no less men, then their Parents, because
the fulness of the manhood is in them, as well as in their parents.

But this is not all, the Apostle goes one step higher, and in the third place
shows, that there is a numericall Identity betwixt the Godhead of Christ, and
the Father; for in him dwells all fullness of the Godhead. There is not
therefore one fullness of the Godhead in the father, and another in the son,
but all the fullness of the Godhead, the same singular Deity in both: and
therefore they are one in essence. John 10.30. I and my father are one: one
God, though two persons. The fullness of the manhood in Adam was numerically
different from that in Eve, and therefore they were two men. But the same
fullness of the divine nature, that is in the Father, is in the Son. And
therefore he is not only true, and perfect God, but one and the same God (for
number) with the father. And thus have I done with the extremes of this union,
the terms united, the man's hood, and the Godhead. Indeed the personal union
is proxime, and immediately only betwixt the person of the word, and the
manhood, but mediately, and consequently, it is of the two natures, as they are
united in one person of the word.

The next thing to be handled in the words, is, the manner of this union, and
that is set down from the adjunct, and from the sort or kind of it. 1. From
the Adjunct of it: it is a permanent union, it dwells in the manhood. 2. from
the sort or kind of it, it is a personal union; it dwells bodily.

1. The manner of this union is described from an adjunct of it, permanency, It
is a permanent union. The fullness of the Godhead dwells in him: Apud Graecos
differunt (...) and (...), sicut apud Latinos habitare, and commorari. Sic enim
Cicero, natura, inquit, domicilium nobis non habitandi sed commorandi dedit.
Ideo etiam Petrus vitam nostram (...) vocat eleganter, 1 Epist. 1.17. This note
Cornel. a Lapide filcheth out of Beza, without the least mention whence he has
it.
(...) signifies usually not a temporary, but a durable mansion. The fullness
of the Godhead does not so journe in the manhood only for a time, but it
dwells in it, it has a constant, fixed, settled, and perpetual residence
therein. Wherefore, as Beza observes, the Apostle does not say (...), has
dwelled, but (...), dwells, in the present tense. And indeed, it shall dwell
therein, in the future tense too, and that unto all eternity.

Our Divines farther from the verb (...) generally collect, that the union of
two natures in Christ, is not by way of mixture, confusion, conversion, or any
other mutation. For none of all these can have place between the dweller, and
the house, in which he dwells.

But I shall content my self lightly to have touched this, and pass on to the
last thing remarkable in the Words, The sort, or kind of this union. It is a
personal union. The fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in him. It is said
to dwell in him, says August. De Quiros, to exclude all mutation. It is said
to dwell in him, bodily, to exclude that inhabitation, which is only by
extrinsecall denomination.

There is a twofold presence of the Godhead, general, and special.

1. General, and so he is every where by his essence, presence, and power,
Enter, Praesenter, Deus hic and ubique Potenter.

1. By his essence, because he fills all spaces of the world by the immensity
of his substance. Do not I fill heaven and earth (says the Lord) Jer. 23.24.
The heaven of heavens cannot contain him, 1 Kings 8.27. He is not far from
every one of us, Act. 17.27.

2. By his presence; that is, by his knowledge, Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any
creature, that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open
unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do.

3. By his power, and operation, which produces, preserves and governs all
things in the world, 1 Cor. 12.6. And there are diversities of operations, but
it is the same God, which works all in all.

But now besides this general way of Gods presence, there are also other
special manners of his presence, by which he is in a peculiar way only in some
creatures. There was a miraculous presence of the Godhead in the Prophets and
Apostles, by whom he wrought diverse miracles. There is a gracious presence of
him in all his Saints. There is a relative presence of him in his Church
visible, and in his ordinances, Exodus 25.8. Numb. 5.3. and Chapt. 35.34. Deuteronomy.
33.12. Psalm. 9.11. Psalm. 135.21. Isai. 8.18. Ezekiel. 29.45. Joel. 3.21. Zachar.
2.10,11. Chap. 8 3. Psalm. 74.7. There is a glorious presence of the Godhead,
and thus heaven is his dwelling place, 2 Chronicles. 6.21; 39. 1 Kin. 8.30: Thus he
dwells on high, Psalm. 113.5. Isai. 33.5: In the high and holy place, Isai.
57.15. In the heavens. Psalm. 123.1. In the light, which no man can approach
unto, 1 Timoth. 6.16. But all these several ways of the Godheads dwelling in
the creature, fall far short of that in the text, Notandae sunt autem hae duae
particulae, 1. plenitudo Divinitatis, 2. Corporaliter. Nam illae significant,
aliter in Christo, aliter in aliis sanctis habitare Divinitatem: In Christo
habitat per plenitudine^, in aliis per divisione^, 1 Cor. 12.4. In Christo
corporaliter, id est, vere, and substantialiter, in aliis participative. Nam
ipsa Divinitas vere and substantialiter est in Christo: In aliis per dona
quaedam a Divinitate participata. Becanus Sum. Theol. tom. 5. cap. 7. quaest. 3.
the bodily, that is, personal, or hypostaticall inhabitation of it in, and
union of it with the humanity of Christ. For this is so close, straight and
intimate, as that the Godhead inhabiting, and the manhood inhabited, make but
one person; Even as the reasonable soul and body in man make one man.

Before I descend unto the application of this high, and mysterious point, I
shall 1 clear the words from a misinterpretation of the Socinians, 2.
Vindicate them from a misinference of the Lutherans, and 3. Give an answer unto
the most material objections, that are made against this doctrine.

1. I shall clear the words from a mis-interpretation of the Qua de causa
divinis monitis, incitamur, ut omnibus aliis disciplinis posthabitis uni
Christo adhaereamus, in quo, id est, in cujus doctrina omnis divinitatis
plenitudo continetur; in quod nihil aliud est quam Christi disciplinae came vim
esse, ut non partem aliquam salutiferae veritatis, non umbram, non nutu
significatam, sed clarissimam plenissimamque divinae voluntatis rationem
complectatur. V^lkel. De vera Relig. lib. 3. cap. 5. page 47.
Socinians, who in opposition unto the Deity of Christ, darken the text, with
this ensuing gloss. In Ex Divinitate quoque corporaliter in Christo habitante
coessentialitatem hanc concludi minime posse, inde perspicitur, quod Divinit at
is nomine, nec Dei, nec Christi natura, sed divinae voluntatis notitia, Deique
colendi ratio intelligi potest, atque adeo debet. Quam quidem plenitu: dinis
vocabulo amplificare, and corporaliter Christo, id est, ipsius doctrinae
inesse, ideo asserere voluit Paulus, ut divinae veritatis cognitionem perfectam
solidam, nullaque ex part adumbratam, ut in lege fiebat, Christi institutis
contineri intelligeremus, id quod satis, ostendit, Divinitatis nomine,
essentiam ipsius Dei altissimi intelligi nequaquam debere etc. Volkel. l. 5. c.
10. p. 437, 438.
him; that is, in the Doctrine of Christ dwells all-fulnesse of the Godhead
bodily: that is, the will of God is revealed and manifested perfectly, and
fully: and that not in a dark, and shadowed way, as in the Law, but bodily;
that is, clearly, and plainly.

To maintain this interpretation, they are forced to faigne that there are two
Metonymies in the words: that Christ is taken for his Doctrine: and the
dwelling of allofulnesse of the Godhead bodily therein, for the perfect, full,
and clear manifestation of the will of God.

Now there is a rule for interpretation of Scripture, that should never be
violated: to wit, that we are not to run unto tropes and figures, as long as
there is no absurdity in the acception of words, according unto their proper,
and native sense, or signification. If we give way unto the violation of this
rule, the greatest part of Scripture may be easily wrested from it is true
intent and meaning, and perverted unto the patronage of error, and eluded when
urged for the maintenance of the truth.

Yea, but they pretend, that there is absurdity, in the proper acception of the
words, and they have compelling reasons from the text it self, and context,
for their assigning of two metonymies in the words.

Let us hear them speak for themselves.

1. Why must Christ here signify the doctrine of Christ? why, says Christum
autem saepenumero, non Christi personam aut naturam, sed per metonymicam
dicendi figuram aliud quippiam, vel ad Christum respiciens, vel ab illo
profectum designare, ex tllis locis perspicuum est, ubi Christus mysterium
inter homines appellatur, Col: 1.27. and ubi Christum accepisse, Col. 2.6.
Christum didicisse, Ephesians. 4.20. Christum induere debere, Romans 13.14. aut eundem
induisse, Gal. 3.27. in Christo esse, 2 Cor. 5.17. in Christo denique ambulare
dicimur, Col. 2.6. Hoc autem in loco Divinitatis plenitudinem, Christo
corporaliter inhaerentem, non naturae alicui, sed philosophiae, legalibusque
institutis, utpote umbratilibus opponi manifestissimum est. Unde efficitur, id
ejus nomine intelligendum esse, quod paulo ante diximus. Volkel. loco praedicto.
Volkeliius, it is plain and evident, that oftentimes in Scripture Christ
signifies not the person, or nature of Christ, but metonymically, something
respecting Christ, or proceeding from him. And this he goes about to manifest
from those places of Scripture, wherein Christ is termed a mystery among men,
Col. 1.27. And where men are said to receive Christ, Col. 2.6. to learn
Christ, Ephesians. 4.20. to put on Christ, Romans 13.14. Gal. 3.27. To be in Christ,
2 Cor. 5.17. To walk in Christ, Col. 2.6.

1. But soft and fare, 1. There is a wide difference betwixt may, and must.
Though Christ elsewhere is taken for the doctrine of Christ, it does not
therefore follow, that it must be so taken here.

2. If we look forwards on the words after, they speak plainly of the person
of Christ. verse. 10. and ye are complete in him, which is the head of all
principality and power. In him we are circumcised, v. 11. with him are we
buried in baptism, v. 12. You has he quickened together with him, v. 13.
nayling the handwriting of or dinances, that was against us, unto his cross,
v. 14.

I hope they will not say, that his doctrine is the head of all principality
and power; that we are crucified in the doctrine of Christ; that we are buried,
and quickened together with his doctrine; that the handwriting of ordinances
was nailed unto the Cross of his doctrine. Yea, but though they have no
countenance from the context following, yet, they pretend, they have it from
that foregoing, as Dicti Apostolici Col. 2.9. In Christohabitat tota plenitudo
Deitatis (...) hanc proferunt interpretationem, quod in doctr. Christi voluntas
Dei plene and integre nobis sit manifestata Schmal: contra Frantz. p. 67.
Catech. Racov. p. 354. Ostorod. in disp. contra Tradelp p. 2. c. 11. p. 195.
urgent connexionem textus, quia in anteccdentibus agitur de doctrina Christi,
quibus hoc dictum (...) subjungitur conferunt Ephesians. 4. v. 20. Heb. 13. v. 8. and
9. De persona and officio Christi. p. 444.
Gerhard insinuates out of Schmalcius, and Ostorodius. In the verse immediately
preceding (say they) Christ is put for the Doctrine of Christ; and Christ there
is the antecedent unto (...) in the text. And if the Antecedent, Christ,
signify the doctrine of Christ, the relative, in him, must do so too.

For answer: in that clause, (...), the doctrine and command of Christ is
implied, and signified mediately by the word Christ: for Christ signifies the
unction of our Savior, as unto his priestly, so also prophetical, and Kingly
office: and therefore many Divines do paraphrase (...) thus: not after the
doctrine or command of Christ. But the word Christ immediately here signifies
the person of Christ, denominated from his unction unto all his offices, and so
consequently considered, as teaching, and governing of his Church, and that
this is the immediate signification of the word here, and not any metonymicall
sense of it, for doctrine, is clear from the coherence with the following
words: for compare these two verses, with the whole series of the Apostles
discourse, down-wards, unto verse. 16. and it will be apparent, that Christ,
verse. 8. and (...) verse. 9. is the same with him, in whom the believing
Colossians are said to be complete. Now this is the person, and not the
doctrine of Christ; because he is forthwith said to be the head of all
principality, and power, in whom they are said to be circumcised, and with whom
they are said to be buried and together with whom they are said to be
quickened, verse. 10,11,12,12,13. Who is farther described, verse. 14, 15. to
have blotted out the hand writing of ordinances, that was against us, which was
contrary to us, and to have taken it out of the way, nayling it unto his
Cross, and having spoiled principalities and powers, to have made a show of
them openly, tryumphing over them in it. And these particulars can be averred
only of Christ's person, and not of his doctrine.

Unto this I shall subjoyne the answer of Connexio textus per nostram
interpretationem non labefactatur. Inde enim atque idco filius Dei confilium
and voluntatem Patris de nostra salute nobis plene manifestavit, quia est in
sinu Patris, Jo. 1.18. quia est verus Dei filius, Qui solus novit Patrem, Math.
11.27. Qui est verus Deus, in quo juxta naturam humanam tota plenitudo ^eitatis
habitat. Omnis plenitudo Deitatis non est voluntas Dei revelata, quia hic ex
part cognoscimus, 2 Cor. 13. v. 9 sed significat perfectissimam Dei essentiam.
Gerhard de persona and officio Christi page 444.
Gerhard, unto this their argument. The connection of the text (says he) is no
wise infringed by our interpretation. For therefore has the Son of God fully
manifested unto us the Counsel and will of the father, concerning our
salvation, because he is in the bosom of the father, John 1.18. because he is
the true son of God, who alone has known the father Matthew. 11.27. Who is
true God, In whom according unto the humane nature all fullness of the Godhead
dwells.

Enough has been said, to prove that the first pretended metonymy can have no
place, without gross, and palpable violencing of the words.

And yet, there is less color for the second: For was it ever heard, or read,
that all fullness of the Godhead signifies the will of God, or the knowledge,
or revelation thereof. This is such a Catachresis, for which they can bring no
President, or Parallel. It sounded so harsh in the ears of their own Videt
Enjedinus perquam durum esse (...) plenitudinem de voluntatis divinae
patefactione accipere, ideo sine ullo argumento fingit incuria scribarum
scriptum faisse (...) pro (...). Gerb. loc. praedict.
Enjedinus, as that it drove him to affirm, that (...) was by the carelessness
of transcribers crept into the Original, instead of (...). But for this he
brings no color of proof, only he adventureth on it, because they have
nothing else to say for justification of this evasion. But because they cannot
here relieve themselves from any such usage of the expression elsewhere in any
author, either sacred, or profane, their next attempt therefore is, to put
the words themselves upon the rack, and to torture them, to speak something in
their be half against the orthodoxe, and received sense, which we have given.
Three Arguments I find to this purpose brought by Volkellius.

The first Verbis Col. 2.8. Admonemur, ut Christ^ capite nostro contenti, id
est, in sola tllius disciplina acquiescentes, non Philosophicis institutis,
quae ad Divinum cultum nihil afferunt momenti: non hominum commentis, per
quantumvis veritatis speciem inductis, non denique disciplinae Mosaicae, quae
ad Christi instituta respectu habito, umbrae instar obtinet, nos tradamus
abducendos: Cum in Christi doctrina, non adumbra^a aut imperfect a rerum
divinarum, sed corporalis, eaque tota ac plena id est, verissima simul atque
absolutissima divi^ae voluntatis expl catio con^neatur. Atque hmc esse omnem
illam divinitatis plenitudinem a Paulo ibidem commemoratam, non autem, ut multi
existimant, divinam essentiam sive natur^m. tum ipsa loquendi formula, tum
verborum contextus, tum res ipsa do^et. Primo enim, is loquendi modus e^usmodi
est, ut divini^atis istius, de qua Apostolus sermonem habet, pa^tes qua^dam
innuat; quandoquidem non divinitatem simpliciter, sed ejus plenitudinem, and
quidem omnem, seu totam, commemorat: ut facile appareat, id dicere voluisse
Apostolum: In Christo, sive in ipsius doctrina, non aliquam divinitatis
particul^m contineri, qualis suo modo, vel in Philosophia, vel in h^minum
sapientum institutts, vel in disciplina Mosaiea comprchendi videtur: sed omnem
plenitudinem Divinitatis, id est, perfectissimam divinae volumatis
explicationem comprehendi. Divin^m autem essentiam, seu substa tiam in divers^s
parts distrahi, ut nimirum in aliis particulatim, in aliis vero plenissime
habitet, nemo sanus dixerit. ^olkel. lih. 6. cap. 5. page 641. Vocabulum
plenitudinis etc. satis ostendrt, Divinitatis nomine, essentiam ipsius Dei
alti^simi intelligi nequaquam debere. Quid enim alioqui necesse fuisset
plenitudinis istius Divinitatis, and quidem omnis, meminisse? quasi vero
susp^cari quispiam potuisset, eam in illo, in quo habitet, non plenam, vel non
usquequaque plenam esse. Volkel. lib. 5. cap. 10. page 437, 438.
is taken from the impartibility, or indivisibility of the Godhead. The Divine
essence is impartible, and indivisible, it has no parts, so that wheresoever
it dwells, it is full, and entire in all points. But now the Godhead, of
which the Apostle speaks, has parts, for he mentions not simply the
Godhead, but the fullness, nay all the fullness of it. And therefore, I
believe, he would have the Reader collect, that the addition of all-fulnesse
were supervacaneous, if by Godhead were meant the essence of God. He for his
own part infers, that it signifies not the Divine essence, but the
revelation of Gods will. In Philosophy, in the traditions of men, and in the
Mosaicall Law, the rudiments of the world, there were some few portions, or
branches of Gods mind and will displayed; but in the Gospel, in the doctrine of
Christ, there dwells all fullness of the Godhead: that is, a most perfect
explication of Gods will is comprehended

For answer, 1. All-fulnesse of the Godhead, does no more signify parts in the
Godhead, then it does to say, that totus Deus est ubique, for God is only
totum perfectionis, and such a whole has no relation to parts.

2. As I showed out of Zanchy, fullness is ascribed unto the Godhead of Christ,
to signify, that he is God coequall, and coessentiall with the Father.
All-fulnesse is attributed unto the Godhead in him, to denote, that he is one
and the same God, with the Father: and this exposition excludes all parts, and
divisibility from the Godhead in Christ.

3. Not only the Philosophers, but also the Gnostics, against whom our
Apostle here deals, were not only for integrall, but also for subjective
parts of God. They maintained a plurality of God's masculine, and feminine;
they parcelled out, as it were, the perfections of the Deity unto their
several Gods. In opposition unto them then, and their forged Deities, their
Aeones, the Apostle might very fitly say, that in Christ there dwelled
all-fullnesse of the Godhead. Volkellius thinks it cannot fall under the
suspicion of any, that the Godhead should not be full, and that in all points,
where it dwells. But he would have forborne this passage, if he had weighed
what is said of the Gods of the Heathens by Hesiod in his Theogonia, as also
what Ecclesiastical story relates of Simon Magus, and Valentinus, his Aeones.
Nay we need not go so high, for the disporoofe of this his assertion; for it
may be convinced of untruth, and rashness, from the tenet of the Lutherans,
who hold a communication of the Divine properties unto the humanity, in part
only. For they give it only omnipresence, omnipotency and omniscience, but
not infiniteness eternity and simplicity. It has been, you see, not only the
suspicion, but the opinion, though erroneous, and blasphemous, of diverse in
both primitive, and latter times, that the Godhead is communicable in part
only. The addition therefore of All-fulnesse unto the Godhead is not
unnecessary.

A second argument of Deinde in ipsa verborum comprehensione aperte videmus
Divinitatis plenitudinem in Christo habitantem, doctrinis ab ip^ias diseiplin^
alienis opponi, and sic Christum hoc in loco, si modo oppositionem istam omni
absurditate liberare volumus, pro sua doctrina accipi, vel saltem eatenus
quatenus doctrinam illam tradidit, rovamque religionem hominibus prae scrip^it,
confiderari; quo pacto et alibi Christi nomen usurpari videmus. Volkel. lib. 6.
c. 5. p. 641.
Volkellius proceeds from the cehesion of the words, with those foregoing.
The all-fullnesse of the Godhead, that dwells in Christ, is opposed unto
doctrines, unto Philosophy, the traditions of men, and rudiments of the world.
But now there can be no congruous opposition betwixt the divine essence, and
doctrines. And therefore the divine nature is not here meant.

For answer, The minor is most false: for the Deity of Christ may very aptly be
opposed, as the strongest, and most convincing argument we have against all
additionall doctrines, unto the doctrine or gospel of Christ. From the all
sufficiency of his person, in himself, it is very obvious, unto any man of
tolerable reason and understanding, to infer, that there is an all
sufficiency in his doctrine, and an all-fulnesse in his ordinances. If the
divine essence dwell in him, then he needs no supply from philosophy, from
traditions, and the law of Moses. The Apostle might indeed have opposed unto
these doctrines the fullness, and perfection of Christ's own doctrine, but he
rather chooses to lead unto the fountain of all that perfection, which is in
his doctrine, the all-fulnesse of the Godhead dwelling in his person. This
answer Doctrinis, et traditionibus: hominum opponitur, non mod^ Christi
doctrina, quam Christi nomine accipere idem coact^ est, sed ipse Christus,
quippe qui est caput uostrum, fons omnis salutaris sapientiae ad vitam aeternam
necessariae, ex quo omnes notitiae divinae rivuli in Ecclesiam derivantur. loc.
praedict.
Gerhard gives unto Smalcius, and Ostorodius. Not only the doctrine of Christ
(says he) is opposed unto the doctrines, and traditions of men; But Christ
himself, as being our head, the fountain of all saving wisdom, necessary
unto eternal life, from whom all the rivulets of divine knowledge are derived
unto the Church.

I go on to the third, and last Denique vox corporaliter id, quod asserimus,
ostendit: nam pr^terquam quod, quicquid alii dicant, nequaquam oftendi possit
quo pacto divina substantia corporaliter in quopiam habitare queat; satis tum
ex hoc ipso loco, tum ex verbis illis, quae infra v. 17. habentur, apparet,
corpus opponi umbris; and fic corporalem inhabitationem umbratil^, qualis in
lege f^it, id quod nihil ad divinam substantiam pertinet, sed ad voluntatem.
lib. 6. cap. 5. page 641.
objection, which is taken from the word Bodily. For besides, that it can in no
wise be shown after what manner the divine substance can dwell bodily in any
one, it sufficiently appears, both from this very place, and from those
words, which are afterward in verse. 17. that body is opposed unto shadows;
and so a bodily inhabitation unto an umbratile: Such as was in the law, which
nothing appertains unto the divine substance, but unto the divine will.

For answer. 1. Here is a dictate, that the divine substance cannot dwell in
any one bodily, which merits not any scholasticall examination, but merely
denial, and rejection.

2. As for the latter part of the objection: Suppose that the bodily
inhabitation of the Godhead be opposed unto the umbratile, or typical dwelling
of it, under the law, in the types, and shadows thereof, yet this will no wise
incommodate our sense, but may very well be reconciled with it. Because the
tabernacle, arc, and temple were types of Christ's humanity; and the typical
presence of the Godhead in them prefigured the personal presence of the
Godhead in this. The words then may fairly be interpreted of the divine
essence, and there is no necessity to understand them of the revealed will of
God.

In a second place we shall vindicate the words from a false inference of the
Lutherans, who hence thus argue for their communication of the properties of
the Godhead unto the manhood of Christ. That which dwells bodily in the
humanity of Christ is really communicated thereunto: But the divine essence,
and all the attributes of the Godhead, all the fullness of the Godhead dwells
bodily in the humanity, and therefore the attributes of the Godhead are really
communicated unto the humanity.

For answer: we grant a communication of the properties of the Godhead unto the
manhood in an orthodoxe sense; that is, 1. Personalis communicatio proprietatum
est communio, vel concursus ad casdem operationes, ita ut fim^l praestentur ab
utraque natura, sed secundum suas distinctas proprietates. Ames med. Theol.
lib. 1. cap. 18. sect 21.
A concourse with the humane nature unto the same operations; so that they are
performed together by each nature, but according to their own distinct
properties. 2. A predication of the person denominated from the humane nature,
or, which comes all to one, a predication or affirmation of the humane nature
expressed concretively: For the concrete of the humanity implies the person
that has the humanity. Thus with warrant of the Scripture we may say, that the
man Christ is omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent This is the same, which
Attributa Divina communicata sunt humanitati Christi, non in se, sed in
supposito, seu persona verbi: nam humanitati datum est, ut subsistat in persona
verbi, quae est omnipotens, omniscia, ubique praesens, vel ut alii loquuntur,
per unionem hypostaticam factum est, non quidem, ut humanitas in se sit
omnipotens, omniscia, and ubique prasens: sed ut fit humanitas illius personae,
quae est omnipotens, omniscia, and ubique praesens. Becanus Summa Theol. Tom.
5. cap. 7. quaest. 3. page 118, 119.
others say, that the divine attributes are communicated unto the humanity, not
in it self, but in the person of the word: that is, by the hypostaticall union
it comes to pass; not that the humanity is omnipotent, omniscient, and
omnipresent in it self; but that it is the humanity of that person, which is
omnipotent, omniscient, and every where present.

But this concession will give no satisfaction unto the Lutherans; nothing will
content them, unless we say of the manhood in abstracto, that it is
omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent. But now that communication of divine
properties, which is expressed in such a predication, we utterly deny to be
implied in these words: The fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily. And
their bare affirmation of it without farther proof, is a most miserable begging
of the question. But I shall not content my self with a bare denial of this
their sense, but disprove it, and that out of the very words of the text:
All-fulnesse of the Godhead signifies the divine essence, and all the
intrinsecall attributes thereof whatsoever: and so much is affirmed by their
own Chemnitius, De duab. not. in Christo. Cap. 9. page 211. as he is quoted by
Gerhard. Plenitudo Deitatis (says he) significat ipsam perfectissimam divinam
naturam filii Dei, and quicquid in ea est, vel ad eam pertinet, sicut plenitudo
orbis, seu maris, in scriptura it a vocatur.

The fullness of the Godhead signifies the most perfect divine nature it self
of the son of God, and whatsoever is therein, or appertains thereunto: Even
as the fullness of the earth, and sea, in scripture, comprehends whatsoever
is in, or upon them.

This premised, it follows, that if this place of the Apostle import any such
communication of the divine Attributes, as they plead for, it then signifies a
communication of all the divine attributes, not only of omniscience,
omnipotency, and omnipresence, but also of simplicity, eternity, independancy.
but there is no learned Lutheran will undertake the patronage of such a
communication of simplicity, eternity, independency, unto the manhood of
Christ. None of them, I believe, will be so gross, as to affirm, that the
manhood is simple, and a pure act, seeing it is essentially compounded; that it
was from everlasting, seeing it was created in the fullness of time; that it is
independent* seeing it is a creature, and therefore dependant upon God the
creator. By their own confession the place makes nothing for such a
communication, as is before specified, of these latter sort of attributes, and
consequently, it can make nothing for such a communication of any attributes
whatsoever, unto the manhood of Christ. For all-fulnesse of the Godhead cannot
with any color of reason be restrained unto one sort of Attributes, more then
unto another, but is equally and indifferently appliable unto all.

I had thought, for the present, to have said no more of this argument, but
just as I was dismissing it, I lighted upon a passage in Attributa divina
communicata humanitati, non solum in persona ver by, sed etiam in ipsa
humanitate, non tamen proxime, immedia* te and formaliter; sed tantum mediate,
conscquenter, and identice: nam sola subsistentia verbi proxime, immediate, and
formaliter communicata est humanitati in se, and per illam proxime immediate,
and formaliter subsistit humanitas. Sed quia illa subsistentia reipsa idem est
cum essentia and a tributis divinis, ideo consequenter, and identice essentia
and attributa divina communicata sun^ humanitati. Non ut humanitas per illa sit
omnipotens, omniscia, and ubique praesens, sed ut per illa, q^atenus
identificantur cum subsistentia subsistat. Sum. Theol. tom. 5. cap. 7. quaest.
3. p. 119.
Becanus, that merits a little stay, and consideration. Besides that grant
above mentioned, which the Orthodoxe make unto the Lutherans, he gratifieth
them farther, and yields unto them, that the divine attributes are
communicated unto the humanity, not only in the person of the word, but also
in the very humanity it self: Howbeit, not proxime* immediately, and formally,
but only mediately, consequently, and identically; for only the subsistence
of the word is communicated proxime, immediately, and formally unto the
humanity in it self, and by it the humanity does nextly, immediately, and
formally subsist. But because that subsistence is really the same with the
divine essence, and Attributes, therefore the divine essence, and attributes
are communicated consequently, and identically unto the humanity, not that the
humanity is Omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent by them, but that it
subsisteth by them, as they are really one and the same thing with the
subsistence of the Word.

A hint he had of this conceit it seems from Gregory De Valentia: For unto him
he refers the reader, and the words, which he relates unto, are as
follows. Agnoscimus and subsistentiam, and etiam divinitatem atque
perfectionem omnem verbi, naturae humanae communicatam esse uno quodam modo
maxim reali, ut scilicet in persona verbi subsistat, primario quidem per ipsam
verbi subsistentiam seu personalitatem, secundario autem per Divinitatem etiam
and perfectiones ejus, quae ab ea subsistentia re non differunt, tom. 4.
Quaest. 2. punct. 3. Sect. 3. page 131. We acknowledge, that both the
subsistence, and also Divinity, and every perfection of the word is
communicated unto the humane nature, after one way or manner, that is most
real: to wit, that it subsisteth in the person of the word primarily, by the
subsistence, or personality it self of the word, secondarily by the Divinity
also, and perfections thereof, which do not differ really from the subsistence.

Thus you see, that both of them make no bones to affirm, that the
subsistence, or personality of the word, is communicated unto the manhood of
Christ, so that it denominates it to subsist properly in, or by the person of
the word.

For confutation of this their opinion, I shall at present allege but 2
arguments out of Si humanitas Christi aliquo mo o subsistit, aliquo modo est
suppositum aut persona, and proinde aliquo sensu verum erit Christum
assumpsisse suppositum, aut personam: at absurdum est posterius: Ergo etiam
prius. Probatur connexum, quia suppositum and subsistentia reciprocantur, adeo
ut omne suppositum habeat subsistentiam, and omne subsistentiam habe^s sit
suppositum. Dicet aliquis: ergo caro Christi pla^e destituitur personalitate.
Respondetur, eam non destitui personalitate, hoc sensu, quasi non sit personae
alicui unita est enim u^ta personae (...): sed quod subsistentia proprie, and
formaliter ei neque in sit, reque attribui possit.

Idem etiam sic demonstrari potest: Si humana natura Christi subsistit, vel per
se subsistit, id est, ex se subsistentiam habet, vel subsistit quatenus existit
in persona (...): prius a null: admittetur at neque posterius man^festa
absurditate caret; quod sic probatur* Caro Christi, quatenus existit in p^rsona
(...) habet modum quendam existendi, subsistentiae contrarium, ergo non
subsistit. Probatur Antecedens; esse in alio supposito, and subsistere, seu
esse per se, and extra omne aliud suppositum, sunt duo oppositi modi existendi,
at caro Christi, quatenus existit in persona (...), habet priorem modum
existendi, i. e. existit in supposito: ergo non potest habere posteriorem, qui
ei e diametro opponitur. Philos. Theol. Exercit. 1. art. 12. page 55, 56.


Baron against it.

1. If the manhood of Christ subsist any manner of way, then it is a person, or
suppositum: for what is subsistence here, but suppositality, and therefore it,
and suppositum are reciprocated.

2. To exist in another person, and to subsist, are opposite manners of
existence; for to subsist is esse per se, and extra aliud omne suppositum. But
the manhood of Christ does exist in the person of the word, and therefore it
cannot be said to subsist. If these men would have consulted their own Suarez,
he would have rectified this their mistake, and have told them, how that usual
saying. The humanity of Christ subsists in the person of the word, is to be
qualified, to wit, in regard of its termination unto, and sustentation by the
subsistence of the word. For having propounded this objection, Dices, humanitas
Christi non subsistit proprie, quia non est in se, sed in alio. He frames
hereunto this answer. Respondetur, non subsistere, tanquam id quod subsistit:
sed proprie verbum in illa subsistit, and illa dicitur in verbo subsistere,
quia illius subsistentia terminatur, and quasi sustentatur: in tert. part.
Thomae. tom. 1. disputat. 8. sect. 3. page 231. See of this farther above, p.
33.

But now the Lutherans from this place argue, as for the communication of the
properties of the Godhead in general, unto the humanity of Christ, so more
particularly for the communication of omnipresence thereunto, and their
argument stands thus. That nature is every where, without which the
all-fulnesse of the Godhead is no where: But without the manhood of Christ the
all-fullnesse of the Godhead is no where, and therefore the manhood of Christ
is every where. The major is unquestionable: and for the minor, it may be thus
confirmed. All-fulnesse of the Godhead is no where without that nature, in
which it dwells always, and every where bodily: But in the manhood of
Christ all-fulnesse of the Godhead dwells bodily allwaies, and every where.
If we should say, that the all-fulnesse of the Godhead does not now at this
present dwell bodily in the manhood of Christ here upon earth, it will then
follow, that on earth it is out of it is house, and does not actually dwell
therein; and therefore it undeniably follows, that the all-fullnesse of the
Godhead is no where without the humane nature of Christ.

For answer hereunto, 1. This expression, All fullness of the Godhead is
without the humane nature of Christ, may have a Est (...), and non Extra
carnem; quia non est separa^us a carne; (...) extra carnem; quia non est
inclusus carni. Altin. loc. Com. part. 2. p. 261.
twofold sense. It may signify 1. A separation of the Godhead from the manhood.
2. A denial of inclusion in it.

1. A separation of the Godhead from the manhood; and so we readily grant it.
The Godhead of Christ is no where Separated, or asunder from the manhood, for
unto this by means of the infiniteness and simplicity of the Godhead, it is
sufficient, that they have somewhere a joint presence.

But 2. as to be without the humane nature of Christ signifies a denial of
inclusion in it, so we aver, that all fullness of the Godhead is some where;
(to wit, here on earth, and in many other places) without the manhood: for it
does not dwell therein, as a thing contained in a place containing. So that the
manhood is not coextended with the Godhead, and has not the same amplitude of
presence with it. And this distinction applied unto the first syllogism, is a
sufficient solution unto the objection.

But now the Prima objectio Lutheranorum sumitur ex vi unionis hypostaticae hoc
modo. Quando duae res inseparabiliter inter se unitae sunt, tunc ubi est una,
ibi necesse est alteram esse; alioqui, si una esset alicubi, ubi altera non
est, iam non essent inseparabiliter inter se unitae. S^d humanitas Christi, and
persona verbi sunt inseparabiliter inter se unitae. Ergo ubiest persona ver by:
ibi est huma^ nitas Christi; at persona verbi est ubique; ergo and humanitas
est ubique and confirmatur ex Damasceno lib. 3. cap. 3. ubi ait, humanitatem et
personam verbi, non solum inseparabiliter, sed etiam indistanter unitas esse.
Itaque non distat ab alia. Distaret autem, si una esset ubique, and altera in
certo tantum loco. etc. Beca: Sum. Theol. tom. 5. c. 7. q. 4.
Lutherans from the inseparability, and indistance of the union, betwixt the
two natures, plead for the coextension of the manhood, with the Godhead. When
two things (say they) are inseparably united, betwixt themselves, then where
one of them is, there it is necessary, that the other be also: otherwise, if
one of them should be some where, where the other is not, they should not be
inseparably united betwixt themselves. But the humanity of Christ, and the
person of the word are unseparably united betwixt themselves; therefore where
the person of the word is, there also is the humanity of Christ. But the person
of the word is every where, therefore also the humanity of Christ is every
where.

Divines generally out of Damascene affirm, that the manhood, and the person
of the word are united, not only inseparably but also indistantly, therefore
one of themis not distant from the other; but one of them would be d^stant from
the other, if one of them should be every where, and the other only in a
certain determinate place.

For answer: the major is most false: for we see even in nature, that where
there is no separation betwixt the terms or extremes of an union, that yet
the union is not by way of exequation, or equipatency: In a living man, the
foul is not separate from the head, and yet the head does not exist,
wheresoever the soul does; for then it should be in the feet. A star is
inseparably conjoined with it is orb, but because it is less in quantity, then
it is orb, therefore it is not wheresoever it is orb is.

So the God head and manhood of Christ are united inseparably, and indistantly,
but it does not therefore follow, that the manhood being finite, is in point of
presence commensurate unto the Godhead, which is infinite.

Yea, but they argue for this, not only from the inseparability of the union,
but also from the indivisibility, simplicity, and impartibility of the Godhead.
In the manhood of Christ dwells all-fullnesse of the Godhead, the whole
manhood is united unto the whole, indivisible, and impartible Godhead, and
therefore it is wheresoever the Godhead is, and that is every where.

For answer; the consequence is false; and the falsehood of it the learned Mr
Barlow illustrateth by diverse particulars. Exercit. Metaph. 6. p. 177, 178,
179. This present day has a coexistence with whole eternity, that is simple,
and indivisible. But the duration of this day is not adequate unto the duration
of eternity. Eternity was before this day, and it will be for ever after the
period of this day. So the manhood of Christ is united in heaven, where it
existeth, unto the whole indivisible Godhead, but it does not thereupon ensue,
that it coexisteth with the Godhead in all places besides. The humane nature of
Peter is present unto the Godhead in such a determinate space, but it would be
madness for any man hereupon to infer, that because the Godhead is
indivisible, therefore, if Peter do presentially coexist in one space with it,
therefore in all other spaces whatsoever. The whole indivisible soul is united
with the head, and so long, we cannot say, that it is any where separated from
the head, but yet, it would be a gross absurdity for any man to say, that the
head is present, wheresoever the soul is, for then it should be where the
hands, feet, and all the other members are. So the whole entire Godhead is no
where sundered from the manhood, and yet the manhood does not adequate it is
immensity. And this is sufficient for answer unto the first Syllogism. As for
the second Syllogism, I deny the minor: to wit, that all-fulnesse of the
Godhead dwells in the manhood every where: all fulness of the Godhead is
every where; but it does not dwell in the manhood every where.

The hypostaticall union may be considered terminatively, or informatively.

1. Terminatively, in regard of Termination: and so it is terminated unto the
person of the son, and in his person unto all-fulnesse of the Godhead, which
is every where. It fills heaven and earth with it is presence. But now if we
consider it informatively, in regard of information, or inhesion (taking the
word largely) so it is seated in the humane nature, that is not every where,
but only in heaven, at the right hand of God.

Loc. Com. part. 2. p. 261
Altingius in answer unto this argument confesses, that the person of the word
has the humane nature every where personally united to it. And the learned
Hooker has touching this particular, these following expressions: Somewhat of
the person of Christ is not every where in that sort, namely, his manhood, the
only conjunction whereof with Deity is extended as far as Deity, the actual
position restrained and tied to a certain place, yet presence by way of
conjunction is in some sort presence. page 302. Eccles. Pol. And again, page
303. Even the body of Christ it self, although the definite limitation thereof
be most sensible, does notwithstanding admit in some sort a kind of infinite
and unlimited presence likewise. For his body being a part of that nature,
which whole nature is presently joined unto Deity, wheresoever Deity is, it
follows, that his bodily substance has every where a presence of true
conjunction with Deity.

I hope the learned and ingenuous reader will not be offended, though such an
inconsiderable person, as my self, in the Common wealth of learning, assume
the liberty of passing my censure upon these passages. For I profess, it is
not out of any disrespect unto the memory of these great scholars, but only
out of affection unto the truth. If I know any thing, in either Philosophy, or
scholasticall Divinity, they are both guilty of a gross mistake, and I cannot
sufficiently wonder, that it should fall from so learned pen. You may see it
acutely proved by Secundum vero quod erat probandum, repugnare scilicet unionem
esse intrinsecam verbo, probatur ex multis implicantiis. Prima autem and fun
damentalis est, quia haec unio nec potest esse creata nec inere ata^non creata,
ut ab omnibus conceditur, etiam ab adversariis, quia daretur mutatio in verbo:
quod vero non possit esse inincreata, de qua est quaestio, probatur.

Primo, quia, ut saepius dictum est in disput 4. Philos. in prima dissicultate,
unio est essentialiter nexus actualis sienim esset p^teutialis, requireretur
alia actualis, quae actualiter nectat extrema: Standum est igitur potius in
priori unione, and dicendum, quod illa est actualis^ ergo unio est actualis
nexus, quomodo potest ^ste nexus concipi ab aterno in verbo, and non nectere,
seu unire verbum actualiter cum natura creata?

Secundo probatur, quia ha^ unio di^eret ^antum ordinem ad naturam creatam,
ergo dependeret ab illa, est autem absurdum ut res increata totum suum esse
habeat dependenter ab aliquo creato quia non haberet majorem necessitatem, quam
ens creatum. Quod vero talis unio diceret ordinem ess^ntialem ad creaturam,
probatur, nam non potest intelligi ratio extremi unius unionis cum al^ero sine
intrinseco and transcendentali respectu ad illu^ aliud. Quarto probatur, quia
ratio actualis unionis exsua essentia est quid incompletum and ordinatum ad
alterum; est enim essentialiter conjunctio duorum ad constitutionem vnius
tertii-non ergo potest Deo convenire formaliter and intrinsece, quin dicat
imperfectionem in Deo, a qua non potest abstrahere. Remanet igitur ex dictis
probatum, quod quid unio non potest afficere intrinsece nisi tantum unum
extremum, and quon^am hoc extremum non potest esse verbum, sequitur quod
afficiat intrinsece tantum humanitatem.


Albertinus Coral. tom. 2. Quaest. 5. Theolog. circa quintum Corallar: de
subjecto unionis hypostaticae. That the hypostaticall union regards, and
affects the word only extrinsecally, as it is term, and that it respects the
manhood only intrinsecally as it is subject. This is the common opinion of
Schoolmen, and for it Albertinus thus disputes. If the hypostaticall union be
intrinsecall unto the word, it must be either created, or uncreated. It cannot
be created: For this would infer a change in the Godhead: neither can it be
uncreated, because actual union has such an incompleate being, as is
dependant upon, and essentially related unto something else, and therefore
utterly inconsistent with that infinite perfection which is in an uncreated
being: The hypostaticall union therefore is not intrinsecall, but extrinsecall
unto the allofulnesse of the Godhead in Christ. Well, this promised, the
absurdity, and irrationality of what these men have asserted is apparent.

1. For Altingius: The union of the two natures can no where exist out of it is
subject, but the humane nature is the subject, in which it is placed, and
therefore impossible for it to exist, where the manhood is not. The manhood is
not every where, and therefore the union is not every where, and consequently
the manhood is not every where united, but only there, where the manhood has
it is existence; for denomination from the union only follows the existence of
the union: It does not, It cannot denominate, where it is not.

2. Then for the Great Hooker: whereas, he says, that the conjunction of the
manhood with Deity, is extended as far as Deity, that the body of Christ is
joined unto Deity, wheresoever Deity is, that his Bodily substance has every
where a presence of true conjunction with Deity. This also is easily refuted
upon the same ground, as that of Altingius was. For however the conjunction of
the manhood with the Deity, respects the Deity as a term unto which it is,
yet it regards the manhood alone, as the subject in which it is. And therefore
it is extended as far as the manhood only, and not as far as the Deity,
in which it is not at all. And hereupon it follows, that the body of Christ
cannot possibly be joined unto the Godhead, where the body is not. It cannot
have a presence of conjunction, where it has not a presence of existence.

I shall add one thing more, and then, I shall have done with what I have to
say in refutation of these worthy Gentlemen. The hypostaticall union by the
common consent of Schoolmen, is modus substantialis, not a substantial
entity, but only a substantial manner of being, and the res modificata of it,
the thing, which it modificates, is the humanity of Christ. But now it is
utterly impossible, that modus, a manner of being should have any existence out
of or apart from the Thing, which it modificates. Thus figure cannot exist
severed from quantity: Vbication, a re ubicata; duratio, a durante; sessio, a
sedente. The subsistence, or personality of a finite narure, cannot exist
without that nature. The Papists, who in order unto their monster of
transubstantiation, hold it possible for accidents to exist separated from
their subjects, yet are unanimous in affirming, that mods cannot possibly by
the divine omnipotency exist sunder'd a rebus modificatis. All this being
presupposed, let any, that is tender of the reputation of Mr Hooker, tell me,
what probability of coherence there is betwixt these two propositions of his,
that the actual position of Christ's manhood, the res modificata, i^
restrained, and tied unto a certain place; and yet that the modus, the
conjunction thereof with the Deity, is extended as far as Deity. I shall
illustrate what I have said, by instancing in the union of the soul with the
head of a man, which though it be terminated unto the soul, is only placed in
the head, tanquam subjecto, or rather, re modificata. Therefore this union is
commensurate unto the presence of the head, and cannot be said to be extended
as far as the soul, which is tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part.
Though then the soul, which is in the head, be in all the other members, yet
we cannot say, that it is united with the head in them. As for the application
of the similitude, the reader may easily supply that out of what has been
already delivered.

That, which occasioned this mistake in Altingius, and Mr Hooker, was (as I
suppose) their conceit, that if the manhood be not every where united with the
person of the word, and therein with the Godhead, that then the person of the
word, and the Godhead may be said somewhere to be separated from the manhood.
This is apparent by the whole series of Altingius his discourse, and no less
seems to be imported by this following passage in Hooker, premised by way of
proof unto this his assertion: Because this substance (says he) is
inseparably joined to that personal word, which by his very divine essence is
present with all things, the nature, which cannot have in it self universal
presence, has it after a sort by being no where severed from that, which every
where is present, etc.

But this is a Lutheran conceit, and very untrue; for from the infiniteness,
and simplicity of the word, it inevitably follows, that if it be any where
united with the manhood, that then it can no where be severed therefrom; and we
may illustrate it by that similitude (which I have often alleged) of the
soul. We cannot say of the soul in the feet, that it is separated from the
head, because the same indivisible soul, that is in the feet, is substantially
united with the head: and the union of the soul with the head is not in the
feet, but in the head only: there is nothing touching this particular which I
can think of, that remains unsatisfied, but only one passage more in Hooker,
which I shall transcribe, and briefly reply unto. In as much (says he,) as
that infinite word is not divisible into parts, it could not in part, but must
needs be wholly incarnate, and consequently, wheresoever the word is; it has
with it manhood, else should the word be in part, or somewhere God only, and
not man, which is impossible; for the person of Christ is whole, perfect God,
and perfect man wheresoever, etc.

For answer unto this, I offer these following particulars.

1. This objection is every way as forcible, for the actual position of the
manhood every where, as well as for the conjunction of it with the Deity every
where. And the Lutherans from it thus argue for the ubiquity of the manhood.
Christ is every where man, therefore every where he has his manhood. For if
somewhere he should not have his manhood, he should somewhere be man without
his manhood, which is absurd. But now Mr Hooker denies the actual position of
the manhood every where, and yet his argument, mutatis mutandis, with due
change, is as cogent for that, as for the conjunction of it with the Deity
every where.

But besides this answer ad hominem, in a Second place, I answer directly, by
denying the consequence of this proposition: If the word has not with it the
manhood, wheresoever it is, then it should be somewhere not man: For because of
the simplicity, indivisibility, and infiniteness of the Godhead, this is
sufficient ground to say, that the person of the word is every where man, if
any where it be personally united with the humane nature. Thus because the
reasonable soul, being indivisible, is substantially united with the head, we
may say of it, in all the members, that it is the form of the head, and yet
it is information of, and conjunction with the head, is placed only in the
head, and not extended unto any other member.

3. If Mr Hooker had but consulted the Schoolmen, he would never have troubled
his readers with this objection, unto which they give a perspicuous answer.
This Illa autem propositio, Chri stus ubique est Homo, distinguenda est. Nam si
illa p^rticula ubique, cadit supra praelicatum Homo, tunc falsa est propositio.
Ratio est, quia praedicata supponunt pro formali significato: ergo homo, quando
est praedicatum, supponit pro humanitate. Cum ergo dicitur, Christas ubique est
homo, sensus est, Christus ubique habet suam humanitatem. Quod falsum est,
ficut etiam falsum est dicere, Christus ab aeterno est homo, id est, ab aeterno
habet suam hamanitatem. Si autem particul^ ubique conjun^ gitur praecise cum
subjecto, tunc admitti porest illa propositio, Christus ubique est homo, id
est, Christus, qui est ubique, est homo. V^l Christus ubique existens, est
homo. Hinc patet, eodem mode distinguendam esse hanc propositionem: verbum
ali^ubi non est homo. Nam vera est hec sensu: verbum alicubi est fine humanit
(...): vel verbum alicubi non habet suam humanitatem. Falsa est hoc sensu:
verbum alicubi existens non potest dici homo: vel, verbum alicubi existens, non
est homo. Similes sunt hae duae: Anima alicubi est fine capite, and, anima
alicubi existens, non est forma capitis, Haec enim falsa est, illa vera. Becan.
Sum. Theol. tom. 5. cap. 7. quaest. 4. page 127, 128.

De illa propositione, Christus ubique est homo, si illud, ubique ^at supra
praedicatum, homo, D. Thom. dicit in rigore esse falsum, quia praedicata
formaliter tenentur: and, ideo illud, ubique cadit supra humanitatem ipsam, and
significat, illam esse ubique, seu ubique copulari tali supposito. Sicut haec
etiam est falsapropositio, Christus ab aeterno est homo, propter eandem
rationem: and haec similiter, anima, ubicunque est, informat manum, etc. Si
tamen adverbium pr^ise conjungatur cum subjecto, admitti potest illa locutio:
sensus enim erit, hoc suppositum, quod est ubique, esse hominem, and de illo
ubique existente vere diciposse, esse hominem. Suarcz in tert part. Thomae
disput. 32. sect. 4. page 532.


proposition, (say they) Christ is every where man, is to be distinguished. The
particle, every where, may be referred unto either the predicate man, or the
subject Christ. If it be referred unto the predicate, and the sense of it be,
that the manhood is every where, or that it is every where coupled with the
person of the word, then it is false: as it is false to say, that Christ was
man from everlasting, and as it is false to affirm, that the soul informs
the head, wheresoever it existeth. But now, if we refer it to the subject,
and the meaning of the proposition be, that Christ, who is every where, is man,
then it is true, and sound for Christ is every where in regard of his person.
But this will yield no advantage unto the opinion of Mr Hooker, that the union,
or conjunction of the manhood with the Deity is extended, as far as the
Deity. If any one of the admirers of Mr Hooker think, that I have wronged
their great patron of ceremonies in this discourse, I shall be contented to be
disciplined by them, so they will do it with arguments, and not with
invectives.

In the third, and last place, I shall dispatch an answer unto those
objections against this personal union, which are of greatest weight, and they
shall be drawn, 1. From the extremes of the union considered severally, and
apart, 2. From a comparison of them togeither in regard of their disproportion,
and disparation.

1. From the extremes of the union considered severally, and apart, 1. From
the person of the word, and the Godhead, in which it subsisted from all
eternity, and 2. From the humanity.

1. From the person of the word, and the Godhead, in which it subsisted from
all eternity.

1. From the person of the word, from the simplicity, compleatnesse, and
unchangeablenesse of it.

1. From the simplicity of it. The word considered in it self is most simple,
and uncompounded. But the result of it is union with the manhood is compounded:
for that is nothing else, but Christ, or the word incarnate, the word
subsisting in the divine nature, in a connaturall way, per connaturalitatem,
and in the humane nature, by assumption thereof. And Christ the word incarnate,
consists proxime, and immediately of the manhood, and subsistence of the
word, consequently, and mediatly of the divine and humane nature; and therefore
it is compounded.

But now this composition will be a great imbasure unto the word: for in every
composition there are parts compounding, that mutually perfect one another, and
are of their own nature, ordained to compound the whole. All which particulars
are utterly repugnant unto the perfection of the word. For that is infinite;
and therefore it cannot be a part: for then, it should have an incompleate
being: it cannot be perfected by the manhood: and lastly, it cannot have any
natural tendency unto composition.

For answer unto this, 1. Duplex est compositio, una hujus ex his, alia hujus
ad hoc. Prima compositio est, sicut compositio hominis ex anima and corpore, ex
quibus, tanquam ex partibus, consistit intrinsece. Secunda compositio est
accidentis ad subjectum, vel subjecti cum accidente. Non enim subjectum
compositum est ex subjecto and accidente: nec accidens ex accidente and
subjecto, sed unum est alteri compositum, id est, cum alio positum, quamvis
aggregatum ex ut oque possit dici compositum ex eis: Tunc ad quaestionem
dicendum, quod persona verbi post incarnationem non fuit composita prima
compositione, quae est hujus ex his. Cujus ratio est, quia omne tale compositum
dependet ex compone^tihus, tanquam ex partibus constituentibus ipsum, and est
posterius ipsis saltem ordine naturae. Sed personalitas Christi non dependet a
natura divina and humana, tanquam ex partibus constituentibus ipsam, nec est
aliquid posterius ipsis. Imo praeexistit saltem alteri naturae, s^l humanae,
ergo personae Christi non est composita ex natura divina and humana. Si autem
loquamur de secunda compositione quae est hajus a^ hoc, adh^c tal^s fit
dupliciter, uno modo per inhaerentiam unius ad alteram, qualis est compositio
accidentis ad subjectum, and hoc modo persona verbi non est composita post
incarnationem, quia nec ipsa, qua subiective existit natura humana, nec natura
humana potest alicui inhaerere. Quod patet per rationem quia omne quod recipit
aliquid inse, per modum inhaerentiae, se habet ad ipsum, ut potentia passiva ad
actum and ficut perfectibile ad suam perfectionem. Sed persona divina non
potest schabere ad quodcunque aliud per modum potentiae passivae, vel per modum
perfectibilis: ergo ipsa non est componibilis alicui per modum inhaerentiae.
Alio modo sit talis compositio per sol^m dependentiam habitudinis relative, ita
ut unum fit inexistens, aliud vero subsistens terminans respectum and
dependentiam inexistentis, and h^c modo persona divina post incarnationem fuit
composita, quia quae prius subsistebat in so^a natura divina, post
incarnationem terminavit per suam subsistentiam dependentiam naturae humanae,
etc. lib. 3. Did. 7. q. 3.
Durand distinguishes of a twofold composition: Hujus ex his, and hujus ad hoc.

1. Hujus ex his. Such is the composition of man, of a body and soul, of which
it consists intrinsecally as of parts. And this composition he rejects,
because that which is thus compounded, depends of it is parts compounding and
is after them at least in order of nature. But now the personality of Christ
does not depend upon the humane and divine nature as parts constituting it,
neither is it after them in order of nature, nay it preexisted unto one nature,
to wit, the humane, and therefore the person of Christ is not compounded of the
divine and humane nature, if we speak of this kind of composition.

There is (says he) a second kind of composition, and that is hujus ad hoc,
and it is not so properly a composition of a third thing out of the things
united, as an adjoining of one of the things united unto the other. And thus
the person of the word after the incarnation may be said to be compounded. For
hereby, the humane nature is added unto the person of the word, and unto the
divine nature in the unity of the same person. But now, he allo subdivideth
this composition, which he terms hujus ad hoc. For it is either by inherence
of one thing in another, and such is the composition of an accident with it is
subject: or else by way of a suppositall dependence of one thing upon, and
relation unto another: so that the one should substantially inexist in the
other, and the other should terminate the respect and dependence of the former,
which inexists, and after this latter manner the person of the word is after
the incarnation compounded. Because, whereas before, it subsisted only in the
divine nature, after the incarnation, it by it is subsistence terminated the
dependence of the humane nature, Thus he.

A second answer is given by Aquinas. That this composition is not ratione
partium, but ratione numeri, part. 3. q. 2. art. 4. His plain meaning is, that
the things reckoned up in this composition, to wit, the personality, or
subsistence of the word, and the humanity, or the deity, and humanity are not
parts properly so called; for this would imply imperfection, and
incompleatnesse in the word: but yet they are things really distinct, and that
in number, substantially united together. And the union (thinks he) of things
really and numerically distinguished, if it be not a mere aggregation, is
sufficient to make a composition, as the word may be taken in the most general
acception of it.

In a third place, The Scotists out of Bonaventure distinguish of a proper, and
improper, or similitudinary composition. They grant, that the person of the
word after the incarnation, is compounded, taking the word composition in a
large and improper sense. But then they utterly deny, that it is compounded in
strictness, and propriety of speech. For as compositio proprie and rigorose
sumpta necessario exposcit, quod alterum ex componentibus habeat rationem
actus, alterum rationem potentiae passivae, sed nihil est in persona Christi,
quod habeat rationem actus informantis, and rationem potentiae ad ejus
compositionem ergo nullo modo est dicenda proprie composita: Mayor ex bis, quae
supra notavimus patet. Miner vero ostenditur. Quia si fiat comparatio inter
naturam divinam and humanam, neutra ratione mactus informantis, nec rationem
potentiae passivae habere potest, quia natura divina, cum fit purissimus actus
per se existens, nec informari nec informare potest. Pratere a, quia in omni
co^positione compositum est quolibet ex componentibus perfectius, at natura
Divina nihil perfectius excogitari potest, agitur, etc Si vero fiat comparatio
naturae humanae and divinae, ad personam Christi, dici etiam non potest, quod
ibi sit compositum expersona and naturis, propter easdem rations. Super. tert.
lib. sentent, controv. 3. art. 3. page 71, 72.
Rada objecteth, all proper composition is of an informing act, and passive
power. But now if we compare togeither, the person of the word, and his
humanity, or the Deity, and the humanity, as united togeither, they cannot be
thus related one unto another. For the person of the word, and the divine
nature, in which it subsists, is a most pure act, and therefore nec informari,
nec informare potest. Add hereunto, that that, which is compounded of parts
properly so termed, is better, and more noble then each of the parts
compounding, considered single, and apart by themselves. But Christ, the word
incarnate, cannot be more noble, then the word considered praecise, as it was
in it self from all eternity: for it was of infinite perfection, and there can
be no greater perfection, then that which is infinite.

4. The Thomists, who do most eagerly contend, that this is a composition
properly so called, do yet so refine the word, and take it in so abstractive a
sense, as that it excludes all imperfection. Indeed the imperfections mentioned
in the objections of Rada are peculiar unto ordinary, and natural
compositions. But this (say they) is an extraordinary and supernatural
composition, of which we have no more but this one instance; and therefore it
is not to be measured by them. Cajetan is here very wary, and modest: For he
dares not say absolutely and simply, that the person of the word after the
incarnation is compounded, but thinks it fit to allay, and moderate the
harshnesse of the expression, and to say that it is a person compounded after
an ineffable manner.

As for mine own part, I must needs profess, that I conceive the difference
between them to be only a Logomachy, a strife of words, proceeding from an
itch in these two sects to quarrel wheresoever they meet. And therefore the
composing of it is not worthy any long digression. The Scotists yield unto the
Thomists that which these call a proper composition; to wit, an union of the
person of the word, and the Dietie therein with the humanity. They confess
that the word, as incarnate, may be said to be compounded in this sense, that
it subsisteth, as in the divine nature, which is connaturall and intrinsecall
thereunto, so in the humanity which is extraneous, as it were foreign, and
adventitious unto it; And this is all the composition, that the Thomists argue
for. The controversy then is only de modo loquendi: and yet herein, the
Thomists are favored by the notation of the word. For according unto that,
compositio is quasi positio cum alio: And compositum is quasi cum alio positum.
Now the manhood and Godhead of Christ are put togeither, and that not by
aggregation, but in a way of substantial union. Besides, as Compositum est
quod ex diversis rebus constat, sed Christus Dominus, quatenus est terminus
resultans per banc unionem est vere unus constans ex multis rebus, ergo vere
compositus. Confirma tur primo quia terminus hujus unionis non est simplex,
ergo Compositus: Nam baec duo immediate, and cont^adictorie opposita sunt.
Antecedeus, sc, quod terminus hujus unionis non est simplex in hunc modum
probatur Terminus hujus unionis, ut sic, resultavit, seu incepit esse in
tempore. Sed nihil, quod huiusmodi est, est omnino simplex, ergo. Denique hic
terminus resultat ex unione plurium rerum distinctarum, ergo non potest esse
omnino simplex. Sienim sola significatio vocis confideretur, ipsum nomen
unionis opponitur perfectae simplicitati, si proprie de unione fit sermo tum
quia quae uniuntur, non sunt idem, tum etiam, quia minus est esse unita, quam
esse unum.

Consirmatur secundo, quia mag^s compositus est Christus, ut est hic homo, quam
sola humanitas, quis Christus intrinsece includit humanitatem, and aliquid
aliud, ergo: in tert. part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 6. Sect. 4. page 195. 196.


Suarez disputes, Simplex and compositum are opposed contradictorily. And
therefore Christ the word, as incarnate, must be either simple, or compounded.
That it is not simple, he thus proves; Because union is opposed unto perfect
simplicity: for those things, which are united, are not the same; and to be
united is less then to be one. This argument so graveld Faber Simplicitas
potest comparari ad duo. sc. ad compositionem proprie dictam ex pluribus, and
ad unionem ex pluribus: si loquamur primo modo, dico quod persona est ita
simplex ante incarnationem sicut post: Si vero consideretur secundo modo, dico
quod potest dici composita, in lib. tert. Sentent. did. 6. quaest. 3. disp.
16. page 84.
Faventinus, that whiles he undertook the solution of it, he confesses, that
the person of the word after the incarnation is compounded, as simplicity is
opposed unto union, ex pluribus, of things really different; and yet this is
all the composition that Suarez disputes for.

As for the objections of Durand, they receive a very easy solution.

For however the person of the word, considered praecise in it self, be
eternal, and independent, and therefore not after Illud, quod resultat
praecise ex vi hujus compositionis, non est suppositum divinum ut sic, quia,
suppositum divinum in hac compositione se habet specificative, quod autem
resultat reduplicative ex hac compositione est suppositum humanum ut humanum,
ut terminans scilicet naturam humanam, ut sic autem sub hac formalitate
praecise ut est terminans, est posterius humanitate and pendet ab illa, quamvis
absolute et simpliciter dicendum non sit, quia propositio faceret sensum
falsum, quod sc suppositum Christi quod est suppositum verbi, sit posterius
humanitate, and pendeat ex illa. Albertinus Coral tom. 2 tert. Coral. Theol.
ex praedicam: substant. quaest. 3. dub. 1. page 113. Persona Christi quatenus
subsistit in natura divina, praeexistit incarnationi: quatenus vero subsistit
in natura humana non praeexistit incarnationi, sed est terminus resultans per
incarnationem. Becanus Sum. Theol. tom. 5. cap. 6. quaest. 2. page 101.
the manhood, not dependant upon it. Yet the word considered, as Christ, as
incarnate, as subsisting in two natures, may under this reduplication be said
to be after the manhood, and to depend upon it; for it is the total and
adequate term, which results from the union thereof with the person of the
word, and the Godhead therein: And it is distinguished from the word,
considered praecise, with that distinction, which is termed distinctio
includentis ab incluso: For it includes more then the word, to wit, the
humanity.

A second objection is taken from the compleatnesse of the word. That which
comes unto a thing already complete, and perfect, comes thereunto only
accidentally, and makes therewith only an aggregation, and not a substantial
union. But now the person of the word, from all eternity, was most perfect, and
complete. And therefore the adding or coming of the manhood unto it, is not
substantial, but accidental.

For answer. The major is true only, when one thing is so added, and comes
unto another, as that it pertains not to the sam* subsistence. And thus a
man's garment is added unto him, and therefore united with him only
accidentally; so that homo vestitus is ens unum tantum per accidens. But now
the manhood is so added, and comes unto the word, that it is drawn, or assumed
into a communion of subsistence with the word, and it is divine nature.

A third argument is fetched from the unchangeablenesse of the word. The word
was God, and it is impossible for God to be changed. But now the word should be
changed by the incarnation, or personal union, because there by it should be
made substantially man, whereas before it was not man.

Unto this I shall Verbum carnem dicimus factum non immutando quod erat, sed
suscipiendo, quod non erat, nostra auxit, sua non minuit. Gregor. lib. 9.
Epist. 61.
answer briefly in the words of Becanus Sum. Theol. tom. 5. cap. 1. quaest.
1. page 8. Deus non mutatur per incarnationem Quia per illam non acquirit aut
amittit ullam perfectionem intrinsecam. Tametsi enim fiat homo, tamen humanitas
not fit intrinseca Deitati aut personae, sed solum illi unitur, sine ulla
intrinseca Dei mutatione. Nec obstat hic loquen^i modus: Deus per incarnationem
fit homo, cum antea non esset homo. Nam licet recte inde colligatur, aliquam
mutationem factam esse; non tamen necesse est factam esse in Deo, sed sufficit
factam esse in humanitate. God is not changed by the incarnation, because, by
it, he does not acquire, or loose any intrinsecall perfection: for although he
be made man, yet the manhood is not intrinsecall to the Godhead, or person, but
only united thereunto without any intrinsecall change of God, neither is this
impugned by this manner of speech: God by the incarnation is made man; Whereas
before he was not m^n. For although thence it be rightly collected, that some
mutation be made, Yet notwithstanding, it is not necessary, that it be made in
God, but it is sufficient, that it be made in the humanity. But this doubt I
have already fully discussed on, Joh. 1.14. page 82, 83, 84. whither I shall
remit the reader.

1. Another argument is taken from the Godhead, in which the Person of the word
subsisteth. All-fulness of the Godhead is common unto all the three Persons;
and therefore, if it be hypostatically united with the manhood, in the Person
of the Son, it is also united therewith in the same manner in the two other
Persons, and consequently, we may say of the Father and holy Ghost that they
are incarnate.

For answer, I deny the consequence: and my reason is, Because all-fulness of
the Godhead dwells bodily in the humanity, not as it is considered
absolutely, and at large, as it is common unto all the three Persons, but as it
is taken relatively, or determinately, as it is determined unto the Person of
the Son. The Godhead is united with the manhood only as it is in the Person
of the Son. Indeed the incarnation, or assumption of the humane nature, being
an outward work of the Trinity, belongs unto all the three Persons effective,
in regard of effection; It is the effect of all of them: for the ground and
reason of efficiency is omnipotency, and that is common unto the whole Trinity.
But it is peculiar unto the Son, as it is considered terminative, in regard
of it is termination, and relation. The second Person then, is the alone term,
unto which the humane nature is assumed. Because the ground and reason of this
termination, is the personality, or subsistence of the word, which is proper
unto it, and incommunicable unto the two other persons. All three Persons did
jointly and undividedly frame and sanctify the manhood, as also did unite it
with the Godhead: But it was only the Person of the word, that was united
therewith. Thus the word alone is said to be made flesh, Joh. 1.14: to be
manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. to take on him the form of a servant,
Phil. 2.7: the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16: to take part of flesh and blood,
Heb. 2.14. The Father is greater then the Son, Joh. 14.28. that is, as
touching the manhood. But now this would not be true, if the Father were
incarnate, and did subsist in the manhood, as well as the Son. It is
therefore evident, that the whole Trinity was not incarnate.

A second sor^ of objections proceed on the manhood's part, and they are taken
from the connaturalness of a proper personality, or subsistence of it is own
thereunto, the resultancy whereof therefrom was miraculously prevented, and
stayed: For hereupon two objections will follow. The humanity of Christ will be
by the personal union 1. Debased. 2. Violenced.

1. Debased: Because it is affirmed to want the greatest perfection, and utmost
complement of the humane nature, which is connatural thereunto, and found in
all other men.

2. Violenced: For here by it is deprived of it is proper personality, unto
which it has a natural propension, or tendency, and therefore it exists
violently in the person of the word.

But neither of these pretended absurdities are the sequel of this personal
union.

1. Hereby, there redounds no imperfection unto the humanity of Christ, but
rather exaltation, and advancement: For notwithstanding it, Christ wanted
nothing, to make him a perfect man, because he has a perfect humanity, unto
which is communicated a subsistence, infinitely transcending it is own; and
therefore it is in the Person of the word after an higher manner, then if it
had subsisted by it self. The Apostle, Heb. 2.17: tells us, that Christ was
made like unto his Brethren in all things. And Damascene has a saying, that
verbum assumpsit omnem rem, quam in na^ura pl^ntavit. But they are both Quod
vero attinet ad mysterium incarnati^nis, respondetur, non solum non esse
inconveniens, verum potius esse necessarium ad explicandam veritatem illius
mysterii, quod verbum non assumpserit in humana natura aliqu iratione^
positiva^ constitutivam personae, sive illa sit res o^nino distinct a, sive
modus tantum. Ex quo non sequitur illam naturam non esse perfect am in esse
naturae, sed tantum sequitur non esse personam. Et ita intelligendum est, quod
Damascenus ait, nempe assumpsisse verbum quic, quid ad veritatem humanae
naturae pertinet and ad formalem hominis constitutionem, non vero quod spectat
ad personam creatam ut sic. Suarez. Metaph. disp. tom. poster. disp. 34. sect.
2. number. 19. page 181.

Respondetur, Subsistentiam non esse accidens, sed substanti^lem quendam modum
qui quidem pertinet ad complementum hominis in ratione suppositi and personae,
non tamen ad complementum humanae naturae, nec hominis, ut homo est, for
maliter enim constituitur and essentialiter, humanitate. Unde fateor deesse
humanitati modum hunc, non tamen Christo deesse aliquid, ut sit perfectus homo,
quis perfectam habet humanitatem, and altiori subsisientia subsistit, and hoc
modo dicunt, Dam. 3. de fid. cap. 6. and alii patres ^verbum assumpsisse totum,
quod in nostra natura plantavit, quia quod inassumptibile est, est incurabile,
quia perfectissimam humanitatem sibi univit, non tamen illum modum, qui non est
de essentia hominis, ut homo est. Su^rez. in tert. part. Thomae. Disp. 8. Sect.
3. page 226. 227.


to be understood of such things, as appertain unto the truth of the humane
nature, and formal constitution of man, and not of that, which appertains
unto a created person, a^ such: For herein indeed, he is unlike other men. But
this does not cast him, as man, any way behind either men, or Angels, in the
point of dignity. For Christ man is an uncreated, an infinite person. Whereas
they all are but finite, and created persons.

Neither, 2. does the humanity of Christ suffer any violence by it is personal
union: for although it has not formally a natural personallity, yet it has
the perfection thereof, in the person of the word, after a more eminent manner.
It will not reckon the absence of it is own finite subsistence a want, as long
as the room thereof is abundantly supplied by the presence of that, which is
infinite. For with an infinite subsistence an intellectual nature cannot but
be satisfied (...) fully acquiesce in it, seeing the creature is capable of no
higher ennoblement.

I proceed unto the last head of objections, those which are taken from a
comparison of the extremes of this union together, and that in regard of
their disproportion and disparation.

1. Disproportion, disproportion or distance is many times an hinderance unto
union. And therefore, because a substance, and an accident differ genere, in
their general nature, sort, or kind, therefore nothing can be compounded of
them, that is ens unum per se, one with an essential union. But now, there is
a far greater disproportion betwixt the person of the word, the Godhead, and
manhood in Christ: For that is an infinite disproportion betwixt the creator,
and the Creature, and there cannot possibly be a greater distance, then that
which is infinite. It follows therefore, that because the person of the word,
the Deity, and the humanity of Christ are thus disproportioned, they are
altogether incapable of any substantial union.

For answer: the Infinita distantia perfectionis, quae est inter personam verbi
and humanitatem Christi, non obstat, quo minus haec illi uniri possit; modo
inter hanc and illam fit sufficiens proportio ad constituendum compositum. Est
autem sufficiens proportie, quia humanit is est capax ut actu subsistat per
insinitam subsistentiam: sicut est capax ut a Deo producatur per infinitam
potentiam. Sicu^ ergo non sequitur, Humanitas Christi, and omnipetentia Dei
infinite inter se distant: ergo illa per hanc creari non po^est. Sic etiam non
sequitur. Humanitas Christi, and subsistentia verbi insinite inter se distant:
ergo illaper hanc subsistere non potest. Ratio est, quia infinita illa
distantia in eo solum consistit, quod perfectio creaturae infinite distet a
perfectione Dei: non autem in eo, quod nulla sit proportio creatoris ad
crcaturam in genere causae and effectus, aut subsistentiae divinae ad creaturam
subsistentem in genere principii terminantis, and rei terminatae. Becanus Sum.
Theol. tom. 5. cap. 5. quaest. 1. page 8, 9.
disproportion between them in genere ent is is no bar unto their personal
union; for notwithstanding it, there is a proportion between them, in genere
principii terminantis, and rei terminatae, though not natural yet
obedientiall, or of non repugnancy. Though then, they be infinitely distant, in
point of perfection, yet they are proportioned in order unto a personal union.
For there is an ability in the person of the word, to suppositate, and assume
the manhood, and there was a capacity in the manhood to be assumed, supported,
and terminated by the person of the word.

The second argument from the comparison of the extremes of this union
togeither is taken from their disparation. From this union result Gerhard de
persona and officio Christi. p. 454. c. 9.
personal propositions, as they are called, in which the concrete of one
nature is predicated of the concrete of another nature: As God is man; and man
is God. But now God and man are disparates, and disparates ^not be affirmed of
one another substantively. We cannot say a lion is a fox, or a man is a beast.
And if there be not truth in these personal propositions, the personal union,
of which they are the sequel, is but a mere fiction.

For answer: God and man are disparate terms, when they both subsist with
that subsistence, which is connaturall unto each. And this is the case of the
humanity in all men, except the man Christ Jesus, and in him the manhood was
void of a proper, and connaturall personality, or subsistence, as being united
with, and supported by the person of the son. In him then, the Godhead and
the manhood make but one person. And therefore, in the personal propesitions
spoken of, the subject and predicate, God and man, (as Posita assumptione
humanae naturae ad personam verbi, illa propositio (Hic Homo est Deus)
verissima est, secundum omnes regulas Philosophiae, cum pro eod em suppesito
suppo^ant, tam hic homo, quam hic Deus. De Sacramen. Eucharist. l. 3. cap. 19.
Vide Scheib. top. c. 12. number. 32. and cap. 14. Bum. 35.
Bellarmine well observes) are taken for one and the same person, and
therefore are nor disparate terms. When we say, touching Christ, God is man,
and man God, God is nothing but the person of the word, assuming the manhood,
denominated after the Deity: And man signifies the very same person,
denominated after the humanity, which is assumed unto the Godhead, and there
can be no opposition betwixt a person, and it self, though there be a
difference in the denominations of it from the several natures, in which it
subsisteth. To illustrate this great mystery by a familiar, and apt similitude.
A pear tree, and an apple tree, when they have distinct subsistences, and are
diversa supposit^, then they are disparate, and cannot be predicated one of
another. We cannot then say, a pear tree is an apple tree, or an apple tree a
pear tree. But when the branch of one is grafted into the stock of the other,
and there is an union, and communion betwixt them, in point of subsistence: Why
then, there is no longer any opposition betwixt them, but a consension in
regard of predication: so that we may truly say, that one and the same tree is
both an apple tree, and a pear tree. Thus there is a disparation betwixt God
and man, when they have several subsistences, and then it is blasphemy to
affirm them of one another, to say, that God is man, or man God. But now in
Christ, they have but one subsistence, or personality, and here it is heresy to
deny their mutual predication of one another.

And thus have I in some measure explained, and cleared this great mystery of
the personal union. There remains nothing then, but to make some brief use,
and application of it.

1. It may serve for terror unto all the obstinate, and impenitent enemies of
Christ Jesus, though never so great, and powerful, here on earth: For their
enmity is most foolishly directed against a person, that every way is
infinitely their superior; in whom dwells all fulness of the Godhead
bodily. And therefore, he is God, the living God, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts.
He is God, and none else: and therefore, unto his name every knee shall one day
bow, and all that are incensed against him, shall be ashamed, Isay.
45.22,23,24. Romans 14.11. Phil. 2.10. He is the living God, therefore, it is a
fearful thing to fall into his bands, to be obnoxious unto his vindicative
justice, Hebr. 10.31. He is the Lord, how dare we then provoke him to jealousy.
Are we stronger then he, 1 Cor. 10.21. He wounds and kills, neither is
there any that can deliver out of his hand, Deuteronomy. 32.39. He is able to destroy
soul and body in hell fire, Math. 10.28. He is the Lord of Host's, therefore,
if his hand be stretched out, who shall turn it back, Isay. 14.27. Because he
is the Lord of Hosts, therefore, as you may see, in Isay. 8. verse. 13, 14, 15.
compared with, Luke 2. v. 34. Romans 9.32,33. 1 Pet. 2.7. He will be for a stone
of stumbling, and a rock of offense, for a gin, and a snare, unto such of his
adversaries, as are finally impenitent: Be they never so great and powerful,
He will be as a stone, and a rock to dash, and split them in pieces. Be they
never so crafty, and subtle, He will be for a gin, and a snare, to catch, and
entangle them, unto their eternal destruction. We may apply here, that of Ely
to his sons, 1. Sam. 2.25. If a man sin against the Lord, who shall
entreat for him. He that sins with a high hand, presumptuously and
impenitently, against the Lord Christ, sins against his judge; and
therefore, none can mediate for his peace, and reconciliation.

2. This doctrine of the personal union is a ground of unconquerable comfort,
and unextinguishable joy, unto the Church in general, and all the members of
Christ in particular. They are related unto one of the greatest persons, that
is a person, that is God as well as man, and therefore, a rewarder of them that
seek him, Hebr. 11.6. rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. Excellent in power, and in
judgment, and in plenty of justice, Job. 37.23. his right hand is full of
righteousness, Psalm. 48.10. that is, The Lords Dickson.
power is not idle, but constantly working in equity and justice for
performance of promises, and threatenings, for defending his people and
punishing his enemies. The man, who is our shepherd, is fellow unto the Lord of
Hosts, Zechar. 13.7. and therefore He is Jehovah, the Lord of Hosts, and
therefore we may with David, be confident, that we shall never want etc. Ps.
23. He is the Son of God, therefore his blood cleanses from all sins, 1 John
1.7. therefore the gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church, Math.
16.16, and 18. He is the first borne of every creature, Col. 1.15. therefore
they, that are his, need not dread the malice and opposition of any creature.
When Zennacharib, in the days of Hezekiah, brake in with his forces, like a
deluge upon the land of Judah, overwhelming it from one side unto another. The
prophet Isaiah upon this account, that it was the land of Immanuel, a land
interested in Christ, who being God from all eternity, became one with us in
the fullness of time, bids, and as it were proclaims a defyance unto all the
associations, preparations, consultations, and resolutions of their
adversaries. Now therefore behold, the Lord brings up upon them the waters of
the river s^ng and many, even the King of Assyria and all his glory: and he
shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his banks. And he shall
pass through Judah, he shall overflow, and go over, he shall reach eeven to the
neck: and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, o
Immanuel. Associate your selves, o ye people* and ye shall be broken in pieces,
and give care all ye of far countries: gird your selves, and ye shall be broken
in pieces: gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel
together, and it shall come to naught: speak the word, and it shall not stand;
for God is with us, Isaiah. 8. verse. 7, 8, 9, 10.

The same Prophet, having prophesied of the future enlargement, and advancement
of the Church, by the conversion of the Gentiles, chap. 54. verse. 1, 2, 3: in
the fourth verse, he dehorts from doubt, and distrust of the fulfilling of this
his prophecy, assuring them, that their expectation thereof should not be
frustrated. And whereas the maine discouragements of their hope were, their
reflection on their servitude in Egypt, when they were, as it were, in their
youth, Jer. 2.2. Ezekiel. 23.3: and their present sense of their widdowhood, that
is, desolate condition by the Babylonian bondage, the Prophet promises them
such a glorions estate for the future, as shall drown the memory of all their
former reproach, and misery. Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed: neither
be thou confounded, for thou shall not be put to shame: for thou shall forget
the shame of thy youth, and shall not remember the reproach of thy widdowhood
any more.

But now the argument, by which he labors to erect their faith, and hope,
touching the performance of all this, is the Deity of Christ: For thy maker is
thy husband, (the Lord of hosts is his name) and thy Redeemer the holy one of
Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be called, verse. 5.

Because the Church is espoused unto her Maker, therefore no creature shall
hurt her; Nay all the creatures, as there is occasion, shall be serviceable
unto her. Because the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole earth, is her
Redeemer, therefore she may confidently expect a full deliverance: for with him
is plenteous redemption, so that he will redeem his Israel from all he
^iquities, Psalm. 103. verse. 7, 8. And from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the Children of God, Romans 8.21.

The Prophet (you see) makes the Godhead of Christ, the foundation of the
Churches happiness, and that in the most calamitous condition of war, and
captivity: And for it we have a very good argument from the mouth of our
Savior, Joh. 10.29,30: where he asserts the certainety of the salvation of all
his sheep, from his coequality or coessentiality with his Father: in verse. 27,
he gives us the character of his sheep, They are such as obey his doctrine, and
imitate his example, my sheep hear my voice, and I know them and they follow
m^. Hereupon he promises them eternal life, and perseverance in faith: and I
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of my hand, verse. 28. They are in his hands, under his pastoral
care, and protection, and no man or Devil can take them from him, can break
off, or interrupt either totally, or finally their union with him. This he
makes good by a comparison of himself with his Father, in regard of power. My
Father, which gave them me, is greater then all: and no man is able to pluck
them out of my Fathers hand. I and my Father are one, verse. 29, 30. The Father
is more powerful then all the creatures, then the Devil, and all his
instruments; and therefore none can pluck the sheep of Christ out of the
Fathers hands. And if they be in the Sons hands, they be in the Fathers to o,
Joh. 17.10.

But now Christ assumeth that he is one with his Father, in regard of
essentials: I and my Father are one, verse. 30. and therefore he is as powerful
as his Father: He is whatsoever his Father is, as touching his essence, and can
do whatsoever his Father can do. What things soever the Father does, these
also does the Son likewise, Joh. 5.19. Hereupon then it undeniably follows,
that all the men on earth, all the Devils in hell, are not able to pluck so
much as one of his sheep out of his hands.

That the fullness of the Godhead in Christ is a storehouse of blessings, that
never can be emptied, I shall yet farther evidence, by a brief view of the
names, attributes, and works of God, and their application unto Christ.

1. Then, as touching the names of God, and their attribution unto Christ,
together with the comfort, that hereupon redounds unto the people of Christ, I
shall desire the Christian Reader to peruse, and consider these following
Scriptures, Jer. 23.6. In his days Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell
safely, and this is his name, whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
righteousness. Here, we have a name of God, given unto Christ, Jehovah the
Lord, and the salvation and justification of the Church depending upon, and
resulting from this name.

1. The salvation in general of the Church depends upon this his name. Because
he is Jehova, the Lord; therefore, in his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely. Which words of the Prophet may be paraphrazed by
those of the Angel, Math. 1.21. He shall save his people from their sins.

2. A particular branch of salvation depends upon this his name. Because the
branch of David is the Lord, therefore he is able to justifye us, to be our
righteousness. This is his name, whereby he shall be called, the Lord our
righteousness: Which words may be expounded by those of Paul, 1 Cor. 1.30.
Christ Jesus is made of God unto us righteousness, etc.

Unto this place we may aptly conjoyne Isai. 45.22,23,24,25: for that it is
meant of Christ, a comparison of verse. 23. with Romans 14.11. and Phil. 2.10 will
easily demonstrate. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth For
I am God, and there is none else. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone
out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every
knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. Surely shall one say, in the Lord
have I righteousness, and strength. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel
be justified, and shall glory.

Another name of God given unto Christ is the Lord of Hosts: and how
comfortable the attribution of it unto Christ is, may be cleared from these two
following scriptures. The first is Isai. 8. verse. 13, 14. Sanctify the Lord of
Hosts himself, etc. and he shall be for a Sanctuary, etc. Because he is the
Lord of Hosts, therefore he is a sanctuary, which none can violate, a sure
refuge. That the Person there spoken of is Jesus Christ, cannot not be
questioned by any true Christian. For Simeon in Luke. Paul and Peter applies
the latter part of the 14 verse unto him, and that speaks still of the same
Person, which the former part does. Agune in Zech. 2. verse. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Because he is the Lord of Hosts, sent by the Lord of Hosts, therefore he
assures the Church of the Jews, that after their own glorious restitution,
they should enjoy a full victory over their enemies, unto whom for the present,
they were vassals, and servants: And that this victory should be gained very
easily on his part, as it were with the shaking of his hand, or lifting up of
his finger. And hereupon, he exhorts them to triumph, sing, and rejoice: and he
back's his exhortation from a promise of his presence in her, of the
conjunction of the Gentiles with her, and of his government of her. For thus
says the Lord of H^sts, after the glory has he sent me unto the nations,
which spoiled you: For he that touches you, touches the apple of his eye. For
behold, I will shake my hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil to their
servants: and ye shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me. Sing and
rejoice, o Daughter of Sion, for lo, I come, and will dwell in the midst of
thee, says the Lord. And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day,
and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shall
know, that the Lord of Hosts has sent me unto thee. And the Lord shall inherit
Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.

To go from the Old Testament unto the New, and there, I shall single out but
one place at present, 1 John 5. verse. 18, 20. where he is termed the true God;
and his being so, is a reason of the saving illumination of the regenerate, as
also of their preservation from the sin unto death, and protection against
the temptations of Satan. We know, that whosoever is borne of God, sins not:
But he that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches
him not. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true: and we are in him that is
true, even in his Son Christ Jesus. This is the true God, and eternal life.

2. Proceed we next, from the names of God, unto his attributes, and consider
we what comfort, the ascribing of them unto Christ, does minister. I shall at
present instance only in his eternity immutability, omnipresence omnipotency,
and omniscience.

1. Then for his Eternity. Because his goings forth have been from of old from
everlasting, therefore the remnant of his Brethren shall return unto the
Children of Israel. And he shall stand, and feed in the strength of the Lord,
in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God, and they shall abide: for now
shall he be great unto the ends of the earth. And this man shall be the peace,
when the Assyrian shall come into the land, and when he shall tread in our
palaces, Micah. 5.2,3,4,5. If he had been but a mere man, if his coming forth
had been only from Bethlehem Ephratah, he had been utterly unable to have
accomplished any of all this. He could not have brought in the fullness of the
Gentiles, the remnant of his brethren, and have joined them unto the believing
Israelites: He could not have fed them: that is, he could not have made
provision for them: He could not have governed, and protected them: He could
not have been peace, and security unto them against the dreadful fury of the
Assyrians invasion. Our Savior Christ having averred, Joh. 8.51. that
whosoever kept his sayings in his heart by faith, in his life by obedience,
should enjoy eternal life. The Jews presently opposed him herein, and the
matter is argued pro and con, between Christ and them, ver. 52, 53, 54, 55, 56,
57. and at last Christ closes up the disputation with affirmation of his
eternity, ver. 58. Before Abraham was, I am. Because he was before Abraham,
therefore, if a man keep his sayings, he shall never see death.

Secondly, that person in whom dwells all fullness of the Godhead bodily, is
immutable; and this immutability, we have most clearly, and fully predicated of
Christ in Psalm. 102.26,27. (If we will allow the Apostle Paul, Heb.
1.10,11,12. to be a competent interpreter of the Psalmist) and the predication
hereof is in conjunction with two other excellencies of the divine nature: one
but now mentioned, Eternity, ver. 24. The other presently almost to be insisted
on; the creation of all things, ver. 25. From all which he concludes the
perpetuity, indeficiency, and unbarrennesse of the Church, ver. 28. 1. He
affirms the eternity of Christ. His duration is coextended with the duration
of all the creatures, Thy years are throughout all generations. Next, he
signally asserts his creation of all things, ver. 25. Of old have thou laid the
foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the work of thy hands. And 3. As
for his unchangeablenesse, he does not barely affirm it, but illustrate it
also, by a comparison of dissimilitude; with the change of those creatures
which seem most exempted from mutation, ver. 26, 27. They shall perish, but
thou shall endure, yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment, as a vesture
shall thou change them, and they shall be changed. But thou art the same, and
thy years shall have no end. And from all this, he draws this conclusion,
that the Church of Christ shall still, in all ages, be fruitful, and bring
forth children unto God. The children of thy servants shall continue, and their
seed shall be established before thee, ver. 28. Where, by the Children, and
seed of the servants of God, he does not understand such, as descend from them
by carnal propagation, but such as retain their faith, and imitate their
piety. Because Christ is Eternal, omnipotent, unchangeable, therefore his
Church, which is conjoined with him by an indissoluble bond, shall be
perpetual, and never totally fail from off the earth, never be extinguished
by the greatest calamities, that are incident unto mankind.

Thirdly, If all fullness of the Godhead dwell in him, then also omnipotency.
Unto us a child is borne, unto us a son is given, who is the mighty God,
Isai. 9.6. And this is brought by the Prophet, as an argument for confirmation
of those sweet, and precious promises of consolation, redemption, and subduing
of enemies, whereby he goes about to comfort the godly and faithful in
Israel, and that in the utter devastation and depopulation of their country,
verse. 2, 3, 4, 5. In reference unto his omnipotency it is, that God speaking of
him in the Pialmist, says, I have laid help upon ont that is mighty, Psalm.
89.19. that is, mighty to save, Isai. 63.1. able to save unto the uttermost,
Heb. 7.25. Hence is it also that he is styled by Zachariah an horn of
salvation: that is, a strong and mighty Savior, Luke 1.69. one that is able to
do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. able
to keep our souls, which we have committed unto him, 2 Timoth. 1.12. able to
keep them by his power through faith unto salvation.

Fourthly, Christ is omnipresent. He was in heaven, as God, when, as man, he
conversed with men here upon earth, Joh. 3.13. and therefore he is a very
present help in trouble, Psalm. 46.1. Though the heavens must receive his
manhood, until the time of restitution of all things, Acts. 3.21. Yet as God
he sits on the throne in the Christian Churches, here on earth, Revel. 4. and
will be with the faithful ministers thereof, unto the end of the world, Math.
28.20. and he will be in the midst of all assemblies of her members gathered
in his name, Math. 18.20.

Fifthly, if there dwell in him all-fulnesse of the Godhead, then also
omniscienc^: He knew what was in the heart of man, Joh. 2.25. He knows all
things, Joh. 21.17. He is the wonderful counselor, Isai. 9.6. And therefore
can foresee, and disappoint all designs: and machinations against his Church,
and Gosple. His people need not fear the depths of Satan, Revel. 2.24. for
with him there is an ineffable depth of the riches both of wisdom and
knowledge, unsearchable judgments, and ways past finding out, Romans 11.33.

To pass on from the Attributes of God, unto his works, I shall at this time
make mention of two, the Creation, and preservation of all things.

2. Then, the creation of all things is attributed unto Christ, Joh. 1.3,10.
Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2. and therefore, we may commit the keeping of our souls
unto him in well-doing, as unto a faithful creator, 1 Peter. 4.19.

2. The preservation of all things is attributed unto him. By him all things
consist, Col. 1.17. He upholdeth all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3.
Therefore, he can preserve by the power of his grace, all his people from
total, and final defection, and keep them by his power through faith unto
Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. He can put his fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from him, Jerem. 32.40. Enough has been said to prove, that the
personal union is a sufficient argument for the all sufficiency of Christ, to
carry on his great design of saving the souls of such, as belong unto the
election of grace.

In a second place, it is also a proof of his Willingness and readiness to
do the work. Can two (says the Prophet) walk together, except they be
agreed; Amos 3.3. So may we say, can the Godhead dwell in the manhood, except
the Godhead intend reconciliation with some persons in the manhood; to wit, the
men, which the Father had given unto the Son out of the world, Joh: 17.6,9. God
is a consuming fire, and yet the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in the
humanity of Christ; and therefore, we may shape an affirmative answer unto the
question propounded by the Prophet Isaiah, chapt. 33. v. 14. and may say that
some among the sons of men shall dwell with the devouring fire, shall dwell with
the everlasting burnings. The cohabitation of the Godhead with the manhood, in
the person of Christ, is a full evidence, that as it is Revel. 21.3. the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people: And God himself shall be with them, and be their God. Such an
infinite person as the Son of God, would never have assumed us unto himself,
in his incarnation, if his design had not been to have communicated himself
unto us, by making us his house, his sanctuary, his holy temple, his habitation
through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.20. in which he will dwell and walk. The high and
lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, who dwells in the high and holy place,
would never have dwelt and tabernacled amongst us, Joh. 1.14. never have dwelt
in the flesh, unless it had been his gracious purpose, to dwell with him also,
that is of a contrite and humble spirit; To revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones, Isay 57.15. The personal union
(you see) considered single by it is self, is a very high demonstration of
Christ's love unto mankind: But it is capable of farther amplification, and
exaggeration by comparison with his actions, and sufferings in our nature.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, 1 John 3.16. Because Christ, who was God, laid down his life for us: because he,
in whom dwelled all fullness of the Godhead bodily, submitted himself unto the
shameful, and painful death of the cross, unto the curse of the law, and the
wrath of God; and that for us, that harbored nothing, but thoughts of
hostility against him. This therefore speaks such a matchless eminency of
love, as is beyond the comprehension of either men, or Angels. To distrust the
constancy, and future expressions of such a love, is a high piece of
ingratitude. Seeing a person, so infinitely great and glorious, has done, and
suffered so much for the purchase of our salvation, we may therefore collect,
that it was his absolute decree, to apply, and confer the salvation, thus
purchased, and consequently to accomplish all things requisite for the
completing thereof. He will make known the riches of his glory on the vessels
of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory, Romans 9.23.

Thirdly, from the personal union, we may be dehorted from embasure of our
natures by sin. The relative presence of God in the midst of his people, was
used as an argument against not only Moral, but also Leviticall and
Ceremonial uncleanness, Defile not the land, which ye shall inhabit, wherein
I dwell: for I the Lord dwell amongst the Children of Israel, Number. 35. ver. 34.
And the Lord said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the place
of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of
Israel for ever, and my holy name shall the house of Israel no more defile,
neither they, nor their Kings, by their whoredom, nor by the carcasses of
their Kings in their high places, Ezekiel. 43.7. And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying, Command the Children of Israel, that they put out of their camp every
leper, and every one, that has an issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead,
etc. that they defile not their camp in the midst whereof I dwell, Number.
5.1,2,3. Now this relative presence is nothing almost, in comparison of that
substantial, and personal presence of the Godhead, in Christ's humane nature;
and therefore, that is a more effectual disswasive from the pollution of sin.
There can be no greater grace showed toward man, then that God should
vouchsafe to unite to man's nature the person of his only begotten son. Hooker.
p 297
We should then be very mindlesse of, and unthankful for Gods thus gracing,
and exalting of our nature, if we should by sinful lusts, and corruptions,
defile our natures, which are for sort, or kind the same with that of the only
begotten son of God.

4. From this doctrine of the personal union we may, first, be exhorted unto
the worship of Christ, 2. Directed in our worship of God.

1. We may hence be exhorted unto a divine worship, and a religious adoration
of him, Revel. 1.5,6. Chapt. 5.8,12,13,14. Chapt. 7.9,10. the fullness of the
Godhead in him is the ultimate, formal, and adequate object of divine worship,
and calls for a divine faith, and trust in him, Joh. 6.29. John. 14.1. John.
16.9. As also for such an height of love, as cannot be given unto a mere
creature, without Idolatry, Luke 14.26. Because he is the Lord, therefore serve
him with fear, and rejoice with trembling. He is the son, therefore kiss him
least he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
little, Psalm. 2. v. 11, 12. He is thy Lord, and worship thou him, Psalm. 45.11.
He is the Lord of Hosts, therefore sanctify him, and let him be your fear, and
your dread, Isai. 8.13. He is God, and none else, therefore let every knee bow
unto him: let every tongue swear by him, Isai. 45.22,23. He thought it not
robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6. And therefore, let us honor him,
even as we honor the father, Joh. 5.23. He is God over all, and therefore, let
him be blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. He is the mighty God, Isai. 9.6. therefore
let us humble our selves under his mighty hand, 1 Pet. 5.6. He is worthy to
receive glory, honor, and power, for he has created all things, Revel. 4. ult.

2. From the personal union, we may take direction for our worship of God. The
Israelites under the old testament were to bring all their holy things, their
offerings, and sacrifices before the Altar, and Tabernacle, and afterward the
Temple, the habitation of Gods house, and the place, where his honor dwelt,
Levit. 16.13,14. Deuteronomy. 12.5,6. They were to pray, and worship toward the city,
which God had chosen, and toward the house, the holy temple, which God had
built for his name, 1 Kings. 8.35,44,48. Psalm. 5.7. Dan. 6.10. But now the
Arc, tabernacle, and temple were but types of Christ's manhood, and the
presence of God in them was but typical. In the manhood it self, there is a
personal presence of the Godhead. And therefore, we should bring all our
duties, and services, all our acts of worship unto Christ, man, and present
them in his name, and through his mediation: that is, in our performance of
them, we should eye Christ man, as the instrument, and moral cause, meriting
of, and interceding for their acceptance. From above the mercy seat, where
God dwelt typically, betwixt the Cherubims, Psalm. 80.1.2 Kings 19.15. there
God communed with Moses, and met with his people; Exodus 25.22. Exodus 29.42,43.
Numb. 7.89. And this was to teach, that all the approaches of Gods people unto
him, and all acts of their communion with him in faith, hope, love, prayers,
praises, hearing of the word, and receiving of his sacraments should be in
Christ, our alone mercy seat, or propitiation, 1 John 2.2. as the way, and
means of their acceptance: For in him only dwells all-fulnesse of the
Godhead bodily; and therefore, in him alone, for his sake merely, will God be
well pleased with our persons, and services, all the worship, and honor, that
we tender him.

For farther application of this point, I shall refer the reader unto what I
have said on Joh. 1.14. and for the present, I shall only dispatch the
consideration of those inferences, that the Apostle himself draws from it in
this place, in the words foregoing and following.

1. In the words foregoing. Beware, lest any man spoil you through Philosophy
and vain deceit, after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ: for in him, etc. verse. 8. which words, I shall
first expound in themselves, then show the inference of them from the dwelling
of all-fulnesse of the Godhead in Christ bodily.

1. Then, to expound the words briefly in themselves; They are an exhortation
unto a careful and heedefull eschewall of seduction by any additionals unto
the doctrine of Christ. In them we have two things especial remarkable 1. the
danger. 2. The means of such seduction.

1. The danger of it* it is a spoiling of the soul. The word is (...), and it
signifies to drive away, as a prey, or booty. Those, that seduce from Christ,
by additions unto his Gospel, are the worst of thieves, or robbers: For they
plunder men of truth and faith, of God and Christ, grace and glory; They carry
away their souls from the fold of Christ, as a prey to be devoured by Satan.
Besides, it is not a simple theft, but a kind of sacrilege, for it spoileth the
soul, that was made after the Image of God, and consecrated, as a temple unto
God, and reedeemed from Satan for the service of God, by the blood of him, in
whom dwells all fullness of the Godhead bodily.

2. We have the means of such seduction, the impostures, or wiles, by which
seducers withdraw men from Christ, Philosophy and superstition.

1. Philosophy: Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy: where, by
Philosophy, is understood either the abuse of true Philosophy; and that is,
when matters of faith are submitted unto the tribunal of reason: when the
mysteries of the Christian Religion are tied, and judged by the dim light of
nature: or else 2. the erroneous, though curious speculations of some
Philosophers, which were by the Gnostickes, and other Heretics, brought into
Divinity. Such perhaps might be the dotages of the Platonists, touching Angels,
that they created the world, were mediators between God and men; and
therefore, were to be worshipped. This philosophy is the same with that
science, falsely so called, of which Paul speaks 1 Timoth. 6.20.

A second imposture, or wile, by which seducers draw men from Christ, is
superstition, termed here, by the Apostle, vain deceit. And unto this
interpretation I am lead by these 2. considerations.

1. Because these words, vain deceit after the tradition of men, have a great
similitude, as in sound, so in sense and signification, with that which our
Savior speaks of the superstition of the Pharisees, Math. 15.9. In vain they
do worship me, teaching for doctrines, the commandments of men.

2. Because our Apostle in the pursuit of his confutation of these seducers,
disputes against several branches of soperstition verse. 16, 17, 18, 20, 21,
22, 23. and expressly names will worship, which is the same with
superstition. I know the generality of interpreters think this clause to be
added appositive, or expositively, to explain what is meant by Philosophy. The
Apostle does not condemn all philosophy, but only that, which is vain, and
deceitful: And then the particle (and) is as much as even, or, that is. Beware
lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, that is, vain deceit. I do not
deny, but that ((...)) is many times redundant, or used only expositively, but
I suppose that is, when there is some absurdity in it is signifying a distinct
thing. But now there can be no pretense for any such absurdity here, and
therefore not to take it, as a conjunction copulative, showing a distinct
thing, would be to offer violence unto the text. Some think i^ to be thus
meant, Philosophy, which is vain deceit: but the conjunction does show that
here a distinct thing is meant: therefore I take vain deceit here for all
religious rites, which carnal wisdom inventeth and obtrudeth. Bayne in locum.


In the words, we have superstition described from 1. it is effect, deceit. 2.
adjunct, vain. 3. rule, and that is set down 1. positively, and absolutely;
After the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world. 2. Adversatively,
and not after Christ.

1. From it is effect, deceit. It deceives men's hopes, and expectations: (...)
it promises them acceptance with God, peace, and comfort to their consciences;
and fails in both. For God will reject all superstitious usages in his
worship, with a great deal of indignation. Who-hath-required these things at
your hands Isai. 1. And then unto an illight ned, and awakened conscience,
reflection on them will afford nothing, but matter of terror and repentance.
The word (...), signifies a drawing out of the way: For it is compounded of
(...) priv. and (...) a path. From the notation of the word then we may
observe, that superstition withdraws men from the way, Christ, and from his
way of worship, prescribed in his word: whereupon it comes to pass, that the
most superstitions persons, the strictest observers of humane inventions, are
commonly the greatest neglecters of Christ's own ordinances.

2. We have here the adjunct of superstition, vanity; vain deceit. And vain
it is 1. Because empty, in that it is not accompanied with the grace of God:
For God sanctifies only his own ordinances. 2. Because unprofitable, to no
purpose. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments
of men, Math. 15.9* The end, which men propound unto themselves, in the worship
of God, is the pleasing of him. And this is an end, unto which superstitious
practices, the carnal devices of men, are used altogether in vain, because
they no wise conduce unto it: for they are so far from pleasing God, as that
they rather anger, and provoke him. Thus the Israelites provoked him to anger,
with their inventions, and with their counsel, Psalm. 106.29,43.

Next, we have the rule of this superstition, which the Apostle speaks of,
and that is set down, 1. positively, and absolutely, 2. Adversatively.

1. Positively, and absolutely; and that is twofold. 1* the tradition of men,
2. the ceremonial laws of Moses, the rudiments of the world.

1. The traditions of men; vain deceit after the tradition of men. The
traditions of men are the same with the precepts of men, Math. 15.9. And why
should we fly unto the commands of men, for direction in Go^ worship, as long
as he himself has given us a perfect and sufficient rule thereof in the
scriptures, 2 Timoth. 3.15,16. Isai. 8.20. Acts 26.22. John 20.31. Those that
obtrude, and press the traditions of men, in the service of God, go about to
spoil men's souls, to carry them away from the true worship of God in Christ.

A second rule of this superstition, which the Apostle would have them to
beware of, is the rudiments of the world; that is, the ceremonial laws of
Moses, as appears by collation of this place, with verse. 20, 21. of this
chapter: as also with Gal: 4.3. The only places besides this, where the phrase
is used, in the new testament.

Now 1. They are termed rudiments or elements in an allusion unto Grammar,
wherein letters are the rudiments or elements of all literature; even so the
ceremonies of the Mosaicall law contained an elementary kind of instruction.
They were as it were the Primer, the A, B, C, of the Church, suited unto her
age of infancy. Even so we, when we were Children, were in bondage under the
elements or rudiments of the world, Gal. 4.3.

2. They are termed rudiments of the world, or worldly rudiments, because they
enjoined Corporeal, sensible, and in comparison of the more spiritual
ordinances of the Gospel, earthly, and carnal ceremonies: And the reason of
this appellation Estius conjectureth to be, Because the world is often in
Scripture put for that part thereof, which is corporeal, and sensible; and in
conformity hereunto, the Leviticall sanctuary is said to be a worldly
Sanctuary, Heb. 9.1. By this you see, that those, who press the antiquated,
and abrogated ceremonies of the Mosaicall law, are seducers, that carry away
the sheep of Christ from his fold, as a spoil, a prey, or booty, Gal. 5.2.

Lastly, we have these two rules of superstition, the tradition of men, and the
rudiments of the world, set down adversatively, by way of Antithesis, or
opposition: And not after Christ: that is, they are not after the doctrine, or
commandment of Christ. Whatsoever is not after Christ, that is, according unto
the doctrine of Christ, in the Gospel, is against Christ; and therefore, vain
deceit. The uncommandednesse of a worship is sufficient to brand it for
unlawful. Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire before the Lord, which he
commanded them not, Levit. 10.1. They have built the high places of Tophet etc.
Which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart. Jerem. 7.31.

You have seen the words expounded in themselves, I shall in the next place
briefly dispatch the inference of this exhortation, from the dwelling of
all-fulnesse of the Godhead in him bodily, implied in the particle (for):
Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ; for
in him dwells all fulness of the Godhead bodily. From the fullness of the
Deity, in the person of Christ, we may conclude the fullness, perfection, and
all sufficiency of his doctrine. And consequently the danger, vanity, and
deceitfulness of all additions thereunto whatsoever, whether heathenish
philosophy, Pharisaicall, or Popish, the traditions of men, or Judaicall, the
rudiments of the world. What seducers can more spoil the flock of Christ, then
the patrons of such additionals: For they withdraw from all fullness in the God
head, unto that which is but vain deceit. They lead from the fountain of
living waters, unto broken cisternes, that can hold no water. The Philosophy of
the Gentiles has indeed a show of wifedome, but it was but folly, and thick
darkness, compared with the wisdom of Christ. In him as man, were hid (...)
the treasures of ^sedome, and knowledge, verse. 3. of this chapter. And as the
son of God, he was the eternal, uncreated wisdom; He was full and perfect
God: His knowledge then was infinite, and therefore he was able to provide, not
only sufficiently, but abundantly for the instruction and salvation of his
Church, without the supply of humane traditions, or Mosuicall ^eremonies. All
men are liars, and therefore, it would be a madness to embrace the traditions
of men, as long as we have the truth it self to instruct us. The highest
perfection of the saints of God, is, to be pantakers of the divine nature, to
have the Godhead dwell in them operatively, in regard of it is gracious effects.
Whereas the son of God has the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him
personally; and therefore in comparison of his precepts, which are able to make
even the simple wise unto salvation, Psalm. 19.7.2. Timoth. 3.16. the most
specious, and plausible traditions of even the best of men, are in matters of
faith, and salvation, most vain, empty, and deceitful trifles. In Christ
dwells an all fullness of knowledge, and we having so able a seacher, it
would be extreme and unspeakable folly in us, to fall back again unto our
horn book, unto the rudiments of the world, unto an elementary, worldly, or
carnal way of instruction, by the ceremonies of Moses his law, that was
accommodated only unto the Childish condition of the Church. Besides, Christ
himself has abrogated all ceremonies of the law, and from the all-fulnesse of
the God^head in him, we may gather his all-fulnesse of power and authority to
make such an alteration. Because he is God, he is Lord of the Sabbath, and all
other ordinances in the Church. It is no less therefore then a treasonable
presumption, for men to revive those laws, which he has repealed, to press
those observances, which he has abolished. Interpreters upon the place,
generally make this observation upon the coherence, that the Apostle gives
this general refutation of those three impostures before specified, that they
are not according unto the doctrine of Christ, not after Christ, to show that
this consideration alone is ground enough to reject any doctrine, or part of
worship. For he that derogates from the all sufficiency of Christ's doctrine,
detracteth from the alsufficiency, and infiniteness of his Godhead. If men
would but seriously consider, how great, and glorious a person he is, how
infinitely wise, they would not listen unto impostors, but hang upon Christ's
mouth only, for direction in matters of faith, and worship. They would never
dare to presume, to attempt any supply unto the unsearchable riches, or
fullness of wisdom, the manifold wisdom of God, displaid in his Gospel,
Ephesians. 3.10. In him dwells all-fulnesse of the Godhead bodily; and therefore,
beware least any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: The
Deity of Christ was the maine ground, why Peter professes in the behalf of
the rest of the Aposties, a resolution to adhere constantly, and solely unto
the doctrine of Christ, Joh. 6.68,69. 1. He lays down two reasons for
adherence unto Christ's doctrine alone, 1. The alsufficiency thereof to
instruct us in the way unto eternal life, and salvation. Thou have the words
of eternal life, verse. 68. and this he makes good from the alsufficiency of
his office and person, verse. 69. Thou art that Christ, the son of the living
God: Thou are not only man, but God. The son of the living God: therefore,
thou art all-sufficient to be our Christ, our Priest, King, and Prophet; and
therefore thou have the words of eternal life. 2. We have the utter
insufficiency of all created persons, to give us any light herein, whither
shall we go, verse. 68: that is, for the words of eternal life. Christ is the
sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. and therefore, will infallibly guide us unto
heaven. But if we forsake him, and follow any other light, it will prove like
that of an ignis fatuus, it will lead us into the ditch, into the bottomless
pit of hell.

We may enlarge this use farther, and proceed ab hypothesi ad thesin: for the
personal union of Christ's Godhead with his manhood is a sufficient argument,
not only against the abuse of philosophy, traditions of men, and rudiments of
the world, but also against all other additionals, in the matter of salvation,
unto Christ whatsoever; and that in regard of any of his offices. Because he is
God man, Because in him dwells all-fulnesse of the Godhead bodily, therefore
he he is able to save unto the uttermost; therefore he is an all-sufficient
Prophet, able fully to instruct his Church; therefore he is an all-sufficient
King, able perfectly to govern his Church; therefore he is an all-sufficient
Priest, able fully to satisfy, and merit, and consequently able thoroughly to
intercede for his Church. Hinc colligimus: Quicunque vere cognoscit, in Christo
homine inhabitare plenitudinem Deitatis corporaliter, hoc est, Christum esse
and verum, eumque unum cum patre Deum, and verum hominem; is etiam agnoscet, in
solo Christo plenitudinem salutis ^ostrae positam elle: e^quecontentus fide
Christum apprehendisse, salu^em non quaeret vel ex Philosophia, vel ex
traditionibus hominum quorumcunque, vel etiam ex Mosis paedagogia. Ac
proinde^cur homines tot superstitionlbus and idololatriis impliciti, in illis
quaerant salutem, causam hancesse, quia non agnoscuat id, quod hi^ tradit
Apostolus, nimirum in Christo homine inhabitare omnem plenitudinem Deitaris. Er
cert^ experientia hoc in multis declarat, and multos ego observavi, qui cum
defecissent ad Arianismum and Samosatenismum. Postea etiam facti Pelagiani,
salutem collocarunt in nescio qua sua, quam profitentur, perfectione vitae
atque operum. Quid ita? Quia cum non agnoscant Christum pro vero Deo, neque
etiam persuadere sibi po^unt, per eum peccata sua expiata esse sanguine illius.
Tales sunt fere Anabap^istae omnes. Tales sunt Turci and Judaei. Cur enim omnes
in suis operibus salutem collocant ac quaeru^t, quam tamen nunquam inveniunt:
Quia ignorant in Christo inhab tare plenitudinem Deitatis, eoque and omnem
plenitudinem salutis. Et antea Argumentum Apostoli (ut illud fusius explicem)
tale est. Qui o nnem alicujus rei plenitudinem, nunquam deficientem, domi suae
and in promptu semper habet, atque ita habet quotiescunque vult (el liceat ex
tali plenitudine accipere, certe necesse non fuerit, ut alibi quam domi suae
talem rem quaerat: Imo fatuus fuerit, si alibieam quaerat, cum non alibi, quam
domi suae reperiri queat* Quis enim non indicet illum esse insanum, qui cum
domi suae quicquid auri and argenti reperiti potest, habe^t^idque semper in
promptu, apud alios, qui non habent, quaerat aurum and argentum; At qui nos
Christiani, qui Christo per fidem insiti sumus, domi nostrae habemus quicquid
ad salutem nostram neceisarium est. Habemus enim Christum carnem nostram, and
caput nostrum, in quo inhabitat, idque corporaliter, omnis plenitudo Deitatis,
eoque bonorum omnium; atque ita in promptu illum habemus, ut sempet nobis
liceat de hac plenitudine, quantum capere possumus accipere; manu nimirum
fidei. Stultum igitur and impium est, alibi quam in Christo, salutem, vel
totam, vel partem quaerere, cum in carne nostra tota salus resideat.
Zanchy upon the words makes this collection, that whosoever truly knows,
that in Christ, man, dwells all*fulnesse of the Godhead bodily, that Christ
is true God, and one God with the father, that he is true man, he will
acknowledge, that the fullness of salvation is placed in Christ alone; and
therefore, he will rest upon Christ only for salvation, and not seek for it
elsewhere. Indeed to seek for it elsewhere is such a piece of folly or
madness, as if a man, that has a fountain of living water in his own
garden, should fetch water for his occasions from stinking puddles: As if he
that has at home, in his own house, a bottomless mine of gold, and silver,
should search for it over a vast wilderness, where he can find nothing, but
worth-lesse pebbles.

To proceed in a second place unto that, which the Apostle in the words
following infers, from the dwelling of all-fulnesse of the Godhead etc. in
the humanity of Christ, And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all
principality and power, verse. 10. In the words the Apostle collects from the
personal union two particulars. 1. The dignity of all Believers, the members
of Christ. Because in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily;
therefore ye are complete in him. 2. The dignity of the humane nature of
Christ, in comparison of the Angels. Because in him dwells all-fulnesse of
the Godhead bodily, therefore he is the head of all principality, and power.

1. He infers herefrom the dignity of all believers: In him dwells all
fullness of the Godhead bodily: And ye are complete in him. Here I shall 1.
open the words in themselves: And then 2. open the dependence of what is in
them asserted, upon the personal union, The dwelling of all-fulnesse of the
Godhead bodily in the humanity of Christ.

I shall 1. explain the words in themselves. Secundum Graecorum expositionem,
and vos in illo, tanquam capite, repleri estis divinitate; quatenus scilicet
dignitas capitis redundat in corpus. Sensum hunc probant, quia continuo
subjungitur, Christum esse Caput: Estius in locum.
Some understand the words of the Godhead it self, dwelling in Christ, in as
much as the dignity of the head redoundeth unto the body. What loving wife, but
looks upon the honor of her husband, as reflecting upon her self? And good
subjects think themselves interested in the exaltation of their sovereign.
The extraordinary eminence, and renown of particular persons, for prowess,
piety, learning, or any other personal worth, is interpreted a credit, and
honor unto their whole nation. Thus, we men should think our selves concerned
in the personal union, Because therein our nature was advanced unto as great
an height of honor, as it is capable of. It is (say the Schoolmen) of all
unions of things really different, the greatest, and most excellent in genere
unionis, and in genere doni. 1. In genere unionis; Because it is a most
straight, close, and intimate conjunction of things, betwixt which there is an
infinite distance; to wit, of a pure act, with a passive power; of the highest
spirit, with the lowest; may of the supreme spirit, with flesh; of an
uncreated person, with a created nature.

2. It is greatest, in Est i sta naturae humanae tanta et tam celsa and summa
subvectio, ut quo attolleretur altius, non habet. August. de prae destinatione
sanctorum ca* 15.
genere doni: It is the greatest gift God can bestow upon mankind; for therein
God communicates unto a created nature, that infinite, and uncreated
perfection, which he has in himself, by communicating unto it a divine
person, with a substantial, and personal communication, then which no greater
communication of the Deity is imaginable.

This is apparent, 1. Ex part ipsius unionis, from the union it self. For
this union places man in an higher rank, and order, then any other
supernatural gift: for it makes that man is God, which no other gift, either
of grace, or glory, can perform.

2. It is evident from the adequate term, resulting from this union, which is
Christ* For he is more perfect, then any creature whatsoever. There be some,
that have but a very remote interest in, and little benefit by this ennoblement
of our nature, to wit, the enemies of Christ and his Church: for unto them,
without repentance, it will minister but matter of greater terror. How will
they be confounded, to see, that he, whom they have all their lives long
opposed, is so great and glorious a person, in whom dwells all fullness of
the Godhead? etc. But now all true believers whatsoever, are nearely, and
deeply concerned, and interested herein, 1. In regard of their intimate
relation unto him; they are his members, friends, spouse, bone of his bone,
flesh of his flesh. 2. Because this dignifying of his humanity by the
hypostaticall union, was for their sakes, to make them complete, to perfect
their happiness, to render them righteous, and make them gracious, and
glorious. This exposition, though it contains nothing but truth, yet I
conceive, is not the sense of the Apostle in this place. For the compleatnesse
here included in the word (...), translated complete, or filled, denominates
believers immediately to be complete, impleate, or filled. But however
Believers have interest in, and relation unto the dwelling of all-fulnesse of
the Godhead in Christ, yet the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in the humanity
of Christ, does not immediately denominate them complete: For to assert that,
would open a plain way unto the error of Osiander, who held, that Believers
are denominated righteous by the essential righteousness of Christ's Godhead.
The grossness of which tenet Gerhard loc. Com. tom. 2. de justificat. Chapt.
5. sect. 195. page 677. proves amongst diverse others by this consideration,
that if Believers may be called righteous, from the essential righteousness
of God, then also they may be denominated omnipotent, from the essential
omnipotency of the Deity. Indeed the fullness of the Godhead denominateth
believers complete, mediately, and causally: For it is the Cause, and ground
of all their spiritual compleatnesse, and supernatural perfection: so that
they may be said to be complete from it, though they cannot be so properly
denominated complete with it. But this cannot be the sense of the words,
without a metonymie: And in exposition of scripture, we are not to fly unto
tropes, unless there be some absurdity, if the words be taken properly; And
what absurdity is there, if by the compleatnesse, or fullness, which is the
abstract of the concrete complete, or filled, in the text, we understand not
the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in Christ, but a fullness, or
compleatnesse derived, or communicated unto believers from Christ, with which
they are truly invested, and which immediately denominates them.

Those that go this way to work, in the exposition of the place, are yet
subdivided: For some restrain it unto the compleatnesse of justification;
Others enlarge it unto the whole perfection, which a Christian participates
from Christ, unto the compleatnesse, as of their justification, so also
sanctification, and glorification.

1. Some restrain it unto the compleatnesse of Believers justification, and
they think, that the scope of the Apostle is to declare, that the
compleatnesse or perfection, by which they are perfectly justified before God,
lies out of themselves, in Christ. Ye are complete in him: that is, ye are
complete, not from him, by any inherent righteousness, for that is in this
life incompleate, and imperfect; Isay. 64.6. But ye are complete in him: that
is, by a compleatnesse or perfection in him, which is imputed unto you, that
is, accepted for you unto justification, 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Cor. 1.30. Ephesians. 1.6.
Phil. 3.9.

As for that stale objection of the Papists: Every thing is, what it is,
formally, by something inherent in it self. Man then, cannot be formally
righteous before God, with a righteousness that is in Christ, no more, then he
may be denominated formally wise, from the wisdom of another. This is by some
revived against the imputation of Christ's righteousness, with a great deal
of eagerness, and violence, who yet look upon themselves as Protestants of
the highest form, and take it in great snuff, to be told by any of compliance
with Papists herein. As for the argument it self, these men would never have
thus troubled the world with it anew, if they had but seriously considered the
answers, that are given by the generality of Protestants hereunto. Two worthies
of our own nation, Abbot, and Ames, have given unto it so clear, and full a
solution, as I am confident will satisfy all impartial, and unprejudiced
readers.

1. Dr Abbot in his second part of his defense of the reformed Catholic
against Bishop. page 423, 424. We say (says he) that a man may be formally
just two manner of ways. A man is one way formally just in quality, Another
way formally just in law. Formally just in quality is he, in whom is found the
perfect inward form and quality of justice and righteousness without spot or
stain; and thus it were absurd indeed, to say, that a man may be formally just
by the justice of another, because the inherent quality of one subject cannot
become the inherent quality of another. But in course of law and judgment, the
form of justice is not to be subject to crime or accusation, and he is
formally just, against whom no action or accusation is liable by law. Now it is
true indeed, that every one that is formally just in quality, is also formally
just in law, but yet a man may be formally just in law, who by inherent form
and quality is not just. For in this sort a man becomes just by pardon and
forgiveness, because pardon being obtained, the law proceeds no farther, and
all imputation of the offense in law is taken away, as if it had never been
committed. And this is the state of our justice and righteousness in the sight
of God, that through the imputation of the merit and satisfaction of Jesus
Christ our sins are forgiven us, and thereby no accusation is liable against
us, either as having done what we ought not to do, or not done what we ought
to do, according to the words of the Apostle, who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? If we respect inherent quality, there is enough to
charge him with, but by forgiveness of sins the same becomes as if it had
never been. In a word therefore, we are not formally just in quality, if God
judge us thereby, being stained and defiled in all the righteousness that we
have; but we are formally just in law, by the imputation of the righteousness
of Christ, for that thereby a satisfaction is interposed, and our sins are
remitted and pardoned, so that there is no let, but that God mercifully for his
sake accepts us unto ever lasting life.

As for the answer of Ames, it stands thus. Non alia ratione formaliter nos
justos nominari, and esse dicimus, imputata Christi justitia, quam qua is,
cujus debitum ab altero solvitur, nominatur, and est ab illo debito liber, vel
immunis: and qua is, cui procuratus est alterius favor, aut graetia, nominatur,
and est illi alteri gratus. Haec autem fieri posse probatur satis ab
experientia communi. Bellarm. enervat. tom. 4. page 134. when we say, that we
are righteous, and formally denominated such, by the righteousness of Christ
imputed unto us, our meaning is no otherwise, then as when also we say, that a
man is freed, or discharged from a debt, which is paid for him by another, or
as when a man is said to be gracious with another, when this grace or favor is
procured by a third person. And again in p. 135. exempla quae profert Bellar.
denominationu^ ab extrinseca forma (res cognita, paries visus, athiops albus
vestibus) nullam habent proportionem ad hanc. Fidelis est iustifis catus coram
Deo justitia imputata. In ista significatur moralis habitudinis ratio and
status, qui pendet ex causa extrinseca: sed nihil tale in illis apparet.
Exempla apta sunt in scripturis: Infidelis est condemnatus; peccator est
redemptus etc.

In a second place, some extend the place, so as that they make it to take in
the whole perfection of a Christian, which is communicated, or derived from
Christ, either by imputation or by real infusion, and so it may be paraphrased
by Ephesians. 1.3. God has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ,
with righteousness, grace, and glory. The intendment of the Apostle is to
assert, that the cause, or Original of all the compleatnesse of a believer, is
Christ Jesus alone; And therefore, (...), in him, is as much as, by him; (and
such is the signification of it elsewhere: as, Col. 1.16. Ye are complete in
him: that is, ye are complete for him, and from him: for his sake, as a
meritorious cause, purchasing your compleatnesse, and from his real influence,
as a physical cause, working, and effecting your compleatnesse. This sense of
the words is more comprehensive then the former, and therefore to be embraced,
if it be not otherwise liable unto any just exceptions, and whether it be so, I
shall in the next place briefly examine.

1. How can Believers here in this life be said to be complete, as touching
their sanctification, seeing the counter-lustings of the flesh are an
undeniable proof of the imperfection thereof.

For answer: Their sanctification is complete, and full, in regard of parts,
though not degrees. Every believer receives from Christ's fullness grace for
grace, Joh. 1.17. Every one has grace sufficient, 2 Cor. 12.9. sufficient for
the mortification of every lust, and corruption; sufficient to enable for the
acceptable performance of every duty, necessary to salvation. Quintus Curtius
comparing Alexander and Parmenio together, passes this censure upon them:
Multa sine rege prospere, rex sine illo nihil magnaerei gesserat. He
prosperously achieved many things without Alexander: Alexander did nothing of
moment without him. If we compare a Christian with Christ, we may say, that
without Christ he can do nothing at all, Joh. 15.5. whereas he can do all
things through Christ, which strengthens him, Phil. 4.13.

2. The like objection may be framed against the compleatnesse of Believers in
this life, as touching their glorification: for though they have the first
fruits and beginnings of glory, yet they are so overballanced by the
unspeakable miseries of this life, as that Paul doubted not to say, that they
were of all men most miserable, if their happiness were confined unto this
life, if in this life only they had hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19.

For answer: It Is true, Believers are not complete actually, as touching their
glorification, but yet they may be said in respect of it, to be complete
virtually and seminally; and for such an assertion, we have the warrant of
Scripture. He that believes on the Son, (says John the Baptist) has
everlasting life, Joh. 3.36. not only shall have it, but has it. He has it
already in the seed, and root of it. The grace of the Spirit in his heart is a
well of water, that will spring up unto everlasting life, Joh. 4.14. In this
sense he that has the Son, has the life of glory, as well as a life of
righteousness, and holiness, 1 John 5.12. and so ground to rejoice in hope of
the glory of God, Romans 5.2. Look as a man, that is an undoubted heir unto
great riches, might be said to be rich in reversion, if he could be assured to
live unto the enjoyment of it. So Believers may be said to be complete in
regard of their glorification, because there is a certainty of their full
fruition of it: for they are heirs apparent of perfect glory. The God and
father of our Lord Jesus Christ has according to his abundant mercy, begotten
us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for you, 1 Pet. 1.3,4.

And this inheritance is made sure unto them by an eternal, and immutable
decree, 2 These 2.13. by an irreversible, and unrepealable promise of an
omnipotent God, Hebr. 9.15. that can break through all difficulties, and
overcome all impediments of it: As also by the purchase of an unvaluable price,
by the testimony of an infallible spirit, sealing them unto the day of
redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. that is, deliverance from all bondage into the full
liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8.21. Believers then are happy, when others,
nay themselves judge themselves in the very extremity of misery, when they
walk in darkness and see no light, Isaiah 50.10. There is you see, certitudo
objecti; The future compleatnesse of their glory is a thing certain in it
self: and there may be certitudo subjecti. Such believers as walk humbly with
their God, Micah. 6.8. and purify themselves as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. may,
and ought to reach that full assurance of hope, of which the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 6.11. upon this account it is, that the Apostle says, that we are saved
by hope, Romans 8. verse. 24. that is, we are saved here in this life, not in
regard of a present, and plenary possession, or fruition, but only in respect
of an assured expectation thereof. And thus I have ended with the exposition of
the words in themselves. I am in the next place briefly to examine the
inference of them from the foregoing. There dwells in Christ, as man,
all-fulnesse of the Godhead bodily; therefore ye, who believe in Christ, are
complete in him; for he is able to make you complete: Because hereupon it
follows 1. that in all that he did, and suffered, there was an infinite
merit, able to purchase this compleatnesse. 2. That there was in him an
insinite power, able to confer this compleatnesse. Some understand those
words of our savior, Joh. 6.63. concerning the humanity of Christ, considered
alone, without his Deity. It is the spirit that quickneth: that is, it is the
Godhead united unto the humane nature, that gives spiritual life. The flesh
profits nothing: that is, the humane nature of Christ, if it were disunited
from the divine, it would be of little avail unto the quickenance of our
souls. Its concurrence is not only profitable, but necessary; yet it is only
isntrumental; and therefore, in the virtue of it is principal agent, the
fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in it. If Christ had been mere man,
though clothed with all the power, that a creature is capable of, He could not
have saved so much as one single soul from eternal death. But he is God, as
well as man, and therefore able to justify, sanctify, and glorify even
millions of worlds. With thee (says the Psalmist unto God) is the fountain of
life, Psalm. 36.9. A fountatine that can never be exhausted. The fullness of
the Godhead in Christ is not as a river, but as a sea, whence flow all those
streams that make glad the city of God, Psalm. 46.4. It was from his Deity
that there was in him an ample sufficiency, to finish the transgression, to
make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.24. Because his righteousness is the
righteousness of God, Phil. 3.9. therefore it is appliable to, and available
for all the believers that ever were, are, or shall be in the world. Because it
was the great God, that was our Savior, and gave himself for us; Therefore he
has redeemed us from all iniquity, and purified us unto himself a peculiar
people, Tit. 2.13,14. Because he is the Son of God, therefore his blood
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. therefore by one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. Because the Father
has by eternal generation, given unto the Son to have life in himself,
Joh. 5.26. therefore he quickens whom he will, verse. 21. He can quicken those
souls, that are dead in sins, and trespasses; and he will at the last day
quicken those bodies, that have for thousands of years been rotten in their
graves. Because he is the Lord from heaven, 1 Cor. 15.47. The Lord of Glory, 1
Cor. 2.8. therefore he can clothe our mortal, and corruptible bodies with
incorruption and immortality; He can change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according unto the working, whereby he
is able even to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3.21. Can you desire
more comfort, then that, which this point yields: It promises as much
perfection, as our natures can hold.

But it is indeed only unto those, who are qualified; as those Colossians
were, unto whom our Apostle directs this Epistle; Saints, and faithful
Brethren, Chapt. 1.2. who have received Christ Jesus, the Lord, rooted, and
built up in him, and established in the faith, abounding therein with
thanksgiving, Chapt. 2. verse. 6, 7. This restriction is implied (think some)
in that the Apostle does not say, ye are complete from him, or by him, but ye
are complete in him. That clause, (...), in him, contains (say they) a
description of those, that are thus complete. They are such, as are in Christ,
as have an actual inexistence in him; Such as are incorporated, and implanted
into him by the spirit, and faith: And they are all new creatures, 2. Cor.
5.17. they have all the spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9. Men may take a full draught
of a Musculus. Da venant.
natural fountain, and yet not go into it, but stand without it. But now as
for this spiritual fountain, Christ Jesus, none can so much as sippe of the
water of life in him, without passing into him, by the act of a faith, that
purifyeth the heart, Acts 15.9. and works by love, Galat. 5.6. and out of the
belly of him, that believes, shall flow rivers of living water, John 7.38.
Branches, separate from the vine, wither, and grow saplesse: Members, cut off
from the head, are dead, and become carrion. Professors, disunited from
Christ, can have no vital communion with him, no participation of any true,
and real compleatnesse from him. They are but livelesse pictures of
Christians, have only a form of Godliness, only the carcass of that
perfection, which Christ imparteth unto his members; and therefore, however
they may be for their natural, and acquired endowments, most accomplished
persons, yet as touching spirituals, they are next to devils, of all creatures
most imperfect, and incompleate, wretched, and miserable, poor, blind, and
naked, Revel. 3.17. able to do nothing, John. 15.5.

In a second place; Paul infers from the personal union, the dignity of the
humane nature of Christ, in comparison of the good Angels. Because in him
dwells all fullness of the Godhead, therefore, he is the head of all
principality and power. Here examine we 1. what is meant by principality, and
power, 2. How Christ, as man, is the head of all principality, and power.

1. Then enquire we, what is meant by principality, and power. In verse. 15. of
this chapter, and in Ephesians. 6.12. they signify evil Angels. But here they are
taken only for the good Angels. Angels, which are termed in scripture, the
elect Angels, 1 Timoth. 5.21. the Angels of heaven, Math. 24.36. the Angels of
light, 2 Cor. 11.14. the sons of God, Job. 1.6. Job. 38.7. who are termed 1.
Principalities, from that excellency, which they have by nature, and grace,
above other creatures: they are the chief of the creation, as it were Princes,
in comparison of other creatures.

2. They are styled powers, for that Authority, which God has delegated unto
them, over other creatures.

For the restriction of the terms here unto the good Angels, I shall allege
3 arguments.

1. This headship is a sequel of the personal union, and therefore no mere
creature shareth in it. But if it denoted barely a superiority over the wicked
Angels, it were a privilege communicable unto the good Angels.

2. To be head is properly a superiority, that is some way or other beneficial
unto those, unto whom it relates. And therefore Christ intended good unto those
principalities, and powers, unto whom he is an head. But he designed no good
unto the wicked Angels; and therefore, they are not here meant.

3. The Principalities and powers here, are in all probability the Angels, the
worship of whom is prohibited, verse. 18. And they are good Angels: For
unlikely, that the seducers, against whom the Apostle deals, should press
them unto the worship of wicked Angels.

Having found what is meant by these principalities, and powers, enquire we
next, how Christ, as man, is an head of them.

Why, 1. in regard of excellency above them. 2. in regard of authority over
them. And 3. (As some think) in respect of influence upon them.

1. Then, because in the manhood of Christ there dwells all-fulnesse of the
Godhead bodily, therefore, as man, he is an head unto the good Angels, in
regard of excellency, or eminency above them. He is superior to them, because
all Angelical perfections whatsoever, fall far short of the hypostaticall
union, which is denied unto the Angels, and vouchsafed unto the humane nature,
in the person of Christ. He took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took
on him the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. Being made so much better then the
Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they,
Heb. 1.4. Though they be Principalities, and powers, excellent, glorious, and
powerful creatures, yet they are still but mere creatures. But now Christ, as
man, has by the personal union, obtained a more excellent name, then they;
because thereby, as man, he is personally the son of God, Homo potest accipi
ratione suppositi: and sie cum suppositum naturae humanae in Christo, si^
persona filii Dei, cui per se convenit esse Deum, verum est, quod Christus
fecundum quod homo, sit Deus. Aquinas part: rert: quaest: 16. Art: 11.
God himself, the Lord and creator of principalities, and powers.

2. Because in Christ, man, dwells all-fulnesse of the Godhead bodily,
therefore he is an head of the good Angels, in regard of authority over them;
they are his servants, his ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. made subject unto
him, 1 Pet. 3.22. so that he can command them at pleasure. And hereupon they
are termed his Angels, Math. 13.42. and 16.27. and 24.31. Mark. 13.27. Revel.
1.1. and 22.16. That holy thing which shall be borne of thee (said the Angel
unto the Virgin Mary) shall be called the son of God, Luke 1.35. Christ, as
man, was the natural son of God, by the assumption of our nature in unity
of one person; and because he was the son of God, heir, and Lord of all,
therefore he is the King, and governor of even thrones, and dominions,
principalities, and powers, and has them all at a beck.

3. Some go farther, and say that Christ is an head unto the go^d Angels, in
regard of internal influence upon the^. He is unto the^ (say they) a
mediator, though not of redemption, or reconciliation, (For so he is a
mediator only between God and men, for whom he gave his life a ransom, 1
Timoth. 2.5,6.) yet of preservation, or confirmation, in that they owe unto his
merits the prevention of their fall, and the continuance, and establishment of
their peace, and friendship with God.

But this opinion may be impugned by what some Schoolmen of great note,
Vasquez in tert. part. Thomae tom. 1. disp. 49. Beca^us Summa Theol. tom. 1.
tract. 3. cap. 2. quaest. 4. page 58. etc. and tom. 5. cap. 14. quaest. 9. page
261; and others have said against the meritorious influence of Christ, as man,
upon the grace, and essential glory of Angels, who yet grant in his humanity
an influence of illumination, Ephesians. 3.10. and accidental joy, Luke 15.7,9.
upon them.

We may from them take these two arguments.

1. To say, that the Angels confirmation in their gracious and glorious estate,
and the preservation of them from falling, does presuppose the fall of Adam, is
a proofelesse assertion: But the mediation of Christ presupposes the fall of
Adam, as being occasioned thereby. And for any one to affirm, that Christ had
been mediator, and had been incarnate, if Adam had never fallen, is to speak
without evidence from scripture; therefore Christ's mediation for the
confirmation, and preservation of Angels, is an unscripturall notion.

2. Christ merited for those, unto whom he was a mediator. But now Christ did
not merit any thing for Angels: therefore he was not a mediator for them. The
minor, which only will be questioned, may be thus proved: Christ died for all
those, unto whom he merited any thing: because his merits had their
consummation at his death. John 19^36.
But now the scripture speaks not one word, or syllable of Christ's dying for
the Angels; and therefore we may conclude, it is also silent, as touching his
meriting any thing for them. And therefore, I shall for my part content my
selse with ignorance thereof.

Indeed the two former particulars of Christ's headship over the Angels,
superiority above them, and government of them is sufficient for the comfort of
the Church. It is a great honor unto the Church, that the good Angels in
heaven, are in point of Dignity inferior unto her husband; but that they are
under his authority, subject unto his government, makes much for her real
benefit, and security. For how can she be unsafe, who is married unto the Lord
General of the Militia of heaven? All the Angels in heaven are the subjects of
Christ, man, fully conformable unto his commands; and therefore will be very
ready to do any possible service unto the Queen of their King. They will be
very forward to minister, in all things requisite, unto all heirs of
salvation, Heb. 1.14. to encampe round about them, Psalm. 34.7. It is part of
their charge, given unto them by Christ, to keep his members in all their
ways, to bear them up in their hands, least they dash their foot against a
stone, Psalm. 91.11,12. Though the Church be begirt with never so many, and
powerful adversaries, yet she should shake off all carnal fear of them:
Because her Savior can (when he will) command what multitudes please him, of
the heavenly host, for her guard and protection. The combinations, and attempts
of all the principalities and powers, in earth and hell, for her ruin, cannot
but be vain, and fruitless, as long as her head is head of all the
principalities and powers in heaven; for against these, the other can make no
resistance. This Presidenteship of Christ over the Angels, was showed in a
vision unto the prophet Zechariah, for the encouragement of the Jews, against
their abject state under the Persian empire. I saw by night, and behold, a man
riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle trees, that were in the
bottom, and behind were there red horses, speckled, and white. Then said I, O
my Lord, what are these? And the Angel, that talked with me, said unto me, I
will show thee what these be: And the man, that stood among the myrtle trees,
answered, and said, These are they, whom the Lord has sent to walk to and fro
through the earth, Zech. 1. verse. 8, 9, 10. Here we have the then low, and
depressed condition of the Church, set forth by diverse particulars: It was
night with her, a dark and sad time: she was in a valley or bottom: And this
bottom was covered with the shadow of black and thick trees: It was in the
bottom among the myrtle trees. But now the King, and protector of the Church
is ready for her succor, and relief. And therefore, he is said to be riding:
And he is like a consuming fire, all in a flame with anger against her enemies;
and therefore he is said to ride on a red horse. He is waited and attended on
by Angels, whom he employeth in his errands: They walk to and fro through the
earth, verse. 10. And they give up their account unto him, verse. 11. Behind him
were there red horses speckled, and white. They were behind him, as soldiers
following their captain, and there were some for all dispensations. Junius.
Red horses, ad praestanda judicia, for execution of his judgments: White
horses, ad beneficia ejus praestanda, for conveyance of his benefits: And
speckled horses, ad utrunque conjunctim, for actions of a mixed nature, partly
for protection of his Church, and partly for punishment of her adversaries.
Christ's soveraignety over the Angels, is (you see) a very comfortable doctrine
unto the people of Christ: As it is useful for their consolation, so farther,
it may serve for dehortation of them from the adoration, and invocation of
Angels, which perhaps the Apostle particularly aimed at against the Gnostics,
and other seducers, that urged the worship of Angels, verse. 18. Suppose they be
most excellent, and powerful creatures, Principalities, and Powers, yet they
are still the subjects, and servants of Christ, our mediator. He still is
their head, and sovereign, and therefore it were a very foolish part to
forsake him, and fly unto their mediation. I shall conclude all, that I have
to say on these words, with that of Calvin in locum. Sed interim tenendum est,
sursum and deorsum cancellos nobis circundari, ne a Christo vel tantillum
divertat fides nostra. This one thing must be kept in remembrance, that the
Apostle here sets us limits up-wards, and down wards: Upwards, toward the
Angels, Principalities, and powers: And down-wards, toward philosophy, and
vain deceit, after the tradition of men, and after the rudiments of the world:
that so our faith may not swerve a jot from our head, and redeemer, Christ
Jesus, in whom dwells all fullness of the Codhead bodily.

In Christ, as man, Secondly, there was a fullness of grace. There was in
Christ (says Pererius upon Joh. 1.14.) a threefold fullness of grace. For
there was in him habitual grace, the grace of headship, and the grace of
union, and in all these three, he had a fullness. 1. The habit uall grace,
concreated with the soul of Christ, was most full, because it was in the
highest degree, and in the highest manner, and in the greatest excellency,
wherein it could be had, secundum rationem gratiae, and according unto the end,
whereunto grace was ordained, which is the union of an intellectual nature
with God. He was full of grace, having every virtue, grace gift, operation, and
effect of grace. 2. The grace of headship was most full in Christ, as reaching
unto all the elect, not only men, but angels also. 3. The grace of union was
in him not only full, but He means terminatively, as it is terminated unto
an infinite person: For formally in it felfe, the union is finite.
infinite: Because the union was made in the person of the word, which was of
infinite perfection, and virtue. He names also another cause, for which this
grace of union may be said to be most full: Because the word has assumed into
the unity of it is person, not only the soul of man, but also his body, and
all the parts thereof; All things whatsoever, that appertain unto either the
verity, or integrity, of the humane nature: Neither is this union of them with
it, for a certain determinate time, but for perpetuity; so that they never are
to be separated therefrom: Thus Pererius.

For the fuller opening of this branch of Christ's fullness, I shall handle
these two following particulars: Christ as man was 1. the object. 2* the
subject of a fullness of grace.

1. He was the object of a fullness of grace, taking grace, for the love, and
favor of God. And to show this, Solomon a type of Christ, was by the command
of the Lord himself, termed Jedidiah: Cornell, Alapide*
that is, beloved of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.24. and Ephesians. 1.6. He is termed
absolutely, and (...), the Beloved: Because he is beloved above all others; and
none are beloved, but in, and for him: Because it is he, whom the father
loves, and has loved from everlasting, not for any other, but for himself,
as being his natural son, in whom there is a perfect resemblance of him.
Agreeable unto this, is that, which Christ under the name of wisdom, speaks
of himself, in Prove. 8.30. Then was I by him, as one brought up with him: and
I was daily his delight etc. Two things are here remarkable unto our present
purpose, 1. in the Hebrew it is in the plural number, The new Annotations:
delights, to signify that he was his greatest delight. And 2. we have the
connection of this delight of the father in the son, and that on both the
fathers, and the sons part. 1. It is connexed on the fathers part, with his
creation of all things: Then was I daily his delight: that is, when he prepared
the heavens, when he set a compass upon the face of the depth: when be
established the clouds above: when he strengthened the fountains of the deep:
when he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his
commandment: When he appointed the foundations of the earth, verse. 27, 28, 29.
And the reason of this connection of the fathers complacency in the son, with
his creation of the heavens, the fountains of the deep, the sea, the
foundations of the earth, was, to intimate, that the father took more pleasure
in his son, then in the view of all his creatures, then in all the glory, and
beauty, that was in heaven, and in earth. Next, we have the connection of it on
the sons part, and that 1. natural, and necessary, with his own delight in
the father: Rejoicing always before him, verse. 30. 2. gratuitous, and
voluntary, with his complacency in the sons of men. Rejoicing in the
habitable part of his earth, and my delights were with the sons of men, verse.
31. The great and wonderful interest he has in his father's love, is (as some
conceive) set forth by that expression in Joh. 1.18. He is in the bosom of his
father: that is, in his bowels, in his dearest, and tenderest affections. For^
as Pelargus upon the place observes) the bosom is the place of love, and
therefore, to be in the bosom of the father, is to be dilectissimus, the most
beloved of the father. Thus in common speech, intimates are termed bosom
friends, and Joh. 13.23. the disciple, whom Jesus loved, leaned on his bosom.
For Lazarus to be in the bosom of Abraham, Luke 15.16. was to have a most
intimate, loving, and friendly fellowship, and communion with him, and all
Believers in glory. The intimacy, that ought to be betwixt husband and wife, is
expressed in Scripture by their being mutually in one another's bosoms: And
therefore, the husband is termed the husband of the wifes bosom, Deuteronomy. 28.56.
And the wife, the wife of her husbands bosom, Micah. 7.5. Whereas our Savior
in Joh. 17.11,21,22. affirms, that he, and the father are one, that the
father is in him: and he in the father, Cajetan, and others, expound this of
that oneness of affection, which is between him, as man, and the Father.
Indeed Christ as God is one with the father, in regard of the divine essence,
and will, as he himself affirms, John. 10.30. But that he is to be
considered here, as man, Cajetan proves by this at least probable argument.
Christ is to be considered here, as praying; Now he prays as man, and not as
God; And therefore he speaks of himself, as incarnate. Christ man, and the
father are one, by the indissoluble bond of mutual love. They dwell in one
another, by love; the father is in the son, as a person that is loved, is in
the party loving: And The son is in the father, as his beloved; as he, in
whom he is well pleased. The fullness of Christ's grace, or favor, with the
father, is in part implied by that metaphorical expression, of Christ's
sitting at the right hand of God. For in wordly courts, this was the highest
place, next to the King; and therefore a mark of special, and extraordinary
favor: and hereupon Solomon placed his mother, and hu Queen, at his right
hand, 1 King. 2.19. Psalm. 45.9. In John. 3.35. you may gather the eminency of
the fathers love of the son, from the vastness of the Authority, that he
has committed unto him. The father loves the son, and has given all things
into his hand.

Because the father loves the son, therefore he has given all things into
his hand; therefore he has submitted the whole universe unto his disposal,
and government. Indeed, we may best take the measure of the love of God,
toward Christ, from the fruits, and effects thereof, that great dignity, and
Authority, those great and glorious endowments, with which Christ's humane
nature was enriched. Christ may be said says Rhada Sup. lib. 3. Senten:
controver: 4, art: 3. page: 107.

To be beloved by, and gracious with God in regard of a threefold
gratiousnesse. The first, is terminated to the person of the word, and it is that
love wherewith the Father loves Christ as his natural and only begotten son,
and therefore it is as substantial, so natural and necessary, for it is the same
love wherewith he loves himself; and besides, it is in every regard infinite,
for the person loving is infinite, and the person beloved is Infinite, and so
infinitely lovely and amiable.

The second is terminated to the manhood, and belongs to the grace of union,
and this be terms a personal gratiousnesse, and he describes it to be the
free and spontaneous love of God, by which he imparted unto the humanity the
personal being of the word, and therefore infinitely beloved of God. The third
gratiousnesse of Christ is accidental, and agrees unto his manhood by
habitual grace, which formally perfected his soul, and elevated it to a
participation of the divine nature, and thereby rendered it very gracious and
acceptable in the eyes of God.


Of that I have spoken already, and of these I shall hereafter treat at large.

The scripture acquaints us with two reasons, that invest him into this high
favor of God* 1. his relation unto him, 2. His service of him.

1. His relation unto him. Because he was his only begotten son, Math. 3.17.
Math. 17.5.2 Pet. 1.17. In which words there be 4. particulars, that signify
the singularity of the fathers love unto Christ.

1. The Notanda est in Graeco inculcatio articuli; (...); quae emphasin habet
ad significandum filium naturalem, ac proprie ex ipso genitum: dum dicitur,
Ille filius meus, ille dilectus. Estius in 2 pet, 1.17. Articulum duplicem
expressi: cujus videtur hic esse emphasis maxima, non tam ut distinguatur a
filiis aliis ^ cum fit unigenitus) quam ad dignitatis commendationem. Nos enim
non natura, sed adoptione sumus silii: qua ratione etiam Christus ipse dicitur
primogenitus inter multos fratres, quia licet unicus sit proprio jure; princeps
tamen est inter multos, quatenus adoptionis fons est ac caput. Beza in Matthew.
17.5.
repetition of the demonstrative Article, (...): for that has it is weight; and
imports, that he is beloved of the father by way of excellency: And
therefore, some express the force of doubling the Article thus: this is that
my son, that my beloved. The doubling of the Article then, does not so much
difference him from, as advance him above all other sons, whether Saints, or
Angels: For he is a son by nature, they by adoption; in which regard he is
called the first borne among many brethren: because though he be of right the
only son, yet, he is chief among many, in that he is the fountain, and
head of our adoption: and therefore has the supremacy in the affection of the
father.

For the father to say, that he is his son, is a sufficient intimation of his
affection unto him. But he adds, 2. that he is his Additur autem dilectus,
graece (...), non restrictionis causa, tanquam Deus filium naturalem habeat
aliquem non sibi dilectum, quod in hominibus persaepe contingit, sed ut
epithetum necessarium. Neque enim potest filiusey. Deo naturaliter genitus, in
quo perfecta est similitudo patris, non esse ei perfecto summoque amore
dilectus Estius 2 Pet. 1.17.
beloved son. The word (beloved) is added, not for restrictions sake, as if
God had any natural son unbeloved, as it often happens amongst men, but as a
necessary epithete. For the son begotten naturally of God, in whom there is
the perfect similitude of the father, cannot but be beloved by the father, with
a perfect, and the highest love.

3. The father does not content himself to say, that he is his beloved son,
but affirms farther, that he is his beloved son, in whom he is well
pleased. Men may have sons, whom they may dearly affect, and yet they may be
displeased with them. But Christ is such a son, in whom his father
delights, and with whom he is fully contented. This is my beloved son, in
whom I am well pleased. The word, (...), signifies a fullness of approbation,
an infiniteness of affection, without any mixture of displeasure, and such an
height of delight, complacency, and contentment, as is unexpressible. This is
my beloved son, in whom I am well-pleased: that is, of whom I have an high
estimate, unto whom I bare singular good will, and affection, and in whom I
wonderfully delight, and rejoice.

The Demonstrative Pareus on Math. 17.4,5.
((...), this) especially Math. 17.4,5. distinguishes him from Moses, and
Elias; and all other saints, as the Lord from the servants. He is exalted above
the prophets, as a son; as a lord, above the servants. He is nearer, and
dearer unto the father, then they are, or can be.

In Col. 2.13. He is termed the son of his love: (...). Where the Apostle
uses an Hebraisme, whereby the genitive case is put in the room of an
epithete. So that the son of his love, is as much as his beloved, or deareson,
his most beloved son. Look as filius perditionis is filius perditissmus:
that is, most worthy to be destroyed destinated, to destruction, desperately
perishing, or notoriously wicked, Joh. 17.12.2 These. 2.3. So Christ is termed
the son of Gods love; because he was transcendently beloved by God. As also
because he was most worthy to be beloved: Because he was designed unto all the
the possible expressions of love. Beza illustrates this Hebraisme by Psalm.
15.1. where the mountain, or hill of Gods holiness is as much as his holy
hill, or mountain. And Conelius A lapide paralelleth it with Prove. 5.19. Where
the hind of loves is as much as the most beloved hind.

A second particular in Christ, that deserves a fullness of grace, and favor
with God, is his service of him, and obedience unto him, both active and
passive. And hereupon is it, that in Math. 12.18. the Evangelist applies unto
Christ that of the propher Isaiah, Chapt. 42.1. Behold my servant, whom I
uphold, mine elect, in whom my soul delights, God had chosen him to be his
servant, a mediator betwixt himself and man; and because he has discharged
this his office, therefore he is his beloved, in whom his soul is
well-pleased. Therefore does my father love me (says Christ himself) John.
10.17. Because I laid down my life, etc. Suitable unto this is that analysis,
which Sicut priore clogio personam fili^ unigenici asseruit pater: ita hoc
altero commendat ejus officium, docens hunc unum esse nobis datum mediatorem,
and servatorem, in quo velit nobis esse propitius, and in quo nos salutem
quaerere oporteat: sicut testantur Apostoli: non est in alio salus, nec est
datum aliud nomen, in quo possimus servari, etc.
Pareus makes of these words, this is my beloved son, in whom I am well
pleased. The former part of of the words, This is my beloved son, concerns
his person: The latter, in whom I am well pleased, regards (thinks he) his
office, as he is mediator, our Savior, and surety, in, and for whom, God is
propitious to us, and reconciled with us. Because he was his only begotten
son; therefore he was beloved by him: because he would faithfully discharge
his office, therefore he was well-pleased with him. And hereupon it was, that
his voice was heard from heaven, as at his Baptism, which was a public
inauguration of him, for the public performance of all his offices, so also
in his transfiguration, which was a private preparation of him, for the final
discharge of so much of his office, as was to be performed here upon earth.

But this is not the fullness meant here in the text. Col. 1.19. For Gods love
of, and favor toward Christ, respected Christ only objectively, and
extrinsecally, as his adjunctum occupatum, terminated unto him. Whereas the
fullness in the text regarded him subjectively, and intrinsecally, as adjunctum
receptum, dwelling, and inhering in him. This fullness therefore of Gods grace,
and favor toward Christ, I shall pass over as soon as I have made some
brief use, and application thereof.

The first use is of information. The fullness of Christ's grace and favor with
God, compared with the fullness of his afflictions, that he suffered by the
decree of God, do clearly evince, that an height of love, and favor, is
consistent with a depth of affliction, Christ was an object of a fullness of
grace, and yet the subject of a fullness of sufferings. It pleased the Lord to
bruise his natural son, Isai. 53.10. Therefore it is no marvel that he
scourges every adopted son, whom he receives, Heb. 12.6. If the darling of
the father, the first borne among many brethren, our elder brother, were all
his life long a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Isai. 53.3.
oppressed and afflicted, ver. 7. If he suffered before he entered into his
glory, Luk 24.26. The rest of the brethren then must not think it strange, if
their way lies through much tribulation unto the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22.
Christ was the beloved son of God; even when he hung upon the cross, even then
was the Father well pleased with him. And therefore, to ro^ in a prison, to
expire in an ignominious way, at a stake, or upon a scaffold, or under a
gallows, is not in it self a mark of Gods displeasure unto his children. The
Son of Gods love cried out, that he was sorsaken of God, Mat. 27.46. that is,
deprived of the sense of all consolation: and therefore, spiritual desertions
are not always an argument of disfavour. Gods dearest children may for a long
time walk in darkness, and see no light, Isai. 50.10.

A second use is of consolation. For this fullness of grace unto Christ
reflecteth, in some measure, upon his members. It is impossible, that God
should hate or abhor those that are so nearly related unto the Son of his
love. If he delight in him, he cannot be averse from them. If the name of
Christ be Jedidiah, beloved of the Lord: His spouse's name is Hephzibah,
because the Lord delights in her, Isai. 62.4. The God of heaven cannot look
upon the members as enemies, as long as the head is his favorite. If he be
gracious, they cannot be disgracious. Because he is in the bosom of the
Father, therefore they are not strangers unto the father, but he will carry
them in his bosom too, as a nursing father bears the sucking child, Numb.
11.12. If the first borne be beloved, by way of eminency, the rest of the
brethren are beloved too, in a way of subordination. If he be the primary
object of Gods love, They are the Secondary. If he be God's elect servant, in
whom his soul delights, Isai 42.1. then he has chosen us in him, that we
should be holy, and without blame, before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. Aquinas part.
tert. quaest. 24. art. 4. determines, that the predestination of Christ is the
cause of our predestination, non secundum actum praedestinantis, not in regard
of the act predestinating. For God, with one and the same act, has
predestined us and Christ; And nothing can be the cause of it self. But
secundum terminum praedestinationis, in regard of the term, or effect of
predestination. Because the grace, unto which Christ was predestined, is the
cause of that grace, unto which we are predestined, and that both
meritorious, and exemplary; whom he did foreknow, he did also predestinate to
be conformed unto the image of his Son, that he might be the first borne among
many brethren, Romans 8.29. our Savior in that solemn prayer of his, Joh. 17.
has ver. 22. this passage, The glory which thou gave me, I have given them.
Where Maldonate, by the glory which the Father gave him, understands his love
of him. For was it not an unspeakable glory unto his manhood, to be so
superlatively beloved by God? And was not the publication hereof, at his
Baptism, a public glorifying of him? Well, this affection of his Father he
deriveth unto all believers: for it is for his sake that his Father sets his
heart upon them. The glory which thou have given me, I have given them: that
is, says Maldonate, as thou have loved me, so have I loved them. If God
accept of him, he will not refuse any that belong unto him. It is noted by some
concerning Math. 3.17. that the preposition, in, (...), is more comprehensive,
then with, or by, or through whom; for it signifies, not only that God is
well-pleased with Christ, but also that he is well-pleased with others for his
sake: And who should those others be, but such, in whose hearts he dwells by
faith; for they are, as it were, parts of his fullness, Ephesians. 1.23. God's
complacencie in his Son exempts them alone, of all the sons of men, from
his displeasure: and if God be well pleased with them, it matters not who is
displeased. If they have his favor; they need not fear any man's frown. His
grace and love is an impregnable bulwark against the hatred of all the world.

But to break the consolation that this point affords unto the members of
Christ into some particulars, They may hence infer, that here in this life
they shall enjoy a full remission of their sins, a gracious acceptance of
their persons, a plentiful provision for their wants, an assured and
continual confirmation of their graces; and then (for the life to come) they
may hence undoubtedly expect the full, and perfect glorification of their
souls and bodies.

1. They may conclude the full remission of their sins from the fullness of
Christ's grace, and favor with God. If any man sin we have an advocate with
the father, 1 John 2.1. an advocate, that is in the bosom of the father, Joh.
1.18. that has his ear, and heart. And such an advocate must needs prevail.
Ahasuerus, a barbarous King, could not withstand the petition of his Queen,
for the life of her people, Esth. 8. And can God (think you) deny the
intercession of his beloved son, for the life, and pardon of his Queen, his
Church, and people. We have an advocate with the father. The judge, whose
favor and mercy in our behalf he, as man, imploreth, is his father, and our
father in him: And a father cannot be inexorable unto a son, pleading for his
brethren. We indeed are guilty, but he is innocent. We have an advocate with
the father Jesus Christ the righteous. He is righteous, and therefore needs no
remission for himself; And so might the better, and more boldly, speak for
us, if his intercession were only out of Charity. But his intercession is out
of justice, and in a way of authority, for what he has merited; and therefore
cannot have a repulse. He is such an advocate, as is also a propitiation, verse.
2. that is, a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins. He has fully satisfied
Gods justice for all the sins of all his people; And therefore, he may justly
challenge the forgiveness of them. Beza and Maldonate think, that in those
words, Math. 3.17. and 17.5. In whom I am well-pleased, the father signifies,
that Christ alone is the mediator, and peacemaker, between God and man. When
he looks upon him, he lays aside all indignation, and is fully appeased,
and reconciled. This may comfort against the incessant accusations of Satan: He
accuses the brethren before our God, day and night, for their sins, Revel.
12.10. But the intercession of the beloved will silence all his accusations.
When Alexander the great had read over a long letter, which Antipater had
written unto him, against his mother Olympias: Lo (says he) Antipater knows
not, that one tear of a mothers eye will wipe out ten-thousand such letters.
Christ's intercession now in heaven is not, as it was in the days of his
flesh, with cries, and tears, Heb. 5.7. but in an authoritative way, in the
right, and virtue of his sacrifice, his death, the blood of sprinkling, which
speaks better things, then the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24. And the sacrifice,
the blood, the death of the son of Gods love, is sufficient to blot out all
the criminations, that the accuser of the Brethren puts up against them.

2. They may hence infer the gracious acceptance of their persons with God.
Of his fullness have all we received, and that grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. that
is, (as Pelargus out of Chemnitius expounds that clause) we are gracious, and
accepted with the Father, for that grace, wherewith he loves, and accepts
the Son, made under the Law for us. Hereupon is it also, that Pareus supposes,
that those words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.6. in his grace he has made us
accepted in the beloved, are a commentary of this part of the Fathers voice
from heaven, In whom I am well-pleased. And hence also Beza compares those
words of the father with Exodus 28. ver. 36, 38. where the high Priest is
commanded to appear before the Lord, with a plate of pure gold upon his
forehead, upon which was to be engraven, Holiness unto the Lord, that the
people of Israel might be accepted before the Lord. For herein the high priest
was a type of our great high Priest, Christ Jesus, in whose face, and for whose
sufferings and mediation, God accepted the person, and services of his people:
And this acceptance of them by God should work their hearts unto an holy and
humble disdain of all the scorn and contempt of the world. If God accept, and
embrace them, for the sake of his beloved, what need they care, though all the
enemies of him, and his beloved, despise them, and shun all conversation with
them.

3. From the dearnesse of Christ unto God, compared with Gods exposall of him
unto death for his members, they may conclude, that God will make plentiful
provision for all their wants. It is the inference of the Apostle himself Romans
8.32. He that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all: how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things. He that soared not his
own son, his dear son, his most tenderly beloved son; but delivered him
up for us all unto the slaughter, how shall he not with him freely give us all
things: that is, all things needful for our eternal happiness, and
salvation: all things, that pertain to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.13. The
promises of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timoth. 4.8.

4. They may hence be certain of a continual confirmation of their graces,
and preservation from Apostasy. Gods If Kings bear goodwill to some family, if
his love begin in some chief one, who is with him at court, as his special
favorite, it is so much the firmer to all the rest of them. Thus here, how
firm and sure is his love to us, who^n he has loved unto life in Christ our
head and eldest brother, who is his natural son, from whom it is impossible
that his love should ever start? and when it is sure to the head, can the body
be forsaken? Mr Bayne on Ephesians. ^. ver. 4. pa. 39.
love of them is, like his love of him, immutable. Thou have loved them, as
thou have loved me, (says Christ) Joh. 17.23. If the head be always the
beloved, the members can never be hated. The fruits therefore of this love, the
gifts and callings of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29. If the natural
son of God be daily his delight, and that as well unto, as from eternity:
Therefore with everlasting kindness he will have mercy on his adoptive sons.
The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; But my kindness shall
not depart from them, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says
the Lord, that has mercy on them, Isai. 54.8,10.

But now if he should not uphold, and establish them by his spirit, Psalm.
51.12. if he should not continually support, and underprop their graces, but
suffer them totally, and finally to decay and wither, this would be a palpable
withdrawing of his loving kindness, and a shutting up his tender mercies in
anger. Besides, the sons love of them resembles the fathers love of him,
Joh. 15.9. As the father has loved me, so have have I loved you. Now there is
no change in the fathers love of him, therefore neither in his love of them:
And therefore we may conclude, that as it is their duty, so it shall be their
privilege, and happiness, to continue in his love. The Apostle Paul
professes, in the behalf of all believers, that nothing can divorce them from
the love of God, in Christ, that is, for Christ. I am persuaded (says he) that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord, Romans 8.38,39. In those last words, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, The
Apostle lays down the ground of the perpetuity of God's love of his
children. It Is not in themselves, but in Christ Jesus: that is, it is for his
sake, for that unalterable affection, which he bears unto him.

Lastly, from the eminency of God's favor unto Christ, his members may with
confidence expect the perfect, and full glorification of their souls and
bodies hereafter in heaven. For our Savior himself, in that prayer of his
Joh. 17. having petitioned for the glory of all that were to believe on him, he
inforceth this his petition, by representing unto the Father the love, that he
has borne unto him as man from all eternity. Father, I will that they also,
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory,
which thou have given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the
world, ver. 24. Is is as if he had said: That love which thou bear unto me,
express unto those that are mine. As thou loved'st me, invest them with that
glory, which thou have decreed unto my humanity. Believers then may as
confidently expect their own glory, as they are assured of the Fathers
affection unto Christ: and this assurance should digest all their sorrows, and
miseries, here in this life.

From Consolations I proceed unto Exhortations, and they shall be directed,
either unto the enemies, or members of Christ.

1. Then for enemies, and aliens; they may hence be exhorted 1. Unto
humiliation for their past enmity against Christ. 2. Unto a serious and earnest
endeavor after reconciliation, and union with him.

1. Unto humiliation for their past enmity against him, and his, his members,
ministers, and other ordinances. Who dare almost oppose the Minions of earthly
Princes: for History presents us with plentiful instances of such, whom their
very frowns have ruined. O then the hatred of heavens favorite must needs be
infinitely more fatal, and unfortunate, Because he is able to crush his most
potent adversaries. tremble then to consider, that all thy life long thou have
hated the beloved, loathed and abhorred God's darling, been averse from the Son
of his love: rejected his elect servant, in whom his soul delights, been a
most disaffected, and malignant Antagonist unto him, in whom the Father is
wellpleased.

2. Because Christ is so highly graced with God, all his enemies may be
exhorted to do, what lies in them, for the future, for reconciliation and
union with him, by application of themselves unto the diligent use of such
means and ordinances, as God has sanctified, and set apart for that purpose.
For those that are not united with him cannot expect so much as a good look
from God, because God is reconciled only in him, 2 Cor. 5.19. he accepts none
but in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. He is well pleased with none, but such as are
in him. Those that are out of him lie under the displeasure and wrath of God,
which is a consuming fire. In terrene courts, how ambitious are men to be
related unto the grand favorite, as knowing, that he is the channel of all
considerable preferments. Should it not then be the utmost ambition of men, to
have relation unto Christ: for through him only God dispenses all saving
favors unto the sons of men. We may say of him, in reference unto God, as
Tacitus did of Sejanus, the powerful favorite of Tiberius: ut quisque Sejano
intimus, ita ad Caesaris amicitiam validus. Contra, quibus infensus esset, metu
ac sordibus conflictebantur. He that was an intimate of Sejanus, needed not
with any great labor search for honors: He that had him his enemy, languished
under dispraise and misery. None had any honor without his favor: Neither
without him could any keep any place of either profit or credit, with security.
Besides, I shall yet farther propound, by way of motive, to stir up unto this
union, this following difference, betwixt the Court of Heaven, and those of
earth. Though men do not shine, and glitter in earthly Courts, they may be safe
in a retired privacy. But now in the Court of Heaven there is no middle betwixt
the two extremes of intimacy and hatred. They are all either enemies, or
intimates. Those are under a cloud, that are not in grace and favor. All they
are rejected, that are not accepted in the beloved: And therefore in disunion
from Christ there is nothing to be expected but rejection, disgrace, shame,
everlasting contempt, and confusion.

I pass on unto those exhortations, that concern the members of Christ, and
they are seven.

1. If we compare the transcendency of Gods love of Christ, with the greatness
of his sufferings for their sins, this will afford a strong argument unto an
hatred of, and sorrow or humiliation for sin: For nothing can more lively
discover the heinousness of sin, and the terror of Gods wrath against it.
Christ was an object of a fullness of grace and favor, and withal he was the
object of a fullness of wrath, as our sins were charged upon him, as our
surety: He was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities,
Isai 53.5. For the transgressions of my people was he stricken, ver. 8. He made
his soul an offering for sin, ver. 10. God would never have used such a
rigor and extremity of severity toward his dear Son, for sin imputed to
him, if sin had not been a thing, which he infinitely abhorred. O what
horror is there in that, for which God was Irae autem hujus objectum fuit
Christus, non absolute, sed tantummodo quoad paenam, quae per iram infertur,
quam ille tanquam sponsor noster subivit. Ames med. Theol. lib. 1. c. 22. sect.
9.
angry with the son of his love, for which (for a while) he deserted him, in
whom he was well pleased, which turned the favorable countenance of a loving
father, into frowns against a beloved son.

2. They may hence be exhorted unto a fullness in their love of Christ. If he
be the beloved of God, it is fit that he should be their beloved too, that they
may say unto him, as the Church, Cant. 1.7. O thou whom our soul loves. He is
in the bosom of the Father; and therefore he should be no stranger unto our
bosoms. We should always lodge him in our hearts, thoughts, and affections.
We should not be cold and remiss in our love of the Son of Gods love. He
ever was, is, and will be the delight of God, and therefore our complacency
should be in him, above all the creatures. God has set his whole love upon
him, and therefore we semblably should set our whole hearts upon him also, and
not divide them betwixt him and the creature, betwixt him and our corruptions.

3. The members of Christ may hence be provoked unto thank-fulnesse, and that
both unto the father, and unto Christ himself.

1. Unto the father, and that in regard of two considerations.

1. Because his love of him is the Original of his love of us. 2. The giving
of a person, so highly beloved, unto the death for us, is a most evident
demonstration of the unmeasurablenesse of his affection unto us.

1. Then let us glorify him for the fullness of his love unto Christ, as man,
and mediator, because it is the Original of all the love, that he bareth unto
his Children, if we speak of Gods love quoad effectum: that is, it is the
fountain of all the good decreed unto them. Christ's election is the cause of
our election, non quoad actum eligentis, not of the act of election: for that
being in God, is the same with God himself, and therefore independent, and
without a cause; but quoad res electione praeparatas, as touching the grace and
glory, unto which we are by election designed. All the fruits, and effects of
our election, are derived unto us from Christ's election. And if Christ, as
man, had not been elected unto the grace of personal union, a fullness of
habitual grace, and perfection of glory, we had been for ever rejected from
the presence, and favor of God. If he had not been the son of Gods love, we
had all of us been for ever Children of wrath, and sons of perdition; and
therefore is it, that John the Baptist, in his testimony of Christ, ascribes
unto him the coming of grace or favor unto men. The law was given by Moses,
but grace, etc. came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17. If Jesus Christ had not come
in the flesh, the grace of God, that brings salvation, had never appeared
unto the sons of men, Tit. 2.11. but they had all of them for ever layne
under the curse, and condemnation of the Law. In that benediction of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.14. grace is appropriated unto Christ, and that not only as
God, but also as man, The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ. He was in himself
the principal object of Gods grace and favor: and he was the meritorious
cause of it is derivation unto us: He purchased, and procured all the grace and
favor we enjoy with God. Hence also is it, that the Angels in their doxologie
aver, that the good will of God accrewed unto men by Christ incarnate, Luke
2.14. After the fall, all the expressions of Gods good will unto mankind were
for the merits of his beloved: In him alone he was well pleased. Our Savior
himself, Joh. 17.24. prays for the glorification of believers, upon the
account of his Fathers love of him. Father, I will that they also, whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory, which
thou have given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.
This sufficiently intimates, that they owe all their glory unto Gods love of
Christ, as man, and mediator: for otherwise there were little congruence in
bringing this, as an argument to back his prayer for that. If God then had not
loved Christ before the foundation of the world, lapsed man could never have
been glorified, never have seen the face of God in heaven. God has blessed us
(says the Apostle) with all spiritual blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. that is,
for Christ's sake. All the sweet and precious promises of the Gospel are as so
many beams of Gods love; and that they shine upon us, it is only by
reflection from this Sun of righteousness. If the light of Gods countenance
had not shined upon him, we had still sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death. Not so much as one promise of the Gospel had ever shone upon our poor
souls: for all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen: that is,
they are all made, and performed for him, 2 Cor. 1.20.

2. The dearnesse of Christ unto the Father, compared with the Fathers exposall
of him unto death for us, clearly demonstrates the matchless eminency of the
Fathers love unto us, and so is a very pressing argument for our thanksgiving:
See what our Savior himself speaks in exaltation, and as it were admiration
of this love, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten son, etc. The particle (so) points out such an height of love, as is
unexpressible: Ransacke all the Poets, and in all their fictions you can find
no parallel unto this love: That he should seem for a time, to suspend his
love unto his beloved, that he might extend his love unto enemies, unto
traitors, and rebels; that he should deliver up the son of his love unto the
utmost severity, and rigor of the law, for the ransom of Children of wrath;
that he should not spare him, for this intent, that he might spare them: that
he should make him a curse, to redeem them from the curse of the law, Galat.
3.13. that he should scourge him, to heal them, Isai. 53.5. punish him, to
save them: give him up unto death, that they might enjoy eternal life: that he
should desert him, in point of consolation, that they might not be eternally
lost, but embraced in the arms of his love for ever. O this speaks the most
transcendent love, that ever God showed toward any miserable creature. And
therefore the most enlarged thanks, and praises, will fall infinitely short of
it.

In the next place, if we consider the connection of this fullness of Gods love
unto Christ, with Christ's fullness of love unto us, we shall find very great
reason for the direction of our thanks, and praises unto Christ himself, as
well as unto the Father. We have these two fulnesses of love connexed by
Christ, under the name of wisdom, Prove. 8.30,31. Though he was by God, as one
brought up with him: and was daily his delight, rejoicing in the habitable part
of his earth: and his delights were with the sons of men. Which passage we may
expound by those words of our Savior, Joh. 15.3. As the Father has loved me,
so have I loved you. O what an astonishable condescension is there in this love
of our Savior, that the darling, and only beloved of the great God of
glorious heaven, should fetch a spouse from this miserable earth, should cast
his eye, and set his heart upon such forlorn creatures, and depraved sinners,
as we are; that he, which is in the bosom of the Father, should take such
despicable wretches, as we are, into his own bosom, marry us unto himself,
and rejoice over us, as a Bridegroom rejoices over his bride, Isai. 62.5.
Such was the happiness of Christ, in the fruition of his Fathers eternal
love, as that it was incapable of any further improvement. But yet
notwithstanding this his happy state and condition, he stooped so low as to
make his rebellious servants the objects of a boundless affection. Was not
this, as it were, a debasing of himself; and such a mercy unto us, as is above
recompense? All that we can do, is humbly and thankfully to acknowledge,
admire, and adore it; to resign up our selves unto the service of him, and
unto suffering for him (if he honor us with a call thereunto,) and to make it
the chiefest matter of our care, to decline whatsoever is unsuitable unto this
high place of grace and favor with him, and will reflect any dishonor, or
reproach thereon.

4. The height of Christ's grace and favor with God should prevail with us for
obedience unto his doctrine, and submission unto his directions. This use was
made of it by Christ himself, Prove. 8.30,32, etc. I was daily his delight. Now
therefore hearken unto me, O ye Children: for blessed are they that keep my
ways, verse. 33. Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not. It is also
pressed by his father, in his transfiguration, Math. 17.5. This is my beloved
son, in whom I am well-pleased: Hear ye him: that is, in the language of
scripture, obey him, accept him, not only as a priest, to satisfy for you; as
a redeemer, to save you; but also as a prophet, to instruct you; as a King, and
sovereign Lord, to govern, and guide you. The only begotten son is alone
in the bosom of the father, and therefore best acquainted with his mind and
will, and consequently best qualified, and enabled for the revelation thereof.
He only can declare him: for no man besides him has seen God at any time,
Joh. 1.18. Unto him therefore in his word let us only have recourse, for
instruction in things toward God: And unto such instructions let us lend an
open ear, and heart, let us yield a ready and full conformity, without farther
consulting with flesh and blood.

5. Because Christ is in such great grace and favor with God, it will be
discretion to have all our addresses unto, and worship of God in his name,
through his mediation. He is the powerful favorite of heaven, and therefore
all accesses unto the God of Heaven are by him, all dispatches from heaven unto
earth pass through him, not a promise, not a saving mercy, not a word of peace
and comfort is conveyed unto a believing soul but through his mediatorship.
The greatest part of public ceremonial worship under the law was lawful,
and acceptable unto God, only at the Temple in Jerusalem. Sacrifices were to
be offered only upon the Altar there, Isai. 20.4. and 56.7. The Temple and
Altar were herein types of Christ, in whom alone the whole moral worship and
service of God is acceptable, out of him God rejects, and looks upon the
most glorious performances, as heathenish abominations, as the butchery of a
man, the cutting off a dogs neck, the offering swines blood, the blessing of an
Idol, Isay. 66.3. It is in the beloved alone, that God accepts of, and is
well pleased with, as our persons so our services; all prayers preferred, all
duties performed in his name will speed well, and find a gracious, and
favorable reception. It is related in Plutarch of Themistocles, that when he
fled from the fury of his Citizens, unto Admetus, King of the Molossians, whom
yet he had formerly provoked, he took the Kings little young son in his
arms, and went and kneeled down before the Altar in his chapel, which humble
manner of sueing the Molossians took to be most effectual, and such as was
not to be refused. When being pursued by the guilt and cry of our sins, the
rigorous sentence of the law, the accusations of Satan, and the terrors of
our own conscience for them, we run unto an incensed God for mercy, there is
no way to appease him, but to take his dear son in the arms of our faith,
and to lodge, or offer him, as it were, upon the Altar of his bosom. This is
such an enforcing manner of supplication, as that God in his new covenant of
grace has engaged himself unto a compliance with it.

6. Because Christ is so eminently gracious with God the father, we should be
stirred up unto a correspondency with him in his affections, to love those
persons and things, which he loves, and to detest whatsoever he hates.
Courtiers usually seem at least to proportion all their passions unto those of
the Princes minion. They admire whatsoever he likes; they adore whomsoever he
affects; and profess a deep dislike of all that he disaffecteth. They
affront and quarrel all upon whom he frowneth. Well then, may not we be
ashamed, that there is not the like compliance in us with Gods favorite. We
dote upon sin, which his soul abhors. We delight in that company, and those
places, unto which he is a stranger. We loath those ordinances, which have his
most evident approbation, and institution. Those unsavory and profane jests,
rotten communication, that are an abomination unto him, and stink before him,
are the matter of our greatest merriment. We distaste most the conversation of
those, that have most intimate communion with him. Those are an eyesore unto
us, who are as tender unto him, as the Apple of his eye. His jewels, Mal. 3.17.
his crown jewels, his crown of glory, and royal diadem, Isay. 62. ver. 3.
are accounted by us as the filth of the world, and offscouring of all things, 1
Cor. 4.13. There is nothing, that he esteems more amiable in men, then the
beauty of holiness, the Image of God. This is the chain upon the neck of his
spouse, Cant. 4.9. that ravisheth his heart; And there is nothing more, that
our hearts rise against. O, what a dangerous thing is this antipathy unto him,
that is in the bosom of the father, and at his right hand. How unsafe is it to
be thus opposite unto his affections; Hereby we must needs incur the
displeasure both of him and his father, and that is the undoubted path unto
everlasting ruin, and destruction; for in their favor is lise, Psalm. 30.5.

7. And lastly, If Christ be so great and gracious with God, It then very much
concerns us to labor for assurance of his love, and favor. For we must
needs be liable unto perpetual torment and terror of mind, as long as we are
in suspense of our eternal condition; As long as we are doubtful, whether we
shall be for ever miserable or happy. And the wrath of Christ, who is chief in
the affection of the father, is (as Solomon speaks of the wrath of a King) as
the messengers of death, and roaring of a lion. Whereas on the other side, in
the light of his countenance is life, and his favor is as a cloud of the
latter rain, Prove. 16.14,15. and 19.12. and 20.2. If he smile upon a soul
nothing can make it miserable, and if he frown upon it, nothing can make it
happy.

For God is reconciled to none, but in and through him. He makes none blessed
but for his sake. Well then, we can expect no tranquillity of spirit, no solid
comfort, no sound peace of conscience, no joy unspeakable, and full of glory,
until we have attained a certain and well bottomed persuasion, that the son
of Gods love, in whom alone he is well pleased, has lifted up the light of his
countenance upon us.

What I have said touching our assurance of Christ's love, may be applied unto
our assurance of Gods love of us in and for Christ. For it is of no less
importance, as being inseparably connexed therewith, and the ground and cause
thereof; and therefore, without Gods love of us for Christ his sake, we can
never be happy, and without assurance of it, we can never be comfortable.
Hereupon is it, that in the salutations prefixed unto most of Paul's epistles,
peace is made a sequel of grace from God our father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ. Without the grace of acceptance with the father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and also sense and apprehension thereof, no peace of conscience, no
serenity of spirit is to be expected. That man, that is doubtful of Gods love
in and for Christ, if his conscience be awak'ned, cannot but have a perpetual
tempest in his bosom: For he can apprehend God ^o otherwise then a consuming
fire; And such a consideration must needs beget unutterable horror. Our
Savior himself makes this assurance the scope of the revelation of Gods
goodness, and mercy, in the gospel, John. 17.26. And I have declared unto
them thy name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou have loved me
may be in them, and I in them. There be some that understand that clause, that
the love, wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, concerning the
extension, or termination of Gods love of Christ unto Believers, as a secondary
object; and they thus gloss the words: That thou may love them for my sake;
that thou may love them with that love, wherewith thou have loved me.
Believers are made by faith one body with Christ, and therefore cannot but
share in Gods love of Christ. If God love him, They cannot but be beloved in,
and for him; and therefore our Savior adds; and I in them: which is (says
Maldonate) because I am in them; to wit, as the head in the members. As if he
should have said: seeing I am in them, seeing I dwell in their hearts by faith,
so that I and they make but one body mystical, therefore thy love of me cannot
but be derived unto them. If thou love me, it is impossible thou should
hate them. This termination of Gods love of Christ unto Believers is in regard
of the fruits and effects of it, and so it is the same with it is presence of
influence on them. The body of the Sun is in the heavens, but the efficacy of
it reaches unto the lowest of the elements, the earth, causing on its surface
light, and warmth, and producing in the very bowels of it many rich metalls,
and minerals. Thus the love, wherewith God loves Christ, is in God himself,
if we speak of a presence of inherence, (taking the word largly, as it is
applicable unto any adjuncts, even such as the attributes of God are;) But it
is in all them that believe in regard of a presence of influence, and effective
presence: for it enlightneth, and comfort them, and produces in their
bosoms the precious gifts, and graces of the spirit. But now the love,
wherewith God loves Christ, is said to be in believers, not only in regard of
their participation, but also perception of it, not only effectively, in
regard of its effects, grace, and glory; but also objectively, in regard of an
objective, or intentionall presence, as it is the object of their knowledge,
apprehension, and assurance. And they never fully and truly know and apprehend
it, as they ought, but in the rebound, and by way of reflection, until they be
assured of it is being terminated unto, and reflected upon them; until as it is
Romans 5.5. the love of God be shed abroad in their hearts: until they have a
full sense and feeling of that love, wherewith God loves them in Christ:
until they have tasted that the Lord is good, and gracious unto them for
Christ, Psalm. 34.8. 1 Pet. 2.3. A practical, and experimental, full
knowledge then, and assurance of Gods love of Christ, implies in the result,
knowledge, and assurance of Gods love of us; so that they, who are doubtful,
and distrustful of Gods love of themselves, fall short in a due apprehension
of Gods love of Christ. The reason for this coherence of these two assurances
is the connection betwixt their objects, Gods love of Christ, and Gods love of
us. For 1. If we look upon the act of each, as considered in God, so they are
one and the same decree of election. Gods election of Christ, and his members,
are not different acts, a part rei; and a part rationis, in our manner or way
of conceiving, they are (as Dr Twisse often shows) coordinate and
simultaneous, as being parts of one formal complete decree de mediis. 2. If we
compare the fruits of each love, so the fruits or effects of God's love of us,
all the good we enjoy for the present, or expect for the future, depend upon
the effects of Gods love of Christ, the habitual grace of his humane nature,
the satisfaction and merit of his obedience, etc.

This assurance and feeling, that believers have of Gods love of Christ, and of
themselves for Christ, is amplified here from the cause, and from a concomitant
of it.

1. From the cause of it, manifestation of the name, and revelation of the arm
of the Lord, Isai. 53.1. I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare
it: that the love, wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them. By the name
of God is meant the Cyrilli interpretationem magis probo: nomen, hoc loco, pro
gloria positum esse, ut apud Solomonem, cum dicit, melius est nomen bonum, quam
divitiae multae. Hoc ita esse ex eo perspicuum est, quod pro eode^ accipiat
glorificare Patrem, id est, ejus declarare apud homines gloriam, and nomen ejus
hominibus manifestare. Continet ergo hoc loco nome^ Dei, quicquid in Deo
gloriosum, quicquid beneficum, quicquid hominibus salutare est, quale imprimis
fuit, quod ita mundum dilexerit, ut filium suum unigenitum daret, ut omnis qui
credit in eum, non pereat, sed habeat vitam aeternam. Maldonate.
glory of God, even as the name of men is taken for that credit, estimation,
and regard, which they are in. There is a glory of God, which the very
creatures declare, Psalm. 19.1. Romans 1.20. The glory of his power, wisdom, and
general love, as he is the creator, preserver, and governor of the world.
But now the glory, which is the name of the Lord, of which Christ here is the
revealer, is that of especial, saving and redeeming love and mercy, which
shines in the Gospel, and covenant of grace. The heavens and firmament
declare not so much glory, as the cross of Christ. What glory of God can be
co^parable unto his so loving the world, that lies in wickedness, as to give
for it his only begotten son, Joh. 3.16. And therefore this glory does most
eminently merit to be entitled his name. Well, you see the knowledge and sense
of Gods love of Christ, and of us in Christ, is the maine end and drift of
Christ's manifesting this name, this glory of God by his word and Spirit. And
therefore, we should give all diligence to make this love sure, to have a due
and deep taste and feeling of it, to have it shed abroad in our hearts. If
believers have not attained hitherto, they walk as yet below the revelation of
Gods name* and arm in the Gospel. But now the first manifestation of Gods
name, at our first conversion, will not serve the turn. I have declared unto
them thy name, and will declare it, etc. I have manifested it in their first
illumination, and I will manifest it in the further growth and progress of
their knowledge. Hence then we may observe, that to raise believers unto such
an height, as the due assurance of this love, there will be continual need of
new, fresh, farther, and fuller discoveries or manifestations of Gods name in
the Gospel. And therefore, let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all
wisdom, Col. 3.16. Watch daily at the gates of wisdom; waiting at the posts
of her doors, Prove. 8.34. Narrowness in the manifestations of Gods name is
ever followed with weakness, and feebleness in our assurance of his love.
They, to whom the arm of the Lord is revealed but in a small measure, may
presume much, but they know but little of the love, wherewith God loves
Christ, and his members.

2. We have this assurance of believers amplified from the concomitant of it,
growth in their union with Christ. That the love, wherewith thou have loved me,
may be in them, and I in them. The meaning of those last words, and I in them,
is, that I may dwell more and more in their hearts by faith. The increase of
our union with Christ is inseparably connexed with our assurance of Gods love
of us for Christ, as a necessary effect thereof; And this may serve both for
comfort and trial.

1. For Comfort: For what an unspeakable Comfort and advantage do believers
reap by their assurance, in that it thus promoteth their union with Christ, by
knowledge and assent, by love and adherence. It begets more clearenesse and
evidence in their knowledge of, more certainty in their assent unto the
promises of the Gospel: It works fullness in their love of, and firmness in
their adherence unto Christ, and so every way, in every regard, it knits, and
unites more closely unto him: and increase of our union with him enlarges our
communion with him, in all the blessings flowing therefrom, and depending
thereon.

2. This may serve for trial of the soundness and sincerity of believers
assurance of Gods love: wheresoever it is, there is a progress in their union
with Christ: he dwells more and more in their hearts by faith. He does not
only knock at the doors of their hearts, as a passenger, but he comes in unto
them, and makes his abode with them, Joh. 14.23. He dwells in them. He does not
only dwell in their tongues, and in their understandings; but he dwells in
their hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. He has his throne in their wills, and affections.
Those that grow in such an union as this with Christ, they have fruitfulness
for their character assigned by Christ himself, Joh. 15.5. He that abides in
me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. He in whom Christ has
his abode, is no barren professor, but is filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory, and praise of God,
Phil. 1.11.

2. Christ as a man was the subject of a fullness of grace. He had a twofold
grace, the grace of his favor toward us, the grace of his spirit in himself:
and of both there was in him a fullness.

A fullness 1 of the grace of his favor, love, and mercy toward us. The
Apostle ascribes unto him riches of this grace, and affirms, that therein he
has abounded unto us, Ephesians. 1.7,8. neither is this barely affirmed, but as
strongly confirmed from the effects, or fruits thereof, 1. In our
justification, In whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins, according
unto the riches of his grace, etc. both of which are plenary, Psalm. 130.7. In
him there is plenteous redemption. He will abundantly pardon, Isay 55.7. or he
will multiply to pardon, as it is in the margent. 2. In our vocation. In the
riches of his grace he has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence,
ver. 8. Thus also Romans 10.12. the Lord is said to be rich; to wit, in mercy,
love, and favor, Ephesians. 2.4. Unto all that call upon him. Where by Lord (says
Diodati) is meant Jesus Christ, who by his death and resurrection has gotten
himself a title over all men, to be their Lord and master, and to be the head
of the elect amidst all Nations. And he is said to be rich in the fruits and
effects thereof: For (as Calvin and Estius upon the place observe) rich is here
taken actively, for bountiful, liberal, or gracious. The bounty and
liberality of men may be disenabled by extensivenesse unto too many: but it
cannot be so with the grace, love, and favor of our Lord Jesus Christ, for he
has unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8. that cannot be impaired by
communicativenesse. He cannot be impoverished, though he be rich unto all that
call upon him.

This fullness of Christ's love is to the full displayed in the Song of Solomon,
and that both in the Churches confessions, and Christ's own professions of it.

1. In the Churches confessions of it, and that both to Christ, and others.

1. She makes a grateful acknowledgement of it unto Christ himself. Thy love
(says she) is better then wine, Cant. 1.2. Next, she celebrates, and reports
it unto others, chap. 3.9,10, King Solomon, that is, Christ, made him a
chariot; that is, framed, and assumed unto himself an humane nature, the midst
or innermost whereof, his heart, being paved with love of the daughters of
Jerusalem: that is, the elect of God, the children of Jerusalem, the mother of
us all. In Isay 49.16. Zion is said to be engraven upon the palms of his hand,
but here to be, as it were, written upon his heart. But as the heart signifies
inward love, so the arm of Christ signifies his outward manifestation of love
by helping, bearing, and supporting her in all her infirmities through his
power, Psalm. 77.15. and 89.10. Esa. 40.10,11. Ainsworth.
She was in his heart to live and dye for her, 2 Corin. 7.3. Again, chap.
7.10. His desire (says she) or desirous affection, is toward me. As it said
of the woman, Genesis 3.16. that her desire should be unto her husband.

Next, we have Christ's own profession of this great love of his unto his
Church. He terms her his love, his dove, his spouse, his sister, his beloved,
his friends, Chap. 5. v. 1. He acquaints her, that in expression of his love
unto her, he had endured much trouble, and misery for her. My head (says he)
is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, Chap. 5.2.

Unto the Churches confession, and Christ's own profession of this fullness of
love, we join also the Churches petition for it, Cant. 8.6. Set me as a seal
upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm. This was a prayer dictated unto,
and penned for the Church, by the Holy Ghost himself; and therefore, if she
put it up with faith and confidence, it cannot be successelesse. From it then
we may conclude, that the Church is very precious in Christ's esteem, graven as
the graving of a seal upon his heart. And this his estimate of her he will
manifest by wearing her as a signet upon his right hand. The high priest, Exodus
28. was to bear the names of the children of Israel engraven upon twelve
precious stones, and set in gold, in the breastplate of judgment, upon his
heart, when he goes in unto the holy place, for a memorial before the Lord
continually, verse. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 29.

Herein the exceeding and wonderful care and love of Christ unto his members
is plainly typified, and that in diverse particulars.

1. The names of the children of Israel were engraven upon twelve precious
stones, set in gold, to show, that the people of Christ are very dear and
precious unto him, as it were his jewels, and precious stones, Mal. 3.17.

2. Besides, there was curious art bestowed upon the engraving of these names.
It was like the engraving of a signet, ver. 21. And this might figure the
curiosity of Christ's workmanship in creating and engraving holiness, the image
of God, upon the spirits of his people, which far exceeded that which was
used in the framing of those glorious, and celestial bodies, the sun, moon,
and stars. And the curiosity of this his workmanship in the beautifying of
his members is a demonstration of his extraordinary affection unto them.

3. His care of them, and affection to them, is not only joint and general,
but particular and several, of one by one. Babington in locum.
The High priest was to have in his breast plate the twelve stones, with the
particular names of the Tribes.

4. Christ bears his members not only on his shoulders, verse. 12. by his
protection of them, and patience unto them; but in his breast and heart, by his
singular and most tender affection toward them. While he was here on earth his
heart was so set upon them, as that he shed his heart blood for them. And now
he is gone into the holy place: they are still upon, and in his heart; he is
still mindful of, and deeply sollicitous for promoting their salvation. He
even now rejoices in the habitable part of his earth: and there will never be
a period in his delights with the sons of men, Prove. 8.31. the twelve stones
are termed Exodus 25.7. lapides (...): that is, stones of fulnesses, or filling
stones. Perhaps (thinks Altingius loc. com. part. 2. page 1.) because the
breast plate was filled with them, and this might signify, that the breast, or
heart of Christ was even filled with his members, in regard the love of his
heart was fully placed upon them, more then on all the rest of the creatures.

5. The High Priest was to bear the names of the children of Israel for a
memorial before the Lord continually. And this might denote, that Christ is
ever mindful of his people. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she
should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea they may forget, yet
will not I forget thee, says the Lord Christ unto his Zion, Isay 49.15. Christ
remembers all his people, even when as man he sees them not. And this might
be imported by the High Priests bearing the names of the children of Israel
upon his two Quod vero spectat usum Ephod, seu amiculi, debuit reliquis
vestibus summi Sacerdotis superindui, and eidem pectorale inseri; and in
gemmis, quae humero aptarentur, habere nomina duodecim filiorum Israel, ut
significaret Christum Ecclesiam, ejusque membra omnia semper in memoria habere,
etiam obverso tergo, propter amorem ardentissimum, quo eos prosequitur, ac
propter ipsos coram Deo semper apparere. Heb. 7.16. Rivet. in locum
shoulders for a memorial, as well as on his breast plate, ver. 12. His heart
is toward them, when his face is not. I shall close all these testimonies with
that of the Apostle Paul, Ep. 3.18,19. then which no one place of Scripture
more fully expresses the transcendency of Christ's love unto us.

1. Verse. 18. He ascribes unto Christ's love one dimension more then
Naturalists attribute unto bodies, not only length, breadth, depth, but also
height. Dickson in locum.
Length, in regard of it is eternity: breadth, in respect of it is extent unto
all ages, and orders of men, unto the Catholic Church scattered over the face
of the whole earth: depth, in regard of it is condescension unto a deliverance
of us out of an abyss of sin and misery: Height, in regard of it is
exaltation of us unto an heavenly happiness. Aquinas, as Estius informs me,
thinks that the Apostle here alludeth unto Job. 11.8,9. It is as high as
heaven, what can thou do? Deeper then Hell, what can thou know? the
measure thereof is longer then the earth, and broader then the sea.

But now in verse. 19. we have this immensity of Christ's love set forth more
plainly: The love of Christ passes knowledge: that is, cannot be perfectly,
fully, and exactly known either by men or Angels. The Apostle (thinks Videri
potest Apostolus respice real Gnosticos, qui hoc superbo nomine sese
nuncupaverunt a scientia quam sihi peculiariter venditabant: utitur enim
vocabulo (...) unde (...). Atqui long majus est scire charitate^ Christi,
^pote quae universam Gnosticorum, omniumque Philosophorum scientiam excedit,
quia mysterium charitatis Christi, qua semetipsum pro nobis tradidit, in cor
hominis cujusquam non ascendit, sicut in genere de hujusmodi mysteriis
sapientiae Christianae testatur Apostolus, 1. Cor. 2.9.
Estius) seems to have regard unto the Gnostics, who called themselves by this
proud name, from that knowledge, which they pretended unto above others. To
take them off from this overweening conceit, the Apostle tells them, that the
love of Christ is so incomprehensible, as that it surpasses all the capacity
of our wits fully to conceive it in our minds; and therefore it is able to
puzzle and nonplus them, and all others, that vainly boast a knowledge of
dark and hidden mysteries.

Unto these testimonies I shall add two other arguments of the fullness of
Christ's love. 1. The freeness of it: And 2. the unmeasurablenesse of it is
fruits or effects.

1. The absolute freeness of it: It was neither for his advantage, as an end,
nor for our deservings, as a motive. He first loved us, 1 John 4.19. While we
were sinners Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. When we were enemies we were
reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, verse. 10.

As it is unmerited, so secondly, its fruits and effects, to wit, his purchase,
and application of our redemption, are unmeasurable by our understandings here
in this life.

1 His purchase of our redemption, not by corruptible things, as silver and
gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18,19. did so far
exceed humane reason, as that it became thereunto a rock of offense. Greater
love (says our Savior) has no man, then this, that a man lay down his life
for his friend, Joh. 15.13. But he himself has given us a greater expression
of his own love. He has laid down his life for enemies, for traitors and
rebels: and besides, this life, that he laid down, cannot be equalled by the
lives of the greatest of all the sons of men; For it was the life of the Son of
God, and therefore of peerless, and inestimable value, 1 John 3.16.

2. As for his application of our redemption, if we endeavor to search it unto
the bottom, it will be found far to surmount humane reach. Is not the
original of it, our election, one of the most mysterious points in all
Divinity? are not the parts of it, vocation, justification, adoption,
sanctification, glorification, all matters of perplexed difficulty? Alas how
endless, and intricate are the disputes of most learned Theologues, touching
their nature, order, and distinction. And we should but flatter our selves, to
expect a decision of these disputes fully and clearly satisfactory, as long as
we remain clothed with corruptible flesh.

To make now some brief application of this fullness of Christ's love unto us.

1. It yields abundant consolation unto all true believers. That may be said of
them, which was prophesied of Naphtali, Deuteronomy. 33.23. They shall be satisfied
with favor, and full of the blessing of the Lord. The earth is full of the
goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 33.^5. Therefore much more the Church. Riches of
patience, long suffering, and forbearance, are extended unto vessels of wrath,
Romans 9.22. Romans 2.4. therefore undoubtedly the Divitias gloriae pro
gloriofissimas, Hebraismus. Pareus.
riches of glory; that is, glorious grace, or the most glorious riches of
grace, Romans 9.23. shall be heaped and poured upon vessels of mercy. If Christ,
as a private person, out of Charity unto the humane nature, as Dr Twisse.
some hold, did commiserate the impenitent Jews, and wept over them, Luke
19.41. O then what yearning of bowels, what tenderness of compassion is there
in him by virtue of his office, as he is mediator, toward those, whom his
father has given him. If our hearts be sad, and disconsolate, our spirits
weary, wounded, and heavy laden with the sense of sin. Why Christ's love
(says the Church) is better then wine, Cant. 1.2. Wine is a very comfortable
creature, making glad the heart, Psalm. 104.15. and the life merry: It makes
the needy and those that are of heavy heart to forget their poverty, and
remember their misery no more, Prove. 31.6,7. and therefore may very well by a
synecdoche, be put for all worldly delights. The words then may be thus
paraphrased; Thy love is sweeter, more comfortable, pleasant, and rejoicing the
heart, then the choicest of earthly pleasures. If we are assailed by our
Corruptions within, by temptations, afflictions, and persecutions without, why
Christ's love is a banner over us, animating us to quit our selves as becomes
the soldiers of the Lord of Hosts: for the use of a banner, standard, or
ensign is, as to draw and keep soldiers togeither, Isay. 5.26. and 11.10. So
also to encourage them, Psalm, 60.4. thou have given a banner to them that fear
thee; that it may be displayed, because of the truth. If the great men of the
world be averse from us, slight, and contemn us, it matters not, Christ's
desire is unto us, Can. 7.10. He will put us as a seal upon his heart, and his
arm, Can. 8.6. Though we have but little favor with the world, we have a
fullness of favor, riches of grace, with Christ. We should not be discouraged
at the unspeakable, and implacable malice, and hatred of our rageing
persecutors, as long as we have an unexpressible, and incomprehensible love of
Christ to oppose unto it. We should not be dismayed at the depth's of Satan's
envy, and malignity, Revel. 2.24. For in Chri'sts love there are all
dimensions. We should not afflict our selves for our poverty, meannesse of
birth, and calling, and the like outward abasures: For none of them exclude
from the grace of Christ. He is rich unto all that call upon him; We should not
therefore despair of pardon, though guilty of many and great enormities. For
Christ's love passes knowledge, the comprehension of men, or Angels; and
therefore hides, covers, nay quite burieth a multitude of sins, All the
sins of believers.

But now that profane persons may not abuse this comfortable doctrine of the
fullness of Christ's love, I shall desire you to take notice of the character,
that the Scripture gives of those, unto whom it is appropriated. The riches of
his Glory: that is, glorious grace is made known only on vessels of mercy,
Romans 9.23. and vessels of mercy are vessels unto honor, sanctified, and meet
for the masters use, and prepared unto every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21. The Lord
Jesus Christ is rich in mercy, but it is only unto those, that call upon him,
to wit, out of an unfeigned faith, and undissembled love, Romans 10.12. that have
a Spirit of prayer, and supplication powered upon them.

2. From this fullness of Christ's love we may be exhorted unto three duties, 1.
Thankfulness for it. 2. A diligent study, and 3. a careful imitation of it.

1. Thankfulness for it. We will remember thy love more then wine, (says the
Church unto Christ, Cant. 1.4.) But she has a thankful tongue, as well as
heart; as she remembers it inwardly in her self, so with joy and triumph she
outwardly publishes, and manifests it unto others. chap. 2. chap. 3. chap.
7. And this her recognition, and commemoration of Christ's love, is not in a
formal, dull, cold, and unpracticall way: for it has such an impression upon
her heart, as that it makes her even sick with the love of him, Cant. 2.5. It
begets in her a love of a most powerful and unconquerable influence. It is a
love as strong as death, Cant. 8.6. that is, it is as forcible, and
irresistible, trampling upon, and breaking through all difficulties, that
occurr in performance of duties unto, or undergoing of sufferings for Christ.
This love is inflamed into jealousy, and this jealousy is as cruel, or hard as
the Grave, ibid. that is, as inexorable unto all the enemies of Christ, unto
her most profitable and pleasant sins, her darling and most indulged lusts.
This love is for its intensivenesse, motion upwards unto heaven, and
consumptive efficacy, compared unto fire, ibid. The coals thereof are as
coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame.

1. Fire is the hottest of elements. So the Churches love of Christ is more
solidly intense, then her love of any creature whatsoever. She is as it were
all in a fire with the love of him.

2. The motion of fire is upwards toward heaven. The love of Christ is as a
fiery Chariot, whereby a soul is carried up unto heaven.

3. Fire burns all things combustible. So love of Christ consumes all a man's
corruptions. And whereas elementary fire may be quenched, the love of Christ is
a celestial flame. Many waters cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown
it, Cant. 8.7. It cannot be extinguished, or abated by calamities.

And in the last place it is so sincere, and incorrupt, as that it cannot be
bribed by any treasure. If a man would give all the substance of his house for
love, it would utterly be contemned, ib. If your love of Christ reach not this
height we have described, it comes short of a due gratitude: we are unthankful
for Christ's fullness of love, if it be not as a loadstone to attract from us a
love of him with all our hearts, souls, and might. In the language of the
Scripture we are utterly forgetful of Christ's love, if it do not constrain
unto duty, and restrain from sin. We despise the riches of Christ's goodness,
grace and bounty, forbearance and long-suffering, if it do not lead us unto a
strict and severe repentance.

2. The fullness of Christ's love may provoke unto a most diligent study of it.
It is an inexhaust fountain, an unfathomeable ocean, a bottomless and
unsearcheable mine. There is therefore more then enough in it to satisfy the
restless inquiries of those, that are most curious and thirsty after
knowledge. In Ephesians. 3.13,16,17,18. There be 4. Motives unto this study of
Christ's love. 1. The comprehensivenesse, 2. the incomprehensiblenesse of this
love, 3. The subject, and 4. the influence of the knowledge thereof.

1. The comprehensivenesse of the Love of Christ: It takes in all the Paulus
nihil per istas dimensiones intelligit, quam Christi charitatem, de qua
continuo post significans, eum, cui vere and perfect cognita est, undequaque
sapere ae si diaeisset, quaqua^versum respiciant homines, nihil reperient in
salutis doctrina, quod non huc referendum sit. Continet enim una Christi
dilectio omnes sapientiae numeros, ideo quo facilior sit sensus, ita resolvi
debent verba: ut valeatis comprehendere Christi dilectionem, quae est
longitudo, latitudo, profunditas and al^tudo sapientiae nostrae: hoc est, tota
perfectio. Similitudinem enim sumit a Mathematicis, ut a partibus totum
desig^et. Quoniam hic omnium fere communis est morbus rerum inutilium studio
ardere, utilis valle est ista admonitio: quod scire nobis expediat, and quid
Dominus considerare nos velit, sursum, deorsum, ad dextram and sinistram, a
front and a tergo. Dilectio Christi nobis proponitur, in cujus meditatione nos
exerceamus dies ac noctes: and in quam nos quasi demergamus. Hanc unam qui
tenet satis habet: extra eam nihil est solidum, nihil utile, nihil ^enique
rectum aut sanum. Circumeas licet coelum, terras, maria: non altius
transcendes, quin legitimum sapiendi finem transilias, Calvin. in Ephesians 3. v.
18.
dimensions, the length, breadth, depth and height of spiritual wisdom, all
the objects of saving knowledge, which are some way or other reducible unto it.
And hereupon that great Doctor of the Gentiles resolved to study privately, and
to preach publicly nothing, but what did some way or other refer unto that
great expression of Christ's love, his death upon the cross, 1 Cor. 2.2. I
determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. Indeed Christ's love is the epitome, and center, the fulfilling of
both Law and Gospel, Romans 13.8. it was out of love, that he performed the
duties, and sufferd the penalties of the law for us. It is out of love, that he
has revealed and will accomplish the promises of the Gospel unto us.

A second motive unto the study of the love of Christ is the
incomprehensiblenesse of it. It passes knowledge; and therefore though we
arrive unto never so great a degree in our knowledge of the love of Christ, yet
still there will be a terra incognita, place for new and farther discoveries.
Christ's love is a structure of vast, indeed infinite, extent: It is as it is
said of God, Job. 11.8,9. As high as heaven, deeper then hell, larger then the
earth, and broader then the sea: and therefore impossible we should exactly
measure it in all these dimensions. However let us labor to measure it as
exactly as we can, that we may comprehend so much of the length, breadth,
depth, and height thereof, as is discoverable by the saints here in this life.
The love of Christ then, is a most spacious object for contemplation, in the
meditation of which, we may exercise our selves day and night, and into which
(to use the expression of Calvin) nos quasi demergamus, we may as it were
plunge our selves over head and ears, as into an ocean, that has no bottom.

A third motive in this place is from the proper, and adequate subject of this
knowledge, That ye may be able to comprehend with all Saints, etc. The
knowledge of Christ's love is the privilege of the saints; common unto all
believers: and withal, it is so proper and peculiar unto them, as that it
belongs unto none, but saints. If thou have an effectual, and applicative
knowledge, though but in a remiss degree, of the transcendent love of Christ,
thou art then a saint: and if thou art a gracious faint here on earth, thou
may be confident, that thou shall be a glorious saint in heaven. But now if
on the other side, thou live and dyest in ignorance, or merely in a
notionall, or uneffectuall knowledge of the love of Christ, thou can have no
evidence of thy saintship. And if thou art not a saint here, thy portion will
be with damned Fiends and Devils in hell hereafter.

A fourth motive is the influence of the knowledge of Christ's love, and that
is 1. preservative from fainting in tribulations here. 2. preparative for the
allfulnesse of God in heaven hereafter.

1. Preservative from fainting in tribulation here. And this may be gathered
from comparison of these verses with the foregoing. For verse. 13. The Apostle
dehorts them from fainting at the news of his troubles. I desire that you
faint not at my tribulation for you, and in the following verses, he backs
this dehortation with a most humble, and fervent petition, the preface unto
which we have verses. 14, 15. for this cause I bow my knee unto the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. The matters, or things petitioned for are three, 1.
Corroboration, and confirmation by the spirit of God, verse. 16. that he would
grant you according unto the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might
by his spirit in the inner man.

2. A further union with Christ verse. 17. and 3. which belongs unto our
purpose, a practical, and experimental apprehension of the love of Christ,
that ye may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge, etc. 18, 19.

By this coherence, you see, that a feeling and efficacious knowledge of
Christ's love, and the dimensions thereof, will embolden and hearten the saints
in their own and others troubles, and as a sovereign cordial keep them from
all despondency and sinking of spirit.

A second branch of its influence is preparative for the all fulness of God,
verse. 19. I bow my knees unto the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, verse. 14.
that ye may be able to comprehend, etc. and to know the love of Christ, etc.
that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God verse. 18, 19: that is,
with a full knowledge of God in the beatificall vision, the full image of God,
a full participation of the divine nature, a full union with, and fruition of
God, full, and immediate influences from God, according unto that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.28. God shall be all in all: that is, in all the elect, he
shall be vice omnium, instead of all ordinances unto their souls, instead of
all means and helps unto their bodies.

And I saw no temple therein, for the Lord God almighty, and the Lamb, are the
Temple of it. And the city had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to
shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof, Revel. 21.22,23. The meaning of the place is, that God shall
immediately by himself, supply the efficiency of all second causes whatsoever.

Before I leave these words, I shall out of them direct unto a cause of the
knowledge of the love of Christ; to wit, to be rooted, and grounded in love,
verse. 17. that is, either in our assurance of Gods love in Christ unto us, or
else in the habit of our love unto God, and Christ. I bow my knees unto the
father, etc. that ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to
comprehend and know the love of Christ, etc. They which are rooted, and
grounded in love, are able to reach the dimensions of Christ's love, to know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge. etc.

A full and firm assurance of Gods love in Christ unto us, and our firm and
constant love of God and Christ, will put us upon a most industrious search
after all the secrets of Christ's love unto our souls. Whereas on the other
side, those that either despair or doubt of that love of God and Christ; as
also those that have but faint affections, and inconstant desires toward them;
all such make but a very slow progress in the study and knowledge of Christ's
love.

The last exhortation is unto an imitation of this fullness of love. Walk in
love (says the Apostle) as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself
for us an offering, and a sacrifice unto God, etc, Ephesians. 5.2. In which words
we have, 1. An exhortation unto the duty of love: walk in love. 2. A direction
unto a pattern, whereunto we must conform our selves in performance of this
duty.

1. As for the exhortation: it is observed by the solid and judicious Zanchy,
that it is not barely to love, but to walk in love: that is, to pass the
whole course of our life, to spend all our days in the fruits and offices of
love, so that all our actions flow from love, be mana^d in love, and end in
love.

2. The Apostle directs us to conform our selves herein unto Christ's love of
us. Walk in love, as Christ has loved us. There be four things especially,
wherein our love of our brethren should be conformable unto Christ's love of us.
1. Constancy. 2. Freeness. 3. Selfe-denyall and humility. 4. Reality of
expressions.

1. Constancy. As God, he has loved us from everlasting. Prove. 8.30. As man,
he loves his own in the world unto the end, John. 13.1. That is, for ever.
Our love of our Brethren should therefore be perpetual, and not be altered,
interrupted, or abated by their petty unkindnesses, much less by the greatest
and most miserable change of their outward condition. Prove. 17.17.

2. Freeness. He died for the ungodly, and for sinners, Romans 5.6,8. He loved
us in the very height of our rebellion. How did he weep over Jerusalem, and
bemoane its sad fate, though it were a place replenisht with persons, that
breathed nothing but hostility against him? Luke 19.41,42. etc. And at his
death how fervently prayed he for the pardon of his rageing and insulting
crucifyers? Luke 23.34. If we will walk by this pattern of Christ's love, we
must exercise some love unto the most impious and undeserving wretches
imaginable. We must love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to
them that hate us, and pray for them which despitefully use us, and persecute
us, Math. 5.44.

3. Our love must be conformable unto Christ's love, in the selfe-denyall and
humility of it. 2 Cor. 8.9. Phil. 2.5,6,7,8. His love was so humble, as that it
condescended unto the very washing of his disciples feet, John. 13. We must so
far deny our selves in our love, as to show it, though it make nothing unto
our advantage, nay though it make much unto our disadvantage, though it be with
the hazard of peace, reputation, wealth, and in some cases, of life. We must
stoop unto the lowest and meanest offices of love, especially to promote the
good of souls.

Lastly, we should imitate Christ's love in the reality of its expressions. He
went about all his life doing good, Act. 10.38. and at last sacrificed (...)
life for us, and therefore we should love not in word, neither in tongue, but
in deed and in truth, 1 Ioh. 3.18. Iam. 2.15,16. There should be a labor, and
work of our love, 1 These. 1.3. Heb. 6.10. that is, our love should be
laborious and working, ministering unto the saints. Christ's love was so
liberal, as that he gave himself, his blood, his life, his soul for us, and
he communicates unto us the satisfaction and merit of his sufferings, the
graces of his spirit, and all his communicable prerogatives. There should be
likewise such a frank disposition in our love, as that we should impart what
we hold dearest, for the good of Gods Church and people. We should lay down
our lives for some brethren, 1 John 3.16. Thus Aquila and Priscilla for the
life of Paul laid down their own necks, Romans 16.3,4. Christ expressed his
love in forgiving those that offend, as well as in giving those that want. He
forgiveth us ten thousand talents, infinite treasons and rebellions, we should
not therefore be inexorable unto our brethren for a debt of an hundred pence,
Math. 18. from verse 24. unto the end of the chapter.

I proceed unto the second fullness of grace, that dwells and inhereth in
Christ's humanity: The fullness of the grace of the spirit, which shall be by
me with all possible brevity, and plainness 1. explained and cleared. 2.
confirmed. 3. applied.

1. For explication. In the words of the Apostle, under this sense, we have an
adjunct, grace, set forth unto us 1. By its extent, and excellency. 2. By its
subject. 3. By its inhesion in that subject. 4. By its cause and original.

1. The extent and excellency of it is expressed in two several gradations: It
was 1. A fullness. 2. An all-fulnesse of grace.

2. Its subject was Christ's humane nature; in him, that is, in Christ as man.

3. We have the inhesion of this adjunct, grace, in this subject, him,
dwells. Of which term I conceive choice is made, to denote, that this
all-fulnesse was in Christ after a permanent and fixed manner: it dwelled in
him. Suitable to which expression is that of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 11. ver.
2. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him. Vbi verbum requiescit,
(says Suarez) ibi indicat permanentiam per modum habitus. The word rest
signifies the permanency and constancy of abode, that the spirit was to make
in him: it was habitually to rest in him.

4. Lastly, we have the cause of all, of all this fullness dwelling in him, the
decree of the father. It pleased the father that in him should all fullness
dwell. Christ owed it not either to his own, or others merits, but solely to
the free purpose and independent pleasure of heaven. Indeed the word father is
not found in the Original, yet it is understood, and therefore rightly
supplied by Erasmus, who herein is followed by the best translations. All that
I shall say in farther unfolding these words, as understood of Christ's
habitual grace, shall be in giving satisfaction unto these two questions.

1. What is meant by this fullness of grace in Christ?

2. How an all-fulnesse of grace can be said to be in his humane nature?

1. What is meant by this fullness of grace in Christ? Antonius Delphinus upon
John 1.14. puts a difference between these two expressions: To be full of
grace; and to have the fullness of grace. A river, nay a pit, or pond, the
least vessel or measure may be full of water; only a fountain, the sea has
in it a fullness of water. A starr, a beam, nay a glass enlightened by the
Sun, may be full of light; only the Sun has in it the fullness of light. Even
so diverse of the saints, the virgin Mary, John the Baptist, Zacharias,
Elizabeth, and Stephen, are in Scripture said to be full of the holy Ghost and
grace; full as vessels, as streams: full as stars, as beams. But Christ
only had in him the fullness of grace: he was full of grace as a fountain, as
a sea, as a sun. He was not only full of grace, but the fullness of grace
dwelled in him: so that in his grace there was an all sufficiency, an
indeficiency.

1. An all sufficiency: sufficient it was for ornament unto himself, and for
influence upon others. He had so much, as was requisite for the dispensation of
all his offices, and for transacting all businesses belonging to his Church,
and as was necessary for his filling up all the emptiness of grace, expelling
all the fullness of sin, and supplying all the defects, and wants possible in
his members.

2. An indeficiency: It will never fail. Chrysostom in the beginning of his
13. Homily upon the first of John, illustrates this by the examples of a sea,
and a fountain of fire: You cannot exhaust the sea, though you draw as much
water out of it as you can; Though never so many rivers run out of the sea,
yet will it never be drawn dry. Even so though all the saints, that were,
are, or shall be, either did, do, or shall receive of his fullness, yet will
he never be emptied, never the less full for all that. The utmost that we
receive, is but (...), as a small drop in comparison of a botomlesse abyss,
and boundless sea. But Chrysostom thinks this similitude not sufficient to
set out the fullness of Christ's grace: because if we take but a drop of the
sea, it makes some diminution, though it be unsensible, and undiscernable.
Whereas the fountain of grace in Christ cannot be lessened in the least
degree, though it be never so much communicated. (...). This similitude being
defective, he proceeds unto another. (...); etc. Suppose there were a fountain
of fire; if you light never so many lamps or candles thereat, you could
diminish nothing therefrom, but still it would be as full of fire as before.
Even so what measures and portions soever of his spirit and grace Christ
dipenseth unto any, he is not a jot impaired thereby; but he has still a
plentiful remainder, nay an all-sufficient, an indeficient fulness, an
inexhaustible fountain, unemptible treasures, an overflowing redundancy of
spirit and grace.

Fullness of grace, as Aquinas notes, qu. 7. art. 10. may be taken either with
regard unto the subject, him, that has grace; or else with regard unto grace
it self; and so it is nothing else, but the perfection, and excellency of
grace.

1. With regard unto the subject of grace, him that has it, with regard either
unto his office, place, and condition requiring, or else capacity receiving
grace.

1. There is a fullness of grace, considered in respect of the condition and
state of the subject, or party that has grace. When one has it fully,
perfectly, and sufficiently, according to his state and condition, to the
utmost bound that God has perfixt to them of such a condition: and in all the
virtue and efficacy of it, in that it extends to the performance of all
things, any ways appertaining to the condition, office or state, of such as
are of his place, and rank. And such a fullness we have ascribed unto many of
the saints, unto the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.28. unto John Baptist Luke 1.15. and
unto his mother Elizabeth, verse. 41. unto his father Zacharias, verse. 67. and
unto Stephen, Act. 6.8. chapter 7.55. All these had grace full, and enough for that
place and condition, to which God had appointed them. Thus the Romans are said
to be full of goodness, and filled with all knowledge, Romans 15.14. Full after a
sort, full with such a fullness, as is proportionate unto the Age of Childhood,
in which we here live. This fullness may be greater or lesser according to the
various places, which those unto whom is is distributed, bear in the Church,
according to the several exigences and measures either of their condition in
themselves, or of their service in the Church. For the effusion of the spirit
of holiness is likened in scripture to the pouring forth of an ointment. Now
no ointment at the skirts or edges of a garment, does run so fresh and full
as on the upper parts. Upon the upper parts there is more conferred, the
measure of the Bishop Andrews.
Ephah, double portions of the spirit. John Baptist, Christ's precursor, must be
filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers womb. The blessed Virgin, the
sacred vessel of his incarnation, must have grace in greater fullness, then
other mortals. But now upon the edges, and skirts of Christ's garment, Christ's
body, the lowest rank of his members, there is conferred less, the measure of
the Hin, single portions of the Spirit. Unto every one is dispensed grace
sufficient, sufficient for themselves, sufficient for, full and adequate unto
that work, and employment, unto which they are designed.

2 Fullness of grace may be taken with regard unto the subjects capacity of
receiving it: So the word fullness carries our conceit to place and measure,
from whence it is borrowed, In which fullness is nothing but a commensuration
of the things, or bodies contained, unto them containing: Even so in Christ, a
fullness of grace is the adequation of grace unto his capacity, his power of
receiving grace. As a place or measure is then said to be full of a thing, when
it has as much of it, as it can hold: So Christ is said to be full of grace,
in that he has received so much grace, as his capacity would contain no more.
There is a twofold capacity of a subject to receive an accident, one natural;
another obedientiall. A natural capacity toward Grace Christ's soul had not,
seeing grace is altioris ordinis, of a rank and order above nature. As for the
obedientiall capacity of his soul to receive grace, that is nothing else, but
the being of his soul considered as not repugnant to grace. And according to
it his soul was capable of so much grace, as implied not a contradiction
thereunto. This capacity the Scotists think that God filled up unto the brimme,
so that if he should stretch, nay rack his power unto the utmost, he could not
possibly pour into the soul of Christ one, the least drop, degree of grace
more, then it was possessed of already: not out of any deficiency in the divine
power, but merely for want of room (as I may so speak) in the limited and
stinted capacity of the soul to receive it. Now the Thomists on the other side
hold, that their adversaries in thus determining, do little better then
over-saucily narrow, and limit the divine omnipotency. And for their own parts
thus resolve it, That God in the infusion of grace into Christ's soul, did fill
up its capacity so far as it could be filled in reference only unto Gods
ordinary, not absolute power. And if I be not mistaken, there is more
moderation in their opinion, then in that of their adversaries: For that
Christ's grace was by Gods absolute power capable of farther intension, they
make good ex part gratiae, ex part efficientis, ex part subjecti, ex part
objecti.

1. Then ex part gratiae: Grace is forma intensibilis, a form that has
degrees: and it is finite, and therefore capable of a farther intensive
enlargement.

2. Ex part efficientis. God is absolutely omnipotent; and therefore able to
produce whatsoever implies not a contradiction. Now the increase of a finite
grace in point of degrees implies no contradiction.

3. Ex part subjecti. The grace of Christ is received in the obedientiall
capacity of his humanity; and according unto that, his humanity was capable of
whatsoever measure of grace God could produce.

Lastly ex part objecti. The greatest measure of grace can never be adequate,
or commensurate unto the object of grace, God, who is cognoscibilis, amabilis,
and participabilis in infinitum.

Before I proceed unto the third acception of the fullness of grace, I must
remove an objection out of my way. It may be objected, that it were not an
endowment sufficient to qualify Christ for the relation of headship, to have so
much grace, as would fill his capacity. His capacity might be but narrow, and
so though he had as much grace, as he could receive, yet he might not have
much, in that he might not be able to receive much. A small vessel may be full
of any liquor, and yet contain no great quantity of it. Even so might Christ
be full of grace in this sense, and yet have no great measure of grace.

Unto this some answer, that the humane nature in virtue of that most intimate
association of the natures, divine and humane in one person, had it is capacity,
it is power of receiving grace, enlarged as much as might be: So that by means
hereof it became larger, then the capacity of all the Angels in heaven,
comprehensive of more grace then they; nay, far wider then it would have
been, if it had not been joined, or then it would be, if it should be
disjoined from the person of the word. But this is an opinion that Quod Bonav
and Ricard. affirmant, quamounque puram creaturam, sive Angelum, sive
rationalem animam, esse capacem gratiaeusque ad certum gradum, ita ut de
potentia absoluta non possit recipere majorem; and nihilcminus animam Christi
unitam verbo fact am esse capaciorem intenfioris gratiae, quam esse possit in
aliqua pura creatura, and in ipsamet animae Christi, si non esset unita verbo,
hoc enim and fine fundamento dictum est, and nullo-modo intelligi potest: nam
licet congruentia ad recipiendam majorem gratiam possit esse major ratione
unionis, sicus and capacitas proxima, quae est per actum, vel dispositionem
propriam, augeri possit ( ut loquitur D. Thom. 2 a. 2 ae. q. 24 art.) 7. tamen
capacitas remota, and quasi fundamentalis, quae est in natura ipsa, nec
crescere potest, nec mutari, quia haec nihil aliud est, quam entitas naturae
cui talis perfectio non repugnat. Et deinde multo minus intelligi potest, quod
per unionem augeatur, cum verbum ipsum nec possit concurrere per modum
potentiae passivae ad suscipiendam gratiam, nec aliquo modo immutet ipsam
animam secundum entitatem naturalem ejus, ut capaciorem illam faciat, and
gratia haec non aliter inhaereat illi animae, quam si per se esset separata.
Add, quod si illa anima capacior fieret per unionem, sicut unio eft infinita,
ita illa capacitas infinite augeretur, ergo vel haberet illa anima infinitam
gratiam, vel certe posset in illa gratia in infinitum augeri, quod isti autores
non concedunt.
Suarez in tertiam part. Thomae disp. 22. s. 2. Censures for groundless and
senseless. He confesses, that by union of both natures in one person, the
congruity for the humanity to receive from the divine nature a larger measure
of grace, is much increased. Meeter it is, that from the Deity there should be
a communication of a greater measure of grace unto that nature, in which the
fullness of it dwells bodily, then unto another, not linkt unto it in so
near, and close a tie. And then farther, he does not deny but that by the
conjunction of the manhood with the divine person and nature, the more near,
and immediate capacity of the soul, to receive grace, may be much enlarged.
Seeing that even is us, our hearts, by the habit's and exercise of our proper
graces, are wonderfully dilated, and opened, as it were, made more
comprehensive, able to receive more grace, then otherwise. By Solomon's Wisdom
and understanding the largeness of his heart was even as the sand, that is on
the sea shore, 1 Kings 4.29. I will run the way of thy commandments when thou
shall enlarge my heart, Psalm. 119.32. to wit, by holiness, and
sanctification. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is
enlarged, 2 Corinthians. 6.11. to wit, by love, and affection. But now as for the
remote, obedientiall, and as it were the fundamental capacity of the soul
toward grace, of which the patrons of the forementioned opinion only speak,
how the union should stretch, and widen that, he cannot conceive. For that
being undistinguished from the very nature, and being of the soul; indeed
being nothing else, but the soul it self, considered as compatible with
grace, how can it possibly admit either of change, or increase. Equal it is,
alike large in all reasonable and intellectual creatures, and is not to be
measured by any natural or supernatural perfection of its subject, but is of
it self indifferent unto the receipt of any kind, or degree of grace,
consistent with the finite, and created being of an intellectual nature.

Not resting therefore in this unsatisfying answer, we will in the next place
show, how that in Chist there was a fullness of grace, not only in regard to
his capacity, his power of receiving it, but also in respect of Aliquando
plenitudo significateximiam aliquam perfectionem gratiae, quae adaequet statum,
vel munus, aut dignitatem suscipientis. Plenum enim proprie dicitur, quod
tantum habet, quantum capere potest, and ad bunc modum plenus gratia dicitur,
Qui habet eximiam aliquam gratiam proportionalam dignitati, vel muneri, in quo
a Deo constitutus est, and haec plenitudo, cum respectiva fit, potest esse
multiplex, and major vel minor, juxta veritatem statuum, vel dignitatum, cum
quibus fit comparatio, and hoc modo alia est plenitudo B. Virginis, alia Johan.
Baptistae, etc. omnis vero haec plenitudo est respectiva, and secundum quid,
Christi vero plenitudo, est plenitudo simpliciter, quia licet gratiae Christi,
plenitudo etiam fuerit proportionata dignitati personae, and unionis, tamen
quia illa dignitas personae erat suprema omnium, and eminenter omnes alias
continens, ideo talis plenitudo respectiva in plenitudinem simpliciter
redundavit. Et hinc etiam factum est, ut haec plenitudo fit quanta esse potest,
non tantum ex part objecti, sed etiam ex part formae, quia scilicet in
Christo pervenit gratia ad totam intentionem, and perfectionem, quam secundum
se habere potest, saltem secundum legem ordiuariam. Suarez. in tertiam part.
Thomae disp. 22. sect. 2. page 395.
grace it self. And such a fullness I am sure is sufficient to constitute him
head of the Church. What it is, Aquinas tells us page 3. quaest. 7. Art. 10. Ex
part quidem ipsius gratiae dicitur esse plenitudo gratiae. Ex eo quod aliquis
pertingit ad summum gratiae, and quantum ad essentiam, and quantum ad virtutem.
In respect of grace it self, there is a fullness of grace, when one attaineth
to the highest top, and utmost pitch of grace in the essence, and virtue of it,
intensively, and extensively. And such a fullness and perfection of grace was
in Christ: A fullness of extent, a fullness of degrees, a fullness of virtue.

1. In Christ's grace there was a fullness of extent, a perfection, or fullness
of parts. He had grace in the greatest extension, according to every sort, and
kind of grace. No grace, whether of edification, or sanctification, but was in
him, if taken according to the whole compass, and latitude of it is object, and
acts. Although perhaps under some particular denomination, and in reference to
some one of its imperfect acts, it may not fitly be ascribed to him. I could
exemplify my self by instancing in faith, hope, fear and the like: But I must
hasten.

In his grace 2. There was a fullness of degrees. He had grace, as far forth,
as it may be had in the greatest excellency and intension, according to every
degree of grace. The Spirit was not given by measure unto him, John 3.34.

And 3. There was in his grace a fullness of Vertus. He had grace unto all
effects, and purposes, whereunto grace does, or can extend it self. Grace in
him was a ground of merit, and satisfaction, a cause of grace in others: It
rendered his humane nature, and actions, well pleasing to the pure eye of
heaven, and communicated unto his soul such a gracious, holy, and heavenly
being, such a transcendent beauty, and unmatchable perfection, as far
surpassed the united, and cumulated perfections of all the Angels in heaven.
Now this fullness of grace in respect of grace it self, in respect of its
extent, measure, or degrees, virtue or efficacy, was proper to Christ,
agreeable unto none besides him. For the dwelling of it in Christ, our Apostle
brings as an argument to prove him head of the Church, and of that it were
not a good argument, had it not been adequate unto the head of the Church, had
it agreed unto any other.

And let this suffice concerning the first question, what is meant by the
fullness of grace in Christ? It is nothing else you have heard, but an
adequation of his grace unto his offices, that require it, a commensuration of
his grace unto his capacity receiving it, the perfection of his grace in
respect of extent, degrees, and virtue.

The 2. Question is, how an all-fullnesse of grace may be said to be in
Christ's humane nature? An all fullness is an infinite fullness; Even as an all
sufficiency is an infinite sufficiency. Now the fullness of grace in Christ's
humane nature is not, cannot be infinite. For God created all things in
measure, number, and weight, Wisd. 11.20. And the grace of Christ is a created
quality, inherent in his soul, a creature too: therefore finite it must needs
be.

For answer. All-fulnesse may be understood, either absolutely and simply, or
else only secundum quid, after a sort, in such a kind: An all-fulnesse of
grace, absolutely, and simply such, cannot be in the manhood of Christ: For
that is nothing else, but an infiniteness of grace, which (we know) is proper
to the Godhead: Now the manhood by being personally united to the Godhead, is
not annul'd, nor essentially changed. Upon this union there follows no
confusion between the natures, or transfusion of the properties from one
nature to another. In Christ's humane nature therefore there dwelled
all-fulnesse of grace, only secundum quid, after a sort, in such a kind. All
the fullness of grace that was, that could be found in a creature, at least in
reference unto Gods ordinary power; Secundum definitionem divinae sapientiae,
as Aquinas resolves it, p. 3. q. 7. art. 12. that is (if I understand his
language) to the uttermost bound, that the divine wisdom, which has ordered
all things in measure, has prefixed to the grace of intellectual creatures.
Even as the light of the Sun is the greatest, that God has decreed unto the
Luminaries of heaven: And the heat of fire is the most intense, which God has
designed unto elementary bodies. The Scotists are not content with this, but
say farther, that the degree of Christ's grace was unpassable even by Gods
absolute power, which opinion, as the Thomists suppose, shortneth the hand of
the Almighty, detracteth from the infiniteness of his power, at least in
reference toward the production, and augmentation of grace; As if in pouring
grace into the soul of Christ, it were quite exhausted.

One thing more I shall entreat you to observe out of Aquinas. p. 3. q. 7.
art. 11. where he distinguishes of a twofold consideration of the habitual
grace of Christ. Potest (says he) dupliciter considerari, uno modo, secundum
quod est quoddam ens, alio modo secundum propriam rationem gratiae, etc. The
grace of Christ may be considered two manner of ways, either in regard of its
being, as it is a thing, a quality, or else according to the nature of Grace.

1. In regard of its being, as it is a thing, a quality, so it may be in some
sense said to be infinite: Because in the nature of grace it is not limited,
bounded, or stinted, but includes in it self whatsoever any way appertains
to grace, or comes within the intensive, or extensive compass of it. Even as
we say that the light of the sun is infinite, because howsoever it be but a
finite and created thing, yet in the nature of light it has no limitation,
bounds, or stint, but contains in it self whatsoever any way appertains to
light. For the clearing of this we may note out of the learned, and accurate
Suarez Respondetur esse a quivocationem in illo termino, gratia in esse
gratiae, nam si sit sermo de esse reali and inhaerente, quod ipsa gratia
confert animae, fatemur hanc gratiam etiam in esse gratiae esse finitam, and
eodem modo conferre^animae finitam pulckritudinem, and reddere illam
proportionatam finitae gloriae: non autem ita loquimur de gratia quando dicimus
illam esse infinitam. Alio ergo modo loquimur de esse gratiae pertinente ad
dignitatem ejus, prout ordinatur ad unionem hypostaticam, illique conjuncta
est; and hoc non habet gratia habitualis ex natura sua, sed ex conjunctione ad
unionem: and ita distinguitur aliquo modo ab ipsa gratia in esse qualitatis,
and ideo sub hac ratione potest esse infinita, quamvis qualitas ipsa finita
sit. page 393. Sed in hoc considerandum est, ex sola acceptatione extrinseca,
ut fic, non conferri gratiae propriam aliquam dignitatem, physicam, vel
moralem, ratione cuius possit dici infin ta: tamen si haec acceptatio, vel
ordinatio, non consideretur ut mere extrinseca, sed quatenus per eam fit ut
illa gratia conjuncta sit aliquo modo divinae personae, dici potest ex hac
conjunctione habere hanc gratiam quendam infinitum valorem and dignitatem, non
quia illi addatur aliquid Physicum vel reale distinctum ab ipsa, and a persona
divina, seu ab unione humanitatis ad ipsam, nihil enim hujusmodi fingi, aut
excogitari potest, sed quia secundum moralem aestimationem, quandam dignitatem
and excellentiam habet ex hac conjunctione: Sicut humanitas ipsa infinitam
dignitatem habet ex unione, and sicut operationes Christi ex eadem radice seu
coniunctione habent infinitum valorem in esse meriti. Illa enim unio ad verbum
quasi elevat, et nobilitat quicquid illi conjungitur iuxta uniuscujusque modum
and capacitatem Unde quia opus bonum est meritorium, dat illi infinitum valorem
in illo ordine, and quia opus paenale est satisfactorium, dat illi infinitatem
in genere satisfactionis: quia ergo gratia ex propria ratione habet facere
gratum and dilectum, ideo per hane unionem accipit quandam dignitatem and
valorem, ratione cuius censetur facere infinite gratum, and hoc est, habere
quandam infinitatem in esse gratiae in ordine ad unionem. Quod recte per
effectus declaratur, nam hinc habet quod sit proximum principium infiniti
meriti, quamvis enim gratia unionis fit principalis radix huius quantitatis in
merito, gratia tamen habitualis est veluti proximum principium ejus. Et hinc
etiam habet, ut possit influere in infinitos homines, nam ad omnes potest
extendi fructus eius, etiamsi in infinitum multiplicarentur. ibid.
in tert. part. Thomae t. 1. disp. 22. sect. 1. that the grace of Christ may be
considered either absolutely, or relatively.

1. Absolutely, intrinsecally, really, and Physically as it is in it is self,
so it is finite, communicating unto his soul though a great, yet but a finite
beauty, and perfection, and rendering it proportionate but unto a finite weight
of glory.

2. Relatively, as referred unto the grace of union, as conjoined unto the
divine, and infinite person of the son, as it is the grace of the son of God.
And so it is in some sort infinite, not as though by this conjunction there
were imparted to it any physical, and real perfection, only according to the
moral estimation of things, it receives thereby a dignity, and excellency,
answerable to that of the person, an infinite dignity, and excellency. For
union of the manhood unto the divine person, and nature in that person,
relatively ennobleth and exalts whatsoever belongs unto the humane nature,
in manner and measure suitable to its nature and capacity. Hence its blood was
the blood of God: it is obedidience, and sufferings the obedience, and
sufferings of God, and therefore infinitely satisfactory and, meritorious: its
grace, and virtues, the grace and virtues of God himself; and so consequently
however, in esse reali' of a finite nature, yet they were, in esse morali, of
an infinite worth, and value, able to be the ground of an infinite merit, and
the principle of influence upon an infinite number of men.

Having done with the explication of the point, I shall in the next place go
on to the second thing I proposed, the confirmation of it. And here to clear
and confirm what we have by our Apostle ascribed unto our blessed Savior, I
will 1. prove it to be so, and then demonstrate why it is so.

1. That it is so, is apparent by sundry places of holy Scripture, out of which
I will cull only those that seem to me most pregnant and pertinent.

1. Of the purity and fullness in Christ's grace, and holiness, there were
diverse types in the ceremonial law of Moses.

1. The curious embroidery, and glorious Cherubims of the veil, Exodus 26.31.
And thou shall make a veil of blew, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twisted
linen of cunning work, with Cherubims shall it be made.

2. The separation of the Nazarites, Numb. 6.

3. The Altar of burnt offerings, which was styled most holy, Exodus 29.37. or
the holy of holies, or holiness of holinesses.

4. The Altar of incense, that was to be overlaid with pure gold, that had no
dross; and to have a crown of gold round about: and therefore called the
golden Altar, Numb, 4.11.

5. The perfection required in their sacrifices. Their burnt offerings of the
heard and the flock, were to be males without blemish, Levet. 1.3,10. and
Chapt. 23.10. If their burnt offerings were of fowls, the crop of it with the
feathers were to be plucked away and cast besides the Altar, Levit. 1.16. Their
meat offerings were to be without leaven, Levit. 1.11. which figured sin, Luke
12.1. Math. 16.6,12. 1 Cor. 5.8. Their peace offerings also were to be
unblemished, Levit. 22.20. The heifer, of whose ashes the water of separation
was to be made, was to be red without spot, wherein was no blemish, and upon
which never came yoke, Numb. 19.2. And so might aptly typify Christ, who as he
was red in regard of his bloody passion, so he was also of an unspotted and
unblemished holiness, and altogether free from the bondage of any sin
whatsoever. The two Lambs that were to be offered day by day for a continual
burnt offering, were to be without spot, Numb. 28.3. The Paschall lamb also was
to be without blemish, Exodus 12.5. and these prefigured Christ, A lamb without
blemish and without spot, I Pet. 1.19. that is, without sin: and exclusion of
sin in intellectual creatures argues a fullness of grace and holiness. We
may then conclude, that Christ's holiness was full and perfect, because it was
blemishlesse and spotless.

6. The unblemishednesse required in all the Priests, that ministered in the
sanctuary, Lev. 21. a verse. 17. usque ad verse. 24.

7. The holy anointing oil described, Exodus 30. v. 23, 24. etc. the precious
ointment that ran down upon Aarons beard, the high Priest, that went down to
the skirts of his garments, Psalm. 134.2.

Unto this we may add 8. the holy garments and ornaments of the high Priests.

1. His white and linen ones, which were peculiar unto the day of atonement,
Lev. 16.4.

2. His rich and glorious ones, which he wore in his ordinary service, that
were for glory and beauty, Exodus 28.2. described at large throughout that whole
chapter.

But to speak particularly of one singular ornament of the high Priest, the
Vrim and the Thummim; the grammatical signification of which, is lights, and
perfections. It was to be put in the breast plate of judgment upon the high
Priests heart, when he went in before the Lord, Exodus 28.30. And herein he was
a type of Christ, the true high Priest, that stood up with Vrim and Thummim,
Ezra 2.63. Gods holy one, with whom his Vrim and Thummim, light of knowledge,
and perfection of purity, were always to be, Deuter. 33.8. Two things are here
typified concerning Christ's gracious endowments; the plenty and the excellency
of them.

1. The plenty of them, and therefore it is in the plural number, lights and
perfections.

2. The excellency of them, imported by the joining of the article in the
Hebrew (...) those lights, those perfections: For this says Ames in an oration
of his touching this subject, is not without it is emphasis, and might signify,
that the light of his knowledge, the perfection of his purity surpasses that
of all other creatures.

9. And lastly, The unction of Solomon Psalm. 45.7. was a type of Gods anointing
Christ's humanity with the holy Ghost, Act. 10.38. as appears by the Apostles
application of the Psalmists words unto Christ, Heb. 1.9. Now Solomon's unction
in the Psalm was not outward, visible, and ceremonial, with material oil,

1. Because it is attributed immediately unto God. God, thy God has anointed
thee. Whereas the external anointing of Solomon at his coronation day, was by
Zadock the Priest, 1 King. 1.38.

2. It is preferred unto that of his fellows. God has anointed thee etc above
thy fellows. And how his external unction excelled that of his fellows,
cannot be evidenced out of Scripture. But if we speak of an inward,
spiritual, and metaphorical anointing of him, with gifts qualifying him for
the office, and duty of a King, those that are here termed his fellows, fell
far short of him. Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of
the East country, and all the wisdom of Egypt: for he was wiser then all men;
then Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol:
and his fame was in all nations round about, 1 Kings 4.30,31. Solomon therefore
did very fitly typifie Christ, whom God anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows, in an higher and fuller sense then him. Here we have a
twofold comparison of the infusion of gifts and graces into Christ's manhood:
one of similitude; another of unequalls.

1. Of similitude: it is resembled unto an anointing: God has anointed thee with
the oil of gladness. And this oil, unto which Christ's habitual grace was
likened, was not mere oil of Olive, but mixed with precious spices,
compounded after the art of the Apothecary, or perfumer, as it is said of the
sacred oil of the tabernacle, Exodus 30.25. and unto this oil there is an apt
resemblance of the grace of the spirit in Christ, because it answers all the
properties and effects thereof. This oil was fragrant, yielding a sweet smell.
And what is said of the name of Christ in general, is appliable unto his
graces in particular, Cant. 1.3. Because of the savor of thy good ointment,
thy name is as ointment powered forth, therefore do the virgins love thee. Oil
strengthened the body, so the grace of the spirit strengthened Christ with might
in the inward man, Ephesians. 3 16. It is said of him, Luke 2.40. that he waxed
strong in spirit, being filled with wisdom: and the reason of it is subjoyned:
and the grace of God was upon him. With this oil in those times they
beautified their faces; Oil makes man's face to shine, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 104.15. So the grace and holiness of Christ put a luster upon him, and
made him to shine gloriously before God and man. This oil was of a refreshing
nature; and therefore used in feasts, and times of rejoicing. Whereupon it is
termed the oil of joy, and opposed unto mourning, Is. 61.3. The grace of
Christ's soul produces gladness and joy unspeakeable, and that both in Christ
anointed, and his members, for whom he was anointed: and therefore it is very
fitly styled the oil of gladness. The oil in those Eastern countries was so
sweet, as that Manna is for pleasantness of taste compared unto it, Numb. 11.8.
The taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil: or the best Ainsworth.
moisture of oil. Thus the graces of Christ are delectable, and pleasant unto
every soul, that feeds on them by faith, and devout meditation. The end for
which Aaron and his sons were anointed, was to consecrate them, that they might
minister unto the Lord in the Priests office, Exodus 30.30. So the design in
pouring forth without measure the true oil of anointing, the Spirit, upon the
Lord Christ, was the consecration, authorizing, and qualification of him, for
the administration of all his offices.

2. Here is a comparison of Christ's Unction with the spirit in point of
quantity; a comparison of unequalls: collatio majoris cum minoribus: He was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows.

Here by fellows may be understood those that were such in a special or
general manner.

1. Those that were such in a special manner, by peculiar office, all Kings,
Priests and Prophets: for they in those times were anointed; and therefore
might in that respect be termed the fellows of Christ, who was anointed by God
himself, to be the King, Priest, and Prophet of the Church. And he was
anointed above these his fellows; because all these three offices were
conjoined in him, and in dignity surmounted theirs. Besides, his abilities for
them were vaster then theirs.

But 2. the fellows of Christ may be understood in a general way (unto which
interpretation I incline, as the more probable) of those, that are such by that
vocation, which is common unto all beleivers: for they are all consorts and
sharers with Christ in the unction of his spirit, and thereby are made Kings
and Priests unto God, Revel. 1.6. But now they were his fellows, not in a way
of equality, but only in a way of subordination. He was anointed above these
his fellows extensively, in regard of the number of his gifts and endowments;
intensively, in respect of the degree or measure. For the spirit was not given
by measure to him, Job. 3.34.

2. Of this fullness that was to be in Christ, there ran diverse prophesies
under the Old Testament.

The first is that of Isaiah, 11.2. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him. Others may have some feathers of the dove, as it were, the first fruits of
the spirit only: But upon him there descended the dove it self, the whole
entire spirit; fons omnis spiritus sancti (says Hierome upon the words) all
the gifts and graces of the spirit: The spirit of wisdom and understanding;
the spirit of counsel and might; the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of
the Lord. And this descent of the spirit on him was not, ut avolaret, sed
jugiter permaneret, as the same Father has it, It was to rest upon him.
Answerable to which was the record that John bare, saying; I saw the spirit
descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him, John 1.32.

2. A second prophecy concerning this particular, we have in Daniel 9.24.
where the Angel Gabriel informed Daniel that Christ was to be the most Holy.
Seventy weeks are determined to anoint the most holy. The most holy he was to
be, not only essentially, as God, but also as man; and so too, not only by the
assumption of the word, but also by the sanctification of the spirit, by
infusion of such an unmeasurable fullness of habitual holiness, as
wonderfully exceeds the joint and cumulated holiness of all either Saints or
Angels.

A third Prophecy (and I will trouble you with no more) is Zachary 3.9. For
behold the stone that I have laid before Joshua: upon one stone shall be seven
eyes, behold I will engrave the graving thereof, says the Lord of hosts. Unto
which place answers that in the Revelation of Saint John, chap. 5.6. And I
beheld, and lo, in the midst of the throne, etc stood a lamb, having seven
horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God. See Pemble on the
place.
The stone in that place of Zachary is the chief corner stone, the head of the
corner, Christ Jesus, God blessed for ever. By eyes, is meant knowledge,
wisdom and providence. By seven, is denoted perfection and sufficiency. By
engraving the graving thereof, is signified the beautifying, and as it were
polishing of Christ's humane nature, with all excellency of either gracious or
glorious endowments. So that the words may be thus paraphrased. Behold, I have
laid in Sion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornet stone,
a sure foundation, Is. 28.16. And this stone shall not be like the stones of
the material Temple, a dead and senseless, but a living and quicksighted
stone: upon this stone shall be seven eyes, a fullness of providence and
wisdom. This stone shall not be a rude, rough, unwrought, and unpolisht, but a
most curiously carved, and an artificially engraved stone, indeed the most
beautiful of the whole building. Behold I will engrave the graving thereof,
says the Lord of hosts. The Prophet alludes (think interpreters) unto the
costly and curious workmanship of the stones of the Temple, which did in some
weak manner set forth the riches and excellency of Christ's gifts and graces.

These forementioned prophesies receive much light from those many vulgar, and
obvious similitudes, under which the fullness of Christ's grace is figured in
scripture. I will touch but on a few.

1. It is compared unto an excelling, and surpassing beauty, which is resembled
unto that of the rose of Sharon, and lilly of the Valleys, Canticl. 2.1. and
is set out with most exquisite attire, and ornaments, sweet perfumes and
precious ointment. Behold, thou art fair my beloved, yea pleasant, Cant. 1.16.
My beloved is white and ruddie, the chiefest among ten thousand. His head is as
the most fine gold, his locks are bushie, and black as a raven. His eyes are
as the eyes of Doves by the rivers of water washed with milk, and fitly set.
His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like lillies,
dropping sweet smelling myrrh. His hands are as gold rings set with the
Berill: His belly is as bright Ivory, overlaid with Saphires. His legs are as
pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: His countenance is as
Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars. His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is
altogether lovely, Canticl. 5.10,11,12,13,14,15,16. He is the desire of all
nations; and the allurement of all hearts, that look upon him. Hagg. 2.7. All
his garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and Cassia, Psalm. 45.8. He is anointed
with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7. Because of the
savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as ointment powered forth, therefore
do the Virgins love thee, Cantic. 1.3. What is said of his Church, Cant. 3.6.
may be applied unto him in a far greater eminency: he is perfumed with myrrh
and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant. In Revel. 1.13. he is girt
about the paps with a golden girdle. On which words, that industrious Gentleman
Mr Leigh has this annotation. His girding about the paps and breasts
signifies, that there is no defect, or aberration in any motion or affection
in our Savior Christ, but every thought, and inclination of his heart, is kept
in order by the fullness of the spirit: and he parallels it with Esaias. 11.5.
righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle
of his reins: that is, he shall have so much of righteousness and
faithfulness, as that it shall serve him for a girdle: By it he was girt; that
is, sufficiently prepared and made ready for execution of his office.

2. Christ's fullness of grace is set forth by the similitude of an apple tree.
As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons.
As the Apple tree (says Ainsworth upon the words) has more variety of fruits,
then any other tree, that grows, (that it is not easy to reckon up the many
sorts of Apples of different taste) so Christ excels in variety of graces,
etc. The Chaldee Paraphrast expounds this of the pomecitron tree; but for the
cause aforesaid I would not (says he) restrain it to any one kind, that the
fullness of grace and truth, which was in Christ, might here be observed. The
best of the sons of men are in comparison of Christ but as trees of the wood:
they are either barren, or else they yield no fruit but what is at least in
part sour, and unsavory. But now Christ is like an apple tree, because his
graces do as far transcend those of the choicest saints, as the sweetest
apples do sloes, graks, or acorns.

3. Christ's fullness of grace is set forth by the expression of a fountain. A
fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon,
Canticl. 4.15. A fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall
water the valley of Shittim, Joel. 3.18. In that day there shall be a fountain
opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and
for uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. Christ was full of grace, as a fountain of
waters. Now in the narrowest fountains there is such a plenitude of waters, as
is always living, never decaying. Whereas let the greatest pits and torrents
be never so full, yet the water in them will still grow less and less, But of
this before.

Christ 4. for his fullness of grace is compared unto the sun, Mal. 4.2. The
sun of righteousness. Whereas the best of the saints were but stars, and
beam's of righteousness. And however one star differ from another in light,
and magnitude, yet they all come short of the sun. The light of the sun is
enough for the whole visible world. The righteousness of Christ is sufficient
for all the members of the Church. No eye can overlooke the light of the sun.
No faith can comprehend, or overclaspe the righteousness of Christ. He was a
sun of righteousness.

5. Christ for his fullness of grace is resembled unto a King. He is a king of
righteousness, Heb. 7.2. And therefore he has an abundance, even a kingdom
of righteousness. For being a king of righteousness, it is probable, that he
is not poor in it, but that he has even riches, and treasures thereof to
dispense, beyond the capacity, or comprehension of all the faith, that is,
ever was, or shall be in the world.

6. The unmeasurable plenitude of Christ's grace, and holiness, is lastly
figured under the similitude of riches, and treasures. There are unsearchable
riches in Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. And one branch of these riches is his grace, and
wisdom. Now riches denotes not only the precious worth, and high value, but
the plenteousnesse also, the fullness of a thing. Christ therefore was full of
grace, and wisdom. But in Christ's grace, and wisdom, there was not only
plenty, but immensity; There was no end, or bottom of his riches; they were
unsearchable riches. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2.3. and what is spoken of knowledge, may be said of all other
habitual gifts, and graces in Christ. The metaphor of treasures, as that of
riches, signifies two things. 1 That the knowledge and wisdom of Christ's
manhood are precious qualities, they are treasures: and treasures are made up,
not of pricelesse pebbles but precious metals, gold, and silver, or rich
pearls, and Jewels. Wisdom is better then rubies: and all the things that may
be desired, are not to be compared to it, Prove. 8.11.

2. That the Manhood of Christ is enriched with knowledge and wisdom in a very
full and transcendent measure. The Apostle says not, In him are hid knowledge
and wisdom, but the treasures of knowledge and wisdom: some few pieces of
silver and gold, nay some pretty tolerable sums, amount not to treasures:
They are vast heaps. Even so not a measure, but a fullness is required unto the
treasures of knowledge and wisdom. But now in Christ were not only some
treasures, but all the treasures. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge. As the term treasures, points us unto the abundance and
fullness: so the Epithete all, all treasures, plainly notes the redundance,
and allfulnesse of his knowledge and wisdom.

There is in Christ's knowledge a threefold fullness: a fullness of sorts or
kinds, a fullness of degrees, a fullness of objects.

1. A fullness of sorts or kinds; wisdom and knowledge; wisdom, which regards
things dogmaticall; and knowledge, which respects things practical. The spirit
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel, etc, the spirit of
knowledge, etc. Isaiah 11.2. The difference betwixt which, interpreters on the
place Septem sunt Spiritus Sancti dona, quibus h^mo tam in ratione quam in
appetitu perficitur ad virtutum opera consummanda, donum sc. sapientiae,
intellectus, consilii, fortitudinis, scientiae, pietatis, and timoris. Ratio
autem est speculativa and practica, and in utraque consideratur apprehensio
veritatis, quae pertinet ad inventionem, and judicium de veritate. Ad
apprebensionem igitur veriettis porsieitur specul^tiva ratio per intellectum:
practica vero per consilium, ad recte autem judicandum speculativa quidem per
sapientiam, practica vero per scientiam persicitur. Appetitiva autem virtus, in
his quidem quae sunt ad alterum, perficitur per pietatem: in his autem quae
sunt ad seipsum, perficitur per fortitudinem contra timorem periculorum: contra
concupiscentiam vero inordinatam dilectabilium per timorem.

Wisdom is in respect of things divine: understanding of the first principles;
science of conclusions; counsel of things to be done: fear makes men decline
from that which is ill, and strength confirms them to overcome the
difficulties wherewith well-doing is beset. Field of the Church, book 5. chap.
14. page 435. See also the second Edition of out new Annotations upon the place.


Aquinas 1 a. 2ae. quaest. 68. Art. 4. and the commentators on him, Dr. Field,
and others, have attempted to set down, with what success I will not
undertake to determine, but refer it to the judgment of the learned reader.
The Schoolmen reckon up three sorts, or kinds of Christ's created knowledge.

1. The knowledge of the beatificall vision. 2. Infused knowledge. 3. Acquisite
knowledge.

1. The knowledge of the beatificall vision, scientia beata, and for this they
quote, Ioh. 3.13. where the word (...), is of the praeterperfect tense, and
signifies that Christ was then already ascended into heaven which could not be
true of a bodily ascent, but of a spiritual, by the beatifick vision. But by
the sight of Gods essence we cannot know the decrees of God, or the creatures
in themselves: for the Angels enjoyed it, and yet know not thereby the day of
judgment, Mark. 13.32. nay they were ignorant of the manifold wisdom of God
according to the eternal purpose, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Which was made known unto them by voluntary revelation, and manifestation of
the same, Ephesians. 3.9,10,11. The glorious saints have an uninterrupted vision of
the Deity, and yet cannot by virtue of it discern any thing concerning the
affairs and occurrences of this life. Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledges us not, Esaias. 63.16. This knowledge therefore was not enough for
Christ.

But in the second place, there was in him an infused knowledge, by which
especially he knew things, that were not knowable, or discernable by the light
of nature, or reason: He was filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was
upon him, Luk 2.40. The wisdom with which he was filled, was from the grace of
God upon, or in him. Of this wisdom he showed forth such effects, when he was
but twelve years old, as bred astonishment in all his auditors, verse. 46, 47.
They found him in the Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both
hearing them, and asking them questions. And all that heard him, were
astonished at his understanding and answers. For it they farther allege, Heb.
10.5,6,7,8,9. Hence Suarez, Becanus, and others generally thus argue. The
Apostle here says expressly, that Christ in his first coming, or entrance
into the world, knew the will of the father, and the mystery of our redemption,
knew that God would not be pacified, or appeased with mankind by Mosaicall
sacrifices, but by his bloody death, and passion. And this will of God he
himself accepted, and hereupon voluntarily offered his life for the ransom of
mankind, and thereby purchased our sanctification.

3. There was in him an acquisite, or experimental knowledge, gotten, and
gained by experience; and for this they quote, Hebr. 5.8. Though he were a
son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered.

2. There was in his knowledge a fullness of degrees: and therefore his
increase in wisdom, spoken of Luke 2.52. is extensive only, and not intensive.

3. There was in his knowledge a fullness of objects. Some Schoolmen have
affirmed, that Christ, as man, even in this life, knew all creatures possible.
Most of them aver, that he knew all things past, present, and to come.
Becanus limits the extent of Christ's infused knowledge only unto all things
concerning men, Angels, and himself. We for our parts shall presume only to
say, that he always knew all things, in every article of time, that then was
necessary for our salvation, and the execution of his own office. Distinguish
we must betwixt his state of humiliation, and exaltation.

1. In his state of exaltation, and glory, he exercises in order unto his
Church a Lordship, and dominion over all things. And it is very probable, this
his knowledge is as vast as his Empire. Cyrus knew the names of all his
soldiers: and therefore it is unlikely, that Christ's humanity should be
ignorant of any thing made subject unto it. He is to be judge of men and
Angels, as he is the son of man. The father has given him authority to
execute judgment also, because he is the son of man, John 5.27. And
therefore, as man, he knows all things, that are to come within his
cognizance, as judge. The very secrets of men, Romans 2.16. The hidden things of
darkness, and the counsels of the heart, 1 Cor. 4.5. But now this knowledge of
Christ, as man, is not by force of the humane nature, but by infusion, or
revelation from the divine.

2. As for his state of humiliation, the fullness of his knowledge in that was
consistent, 1. with the nescience of diverse things. He knew not, as man, the
day of judgment, Mark. 13.32. the barrenness of the fig tree, Mark 11.13.2.
With increase in his knowledge: For in Luke 2.52. He is said to increase in
wisdom and stature, etc. He is said to increase in Wisdom, in the same sense,
wherein he is said to increase in stature: for they are both coupled togeither
by Luke: But he increased in stature really, indeed, and in truth, and not
only in the opinion of men; and therefore also there was a reality in the
growth of his wisdom. For this also our Divines usually allege, Luke 2.40.
And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the
grace of God was upon him. The word translated filled, denotes three things.

1. The fullness, that was in the wisdom of Christ: He was full of wisdom.

2. The dependancy of it upon it is efficient; Christ, as man, was filled with
wisdom, to wit, by God. The humanity did not, could not fill it self, but
was replenished by the Deity.

3. We have here implied the Antecedent, or terminus a quo of this his
fullness, to wit, a denial of the antecession thereof. The Child grew, etc.
and was filled with wisdom. He was filled then, and not before. The manhood
was always even from the very first moment of it is conception full of wisdom,
according to the first act: And yet we see here, there is a fullness of
wisdom de novo accrewed unto him, to wit, in regard of actual apprehension.

Against this Bellarmine tom. 1. De Christo. l. 4. c. 2. alleges, Esa.
11.1,2. There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch
shall grow out of his roots. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him,
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the
spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. All understand the place of
Christ, who is said to be a rod coming out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch
growing out of his roots, even in his very conception, and even then the
descent of the spirit of the Lord was upon him; And therefore the soul of
Christ learned nothing afterward, which before he knew not. The very same
thing all those places signify, where Christ is said to be anointed by God with
the spirit, Psalm. 45.7. Esaias. 61.1. Act. 4.27. and 10.38. For the Angels
termed him Christ, that is anointed, Luke 2.11. as soon as he was borne of
the Virgin. Unto this he adds John 1.14. for there that clause full of grace,
seeing (...), is the nominative case of the masculine gender, ought to be
coupled with (...), translated the word, and therefore it follows, that the
word was no sooner incarnate, made flesh, but it was forthwith full of grace,
and truth: This Bellarmine.

Unto this Ames Bellarm. En^rv. tom. 1. lib. 2. p. 82, 83.
gives this full, though brief answer. 1. We grant, that Christ was anointed
with the spirit of wisdom from his very conception, so that the denial hereof
is to no purpose sophistically anticipated by Bellarmine, as if it were our
defense. But even as the divine nature did in some manner shut up or conceal
and hide it is majesty in it self in the humiliation of Christ, that it might
not show forth that dignity, which afterward appeared in his exaltation. So
also that spirit of wisdom was held in or restrained, that it might not be put
forth presently in perfection, but by little and little, according to the state
of Christ. 2. There is a spirit of wisdom, wheresoever there is ability or
promptness, of understanding easily all things, which are necessary to be
known, as occasion requires; Although all singulars be not actually known.
3. That wisdom, which is perfect intensively, and in the first act, may be
increased in the second act, and by extension unto new objects. 4. Even those
amongst the Papists themselves, who ascribe some knowledge unto Christ, full and
perfect every way, from the beginning, do yet confess concerning an acquisite
knowledge, that Christ has grown and increased therein, not only in regard
of the effect, or according to the experience thereof, but also according to
the essence or habit of the knowledge it self. Of this acquired knowledge it
is, that Aquinas says, part. 3. quaest. 12. Art. 2. that it was always
perfect, secundum tempus, sed non simpliciter, and secundum naturam.

The Lutherans from this place Col. 2.3. argue for the communication of
Omniscience unto the humanity of Christ. In Christ man are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and therefore as man, he is omniscient.

For answer; All treasures may be said to be in the manhood of Christ, either
simply, or in comparison of other creatures. In the Deity of Christ only all
treasures of wisdom, and knowledge are simply, and absolutely: and in his
humanity all treasures may be said to be, as it is Si Apostolus loquitur de
Christo secundum humanitatem, dicendum est, in Christi humanitate esse omnes
Thesaur^s sapientiae and scientiae collective, qui in Angelis and hominibus
sunt divisive. Nam quicquid sapien tiae and scientiae est divisim in Ange'is,
and heminibus, hoc conjunctim est in Christo sccundum humanitatatem. Becan.
Sum. ^he. tom. 5. page 878.
compared with all, either men, or Angels, for in respect of them, he has an
unmeasurable treasury.

Unto this truth concerning the fullness of habitual grace in Christ, of all
the sacred writers, besides our blessed Apostle, the Beloved disciple of our
Savior, Saint John, gives the clearest, and plainest testimony, and that
especially in these two following places.

The first place is, John. 1.14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among
us, full of grace and truth. Where by grace some understand all moral virtues,
that perfect the will, and affections; and by truth, all intellectual virtues,
that adorn, and beautify the understanding. Full he was of grace, to sanctify;
full of truth, to enlighten: Full of grace, because the life; full of truth,
because the light of men: Full of grace, to expel our sins; Full of truth, to
dispell our ignorance. The descant is Bonaventures on the place.

A second place, with which I will conclude, is John 3.34. God gives not the
spirit by measure unto him. There is plenitudo vasis, and plenitudo fontis: the
fullness of a measure or vessel, and the fullness of a fountain. The fullness
of grace in the saints was like the fullness of a measure: They had the spirit,
but in measure. Unto every one of us grace is given according to the measure of
the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7. As God has dealt to every man a measure of
faith, Romans 12.3. Whereas the fullness of Christ was the fullness of a
fountain, without measure. He gave not the spirit by measure unto him. Now the
Spirit was the cause, and ground of all grace, and holiness. Having that then,
not by measure, but in all fulness, he must needs have of grace a fullness.
He was filled with the spirit of grace, anointed with it all over: Therefore
full of grace.

And so having done with the (...), I come now to the (...); To discover the
demonstrative reason of the dwelling of allfulnesse of grace in Christ: And
after I have showed you that it is so, to show you now, why it must be so.

The Schoolmen note, that in Christ there is a threefold grace. Gratia
unionis; Gratia unctionis, seu habitualis; Gratia capitis. The grace of union:
the grace of unction, or habitual grace: the grace, or gift, of being head
over the Church. Now the plenitude of his unction, the fullness of his
habitual grace, may be demonstrated from his grace of union, from his grace of
headship.

1. From his grace of union. Christus habuit gratiam in summo secundum
perfectissimum modum quo haber^ potesi and hoc quidem apparet, ex propinquit ^e
animae Christi ad causam gratiae. Dictum est enim quod quanto aliquod
^eceptivum pr^pinquius est causae ^fiuenti, tanto abundantrus recipit Et ideo
anima Christi, quae propinquius conjungitur Deo inter omnes creaturas
rationales, maximam recipit influentiam gratiae ejus. Aqu^nas. part. 3. quaest.
7. art. 9.
The nearer a thing is to it is cause, from whence proceeds any good, the more
plentifully does it partake of it is influence. Every person, the nearer he is
linkt unto earthly Potentates, the more he has prerogative before others more
disjoined. Now the divine nature is the fountain, and that bottomless, and
infinite, of all grace, From it comes every good, and perfect gift. And the
humane nature of Christ is joined unto it, in the nearest, in a personal
union. A congruence therefore was it, that there should be a derivation unto it
of an abundance of grace. Unmeet were it, if in that nature, in which there
dwelled bodily an all-fulnesse of the Godhead, there did no^ also dwell
habitually an all-funesse of grace.

2. It may be demonstrated a gratia capitis, from his being head unto the
Church. For in the head of the body mystical grace is to reside in all
eminency, and perfection, both of parts, and degrees. Even as in the head of
the body natural, there is a fullness of sense, All the five senses. Whereas
in the rest of the members there is but one sense, the sense of touch, or
feeling. The illustration is not mine, but Austin's, in the latter end of his
57 th Epistle ad Dardanum.

But this will be more appparent, if we will consider, that Christ under this
relation of head, is to be causa efficiens, and exemplar is, the principle, and
pattern of grace, and holiness unto us, to fill up the emptiness of grace in
us, to expel the fulness of sin out of us. And then to enable him for the
discharge of all this, an all fullness of grace was a requisite qualification.

1. Christ under the relation of head was to be a Christus habuit gratiam in
sum^o secundum per fec^ssimum modum quo haberi potes^. Et hoc quidem aptaret ex
comparatione ejus adeffect um: Sic enim recipiebat anima Christi gratiam, ut ex
ea quodammodo transfunderetur in alios: Et ideo oportuit quod haberet maximam
gratiam, ficus* ignis, qui est causa caloris in omnibus calidis, est maxim
calidus. Aquin. quaest. 7. Art. 9.
principle, and fountain of grace, and holiness unto his Church. Even as the
head in the natural body is the cause of sense, and motion in the members; and
therefore of grace, and holiness, there must be in him an all-fulnesse. Even
as in the sun, the fountain of light, from whom the moon, and stars borrow
all their light, there is a fullness of light. As in the Sea, the original of
all waters, there is a fullness of waters. As in the fire, the principile of
all elementary heat, there is a fulness of heat. Grace, and holiness, was
conferred upon Christ, not as a private, but as a public person, as the head
of his Church, as the universal principle of grace, from whence there was to
be a redundance, and overflowing of it upon all his members. Of his all
fullness all are to receive, John. 1.16. And therefore there had need to be
such an abundance and plenitude thereof in him, as that in Sed quaeres, quanta
sit haec intensio gratiae Christi, quantumque excesserit aliorum hominum vel
Angelo. rum gratias. Respondeo, hoc minime posse constare; verisimile tamen
esse tantam esse ha^c unicam gratiam animae Christi, ut omnes a'ias in se
complectatur, and excedat, ita ut si concipiamus ex omnibus aliorum hominum and
Angelorum gratiis inter se conjunctis unam consurgere habentem omnes illos
gradus intensionis, intensio gratiae Christi totam illam vel aequat, vel
superat. Ratio est, quia sidignitas animae Christi verbo unitae secundum se
confideretur, digna erat summae gratiae, si esset possibilis, quia vero haec
impossibilis est, definita est per divinam sapientiam summa quaedam gratia,
quae maxim esset consentanea dignitati, and muneribus Christi, tota vero illa
intensio optima ratione convenit Christo; tum propter dignitatem personalem;
tum quia est universalis fons gratiae, in quo tota debuit congregari, quae in
alios erat diffundenda* ergo credibile est ita factum esse, quia juxta regulam
August. lib. 3. de lib. arbitr. cap. 5. id quod vera ratione melius esse
occurrerit, id credendum est fecisse Deum. Suarez in tert. part. Thomae disp.
22. sent. 2. page 397.
comparison of it, all the grace, and holiness in the world, though heaped
into one subject, of never so wide a capacity, should yet be but as a drop to
the Ocean, as a beam to the Sun, the least spark to the whole element of
fire.

2. Christ under the relation of head, was to be an exemplary cause, a
pattern, and rule of Grace, and holiness, unto which our's must be
proportioned. We must be holy, as he is holy, conformed unto his image, Romans
8.29. Now primum, and optimum in unoquoque genere (says the Philosopher) is
mensura and regula caeterorum. The rule, and measure of the rest in a kind, is
to be the best, and chiefest of that kind. Of living creatures, we see the rule
and measure is the perfectest, to wit, man; in whom we have couched, and that
after an eminent manner, all the fullness of life, all the degrees, and rancks
of life, the vegetative, the sentitive and reasonable life, togeither with all
the operations of each of these. Even so of those, that live the life of grace,
the rule and measure is to be the most perfect, to wit, Christ Jesus; in whom
the father decreed that grace should dwell in all perfection. If we set either
to our selves, or others, a sampler to work after, we will frame it as
perfect, and absolute, as we can. God has set, and drawn Christ for a copy,
unto which our sanctity must be conformed. And will God (think you) design
any other besides a perfect, full, and complete copy. Shall there, can there be
any imperfection in the Almighties draught of an examplar? Must our grace and
holiness answer Christ's exactly; and shall not his grace and holiness then
be fully exact?

Christ, thirdly, under the relation of head is to fill up that emptiness of
grace, which is in us. Even as the head in the natural body is to supply the
defects and wants in the members. By nature there is in us an universal
nakedness, and emptiness; and emptiness of light, beauty, rectitude, peace,
holiness, happiness in our whole man; A general ineptitude, and
indisposednesse toward whatsoever is good; nay in the best, even after
regeneration, who have of grace a fullness in regard of parts, there is yet an
emptiness in respect of degrees. The measure of their graces is still
defective. Now Christ, in that he has undertaken to repair, and restore us
unto our primitive condition, is to fill up this total emptiness, which is
naturally in all of us; this graduall emptiness, which is also in the best of
us: and he that must thus supply our emptiness, must himself be possessed of a
fullness. He that is to satisfy the craving and demands of our extreme
poverty, must have unsearchable riches. He must have all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, answerable unto our unconceiveable ignorance. Because
our flesh is devoid of grace and truth; In it dwells no good thing, Romans
7.18. therefore that flesh, which the word was made, for the redemption of
ours, was to be replenished with all good things, was to be full of grace and
truth.

Fourthly and lastly: An all-fulnesse of grace was necessary unto Christ, in
that as our head, he was to expel the fullness of sin out of us. By nature,
we are filled with unrighteousness, Romans 1.29. We are full of filthiness, and
deformity in flesh and spirit, and overspread from the head to the foot with
blaines, and putrefactions. All the faculties of our souls are full of sin.
Our minds are full of vanity, and darkness. Our consciences are full of
impurity, and insensiblenesse. Our hearts are full of unbelief, impenitency,
folly, hypocrisy, and hardness. The heart of the sons of men is full of
evil, Eccles. 9.3. Our wills are full of contumacy, rebellion, and stoutnesse.
And as there is a fullness of sin in the powers of our souls, so also in the
members of our bodies. Our tongues are full of deadly poison, Jam. 3.8. Our
eyes full of adultery, 2 Pet. 2.4. Nay there is a fullness of sin, as in our
natures, so in our actions and services. Our alms, prayers, sermons are full
of sin. Now one depth calls for another, one fullness for another. The
depth, the fullness of sin in us, for a depth, a fullness of grace in Christ.
The treasure of sin, the treasure of an evil heart in us, Math. 12.35. for all
the treasures of wisdom, and grace in him. The strong man is not overcome, and
driven out of the house, but by a stronger, Luke 11.21. The kingdom and
dominion of sin in us, cannot be overthrown, but by a King of
righteousness. Our souls are so bespotted, as that there is no cleansing of
them, but by the lamb of God, who was without blemish, or spot. The fullness
of sin cannot be driven, and chased out of our souls, but by Christ, in whom
there was a greater fullness of grace. And this, though not enough, must now
suffice, for demonstration of the congruity, and necessity of the dwelling of
an all* fullness of grace in Christ.

The uses that I shall make hereof, shall be of Information. Refutation.
Consolation. Exhortation.


1. Then to begin with the uses of Information, which shall be two.

1. From the dwelling of all fullness of habitual grace in Christ, we may
infer his qualification, and fitness for all his offices.

1. Hereby he was qualified for his Priestly office. For he was holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners; and such an high Priest became us,
Hebr. 7.26.

2. Hereby he was fitted for discharge of his Kingly office. For this Exponimus
voces (...) propterca verse. 3. non de causa consequen^s sed de causa
consequentiae, non ut amor justitiae etc. sit causa, cur Deus unxerit hunc
regem oleo laetitiae, sed ut unctio causa sit tanti amoris and odii. Quasi
diceret, unxit te propterea, id est, in eum finem, ut diligeres iustitiam vel
Dilexisti justitiam, quia unxit te oleo. Sic Augustinus in hunc locum,
propterea ut diligeres justitiam, and odio prosequereris iniquitatem, unctus
es. Rivet. in locum.
end, or intent, God anointed him with the oil of gladness above his
fellows, that the scepter of his kingdom might be a scepter of
righteousness. That he might love righteousness and hate iniquity, Heb.
1.8,9. Psalm. 45.6,7.

3. All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are a sufficient furniture for
execution of his Prophetical office. Who so meet to be the great Prophet of
the Church, as he, that is infallibly true in all that he says? And the
Baptist asserts the perpetual infallibility of Christ's testimony from the
unmeasurablenesse of his gifts and graces, Joh. 3.34. In ver. 33. he sets down
what honor belief of Christ's testimony yields unto God, to wit, subscription
unto, and confirmation of his veracity, He that has received his testimony
has set to his seal, that God is true. And this he proves, because his
testimony is always the testimony of God: For he whom God has sent, speaks
the words of God, ver. 34. Ordinary Prophets did not always speak the words
of God, but sometimes they spoke out of their own private spirit, and not as
Prophets, having the spirit of prophecy upon them, as is plain in Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.6. and Nathan, 2 Samuel 7.3. But now Christ, whom God has sent
singularly, and eminently, as the chief of all his ambassadors, speaks only
the words of God, so that his testimony is simply, and absolutely divine. And
of this he assigns the reason, ground, or cause, in the following words, for
God gives not the spirit by measure to him.

Secondly, Hence we may be informed, that if Christ had lived in these our
days, he would have been extremely hated by all carnal and unregenerate men,
who yet carry a very great outward, and ceremonious respect unto him, and
profess a deep detestation of all that had any hand in his murder and
crucifying: For there is nothing that they so much malign, as holiness; and
therefore their malignancy against Christ, the most holy, would have been
unspeakable. If but some few, and faint, some broken rays or beams of grace
shine in the life of a member of Christ, this presently makes him the butt of
their malice: And therefore if they had conversed with Christ in the days of
his flesh, they would have accounted him of all persons living, the most
odious. They, that disgust the drops of goodness in his, would never have
relished the fountain, and ocean thereof in himself. They look with envy
upon stars of the least magnitude in the Churches firmament; And therefore
the sun of righteousness could not but be a most unpleasing object unto
them. They loath the least measure of the spirit: and therefore what would
their abhorrence have been of him, unto whom God gave not the Spirit by
measure? They contemn, and deride that anointing, which believers receive from
the holy one; and therefore the unmeasurablenesse of his own unction would
have ministered unto them ample matter for their contempt and derision.

Secondly, this point may serve for confutation of a passage in the Learned Dr
Hammond against Mr Cawdrey, to wit, that Christ's love of God was capable of
farther degrees. That I do not fasten this tenet wrongfully upon him, will
appear unto any rational man by his own words, which I will therefore
transcribe.

Dr Hammond, page 222. In the next place he passes to the inforcement of my
argument from what we read concerning Christ himself, that he was more intense
in prayer at one time then another, when yet the lower degree was sure no sin;
and prepares to make answer to it, viz. that Christ was above the Law, and did
more then the Law required, but men fall short many degrees of what is
required. But sure this answer is nothing to the matter now in hand, for the
evidencing of which that example of Christ was brought by me, viz. that sincere
love is capable of degrees. This was first showed in several men, and in the
same man at sever all times, in the several ranks of Angels, and at last in
Christ himself, more ardent in one act of prayer then in another.

The conclusion which the Dr undertakes to evidence, is, that sincere love is
capable of degrees. Now this the example of Christ will never prove, unless it
infer, that Christ's love of God was capable of degrees, more intense at one
time then at another. If Christ's greater ardency in one act of prayer, then in
another, does not argue a greater fervency in his love at one time, then
another, this argument from Christ's praying more earnestly, will never reach
the proposition, for which it was brought. Indeed in his treatise of
Will Worship, p. 24. he minceth the matter, and speaks more cautelously: It
is possible (says he) for the same person constantly to love God above all,
and yet to have higher expressions of that love at one time then another. Thus
we read of Christ himself, Luke 22.24. etc. But of this we may say, as he does
of Mr Cawdrey's answer: It is nothing to the matter now in hand. Because there
may be a graduall difference in the expressions of the same love, for degree.
Christ's death for us was a higher expression of his love of us, then his
poverty, hunger, thirst, etc. and yet they might proceed from a love equally
intense.

His Argument then (you see) from Christ's example, will not serve his turn,
unless it conclude a greater intension in his love of God at one time, then at
another. And the falsehood of such an assertion is evident from the point here
handled, and confirmed, the absolute fullness of Christ's grace, which by the
general consent of the Fathers and Schoolmen was such, as that it excluded all
intensive growth. It was a sequel of the personal union; and therefore it was
from the very first moment of his conception. The Word was no sooner made
flesh, but it was forthwith full of grace, and truth. His love of God was
incapable of farther degrees; unto whom God gave not the spirit, that is, the
gifts, and graces of the spirit, by measure. But unto Christ God gave not the
spirit; that is, the gifts and graces of the Spirit, by measure, Joh. 3.34.
therefore his love of God was not capable of farther degrees. There have been
some, that here by Spirit have understood the Godhead of Christ, which was
given unto him, as Son, by eternal generation, as man, by the Hypostaticall
union. But whether the Doctor will embrace either of these expositions, I
cannot divine. Indeed many learned men have thought, that the Spirit of Christ
may signify his Godhead, in distinction from, or opposition unto either his
flesh, Romans 3.4. 1 Timothy 3.16. or blood, Heb. 9.14. yet that standing single,
and absolutely by it self, without such comparison, it should have any such
signification in Scripture, can never, I am very confident, be made good by the
Doctor; and therefore I shall acquiesce in the common interpretation, which
gives an utter and total overthrow unto the Doctors opinion. Unto it also the
Schoolmen are generally opposite, as will soon be confessed by those that will
peruse such of them as comment in tertiam part. Summae Aquinatis quaest. 7.
art. 12. and in tert. lib. sentent. distinct. 13.

The Scotists think, that in grace, and consequently in the love of God, there
is a maximum quod sic, impertransibile per divinam potentiam absolutam: and
then they conceive, that there is a great condecency in the clothing,
dignifying, or beautifying of Christ's humanity therewith. Because of all other
creatures, it was most straightly and nearly conjoined with the Deity, the author
of grace, and also for that it was by God designed to be the universal
principle, and fountain of grace unto all the Saints, that ever were, are, or
shall be in the world.

The Thomists dare not adventure so far herein; but yet Thomists and Scotists
are unanimous in asserting, that the grace of Christ's humanity was in regard of
Gods ordinary power, ever summa, both positive, and negative: that is, for
degrees, it was always at the highest, so that it could never be matched, or
surmounted. The reasons of Aquinas for this, dilated on at large by his
commentatours are two, ex part formae, scil. ipsius gratiae; and ex part
subjecti, scil. Christi.

1. Ex part formae, ipsius gratiae. The habitual grace of Christ was referred
unto the grace of union, as a consequent ornament of it; and therefore in all
congruence it was to be suited and proportioned unto it. Now the union of the
manhood with the Godhead was the greatest, that a creature was capable of, and
therefore congruent, that the degree of Christ's habitual grace should be the
highest, that the wisdom of God has allotted unto intellectual creature.

A second reason is taken ex part ipsius subjecti, scil. Christi. Christ was
not pure viator, but in his soul, he was also comprehensor, and that from the
first instant of his Incarnation. He always therefore in his soul enjoyed
heaven, happiness, the beatificall vision: and therefore all his graces, and
consequently his love of God were in termino, and therefore could not admit any
further degrees. It is not to be denied, but that by special dispensation
there was some restraint of the influence of his happiness, or beatificall
vision, in the whole course of his humiliation, and particularly in the time of
his doleful passion. But surely it seems very improbable, and no ways
sortable unto the state of Christ's blessedness, for his grace and holiness,
the image of God in him, his love of God, etc. to be liable unto perpetual
motion and augmentation.

But let us hear the Doctors objection, and consider of what weight it is. It
is taken out of Luke 22.44. And being in an agony, he prayed, (...), more
earnestly: that is, he was more ardent in prayer then at other times. And hence
he must infer, that his love of God was more fervent then at other times: or
else this instance of Christ's will not be home unto that, for which it is urged.

For answer: 1. The vulgar translation renders (...), prolixius: and if this
version be good, then there is no place for the Doctors objection. But 2.
Suppose we stick unto our own translation, yet the place may fairly be so
interpreted, as that it may no ways advantage the purpose of the Doctor. For
(...), more earnestly, may be considered in reference unto either the object,
unto whom he prayed, God; or the matter, against which he prayed, the evils
with which he conflicted in his agony.

1. Then he did not in his agony pray more earnestly then at other times, if we
consider his prayer in reference unto the object, unto whom it was, God. The
Religion, and inward worship of his prayer, was for degrees always alike
equal. His trust and dependence upon God, love of, zeal and devotion toward
God, from which all his prayers flowed, were not at one time more intense then
at another.

But now 2. he prayed more earnestly in his agony, then at other times, in
regard of the matter, against which he prayed, the evils that he encountered
with, which if they were not greater, then those that he deprecated in the
former prayer ver. 42. yet at least they made a greater impression upon his
humane nature: for they put him into a bloody sweat. Being in an agony, he
prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood,
falling down to the ground.

I hope I shall not incur the displeasure of the Doctor for my boldness in
presuming to examine this passage in him. And I profess for mine own part,
that if he will honor me so far, as to reply unto what I have said, his
pains shall be very welcome unto me: if he do it (as I am confident he will)
in a fair and Scholasticall way.

Thirdly, the dwelling of all-fulnesse of grace in Christ will yield abundant
and unutterable consolation unto all those that have interest in Christ, all
his true and sincere members. And here that this point may shed the greater and
larger comfort unto all their hearts, I shall 1. Demonstrate, that upon union
with the person of Christ there ensues 1. A communion in. 2. a conformity unto
his fullness of grace: and this being made good, I shall in the next place
show, how that Christ's members may reap hence a double comfort. 1. Against the
strength and fullness of sin. 2. Against their wants in, and emptiness of
grace.

1. The first thing to be done, is to prove, that all the members of Christ
shall enjoy communion in, and conformity unto the fullness of Christ's grace.

1. A communion in it, by imputation of it unto them; that is, acceptance of
it for them. And hence is it, that Paul speaking in the name of all believers,
says, that Christ of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, and
sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. What God Ezekiel. 16.14. speaks of the Church of
Jerusalem, is applicable unto the Church in general. Thy beauty was perfect
through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, says the Lord God. Now one
branch of that comeliness with which God invests the Church, and all her true
members, is the beauty of habitual holiness in Christ. The best of saints
considered in themselves, are in great part naked, and those garments that they
have of inherent righteousness, are but as filthy, or menstrous rags, Is.
64.6. But now here is their comfort; they have an husband, that has a full
wardrobe of graces, wherewith he can adorn and beautify them from top to toe,
wherewith he can cover all their rags, and nakedness. For the sake of Christ's
spotless holiness, every soul espoused unto Christ is accepted as
graciously, as if so be she were in her self without spot. Thou art all fair,
my love (says Christ to his Church) there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4.7. that
is, as by remission, so also by acceptance. The Vrim, and the Thummim, were to
be applied unto the twelve names of the tribes of Israel, engraven in the
breast plate of the high priest, Exodus 28.30. And this might be to typifie the
application of those lights, and perfections, that were in the heart of Christ
unto all his people: and therefore it is termed (think some) in the latter
part of the verse, jus filiorum Israelis, the judgment of the people of Israel;
that is, that, by which they were to be justified in the judgment of God. There
is darkness in our light, imperfection in our purity, and consequently an
utter unaptnesse and disability for our justification. But now upon the heart
of our high Priest, there is the Urim and the Thummim, lights and perfections,
a fullness of knowledge, and a perfection of all other gracious endowments,
which can stand before the utmost severity of law and justice. But now this
that we have said, touching the imputation of the fullness of grace in Christ
unto us, must be understood cum grano salis. We must not divide this fullness
of grace from the other parts of Christ's humiliation, but take them all
jointly, and together. Thus Pareus upon Hebr. 5.10. Effectum aeternae salutis
nostrae Apostolus ostendit profluere non ex aliqua part actionum vel passionum
Christi: sed ex toto redemptionis opere plenissime ab eo peracto. Ne igitur
dividamus Christum, aut fidem nostram distrahamus, quaerendo aliam justitiae
partem in nativitate, aliam in habituali sanctitate, aliam in vitae
integritate, aliam in mortis obedientia: oportuit haec omnia in Christo
compleri, omnibusque his consummatis salutis aeternae author nobis extitit. Of
these words, that which Mr Dickson has on the same place may serve instead of
a translation. The proper cause (says he) of our salvation, is to be sought in
Christ, perfected by suffering, not in any one part of his holiness, or
obedience in doing, or any part of his suffering, but in him perfected by his
obedience; even to the death of the cross. We may take comfort from, and make
use of, his holy conception, life, and several virtues: But we must remember,
that his accomplished obedience, in doing and suffering, is our ransom,
jointly considered, and not any particular act looked on alone. With these two
Dr. Ames also accords. Med. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 27.. 27. Haec justitia non est
membratim quaerenda in puritate naturae, nativitatis, and vitae Christi: sed ex
tota Christi obedientia exurgit simul cum remissione peccatorum sicut eadem
Adami inobedientia and spoliavit nos justitia originali, and obnoxios etiam
reddidit reatui condemnationis. This righteousness, which must come in place
of justification, is not severally to be sought in the purity of the nature,
birth, and life of Christ: but it arises out of all the obedience of Christ,
together with remission of sins, as the same disobedience of Adam has both
robbed us of Original righteousness, and made us subject to the guilt of
condemnation.

In a second place, I am to clear, that in all the true members of Christ,
there shall be a conformity unto his fullness of grace. God has predestined
them thereunto Romans 8.29. and how great a congruence there is therein, will
soon appear, if we compare Christ with Adam: For as we have borne the image
of the earthy, the first man, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly,
the second man, 1 Cor. 15.49. The first Adam was not only full of sin in
himself, but he also filled all his posterity with sin, and death. And shall
not the second Adam then fill all his offspring with grace, and life. Unto
them the first Adam was a Channel of sin, and corruption: And Therefore the
second Adam shall be unto them a fountain of grace, and sanctification: For is
not he as powerful to communicate this, as the other was to instill that. And
besides, he is as willing to do it, as he is able: For he has in a plentiful
measure shed his blood for his Church, much more will he plentifully shed and
derive his Spirit upon her. Questionless, he will be as liberal of his grace,
as blood; power out one, as well as the other.

The Prophet Isaiah having chap. 11. ver. 2. foretold, how that there should
descend upon Christ, even the fountain of all knowledge, the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of counsel and knowledge, etc. in ver. 9. he
subjoyneth the plentiful communication, or overflowing of this fountain unto
the Church. The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover the sea: that is, the channel, or bottom of the Sea. The Church, and
her true members shall be as full of the knowledge of God, as the sea is full
of waters. That from this endowing of Christ with all-fulnesse of grace, and
spirit, all that belong unto him have ground of comfort, and wherein, the
Psalmist plainly intimates, Psalm. 45.7. where he calls the spirit,
wherewith Christ was anointed, the oil of gladness. And the oil of gladness
it is called, not only because in reflection on it his own soul was filled
with joy, peace, and comfort, but also because it gladdeth the hearts of all
his chosen people. He was anointed to appoint unto them, that mourn in Sion,
the oil of joy for mourning, Esaias 61.1,3. Now his unction gladdeth, and
cheareth the hearts of all his members: Because of the oil, wherewith he was
anointed, there is also an effusion upon them. The excellency of his unction
above his members implies their communion with him therein. The comparison of
inequality, He was anointed above his fellows, presupposes a comparison of
similitude, to wit, that his fellows were anointed too, though in a far
inferior measure. But now they be only members, and not excrements, that are
the objects of this effusion. They be the fellows of Christ, that share with
him in this his anointing. He is anointed above his fellows; and what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, What communion has light
with darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14. How can they that are filled with all
unrighteousness, Romans 1.29. be the fellows of the Son, and King of
righteousnesss! Are drunkards, swearers, prophaners of the sabbath, adulterers,
muck-wormes, etc. conforts of the holy one? The fellows of Christ are such as
the Apostle says are made partakers of Christ, Heb. 3.14. and those are not
yet made partakers of Christ, who impenitently partake of other men's sins, 1
Timoth. 5.22. and have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
Ephesians. 5.11. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
confidence steadfast unto the end. Apostates then, that leave their first love,
and renounce the fundamentals of the Gospel, the principles of the doctrine of
Christ, or the word of the beginning of Christ, Heb. 6.1. are, whilst such,
excluded from all fellowship with Christ. The fellows of Christ are his
Brethren, and the character, which Christ himself gives of them, is obedience
unto the will of his father, Math. 12.50. They are with him coheires, Romans
8.17. and therefore they exercise all acts of communion with God, their father,
Christ their elder brother, and with the rest of their Brethren. Those, that
are the Children, and heirs of God, joint heirs with Christ, walk in some
degree suitably unto so eminent a relation: And therefore do not walk in the
counsel of the ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat
of the scornful, Psalm. 1.1. But to return from this digression, which I have
inserted to keep aliens, and enemies unto Christ, from presuming to meddle
with the comfort of this point. Though in Christ there was a fountain of oil,
as it was said there was in The new Annotations on Canti. 1.2.
Rome at the day of his birth, yet the streams thereof make glad the city of
God, Psalm. 46.4. The two olive branches through the two golden pipes, empty
the golden oil out of themselves, Zachar. 4.12. Here grace is the golden oil,
Gods ordinances are the golden pipes. The two olive branches are the two
anointed ones, verse. 14. that is, say they that interpret the words of Christ
only, either the two natures of Christ, his Godhead and Manhood, or his two
offices, Royal and Priestlie; as man and priest of his Church, he merited and
purchased grace: as God and King he actually produces it in the souls of
such, as have relation unto him. As the ointment trickled down from Aarons
head unto the very skirts of his garment: Even so the oil of the Spirit in
Christ is diffused from him unto all the members of his body, unto his lowest
members. Ye have received an unction from the holy one, says John, 1 John
2.20,27. unto those little children, new converts, or novices in the faith,
that he wrote unto. In these words there is remarkable for our special
consolation, the influence of this unction, we receive from Christ, against
error and seduction in fundamentals, plainly employed in the adversative
particle, prefixed unto both verses. In ver. 18.19. he speaks of Antichrist,
and Apostates, that swarmed every where. But he has no sooner mentioned them,
but he forthwith opposes this unction of the Spirit from Christ, as a
preservative against the poison of their heresy, and danger of their Apostasy.
But ye have received an unction from the holy one, that will preserve you from
all backsliding Heretics. In verse. 26. he makes special mention of seducers.
These things have I written unto you concerning them, that seduce you. And
presently, verse. 27. he directs unto this spiritual anointing, as a sufficient
antidote against their infection. But the anointing, which ye have received of
him, abides in you: and ye need not that any man teach you: But as the same
anointing teaches you of all things and is truth and is no lie; and even as it
has taught you, ye shall abide in him. There are two properties in the words
of this anointing, which yield full security unto believers against such false
teachers: The sufficiency; and the permanency of it.

1. The fullness, and sufficiency of it. Ye have an unction from the holy one,
and ye know all things, verse. 20. that is, all things necessary to salvation:
And ye need not that any man teach you, verse. 27: to wit, the grounds and
principles of Christian Religion.

2. The permanency of it. The anointing, which ye have received of him, abides
in you, verse. 27 and hereupon in the close of the verse, he infers their
perseverance in union with Christ; even as it has taught you, ye shall abide
in him.

In Ephesians. 4.7. The Apostle shows what kind of doale, or distribution Christ
makes of grace unto his Church, and there be 4 particulars, by which he
illustrates it, 1. the universality, 2. The variety, diversity, or inequality,
3. The limitation, 4. The freeness of it.

1. It is common, and universal: Unto every one of us grace is given: not unto
every man, but unto every believer, unto every true member of Christ, and his
Church.

2. This distribution is with great diversity and inequality. Thus Cornel.
Alapide comments upon it, Cuique data est (says he) gratia non una and par,
sed varia, and dispar: huic major, illi minor. Unto every one of us are given
several graces. We have not the same degrees, if we speak of the graces of
sanctification: We have not the same sorts or kinds, if we speak of the graces
of edification. There is great variety, both in the quantity, and quality of
the talents, or gifts of the servants of Christ: One may have five, another but
two talents. The talents of the one may be of gold; the talents of the other
but of silver.

3. We have the limitation, that is observed in this distribution of grace.
Unto every one of us Grace is given by measure. The best of us have but our
measure, a small, and narrow scantling. For an absolute fullness is the
incommunicable property of Christ himself.

4. Lastly, Here is the freeness of this distribution: Unto every one of us
grace is freely given, not sold. The diversity, that is in the measure of men's
gifts, and graces, proceeds not from any inequality in their merits, or
foregoing preparations, but merely from the free grace, the gift, the good
will, and pleasure of Christ. Grace is given unto us according unto the measure
of the gift of Christ.

It may perhaps seem that this place is not so pertinently alleged, because
it speaks only of a measure in the grace of the saints, and so asserts not a
conformity unto the fullness thereof in Christ. But in the least measure of
sincere grace there is a kind of fullness, Plenitudo respectiva, and secundum
quid. And that Christ communicates such a fullness unto his Church, I shall
farther confirm, 1. From it is relation unto Christ. 2 from Gods end, in the
collation of all fullness of grace upon Christ, 3. By going over the several
gradations of the fullness of grace, that Christ imparts unto her in this life.

1. From the relation of the Church unto Christ. She is related unto him, as a
spouse unto her husband, as a house unto the Lord or Proprietary, as a body
unto the head.

1. As a wife, or spouse unto her husband, Canticl. 4.8. Ephesians. 5.23,25,29,30,31.
In him, the husband, there are hid unsearchable riches of grace, and wisdom:
And will he then suffer her, whom he has taken so near unto himself, to
want, to be poor in grace. He has grace, as a treasurer, and can dispense of
it to whom he will. May not she, who is as it were the wife of his bosom
freely beg it of him? The garments of holiness are all in his custody, and
at his disposal: Can his tender heart then possibly endure to see her go
naked, and in rags? Christ was a lamb absolutely without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19.
and therefore he will not suffer any reigning or unmortified spot in his love.
Thou art all fair (says he himself unto her) and there is no spot in thee,
Cant. 4.7. that is, (if we understand the words of sanctification)
comparatively, in comparison of the wicked and unregenerate, who are all over
defiled, Deuteronomy. 32.5. and spotted with the world, Jam. 1.27.

2. The Church is related unto Christ, as a house unto the Lord, or
proprietary. Christ was faithful, as a son over his house, whose house are
we, Heb. 3.6. Now did he of old fill his material house, the Temple, with his
presence and glory, and will he not now fill his spiritual house with his
spirit, and grace? undoubtedly he will. As the cloud of Gods glorious presence
first filled the Sanctuary, and afterward the whole temple: Even so the spirit
of grace in Christ shall first fill the soul in believers, and it is faculties,
and then spread it self over the body, so that that shall be become an outward
temple of the holy Ghost. It is said of the ointment, wherewith Mary anointed
the feet of Christ, that the whole house was filled with the odor of it, Joh.
12.3. Semblably may we say of the spirit and grace, wherewith Christ was
anointed, that his whole house, to wit, Church, is filled with the fruits and
comforts of it.

3. She is related unto him, as the body unto the head. The Church, which is
his body. The fullness of him, that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. In which
words we have as the relation of the Church unto Christ, so also the influence
of Christ upon the Church.

1. We have here the relation of the Church unto Christ: She is his body, and
hereupon his fullness. The name of fullness is (as Rollocke thinks) a
declaration of the relation of body from it is office, which is to complete, and
in an external way to perfect the head: For the members are a superadded
ornament unto the head, and an object of it is influence. So that though it were
in it self never so comely, yet it would, severed from them, be defective, nay
loose the very nature and relation of head, as having nothing whereon to
exercise its office. So though Christ considered personally be possessed with an
overflowing fullness, yet if we consider him mystically, as head of his Church,
such is his love unto his Church, as that he esteems himself but maimed, and
imperfect, unless he have her joined unto him, as his body. By this then, we
see, that Christ's own interest will lie upon him, as an engagement to be
careful for the filling of his Church, and every member thereof, with all
requisite graces: for because she is his fullness, therefore by filling her, he
himself under the capacity and notion of head, becomes the more full; His
glory and honor is the more advanced, His joy and comfort the more enlarged.
The more gracious his members are, the more joyful and glorious he is.

But this engagement of Christ unto his Church, as his body, and fullness, we
have made good by the second particular in the text, Christ's influence upon the
Church, who fills all in all: that is, who fills all things, to wit, all
powers and parts, in all Saints, in all his members. He fills their
understandings with a saving light; their wills with holy, and heavenly
purposes and intentions, desires and affections: their consciences with peace
and purity: their bodies with promptness and readiness of obedience unto the
commands of God, and their souls.

There be some that differ from us in the interpretation of (...); others in
the translation of (...). But their sense does very well sort unto that, for
which we allege the place.

1. There be some, as Rivet, and Grotius, that take (...), in a passive
signification. The Church is Christ's passive fullness, filled, or made full by
Christ, not only with common, but with spiritual, sanctifying and saving
graces: and this sense, you see, serves expressly for the proof of the matter
in hand.

And no less is implied by those, who translate (...), passively, and so read
the words thus: The Church is the fullness of him, who is filled all in all. As
the Church considered in common, and general, is the fullness of Christ: so
every true member of the Church is a part, and portion of that fullness: and
therefore however Christ, as head, cannot be absolutely complete, until all
his elect members are gathered, and fully united unto him jointly, or together,
all at once in the resurrection, in their bodies as well as souls; Yet he may
be said to be filled inchoatively, and gradually, in the successive vocation,
Sanctification, and glorification of his several members. The union between
Christ and the Church is so near, as that Christ is sometimes taken
collectively, for the whole Church consisting of head, and body. And hereupon,
what is done and suffered by the Church, is frequently ascribed unto Christ
himself, Gal. 2.20. Act. 9.5. And here in this place according unto the now
mentioned reading of the words, he is said to be filled in all; that is, in all
the Saints, in all believers, when they receive of his fullness, and are
thereby filled.

Musculus, and Cornelius Alapide note, that by an usual Graecisme, (...), is
put for (...). All, for according unto all: so that in the words we have a
twofold extent of this paso sive repletion of Christ. 1. Of the subject, or
persons, in whom he is under the capacity of an head said to be filled: In all;
that is, in all his members. 2. Of the matter, wherewith he is filled in these
persons: According unto all; that is, all gracious gifts pertaining unto the
fullness, and perfection of his body, the spiritual life, and salvation of all
his members. Though he of himself personally, be so full, that he fills all
in all, yet he is pleased to account himself under a mystical consideration,
to be filled in all his members, according unto all graces, either of
sanctification or edification, that are powered upon them, both (...) and (...)
according unto all and in all, are (as Calvin observes concerning (...) all)
here to be restrained according unto the present circumstance of the place. Now
the Apostle speaks here in particular concerning the Spiritual government of
the Church; and unto this drift of the Apostle, it will be most suitable to
understand both the alls, in the text, with reference unto the Church: In all,
concerning the members of the Church; According to all, touching such
blessings, and gifts, as are proper, and peculiar to Church members.

There is also another interpretation that comes home to our purpose, and it is
Christum implere omnia in omnibus: id est, licet Ecclesia sit ejus (...), non
idco tamen est (...), quod Christus perse ea carere non possit. Is enim potius
in ea; and in singulis membris. implet omnia very capitis officia, omniaque
beneficia immediate praestat in fingulis. Erge Ecclesia non data est eapiti; ut
sit (...) Christi, sed potius Christus datus est Ecclesiaecaput; ut omnia
colligat membra and in omnibus omnia bona and felicia operetur: omnia inquam
very capitis officia in singulis membris perficit.
Zanchie's. The sum of which is. He fulfilleth, or discharges all the
offices of a true head in every member, and immediately conferreth upon each
all graces, requisite for their salvation, and for their particular station in
the body of Christ.

A second particular I propounded, was Gods end in conferring an allfulnesse of
grace upon Christ. It was to fit, and enable him to be a vital, and universal
principle of grace, and holiness unto his Church. He had it then, not as a
private, but as a public person, as a second Adam, as the head of his Church.
And the head (we know) is an official part in the body, having sense and
motion, not for it self only, but for the whole body. Even after the same
manner that the stomach has meat's, the liver blood; even so Christ's grace
was not for himself, but for his members. If you will compare Psalm. 68.18.
with Ephesians. 4.8. The comparison will light you unto this conclusion, that Christ
received gifis for men, that he might give gifts unto men. Unto this purpose
some of the Schoolmen have noted, that in Christ, gratia habitualis, and gratia
capitis, are not two several graces, really different, but one and the same
grace distinguished only by various respects, and considerations. It is called
habitual grace, considered as a personal perfection of Christ, sanctifying
his own humane nature, It is termed gratia capitis, if regarded, as a
principle of grace, from whence it was to be shed abroad upon others.

But here we must distinguish of a twofold principle of grace, physical and
moral.

1. The habitual grace of Christ's humane nature cannot be a physical
principle of grace in others. For grace is an operative Gratia non est qualitas
activa sui similis, etc. Et ratio reddipotest, quia haec est communis ratio
habitus operativi, ut scilicet, non sit productious alterius ha^itus. sed s^um
actuum, etc. vel ce^te dici potest, gratiam esse eminentem quand ^m participat
onem d^vinae n^turae, quae pr^pt^ea postulat u^so^um per influxum divinit^uis
natura sua participari possit, and ideo non est qualitas activa sui similis,
sed a solo Deo, ut a principali causa producibilis; sicut quia natura Argelica
ta^is est, ut ex se postulet produci per creationem; inde fit, ut non sit
productiva sui similis, sed a solo Deo creari possit. Et confirmatur, nam si
gratia creata existens in anima Christi posse^ esse proprium principium
producendi aliam similem, vel hoc faceret v^luti action transeunte^d modum
formae naturalis; Ethic modus agendi est imperfectus, and non convenit gratiae,
quae est quasi quaedam natura spiritualis, ordinata ad operandum per actus
vitales and immanentes: vel efficeret talem gratiam per aliquem actum vitalem
and immanentem, and hoc etiam dici non potest. Nam isti habitus infusi non
p^odu^ cuntur neque augentur effective per proprios actus, ^tiam in proprio
subjecto, ergo multo minus produci poterunt in subiectis extrinsecis, seu
diversis. Suarez. in tertiam part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 31. sect. 4. page 483.
habit; and operative habits are productive only of acts in their own
subjects, and not of other habits in foreign subjects.

2. Christ's habitual grace therefore is only a moral, or meritorious cause
of ours, And that

1. Remotely; because it is a qualification prerequisite unto all the
satisfaction, and merit of his obedience. For no part of his obedience, either
active, or passive, would have been in the least degree, either satisfactory,
or meritorious, if it had not proceeded from a nature, endowed with an
all-fulnesse of grace, and a most spotless holiness.

2. Say others, proxime; because it merited the grace, and holiness of all his
members: For every branch of his humiliation was meritorious. And was it not a
part of his humiliation that he, who in regard of his divine, and infinite
person was above the law, the Lawgiver, should assume a nature, that should be
all over clothed with habitual conformity unto the law, should be made under
the Law, not only actually, but habitually?

Against this it is usually objected, that Christ, as man, as a reasonable
creature, was obliged unto the habitual grace, or holiness of his nature, as
touching the continuance of it; and therefore it could be no part of his debt,
that he undertook, as our mediator: what he owed for himself, he could not
be bound unto for us.

For answer: I shall apply to the habitual grace of Christ, what Ames says,
Med. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 21.. 24. touching his legal obedience. Although it
was required of Christ, now made man, by right of creation, yet because he was
made man, not for himself, but for us, it was a part of that humiliation,
satisfaction, and merit, which God required, and accepted of him for us.

By this, that I have said, you may qualify diverse passages in some practical
Divines of great note and ability, concerning the influence of Christ's fullness
of grace. I shall give you the sum of what they say, desiring you to
understand them of a moral, or meritorious causality. Christ had fullness of
grace, as the sun has light; a fountain waters; a depositarie treasures.

1. As the sun has light: He was the sun of righteousness. And the sun
was endowed with a fullness of light, not so much for its own proper ornament,
as for the good of the whole universe, to dispense abroad a rich warmth, and
influence upon it. Even so the sun of righteousness was enriched with an
all-fulnesse of grace, not only for his own proper, and personal perfection,
but also for the benefit, and behoof of his members, that he might communicate
thereof unto them, and make them likewise full of grace.

2. As a fountain has waters. A fountain of gardens, A well of living waters,
Canticl. 4.15. Now wherefore is a fountain, but to replenish streams, and
rivers? To what purpose serves a fountain in a garden, but to water the
plants, herbs, and flowers therein, which would otherwise wax dry, and
wither. He fills all things with his wisdom as Physon, and as Tigris in the
time of the New fruits. He makes the understanding to abound like Euphrates,
and as Jordan in the time of the harvest: At which time it overfloweth all its
banks. I also came out as a brook from a river, and as a conduit into a
garden. I said, I will water my best garden, and will water abundantly my
garden bed: Ecclesiasticus 24.25,26,30,31.

3. As a depositary has treasures: In whom are hid all the treasures of
knowledge and wisdom. He had knowledge, and wisdom, as a public officer,
and treasurer thereof. And he was not appointed a treasurer niggardly, to hoard
it up. When a man has riches, it is a vanity under the sun (says Solomon)
to keep them and hoard them up. He were as good not to have them, as not to use
them. Wisdom that is hid, and treasure that is hoarded up, what profit is in
them both? Eccles. 20.3. But he was sealed, and sanctified to be a liberal
dispenser of them, unto those whom his father had given him amongst men. As all
the granaries of corn in Egypt were by Pharaoh committed unto Joseph, for the
supply, not of Joseph's, but of the peoples public wants. Ille frumenta
servavit non sibi, sed omni populo. As Bernard in his second Homily Super
missus est. Even so was Christ entrusted with all treasures of wisdom, and
knowledge, not so much for his own, as for the Churches use.

And thus, you see, how that Christ received this fullness, even for this very
purpose to distribute of it unto his Church. His fullness was, not only a
fullness of sufficiency for himself, but also a fullness of redundancy,
influence, and efficiency upon others.

Now the soul of a Christian may from the premises, to its unspeakabe comfort,
frame this, or the like discourse. Dwells there an all-fulnesse of grace in
my Savior, and can there be an emptiness in me? Was this fullness of grace
bestowed upon him, not so much for himself, as for others, for me amongst the
rest, and will not he employ it for my good? Will not he derive part of it unto
me? So should he betray that trust, which his father has reposed in him, as
Lordetreasurer of his Church, which, but to imagine, were blasphemy. Fullness
of grace was conferred upon him, as the head of his Church; How can it then but
have a powerful (that I say not) unresistable influence upon me, who am one of
his members? Unnatural were it for the head of the natural body to keep in
the spirit, sense, and motion, and not conveigh them unto the rest of the body.
As unnatural, as unbecoming were it for the head of the body mystical, not to
impart grace unto the rest of the members.

In the third, and last place, I shall go over the several gradations of the
fullness of grace, that Christ imparts unto his Church and members here in this
life.

1. He communicates unto all his members an initiall fullness of grace, a
fullness of parts in their first conversion.

2. Unto those, that are of full age, and strong in the faith, he distributes a
progressive fullness, (as I may call it) which accreweth unto them upon the
further growth of their holiness.

1. Then he communicates unto all his members an initiall fullness of grace, a
fullness of parts unto all his members in their first conversion. In the
washing of regeneration, and in our renewing, the Holy Ghost (says Paul) is
shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Lord, Tit. 3.5,6. The vocation
or conversion of the Gentiles is termed by the same Apostle, To. 11.12. their
riches, because therein the riches, that is, a plentiful measure of Gods grace
is by the spirit of Christ powered on them. It is also called in the same place,
the riches of the world, because thereby some of all nations dispersed through
out the whole world, are enriched with gracious endowments from the spirit of
Christ. Of his fullness (says John the Baptist) have all we received, and
grace for grace, John. 1.16. In which words we have 1. A deduction or
derivation of our grace from the fullness thereof in Christ, as a fountain. 2.
An exact conformity, and answerablenesse of our grace unto the fullness
thereof in Christ, as unto its rule, and pattern.

1. We have a deduction or derivation of our grace from the fullness thereof in
Christ, as a fountain. Of his fullness we receive grace: Even as the glass
does the Image from the face. The fullness of grace in Christ is not only a
fullness of an abundance, but also a fullness of redundance. From his fullness
there runs over a share, and portion unto his Church: Even as light is
derived from the sun unto the beams issuing from it; As sap goes from the
root unto the branches; As water flows from the fountain unto the streams;
As sense and motion descends from the head unto the members. I find in some
papers, that I collected when I was first a Student in Divinity in Oxford, and
if my memory fail me not, it was somewhere in Aquinas, that the preposition [
of] denotes three things. 1. the Original, or efficient cause of our grace.
2. The consubstantiality of the principle, or efficient cause of Christ's grace
and ours. Thus the Son is said to be of the Father. And according unto this
acception of the particle, the fullness of Christ is the holy Ghost, who
proceeds from him consubstantiall to him in nature, virtue, and majesty. For
although the habitual endowments of his soul, are different in number from
those in us, yet it is one, and the same spirit, that filled him, and
sanctifies us, All these works that one and the self same spirit, etc. 1
Cor. 12.11.

Thirdly, of, signifies the partiality, or imperfection in participation of
our grace from Christ. We receive of his fullness, and not his fullness it
self. And thus we usually say, take, and receive of this bread and wine, when
we mean only a part of the bread or wine, and not the whole. There is a perfect
fullness of grace in Christ, but how little a part, or portion thereof
redoundeth unto us! Unto every one of us grace is given according unto the
measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7.

2. Here is an exact conformity, and answerablenesse of our grace, unto the
fullness thereof in Christ, as unto it is rule, and pattern. Of his fullness we
receive grace for grace, (...). As in natural Mr Bayne on Ephesians. 1.23. Dr Edw.
Reynolds treatise. page 400.
generation the child receives from his parents limb for limb: not alimbe in
them, requisite unto the integrity of their nature, but is in it too; the frame
of its body is as full as theirs for members, though not for bulk or quantity.
Even so in regeneration, when Christ is fully formed in the soul of a man, He
receives in some weak degree grace for grace. There is not a sanctifying and
saving grace in Christ's humane nature, but it is in some small measure, and
proportion wrought in him; so that the frame of his grace is as full as
Christ's, in respect of the number, though not the measure of his graces.

Pelargus and Maldonate tell us of some, that translate the preposition (...),
upon; we have received of his fullness grace upon grace: that is, omnem
gratiam, or, cumulatissimam gratiam; every grace, or most abundant grace. And
they parallel it with Job 2.4. which they render thus: Skin upon skin, yea all
that a man has, will he give for his life: that is, a man will give for his
life all his wealth or substance, which in those times stood principally in
cattle, expressed Synechdochically by skins.

2. Christ communicates unto such of his members, as are of full age, and
strong in the faith, a progressive fullness of grace: and I term it so,
because it accreweth unto them upon their proficiency in grace, and holiness.
Now that this progressive fullness is attainable here in this life may be
evinced, From the commendations that are given in Scripture unto the Saints for
it; from the exhortations to it; from the prophesies, promises, and relations
of it; from the prayers, both of petition, and thanksgiving for it, that
occur in Scripture.

1. From the commendations that are given in Scripture unto the Saints for it,
as unto Elizabeth, Luke 1.41. Zacharias, v. 67. Stephen, Act. 6.8. and 7.55.
Dorcas, Act. 9.36. and Barnabas, Act. 11.24. one part of the character of the
Angel of the Church of Smyrna is, that notwithstanding his outward poverty, he
was yet rich, Rev. 2.9. to wit; inwardly toward God, Luke 12.21. with true
riches, Luke 16.11. Paul witnesses of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8.7. that they
did abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and
diligence, and in their love toward the Ministers of the Gospel: and he gives
also as large a testimony of the better part of the Romans, such as were
strong, and grown Christians. I my self also (says he) am persuaded of you
my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge,
able to admonish one another, Romans 15.14. In which words we have three things
considerable. 1. What fort of fullness it was, that the Apostle speaks of. 2.
The matter of it, goodness, and all knowledge. 3. The result, or sequel of it,
That ye may be able also to admonish one another. 1. Enquire we, what sore or
kind of fullness it was. There is a twofold fullness of grace: one of parts,
another of degrees.

1. Of parts, when one has all the graces of sanctification for sort, or kind.
And such a fullness is conferred upon even the weakest in the faith, and that
at their first conversion: for then they have so much grace, as does in some
measure enable them, for the mortifying of every lust, for the performance of
all duties, whether of the first or second Table.

In a second place, there is a fullness of degrees, and that again either
absolute, or comparative. Now the Romans were not in regard of degrees
absolutely full of goodness, filled with all knowledge: For such a perfection
of fullness Paul himself disclaimeth, Phil. 3.12. as being the alone
privilege of triumphant Saints.

Their fullness then was only comparative, in comparison of such imperfect
beginnings, as were in novices, and babes in Christ, such as were weak in the
faith.

2 We have the matter of this fullness, goodness, and all knowledge.

1. Goodness, by which the Greek Expositours, as Beza informs me,
understand virtue in general, and oppose it (...), unto wickedness; so that
it comprehends all virtuous and gracious habits whatsoever.

2. All knowledge; that is, the knowledge of all things necessary unto faith,
godliness, and salvation.

3. Lastly, we have the result or sequel of this fullness, Qualification of
them for the duty of mutual admonition, unto which is requisite a gracious
heart, and a gifted head: Because they were full of goodness, they had hearts
propense unto so good a work: Because they were filled with all knowledge,
they were able to manage it for the best advantage unto Gods glory, and their
own edification. The four beasts were full of eyes before, behind, and
within, Rev. 4.6,8. that is, the ministers of the Gospel, comprehended under
the four Evangelists, were full of knowledge and vigilant care. They were full
of eyes before, to look toward God; and behind, to look toward their
people; and within, to look to themselves.

A second Argument for the attainablenesse of this progressive fullness, is the
exhortations, that occur in scripture unto it. Paul exhorts the Corinthians
to be perfect, 2 Cor. 13.11. to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2
Cor. 7.1. and to be abounding in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. The
Colossians to abound in faith, Col. 2.7. the Hebrews to go on unto
perfection, Heb. 6.1. He beseeches the Thessalonians by the Lord Jesus to
abound more and more, to wit, in spirituals; that is, in graces and duties.

Thirdly, there are Prophecies of this progressive fullness in the old
Testament, Esaias 33.5. The Lord is exalted. Christ is risen, and ascended into
heaven: for he dwells on high; that is, he sits at the right hand of the
Father. And the fruit hereof is the filling of the Church with grace and
goodness, He has filled Sion with judgment and righteousness. The spirit
shall be powered upon us from on high: And the wilderness shall be a fruitful
field, Isaiah 32.15. The desert shall rejoice and blossom as the Rose. It
shall blossom abundantly: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, The
excellency of Carmel, and Sharon, Esaias 35.1,2.

A fourth Argument is the promise that is made in Scripture of this progressive
fullness. Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance.

Our Savior propounds this promise twice. 1. In the parable of the sower, unto
the having or possession of grace, Math. 13.12. 2. In the parable of the
talents, unto the diligent use of grace.

1. In the parable of the sower, unto the having or possession of grace; and
then the words may be thus paraphrased. Whosoever has the initials of
sanctifying, and saving grace, the beginnings of faith and repentance, unto him
shall be given increase thereof, Phil. 1.6. and this increase shall not be
sparing, but very plentiful. And he shall have more abundance. The good
ground, the honest and believing heart, that hears the word, and
understands it, bears fruit, and brings forth some an hundred fold, some
sixty, some thirty, Math. 13.23. a spark shall grow to be a flame: That light
which at first was but as the dawning, shall at last shine more and more unto
the perfect day. He that abides in me, and I in him (says our Savior) the
same brings forth much fruit, John 15.5. And the reason hereof, we may fetch
from the second verse of the same chapter, Every branch that bears fruit the
father purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

The Mr. John Goodwin in his Pagans debt and dowry.
Arminians will not allow this promise to be restrained unto the elect and the
regenerate, but would extend it unto the generality of mankind, unto even the
Heathen, unto whom the sound of the Gospel never came. But this our restraint
of the words I shall justify out of our renowned Twisse Vindic. great. lib. 3.
page 140, 141, 142. by three arguments, first, from the caution premised, verse.
9. secondly, from the words immediately foregoing, verse. 11. of which they are a
confirmation, 3. From the words following, which are an illustration of them by
way of Antithesis or opposition.

1. From the caution premised, verse. 9. who has ears to hear let him hear.
Where by ears is meant the inward ear of faith, and spiritual understanding.
Now that they who have ears to hear are the same with our Saviors, (...),
those that have, will easily appear to him, that shall compare the 9, 10, 11,
12. verses together.

2. From the words immediately foregoing, v. 11. unto you it is given to know
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, etc. for whosoever has, unto him
shall be given, etc. Now here would be no proof at all, unless by those that
have, be meant such as resemble the Apostle in piety, and holiness, unless
they be as they, elect and regenerate.

3. From the following words, which are of them an illustration, by way of
Antithesis, or opposition. But whosoever has not, from him shall be taken
away, even that he has. Hence I thus argue. By those that have not, are
understood the unregenerate, and therefore by those that have, are meant the
regenerate. That by whosoever has not, are understood the unregenerate, is
evident, because these words, whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away
even that he has, are urged by our Savior as an Argument to prove that clause
in the precedent verse: But unto them it is not given. Which in Mark. 4.11. is
thus varied. But unto them that are without, all these things are done in
parables. Now by such as are without, our Savior understands Aliens, such as
are not inwardly, and effectually called, such as are not members of the Church
in regard of spiritual communion; However they may have place therein, in
regard of outward profession.

This engagement of our Savior is made, 2. in the parable of the Talents, unto
the diligent, faithful, and holy use of the gifts, and graces, both of
edification, and sanctification, Math. 25.29. And then it may be thus glossed.
Whosoever uses his gifts, and talents well, in a sanctified manner, for his
masters service, the advancement of Gods glory, the promotion of Christ's
Kingdom, unto him, besides the reward mentioned verse. 21, 23, at the last day,
shall be given even here in this life an abundant improvement of these gifts,
and talents, and the great enlargment of their gracious use for the edification
of others.

A 5th argument is from the relations of this progressive fullness.

1. From the relation of an effect toward spiritual and heavenly wisdom.
The wisdom that is from above is (says Jam. chap. 3.17.) full of mercy, and
good fruits. Full of mercy, and that erga egenos, th^se that are wanting, as
also erga errantes, and peccantes, those, that are faulty, and straying: and
full of good fruits; that is, of all offices of humanity, and love, as Pareus
expounds the words. And if it be full of mercy, and good fruits toward men, it
is also full of Religion and acts of worship toward God: For between the
graces and duties of the first and second table there is an inseparable
coherence.

2. From the relation it has of a consequent, and end, unto Christ's ascension.

1. Then it is related unto Christ's ascension, as the consequent thereof.
Whereas the Psalmist, Psalm. 68.18. mentioning the effect, or fruit of Christ's
ascension in regard of his members, says, that he received gifts for men. The
Apostle in his quotation of this place, Ephesians. 4.8. expresses the passage
thus, He gave gifts unto men. Which variation shows (as Fulke observes in
page 12. of his answer to the preface of Martin against the English
translations of the bible) wherefore Christ received gifts, viz; to bestow them
on his Church.

To receive, and give, are different actions; But yet, when receiving, or
taking, is designed unto a farther giving, it is an usual Hebraisme, to
express the latter by the former.

In the words of the Psalmist, there is (as Beza, Piscator, and Rivet observe)
an Ellipsis, which may be supplied thus; Thou having received, gave gifts
unto men. So that by a Metalepsis, the Consequent is understood by the
Antecedent; Christ's receiving of gifts is put for his giving of gifts. Because,
as it is noted by A lapide, he received them not to keep them unto himself,
but to impart, and distribute them unto those, whom God has given him among
the sons of men.

There be two things amongst many others, that discourage poor believers, and
make them doubtful of their shares in the fullness of Christ.

1. The lowness and meannesse of their condition. 2. The sinfulness and
rebellion of their natures and lives.

Now those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 68.18. Thou have received gifts for
men, yea for the rebellious also, hold forth comfort against both these
particulars.

1. It comforts against the lowness and meannesse of our condition. Thou have
received gifts for men indefinitely. Gentiles, as well as Jews; poor, as well
as rich; unlearned as well as learned; deformed, as well as beautiful. No
sinlesse abasure whatsoever is any bar unto the bounty of Christ.

Yea, but says the distressed conscience, I am not only a despicable worm,
but a sinful, and rebellious wretch, and what thoughts of favor can Christ
have to such an one?

Why thou have received gifts for men, says the Psalmist, yea, for the
rebellious also. Every man is even from the womb a rebel against the command,
grace, and spirit of God. And therefore the rebellious here are denominated
from more then an ordinary height of rebellion, contracted by custom in
sinning, and superadded unto that natural contumacie, which is common unto all
the sons of Adam. No degree of rebellion renders incapable of benefit, by the
fullness of Christ's gifts, and graces, but what carries along final
impenitency with it. Thou have received gifts for the rebellious also: that is,
for even the worst of penitent rebels: such as have been notorious, and
desperate fighters against God, Children of disobedience, or rebellion,
foolish, deceived, serving diverse lusts, and pleasures, Tit. 3.3. What a
plentiful portion of gifts, and graces did Christ pour upon Saul, when he was
in the very ruff, and greatest heat of his rebellion, when he breathed out
threatenings, and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord.

By this you see, that one consequent of Christ's Ascension, after his victories
upon the Cross, Col. 2.12. regarding his favorites, and loving subjects, was
a distribution of Spiritual gifts unto them. As it was the custom of
Generals, when after a victory in a foreign war, they returned in triumph
unto their own country to send presents, and portions unto their friends, and
to cast gifts among the poor multitude, 1 Samuel 30.26,27. etc. Esther 9.19,22.
Joh. 7.38,39. Joh. 16.7.

But now ver. 10. of the fourth chapter of the Ephesians, the Apostle affirms
this communication of gifts unto the Church, to be not a mere consequent, but
further, the very and it self of Christ's ascension. He ascended far above
all heavens, that he might fill all things: that is, all his members with all
graces necessary unto them, either in a general way, as they were members of
the Church, or in a more peculiar consideration, if they were officers of the
Church. The universal particle [ all] is to be limited by the matter that is
for the present handled. Now it is manifest by the whole series of the Apostles
discourse, that he speaks of the Church, and therefore all is to be restrained
unto the Church, and her members. And of such restraints of the particle, we
have in this Epistle, besides the present place, three instances, Chap. 1.10,23
Chap. 4.6, Beza thinks, that the Apostle uses it here of set purpose, to show
that all difference between Jew and Gentile is taken away. Before Christ's
ascension the heavenly dew of Gods grace fell only upon the fleece, the land
of Canaan, but since upon the whole earth, upon even the fullness of the
Gentiles. For Christ ascended far above all heavens (...), that he might fill
all: that is, to paraphrase the words by parallel places of Scripture, that he
might pour his Spirit upon all flesh, Joel 2.28. that the earth might be full
of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, Esaias 11.9.

The Lutherans understand the words concerning the absolute filling of all
places with Christ's manhood. Cajetan, Emanuel Sa, and others think, that to
fill all, is as much, as to fulfill all promises, and prophecies, that were
written of him in the old Testament.

But the interpretation of the words, which I have brought, is favored, as
expositours upon the place generally allege, by the scope unto which they
serve for confirmation, by both the words foregoing of which they are an
explication, and by the words following, which are of them an exemplification.

1. By the scope, not only of these words, but also of the whole verse, nay of
the two verses immediately preceding, which is laid down verse 7. Unto every
one of us grace is given, etc. Now unto the confirmation of this, that unto
every one grace is given by Christ, Christ's ascension to fill every one, to
fill all, is very aptly referred.

2. By the words foregoing, verse. 8. of which they are an explication, When he
ascended up on high, etc. he gave gifts unto men. To ascend up on high is to
ascend up far above all heavens; and to give gifts unto men is to fill all
sorts, and kinds of men with gifts. The Apostle seems plainly, thinks Beza,
to allude unto the verse following that testimony of the Psalmist, quoted verse.
8. Blessed be the Lord God, who daily loadeth us with benefits, Psalm. 68.19.
The filling all things in the Apostle, is the same, that loading with benefits
is in the Psalmist.

3. From the words following, which are of them as it were an exemplification.
And he gave some Apostles, and some prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
pastors and teachers, etc. ver. 11.

Every office there mentioned includes, and presupposes gifts for it: for
ungifted officers are no gift, or blessing, but a curse, and judgment rather.
In the words then, as there is expressed the institution of Church officers,
both extraordinary, and ordinary, so there is implied the qualification of
these officers with abilities, and endowments for discharge of their several
duties. Now from the qualifying of Church officers with the graces of
edification, we may infer the furnishing of Church members with the graces of
sanctification: Because those were purposely conferred for the production,
augmentation, and confirmation of these. He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, verse. 11.12. And the saints are not
perfected, until they be filled with grace. The body of Christ is not edified,
unless Christ fill all in all, unless in every part of this body mystical,
all faculties of the soul, and all members of the body be clothed with
befitting graces.

In these words then, we have a description of the effusion of the spirit upon
the Church, 1. a finito. 2. ab adjunctis intensionis and extensionis.

1. Afinito, medio, sive destinato, the means designed to make way for it.
Christ's glorious ascension, He ascended far above all heavens, that he might
fill all, Joh. 7.38,39. Chapt. 16.7. It is Christ's errand, and business into
heaven; and therefore you may be confident he will mind it, and be very
intentive upon the compassing of it. The eye, and heart of a wise man is almost
never off from the end of any important action. It were then blasphemy but to
imagine, that Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, should not constantly have in his consideration, and intention, the
end of so glorious and action, as his ascension far above all visible heavens,
into paradise, the house of God, the third heaven, the heaven of heavens.

Next we have the adjuncts of this effusion of the spirit, the intension, and
extension of it.

1. The intension, measure, or degree of it. It was in comparison of that
sparing communication of the spirit before Christ's ascension, a filling. The
spirit was not as before, only sprinkled, but powered forth. It did descend not
in drops, or dew, but in showers of blessing, Ezekiel. 24.26. The Holy Ghost is
now shed on us abundantly, Tit. 3.5,6. (...), richly, as it is varied in the
margent: that is, largely, or plenteously.

2. We have the extension of it: It was a filling of all. He ascended, that he
might fill all: that is, that he might fill the universal Church, and every
true, and genuine member thereof. The subject then of this distribution of the
gifts of the Holy Ghost, is general, and universal, and that in as many
respects, as the Church is now said to be Catholic* In respect of 1. place. 2.
persons. 3. time.

1. In respect of place. It is no longer a little garden enclosed within the
territories of Jacob, but a spacious field diffused, successively at least,
through all nations, all lands, and countries.

2. In respect of the persons: Because this filling excludes no sort, or
condition of men, neither Jew, nor Gentile, Greek, nor Barbarian, bond, nor
free, male, nor female. Thus Dionysius Carthusianus expounds here the
universal sign. He restraines it unto men, and takes it distributively, de
generibus singulorum, He ascended far above all heavens, ut impleret omnia
genera hominum, id est, quosdam de universis generibus hominum: donis and
gratiis spiritus Sancti. That he might fill all sorts, kinds, or conditions of
men: that is, some of all sorts, with the gifts and graces of the holy Spirit.

Lastly, in respect of time: This distribution was not confined unto the times
presently after Christ's ascension, but if we speak of ordinary gifts of the
Spirit, to continue until the last day, according unto that promise of our
Savior, That he will be with, as the ministers, so the members of the Church,
always, even unto the end of the world, Math. 28.20. What comfort does this
place afford against the badnesse, barrenness, unhealthinesse, or any other
incommodiousnesse of the place of a man's habitation: against the meannesse, or
misery of a man's condition: against the iniquity of the times upon which a man
is cast! None of all these render a man incapable of being the object of this
filling here spoken of, of the giving of gifts unto men. For such is the
objective latitude thereof, as that it excludes no times, no places, nor any
condition of men whatsoever. Caeterum mihi non displicet illa quoque
interpretatio, quae (...) interpretatur omnia Christi officia: and (...), pro
persicere. Duo enim officiorum genera injuncta fuerunt a patre Christo
perficienda; primum continebat omnia, quae in terris pro nostra redemptione
perficienda erant, ut pati, mori, sepeliri. Vbi haec perfecit, ait apostolus
eum ascendisse, ut (reliqua etiam) omnia impleret, in caelo scilicei, and e
caelo: Inter quae etiam erat hoc de quo immediate loquitur Apostolus, de donis
scilicet, e caelo dandis and distribuendis hominibus in Ecclesia. Et eo magis
jam haec interpretatio placet, quia complectitur etiam superiorem de effundendo
suo spiritu, donisque spiritus S. super omnem carnem: sed illa superior non
complectitur hanc. Certe erant etiam multa alia Christo implenda in caelo, and
e caelo, ut supra declaratum est. Ergo quia latius patet haec postrema, eam
amplector.
Zanchy, after he has insisted upon that interpretation, which we have now
gone over, acquaints us with another, that he dislikes not, and it is that
which by (...), understand's all Christ's offices, and render's the word
translated fill, fulfill, discharge, or perform. For there were (says he) two
sorts of offices enjoined Christ by his father. The first contained all those
things, which were to be performed here below on earth for our redemption, as
to suffer, to dye, and to be buried, etc. As soon as he had finished these,
the Apostle says that he ascended, etc; that he might fulfill all those other
offices, which remain to be performed by him in, and from heaven for us at the
right hand of his father.

But this is no prejudice unto what we have said in our sense of the place;
because one of these offices, as Zanchy himself informs us, was that which
the Apostle speaks of immediately before the giving of gifts from heaven unto
men. And the reason, why he approves of this interpretation, is because it is
so comprehensive, as that it takes in the former sense concerning the pouring
of his spirit, and the gifts thereof, upon all flesh.

The last head of arguments is from the prayers for this progressive fullness
of the saints, recorded in scripture; from the prayers of petition, and from
the prayers of thanksgiving for it.

1. From the prayers of petition for it, which doubtless had a gracious
answer, and returned into the bosoms of those that put them up. This I pray,
says Paul unto the Philippians, that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment. That ye may approve things that are excellent,
that ye may be sincere, and without offense, till the day of Christ, being
filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the
glory and praise of God, Phil. 1.9,10,11. We do not cease to pray for you,
says he to the Colossians, and to desire, that ye might be filled with the
knowledge of his will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9.
He prayed unto the Lord to make the Thessalonians to increase, and abound in
love one toward another, and toward all men, etc. 1 These. 3.12. He puts up
also a petition unto the God of peace, etc. in the behalf of the Hebrews, to
make them perfect in every good work, Heb. 13.21. You have Peter also 1 Pet.
5.10. petitioning for the perfection of such converts of them as were scattered
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bithynia. The God of all grace
who has called us unto his eternal glory, by Jesus Christ, etc. make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. Thus also Epaphras was a petitioner
for the spiritual compleatnesse, and perfection of the Colossians; Epaphras,
who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you, always laboring
fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect, and complete in all
the will of God, Col. 4.12.

2. From the prayers of thanksgiving for it; which if this progressive fullness
were unattaineable, would be but a taking of Gods name in vain. I thank my
God always in your behalf, (says he to the Co^inthians) for the grace of
God, which is given you by Jesus Christ, that in every thing ye are enriched by
him, in all utterance, and in all knowledge, etc so that ye come behind in no
gift, etc. 1 Cor. 4.5,7. The same Apostle, Ephesians. 1.3,7,8. blesses the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for that in the riches of his grace he has
abounded tawards us in all wisdom and prudence. In the 1 Timoth. 1.12,14. We
have him presenting his thanks unto Christ Jesus our Lord, because the grace
of our Lord was exceeding abundant toward himself with faith and love, which
is in Christ Jesus. And thus have I at large proved, that the members of Christ
shall enjoy every one of them, 1. A communion in the fullness of Christ's grace
in their justification, 2. A conformity unto it in their sanctification.

I proceed now unto the last thing which I promised in this use, to show, that
from the premises Christ's members may reap a double comfort, 1. against the
strength, and fullness of sin: 2. against their wants in, and emptiness of
grace.

1. Against the strength, and fullness of sin. Naturally there is a fullness
of sin in us. Our powers and members are full of sin. And the very fullness
of sin is in them. Now where there is a fullness of a thing, there that thing
must needs be exceeding strong. How strong are the waters of the sea, only
because the sea is full of waters, and the fullness of waters is there. Against
this fullness of sin now, that is in our natures, we have comfort, nay a full
joy, and triumph, in the fullness of grace, that dwells in Christ: for it is
imputed to us, that is, accepted for us. And God will make us conformable unto
it. And therefore it gives us assurance, that Christ will quench, cure, and
expel all our sins. If in us there be the treasury of an evil heart,
bottomless depths of folly, lust, and ignorance, in Christ there are hid
unsearchable riches, and treasures of grace, and wisdom. If corruption in us
be of an unbounded rage, if we be out of measure sinful, why the grace of
Christ is answerably of an unstinted measure. The spirit was not given by
measure unto him, Joh. 3.34. If sin abound in us, grace does much more abound
in him. Excedit quippe pietas Jesu omnem criminum quantitatem, seu
numerositatem, as Bernard in Vigilia nativitatis Domini. Sermon. 1. If the wounds
and diseases of our souls be many, and deep, the oil of gladness, wherewith
Christ was anointed above his fellows, is able to heal them. Siquidem ante
faciem unctionis Christi, nullus omnino stare poterit morbus animae, quamlibet
inveteratus, says Bernard in the but now cited place. The Yoke (says the
Prophet) shall be destroyed, because of the anointing, Esaias. 10.27. Where some
by yoke understand the yoke of sin; and by the anointing the spiritual
anointing of Christ with the Holy Ghost. If unrighteousness has a kingdom,
and dominion in all men by nature, Christ is a King of righteousness, that
will in all his members overthrow the reign, and dominion of unrighteousness
here in this life, and destroy the very being, and existence of it in death;
that will batter, and weaken all its strong holds now, and utterly raze and
demolish them then. If our souls be overspread with spiritual darkness, and
ignorance, with the noisome fogs, and mists of iniquity; why Christ is a sun
of righteousness, upon the first arising of which in our hearts, our ignorance
and lusts will be dispersed, and scattered; but when it shall come to its full
strength, then all shadows shall fly away, Canticl. 4.1. All darkesome clouds,
nay the thinnest vapor, as well as the thickest mist, shall be dispelled, and
wasted: Even all the remainders of the old man, the least relics of the
flesh, shall have a total abolishment, and be utterly rooted out of the soul:
All conflicts, and combatings of the Law of the members, with the law of the
mind, shall then receive an everlasting period.

2. Here is consolation against their emptiness of grace, against the wants,
weakness, and imperfection of their holiness. How many and great soever their
wants be, how defective soever their graces, how imperfect soever their
holiness, yet by union with Christ, and consequently communion in, and
conformity unto his fullness, they shall be made complete, and perfect. Ye
are complete in him, Col. 2.10. As by reason of a compleatnesse and perfection
in him, imputed to you for justisication, so also by a compleatnesse from him,
really imparted unto you for sanctification. Christ has riches, and treasures
for their poverty, a wardrobe for their nakedness, a fullness for their
emptiness, an unmeasurablenesse of the spirit to supply any deficiency, to
remove any decays of grace, and to make up whatsoever is wanting for the full
fashioning of Christ in their hearts. Indeed an absolute fullness is not to be
expected, as long as we carry about us these robes of frail flesh. Here
something will still be lacking to our faith, and other graces. As the sun
communicates it is light unto the moon, leasurely, by degrees, till she come
to her full light, till it be full moon. So Christ the sun of righteousness
gradually conformeth his members unto that fullness of grace, which dwells in
him; So that here below, they are but in a state of infancy, and so subject to
defects. But yet he pours out his spirit and grace upon them in such order,
and measure, as that they proceed from strength to strenth, Psalm* 84.7. like
the sun to the perfect day, Prove. 8.18. Until at last they arrive unto an
absolute fullness of grace, in respect both of parts, and degrees, incompatible
as with mixture, so with measure, admitting neither of decay, nor growth. Then
they shall be at the wellhead, and therefore brimme-full of grace, each
according to his capacity. They shall have so much grace, as they can hold.
When I awake (says David) I shall be satisfied with thy likeness, Psalm. 17.
verse. 15. I shall be full of thy Image; it is by some translated filled with
all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. Unto us then God will be all in all, 1
Cor. 15.28. Unto the reason, as Bernard descants upon those words, he will be
plenitudo lucis, unto the will multitudo pacis, unto the memory continuatio
aeternitatis. Here we are but sprinkled with the spirit, with a few drops of
it: In heaven it shall be poured most plentifully upon us. Here we are but
covered with a parcel of grace, and holiness, there we shall be clothed all
over with it. There shall be no more any spots, blemishes, or wrinckles in our
holiness, Ephesians. 5.27. No longer any eb's of our graces, any fainting of our
hope, any dullness in our devotion, any drooping of our love, any languishing
of our zeal. All shall be blown into a purer flame, and advanced to a degree
of Angelical sublimitie. Those first fruits of the spirit, which are but
sown in our seed time here, shall then arise, and grow up into a full harvest
of grace, an entire, pure, unmixed, and absolute fullness: For then we shall
all come, etc. unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature, or age, of
the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. Of which words I shall reckon up three of
the most probable expositions, that I have met with. And they proceed according
unto the threefold acception of Christ in scripture. It is taken, 1. For Christ
himself, 2. For the Image of Christ, Gal. 4.19* Until Christ be formed in
you: that is, until the Image of Christ be stamp't upon you; consisting in the
knowledge of him, and conformity unto him both in quality, and practice, as
Mr Perkins shows at large upon the place.

3. It is taken mystically, for Christ considered as a head joined with his
body, the Church, 1 Cor. 12.12.

1. If you take Christ here, for Christ himself. Why then answerably the
fullness of Christ is to be understood of such a fullness, as was formally in
Christ himself, either in the graces of his soul, or in the stature, and
growth of his body. Unto the measure of both which we may be said to come in
regard of our graces at the resurrection, analogically and proportionally.
Because there shall then be in our graces a fullness or perfection of degree,
or quantity. Even as there was in the graces of Christ from the very first
moment of his conception, as there was in the growth of his body at his
resurrection.

2. If Christ be here put for the Image of Christ, then the fullness of Christ
is to be understood, exemplariter, of a full conformity unto the fullness of
grace, and glory in Christ. At the resurrection our resemblance of Christ shall
be full and perfect, the Image of Christ shall be fully framed, or fashioned in
us. So that then we shall receive the full shape of Christians: Christ shall
then ( As Musculus upon the place expresses it) grandescere in nobis. Our now
weak, and as it were, infant graces shall then come unto a perfect man, unto a
ripe age, unto the measure of the stature of fullness, or unto the measure of a
full stature, and be in nothing defective, not so much as in point of degree.

Thirdly, If Christ be taken Mystically, why then the fullness of Christ here
is extrinsick, the same with that, Ephesians. 1.23. The Church, which is his body,
the fullness of him, that fills all in all. And then the meaning of the words
is, until the mystical body of Christ grow to ripeness, and perfection,
until all that belong to the election of grace, all that be ordained to
eternal life, be gathered, and added unto the Church, and until every member
arrive unto a full growth, unto a full measure of grace, and glory. And this I
conceive to be the most probable sense of the words* for as Cornel. A lapide
well observes, the Apostle says, until we come to a perfect man, and not,
until we come unto perfect men: because he speaks not of Christians,
considered severally, but rather of the whole Church, which he compares unto
one perfect man, of which man the Church is as it were the body, Christ
himself the soul, and head. Now when the body comes unto it is fullness of
growth, the head also comes thereunto; as also the strength, vigor,
quicknance, and efficacy of the soul; its union with, and information of the
body, which (though the soul it self be indivisible) is divisible, and
consequently coextended with the body. Even so in like manner, when all the
members, that shall be added unto the Church, shall come unto their full
growth, and perfection in grace; why then Christ, considered under a mystical
capacity, as head of his Church, may be said to come unto his full growth, age,
or stature too: And his union with his Church and members will then absolutely
be full, and complete.

I come in the last place unto the uses of exhortation. From the all-fulnesse
of Christ's grace, we may be exhorted unto two duties, 1. Humiliation for the
imperfection of our graces; 2. Diligence, and constancy in the growth of our
graces.

1. Unto Humiliation for the imperfection that is in our own graces: and to
give the better edge unto this exhortation, I shall propound two motives.

1. The perfection of the holiness of the second Adam should mind us of that
perfect holiness, which we lost in the first Adam. And reflection on such an
unvaluable loss cannot but strike the heart of any one with a deep measure of
godly sorrow, that is not ignorant of the worth, and necessity of grace.

2. All aberrations from the rule are blemishes; and therefore seeing our
graces fall so infinitely short of that perfection, which is in the pattern of
grace, Christ Jesus, all our graces are defective, and sinful, and so present
matter for spiritual mourning. Can we behold the Sun of righteousness, and
not blush at the menstruous rag's of our own righteousnesses? Can we look upon
the bottomless fountain of holiness in Christ, and not be ashamed of our
shallow brook, that would soon wax dry, if it were not continually supplied
from the aforesaid fountain? Alas! what are our drops unto his ocean? our
sparks, or beams unto his sun? His gifts and graces were in comparison of
ours unmeasurable. God gave not the spirit by measure unto him: But what a
narrow measure is there in the brightest gifts, and endowments of the most
glorious saints, that ever lived upon the face of the earth. And this measure
arises from mixture with contrary lusts, and corruptions. The Holy Ghost
replenished the heart of Christ from the very conception: The word was no
sooner made flesh, but it forthwith was full of grace, and truth; But Satan
has filled our hearts from the very womb with a body of sin, and death,
armies of lusts and corruptions like the Midianites, which lay on the ground
like grasshoppers for multitude, Judge. 7.12. As soon as we were conceived, we
were forthwith full of all the seeds of sin, ignorance, and error. In Christ
were unsearchable riches of grace: But we are like the fool in the Gospel,
Luke 12.21. that was not rich toward God. Like the Church of Laodicea, Revel.
3.18. that was wretched, miserable, poor, blind, naked. In him were hid all
the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge; In us there are (to allude unto the
expression of the Prophet upon another occasion, Esaias. 45.3.) treasures of
darkness, the treasury of an evil heart, Math. 12.34,35. The son of man was
clothed with a garment of holines^e down to the foot, Revel. 1.13. Whereas
the robe of our graces is far more narrow, and scanty, then the filthy
garments of our corruptions. Christ was a lamb without blemish, and without
spot: Whereas alas there is a spot in the dearest Children of God, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
the spot of Original, and Actual sin: their purest graces, and most
spiritual duties are bespotted, and distained by the adhesion of sinful
lusts, and corruptions. The eyes of Christ are pure, white, and precious, like
orient Jewels, or sparkling Diamonds. His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the
rivers of water, washed with milk, and fitly set, or (as it is in the margent)
sitting in fullness: that is, fitly placed, and set as a precious stone in the
foil of a ring, Cant. 5.10. But now our eyes are not only dark, and dim,
but impure, and unclean, 2 Pet. 2.14. full of Adultery. Grace was poured into
his lips, Psalm. 4.2.5. his lips are full of grace, it is in the old translation:
But now our tongues are full of deadly poison, Jam. 3.8. Our mouths are full
of cursing and bitterness, Romans 3.14. God anointed Jesus Christ with the holy
Ghost, and he went about doing good, etc. Acts 10.38. But that the greatest
part of men have received no such anointing is witnessed by their unactivenesse
for the glory of God, and good of the Church: They are as unprofitable burdens
unto the earth, as the Sodomites, whose iniquity was fullness of bread and the
abundance of Idleness, Ezekiel. 16.49.

2. We may hence be exhorted unto diligence, and constancy in the growth of our
graces. For let our progress in them be never so great, yet still we shall
come far behind out pattern, and never be able here to reach his
all-fulnesse. Those that learn to write, will labor to come as nigh their
copy, as they can. And in all handy-crafts, learners endeavor a full
conformity unto their rules, and patterns. And therefore we may conclude,
that we can never be too conformable to the holiness of Christ, which God has
propounded unto us for a samplar to imitate. He was full of grace, and
therefore we can never be gracious enough. In him were hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge: And therefore we can never be knowing enough. We desire
a full conformity unto the glory, and happiness of Christ; And therefore it
is very irrational to think upon a stay or stop in the way thereunto, to
wit, a conformity unto his grace, and holiness. What is spoken of the degrees
of grace and light in the Church, Cant. 6.10. may be applied unto every
Christian. In his first conversion, he looks forth as the morning: When he
arriveth unto further maturity, he is fair as the moon, that has a mixture
of spots with her fullest light: But in the state of glory, he will be clear
as the sun. But though for the perfection of his grace, he shall resemble the
light of the bodily sun, yet his brightness can never equal the splendor
of the sun of righteousness. We should not therefore content our selves with
a dawning light, with the twilight, with star or moone-light, but our hearty
prayer and unfeigned endeavor should be, that our path may be as the shining
light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18.

Thirdly, There dwelled in Christ's manhood an allfulnesse of power. In the
midst of the throne stood a lamb, as it had been slain, having seven horns,
and seven eyes, etc. Rev. 5.6. It had seven horns, a fullness of power to
execute, as well as seven eyes, a perfection of wisdom to contrive,
whatsoever was needful for the protection, and guidance of the Church. In the
state of humiliation, Christ's manhood had power of working miraculous, and
supernatural effects: it cast Devils out of those, that were possessed with
them: cured many diseases, that were incurable by natural means: restored
sight to those, that were borne blind: raised the dead unto life: one from the
bed, another from the beer, and a third from the grave, Mat. 11.5. The very
wind and the sea obeyed him, Mark. 4.41. And now in his state of exaltation,
his humanity is still isntrumental, in the all-powerfull works of Vocation,
and sanctification: And in the last day, it will be a powerful instrument in
the resurrection, and full glorification of all the Saints.

For the clearing of this, distinguish we of a twofold power: one moral, by
way of impetration: secondly, another Physical, by way of proper, and real
influxe, or efficiency.

1. We grant, that Christ's humanity had, and still has a moral power of
working miracles, and all works above the course of nature. Look, as men are
said to have a power of doing that, which they commonly effect by their
interest in their friends, as by the prevalency of their wealth: So the manhood
of Christ is so interested in the favor of God, as that it can prevail with
him for doing whatsoever pleases him in heaven and in earth. This moral
power, etc. was congruent unto Christ in his state of humiliation, in regard of
his prophetical office, for the confirmation of his doctrine, which was so
far above the reach of natural reason, as that it would hardly find
acceptance with the sons men, unless it had been backed with wonders, and
miracles of an unquestionable verity, Heb. 2.4. And no less requisite is it
unto his manhood, now it is exalted at the right hand of God, for the gathering,
ruling, and protecting of, and providing for his subjects; as also for the
restraining, overruling, and finally subduing all his, and his Churches
adversaries. That this is all the power Christ's humanity has of working
miracles is affirmed not only by Protestants, but also by Papists, Vasquez,
Becanus; and amongst the ancient Schoolmen by Alensis, Bonaventure, Scotus.
Christ's soul (says In aliquam transmutationem aliquod Agens potest
dupliciter uno modo per potentiam in ipso formaliter existentem. Alio modo non
per potentiam in ipso existentem, sed per virtutem alterius ipsi affistentem:
possumus enim non solum ea quae possumus per nos, and per virtutem propriam,
sed ea, quae possumus per amicos, taenquam per potentian nobis assistentem. His
suppositis dicendum est ad quaestionem, quod si loquamur de potentia animae
Christi quae est in Christo formaliter, and secundum se, sic anima Christi non
habuit omnipotentiam, nec habere potuit, etc. Si autem loquamur de potentia
janimae Christi non perficiente ipsam formaliter, sed solum assistente,
secundum quam dicimur posse ea, quae per Amicos possumus: Sic dicendum, quod
anima Christi habuit potentiam ad omnes mutationes miraculosas, ordinabiles ad
finem and fidem incarnationis. Cujus ratio est, quia ei, cui competit primo
docere ca quae sunt supra ratioren humanam, competit habere potentiam faciendi
opera supernaturalia, talem Doctrinam confirmantia. Sed Christo competebat
tanquam primo and principali doctori, docere ea quae sunt supra naturalem
rationem, maxim, quae pertinent ad salutem hominum, quae est finis
incarnationis, ergo ipsi competebat habere potentiam faciendi opera
supernaturalia, talem doctrinam confirmantia. Hanc autem potentiam non habuit
fibi formaliter inhaerentem, ut prebatum est, sed habuit sibi assistentem,
quatenus divina virtus operatur talia, quae confirmabant doctrinam bumanam.
lib. 3. distinct. 14 quaest. 5.
Durand has power to work any miraculous changes, referrible unto either the
end, or belief of his incarnation, not by any power formally inherent in
itb;ut by the power of the Godhead, infallibly assisting of it.

Yea, but you will say, this power of working miracles by impetration was
communicated unto some of the Prophets, unto the Apostles, and diverse
primitive saints, and therefore not the peculiar privilege of Christ.

For answer: This moral power of working miracles was in them only in a
transient way, as they were prompted by the holy spirit. God bearing them
witness, both with signs, and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of
the holy Ghost, according to his own will, Ephesians. 2.4. God followed his own
will, not theirs, in the working of miracles. Though Gehazi by the direction of
Elisha, 2 Kings 4.31. laid his staff upon the face of the Shunamites child,
for the raising of it from the dead; Yet God, we see, withdrew his help, and
assistance.

But now this power was in Christ's humanity, permanently, and as it were,
habitually: For he always could, and still can prevail with God, whenever
pleased him for the working of any miracle, for the illightning of any mind,
though never so dark, for the sanctifying of any heart, though never so
profane, and carnal. The will of Christ's manhood, although it be a humane
will is yet the will of a divine person, and therefore if it be absolute, it is
always effectual, and successful. He never absolutely, and effectually
willed any thing, but what was agreeable unto Gods absolute will, the will of
his decree, or good pleasure. And therefore those prayers of his, which
proceeded from this absolute will of his, were always heard John. 11.42. This
moral power of Christ's manhood I have treated of at large in what I have said
touching the fullness of Christ's office, and authority; and therefore I might
take my leave of this point, if some Papists did not ascribe unto Christ's
humanity, not only a moral, but also a physical power of working miraculous,
and supernatural effects, whose doctrine I shall briefly examine, and so
pass on.

This physical power is by way of proper, and real influxe, or efficiency.
And thus an Agent has a power of doing that only, which it can truly, and
really effect.

This physical power is again twofold, of a principal, or isntrumental
cause.

It is agreed on all hands, that the manhoood of Christ has not such a
physical power of working miracles, as belong's unto a principal cause. God
alone does great wonders, Psalm. 136.4. It is only the Suarez in ter. part.
Thom. tom. 1. disp. 31. Sect. 4.
author of nature, that has power above nature. In every miraculous work,
the laws of nature are as it were broken; and therefore no creature can after
this manner work, as a principal Agent; But he alone, who is above all the
laws of created nature, and can work upon all things per modum Imperii, aut
efficacis voluntatis by way of command, or effectual will. If he say, let
there be light, there is light, Genesis 1.3. He can command the light to shine out
of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6.

All the controversy then is concerning such a physical power, as is
isntrumental; and here Capreolus, Cajetan, Ferrariensis, Suarez, Gregory de
Valentia, and others maintain, that it works miraculous, and supernatural
effects, as a physical instrument of the Deity.

Against them out of Vasquez in primam part. Thom. tom. 2. disp. 176. cap. 3.
and others, I shall shape this following argument. When any thing is assumed to
be an instrument unto any effect, there is not only the relation of an
efficient and effect, between the principal cause and the effect, but also
betwixt the principal cause and the instrument; because the effect issues, or
proceeds from the principal cause by the instrument: And the instrument does
that really, and truly, which before it did not. Now if there be in the effect
any such relation of emanation from, and dependancy upon the instrument, then
it is either out of the nature of the instrument, or else by some change
wrought in the instrument. Now to apply this unto our purpose. If the miracles,
and other supernatural works wrought by Christ, carry the relation of an
effect unto Christ's humanity, as a physical, and proper instrument, why then
this reference is either according unto the nature of Christ's humanity,
considered in it self; or else by virtue of some new change wrought in the
humanity.

1. They themselves will confess, that it is merely by the will and good
pleasure of God, and therefore not by any natural virtue of the humanity. If
they say, that it is by some superadded virtue, whether permanent, or
transient, it matters not: Why then, I demand, Whether this superadded virtue
be naturally in it is own nature, considered in it self, proportioned, or
utterly disproportioned unto any thing in these miraculous, and supernatural
effects. If it carry no natural proportion unto any thing in them; why then,
it self will need a new, and farther elevation, and the communication, or
derivation of it, unto the humanity, will be alltogeather useless to elevate
it unto such a height of activity, as is pleaded for. If you say of this
superadded virtue, that it has any natural proportion unto something in these
miraculous, and supernatural effects, why then, it has also some previous
action, naturally proportioned unto something or other in them: and what that
is could never yet be by any assigned, or so much as imagined. What previous
action was there in any thing, in the clay, or spittle, that carried any the
least natural proportion unto any thing in the restoring of his sight that was
borne blind, Joh. 9.6,7? What foregoing influence could there be in any thing
in the voice of Christ, naturally proportioned unto the reunion of the soul
and body of Lazarus, and the raising of him out of his grave, Joh. 12.43,44?
Vix concipi potest (says Suarez in tert. part-Thome tom. 1. disp. 31. sect. 5.
page 485.) quomodo aliqua qualitas sit ex natura sua potens ad expellendos
Daemones, and curandos omnes morbos uno momento sine resistentia, and non per
alterationem aliquam, sed per modum imperii, neque naturali necessitate, sed ad
nutum humanae voluntatis. It can hardly be conceived, how any quality should be
of it is own nature powerful to expel Devils, and to cure all diseases in one
moment without resistance, not by any alteration, but in a way of command, not
by natural necessity, but upon the beck of the humane will in Christ. What he
speaks of qualities, may, a fortiori, be applied unto any transient motion
stamped upon, and received in the humanity. All this discourse is built upon
that of Aquinas part. 1. quaest. 45. art. 5. A physical instrument cooperates,
dispositive, unto the effect of the principal Agent. And indeed with what
reason can that be entitled a physical instrument, which has no natural
tendency unto an effect, and of it self contributes nothing at all thereunto?
Wool then cannot be a physical instrument of cutting: Neither Moses his rod of
dividing the red sea: Nor Rams horns of blowing down the walls of Jericho.

Here the sticklers for this physical power have besides that concerning a
superadded virtue, already confuted, two other evasions.

1. Some suppose, that the manhood of Christ may be elevated unto a physical
instrumentary efficiency of miraculous, and supernatural effects, merely by
conjunction with, and actual subordination unto the virtue of the Godhead, as
the principal Agent, without any power of agency seated in the manhood. This
conceit is opposed by Suarez in tert. part. Thomae disp. 31. sect. 6. page 493,
494. and others, upon this ground. Because the progress of an Agent, or
efficient, unto its second act, action, presupposes in it the first act, an
active power. A foreign power without it extrinsecally assisting of it will
not serve the turn: it must be a power intrinsecall unto the efficient, either
by way of identity, or information. The actions of God presuppose an active
power in him by way of identity: The actions of the creatures presuppose active
powers in them, that are qualities. Indeed metaphorically, and improperly, we
may be said to be able to do that, which we can procure to be done by our
friends, or by our money. But to speak properly, and physically, no Agent
whatsoever can be said to be able for an action, so much as in an isntrumental
way, that has not in it something, that is a principle of such an action. But
now this subordination of the manhood unto the Godhead, is merely by
extrinsecall denomination. For, as they state it, it neither presupposes, nor
adds any active power unto the manhood, that is formally and intrinsecally in
it. The Virtue, or active power of the Godhead subsists in the Godhead it
self, and is essential unto it: and therefore the manhood cannot be formally,
and intrinsecally invested with it; and consequently it cannot thereby
beexalted to be a physical instrument of miraculous, and supernatural
actions, of producing which, it has not in it self any active power.

Yea, but say the fautors of this opinion, an instrument works not in its
proper virtue, but in the virtue of the principal efficient: Therefore
immediate conjunction with the virtue of the principal cause, is sufficient to
constitute, and denominate an instrument, in actu primo.

For answer: that usual saying may have two Suarez in tert. part. Thomae
disp. 31. sect. 6. p. 496.
senses: Either that there is an utter nullity of virtue: or that there is an
improportion and insufficiency in the virtue of instruments toward their
effects.

1. That there is an utter, and absolute nullity of virtue in instruments
toward their effects, that they work not by any virtue, which they have,
intrinsecally, in themselves, but only by the extrinsecall virtue of the
principal agent. And this if we speak of physical instruments is most
untrue. For action is a second act; and therefore ever presupposes in the
Agent, which it denominateth, a first act, an active power, not only
extrinsecall, which is without it, but also intrinsecall, which is either in
it, or really the same with it. Impossible is it, for any thing to have so much
as an isntrumental concurrence unto that in respect of which it is not
clothed with a power of Agency.

2. This saying may have another meaning: It may denote only the improportion,
and insufficiency of the virtue, that is in instruments toward their effects,
that they are not able of themselves to produce their effects, without the
supply, and assistance, or motion, and application of their principal
efficient. Thus an axe though it has an edge, a fitness to cut, yet it cannot
actualy cut, unless it be applied by the hand of the workman. And this sense
I grant to be true, and sound; but then it makes nothing to the purpose.

A second evasion, which others fly to, is an obedientiall active power,
completed by the extraordinary concurse of God; and here they pass ab
hypothesi ad thesin; and affirm, there is such a power in every creature.
Look, say they, as there is an obedientiall passive power, in every creature
to receive whatfoever God will put into it, and to be made whatsoever God will
make of it. God is able of these stones to raise up Children unto Abraham,
Math. 3.9. So likewise there is in every creature an obedientiall active power,
whereby it may be elevated unto the working of whatsoever God will effect by
it. According unto this power, the sacraments (say they) are elevated to be
physical instruments of grace: Material fire in hell enabled to burn, and
torment spirits: the words of consecration in the mouth of a massing priest,
exalted to be physically isntrumental in the transubstantiation of bread and
wine into the body, and blood of Christ. This power they term radical or
fundamental, because it is undistinguished from the entity of every creature,
and superaddeth nothing thereunto but a non-repugnancy, or a relation. And they
call it also a remote power, because it has only an inchoate, and incompleate
proportion unto miraculous, and supernatural effects, which is completed by
the extraordinary concurse, or influence of God, elevating the creature beyond
the power, and force of it is own nature.

For answer, 1. The instances they bring for confirmation of this obedientiall
active power, are a most pitiful, and miserable begging of the question: for
they are denied by not only Protestants, but also Papists, As Vasquez,
Becanus, Faber Faventinus, and generally all Scotists: And if I guess not
amiss, this knack was devised for the support of the sacraments physical
efficiency of grace; As also of the physical operativenesle of the words of
consecration, in that new an impious figment of transubstantiation. To bring
then these two, as a chief proof thereof, bewrayes a great barrenness of
other arguments. Revius in his Suarez repurgatus page 922, 923. supposes that
this obedientiall active power in every creature unto any effect, is a kind of
omnipotency; The attribution of which unto a creature, every one will
acknowledge to be blasphemous. Indeed Suarez in tert. part. Thomae. tom. 1.
disp. 31.. 6. p. 509. sticks not to term it, omnipotency. And afterward,
page 514, 515. he says, that though it be finite, and limited intensively, and
entitatively, yet it is infinite, and unlimited extensively, and objectively:
It may be extended unto any thing whatsoever, which God can do, either by
himself, or by any other creature. I know, they will say, that this
omnipotency is but subordinate, secondary, derived, and instrumentary. But
omnipotency is an incommunicable attribute of the Deity: and to talk of a
communication of incommunicable attributes is new and strange divinity. Suarez
him self in the controversy of the Vbiquitaries, would disclaim any secondary
omnipresence of Christ's humanity: And why then here does he contend for a
secondary, or derived omnipotency of it.

But I shall more particularly argue against this obedientiall active power, 1.
from the distribution of an active power, in general, 2. From the utter
disproportion, that is between any creature, and supernatural or miraculous
effects, 3. From a comparison betwixt an obedientiall active and passive power.

1. From the adequate distribution of an active power, in general. Every
active power of ^creature is either natural, or supernatural. For it is
either it is entity, or natural quality, and then it is natural: or else it is
supernaturally superadded, and infused by God, and then it is supernatural.
But now this obedientiall active power is neither natural, nor supernatural.
It is not natural, for then what proportion could it have unto supernatural
effects? neither is it supernatural, because it is say the inventors of it,
really the same with the nature of every creature.

Suarez answers, that however this obedientiall active power be sometimes
natural, sometimes supernatural, entitative, in regard of it is entity, yet it
can never be natural quoad usum, seu quoad munus potentiae, vel quoad modum
agendi, quia non agit juxta commensurationem, vel propriam institutionem, seu
specificationem suae entitatis, neque cum concursu, seu auxilio sibi debito,
nec denique ad effectum, vel actionem suae naturae proportionatam. In tert
part. Thom. disp. 31. sect, 6. page 507.

Unto This I reply, that there is a suitableness, or proportion betwixt every
active power, and the adequate use, or application thereof: and therefore, if
the entity of this obedientiall active power be natural, so must also the
adequate, and total use, and application thereof be too.

A second argument is from the utter, and total disproportion, that is betwixt
every creature, and miraculous and supernatural effects.

I know, they distinguish of a complete, or consummate, and an inchoate, or
incompleate proportion unto any thing, that God can produce either immediately
by himself, or mediately by any other creature.

But can they express, or imagine, what inchoate proportion there is in a
stone unto the beatificall vision, or in a fly unto the production of an
Angel. Are not things material and immateriall altogeither disproportioned?
What Physical influence can water, or fire have upon the efficiency of grace,
faith, hope, or love? And answerably how can grace be physically productive of
water or fire? Some creatures are in regard of qualities contrary; and
therefore impossible they should be in any the least degree proportioned, in
regard of mutual production. What proportion can there be in fire, unto the
production of water; or in water, unto the production of fire? I know, the
patrons of this obedientiall active power swallow these, and greater
absurdities, of which the rehearsal is a sufficient confutation. And I
confess, I should be transported with just wonder at the infatuation of such
rational men, if the Apostle had not told me, 2 The. 2.10,11,12. That because
some men receive not the love of the truth, therefore God shall send them
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, etc. If any one yet desire a
refutation of such senseless fopperies, they may meet with it in their own
Vasquez, and in Faber Faventinus; out of the In quartum sentent. disp. 2. p.
15, 16.
latter of which I shall insert this following argument. If there be an
obedientiall active power inevery creature unto any effect whatsoever, then
there is in an ant, or pismire, such a power unto the acts of understanding, or
willing; and oonsequently an ant, or pismire, remaining an ant, or pismire
without any change at all in it is nature, may by God be elevated to enjoy God,
to understand, discourse, which are effects, that not only surmount it is
nature, but are also repugnant thereunto. For what grosser contradictions can
there be, then to affirm, that a livelesse being, whiles such, can be enabled
for the performance of vital operations.

The last argument shall be drawn from a comparison of an obedientiall active
power with an obedientiall passive power. There is more limitation in that,
then in this: For there is no creature, but can suffer that, which it cannot
do, can receive that, which it cannot produce. But now the obedientiall
passive power of every creature is limited, therefore so also is it is
obedientiall active power. No creature is capable of receiving all things, much
less can it be advanced unto such a pitch of efficiency, as to be physically
isntrumental in the working of all things. That every creature is not capable
of receiving all things, is thus proved out of the subtle Scotus. Things
material are not capable of receiving things spiritual: and spiritual, or
immateriall things are not capable of receiving things bodily, or material. A
stone cannot receive wisdom; nor an Angel, whiteness: For then we may
denominate, a stone, to be wise; an Angel, to be white. I know, Franciscus
bonae Spei in 8. libros Phys. Arist. page 131. acknowledges all these things
to he possible. But then a thing altogeither irtationall may be rational, a
spiritual substance may be corporeal, which are such gross contradictions,
that an ordinary understanding may easily discern them.

And thus have I proved in general, that there is no physical isntrumental
power in Christ's humanity of working any supernatural or miraculous effects.

I shall next bring one argument to prove this particularly concerning such
supernatural, or miraculous effects, as were, or are wrought by Christ at a
remote distance from his humanity. A physical cause cannot work, unless it
be present. Impossible to write here by a pen at Rome, whereupon Aquinas Sum.
part. 1. quaest. 8. Art. 1. proves Gods omnipresence from his influence upon,
or cooperation with all things. But now many miracles were wrought by Christ at
too great a distance, to conveigh any physical influxe from his manhood. Thus
he cured the Centurions servant, Math. 8.8,13. and the rulers son, unto whom
he never approached, Joh. 4.50,51,52,53. and therefore he healed them by the
omnipotency of his Godhead, and not by any physical power of his manhood. The
heavens receive the humanity of Christ until the times of restitution of all
things, Acts 3.21. And at such a distance there can be no physical contact
betwixt it, and the souls of men, and therefore it cannot be physically
isntrumental in their regeneration.

Lastly, Christ may be considered according unto his two fold state of
humiliation, and exalation.

1. According unto his state of humiliation; and in that there was a fullness
of satisfaction, and merit: a fullness of satisfaction to make ample amends
unto Gods enraged justice: a fullness of merit to purchase reconciliation,
acceptance of both their persons and services, the image of God, the kingdom
of heaven, and an inheritance of glory. This fullness of Christ's satissaction
and merit was first, typified under the Old Testament. secondly, asserted in
the New Testament. Thirdly, really evidenced by his exaltation, as a sign.
Fourthly, clearly demonstrated from the worthiness and infiniteness of his
person, as the cause and original thereof.

1. It was typified under the Old Testament: I shall at this present instance
but in three types of it.

1. The Bilson in his survey of Christ's sufferings, page 112.113.
burning, or consuming of the sacrifice by fire, miraculously delivered by God,
which made them ascend toward the place of his glorious presence, in token of
his full and favorable acceptance of Christ's sacrifice prefigured by them,
Lev. 1.9. Judges 6.17,21. 2 Chronicles. 7.1,3. 1 King. 18.38,39.

2. The compleatnesse of the daily bloody sacrifice: for that had conjoined
together with it the unbloudy sacrifice of the meat offering; and another of
the drink offering, Exodus 29.40. And the fuller the sacrifice was, the more it
did resemble the sufficiency of Christ's humiliation.

3. The sweetness of the things required in their meat and drink offerings,
that were joined with their burnt offerings, flower, oil, and wine, Exodus
29.40. unto which we may add the fragrancy of frankincense, which was to be
put on their volun^ary meat offerings, Levit. 2.2,15. These things did serve
aptly to figure, how sweet and well pleasing unto God the sacrifice of Christ
should be.

Secondly, We have this point plainly asserted in the New Testament. Christ
has given himself for us, an offering, and a sacrisice to God for a sweet
smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. In which words we have two things pertinent unto
our present purpose: the sufficiency; the fragrancy of Christ's humiliation.

1. The sufficiency of it. He gave himself for us, (...), an offering and a
sacrifice unto God. Where the first word, (...), signifies either all
sacrifices in general, or else unbloudy ones in particular, meat and
drink offerings. The second word (...), denotes bloody, and slaughtered
sacrifices. Now the comparison of Christ's humiliation, and obedience, unto an
offering and sacrifice, shows that it was the substance of all offerings, and
sacrifices whatsoever, under the law, whether unbloudy or bloody, and that
therein they had all their full accomplishment. There was nothing foreshadowed
by either meat offerings, drink offerings, or burnt-offerings, but was
perfectly fulfilled in his oblation, and sacrifice of himself.

Secondly, We have here the fragrancy, and acceptablenesse unto God, of the
offering, and sacrifice of Christ. He has given himself for us an offering
and a sacrifice to God, (...), for a sweet smelling savor; or for a savor of
sweetness: that is, Christ's offering and sacrifice of himself was as
acceptable unto God, as the sweerest odours are unto man's sense of smelling The
Apostle plainly alludeth unto the sacrifices in the Old Testament, in which God
is said to smell a sweet savor, or a savor of rest, Genesis 8.21. Lev. 1.9.
Burnt flesh yielded no pleasing savor unto man; and impossible, that simply
considered, as it was in it self, it should be as a sweet odor unto God,
Isay. 1.11. In these places then, there is a sacramental Metonymy, by which
that is ascribed unto the sign, which agrees in truth, and indeed, unto the
thing signified, to wit, the sacrifice of Christ. In that alone properly God
smells a savor of rest; that is, it only propitiateth, or appeaseth God,
and makes his anger to rest, Ezekiel. 16.42. When stinking smells offend our
nostrils we usually burn some sweet perfumes, which quiet our disturbed sense.
There is nothing so noisome, and unsavory unto God, as our sins. But now the
offering, and sacrifice of Christ does yield so fragrant a smell, as that it
prevails above them; so that we may say, God does not sent them; His wrath is
pacified; and we smell sweetly in his nostrill's. The sufferings of Christ made
him perfect, as touching his office, Heb. 2.10. chapt. 5.8,9. The offering of
Christ perfects for ever, them, that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. and therefore
there was a perfection in his sufferings, and offering. For nothing that is
unperfect in it self, can communicate perfection unto others. In Romans 1.17.
there be two expressions concerning the righteousness of Christ, arising from
his obedience, that show forth the fullness of the satisfaction and merit, that
was in his obedience. Christ's righteousness is termed the righteousness of
God, and it is said to be revealed from faith to faith.

1. It is termed the righteousness of God: and that (to omit other senses,
impertinent unto our present purpose) two manner of ways, personally, or
objectively.

1. Personally: It was the righteousness of a person, who was God. So that his
Godhead gave value, excellency, and efficacy unto it. But of this, I shall
speak at large, when I come to the demonstration of the point, etc. and
therefore I shall now only mention it.

Secondly, Objectively; and that in a twofold regard: In regard of it is
acceptance by God, and consistency before God.

1. In regard of it is acceptance by God. It is a righteousness, which he
fully accepts, and in which he bath a most perfect acquiesce nce and
complacency. He is well pleased, as with the person, so with the righteousness
of his well-beloved son.

2. In respect of it is consistency before God. There is no righteousness, but
that, wherein we can stand before the tribunal of Gods justice, and rigor of
his law.

Secondly, The all sufficiency, and redundancy of Christ's righteousness is
signified by a second expression in the words, the Revelation of it from faith
to faith: that is, as appears by comparison of the form of speech with others
of the like import. Psalm. 84.7.2 Cor. 3.16. from one degree of faith, unto
another. It is as much as if he had said: It is revealed unto the most growing
and increasing faith. If we make never so great a progress in faith: If we
daily proceed from faith to faith: If our faith grow stronger and stronger, it
will never be able fully to comprehend, however it may in some sort apprehend
the righteousness of Christ. Estius thinks, that the phrase is like unto
that, which is usual in Scripture, from generation to generation: and so the
meaning of the words is, the righteousness of Christ is revealed unto
believers throughout all generations. The strongest and most Dr Edward Reynolds
on Psalm. 110. p. 467.
enlarged faith of all the Saints, that ever were, are, or shall be in the
world, is but finite, and therefore can never be commensurate unto the
righteousness of Christ, which is the righteousness of God, therefore
infinite in worth, unto which no faith whatsoever can have an adequate
proportion; and consequently can never be able to look beyond it.

Thirdly, The fullness of satisfaction, and merit in the humiliation of Christ,
was really evidenced by Christ's exaltation, as a Sign. Christ was thrown into
the prison of the grave, as our surety, and there was no deliverance of him
thence, but by payment of the utmost farthing, we owed unto Gods justice. But
now as the Prophet says, He was taken from prison and judgment, Isai. 53.8.
and exalted unto as great an eminency of glory, and authority, as a creature is
capable of. God raised him from the dead, took him up into heaven, placed him
at his right hand; and there admitted him unto the glorious exercise of an
Authoritative intercession. And is not this a most convincing argument, that he
has paid off all our debts, that he has given a full recompense unto Gods
displeased holiness, a sufficient satisfaction unto his justice provoked with
our sins, and is quitted from that guilt of them, which he assumed in our
behalf. Dr Edward Reynolds on Psalm. 110. page 30.
Hereupon is it, that our Savior says, Joh. 16.8,10. The Spirit, or
Comforter, will convince the world of righteousness, because I go to my
Father, and ye se me no more. Where we have first the matter of this
conviction: and secondly, the argument, by which it is wrought.

1. The matter of it, righteousness, to wit, of Christ; and that not only
private, as he is looked upon under a personal capacity, but also public, as
he is considered under a mystical capacity, as surety for, and head of his
Church. And this is a righteousness, which he communicates unto all his
members. The meaning of the words then is: The spirit shall convince the world
not only that Christ was righteous, and innocent in his own person; and
therefore unjustly numbered amongst the transgressors, but also that he had
righteousness enough in him for the justification of the whole world.

2. We have the argument by which this conviction is wrought; the ascension of
Christ into heaven, and the permanency of his abode, and glory there. Because I
go to my father, and ye see me no more. Our sins and Gods justice would have
kept Christ still in his grave, and never admitted him into heaven, until he
had fulfilled all righteousness: that is, performed all the duties, and
suffered the whole curse of the law, as touching the substance thereof. And if
without doing this, it had been possible for him to have presumed to enter
heaven, God would presently have sent him down unto the earth again, where he
should have been visible until he had answered the most rigorous demands of
the law. Dr Edward Reynolds on, Ps. 110. page 130. 131.
The same thing is affirmed by the Apostle, 1 Timoth. 3.16. where it is said of
Christ, that he was justified by the spirit: that is, the spirit of holiness,
the Godhead, Romans 1.4. that raised him from the dead, and thereby declared him
to be the son of God with power, justified him, as in foro soli, before men,
from the reproaches and calumnies, which his adversaries burdened him with so,
also in foro poli, before God, from the iniquities of us all, Isay. 53.6. which
God laid upon him, in regard of his suretyship for us. Hither also may we
refer that in Hebr. 9.12. By his own blood he entered into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us. He had never entered into the holy
place, if he had not by his blood first obtained eternal redemption for us.
Compare together verses 13, 14 of Heb. 10. and from this comparison you may
gather, that his sitting down on the right hand of God expecting till his
enemies be made his footstool, necessarily presupposes, that he had offered
one sacrifice for sins for ever, that by one offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified.

4. The fullness of satisfaction and merit, that was in Christ's humiliation,
may clearly be demonstrated from the worthiness and infiniteness of his
person, as the cause and original thereof. To clear this, we shall consider
Christ's humiliation under the notion, 1. of a price, 2. of a sacrifice.

1. If we consider it as a price, which he paid for us; so by means of the
worthiness of his person, it was of great and inestimable value. Ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet.
1.18,19. All the worth of gold and silver was from humane appointment. Whereas
the dignity of Christ's blood flowed from the real infiniteness of his person
and nature. It was the blood of God, Act. 30.28. and Bilson.
therefore was able to quench that wrath, that everlastingly and intollerably
would have burnt against us to our final and perpetual destruction of body
and soul.

There be two sorts or kinds of prices, which may be affirmed of Christ's
humiliation: a price of Ransom, and a price of Purchase: and the fullness of
each price therein, arises from the infiniteness of his person. Because it
was the humiliation of an infinite person, therefore it was a full price of
ransom, and a full price of purchase.

1. A full and sufficient price of ransom from the guilt, and dominion of sin,
from the rigor and curse of the law. With him is plenteous redemption, and he
shall redeem Israel from all her iniquities, Psalm. 130.7,8. It is a
redemption so full, and perfect, as that it comprizeth all the steps and
degrees of salvation from all sins, from all the evil that is in sin, and from
all the sad and miserable consequents of sin.

2. A full and sufficient price of purchase to obtain the love, likeness, and
life of God, righteousness, favor, and acceptance, together with all the
gracious and glorious fruits thereof.

Secondly, If we look upon Christ's humiliation, as a Sacrifice, which he
offered for us: it is by means of the infiniteness of his person, an
all-pleasing sacrifice. By one offering, he perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10.14. Now this infinitas acceptibilitatis, this great
acceptablenesse, and well-pleasingnesse of this sacrifice unto God, proceeded
from the dignity, 1. of the Priest offering, 2. of the Sacrifice offered. 3. of
the Altar, upon which it was offered.

1. Of the Priest offering, the son of God, in whom he was well pleased.

2. Of the Sacrifice offered, unto which by means of the personal union, the
virtue of the Deity was truly attributed. The sacrifice which he offered, the
blood which he shed, the death which he suffered, was the sacrifice, blood, and
death of God: and consequently the sacrifice was appliable unto all those, for
whom it was offered: able to sprinkle many nations, Is. 52.15. Because it was
more then equivalent in dignity, and representation, unto all the persons of
all the men in the world.

3. From the dignity of the Altar, upon which it was offered; that was the
divine nature. Through the eternal Spirit, he offered himself without spot
unto God, and so by his blood purges our Consciences from dead works, Heb.
9.14. This Altar sanctified the offering, made it sufficient for Gods
satisfaction, and man's justification: for it gave it an infinite acceptance
with God; so that therein he smelled a sweet savor of rest, and was therewith
fully pacified and contented. The heinousness, demerit, and desert of an
offense, is much aggravated from the dignity of the person offended, and
meannesse of the person offending. Those revilings, which uttered against a
man's equals, are but actionable; if spoken against a noble man, they prove
scandalum magnatum, and punishable with the pillory: if against the supreme
Magistrate, they come to be of a treasonable nature, and punishable with death.
Even so on the other side, the value, dignity of satisfaction, or merit,
proceeds principally from the dignity of the person satisfying or meriting.
For the quality of the person does dignify his work, and make it of Tanner.
answerable value; not as though it had any real influence thereupon, but only
as a moral circumstance, it imparteth to the work such a respect, whereby it
deserves accordingly. The Kingly dignity has no real influence upon the
actions of the King; it does not really advance their nature, but only
morally, as a moral circumstance, it raises their rate and estimation, makes
them of a greater esteem and account, then otherwise they would be. The
greatness of honor is increased from the excellency of the person honoring:
For the Prince but to look favorably, to speak kindly unto me, is a greater
honor, then the greatest and most crouching obeisance of inferiors. Now in
giving satisfaction to a party wronged, a man honors the party, to whom he
gives it: and therefore the more worthy the person satisfying, the greater the
satisfaction. A greater satisfaction it is for a Prince to ask forgiveness
for a wrong committed, then for another to undergo a far sharper penalty. Now
if the greatness of a man's person communicates an answerable worth either of
satisfaction or merit, unto that which he does, or suffers: what an infinite
value then will the infiniteness of Christ's person add to that, which he
wrought for our redemption, for the satisfaction of Gods justice, and for the
acquisition of an inheritance, and other privileges for us? The divine, and
infinite person of Christ does dignify his obedience, and sufferings, and
makes them of an answerable, of a divine, and infinite value, able to satisfy
Gods infinite justice, to expiate the infinite guilt of man's sin: not as though
it did physically, and really advance their nature, but only morally, as a
moral circumstance, raise their value and estimation. Let a Mr. Bayne in his
Catechism.
common man prescribe any thing for my health, and thanks is a sufficient
requital: But let a Doctor of Physic do it, and a fee is due unto him. That
advice, which delivered by a common man, is good cheap, yet coming from a
counselor, sergeant, judge, are of great value. Even so that blood, which
Christ shed, that death, which he suffered, if it had been by an ordinary
person, would have been of no great force; but being by him, who was over all
God blessed for ever, it was of high, indeed infinite price. As sin, though it
be of a finite nature, yet it is, objective, infinite, as being committed
against an infinite Majesty, and so meriting an infinite wrath and punishment.
So Christ's obedience, though it were metaphysically, for its nature, finite,
yet it was morally infinite, as being performed by a person of infinite dignity
and majesty; and so consequently it was of infinite merit, to appease Gods
wrath, and procure all good things in the behalf of his members. But by reason
of the infiniteness, dignity of Christ, person, there was in his obedience and
sufferings, of satisfaction and merit, not only a fullness of Sufficiency. He
is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins
of the whole world, 1 John. 2.2. But also a fullness of Redundancy. The
satisfaction, merit, and acceptablenesse of his sufferings did as far
surmount (thinks Chrysosteme) the demerit, malignity, and unpleasingnesse of
our disobedience, of our transgressions, as the vast Ocean does the least drop
of water; as the payment of infinite millions does the debt of some few pence.
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, for she has received of the Lords
hand double for all her sins, Isaiah. 40.2. to wit, in her head, and surety,
Christ Jesus. This redundancy, overflowing, and overplus (as I may say) of
Christ satisfaction will be more apparent, if with the acute Albertinus, tom.
1. quaest. 18. Theolog. Ex primo principio Philos. page 135. We will be pleased
to consider, that however there was a kind of infiniteness, as well in our
sins against God, as in Christ's satisfaction for them; yet this latter
infiniteness of Christ's satisfaction, was of a higher rank and nature, then
the infiniteness of sin. Because the reference of the satisfactory and
meritorious works of Christ unto his infinite person, was greater, nearer, and
more intimate, then that of sin unto the infinite nature of God offended
thereby: the person of Christ respecting those formally, and as it were
intrinsecally; because as a moral circumstance it morally informed and
dignified them: and the demerit of sin respecting God offended thereby, only
objectively, and extrinsecally, as outwardly terminating its reference unto
him; and therefore however from the infinite person of Christ there redounded
unto his satisfactory actions, an absolute infiniteness of value, and
acceptablenesse, which was absolutely and simply such, yet from the infinite
nature of God offended by sin, there redounded unto sin only an infiniteness
of guilt, and demerit, secundum quid, after a sort, in such a kind.

This doctrine of the all-fulnesse, and infiniteness of Christ's satisfaction
and merit, the Papists injure 1. By abuse of it. 2. By a consequentiall
impugning of it.

1. They abuse, pervert, and wrest it unto the Patronage of Papal Indulgences:
for they make it the principal pillar of that treasury of the Church, erected
by Pope Clement the sixth, to raise a stock to redeem Souls out of
Purgatory. Christ^ satisfaction being of infinite worth, was enough for the
sins of the whole world, all the men, that ever were, are or shall be in the
world: but it is applied only unto a little flock. There is therefor a
surplusage or plentiful remainder of the price of Christ's satisfaction, that
may always farther be applied.

For answer: we readily grant, that there was such an allsufficiency in the
humiliation of Christ, as that it was able to satisfy for the sins of all men
in the world, if it were applied unto them. But then we Ames. Bell. Enervat.
tom. 3. lib. 6. c. 1. p. 232.233.
utterly deny any superfluous and superabundant satisfactions of Christ, not
applied unto those, for whom they were by God and Christ intended. For the
entire price of Christ's satisfaction is applied wholly unto every believer, and
not by pieces and patches. To affirm, that Christ's satisfaction is applied but
in part, that some of his satisfactions are applied, and that others remain
unapplied, what is this, but to divide Christ? The Chamier. tom. ^. lib. 24 c.
12. sect. 1093.
light of the Sun is sufficient to il^ighten all the men in the world; and yet
there are many born blind, that never see the light thereof. But now how
ridiculous would it be to infe^hence, that there are any supervacaneous beams
of the Sun to be put into a treasury of light? The same light of the Sun may
serve for millions of men. So the same satisfaction of the Sun of
righteousness may be, and is applied unto all the Saints. And indeed if but
one single person had been saved and redeemed, it could have been at no lower a
rate, then the whole death of Christ; the whole satisfaction of Christ's blood
must be applied unto such a soul, and not only a parcel thereof. The
reservation then of many satisfactions of Christ in the treasury of the Church
that are not applied, is but a fiction invented for the filling of the Coffers
of his Holiness.

But to speak of this somewhat more accurately: The maine foundation, upon
which Papalins build the superfluous satis^, factions of Christ, and that
imaginary treasure of the Church, consisting principally of them, is the
infiniteness of Christ's satisfaction: and this may be branched into two
arguments.

The first, Such is the infinite worth of Christ's satisfaction, (...) that it
may be extended unto those, unto whom it is never actually extended.

But how sandy a foundation this is for such a structure, is well discovered by
Ames. Because, as much may be said of Gods power and mercy; whence yet to
infer any superfluity in them, were very ridiculous. Satisfactio Christi non
magis dicenda est super flua, aut Thesaurus ab Ecclesia dispensandus, quia sua
natura potest ad illos extendi, ad quos non extenditur actu, quam misericordia,
aut potentia Dei. Bell. Enerv. tom. 3. lib. 6. C. 1. page 232. The substance of
this answer we meet with in one of their own Schoolmen, Suarez in tertia part.
Thomae tom. 4. disp. 51. sect. 1. page 686. Though indeed it be brought by him
to another purpose. Having affirmed, that this supposed treasury of the Church
shall continue even after the day of judgment, he hints an objection against
it, that the remaining of it would be idle, vain, and without fruit. To what
purpose should there be in it sufficient satisfactions for infinite sins, when
there is no longer any place for the pardon of any sin? He answers, that it
would not be idle and in vain: and his confirmation of it will, mutatis
mutandis, with due change serve our turn. Neque id est otiosum, sicut potentia
Dei non est otiosa, etiamsi infinita possit operari, quae non operatur, quia
est attributum quoddam connaturale ipsi Deo pertinens ad perfectionem ejus: Ita
enim infinitus valor propriorum operum est quasi naturalis proprietas Dei
hominis pertinens ad perfectionem ejus. Gods power is not idle, though it can
work infinite things, which it never works, because it is a connaturall
attribute of God, belonging unto his perfection. So the infinite value of the
satisfactory works and sufferings of Christ, is as it were a natural property
of God man; and therefore we cannot say, that any of them be superfluous,
though they be not applied unto those, unto whom they are appliable.

A Second Argument may be framed thus: The blood of Christ is of infinite
price; and therefore every drop of it sufficient to cancel the sins of the
whole world. Christ therefore did endure much more, then was necessary for the
redemption of man: and of his superabundant satisfaction the treasure of the
Church principally consists.

Unto this I shall answer, 1. in the words of Dr. Francis White, in his reply
unto the Jesuit Fisher, page 553, 554. Although one drop of Christ's blood,
even when he was circumcised and whipped, might have been sufficient for man's
redemption, if God had so ordained; yet presupposing the Divine decree, and
ordinance to the contrary, one drop of Christ's blood is not sufficient to make
satisfaction for our sins; because sufficiency in this kind, is to be measured
by the wisdom, will, and acceptance of the ordainer, which requires as much
as himself appointed and decreed should be; and neither more, nor less.

2. A confutation of this popish conceit, touching a sufficiency in one drop of
Christ's blood to satisfy for sin, you may fetch out of another Bishop, Dr.
Bilson in his survey of the sufferings of Christ, etc. page 103. Nothing (says
he) did fully satisfy the justice of God for sin, nor make a perfect
reconciliation for us with God, but his obedience unto death. For that which
must satisfy for sin, must be death; other ransom for sin, God neither in his
wisdom and counsel would, nor in his truth and justice could accept, after
his will once determined and declared. It was the first wages appointed and
denounced by God to sin: In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die
the death, Genesis 2. or certainly thou shall di^ the doubling of the word noting
the inflexibility of Gods counsel and justice. The Apostle witnesses the
same, when he says, the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. Then as sin was
irrevocably rewarded with death, so must it necessarily be redeemed by death:
which rule stood so sure, that when the son of God would give himself for us
to redeem us, he could not do it, (by reason of Gods immutable counsel and
decree) but by death. Wherefore the Apostle calls him Heb. 9. the mediator
of the new Testament through death for the redemption of transgressions. And
where a testament is, there must be (says he) the death of the testator. He
contenteth not himselse to say there was, but there must be the death of the
testator, before we could be redeemed. A necessity not simply binding Gods
power, but plainly declaring his counsel to be fixed, and his will revealed. I
have alleged the testimony of these two Bishops, because I find others of the
same rank to speak another language. And those that have been the most rigid
assertors of the prelaticall cause have made this Monkish dream one piece of
their Divinity; and have bespattered as Puritans, all that have adventured upon
any limitation or mitigation of this hyperbole of Bernards.

Thirdly, I shall referr the reader for further satisfaction unto Illud non
(...) intelligitur, de totali causa meriti Christi: sed (...) duntaxat
departiali causa, nempe dignitate, atque habilitate perscuae satisfacientis etc.
Ludovicus Lucius against Gittichius, the Socinian, who does what he can to
qualify the Rhetoric of such Protestants, as say with Bernard, that one drop
of Ch^ists blood is enough to ransom all mankind, page 22. and withal he
proves page 121. out of Heb. 9.15. that in strictness and propriety of
speech, there was need not only of some few drops of his blood, but of his very
death it self, for satisfaction of Gods justice.

Unto him I shall also fourthly, add Chamier tom. 3 lib. 24. cap. 12. sect. 7,
8, 9. p. 1093. Who there thus argues against the Papists in this particular.
The Scripture ascribes the redemption and salvation of the elect, as to the
blood, so to the death of Christ. We were reconciled unto God by the death of
his Son, Romans 5.10. You that were sometimes alienated etc, now has he
reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, Col. 1.21,22. Now will they
play the sophisters with Christ's death, as with his blood, and say, that some
are redeemed with one part, and others with another branch of his death. What
can be more absurd, then such a distribution of the application of Christ's
death? As all the elect considered jointly, are redeemed by the whole death of
Christ, so every one of them severally, and apart. Paul is not ransomed by one
portion of his death, and Peter by another: But each of them by the same whole
death, considered entirely, in all its kinds, members, and degrees. Now if by
the scripture the whole death of Christ is requisite for the redemption of but
one single soul, then it is but a curious and rash presumption so peremptorily
to affirm, that but one drop of Christ's blood, one tear of his eye, one drop
of his sweat is more then sufficient for the ransom of all mankind.

Unto all these I shall in the last place subjoyne out of Ames Bell. Enervat.
tom. 1. lib. 2. Cap. 2. page 93. a passage that proves one or a few drops of
blood, to be an unmeet satisfaction unto the divine justice for the numerous
and heinous sins of men. Quamvis valor passionis pensandus sit ex dignitate
patientis, tamen ut passio idonea esset, ad valorem illum in talem usum
sustinendum, proportio fuit observanda inter poenam debitam, and solutam.
Although the value of Christ's passion be to be weighed and measured by the
dignity of his person suffering, yet notwithstanding, that his passion might be
fit to receive, or sustain the now mentioned value, requisite it was, that a
proportion should be observed between the punishment, that was due from us, and
that which was paid, and suffered by him. That Christ's sufferings might be
satisfactory, there was requisite not only dignitas personae, but also gravitas
poenae, not only the worthiness of his person, but also a fullness in his
suffering; he was to suffer all the parts of the general curse and punishment
due to sin, as touching the substance, and nature of them, not as touching
the circumstances either of place, or continuance. And this was figured by the
powering all the blood beside the bottom of the Altar, Exodus 29.12. By the
burning of all the burnt offering, Levit. 1.9. by the As the burning of the
heyfer signified the fufferings of Christ, Heb. 13.11,12. So the ashes were the
monument of his most base and utmost afflictions; for ashes were used as
greatest signs of sorrow and misery. 2 Samuel 13.19. Job. 30.19. and 42. verse.
6. Jer. 6.26, and to be brought to ashes upon the earth, is noted for the
extremity of Gods fiery judgments, Eze. 28.18. Aynsworth upon the place.
burning of the red heifer unto ashes, Numb. 19.9.

Secondly, The Papists by jost consequence impugn the all-fullnesse of
Christ's satisfaction, and merit, in their maintenance of saintlie
satisfactions, and merits.

1. In their maintenance of the satisfaction of the saints: for this makes
Christ's satisfaction imperfect, in that it adds thereunto a supply of humane
satisfactions.

Yea, but say the Papists, the doctrine of the satisfaction of the saints is so
far far from derogating any thing from the dignity of Christ's
satisfaction, as that it rather makes unto the greater honor thereof, because
it deriveth all our power of satisfying from his satisfaction. It is no
derogation from Gods Omnipotency, that he works by second causes; that in the
acting of the greatest miracles he makes use of his meanest servants. So it is
no imbasement, but rather an honor, and glory unto Christ's satisfaction, to
have them advanced so far, as that by virtue of them, the members of Christ
are made in part satisfyers of divine justice, not in equality with Christ, but
by subordination to him. Hereupon Bellarmine tom. 3. de paenitentia lib. 4.
cap. 14. very gravely advises us to take heed, that we do not wrong the
works of grace, the members of Christ, and the holy Ghost himself, whiles we
think to strive for the honor of Christ; for the disparagement of the fruit
redounds unto the root: and the injury done unto the members, reflects upon
the head.

But that notwithstanding all this glozing, their doctrine of humane
satisfactions does eclipse the dignity, and overthrow the force of Christ's
satisfaction, will appear by clearing up these two particulars. 1. that
considering the allfulnesse of Christ's satisfaction, humane satisfactions are
needless. 2. that they are injurious to the worth of Christ's satisfaction.

1. Presupposing the all-fulnesse, and infinite worth of Christ's satisfaction
humane satisfactions, are needless, and causeless; To what purpose should any
man light up a dim taper and smoaky candle, when he has the clear and full
light of the sun? If Christ's satisfaction be of infinite price, why then may
it not serve for the expiation of the guilt of temporal punishments? and if
there be an all sufficiency in Christ's satisfaction, what need ours?

Yea, but say they, man's satisfaction is needful, not to supply the want of
Christ's satisfaction, but to apply it unto us. It is one of the instruments
ordained by God for the application of Christ's satisfaction unto us, unto the
taking away of temporal punishments.

That this is but an idle evasion will appear, 1. By a comparison of Christ's
satisfaction. 2. By the entirenesse of the application thereof; and 3. by their
own restriction, and limitation of the use of it.

1. By a comparison of Christ's satisfaction: and such an argument we have urged
by Ames Bell. enervat. tom. 3. lib. 5. cap. 4. page 227. Satisfactio nova non
magis requiritur ad satisfactionem Christi applicandam, quam nova mors,
redemptio, resurrectio, ad mortem, redemptionem, and resurrectionem Christi
applicandam. A new satisfaction is no more required to apply the satisfaction
of Christ, then a new death, redemption, resurrection, is to apply the death,
redemption, and resurrection of Christ.

2. From the entirenesse and indivisibility of the application of Christ's
satisfaction. Christ's satisfaction is applied unto a soul entirely, wholly,
and at once, at least for the same sins, and not by parcels. But now they
without any the least warrant from Scripture, make two parts of the application
of Christ's satisfaction; First, one by confession, contrition, together with
the Priests absolution, to the taking away of the fault, and eternal
punishment. 2. Another by satisfactory works, to the taking away of the
temporal punishments.

3. By their own Mr. Bishop tells usthrough all this discourse, that the use
of Christ's satis faction is to take away the guilt of sin, and the eternal
punishment thereof, and that this we obtain in the forgiveness of our sins.
But now after theforgivenesse of our sins, the satisfactions remain to be
performed by us. If this be so; if the use of Christ's satisfaction be
determined in the forgiveness of our sins, and the satisfactions follow after,
how or to what use do the satisfactions apply unto us the satis factions of
Christ? As for example, Mr. Bishop gives a man absolution before he dies: he
has thereupon his sins forgiven him, and a release from cternall punishment;
but yet being not as yet thoroughly scoured, to Purgatory he must go. Now then
in what fort, and to what end, does Purgatory apply unto him the satisfaction
of Christ? For the satisfaction of Christ medleth not with temporal
punishments; he has left the Kingdom of temporal satis factions, and the
whole revenuethereof to the Pope. What do we here then with applying the satis
faction of Christ? Riddle this riddle he that can, for Mr. Bishop eannot do
it. Abbot against Bishop part. 2 d. page 737, 738.
limitation and restriction of the use of Christ's satisfaction. They limit and
restrain the use of Christ's satisfaction unto the taking away of the fault of
mortal sins, and the eternal punishment of them. And how then can humane
satisfactions apply the satisfaction of Christ for the taking away of temporal
punishment?

Unto these foregoing proofs, I shall add four more, taken from 1. The
general nature. 2, The original. 3. The distribution. 4. The relation of the
instruments of the application of Christ's satisfaction.

1. From their general nature: They are all ordinances of God, branches of his
worship. But the supposed pains of Purgatory, which they make to be
satisfactory to Gods justice, are not ordinances of God, branches of his
worship: therefore, no means of applying Christ's satisfaction to us.

2. From their original. All instruments of applying the satisfaction of
Christ, proceed from the grace, mercy, and favor of God. But the pains of
Purgatory, and we may say the same of all temporal punishments, that are
properly and formally such, come from the justice of God, and are of a
destructive and malignant nature, tending unto the perdition of the creature:
and therefore not means of applying Christ's satisfaction unto us.

Thirdly, from their distribution: They are either on Gods part offering, or on
our part receiving Christ's satisfaction. But by humane satisfactions v. gr. the
pains of Purgatory, and the like, Christ's satis faction is neither offered on
Gods part, nor received on our part: therefore they are no means of applying
Christ's Satisfaction.

Fourthly, from their relation. All means of the application of the
satisfaction of Christ's death, are referred thereunto, as the object, that is
to be applied, and have an aptness for the apprehension, signification, or
exhibition thereof. But now no such thing can be affirmed of the pains of
Purgatory, or the like pretended satisfactory punishments: and therefore they
have not so much as an isntrumental force of applying the satisfaction of
Christ's death and sufferings. I shall conclude this particular in the words of
Abbot against Bishop, 2 d. part. page 736, 737, Mr. Bishop tells us, that the
use of our satisfaction is to apply unto us Christ's satisfaction. A goodly and
witty device; I have a medicine fully sufficient and available for the curing
and healing of my wound, and I must have another medicine for the healing of
the same wound, which I must apply and lay to the former medicine. My surety
has fully and perfectly discharged my debt, and I must my self pay the debt
again, that my surety's payment may stand good for me. A satisfaction to apply
a satisfaction, is a toy so improbable and senseless, as that we may think
them miserably put to shifts, that could find no better cloak to hide their
shame.

2. The doctrine of humane satisfactions is injurious unto, and derogatory from
Christ's satisfaction; and that in two regards.

1. It communicates unto man the power of satisfying, which is a peculiar and
incommunicable prerogative of Christ's.

2. It ascribes unto man satisfaction in such a manner, as that it quite
excludes and shuts as it were out of doors the satisfaction of Christ.

1. It communicates unto man the power of satisfying, which to be a peculiar
and incommunicable prerogative of Christ's may be manifested from two fruits of
Christ's satisfaction, and from a comparison of satisfaction with creation.

1. From two fruits or effects of Christ's satisfaction, proper and peculiar
thereunto. 1. Redemption of us, and 2. A perfect and full reconciliation with
God.

1. Redemption of us. Christ redeemeth us from our sins, by fully satisfying
Gods justice for them; and therefore if the power of redeeming cannot be
imparted unto the Saints; neither can the power of satisfying, because
redemption is founded upon satiffaction. Now the power of redeeming is so
appropriate unto Christ, as that the very Papists themselves acknowledge no
Mediators of redemption besides him. He by himself has purged us from our
sins, Heb. 1.3.

A second effect of Christ's satisfaction is our perfect and full reconciliation
with God, Romans 5.10. Col. 1.21,22. Now these, and the like places, are to be
understood exclusively. We are reconciled unto God only by the satisfaction of
Christ's death and blood. The whole chastisement of our peace was laid upon him,
Is. 53.5. No chastisement whatsoever, besides that of his, can pacify the wrath
of God against us, can procure our peace with him. And indeed the Papists
themselves will acknowledge, that nothing which a sinful man can do, or
suffer, is able to purchase a return of Gods favor, and Friendship. Now if
men's best works, and greatest sufferings cannot reconcile unto God, then
neither can they satisfy the justice of God. Because reconciliation of God unto
man follows satisfaction unto his justice; Even as his enmity with man is an
inseparable Pemble. page 255.
consequent of the breach of his justice: God then is never perfectly
reconciled unto a creature, that has violated his justice, until full
satisfaction be made unto his justice, for the whole punishment due unto such
violation. And if he be once fully and perfectly reconciled, there is no place
for any further punishment, though but temporal: Because the friends of God,
and members of Christ, cannot be condemned; But satisfactory punishments do
necessarily imply condemnation. Besides, as Chamier largely proves against
Tapper tom. 3. lib. 23. cap. 19. page 1044. Reconciliation and remission are,
though distinguished, yet inseparably conjoined. God was in Christ, reconciling
the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19.
Where God is reconciled unto sinners, he does not impute unto them the guilt of
their sins, but totally pardons them: He remits the whole fault, and
punishment. He remembers them no more: he does not so much as make mention of
them: He covers them, makes them as white as snow; blots them out as a thick
cloud; casts them into the depth of the Sea; hides his face from them; casts
them behind his back: removes them as far out of his sight, as the East is
from the West, so that upon judicial enquiry they shall not be found, to wit,
in respect of condemnation, Jerem. 31.34. Ezekiel, 18.22. Psalm. 32.1,2. Psalm.
51.9. Micah. 7.19. Esaias. 44.22. Psalm. 103 12. Esaias. 38.17, and 1.18. Jer.
50.20. If any shall say, that these phrases signify only a partial
forgiveness of sin, any indifferent reader will judge, that they are blinded
with prejudice, and have wilfully shut their eyes against the light of the
truth.

A second argument to prove, that the power of lati-fying is not communicable
unto a mere creature, is taken from a comparison of satisfaction with
creation. Satisfaction has the same place in the order of grace, which
creation has in the order of nature. But now creation is so proper unto God,
as that it is blasphemy to affirm, there be any subordinate creators: And
therefore it is equally blaspheamous to aver, there be any subordinate
satisfyers of Gods justice.

As for that instance, which Bellarmine brings of Gods working miracles by
his servants, it is utterly impertinent: For God alone really, and properly
works miracles. Men being at the most but moral causes of them: as by their
prayers they obtain this of God, that he would do them; or as God uses their
help, as a sign or token of a miracle to be done by him. And moreover, new
miracles were not done by man, for application of any former miracles of God;
as they feign, that our satisfactions serve to apply Christ's. This similitude
therefore has no proportion unto the matter in hand; And thus have we proved,
that the power of satisfying is not communicable unto a mere man, much less
unto a sinful man, no not so much as in a way of subalternation. unto Christ's
satisfaction.

But Sed insto, Primo, satisfactionemnon esse subalternatam passioni Christi:
tum quia Deus non subalternavit, cu^us id solius jus erat: sed soli Papistae.
Tum quia, ipsa Papistarum confessione, passio Christi non operatur per
satisfactionem; Sed satisfactio adhibetur propter imperfectam applicationem
passionis. At quae causae aliarum defectum supplent, eas nemo subalternas^sed
vicarias appellavit. Secunda, non tantum aequo gra^u cooperantes causas
prejudicare invi^em, sed etiam subalternatas gemino casu; Primo, quum it a
subalternantur, ut tamen absque iis non possit prima Causa producere effectum.
Exempli gratia; Etsi sol in Phy sico ordine producat poma: tamen quia non fine
arbore, quae ei subord^natur; ideo confidenter dicat quis, non esse
sufficientem solemn ad producenda poma: Atqui audivimus Vasquez negantem, posse
Christi passionem quenquam efficere dignum gloria* absque propria
satisfactione: audivimus ab aliis, iniquum esse a Deo recipi in gratiam, sine
satis factione, eum, qui multa magnaque peccata admifit, aeque cum eo, qui
pauca, and levia. Necesse (...) igitur fateri, has satisfactiones nonnihil
saltem decerpere de honor Christi. Altero, in causis Ethicis; su^al^ernae
causae derogant primae, quum instituuntur praeter autoritatem e^us. Exempli
gratia, nor patiet^r re^sibi proregem ullum substitui a quoquam. At nos
dicimus, hoc genus omne satisfactionum, praetexiu subordinatae causae, Christi
meritis substitutum esse, ipso Christo, mitto jam nolente certe inscio: Quod
pii nec far, nec d^ssimulare possunt.
suppose, though not grant, that a subordination of humane satisfactions unto
Christ's, were a thing in it self possible, yet it can lawfully be made only
by Christ himself. Now that the Papist's have devised it of their own heads,
without any so much as colorable authority of Scripture, the miserable
weakness of their arguments is a sufficient evidence unto unprejudiced minds.

But secondly, they ascribe satisfaction unto man in such a manner, as that
they thereby quite exclude the satisfaction of Christ, as appears by
Bellarmine his answer unto this following argument of ours, lib. 1. De
Purgatorio cap. 14. If Christ's satisfaction be applied unto us by our works,
they are either two satisfactions, or but one: If they be two satisfactions,
one of Christ's, and another of ours, then God shall be made unjust in punishing
one sin twice over; or if (as some say) the satisfaction be but one, then it is
either Christ's, and so we satisfy not; or ours, and so Christ satisfyeth not:
or else we divide the honor with him, making him to satisfy for the fault, and
we for the punishment.

Unto this objection Bellarmine, having reckoned up two answers, pitcheth upon
a third, which he takes to be the more probable: and it is, that there is one
only satisfaction, and that is ours. Hereby you see Christ is quite excluded,
at least from making satisfaction for venial sins, as they call them, and
temporal punishments.

No says Bellarmine: for it is by Christ's satisfaction (says he) that we have
grace to satisfy. He satisfied immediately for the fault, and the guilt of
eternal death, and mediately for the temporal punishment, in as much as he
gives us grace, whereby we our selves are enabled to satisfy God for it.

Unto this Ames very acutely replieth, Bell. Enervat. tom. 2. lib. 5. page 192,
193. In such a respect as this, God the Father, and the holy Ghost, may be said
to satisfy for us, because we have all grace from God the father by the Spirit.
2. Upon this account, the satisfaction of Christ should have no other relation
unto our sins, and their punishments, then unto good works, as they are good:
for by the satisfaction of Christ, we have grace enabling us to work well. And
again tom. 3. lib. 5. cap. 4. page 229, 230. 1. If Christ's satisfaction be
immediate, and mediate, then his satisfaction is manifold, and not one. 2. If
Christ satisfyeth, our satisfaction intervening, then he has satisfied not
once, but he always satisfies, not by himself, but by us. Then lastly, he
does not so much satisfy for us, as in us.

3. Christ cannot be said to satisfy, as he gives unto men grace, enabling men
to satisfy, any more then he can be said to repent, or confess sins, as he
gives them grace for repentance, and confession.

In a second place, the Papists do covertly evacuate the alfulnesse and
infiniteness of Christ's merits by their doctrine of humane merits of
condignity. To merit is to purchase that right unto a thing, which one had not
before, to make that due, which was not due before. Now if the merits of Christ
be of infinite value, they have purchased in the behalf of his members a full
right unto eternal life and happiness; so that their good works do not make
the same newly due. If they make it any way due, they make it due either in
whole, or in part: if in whole, then Christ hach merited nothing for them: if
in part, then there is something in eternal life, which Christ has not
merited. Either way there is a manifest derogation from the merits of Christ.

Yea but the Papists bear us in hand, that their doctrine of merits does not
obscure, but rather illustrate the glory of Christ's merits: and to make this
good, they have two devices; the one received generally by most, if not by all
of them; The subordination of the saints merits unto Christ's merits. The
second is the peculiar shift of some few; The union of the saints persons with
Christ's person.

To begin with the first, the subordination of the saints merits unto Christ's
merits. Our merits (say they) are derived from Christ's: for he merited for us
the power and grace of meriting; and therefore our merits argue no
insufficiency in, but rather a wonderful efficacy of his merits. It is no
blemish unto the Sun, that the Moon and Stars shine with a light borrowed
from it. The fruitfulness of the branches is no disparagement unto the vine.
The dependant and subordinate efficiency of second causes is no detraction from
the omnipotency and all sufficiency of the first cause. And why should it be
any impeachment unto Christ's merits, to affirm, that he does not only merit
for us himself, but also makes us able to merit?

Unto this fancy I shall oppose these three considerations, that it is 1.
Ungrounded on Scripture. 2. Unnecessary. and 3. Impossible.

1. Ungrounded on Scripture. That Christ's merit has purchased unto us grace
enabling for performance of good works, we deny not; but that he has merited,
that we might merit, is a thing unheard of in the writings of the Prophets, and
Apostles: and therefore to be rejected, not only as a frivolous, but also as a
presumptuous fiction.

But secondly, it is also an Unnecessary fiction. For if Christ's merits be so
inestimable, as that they merit for us perfection, and fullness of happiness
and salvation, what necessity is there that we our selves should merit this
again. If a thing be already done sufficiently, it is more then is needful
for to do it over again.

And thirdly, this subordination of the merit of our works unto Christ's
merits, is a thing utterly Impossible, as may be proved from four particulars
considerable in our good works. 1. Gods donation of them unto us. 2. Our
Obligation unto them. 3. The imperfection and pollution of them. 4. The
disproportion between them and eternal life.

1. Gods donation of them unto us. The gifts of God are incapable of meriting
any thing with God: But all our good works are the free gifts of God, 1 Cor.
4.7. 1 Cor. 15.10. and 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 1.29. and 2.13. Is. 26.12. And
therefore by them God cannot be bound to bestow more upon us. This argument
drove Dicendu^ est, quod meritum de condigno subdistinguitur, quia quodda^ est
meritum de condigno large sumpto, pro quadam dignitate quam Deus ex ordinatio^e
requirit in operibus nostris, ad hoc ut remunerentur vita aeterna. Et haec
dignitas est in nobis per gratiam and charitate^ habitualem. Aliud est meritum
de condigno stricte and proprie accepto, and tale meritum est actio voluntaria
propter quam alicui debetur merces ex justitia, sic quod si non reddatur ille,
ad quem perti^et reddere, injus^e facit, and est simpliciter and pro pry
injustus: and tale meritum de condigno invenitur inter homines, sed non est
hominis ad Deum. Quod patet, quia quod redditur potius ex liberalitate dantis
quam ex debito operis non cadit sub merito de condigno stricte and proprie
accepto. Sed quicquid a Deo accipimus, sive sit gratia, sive sit gloria, sive
bonum temporale vel spirituale (praecedente in nobis propter hoc quocunque bono
ope^e) potius and principalius accipimus ex liberalitate Dei, quam reddatur ex
debito operis, ergo nihil penitus cadit sub merito de condigno sic accepto
Major patet ex ratione meriti de condigno prius posita Minor probatur, quia
facilius and minus est reddere aequivalens eius quod quis accepit ab alio, quam
eum constituere debitorem (quia ad constituendum eum debitorem, requiritur quod
plus reddat, quam acceperit, ut sic ratione plurium, alius efficiatur debtor)
sed nullus potest reddere Deo aequivalens, dicente Philosopho. 8. Ethic. Quia
in his quae sunt ad Deos and ad Parents impossible est aequivalens reddere:
ergo multo minus est possibile, quod ex quocunque nostro opere Deus fiat nobis
debtor, ita ut si non redderet debitum, esset injustus. Causa autem huius est,
quia and illud quod sumus, and quod habemus, sive sunt honi actus, sive boni
habitus, seu usus, totum est in nobis ex liberalitate divina gratis da^te
co^serva^te. Et quia ex dono gratuito nullus obligatur ad dandu^ amplius, sed
potius recipie^s magis obligatur danti, ideo ex bonis habitibus et ex bonis
actibus, sive usibus, nobis a Deo datis, Deus non obligatur nobis ex aliquo
debito justitiae ad aliquid amplius dandum, ita quod si non dederit, ^it
injustus, sed potius nos sumus Deo obligati: Et sentire, seu dicere oppositum,
est temerarium, seu blasphemium, etc.
Durand in lib. 2. sentent. did. 27. quaest. 2. unto the great regret of
merit-mongers, to impugn the merit of condignity, properly and strictly so
called; for such a merit is a voluntary action, whereunto the reward is due of
justice; so that if it be not given, an injury is committed, and he to whom
retribution properly appertains, should simply and properly be unjust. Now
there can be no such matter between God and man, because whatsoever we receive
of God, etc. whatsoever good works we have before done for it, yet we receive
the same rather of Gods liberality, then of the debt of the work. And the
reason that he alleges for this is; because all that we are, and all that we
have, whether good habits, or good acts, or the use of them, is wholly, and
altogether from the bounty of God, freely both giving and preserving them. And
for as much as no man's free gift can bind him to give more, but he that
receives more is the more bound to him, that gives it; therefore hence it
follows, that by the good habits and deeds, which God has enabled us to do,
he is not bound by the debt of his justice to give us more; that he should be
unjust, if he gave it not; but we rather are bound unto him: and it is
rashness, yea blasphemy to think or say the contrary. And at last upon all
this, he infers this conclusion: siquid pro bonis operibus nostris, nobis
datur, vel redditur, potius and principalius est ex liberalitate dantis, quam
ex debito nostri operis. If God give any reward unto our well-doings, this is
not, because he is a debtour to our works, but rather of his own liberality.

A second Argument, that our best works are incapable of merit, and
consequently, that the subordination of our merits unto Christ's, is
impossible, is our obligation unto them. We are bound to fulfill the law in all
perfection. The best of works, the highest degree of obedience is but our due
debt by Gods command. Now the payment of due debts, the performance of our
duty unto God, can merit nothing at his hands, Luke 17.20.

A third argument proving that our good works are incapable of having any
power of meriting derived unto them, is their sinful imperfection, and
pollution. All our righteousnesses are as menstruous, and as filthy rags, Esaias.
64.6. All our graces are imperfect; all our duties are polluted: and therefore
stand in need of favor, grace, and mercy for acceptance. Nay they are so
far from meriting heaven, and eternal life, as that they supererogate for
hell, and everlasting damnation.

The fourth and last argument is the vast disproportion between our good
works, and eternal life: For

1. Eternal life, and happiness, is objectively infinite, as being the
vision, and fruition of God, an infinite good, unto it therefore nothing, that
we can do, or suffer, can be equivalent, Romans 8.18.

2. Our future life, and happiness, is infinite in point of duration. But now
says Anselme, a very ancient Schools man; if a man should serve God a
thousand years with as great fervor and zeal as possible, he could not by
way of condignity, merit to be in the king dome of heaven so much as for half
a day. And thus (you see) that the derivation of merit unto our works from
Christ's merits is an utter impossibility.

But there is one of their great Schoolmen Gabriel Biel in tert. sentent.
disp. 19. Art. 2. Conclus. 5. that speaks yet far more dishonorable of
Christ's merits: For he ascribes merit unto our works in a way of equality
with Christ. Though the passion of Christ (says he) be the principal merit*
for which the grace of God, and the opening of heaven, and the glory thereof be
given, yet it is never the sole or total meritorious cause. Because always
with the merit of Christ there concurreth some work, as the merit of
congruity, or condignity of him, that receives grace or glory, etc.

Here it is in terminis affirmed, that the passion of Christ is not a solitary,
total, meritorious cause: and the reason alleged is; Because there is
farther requisite the concurrence of our merits: therefore, by consequence it
is affirmed, that our supposed, or pretended merits, are conjoined with
Christ's in a way of coordination. Because a total, or solitary cause excludes
only coordinate, and not subordinate causes.

A second shift, that Hosius, Cajetan, and others, mentioned by Vasquez, have,
to clear this their doctrine of merit from dishonouring of Christ's merits, is
the union of the godly with the person of Christ; Whence there redounds unto
their good works a greater worthiness of eternal life, then of themselves
they would otherwise have. They are knit unto Christ, as members unto the head,
as branches unto the vine; and so are as it were reputed one person with
Christ. And consequently their actions and good works, their merits, are
looked upon, as the actions, good works, and merits of Christ himself: For
Christ hereupon, as an head, has an influence upon them as members, and so
works, and meriteth in them. Whereupon Every godly and righteous person may
not only say with the Apostle Paul, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me, Gal. 2.20. But also I merit, yet not I, but Christ meriteth in me. And to
prove all this, they allege a saying rife in their Schools, That our works
besprinkled with the blood of Christ, and washed with the merits thereof, do
become worthy of heaven, and it is happiness, and this saying they might
perhaps ground upon Revel. 7.14. Where it is said of the saints, that they
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the lamb.

But Vasquez has sared us the labor of confuting this evasion, In primam
secundae tom: 2 disp. 214. cap. 7. page 810. Good works (says he) receive
their value, and worthiness from the person immediately, and formally
productive, or elicitive of them; and not from the person giving grace, and
assistance for the performance of them: and therefore our good works have noe
worthiness of desert, or increase thereof, derived from the worthiness of
Christ, our head; and this he does not barely dictate but prove by three
reasons.

1. Otherwise it would follow, that our works were of infinite value; Because
Christ, from whose grace they proceed, is of an infinite dignity.

Secondly, Our good works would be condignly meritorious of justification for
others.

And Thirdly, they would merit in the utmost rigor of justice according unto
not only a proportional, but also an absolute equality between the merit, and
the reward: Which are things disclaimed by those Papists, that are yet most
rigid and stiff patrons of the merit of our beggarly, and polluted
observations.

Having thus cleared the doctrine of the All-fulnesse, and infiniteness of
Christ's satisfaction, and merit, from the Papists both abuse and opposition of
it; I shall in the next place proceed unto some practical application of the
point: It may serve as a motive unto humiliation, and as a ground of
consolation.

1. Then here is a motive unto humiliation for sin: for the fullness of its
obliquity, and infiniteness of its guilt, or demerit, is sufficiently, and
clearly demonstrated from the fullness, and infiniteness of Christ's
satisfaction for it: And therefore there is nothing, that can with half that
justice challenge such a deep measure of our tears, and sorrow, as they. O
the spots and blemishes of our Original Corruptions, and actual
transgressions, must needs be filthy beyond all expression, seeing nothing
could wash them away, but the unvaluable blood of the immaculate lamb of God.
There was no satisfying of Gods justice for them, appeasing of his wrath
against them, no redemption of our souls from them, no possibility (if we
speak in order unto Gods ordinate power) of the healing of them, but by
shedding the heart blood of him, who was over all God blessed for eve; by his
obedience, that reached even so far, as a cheerful submission unto a most
painful and ignominious death. And from this now, let us thus aggravate the
heinousness of our sins. Surely they must needs infinitely displease, and
provoke God, seeing he expects so ample a recompense for them. The stench of
them must needs be extremely noisome, and offensive unto the nostrils of God:
For nothing could quiet and appease him, but that costly perfume, of which the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.2. His son giving himself for us an offering, and
sacrifice to him, for a sweet smelling savor. O that thraldom must needs be
most miserable and intolerable, from which there is no ransom, but by so
inestinable a a price. Those diseases are deadly, unto the healing of whic,
there is requisite so precious, and divine a medicine. Those wounds must needs
be deep, and dangerous, unto the cure of which, there is necessary so rich a
balsome, as out-weighs in worth millions of worlds.

Secondly, This fullness of satisfaction and merit in Christ's humiliation is a
ground of consolation: for from it we may infer 1. a perfection of his
office, that he assumed for us. 2. a perfection of his influence upon us.

1. A perfection of his office, that he assumed for us, the Captain of our
salvation was made perfect through his sufferings Heb. 2.10. and Chap. 5. verse.
8, 9. that is, as touching his office.

1. Such was the worth of his sufferings, as that by them he accomplished,
finished, an fulfilled that work, which he was to perform for us, here on
earth; a full satisfaction of Gods justice, a perfect expiation of our sins,
Luke 13.32. John. 17.4. John. 19.30.

Secondly, He was by his sufferings perfectly, and fully qualified and fitted
for discharge of those duties, that are to be done in heaven for us. He was by
them qualified, as with compassion toward us, so with merit toward his
father. As his own experience of sufferings was a motive unto sympathy with
us; so the value of his suffering^ was an argument of prevalency with his
father. If he ask for the pardon of any sin, he can plead, that he has
fully satisfied God's justice for it. If he crave for any mercy, favor, grace,
in the behalf of his members, why he has paid for it unto the utmost
farthing. An intercession that is backed with an infinite merit must neeeds be
very forcible, and prevailing.

2. From this fullness of Christ's satisfaction, and merit, we may infer a
perfection of Christ's influence upon us. It is said of the gifts, and
sacrifices under the law, that they could not make him, that did the service,
perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, Heb. 9.9. Now this is spoken of them,
as compared. with the sacrifice of Christ, in a comparison of dissimilitude The
deny all then of then sufficiency to perfect in things concerning the
conscience, implies, that the sacrifice of Christ is sufficient to pe^fect the
conscience, to purify it, and pacify it, to enable it for the regular
performance of all its offices. It can put both into our hearts, and mouths,
the answer of a good, conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. By one offering he
has perfected for ever them, that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. He has
perfected them for ever, as a moral cause in the way of satisfaction and merit.

1. He has perfected them satisfactorily. He has fully satisfied Gods justice
for all their sins, 1 John. 1.7. Tit. 2.14. Acts 13.39. and for all things
considerable in their sins, for the fault in the offense of Gods majesty, and
violation of our friendship with him, the stain, or corruption of sin, all
punishments for sin, whether eternal, or temporal; so that they are freed
from the whole curse of the law Galat. 3.13. and totally exempted from any
condemnation whatsoever, Romans 8.1. Sprinkling of blood seven times, was
required upon several occasions under the law: As in the sin offering for the
ignorance of the anointed Priest Aynsworth.
Levit. 4.6. on the day of expiation or atonement Chap. 16.14. and in the
cleansing of the Leper Chap. 14.7. Now seven, is a perfect number, used for the
completing of a work Genesis 3.2,3. and therefore this sprinkling of blood seven
times fitly served to typify, that the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24.
perfectly, and fully cleanses our souls from all sins, purges our
consciences from all dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. This utter
and to^all removal of our sins from us in a way of remission by the
all-sufficient satisfaction of Christ, was typified by the Scape-goate, that
did bear upon him all the iniquities of the Children of Israel unto a land not
inhabited, a land of separation, Levit. 16.22.

Secondly, He has by the offering of himself perfected them that are
sanctified, meritoriously. He has purchased for them not only a possibility,
but also a certainty of salvation: He has not only by his merits opened the
gate of heaven, made salvation possible unto all that believe, but further
procured in the behalse of all the elect, an actual admission into glory: for
he has merited for them faith, repentance, regeneration, perseverance, all
gifts and graces that are absolutely necessary, and will infallibly bring unto
salvation; all things that pertain to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. The
chastisement of our pear was laid upon him, Esaias 53.5. the chastisement that
was laid upon him was of such worth, as that it was sufficient to purchase a
through, and perpetual peace, full favor, and perfect reconciliation with
God. And a peace with the God of heaven is an ample security, and protection
against an uncessant war, with all the Devils in hell, against the greatest
enmity, and rancour, the most powerful opposition of wicked men on earth; and
withal an assured, and undoubted pledge of all such favors, privileges,
honors, and dignities, as favorites may expect from so royal, and munificent
a master, as the King of kings, and Lord of Lords.

Of this perfection of Christ's influence, that I have spoken of, we have in the
remainder of the words an amplification; 1. from the extent thereof, in regard
of continuance; 2. from a restraint thereof, in respect of object.

1. From the extent thereof, in regard of continuance. By one offering he has
perfected them that are sanctified for ever. (...) translated, for ever, may be
referred either unto the duration of the world, or else, the duration of these
that are sanctified.

1. Unto the duration of the world. Christ's oblation of himself perfects those
that are sanctified in all ages of the world. It is an in exhaust fountain,
the satisfaction and merit of which will never be drawn dry. As the sun
enlightens all men, having the use of sight, that ever were, are, or shall be
in the world. So Christ's sacrifice being of infinite merit, perfects all those,
that ever were, are, or shall be sanctified unto the end of the world. Indeed
of it self, it is sufficient for the perfection of even infinite millions of
worlds. This perpetual efficacy of Christ's death was typified under the law by
the casting of Cedar wood into the midst of the burning of the heifer, of whose
ashes was made the water of separation, and purification for sin, Numb. 9.6.
Now of this, Cedar was a very meet type, because it is a firm, and durable
wood, that never rotteth.

2. For ever may be referred unto the duration of those, that are sanctified;
and so it denotes the perseverance of this influence upon them: It is not for
a time only, but unto the end of their lives, indeed unto all eternity; It
keeps them by the power of God through faith unto salvation.

Lastly, you have the restraint of this influence unto them, that are
sanctified, both by infusion of habitual grace, and holiness from God, and
also by dedication, and consecration, as vessels of honor unto God, as by
Gods decree of election, so by their own steadfast purpose and resolution.
Unsanctified and unrenewed persons then, dogs and swine, who are not as yet
separated out of the world, but prostituted unto the vanities thereof, whose
souls are destitute of all saving and sanctifying graces, and defiled with
innumerable lusts and corruptions, that are unmortified, who are utterly
neglective and contemptuous of Gods ordinances, gross and impenitent profaners
of his worship, can expect no share in, comfort or benefit by the fullness of
Christ's satisfaction and merit.

Unto this place we may add another in the same book, Chap. 5.9. being made
perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey
him. In which words we have, 1. The Ground. 2. Manner. 3. Effect. 4. Extension.
And 5. Restriction of the object of this influence.

The ground of it: Being made perfect, to wit, by the things which he suffered,
as appears by comparison of the words with the foregoing, verse. 8. By his
sufferings he was perfectly qualified, and fully fitted for discharge of this
great business, the purchasing of our salvation.

2. The manner of this influence. He was not the instrument, or means, but the
principal cause, the author of our salvation.

3. The effect. It was not only salvation, but eternal salvation. Bilson.
Fuller or more sufficient then eternal salvation, we neither expect, nor ever
shall have any; since that which is eternal admits no change, nor increase.

4. The extension of this influence in regard of object. He became the Author
of eternal salvation unto all that obey him, of what condition soever, though
never so low, and despicable: want of learning, meandness of parts, baseness
of birth, poverty of estate, and all other outward miseries of life can be no
impediment unto the all-powerfull influence of Christ's merits.

Lastly, we have the restriction of this influence in regard of object. He
became the author of eternal salvation, only to them that obey him, to wit,
with the obedience of faith, and with new obedience, the obedience of good
works and sanctification. Children of disobedience, (...), who will not be
persuaded, will not hearken unto divine admonitions, though never so
persuasive, who are refractory, obstinate, and impenitent in their disobedience
and rebellion, are hereby quite excluded from the sweet, and comfortable
influence of Christ's sufferings, though in themselves infinitely satisfactory
and meritorious.

But this perfection or fullness of Christ's influence upon his members, we have
set down, as here in these places, absolutely in it self; so Romans 5.
comparatively, as compared with the influence of Adam upon his offspring. Adam
was the figure or type of him that was to come, verse. 14. to wit, Christ Jesus,
in respect not of such things, as were personal unto either of them, but of
that which is by them communicated unto many. As Adam was a head, root, and
fountain of sin and death unto the universality of men, so Christ was a head,
root, and fountain of righteousness, grace, and life unto the universality of
Believers. But now to prevent all mistaking, before he prosecutes the
comparison of similitude between their influences, he first premiseth the great
disparity that is between them; and this he first affirms; and then
confirms.

1. He affirms it, verse. 15. but not as the offense, so also is the free
gift. But he does not content himself with affirming it once, but repeates it
again, verse. 16. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift. The
repetition was perhaps to signify the great weight of the points handled, as
also to import the more then ordinary incredulity that is in men generally
touching them. There is nothing almost in Divinity goes down more hardly with
flesh and blood, then the imputation of Adam's sin and Christ's righteousness.

Having thus earnestly affirmed this disparity, he in the next place, as
strongly demonstrates it; and that first generally, secondly particularly, by
instancing in some particular heads of disparity.

1. Then in general, he proves this disparity by way of comparison, by arguing
from the less unto the greater, Verse. 15. For if through the offense of one,
many be dead: much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by
one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. In which words by the grace of
God, is understood his favor and love; and by the gift of grace, is meant the
obedience of Christ, mentioned verse. 18, 19. which as Beza notes in relation
unto God, is termed the gift by grace, or the free gift, because it is by him
freely, or graciously imputed to us: in relation unto us, it is styled
righteousness, verse. 18* Because by it, imputed to us, we are made righteous,
verse. 19. Now this is here far advanced above the offense, fall, disobedience,
or transgression of Adam, in regard of fullness of efficiency. If that has
abounded, this has much more abounded, much more overflowed. It is a metaphor
taken from rivers, that overflow their banks. This superiority, superabundancy
of Christ's obedience unto Adam's disobedience, in point of efficacy, may be
demonstrated from the inequality that is between them, in regard 1. of their
general Nature. 2. Efficient. 3. Effects.

1. From the inequality that is between them, in regard of their general
nature. The offense, or disobedience of Adam was privative; Christ's obedience
or righteousness is positive; and therefore more available and forcible unto
salvation, then that unto condemnation. This is an argument urged by Pareus,
but I shall lay no great stresse upon it.

But proceed unto a second inequality that is between them, in regard of
efficients. The disobedience of Adam was the disobedience of a mere man; The
obedience and righteousness of Christ was the obedience and righteousness of
him, that was God as well as man: and therefore the merit of it infinitely
surmounted the demerit of Adams sin; and consequently was more able to justify
and save, then this to condemn and destroy. If you will derive Adams sin
higher, from the Devil, even yet he was but a creature, and so infinitely
short of Jesus Christ, who was God man: And hereupon we may conclude, that
there is more virtue in him, the seed of the woman by way of eminency, then
there was venom in the head of the serpent: He is more able to heal souls,
then Satan to poison and infect them.

A third inequality between them is in respect of their effects; in regard of
their excellency, difficulty, and certainty of eveniency.

1. Excellency. By Christ's obedience we are restored unto greater mercies and
privileges, then ever we were deprived of by Adam's disobedience: Unto gifts
without repentance, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 11.29. Constancy, and
irreversiblenesse in the justification of our persons; such a firmness in the
sanctification of our natures, as is unconquerable by the gates, that is,
power, and policy of hell; such an immortality of the body, in our
resurrection, as is not only a posse non mori, a possibility of not dying, but
a non posse mori, an impossibility of dying.

Secondly, The effects, purchased by the merits of Christ's obedience, surmount
those redounding unto mankind by the guilt of Adam's sin, in regard of
difficulty. It is far more difficult to build up, then to pull down and
destroy. There is more merit, and efficacy requisite for the justification, and
salvation of one soul, then there is guilt, and demerit for the damnation of
millions.

Thirdly, The effects of Christ's obedience transcend those of Adams
disobedience, in regard of certainty of eveniency. The actual damnation unto
which we are liable, by the fall of Adam, is preventable, and avoidable by
faith, and repentance. Whereas the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which
is by one man, Christ Jesus, infers a hypotheticall necessity of salvation,
and so sensu composito, excludes all possibility of damnation.

Secondly, The Apostle proves the disparity between the influence of Christ
upon his, and the influence of Adam upon his, particularly, by instancing in
some particular heads of disparity.

The first head of disparity is the difference between the meritorious cause of
our guilt, and condemnation by Adam, and the Antecedents, or occasions of ur
justification by Christ. The condemnation accruing unto us from Adam is only
for one sin: the judgment was to condemnation by one, verse. 16. that is, by
one offense: One, for number, if we speak of that first sin, committed by
him in paradise, completed in the eating of the forbidden fruit; One, for
kind, if we speak of that contracted from him, usually called, Original
sin. But now our justification by Christ is a full absolution, and discharge
not only from the sin, which proceeds from Adam, but from all other personal
sins. The free gift is of many offenses unto justification, verse. 16. the
blood of Christ cleanses us from all sins, 1 John 1.7. It takes Pareus.
away the cause, and the effect. It stops up not only the fountain, Original
corruption, but all the rivulets of actual transgression. The fullness of
satisfaction in the humiliation of Christ was like the fullness of water in the
sea: And the sea by reason of it is huge vastness can drown mountains, as
well as molehils. Even so the fullness of Christ's satisfaction can swallow up
the greatest, as well as the least sins.

A second head of disparity is in regard of the potency, and prevalency of
their effects. The offense of Adam brought in a kingdom, and tyranny of death.
If by one man's offense death reigned by one, ver. 17. But now the obedience,
and righteousness of Christ has purchased, and erected a far more
powerful, eminent, and glorious kingdom, the Kingdom of life. Much more they
which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life by one, Jesus Christ, ibid. It is very remarkable, that whereas
the Apostle says, in the former part of the verse, by one man's offense death
reigned by one, he does not to answer this, say in the latter part of the
verse, life shall reign by one man, Christ Jesus; but, they which receive
abundance of grace, etc: shall reign in life, by one, Jesus Christ. For this
Estius gives two reasons.

1. Because it sounds more sweetly and comfortably, to say, that justified
persons shall reign by Christ; then to say, that life shall reign in those
that are justified by Christ.

And secondly, it is to put a difference between the Kingdom of death, and the
Kingdom of life. The Kingdom of death destroys all its vassalls, but the
Kingdom of life contrariwise exalts all its subjects, and makes them to be
Kings, partakers of the heavenly Kingdom with Christ. And thus have you seen
out of the Apostle, that there is such a wide imparity between the obedience of
Christ, and the disobedience of Adam, as that the satisfaction and merit of
Christ's obedience, is by far more beneficial unto the Church and people of
God, then the guilt of Adams sin was prejudicial.

In the next place, the Apostle prosecutes a comparison of similitude between
the efficacy of the sin of the one unto condemnation, and of the righteousness
of the other unto justification and life. And this he does first in proper, and
then in metaphorical terms.

In proper terms, verse. 18, 19. As by the offense of one, judgment came upon
all men unto condemnation: Even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift
came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience,
many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall many be made
righteous. In which words we have the influence of Adams offense, and Christ's
righteousness resembled in regard of both intensivenesse and extensivenesse.

1. Intensivenesse: they are like, though not equal, in the intension, or
degree of their efficacy. As Adams offense was effectual to make his posterity
sinners, to involve and inwrap them in guilt and condemnation: so Christ's
righteousness and obedience was available to invest all his members with
justification, to make them righteous before God unto everlasting life.

2. They are resembled proportionally in regard of the extensivenesse of their
objects. As by the offense of one, to wit, Adam, judgment came upon all men,
that were his natural seed, by propagation; Even so by the righteousness of
one, Christ Jesus, the free gift came upon all men, that were his spiritual
seed, by regeneration unto justification of life.

Secondly, This similitude is propounded in metaphorical terms, ver. 21.
That as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through
righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Whereas the
kingdom of Original sin is made the sequel of Adams transgression, So the
kingdom of grace is made the consequent of Christ's obedience.

Original corruption may be termed a King, in regard 1. of vastness of
dominion. It reigns before regeneration in all men, and in all of men, in
their mortal bodies, as well as their souls. 2. In regard of greatness of
power; It has all the powers of the soul, and parts of the body, until they
be renewed by the holy Ghost, under such a command as the Centurion had his
servants, or soldiers, Math. 8.9. And unto this kingdom of sin, the
kingdom of grace by Christ is answerable. As sin reigns unto death; so
grace reigns through righteousness by Jesus Christ. Now unto the grace, and
favor of God, a kingdom an-answerably is ascribed in two respects, 1. in
regard of it is powerful efficacy: it is as able to protect, and exalt all
those, to whom it is extended, as Original sin is to ruin, and destroy
those, that are under it is plenary subjection. 2. in regard of its plentiful
fruits: grace reigns by Jesus Christ; By him there is a large kingdom, a
great abundance of grace answerable to the kingdom, and abundance of sin in
us, to the reigning of sin unto death. The subjects of this kingdom receive
abundance of grace, and of the fruit of righteousness, ver. 17.

There is one thing more in the text, that much conduces unto the glory of
this kingdom of grace, and that is the continuation of it unto eternity. Other
kingdoms may expire; But grace shall reign through righteousness unto
eternal life. And thus the Apostle declares, what a great purchase Christ by
his all-sufficient merits has made in the behalf of his members. He has
purchased for them grace, and favor with the God of heaven; nay, a powerful,
rich, and an absolutely eternal kingdom of grace. O how happy, and glorious
shall all those souls be that are found in Christ, standing by faith, under
the coverture of His merits, and righteousness! Grace shall reign over them
through righteousness unto eternal life.

Secondly, Christ may be considered according unto his state of exaltation, and
so there dwelled in him an all fullness of glory. There was a manifestation of
the All-fullnesse of glory, that was essential unto his Godhead: A real
collation of an all-fulnesse of glory upon his manhood.

First then, in the exaltation of Christ there was a manifestation of the
all-fulnesse, the infiniteness of glory, that was essential unto the Godhead.
This divine glory of his was for a time, as it were laid aside, clouded, and
eclipsed by the form of a servant, the infirmities of his humane nature, the
miseries of his life, and by the shame, and pain of his death. But in his
exaltation the father glorified him, according unto his desire and prayer,
John. 17.5. with his own self, with the glory, which he had with him before
the world was: that is, the father manifested, and displayed in him that glory,
which he had from all eternity in a way of equality with himself. By the
resurrection, he was declared to be the son of God with power, Romans 1.4. and
therefore possessed of an infinite glory: for the son of God is the
brightness of his fathers glory, Hebr. 1.3. the Prince of life, Acts. 3.15.
the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8.

But in a second place, in the exaltation of Christ, besides this external
declaration of the glory of his Godhead, there was farther a real collation of
an all-fulnesse of glory upon his manhood. It is generally resolved by the
Schoolmen, and for ought I know not gainesaid by Protestants, that Christ in
regard of his soul was from the very first instant of his conception
comprehensor, blessed, full of glory: and enjoyed the happiness of heaven for
the substance of it. This Aquinas proves, part. 3. quaest. 34. art. 4. Because
even then he received grace, not by measure. But now, if his grace should fall
short of that of comprehensors, the saints, and Angels in heaven; If he should
not have enjoyed the light of glory; If his graces had not been always acted
in the vision, fruition, and comprehension of God, there had been a measure in
his grace; The spirit had been given unto him by measure. Unto Aquinas I shall
add Becanus, who upon the same argument thus reasons. Sum. The. par. 3,
tract. 1. c. 9. quaest. 2. Christ according unto his humanity had the clear
vision of God from the very instant of his conception. The reason is, because
it is manifested that he had this vision before his death: But the reason, and
ground of his having of it before his death, was the hypostaticall union.
Therefore seeing this reason, or ground of the beatificall vision agreed unto
him from the very instant of his conception, therefore we must say, that he had
the vision of God from the first moment of his conception. The major is plain
from that in Joh. 3.13. No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came
down from heaven, even the son of man, which is in heaven. Where the verb,
ascendit, is of the preterperfect tense, whereby Christ signified, that he had
now already ascended into heaven, which could not be true of a corporal
ascent, but of a spiritual, by the beatificall vision. The same thing may be
gathered from that in John. 12.26. If any man serve me, let him follow me, and
where I am, there shall also my servant be. And from Chap. 17.24. Father I will
that they also, whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory, which thou have given me. From these, and the like places it
is evident, that Christ, when he spoke these things, was in the estate of
blessedness, unto which he also wished, and desired, that the Apostles might
come. Whence I conclude, that he was always in that state from the very
instant of his conception, because there is no reason why he should be in it
then, and not before.

Of this heaven-happniesse, in the soul of Christ, from the beatificall
vision, there would always, without Gods miraculous restraint, and prevention,
have been two, as it were connaturall sequels, 1. a fullness of unspeakable
and unconceivable joy, solace, delight, pleasure, and comfort in his soul, 2.
a redundancy of glory from his soul unto his body. But by the special
dispensation of God, the resultancy of the former was suspended, and withheld
in the time of his passion; and the latter, the Secundum naturalem habitudinem,
quae est inter animam, and corpus, ex gloria animae redundat gloria ad corpus.
Sed haec naturalis habitudo in Christo subjacebit voluntati Divinitatis ipsius:
Ex qua factum est, quod beatitudo remaneret in anima, and non derivar^tur ad
corpus, sed care pateretur; quae convenient naturae passibili secundum illud
quod Damasc. dicit, quod beneplacito Divinae voluntatis permittebatur carni
pati, and operari propria. Aquinas part. 3. quaest. 14. ar. 1.

Anima Christi a principio suae conceptionis fuit gloriosa per fruitionem
Divinitatis per fectam. Est autem dispensative, ut ab anima gloria non
redundaret incorpus, ad hoc quod mysterium nostrae redemptionis sua passione
impleret. Et ideo, peracto hoc mysterio passionis, and mortis Christi, statim
and anima in corpus in resurrectione resumptum, suam gloriam derivavit: Et ita
factum est corpus illud gloriosum, Aquinas par. 3. quaest. 54. ar. 3.


derivation of glory from his soul unto his body was totally deferred until
his Exaltation. And then indeed the interruption of joy in his soul, the
interception of glory from his soul to his body, was altogether removed.

1. His soul was filled with all that joy, solace, pleasure, delight, and
consolation, which can possibly flow from the sight of an object so infinitely
pleasing, as is the essence, majesty, and glory of God. In the presence of God
he had fullness of joye at his right hand pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.
God made him full of joy with his countenance, Act. 2.28.

2. His body was replenished with as much glory, as was proportionable unto the
most vast capacity of the creature. It was (...), a body of glory; that is, a
most glorious body, in it self; and the spring of glory unto others. Of this
glory of Christ's body Peter, James, and John, had a glimpse in the
transfiguration, Math. 17.2. He was transfigured before them, and his face did
shine as the sun, and his raiment was white, as the light. Glory was coevall
unto his soul from it is first creation, but the flowing of it unto his body
was stope to qualify him for the work of our redemption: for that was to be
wrought by suffering; and if his body had been glorified, it would have been
impassible, and could not have suffered. But now here at the present, by
special dispensation, God gives way unto the redounding of glory from his
soul unto his body; and this transitory glory was such, as that it changed the
natural darkness of his flesh, and made his face to shine, as the sun; nay it
brake through the obscurity of his raiment, and made it white, as the light.
His raiment became shining, exceeding white, as snow: so as no fuller on earth
can white them, Mark. 9.3.

Of the fullness of glory that was conferred upon Christ, in his exaltation,
there were diverse prophecies, and types in the old Testament; most clear, and
pregnant affirmations in the new Testament.

1. Diverse prophecies and types in the old Testament.

1. Prophecies, and the most remarkable prophecy hereof is in Psalm. 16. v. 9,
10, 11. which is applied unto Christ by the Apostle Peter, Acts. 2. verse. 25.
usque ad 32. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy
holy one to see corruption. Thou will show me the path of life: In thy presence
is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. In
these words the Psalmist prophesies of the resurrection of Christ's body, and
the glorification of his soul.

1. Of the resurrection of his body, and that he describes 1. in regard of the
term from which. 2. In respect of the term unto which, it was.

1. In regard of the term from which it was: It was a deliverance from death
and corruption.

1. From death and the grave, by way of subvention and release. Thou will not
leave my soul in hell: that is, my person, considered in its mortal part, in
the state of the dead.

2. It was a deliverance from corruption, that is, putrefaction, by way of
prevention, and preservation. Neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see
corruption: that is, to feel and to suffer rottenness.

2. Christ's resurrection is here set forth in regard of its term unto which,
as it was the way unto a glorious and immortal life. Thou will show me the
path of life, verse. 11. or as Peter quotes it, Act. 2.28. Thou have made known
unto me the ways of life: that is, in my resurrection thou have given me
experience of the way unto life from death.

Secondly, David prophesyeth of the glorification of Christ's soul, consequent
unto the resurrection of his body. In thy presence is fullness of joy; at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Which passage we have thus
abbreviated in the Apostle Peter's quotation of it, Acts. 2.28. Thou shall make
me full of joy with thy countenance. Here we have the 1. Matter. 2. Measure. 3.
Duration. 4. The Causes of that glory, with which Christ's soul, in his
exaltation, was repleate.

1. The matter of it, joy, and pleasures. The Apostle Peter speaking of the
imperfect and begun joy of Believers here in this life, says, it is
unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. The joy then of Christ's soul in its
glorified condition is glorious beyond all comprehension.

2. Here is the measure or degree of it; fullness of joy. God has promised to
make all that trust in him, to drink of the river of his pleasures, Psalm.
36.8. But in the heart of his son Christ Jesus, there is an ocean of joy. The
Spirit was given not by measure unto him, John. 3.34. And as the Spirit was the
principle of his grace, so it was the fountain of his glory, and therefore his
glory, as well as his grace, was unmeasurable.

Thirdly, here is the duration of this glory; pleasures for evermore. All his
life long he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Is. 53.3.
Toward his passion his soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, Math.
26.38. And in the doleful time of his passion, that fearful hour of
darkness, his sorrows were beyond measure, Math. 27.46. But for all this God
made him ample amends in the eternity of his joy and pleasures at Gods right
hand.

Lastly, we have the causes of this glory of Christ's soul, the full vision and
the infinite power of God.

1. The full vision of God. In thy presence is fullness of Joy; which in Acts.
2.28. is thus varied. Thou shall make me full of joy with thy countenance.

2. The right hand, that is, omnipotency of God, elevating his soul unto this
vision, by the light of glory. At, or rather by thy right hand are pleasures
for evermore. Jesus was exalted by the right hand of God, Acts. 2.33.

Unto this prophecy I shall add three more.

The first is Isaiah 4.2. In that day shall the branch of the Lord be
beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and
comely, etc. In which words, Christ (if we understand them of him in respect of
his humanity) is called the branch of the Lord, in reference unto the active
principle of his conception, the holy Ghost, the power of the highest, Luke
1.33. The fruit of the earth, in respect of the passive principle of his
conception, the Virgin Mary.

Another prophecy is Isaiah 52.13. Behold my servant shall be exalted and
extolled, and be very high. In that nature, according unto which he is my
servant, he shall be exalted, and be very high. Here are diverse terms of the
like import, heaped up to express the unexpressible glory of Christ's humanity
in its Exaltation.

The last prophecy, which I shall mention, is Ezekiel. 17.22,23. Thus says the
Lord God, I will also take off the highest branch of the high Cedar, and will
set it; I will crop off from the top of his young twigs a tender one, and will
plant it upon a high mountain and eminent. In the mountain of the height of
Israel will I plant it: and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and
be a goodly Cedar, and under it shall dwell all foul of every wing: In the
shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell. Here Christ, in regard of his
Humiliation, was but a tender one, cropped off from a young twig. In his
exaltation, he will be a goodly or stately Cedar, which God will plant upon a
high mountain, and eminent. In the mountain of the height of Israel; that is,
not only in the Church militant, which is termed Gods holy hill of Sion,
Psalm. 2.6. But also in the Church triumphant, entitled Heb. 12.22. mount Sion,
the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem.

With the prophecies concerning Christ's glory, concur also the types of it. I
shall instance but in a few.

1. The Arc of the Testament was to be overlaid with pure gold, within, and
without, and to have a crown of gold round about it, Exodus 25.11.

2. The Altar of Incense also was to be overlaid with pure gold, the top
thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof, and it was
also to have a crown of gold round about, Exodus 30.3. And all this may be to
typify the plentiful glory, that was to be in Christ's humanity. He was to be
glorious within and without, he was to be covered and crowned with glory.

Unto these two types of Christ's fullness of glory I shall add a third; the
garments of the high Priest, that were for glory and beauty, Exodus 28.2.

In Levit. 16.4. the high Priest was to wear in the day of expiation plain
linen garments, and this figured (thinks Aynsworth) the base estate of Christ
here on earth. And why may not we say answerably, that his glorious and golden
garments typified his glorious estate in heaven.

These forementioned prophecies and types receive clear light from express
affirmations of Christ's glory in the new Testament. Christ, after he had
suffered, entered into his glory, Luke 24.26. Where glory is, as it were,
appropriated unto him, as the most eminent subject, and principal efficient of
glory. He had as it were the monopoly of glory. All the glory in heaven was in
some sort his glory. God crowned him with glory and honor, Heb. 2.7. and set
him at his own right hand in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.20. Where by placing of
him at Gods right hand, is understood a conferring upon his humanity, as
sovereign authority, so also unspeakable glory and dignity. Unto these places
we may also refer all those passages, that speak of Christ's exaltation: Col.
1.18. God gave him in all things the pre-eminence. Phil. 2.9. He highly exalted
him, and gave him a name above every name. Ephesians. 1.21. and placed him far
above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that
is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. All
these, and the like Scriptures evidently hold forth, as a fullness of office
and authority, so also a fullness of glory and majesty in Christ, as man.
Christ's manhood was exalted unto an higher degree of glory, majesty, and
dignity, then the most glorious Saint, or Angel ever was, or shall be.
Principalities, powers, mights, and dominions fall far short of his glory.

This doctrine concerning the all-fulnesse of glory in the manhood of Christ,
in its state of exaltation, may be applied for Refutation. Consolation.
Exhortation.


1. For refutation of the doctrine of the Papists, touching the corporal
presence of Christ's body in the Lords supper. For this doctrine of theirs by
just consequence makes Christ's body of glory, or most glorious body, his
impassible body, to be most inglorious; because it affirms it under the
forms of bread and wine to be obnoxious unto as execrable indignities and
obscenities, as can be imagined; as for example, to be burnt by fire, to be
blown away by the wind, to be vomited and disgorged by either a sickly, or
drunken communicant, to be put in a dunghill, to be devoured by worms, mice,
dogs, or hogs, to pass through the guts or entrals into the draught. See
farther of this Bishop Morton of the institution of the Sacrament of the
blessed body and blood of Christ, etc. lib. 4. cap. 10.

Secondly, Christ's fullness of glory in his exaltation may serve for the
consolation of all his members, because they may be confident of conformity
thereunto: for God has predestined them to be conformed unto the image of
his Son, Romans 8.29. Unto the image of his glory, as well as unto the image of
his grace and cross. For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him:
if we suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2 11,12. If Christ
himself, the King, be crowned with glory and honor, he will bestow a
matrimonial crown of glory and honor upon his Queen, the Church, and every
faithful soul. It is said of David, that the Lord had established him King
over Israel, and that he had exalted his Kingdom for his people Isreal's sake,
2 Samuel 5.12. and therefore doubtless his care was to promote the glory and
happiness of the whole people of Israel, as well as of his own person and
family. David was a type of Christ, and therefore we may say of Christ, that
God established him in, and exalted him unto his Kingdom of glory for his
people, his Churches sake; and upon this we may conclude, that he will be
careful to make them glorious and happy, as well as himself.

This conformity of Christ's members unto his fullness of glory, is either
inchoate here in this life, or else consummate hereafter in heaven.

1. Then the saints here even in this life may enjoy a begun, and imperfect
conformity unto Christ's glory; and this may be evinced from 1. the relations of
it. 2. Gods promises of it, and 3. the saints prayers for it.

1. From the relations of it. It had the relation of an end

1. Unto the ministry of Christ himself here upon earth. These things have I
spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be
full, John. 15.11. John. 17.13.

2. Unto the penning of the sacred Scriptures. These things write we unto you,
that your joy may be full, 1 John. 1.4.

Thirdly, unto the prayers of the Saints. Ask, and ye shall receive, that your
joy may be full, John. 16.24.

2. There are many gracious promises in Scripture of this inchoation of the
Churches, and Saints glory here on earth: 2 Peter 1.10,11. If ye do these
things, ye shall never fall. For so an entrance shall be minister'd unto you
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Even here in this life we may have an entrance into Christ's Kingdom of glory,
that shall be everlasting. And this entrance may be abundantly minister'd unto
us, Hag. 2.7. I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of Hosts. The
words perhaps may primarily be understood of Gods honoring the material
Temple, with the bodily presence of Christ: hut we may put an enlargement upon
them, and extend them unto the Spiritual house of God, his Church, which he
fills here in this life with the beginnings, and first-fruites of glory. Ps.
36.7,8. Those of the children of men, that put their trust under the shadow of
thy wings, shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and
thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasure. In Esaias 66.10,11. God
promises all the true members of the Church, all that rejoice with Jerusalem,
and are glad with her, all that love her, to satisfy them with the breasts of
her consolation, that they may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance
of her glory. For thus says the Lord: Behold, I will extend peace unto her,
like a river, etc. verse. 12. If the Church be in a distressed and persecuted
condition, as a meadow that is mowne down, why Christ shall come like rain
upon the mowen grass, as showers that water the earth, Ps. 72.6. When she
lies under reproaches and suffering, even then a Spirit of glory shall rest
upon her, 1 Pet. 4.13. In his days, that is, under his government, shall the
righteous flourish, and abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures,
Psalm. 72.7. The peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your
hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.7.

Lastly, we have the Saints prayers for these beginnings of glory, recorded in
Scripture, and that both of petition, and thanksgiving.

1. Petition. Now the God of hope (says Paul in the behalf of the Romans)
fill you with all joy, and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope
through the power of the holy Ghost, Romans 15.13. This petition doubtless had a
favorable and gracious reception. The least that can be said of it, is, that
it is a sufficient argument of not only the possibility, but also probability
of the thing petitioned for. In it there are two things especially remarkable,
pertinent unto the argument in hand. 1. The matter, with which he prayed that
they might be filled, all joy and peace. 2. An amplification of this matter
from its causes, to wit, instrument, end, and principal efficient.

1. Then we have the matter, with which he prayed that they might be filled,
all joy and peace: which Synechdochically may be very well put for all other
inchoations of glorification, because they some way or other imply them.

1. Then he prays, that God would fill them with all joy. Now a Christian
has all joy, that is, his joy is full and universal, either in regard of
objects, degrees, or duration.

1. Then a Christian has all joy in regard of objects. When he possesses in
some measure all the objects, that is, all the grounds or motives of a true
Spiritual joy, when he has for substance all that a believer ought to rejoice
for: when believers reach such a happiness, their joy is full. John. 15.11.
and 16.24. 1 John 1.4. The joy of Christ is fulfilled in themselves, John 17.13.

2. A Christian may have all joy in regard of degrees, though not absolutely,
yet so far forth, as the measure of joy is attainable in this present life,
which is but the seed time of joy: Ps. 97.11. And indeed, I believe the heart
of man during his abode on earth, is hardly capable of a more overflowing
quantity of joy, then that which supported the Martyrs, and made them laugh and
sing in their fiery trialls, their most bloody persecutions.

Lastly, a believer may have all joy in regard of duration. He may, as the
Apostle exhorts him Phil. 4.4. rejoice always in the storm of the most
violent opposition, as well as in the calm of peace and protection. The
troubles and miseries of this life may sometimes dim his joy, but they can
never totally or finally extinguish it. Your joy (says our Savior) no man
takes from you, John 16.22. He might have said no Devil too.

Secondly, Paul beseeches God in the behalf of the Romans, that as their joy,
so their peace too may be full, and universal. The God of hope fill you with
all peace: that is, with all sorts and kinds of peace; the peace of concord
toward their brethren, the peace of conscience in themselves, and that both
speculative and practical.

1. Speculative, which was a freedom from scrupulous doubtings concerning
things indifferent, of which he spoke before.

2. Practical, and that both of justification and sanctification.

1. The peace of justification, which arises from the assurance of pardon, and
sense of Gods favor.

2. The peace of sanctification, which proceeds from the mortification of all
lusts and corruptions. Such is the fullness of this peace of believers, as
that, as the Apostle says, it passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. that is,
it is incomprehensible by any created understanding, save that of the humane
nature of Christ.

In the next place we have this full and universal joy and peace amplified
from the causes, and that both efficient and final.

1. From the efficient causes thereof, and that again both subordinate, and
supreme.

1. From the subordinate cause thereof, faith: The God of hope fill you with
all joy and peace in believing, that is, by believing. And indeed (...), is by
the Apostle often used for (...), after the propriety of the Hebrew. The
influence of faith upon joy, you have in the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1.8. In
whom, though now we see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory. And as for its efficiency of peace, the Apostle
Paul plainly expresses it, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace
with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: faith is the ground of all true inward
joy, and peace in our own bosoms; and the boundary of all true, sincere, and
sound joy, and peace with others.

A Second amplification is from the supreme, and first efficient cause:
through the power of the Holy Ghost. Nothing can fill a soul with all joy and
peace, but the full, and infinite power of the Spirit of God. Paul may plant,
and Apollo may water; but Omnipotency only can reach such an increase.

The last amplification, which we have of this fullness of joy, for which the
Apostle is a suitor in the behalf of the Romans, is the final cause thereof:
that ye may abound in hope. Pareus observes, that there is an Emphasis in the
verb, (...); He does not wish unto them barely hope, but to abound in hope:
and to abound in hope, denotes 1. a plenteous progress in the degrees. 2. a
fullness of the objects. 3. a constant sufficiency, in reference to the use of
hope.

1. A plenteous progress in the degrees of hope, an arrival unto a full
assurance of hope, Heb. 6.11. By which an entrance is minister'd unto us
abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
2 Pet. 1.11.

2. A fullness of the objects of hope. Some by this abounding in hope (says
Willet upon the place) understand the hoping for of all things needful, both
for the body, and soul.

3. It denotes a constant sufficiency, as touching the use of hope. Look as
he may be said to abound in money, or treasures, who has enough to serve his
turn upon all occasions, to supply all his wants: So a soul may be said to
abound in hope, when it has such a measure thereof, as is constantly
sufficient for a victorious encounter with the thickest variety of the greatest
perils, incident unto mankind. Our hope is then truly abundant, when it is an
helmet strong enough to bear the blows of our most powerful, and malicious
enemies: When it is an anchor sure, and steadfast enough, whereby the soul may
ride it out safely in the most dangerous tempest.

Unto Paul's petition for the beginnings of glory in the Romans, I shall
subjoyne his thanksgiving for the like in himself. 2 Cor. 1.3,4,5. Blessed be
God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of mercies, and the
God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be
able to comfort them, which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our
selves are comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so
our consolation also abounds by Christ.

In a second place, this conformity unto Christ's glory begun here in this
life, and permixed with our infirmity, and misery, shall hereafter in heaven be
completed and perfected: for then we shall have a full, and everlasting
fruition of all honor, and bliss, derivable from God, and proportionable unto
our capacities. God will then make known the riches of his glory on the
vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory, Romans 9.23. Then he
will reveal the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, Ephesians.
1.18. David makes a large profession of the inward gladness of his heart, and
the outward expression thereof by his tongue: My heart is glad, and my glory
rejoices, Psalm. 16.9. Nay, he expresses, that the fear of death did not put
a dampe upon his rejoicing; My flesh (says he) shall also rest in hope. The
hope of a resurrection unto a glorious, and immortal life, made him look upon
his grave, as a bed, Esaias. 57.2. upon death, as a sleep, or rest, 1 These.
4.14. Now the ground of this his joy, and hope, was the resurrection of
Christ's body, and glorification of his soul, verse. 10, 11. But now this could
never have begotten such a joy, and hope, if he had not been assured to be made
conformable thereunto. The life, and glory of all believers is bound up in
Christ's life, and glory; as Judah said, the life of Jacob was bound up in
Benjamins life, Genesis 44.30. Our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.
therefore if God did not leave his soul, his person in sheol, in the grave, in
the state of death, neither will he leave there the persons of any, that belong
unto him: Because God did not suffer his holy one, to see Corruption; therefore
he will rescue, and redeem all his saints from corruption, and not suffer them
to be finally overwhelmed therewith. He will deal with them, as he did with
Christ, show unto them the path of life, make known unto them the ways of
life, etc. Psalm. 16.11. Cause them to have in his presence fullness of joy,
and at his right hand pleasures for evermore; or make them full of joy with his
countenance, Acts 2.28. The glory, which thou gave me, says Christ, I have
given them, John 17.22. which words (to omit other interpretations that are
impertinent unto our purpose, and less probable) may be understood, either of
the real glory of his exaltation by God: or else of the glory of his relation
unto God.

1. Of The real glory of his exaltation by God: and then the meaning of the
words is; that heavenly felicity, unto which thou have predestined my
humanity, I have designed unto all those, that believe in me; I have promised
it unto them, and will purchase it for them; and give them, in way of earnest,
the first fruits, and taste of it. Gods gift of glory unto Christ is
irreversible, and therefore Christ's grant of it unto believers, is irrevocable.

Or, Secondly, the words may be understood of the glory of Christ's relation
unto God, the dignity of his sonne-ship. We beheld his glory, the glory as of
the only begotten of the father, John 1.14. This glory was given unto Christ,
by eternal generation, so that he is the natural Son of God; and believers
unto whom Christ gives this privilege by grace, are sons by grace, and
adoption: and yet even this adoptive filiation is such an unspeakable honor,
as that in comparison of it, to be descended from the greatest Potentate, that
ever was in the world, is but to be basely borne. If we take this sense, it
will also fit our present purpose: For what is the full glorification of the
saints, but the manifestation, and consummation of their adoption? 1 Ioh. 3.2.
The fullness of glory is that inheritance, unto which the faithful are adopted
and into the possession of which they shall enter at the end of the world. And
in this sense is it, that their full glorification is styled by the Apostle
Paul their Adoption, Romans 8.23. In John. 17. verse. 24,25. Christ intercedeth
for the communication of his glory unto all the elect. Father, I will that they
also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory, which thou have given me; for thou lovedst me before the foundation of
the world. O righteous father, the world has not known thee, but I have
known thee, and these have known that thou have sent me. Here we have a
description of the glory of believers, and an amplification of it from the
subjects, and causes thereof.

1. A description of it. He makes it to stand in two things, a coexistence with
Christ in heaven; a vision, or intuition of his glory.

1. A coexistence with him in heaven. I will that they whom thou have given me,
be with me where I am. As God, he was in heaven, even while he was upon the
earth, Ioh. 3.13. But he speaks of himself all along as man, and Mediator;
and he speaks of his being in heaven, as a thing present, because it was very
shortly, and certainly to come to pass. Thus verse. 4. he makes protestation,
that he had finished the work, which God gave him to do; and yet, it was not
finished, until he cried out upon the cross, it is finished, John 19.30.
Austin puts a difference between being where Christ is, and being with Christ.
The damned in hell are where Christ is, as God. But those only are with him,
that have a fellowship with him in his glory: As he said unto the good thief,
to day shall thou be with me in paradise, Luke 23.43. But Maldonate rightly
notes, that no great stresse is to be laid upon this; because that, which he
terms here a being with Christ, he styles Chap. 12.26. a being where Christ
is. Where I am, there shall also my servant be. However yet, the same Author
observes, that to be with Christ, has a greater force, and emphasis, then to
be where he is; because it more expressly signifies a participation of his
glory, a communion in his inheritance and kingdom, a reigning togeither with
him, 2 Timoth. 2.12.

A Second particular, wherein the glory of believers is made to stand by
Christ, is their vision, and intuition of his glory. That they may behold my
glory, which thou have given me. Here they have but a glimpse of Christ's glory:
It shines as it were through a small chinke into a dungeon of darkness. It
is a light, that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. But in heaven they
shall have a full aspect of the splendor of his glory; For they shall see him
as he is, Esaias. 1.32. face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. The sight of this glory shall
be of a transforming nature: for if the imperfect beholding of his glory in the
glass of his gospel change into the same image, into a growing glory, from
glory, to glory; why then the full view of his glory in heaven, will transform
into a fullness of glory. The vision, and intuition of his glory then does
amount unto a fruition of it. They shall be not bare spectators, but also
partakers of it. Thus to see the kingdom of God, and life, John 3.36. is to
enjoy the kingdom of God, and life.

Secondly, We have an amplification of this glory; and that from it is subjects,
and causes.

1. From its subjects; primary, and secondary.

1. Primary, Christ. May behold my glory. Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into his glory, Lu. 24.26. Glory is said to be his
in 4 regards. 1 in respect of his fathers donation. The glory, which thou have
given me; to wit, by the decree of Predestination. 2. By his own purchase: He
humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross;
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is
above every name, Phil. 2.8,10. 3. In regard of plenary participation. 4. in
respect of original, and primary possession. Christ was possessed of a
fullness of glory for to distribute it unto his members.

Christ, the head, is the primary, his members are the secondary subjects of
this glory, unto whom it is diffused from him. I will that those, whom thou
have given me, etc. And to be given unto Christ, signifies the state of
Election: for it signifies a good, and happy state, or condition, precedaneous
unto effectual vocation, John. 6.37. All, that the father gives me, shall
come unto me. But to come unto Christ, is to believe in Christ by an effectual
Vocation. By this then you may gather, that none shall communicate in the
fullness of Christ's glory, but such as the father has given unto him by
election; And they are such, as in God's appointed time are drawn, and wrought
over to come unto Christ, that is, to believe in Christ by an effectual
calling. None then can have a sound confidence of their future glorification,
that are not assured of their past election; and a well built assurance of
election presupposes an assurance of vocation, and of coming unto Christ
thereby; and therefore the Apostle Peter in his exhortation, 2 Pet. 1.10.
premiseth the making sure of their calling unto the making sure of their
election. Give diligence to make your calling, and election sure. None can make
their election sure, that have not first made their calling sure. Those men's
hopes therefore of glory are but rash, and ungrounded presumptions, who turn
the deaf ear unto the call, and command of Christ, who stand of, and refuse
to come in, and submit to his Regiment; but stick still in their sins without
repentance, and wallow in that filthiness, wherein the world lies, 1 John
5.19.

A second amplification of this glory, which awaits believers, is from the
causes of it, and that both moving, and disposing.

1. From the moving causes of it; (to speak of God after the manner of men,)
and the impulsive causes of it are either outward, or inward: outward Christ's
intercession: inward, 1. Gods love of Christ. 2. Gods righteousness. The
dispositive cause is a sanctified, and saving knowledge of Christ's mission.

To begin with the moving causes of it; and 1. with that which is outward, and
procatarticke; Christ's intercession. Father I will, that those, etc. It is not
voluntas imperantis, but optantis, and rogantis: It is not a will of command,
but a will of desire, request, and prayer; and God cannot but gratify Christ in
all his petitions; He cannot but fulfill his will, and satisfy his desires.
Christ intercedeth for the future glory of his members, and therefore they
cannot but be happy: for impossible, that the father should deny him any thing,
for which he is a suter, John. 11.42.

The inward, or proegumenall moving causes of the glory of believers come next
to be considered, 1. Gods love of Christ, 2. Gods righteousness.

1. Then they have Gods love of Christ, as it were a pawn, and pledge of their
complete glory in heaven. Father I will that those whom thou have given me, be
with me, where I am, etc. for thou have loved me before the foundations of the
World. The sum of the words is, because thou have loved me, the head,
therefore glorify them; my members; Thou hate all those, whom thou do not
glorify, and hatred of the members is inconsistent with love of the head. If
thou love me, thou can not hate them: and therefore, as thou love me, let
them be where I am, and there participate in my glory. Can believers desire
greater security against the hazard of their bliss, and salvation. They cannot
miss of heaven, and happiness, unless there be a change in Gods affection
unto his own son, whom as man, and our mediator, he has loved before the
foundation of the world. That love of God then, which raised Christ from his
grave, the state of the dead, unto a throne and crown at the right hand of the
majesty on high, will also in due time exalt all believers unto a full
conformity unto his glory: It will place them with him in his throne, Revelat.
3.21. and kingdom, 2 Timoth. 2.12. and distribute unto them fullness of joy,
and pleasures for evermore.

Secondly, The second impulsive cause of the glorification of those, whom the
father has given unto the son, is his righteousness, compared with the
dispositive cause thereof on their part, their faith, the condition of the new
Covenant. O righteous Father, etc. these have known that thou have sent me. It
is, as if he had said, because thou art righteous, therefore let those, whom
thou have given me, be with me, where I am, and behold my glory; For in them
there is the condition prerequired unto a full enjoyment of glory. They believe
in me, and they know that thou have sent me: And faith in Christ, which is
often expressed by knowledge of Christ, is the prerequisite of eternal life
and glory, John 17.3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the
only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Unto these then
compleatnesse of glory is due, though not by debt of desert, yet by debt of
promise. Therefore, though eternal life be the gift of God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23. yet it is also termed a crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous judge will give, 2 Timoth. 4.8. And the reason of
this appellation of it, is because God by his promise has bound himself to
give it, and in the performance of his promise, he is approved righteous. The
righteousness then of God, that Christ here appealeth unto, in the behalf of
believers, is justitia fidelitatis, Gods truth, and fidelity, in the making
good of his word, and promise. Believers have the fidelity, and veracity of God
engaged for their perfect, and complete happiness.

Lastly, We have the disposing cause of their glory. These have known that
thou have sent me. Because they have known this, let them be where I am, and
there behold my glory. The knowledge of an object in scripture ever implies
suitable affections, and actions. To know Christ then is to believe in him, to
adhere unto him, to embrace, and love him, to obey him, etc. To know that the
father has sent him is, besides the knowledge hereof, and assent hereunto, to
accept Christ in regard of all those offices, for the discharge of which he was
sent by the father; to depend upon him, as a prophet, for the declaration, and
revelation of his father; to rest upon him, as a priest, for the remission of
our sins, and acceptance of our persons; to submit unto him, as a king, for
government, and guidance in all spirituals. Such a knowledge as this, is,
though not a meritorious, yet a disposing cause of heaven, a necessary
antecedent thereof, the way thereunto. Our future happiness, and glory, is
styled in scripture the light of life, John 8.12. the inheritance of the saints
in light Col. 1.12. and therefore, what qualification or preparation for it
more congruent, then the light of such a knowledge, as we have described: By
it, we are made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in
light. Whereas on the contrary, the darkness of Ignorance is a disposition
unto that other darkness, which is in Hell. Those, that do not behold the
glory of Christ here darkly in the glass of his ordinances, 1 Cor. 13.12. they
are utterly unqualified for the distinct, clear, and immediate intuition of his
glory in heaven, where he is seen face to face. The inheritance of the saints
consists in light, and therefore persons ignorant of God and Christ, are
altogether unmeete to share in it, and therefore we may say of them, whiles
they are on earth, that they are in darkness, and the shadow of death, in the
borders, and suburbs of hell.

This dispositive cause of the glory of the elect, we have verse. 25. (to go no
farther) illustrated by a twofold comparison, one of dissimilitude, another of
similitude.

1. By a comparison of dissimilitude. The world has not known thee, and
therefore I pray not for it; but these, that thou have given me, have known
that thou have sent me, and therefore I intercede for their glory.

2. By a comparison of similitude. I have known thee, and these have known
that thou have sent me. I have known thee, in all perfection, Col. 2.3. Math.
11.27. John 1.18. And these know my mission by thee, and therefore in some
measure they know thee also: unto them only of all the sons of men, have I
revealed thee, and disclosed thy counsel; and therefore I am an earnest
intercessour in their behalf, that they may be with me, where I am, and behold
my glory. I have communicated a saving knowledge of me, and thee, unto them,
and therefore do thou impart glory, and happiness unto them. They are
conformable unto me, while I am here on earth, and therefore let them consort
me in heaven hereafter.

But to speak more particularly of the branches of this our conformity after
death, unto the fullness of Christ's glory. It is 1. of our souls, presently
after dissolution from their bodies. 2. of our bodies too, upon their reunion
with our souls in the resurrection.

1. Of our souls, presently upon their dissolution from our bodies: Then the
spirits of just men are made perfect, Hebr. 12.23. perfectly freed from sin,
and misery. And if we speak of their happiness, in regard of essentials,
possessed of as great a perfection thereof, as is communicable unto them. In
their understandings there will be perfect light. They shall see God face to
face, 1 Cor. 13 12. they shall see Christ as he is, 1 John 3.2. In their wills
there shall be love, and joy, flaming unto the highest. What the Apostle
speaks of the Church in general, Ephesians. 5.27. is applicable unto every
believing soul, presently upon separation from the body; Christ forthwith
presents it unto himself glorious, not having spot, or wrinckle, or any such
thing, etc.

Secondly, In the resurrection Christ's members shall enjoy a perfect state of
glory in their bodies, as well as their souls. This second branch of their
conformity unto Christ's fullness of glory I shall set forth, and confirm by
the explication of four places of scripture.

The first is Phil. 3.21. who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according unto the working, whereby he
is able even to subdue all things unto himself. In sanctification there is a
change wrought in both the bodies, and souls of the saints, 1 These. 5.23. But
this is but an imperfect change. In their glorification after death, there will
be a full, and perfect change, as of their souls, presently upon their
separation, so of their bodies in the resurrection. And this change of their
bodies we have here set forth, from the manner, terms, and cause of it.

1. From the manner, or kind of it (...). It is not an essential, but
accidental transformation. Look as in change of old, and broken vessels, the
matter is the same, only the color is fresher and brighter, the fashion
newer, and better: So in the resurrection, our bodies shall be the same for
substance. They shall retain the same flesh, and blood, the same figure, and
members, that now; only they shall be overcloathed with spiritual, and
heavenly qualities, and prerogatives; of corruptible, they shall be made
incorruptible; of passible, impassible; of earthy, heavenly: and this we have
here expressed by the terms of this change, from which, and to which. It is a
transformation of our bodies from vileness, a configuration, or conformation
of them in glory unto the body of Christ.

1. Here is terminus a quo, the term from which, vileness, our vile bodies.
In the Greek it is, (...) the body of our vileness; that is, by an Hebraisme,
our vile bodies, our most vile bodies. This vileness is either general, or
special. 1. general, common to all mankind, to wit, mortality, and
passibility, obnoxiousnesse unto inward infirmities, and diseases, outward
common calamities, and finally unto death, and corruption, 2. Special,
accrewing unto the saints by persecution, Gal. 6.17. Their bodies, while
living, may be blemished with scars, wounds, dismembring, and after death may
many ways be disfigured. Well! all defects, and blemishes shall be removed,
and our bodies shall be fashioned like unto Christ's glorious body.

Here we have the second term of this change, the term unto which, glory:
and this is set down not absolutely, but in a way of comparison, a comparison
of similitude. This glory shall be like that of Christ's body, in his
resurrection. He shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto
his glorious body; and his glorious body, or body of glory, was clothed with
four glorious dotes, or endowments, impassibility, subtilty, agility, and
clarity, For farther explication of which, I shall refer you unto what I
shall presently deliver, on 1 Cor. 15.42,43,44 Only one thing I shall desire
you to remarke for the present, and that is this. Whereas diverse Papists
understand the subtilty of Christ's body, in order unto the penetration of any
other bodies, they are herein contradicted by some of their own Schoolmen
Durand, Capreolus, and Estius. The two latter understand by it the perfect, and
full subjection of the glorified body unto the glorified soul. Perfecta
subjectio corporis ad animam quoadoperationes cognitivas and appetitivas
videtur pertinere ad subtilitatem: and haec subiectio potest intelligi, vel
quantum ad operationes sensitivas praecise, ut nihil sit in corpore, per quod
puritas talium operationum impediatur, sicut nunc fit in nobis frequenter
propter grossitiem and impuritatem spirituum deservientiaum operationibus
sensitivis; Omnis enim impuritas talis segregabitur a corporibus gloriosis: vel
potest intelligi talis subjectio propter obedientiam perfectam, quam tunc
habebunt vires sensitivae ad rationem, quae obedientia modo non est in nobis,
cum caro concupiscit adversus spiritum, and ob hoc corpus nunc dicitur animale
ab animalitate, quia motus animales magis sunt in nobis secundum impetum
sensualitatis, quam secundum dictamen rationis: Sed tunc dicetur corpus
spirituale, quia omnes tales motus erunt plene subjecti spiritui. In quart,
lib. Sentent did. 44. quaest. 5.
The former more distinctly thinks, that this subjection stands either in the
purity, and refinednesse of the sensive operations, or else in a perfect, and
total obedience of the sensitive faculties unto the conduct, and guidance of
reason, without any reluctance of the flesh against the Spirit.

Lastly, here is the cause of this change, Christ himself; Who shall change
our vile bodies. He is the cause thereof, as man, by his merit, and
intercession: But our Apostle speaks of his Causation thereof, as God, by his
omnipotency really effecting it. Whereby he is able even to subdue all things
to himself. He can subdue all things to himself, put all things under his
feet, and therefore he can subdue death, and the grave, he can conquer, and
destroy all their sad, and painful forerunners, ghastie and dreadful
attendants, and consequently he can swallow them all up in a most full, and
complete victory.

A Second place is, Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy
likeness: I shall be full of thy Image, it is by some translated. A gracious,
and sanctified soul is satisfied with the likeness of God, as soon as it is
separated from the body; but the satisfaction spoken of in the text is deferred
until the day of the general resurrection. When those, that dwell in the
dust, awake and sing, Esaias. 26.19. When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness. The likeness, Secundum hoc homo est particeps - beatitudinis, quod
ad Imaginem Dei existit. Imago autem Dei primo, and principaliter in mente
consistit, sed per quandam derivationem etiam in corpore hominis quaedam
representatio imaginis invenitur, secundum quod oportet corpus anima esse
proportionatum. Unde beatitudo, vel gloria, primo, and principaliter est in
mente, sed per quandam redundantiam derivatur etiam ad corpus, Aquin. in lib.
Senten: did. 49. quaest. 4. art. 5. in solutione secundi.
and Image of God, is primarily, and principally in the soul; But yet it is in
the body too, secondarily, by way of reflex, and derivation. And it is of this
likeness of God, that David is to be understood. When I shall awake, thy
likeness, thy Image shall by way of redundancy be derived unto my very body,
and it shall be satisfied, filled therewith in it is measure, so far as it is
capable.

A third place is, 1 Cor. 15. as we have borne the image of the earthie, we
shall also bear the image of the heavenly, verse. 49. As we have been conformed
unto the image of the first man, the fountain of all mankind, who is here
termed earthy, dusty, or slimy, in partaking from him by natural propagation,
a body like his, after his fall earthie, dustie, ^imie, frail, mortal, and
corruptible, subject to age, many blemishes, and deformities, to diseases
within, and violence without; a natural body, (...), that is, an animale, or
soulie body, that is quickened by the, soul, only, which cannot quicken, or
sustain the body without the assistance of natural animal qualities, which
must be continually repaired by sleep, food, and sometimes costly medicaments:
So shall we bear the image of the heavenly; that is, our bodies shall be made
conformable unto the body of Christ in his resurrection, who is here termed
the heavenly, to wit, man, as in regard of his miraculous conception by the
holy Ghost, and his divine, and infinite person, so also in regard of those
celestial and glorious qualities, wherewith his body in its rising was
adorned, and these we have specified above, verse. 42, 43, 44. incorruption,
glory, power, and spirituality.

1. Incorruption: It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; an
immortality far beyond that of Adams body in paradise, to wit, an exemption
from even the possibility of dying, for they shall be quite freed from the
mutual action, and passion of corruptible, and corrupting elements. But
neither is this all; for such an immortality, and incorruption shall be found
even in the bodies of the damned. This incorruption therefore of the glorified
bodies of the saints is an utter impassibility, which excludes not only death,
but also whatsoever is penal, any corruptive, that is, harmefull, malignant
and afflictive passion, any passion, that is either contra, or praeter naturam.
Flesh and blood (says the Apostle) cannot inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
15.50. Where in the following words, the Apostle explaining (thinks In tert.
St. Thomaetom. 2. disp. 48. Sect. 1. page 521.
Suarez) what is meant by flesh, and blood, subjoyneth: neither does corruption
inherit incorruption; to show, that not the substance, but the mortality of
flesh and blood is excluded from the kingdom of God. As by the word,
corruption, the Apostle there understands all bodily miseries, so by
incorruption, says In 4. Sent. did. 44.. 15. page 265.
Estius, he would signify a state of the body exempt from all misery
whatsoever. To prove, that glorified bodies shall be thus impassible, the
Schoolmen allege these following scriptures, Revel. 7.16,17. They shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun light on them,
nor any heat. For the lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, Revel. 21.4. God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain: For the former things are past away.

A hot dispute here is among the Schoolmen, whether the impassibilitie of
glorified bodies be intrinsecall, or extrinsecall. Here we must premise with
Durand, that glorious bodies are not impassible, per privationem principii
passivi; for they shall consist of matter, and there shall be in them a temper
of elementary qualities, that have contraries. Impassible then they are only
per aliquod praestans impedimentum actualis passionis, ne fiat. All the doubt
then is, whether the hinderance, or prevention of this actual passion be from
without, or from within.

1. Scotus, Durand, and others, resolve, that it is only from without, ex
manutenentia Dei, by Gods providence assisting, and preserving of them, either
by positive resistance of the corruptive influence of second causes; or else as
Scotus resolves, by not cooperating with any such causes. He illustrates it by
the similitude of Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego in the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.
That the fire did not consume their bodies, it was not from any intrinsic
impassibility in them, arising either from the want of passive power, or from
something seated in their bodies contrary unto fire, and so making head, and
resistance against it. But the cause of it was only from without: Because Gods
will was not to concur with the consumptive operation of the fire, as
touching their bodies.

Against this Suarez in tert. part. Thomae. tom. 2. disp. 48. sect, 3. p. 530.
objects, that this is not so agreeable unto that of Paul, 1 Cor. 15.53. This
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
For to put on incorruption and immortality in rigor of speech signifies more
then extrinsecall protection of God, hindering extrinsecall Agents. Besides
(says he) Christ's body was impassible otherwise after his resurrection, then
it was while it lay in the sepulcher: But in the grave it was incorruptible by
the outward providence of God, which would not suffer it to see Corruption, to
be resolved into dust, and ashes, or into the four elements, or into any such
thing.

Hereupon Suarez himself concludes, that the bodies of the blessed shall be
made impassible, by some supernatural quality, infused into them, and inherent
in them, rendering them incapable of all corruptive alteration: For it is of
such perfection, that it is able to resist, and hinder the Agency of all the
efficient causes of corruptive passion, page 531.

Thus you see, with what confidence these subtle disputers determine of a
point, that I am persuaded can never be determined, but by the event. As for
the (...), that our glorified bodies shall be impassible, this the scripture
clearly asserts, but as for the quomodo, the manner how, and the (...), the
cause by which it is, it speaks hereof very sparingly; and therefore I shall
not adventure to determine peremptorily concerning it, but leave the decision
of it unto the great day of revelation, when all the secrets, riddles, and
mysteries of Divinity shall be fully and distinctly unfolded.

A second prerogative of glorified bodies, that our Apostle specifies, is
glory, which is the same with that which the Schoolmen term, clarity. It is,
sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, 1 Cor. 15.43. Then shall the
righteous shine forth, as the sun in the kingdom of their father, Math.
13.43. Of this, the miraculous and extraordinary majesty of the countenance of
Stephen might be a glance, and presage, Acts 6.15. All that sat in the
council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face, as it had been the face of
an Angel, that is, bright, and glorious And unto it, we may add the luster of
Moses his face, which shone so gloriously, that the Children of Israel were
afraid to come near him, and he forced to put a veil upon it, till he had
done speaking with them, Exodus 34.29,30,33,35. If such was the glory of the
countenance of Stephen, and Moses, whilst they were mortal, and frail men
here on earth; then how will the Countenance of glorified saints glitter, when
they shall communicate in the glory of Christ's own body; for unto this the
glory of Moses, and Stephen's faces does not bare so much proportion, as the
light of the smallest star has unto the splendor of the sun. It is well
observed by Claritas, quae postrema dos est glorificati corporis ex eo
proveniet quod gloria animae fic redundabit in corpus; ut quod animae
spiritualiter competit, in corpore corporaliter appareat. Nam tale quiddam,
licet imperfecte, conting it nobis etiam in hac vita. Hominis enim laeti ac
been conscii, vultus serenus and quodammodo lucidus est, atque omniuo secundum
affectus animi facies corporis mutari solet. Erit igitur in corporibus
sanctorum splendour quidam oculis conspicuus, qui index erit gloriae spiritualis
exislentis in anima in 4. Sentent. did. 48. sect. 15. page 266.
Estius, that the joy of the soul has even here in this life an unperfect
impression upon the body, making the countenance serene, and cheerful, and
hereupon he infers the redundancy of glory, and happiness, from the soul
unto the body. The spiritual glory of their souls shall be conspicuous by the
bodily brightness of their countenances.

What the Schoolmen speak concerning the flowing of the Clarity of a glorious
body from the soul, is to be understood warily: and (if I be not mistaken)
Suarez gives a very good interpretation of it. The truer exposition (says
Verior expositio est, hujusmodi claritatem dici redundare a beatitudine animae
non physice, sed proportione quadam, quia animae existenti in statu ita
perfecto debita est similis, seu proportionalis corporis perfectio. Suarez in
tert. part. Thomae. tom. 2. disp. 48. sect. 2, page 528.
he) is, that this clarity of the body is said to redound unto it from the
soul, not physically, but by a kind of proportion, Because unto the soul,
existing in so perfect a state, there is due the like or a proportionable
perfection of the body.

A third privilege of glorified bodies, mentioned by the Apostle, is power: It
is sown in weakness, it is raised in power, verse. 43. that is, endewed with a
strength, that is above the reach of inward infirmities, or outward dangers.
This strength is that glorious endowment of the body, which the Schoolmen
term agilitie, whereby the body is most perfectly subjected unto the soul in
regard of Motion, ut mobile principio motivo: By it, it is enabled to move,
wheresoever the soul will have it; to the right hand, or to the left, upwards,
or downwards, and that without weariness, and though not in an instant, yet
with uncredible celerity. For it, they quote out of the old testament, Esaias.
40. verse. 31. They, that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength: they
shall mount up with wings as Eagles; they shall run, and not be weary, and
they shall walk, and not faint. Out of the new Testament they allege Quomodo
rapientur illi quorum corporibus in erit virtus agilitatis, qua seipsapossint
ad nutum animae in omnem partem facillime movere; cum raptus motum significet
violentum? Respondeo, motum, quo sancti ferentur in sub^ime obviam Christo,
raptum ob vocari, non violentiam, quae ibi nulla futura est; sed vel propter
celeritatem, qucmodo dicit Poeta, Quo nunc se proripit ille? qua ratione etiam
de Christo intelligi potest illud Apocalypse duodecimo. Et raptu^ est filius
ejus ad Deum; and ad throuum ejus, id est, celer^ime sublatus; nam and quae
celeriter fiunt, raptim fieri dicuntur: vel quia motus ille quamvis non contra
raturam futurus sit, utpote procedeus ab interna virtute, seu dote agilitatis;
Erit tamen supra naturam, quemadmodum and ipsados futura est supernaturalis:
vel denique raptus idoirco vocatur, quia non ita fiet ab interna virtute;
quinetiam magnum momentum adferat externum illud objectum, quodam modo trahens,
and rapiens ad se Beatos, ipse nimirum Christus, ad quem in sublimi conspicuum,
and gloriosum, tanquam ad caput suum, omnia membra, velut ab ipso attracta,
sese quam celerrime movebunt, nam ab objecto trabi and rapi quippiam, notum
est; utovem a ramo viridi sibi ostenso, puerum a pomo, filium a matre
conspecta, ac vicissem, matrem a filio; quae tamen omnia moventur etiam ab
interna quadam and insita virtute. Estius in locum.
1 These 4.17. Whence they collect, that glorified bodies shall be made so
strong, nimble, and agile, as that they shall be able to meet the Lord in the
air, and afterward to soar up with him unto the very heavens. Out of the
Apocrypha, they cite wisdom. 3.7. In the time of their visitation they shall
shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble.

A fourth endowment of glorified bodies, which Paul reckons up, is
spirituality. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, 1
Cor. 15.44. This is that, which the Schoolmen call subtilty. The
mis-interpretation of which by some, I have before noted, and then also I
acquainted you with Capreolus, and Durand their exposition of it, which, I
confess, is orthodox, but yet not the meaning of the Apostle in this place:
For a natural body, unto which a spiritual body is here opposed, is in the
Greek, not (...), but (...), an animal or soulie body, that is actuated, and
animated by the soul after a natural way, and manner, by the intervention of
bodily helps, such as eating, drinking, sleeping, and the like. In all
congruence of opposition then, spirituality is here opposed unto animality, and
a glorified body is said to be spiritual, in regard of an immediate
supportance by the spirit, without any corporal means, in an everlasting,
incorruptible, blessed, and glorious life. In the resurrection they neither
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in heaven, Math.
22.30. without any use of the generative, and nutritive faculties.

The Fourth, and last place, which I shall allege touching this particular,
is Romans 8.23. Where the full, and perfect glorification of the bodies of those,
that here receive the first fruits of the spirit, is termed Synecdochically
in regard of the term from which it is, redemption, to wit, from all the
punishments of sin; and in conformity hereunto the day of general judgment,
and resurrection, is styled the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. There is a
redemption by way of price, and a redemption by way of power: The redemption of
both our souls, and bodies, in a way of price, was finished by Christ, in the
work of his humiliation, and he rested from it upon the day of his own
resurrection. The redemption of our souls, by power, is perfected in the hour
of death. But the redemption of our bodies, by power, will not be consummated,
until the day of our resurrection, and then they shall be fully delivered from
the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

And thus have I confirmed our future conformity, in souls, and bodies, unto
the all fullness of glory, that dwells in the humanity of Christ. Now the
certainty hereof should comfort us against the sinful corruptions of our
souls, the natural cumber and weariness, the most ignominious deformities,
the most painful infirmities of our bodies, all other wants, and miseries of
our lives, and lastly, the fear of death, a King of terrors unto all, that
are out of Christ.

1. Against the sinful corruptions of our souls. There is no evil of so
malignant a nature, as sin, and therefore nothing so great, and grievous a
burden unto a pious, and sanctified spirit; Nothing so strong an argument for
grief, and mourning. But now the assured hope of our conformation unto Christ's
glory, will put due limits, and bounds unto this our sorrow, so that it will
keep it from degenerating into despair, and keep us from being swallowed up
of over much sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7. for it assures us, that all our corruptions
shall one day be totally, and finally subdued, and we shall be endewed with a
spotless holiness, that cannot be defiled, and so shall be presented
unblameable, and unreproveable in the sight of God, Col. 1.22.

Secondly, Here is comfort against the natural cumber, and weariness, the
ignominious deformities, the painful infirmities of our bodies, etc. For our
resurrection will be a glorious redemption from them all. Here many times our
dull, and unactive bodies are unable, or unready to obey the commands, to
perform the desires of our souls, and so are burdensome clogs, and not
serviceable helps unto them. That, which is sowed in weakness, shall be
raised in power. Glorified bodies shall be endewed with such a power, as shall
render them most obedient, able, and agile instruments of their souls. The
Speed of their motion shall be like that of the devouring fire in a heap of
dry stubble, and the height of it shall surpass the towering flight of the
eagle: For they shall be able to meet the Lord in the air, 1 These. 4.17. when
he comes to judgment, and afterward mount up unto the third, and highest
heavens. Suppose we have blemishes, either natural, or contracted, that render
us deformed in the sight of men; Why the glory, and beauty of the resurrection
will exclude all defects. The most unhansome, ill-favored, and misshapen body
of a saint, shall be fashioned like unto Christ's glorious body. Our bodies
here are little better then receptacles of frailty, and pain, subject unto all
manner of inward distempers, or outward annoyances. But the impassibility, and
clarity of our bodies in their glorified condition be will an abundant
compensation for all this. He, that can with an eye of faith behold the future
configuration of his vile body unto Christ's body of glory, will with patience
support his spirit under the tedious languishment of a lingering consumption,
under the raging violence of a pestilentiall fever, under the otherwise
unsupportable torments of the gout, cholick, stone, etc.

And in the third place, he will patiently undergo all other wants, and
miseries of this life. As for wants, he knows, that we have Gods promise to
supply them, Phil. 4.19. God shall supply all your need, according unto his
riches in glory by Christ Jesus. As for all the most grievous aflictions of
this life, he expects a far more exceeding weight of glory, that will overpoyse
them, 2 Cor. 4.17. The Apostle there expresses our future bliss in four
gradations, 1. It is glory. 2. it is massy, or weighty glory, whereas our
aflictions are but light. 3. it is eternal, and in comparison of that, our
aflictions are but for a moment, 4. it is a far more exceeding weight, then
our aflictions, (...), exceedingly exceeding, or above measure exceeding, that
is, it is unmeasurable. I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are
not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us, Romans
8.18. This life unto the best is Bochim, a vale of tears. Here they sow in
tears, Psalm. 126.5. Thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and give
them tears to drink in great measure, Psalm. 80.5. But light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. and a glorious
harvest will come, wherein they shall reap in joy, and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes, Revel. 21.4. Man, that is borne of a woman, is of few
days, and trouble, Job. 14.1. man is borne unto trouble, as the sparks flee
upward, Job. 5.7. But there remains a rest unto the people of God, Hebr. 4.9.
a rest from all their labors, Revel. 14.13. their hearts therefore may be
glad, and their glory may rejoice, and their flesh also shall rest in hope,
Psalm. 16.9. who almost, but may take up that complaint of the Psalmist, Psalm.
88.3. My soul is full of troubles, and my life draws nigh unto the grave.
But unto it, all Christ's members may oppose that which David speaks in the
name of Christ himself; Thou will make known unto me the ways of life. Thou
shall make me full of joy with thy countenance, Act. 2.28. Here Gods people
have waters of affliction of a full cup wrung out unto them, Psalm. 73.10. Here
they have a full draught of misery; But against the bitterness of this cup
they may be cheared by expectation of the river of divine pleasures, the
streams thereof make glad the city of God, which God has promised to make all
those drink of, that put their trust under the shadow of his wing: For with
him is the fountain of life; in his light shall we see light, Psalm. 36.8,9.
Amongst the miseries of this life, we may well range the infamy of our names,
and it is common, and incident to the most of men, Who almost so innocent, but
has occasion to complain as David, Psalm. 69.19,20. Thou have known my
reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor, etc. Reproach has broken my heart,
and I am full of heaviness. Against this we should comfort our selves with
this confidence, that God will one day clear up our reputations, and wipe away
all obloquies from our names. The Lord Christ will come to be glorified in his
saints, and to be admired in all them, that believe, 2 These. 1.10. The Lord
Christ will be the fountain of their glory, and the measure of it will be unto
admiration.

Unto the reproaches, which the names of saints, and Believers lie under, we
may add that, which ministers no less argument of grief, and sorrow unto a
sanctified soul; the unavoidable society of the ungodly. How was just Lot
vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2.7. Woe is me says
David, that I sojourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar, Psalm
120.5.

But against this we must solace our selves by the hopes of Gods glorious
presence, in which we shall enjoy, as Christ now does, fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore at the right hand of God.

Lastly, here is comfort and encouragement unto those, that are Christ's,
against the terrors of death; When we are as Joshua and David, to go the way
of all the earth, Joshua. 23.14. 1 Kings. 2.2. to die; This consideration may
comfort us, that God will show us the path of life, make known unto us
experimentally the ways of life. Nature trembles to consider, that one day it
must descend down into the throne of death, make it is bed in the dust among
worms, and putrefaction. But Faith erects the soul by giving evidence of our
future full vindication from all the dishonor of the grave, and full
conformity unto the all-fulnesse^ of Christ's glory.

Lastly, the all-fulnesse of glory that dwells in Christ's humanity, may be
applied in a way of exhortation.

1. Because it is the pattern and pledge of our own fullness of glory, Phil.
1.21. Therefore it should weane us from the love of this miserable world and
life, and quicken in us an earnest expectation of, and fervent longing for that
time and day, wherein this glory shall be not only revealed, but communicated
unto us. Death will put a period unto the most lasting joys of this world, and
therefore we should not let out our hearts unto them; but there are pleasures
at Gods right hand, that are beyond its reach, for they shall be for evermore.
The word (...), is derived from a word that signifies victory: because Rivet in
locu^.
eternity is as it were a conquest of time, and whatsoever is measured thereby.
Unto these everlasting delights our souls should be always suspiring. Here we
are troubled with the passibility, animality, and weakness of our bodies, and
we dread all thoughts of the corruption and dishonor of the grave; and
therefore we should sigh and groan in our selves for the redemption of our
bodies, we should ardently wish and pray for incorruptible, powerful,
glorious, and Spiritual bodies. The sin of the soul is an heavier load unto
a gracious heart, then the frailty of the body. O wretched man, that I am,
says Paul, who shall deliver me from the body of this death, Romans 7.24. Why
death it self will give a full and final deliverance; it will exempt as from
the pollution of sin, so from the vexation of all temptation to it. After death
there will be no more any lustings of the flesh against the Spirit, no more any
warring of the law in our members against the law of our minds, and bringing us
into captivity unto the law of sin, which is in our members, Romans 7.23. And
therefore death is desirable by all that are in Christ, Phil. 1.23. so it be
with submission unto the decree of God, with a patient contentation to serve
our own generation by the will of God, Act. 13.36. To do first that service
for the Church, which God has appointed us. No filthiness comparable unto
that in the spot of sin, and therefore how welcome should a glorified condition
be unto us, in which we shall be without spot, blemish, wrinkle, or any such
thing. The mortification of sin in this life is attended with the peace of
conscience, that passes all understanding: but because it is not perfect,
therefore it is often interrupted with storms. But the utter eradication of
sin is followed with a perpetual calm, and therefore ardently desired by all
that know and prize tranquillity of Spirit. A cluster of grapes cut down at the
brook of Eshcol, and brought into the wilderness, was very sweet, Numb. 13. Oh
then how pleasant will the whole vintage in the land of Canaan be! If the first
fruits of our glory be so joyous, and delightful, O then the comfort that we
shall reap in the whole crap, or harvest! The fullness and perfection of our
glory is such, as never entered into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2.9. The glory of
Christ in his transfiguration on the mount was so satisfactory unto Peter, as
that he desired his sight of it might never have end or interruption. Then
answered Peter and said unto Jesus, Lord it is good for us to be here: if thou will let us make here three Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and
one for Elias. And yet Peter was only a spectator of this glory, and had
himself no share in it. O then what infinite satisfaction may we expect in the
beholding of Christ's glory in heaven! for it will be accompanied with an
everlasting enjoyment thereof; the luster of it will be diffused unto us, so
that some shall enjoy the glory of the Sun, some of the Moon, some of the
Stars, 1 Cor. 15.41. We may conclude then of heaven, as Peter of the mount of
Christ's transfiguration, Lord it is good for us to be here. In earth we are
surrounded with spectacles of discontent, but in heaven the glory of Christ
will be an all-pleasing object: for in the sight of it will stand part of our
bliss, and therefore it should command our hearts, and draw unto it our
thoughts, and affections. Christ glorified is our treasure, and where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also, Math. 6.21. Wheresoever the body
is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together, Luke 17.37. Math. 24.28.
Hosea chap. 1.11. Prophesying of the true members of the Church under the
Gospel, gives them this character. They shall appoint themselves one head;
and ascendent e terra, they shall come up out of the land: that is, they shall
ascend from earth to heaven in their desires. In Cant. 8.3. the motion of the
Church, even here in her state militant, is ascension. Who is this that comes
up out of the wilderness. Though she be in a wilderness condition, yet the
texminus ad quem of all her motions, is the land of promise, the heavenly
Jerusalem; she is still coming up out of the wilderness. The constant prayer
of the Church is for the coming of her Lord, and Husband, Christ Jesus. and
the spirit dictates this prayer unto her. The spirit and the bride say, come,
Revel. 22.17. She knows, that the day of his coming will be her wedding day;
And has she not reason to long for the consummation of her marriage with so
all-glorious an husband. She is assured, that the day of his coming will be
her coronation day, wherein he will grant her to sit with him in his throne,
Revel. 3.21. and place upon her head a crown of righteousness, 2 Timoth. 4.8.
of life, Jam. 1.12. and glory, that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. What more
tempting and alluring, then the beauty of such a crown, the glory of such a
throne! And therefore she has great cause to love the appearing of the Lord
Jesus, 2 Timoth. 4.8. and to desire, that it may be hastened.

2. From Christ's all-fulnesse of glory, and the certainty that we have of our
participation thereof, we may be exhorted to use our strictest endeavors in
our declining of sin, pursuit of holiness, and tracing the ways of new
obedience. Has not Christ decreed to make us glorious like himself. The glory
which thou gave me, I have given them, Joh. 17.22. and is it not then a very
undecent thing for us, to have here inglorious souls, base and unworthy
affections, and conversations? He has prepared for us riches of glory; And
unto such riches will not poor and low souls be unsuitable? We are begotten
by the refurrection of Jesus Christ unto a lively hope, an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
us, 1 Pet. 3.4. and unto such an undefiled, and heavenly inheritance will not
defiled consciences, and earthy minds be altogether disproportioned, and so
unqualified, and unmeete for the partaking of it? If you compare verse. 20, 21.
of 3 Phil. you may find an argument to stir us up unto heavenly mindedness.
We look from heaven for the savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, etc.
Therefore let our conversation be in heaven. Here on earth, as it was said of
Lazarus, Luke 16.25. we receive our evil things. Even a Jacob complains of
the few days of his Pilgrimage, as evil, Genesis 47.9. and unto a Solomon all
things under the sun were vanity, and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.2. and
therefore while our bodies are fastened unto the earth, this theater of misery,
our souls should soar up to heaven in devotion. Because those, that have
chosen Christ for their Head, and King, shall ascend from earth to heaven in
their bodies at the resurrection, ascendent e terra, Hos. 1.11. They shall come
up out of the land; therefore it is fit, that now in this life they should come
up out of the land, ascend, and mount unto heaven by divine, and spiritual
meditations, and heavenly affections. When Christ took Peter, James, and John,
to be witnesses of his glorious transfiguration, he brings them up into a
high mountain apart, Math. 17.1. and why might not this betoken, that to
qualify us for the contemplation of Christ's glory here, and the fruition of
it hereafter, there is requisite an elevation, and separation of our hearts
from the distractions of all things here below.

Saint John having propounded our future conformity unto Christ's glory, 1
Job. 3.2. when he shall appear, we shall be like him, etc. he presently
adds, verse. 3. that the hope of this conformity is accompanied with
unfeigned endeavors after purity; and every man, that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. And indeed it would be very irrational
for a man to hope to be like Christ in his glory, and happiness, and at the
same time to resolve to be unlike him in his grace, and holiness. In Romans
8.23. they, that wait for the Adoption, that is, the consummation, and
manifestation of their adoption, to wit, the redemption of their bodies, are
described by the Apostle to be holy, and penitent persons, such as have the
first fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5.22,23. and such as groan within themselves,
that is, under the sight and sense of their lusts, and corruptions. This
connection of spiritual sorrow, and humiliation, with the first fruits of the
spirit, is very congruent; because there is a great deal of equity in this,
that we should mourn, and groan for that, which grieveth the Spirit, by whose
graces we are sealed, that is, marked out for redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. In
heaven the spirits of just men shall shall be made perfect, Ephesians. 12.23. and
if we desire after death to be rankt amongst them, we should labor by the
promises to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. to be perfect, as our
father, which is in heaven, is perfect, Math. 5.48. When we awake, satisfaction
with the image or likeness of God will be our reward, Psalm. 17. verse. last.
and therefore here it is our duty to put on the new man, which is renewed after
the image of God. When our souls are sinlesse, then they shall be completely
happy; and therefore the inchoatio^ of their bliss consists in repentance
for, and mortification of sin. The vessel of our bodies shall one day be
replenished with glory, and therefore every one should know how to possess it
in sanctification, and honor, not in the lust of concupiscence, 1 These. 4.4.
Christ will fashion our bodies like unto his glorious body, and therefore
unfitting to debase them unto the drudgery of sin. O how can they hereafter
be meet receptacles of, and qualified subjects for glory, if we wholly make
them the instruments of our lusts; and their members weapons of
unrighteousness? vessels unto honor should purge themselves from vessels unto
dishonor, and not prostitute themselves unto such sordid uses, as those are
applied unto, 2 Timoth. 2. verse. 20, 21. If we are vessels of mercy, which God
has prepared unto glory, and on whom he will make known the riches of his
glory, Romans 9.23. we shall be very ungrateful, if we do not glorify him in
our bodies, and spirits, 1 Cor. 6.20. if we employ any faculty of this, or
member of that, unto his dishonor. The blessedness of glorious saints in
heaven is to see God face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. to see Christ, as he is, 1 John 3.2. And therefore for this every gracious saint prepares by seeking his
face here in his ordinances. Psalm. 27.8. Because God will one day make known
unto us the ways of life, Psalm. 16.11. in a way of possession, therefore it
is fit that now we apply our selves unto Gods showing us the way of life in the
way of instruction and revelation. Our constant prayer should be that of
David's, Psalm. 25.4,5. Show me thy ways, o Lord, teach me thy paths, lead me
in thy truth and teach me. Christ prays in the behalf of all the elect,
those whom his father has given him, that they may be where he is, and that
they may there behold, that is, enjoy his glory, which God has given him, John
17.24. Now unto this prayer our souls do not say a hearty Amen, unless they
pant after the assemblies of the saints, and communion with Christ in them, as
the heart pants after the water brooks, Ps. 42.1,2. Where two or three are
gathered together in the name of Christ, there has he promised to be in the
midst of them, Math. 18.20. And they that loath such society, would soon be
tired and cloyed with the happiness of heaven. There are persons loathing
Christ, and loathed by him: those that principally affect such, and delight
most in their felloship and company, do not cordially care to come where Christ
now is in his exalted condition; and if their hearts were left unto their
liberty of choice, they would refuse the pleasures of paradise for those of an
alebench or tavern, if they were perpetual. And if it were possible for the^
to have a view of the glory, which God has given Christ, they would quickly be
weary of so happy a sight, and turn away their eyes from beholding it.

Thus have I at last gone over the several branches of that all-fulnesse which
dwells in Christ I shall briefly insist upon some uses that may be made of
them, considered jointly, and so I shall put a conclusion unto my meditations
upon this subject.

These Uses shall be either of information, exhortation, or consolation.

1. Of Information, and they shall be two.

1. From this all-fulnesse that dwells in Christ, we may infer his
incomprehensiblenesse. He is a mine, unto the bottom of which we can never
dig. He is an ocean, that can never be fathomed. His riches are said to be
unsearchable, Ephesians. 3.8. which Epithet denotes the undiscoverablenesse of
them by the light of nature, the incomprehensiblenesse of them by the light of
faith.

1. The absolute undiscoverablenesse of them by the light of nature. Flesh and
blood can never reveal them; so that without divine revelatio^, we had been as
utterly ignorant of the^, as the world was of the mines of America, before the
discovery of Columbus. The word (...), translated unsearchable, signifies not
to be traced out by the footsteps: for (...), is to find out by the footsteps.
The riches of Christ are not to be traced out by any footsteps of them: for in
the whole book of the creature, there are no vestigia, no prints left of them.

2. The riches of Christ are said to be unsearchable in regard of their
incomprehensiblenesse by the light of faith. We may comprehend them manu, not
visu, 1 Cor. 2.9. That faith which is most quick sighted, does not reach a
full, adequate, and comprehensive knowledge of them: Of the riches of glory it
has only a glimpse, and that a far off: The riches of grace, redemption,
righteousness, etc. it sees only darkly, and dimmely, as through a glass;
and then the riches of his divine person and nature are absolutely infinite,
and therefore cannot be comprehended by the finite understanding of man: For
between the object comprehended, and the power or faculty comprehending, there
must be a proportion. But between that which is finite, and that which is
infinite, there is no proportion. As the Apostle says here of the riches of
Christ in general, that they are unsearchable, so in Col. 2.3. he affirms
particularly concerning the treasures of wisdom and knowledge in Christ, that
they are hidden, and they are said to be hidden, because they are totally and
altogether concealed from the unregenerate, Math. 16.16. 1 Cor. 2.14. 1 Cor.
1.23. And because they are but sparingly and in measure here in this life
manifested unto the regenerate, 1 Cor. 13.12.

2. From this all-fulnesse that dwells in Christ, we may infer the
excellency and preciousnesse of the calling of the ministry: for it is by God
designed unto the proposal and application of this all-fulnesse unto the sons
of men: and what calling or office can have a richer, a more noble, and diviner
object? We have (says the Apostle) this treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor.
4.7. Though the most faithful, holy, and diligent ministers of the Gospel be
but earthen vessels, yet they hold a divine and heavenly treasure. In Christ
are hid all the treasures of grace, of wisdom, and knowledge. And ministers
are Christ's Almoners and cofferers, to distribute these treasures unto poor,
hungry, and naked souls. And what employment can be more honorable in it
self, and more beneficial unto a man, by the fall of Adam sunk into an
extremity of want and poverty? The Apostle Paul acknowledges, that to preach
the unsearchable riches of Christ, was a great grace given unto him, Ephesians. 3.8.
where I shall take notice of three things.

1. The riches of Christ were either such as he was possessed of in himself, or
such as he communicatth unto us.

1. Such as he is possessed of in himself, The riches of his person, and
natures, his rich and glorious offices, the riches of his satisfaction, merit,
spirit, knowledge, power, and glory.

2. Such as he communicates unto us, the riches of justification,
sanctification, and glorification.

2. To unfold the Metaphor, riches imply 1. plenty. 2. plenty of things, that
are of price and value.

3. These riches are said to be unsearchable, because undiscoverable by the
mere light of nature, though never so much improved; and because
incomprehensible by the light of grace, though never so much raised. Now to
apply all this to our present purpose: here be three things in the object of a
ministers study and work, to set forth the dignity of his office. 1.
Largeness. 2. Preciousnesse. 3. Mysteriousnesse.

1. It is a large, wide, and extensive object; Riches, and riches so
unsearchable, as that they can never be counted or summed up by any created
understanding.

2. It is a precious and rich object; riches, and riches of Christ. Unto all
riches things of worth are required. But these riches are of an extraordinary
nature; they are of Christ, and therefore divine, and heavenly.

Lastly, it is a mysterious, deep, and abstruse object. The riches of Christ
are unsearchable: for nature ^an make no discovery of them at all; and even
grace can make but a very defective, and inadequate discovery of them. We know
but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12.

2. From the all-fulnesse that dwells in Christ, I shall infer, and press
two Exhortations.

The first shall be unto those, that as yet have no interest in Christ. Because
there dwells in him all-fullnesse, therefore he is an all-satisfying object,
an object that will quiet, and content the soul of a man; and therefore hence
they may be exhorted unto a most diligent appliance of themselves unto those
means, by which God ordinarily unites unto Christ those, whom he has given
him among'st the sons of men. Out of Christ, it fares with a soul as with
Noah's dove at her first sending forth, before the waters were abated from off
the face of the ground. She can find no rest for the sole of her foot, Genesis
8.8,9. All the honors, and preferments, that the most ambitious hopes can
fancy to it self; All the riches, and treasures, that both the Indies can
afford, the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, Esaias.
45.3. the precious things of the earth, and the fullness thereof, Deuteronomy. 33.16.
the fullness of the wine press, Numb. 18.27. the hid treasure, with which God
fills the belly of the men of this world, Psalm. 17.14. to be filled with the
finest, or fat of the wheat, Psalm. 147.14. All these cannot yield full
satisfaction unto a reasonable soul, in that they will still prove
improportionate unto it is na ure, which is spiritual, and to it is capacity,
which is boundless, and therefore must needs leave the soul unquiet, the mind
unsatisfied, always flitting from one thing unto another, the desires still
roving, and restless, still longing after higher honors, and more riches; And
therefore as our Savior says, a man's life consists not in the abundance of
the things, which he possesses, Luke 12.15. But now Christ, and his fullness,
are proportionable both unto the spiritual nature, and boundless capacities
of our souls; and therefore abundantly satisfactory.

1. Unto their spiritual nature, that his fulness will suite and fit well
enough, in that it is spiritual. His riches, treasures, his feast of fat
things, of fat things full of marrow, etc. Esaias. 25.6. are all spiritual.

2. Unto their boundless capacity: for his fullness is an all fulness, and
in some particulars of it, there is an absolute infiniteness, as in the
fullness of his God head, in the fullness of his satisfaction and merit: and
therefore, there is in it an all sufficiency to satisfy the desires of the
souls. Hereupon he is termed the desire of all nations, Hag. 2.7. not only a
person desired, or desirable in the concrete, but desire, in the abstract Now
this imports, says Bishop Lake upon the words, that he is totus
desiderabilis, altogether, and in every part desirable, and totum
desiderabile, whatsoever the heart of man can desire, all that can be desired.
Esau said unto his father, have thou not reserved a blessing for me, have thou
but one blessing, O my father? Bless me, even me also, O my father, Genesis
27.36,38. There is no color for any such language unto Christ: for in him
dwells all-fulnesse of blessings; blessings enough to satisfy the desire of
all believers in all nations. He has reserved a blessing for the Gentiles, so
that they partake of the root, and fatness of the olive tree, Romans 11.17.
Plutarch in the life of Phocion,
When a certain Gentlewoman of Jonia showed the wife of Phocion all the rich
Jewels, and precious stones she had, she answered her again; all my riches,
and Jewels, is my husband Phocion. Every believing soul has far greater
reason to speak thus of it is husband, Christ; for in him, it is pessest of
such unsearchable riches, and treasures, as that in comparison of it, all the
wealth in the world is but dross, and dirt^. It has a share in his
all-fulnesse, and therefore it will set down its rest, and enjoy full
satisfaction: with the Martyr it will cry, None but Christ, none but Christ:
With the Psalmist, It will say, whom have I in heaven but thee; and there is
none upon earth, that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. I wish for nothing
but this, that I may always feed on, relish, and taste of thy sweetness,
fatness, and fullness.

Unto this proportion, that is in Christ's fullness, unto the soul, add we in
the next place, the perpetuity hereof, Christ is as a suitable, so an eternal
good unto the soul: For this all-fulnesse will dwell in him unto all
eternity. He is that tree of life spoken of Revel. 22.2. that shall bear
twelve manner of fruits, and yield her fruit every month. He shall be no
withered, no barren tree, but fruitful; and the fruit, that he shall bear,
shall be precious: He shall be a tree of life. Next, it shall be plentiful,
twelve manner of fruits. Unto it, lastly, there shall agree a lasting verdure,
and freshness, It shall yield fruit every month: There shall be with it a
perpetual Autumn. A Spanish Ambassador. when the Venetians made ostentation
unto him of their vast and replenished treasury, he told them that their
treasury had no root, and therefore might soon be drained: But the treasury
of his master had a root, the mines of America, so that when his coffers were
empty, he could quickly replenish them again. All terrestrial treasures, and
riches, are rootlesse, and therefore may be consumed, and end in want, and
poverty. But the spiritual riches and treasures of a Christian have an
eternal root in the heavens, the all-fulnesse, that dwells in Christ, and
therefore can never be exhausted; although they may be much diminished, when by
sins of presumption they put a stop unto some influences of this unwithered
root.

What has been said serves to show us the miserable estate of men without
Christ: for without him, in themselves, and in all things else, there is
nothing, but vanity and emptiness. In him alone there dwells all-fulnesse.
And if they have no part in him, how can they partake of the blessed influence
of his fullness. As there can be no sap in those branches, which have no true
union with the root: so neither can there be any true, and saving good in
those men, which are not ingrafted into the true vine, Christ Jesus; they may
have a great deal of worldly treasure to lay up for themselves, but as our
Savior says, Luke 12.21. They are not rich toward God. In the fullness of
their sufficiency they shall be in great streights, Job. 20.22. and wants: for
they have not the love of God, in whose favor is life, Psalm. 30.5. They are
void of the image, and spirit of God, the earnest of that inheritance, which
God reserveth for his sons; and therefore they shall never see the face of God,
never enjoy the life of God. But in the state of disunion from Christ there is
not only an utter emptiness of any saving good, but also a fullness of all
evil Prove. 1.31. and 14.14. Psalm. 31.23. a fullness of sin and a fullness
of misery.

1. A fullness of sin. As the earth upon the withdrawing of the sun is
covered with darkness, and with many thick, and gross vapors, fogs, and
mists: so the soul, upon the absence of Christ, is overspread with spiritual
darkness, with ignorance, with sin, with noisome and corrupt lusts.

And upon this secondly, there will follow another fullness, a fullness of
misery, and unhappiness. They shall be filled with mischief, Prove. 12.21.
They shall be filled with drunkenness, and sorrow, with the cup of
astonishment and desolation, Ezekiel. 23.33. Sometimes God gives many of them a
foretast of their future fullness of misery in the horrible terrors of their
guilty consciences. The seven Angels pour out upon the heads and hearts of
wicked men, even here in this life, seven golden vials, full of the wrath of
God, Revel. 15.7. The Apostle speaks in Heb. 10.27. of a certain fearful
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries. But alas! the expectance of hell is but a flea-biting in
comparison of the experience of it. For this is the full wages of wickedness,
and the highest degree of Gods displeasure against sin. One reason, why such as
are reprobated from union and communion with Christ, are called vessels of
wrath, Romans 9* is, because they shall be filled with the wrath of God, and all
the direful fruits thereof; they shall be filled with all the fullness of
Satan* they shall be like the full roll of Ezekiel chap. 2.9,10. that was
written within, and without; and the contents thereof were lamentations, and
mourning, and woe: they shall be not only miserable, but all over miserable,
miserable in both souls and bodies; they shall not only be full of misery, but
the very fullness of misery shall be in them.

A second exhortation shall be addressed unto those that have already relation
unto him; and it is, to labor after farther enlargements in their
participation of his fullness. For in him dwells all-fulnesse, and of that we
can never partake enough. In him are unsearchable riches and treasures, and
therefore we can never come unto the bottom. We should not therefore put any
stop, or suffer any diversion in our endeavors to be enriched by him. To
provoke hereunto, I shall propound by way of motive, Christ's willingness to
impart of his fullness, his invitation of us to receive it. Bishop Andrews on
John 1.14.
The breasts that are full, have as great pleasure in being drawn, as the
child that draws them. Assure our selves it is so here. There is majus
desideriu^ deplendi in him, then reple^di in us; a greater desire in him to
impart of his fullness, then in us to receive; in him to fill, the^ in us to be
filled. Hear how earnestly he himself inviteth us. Eat O friends, drink,
yea drink abundantly, O beloved, Cant. 5.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come
ye to the waters, etc. Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your ear, and
come unto me, Esaias 55.1,2,3. If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and
drink, John. 7.37. Let him that is a thirst, come. And whosoever will, let him
take the water of life freely, Revel. 22.17. We have a call, and this licenseth
us to receive of his fullness: we have a command, and this obliges us to
receive of his fullness. Should some great man proclaim that his house was
free, and open to all comers, that they might freely enter, and take their
fill of pure and rich wines, of sweet and dainty viands, and withal load
themselves with treasures and precious jewels; what flocking would there be
unto such an ones house, what thronging and crowding about his gate to press
in upon him? Behold, Christ in Prove. 9. is represented under the name of
wisdom, as a great Queen, that keeps an open and a royal house for all
comers. She sends forth her maidens, verse. 2, 3. that is, ministers of
incorrupt both doctrine and life, to invite guests unto her well-furnished
table. He sends Ambassadors beseeching by them to feed on his fatness, and
fullness; He counsels every soul, as he did the Church of Laodicea, Revel.
3.18. to buy gold of him tried in the fire, that they may be rich; to come unto
him, as unto a spiritual wardrobe, and Iewelihouse, and to take from him the
robes of righteousness, the rich, and precious ornaments of all sorts of
graces. But this gracious offer, this beneficial ad vice, we slight and
contemn, like the Prodigal, Luke 15.16,17. We forsake the plentiful
provision, that is in our fathers house, where the hind^servans have enough,
and to spare; And all our travail is to fill our belly with husks, that the
swine do eat. How cold are we in the acceptance of those true, divine, and
celestial riches and treasures, that are in Christ? and yet how do our hearts
pant after earthly treasures, that are subject to corruption by the moth, and
rust, and unto the violence, and rapine of robbers, Math. 6.19. Christ
complained of the Jews, how often would I have gathered you, But ye would not,
Math. 23.37. He may complain of us, how often would I have filled you, and ye
would not. Well were men but truly convinced of their utter emptiness, and
insufficiency, as touching spirituals, and were their eyes opened to behold
that all-sufficient supply, which is to be had against it in the all-fulnesse,
that dwells in Christ, it is impossible they should be so backward, as they
are, in their reception thereof. But alas* this is a thing, that is hidden from
most of our eyes.

Before I make an end of this use; I shall direct unto some helps, or means
conducing unto enlargements in the communication of Christ's fullness unto us,
And they shall be four. 1. The actuation of our faith, which is our receiving,
or acceptance of Christ's fullness, 2. an increase in spiritual poverty 3.
hunger, and thirsting after Christ's fullness, 4. A diligent use of ordinances,
which are instruments on Christ's part, by which he conveyeth unto us of his
fullness.

1. The Actuation the stirring up of our faith, which is our receiving, and
acceptance of Christ's fullness. There is a fullness of light in the sun, but
it illightneth none, but those, who open their eyes to admit, and make use of
it is light. There dwells an all-fulnesse in Christ; But what advantage can we
expect thereby, unless we open our hearts to receive of it? This all-fulnesse
is the universal food of the whole Church. It is a feast of fat things, of
fat things full of marrow, Esaias. 25.6. But our hungry souls will receive but
little satisfaction thereby, unless by faith we feed on the several dishes,
that are therein. It comprizeth abundant provisions, not only for the
necessities, but also comforts, and delights of all his people: But we must
reach out the hand of faith to supply thence all our wants, or else
notwithstanding this abundance, we may yet be in an indigent, and comfortless
condition. The Church has in Christ breasts of Consolation, an abundance of
glory, but she must suck, before she can be satisfied with these breasts; She
must milk out, before she can be delighted with abundance of glory, Esaias.
66.11. Christ is the bread of life; but the bread of life cannot quicken, and
nourish, unless we eat of it: In him are the waters of life, but these waters
cannot refresh, and comfort, unless we drink liberally of them: And he that
believes, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, John. 7.37.
Those of the children of men, that put their trust under the shadow of the
Lords wings, that is, true believers shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of his house, and he shall make them to drink of the river of his
pleasures, Psam. 36.7,8. The woman of Samaria said to our Savior, Sir, thou
have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep, Joh. 4.11. Christ indeed is a
deep well; But God (his name be praised for it) has provided something to
draw with, the bucket of faith. Let us let down this bucket into this well:
Let us actuate, and exercise our faith upon the all-fulnesse, that is in
Christ, and hereby with joy we shall draw water out of the wells of salvation.
Indeed this well is of infinite depth, the bucket of our faith is of a narrow
capacity, and our wants are continually renewed; for the supply of which, we
must always be letting down, and drawing up this bucket of faith: We must not
suffer it to be idle, but set it always a work: What the Apostle speaks
concerning the revelation of one part of Christ's fullness, the fullness of his
righteousness, Romans 1.17. may be applied unto the revelation, and
communication of other parcels thereof: They are revealed, and communicated
proportionably unto the growth, and progress of our faith; From faith to faith.

A second help, that will conduce much unto the enlargement of our
participation of Christ's fullness, is an increase in spiritual poverty,
humility, self denial, and apprehension of our utter emptiness in spirituals.
For this emptieth a man of himself; and the more a man is emptied of himself,
the more room is made for the fullness of Christ, and so a soul is the better
fitted and prepared for the reception thereof. Every valley, every lowly soul
shall be filled, Luke 3.5. The humble valleys are covered over with corn,
Psalm. 65.13. whiles the high hills are barren. Pride, self sufficiency,
selfe-dependancy, unqualifieth a man for receiving from Christ's fullness; for
they fill a man with himself, and the fuller a man is of himself, the less
place there is for Christ. The rich (says Mary) he has sent empty away, Luke
1.53. Those who are rich and full only in a proud opinion, he slightingly
dismisseth them, they get nothing of his fullness: and no wonder; for they
relish it not, they make no reckoning of it. To allude unto that of Solomon,
Prove. 27.7. The full soul loatheth the honey comb; the soul that is full in
fancy and conceit: Whereas on the other side, a soul thoroughly convinced of
its own wants and emptiness, cannot but be deeply sensible, that without a
supply from Christ it is lost, and undone for ever; and therefore its
emptiness presents unto it a continual argument for mourning: And a mourning
and humbled soul God will never leave unsatisfied, and uncomforted. I have
satiated (says he) the weary soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful
soul, Jer. 31.25.

The third means qualifying and fitting of us for receipts out of Christ's
fullness, is hunger and thirst after it: For this in some sort enlarges the
capacity of the soul, makes it more capacious and comprehensive of Christ's
fullness, then otherwise it could be. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it,
Psalm. 81.10. Desire is the mouth of the soul: if that be widened, we have
Gods promise for the filling of our souls. Dissatisfaction is the inseparable
curse of inordinate and unlawful desires. But holy and heavenly desires are
still rewarded with the blessing of satisfaction. Blessed are they which do
hunger, and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled, Math. 5.6.
He has filled the hungry with good things, Luke 1.53. He satisfyeth the
longing soul, and fills the hungry soul with goodness, Psalm. 107.9. I
will power water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground, Isa.
44.3. A thirsty soul is here resembled unto dry ground, unto the earth in a
great drought, when it does as it were gape for rain: upon such a soul (says
God) I will power not drops, but floods. David in Psalm. 63.1. professes a
very earnest desire after communion with God in Christ. O God, thou art my God,
early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for
thee, in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is: and hereupon verse. 5. he
promises unto himself sweet and full satisfaction. My soul shall be
satisfied, as with marrow, and fatness. That which Paul speaks of himself,
and Timothy, in reference unto the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.11. is applicable unto
Christ in order unto all Christians. His mouth is open unto us, his heart
enlarged. We are not straightned in him, but we are straightned in our own
bowels; that is, in our narrow affections, which are not in any measure of
proportion corresponsive unto the all fullness that dwells in him.

The last help which I shall advise unto, for enlargment of our participation
from Christ's fullness, is a diligent use of ordinances: for these are the
Instruments, by which Christ conveyeth of his fullness. These are the two
golden pipes, by which the two Olive branches, the two natures of Christ, or
his two offices, Regal, and Priestly* empty the golden oil out of themselves,
Zech. 4.12. These are the wings, that is, the beams and rays of the Sun of
righteousness, Mal. 4.2. the vehicula of its influence. In Psalm. 36.8. we
have a promise of sweet and abundant satisfaction unto Believers, but it is
affixed unto the ordinances of God. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thy house.

What Paul Romans 15.29. assures himself touching his coming among the Romans,
is appliable in some degree unto the ministry of even ordinary pastors and
teachers. It is in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ: that
is, as Lyra glosseth it, in the abundance of spiritual grace; so that their
congregations, if they receive the Gospel with all readiness of mind, shall
(to use the words of Calvin upon the place) spiritualibus Evangelii divitiis
affluere, abound in all spiritual riches of the Gospel. God ordinarily does
so largely bless the labors of pious and painful ministers, as that for a
seal of their ministry, he makes them isntrumental in imparting unto Gods
people in their flocks, not only some Romans 1.11. but all spiritual gifts, and
graces, that are sanctifying and saving.

Lastly, here is a word of Consolation for every soul, that is united unto
Christ. We may say of Christ, what the wise man did of his fear, Prove. 19.23.
He that has him, shall abide satisfied: he shall not be visited with evil.
What the Poets fancied of their cornu copia, may more truly be averred of
Christ: that, as they feigned, afforded them, who possessed it, whatsover they
desired. And Christ yields unto them, who have interest in him, a supply of all
that they can lawfully, and will thoroughly and effectually wish and ask for.
It is but asking, and we have Christ's promise to receive, that our joy may be
full, Joh. 16.24. He is plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon him,
Psalm. 86.5. There dwells an all fullness in the head, and therefore there
cannot be an emptiness in any of the members; for he received this
all-fulnesse for them, and therefore he will either derive unto them, or employ
for them, every parcel of it. In him there is, as fullness, so bountifulness:
he is, as full, so bountiful, most ready to impart unto others that fullness,
which for their sakes he is possessed of. We may say of him, what Solomon does
of the clouds, Eccl. 11.3. If they be full of rain, they empty themselves upon
the earth. Christ is full of every desirable good, and he will empty himself
upon every one, that is related unto him. In some sort he communicates unto
them most particulars of his fullness. He imployeth the fullness of his office
and authority, and he lays out the fullness of his sufficiency to promote
their salvation: He communicates unto them even the very fullness of his
Godhead in a way of anology and resemblance. Saint Peter speaks of an
Analogicall participation of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. The fullness of his
grace, and favor with God, he makes use of to ingratiate us with God, and he
makes us the objects of his own fullness of Love and favor. As for the
fullness of his habitual grace, we have the very same grace for kind, imparted
unto us, though far different in measure. We receive of his fullness grace
for grace, John. 1.16. The fullness of his satisfaction and merit is
communicated unto us by imputation, that is, acceptance; it is accepted for us
unto our justification From his fullness of glory, he will derive some beams
unto us: He will fashion our bodies unto an imitation of his glorious body: And
unto this there will be presupposed in our souls a resemblance of the glory
and happiness of his soul: for the body is happy and glorious by redundancy
from the soul. This premised, what is there that should perplex a soul, that
is in a state of Union with Christ? Is it wants and emptiness? why it has the
all-fulnesse of Christ to gage for a supply. Is it its own impotency and
disability? why! unto that it may oppose Christ's all sufficiency. Though we be
not able of our selves to contribute any thing toward our salvation, yet he
that has undertaken the work, is able to save unto the uttermost, and he is
also authorized hereunto. He has all power given unto him in heaven and earth,
a fullness of office and Authority. Is Original corruption a trouble unto
them, that rendered them children of wrath in their cradles, and in the womb?
Against the discomfort of that, they should set Christ's fullness of grace and
favor with God: for this will purchase the grace of Adoption for all that are
his. He is the son of Gods love, and therefore in him he will be well pleased
with them. Do they complain as the Psalmist, we are exceedingly filled with
contempt. Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those, that are
at ease, and with the contempt of the proud, Psalm. 123.3,4. Why! upon this
they would look with an eye of contempt, if they did but consider, how their
blessed Savior is full of grace, love, and favor, toward them. Are they
disquieted with the sight, and sense of the defects, and imperfections that are
in their graces? why! they are covered with the fullness of Christ's habitual
grace and holiness. Is the vast guilt of their actual enormities a terror
unto them? why^ all their sins are swallowed up by the fullness and
infiniteness of Christ's fatisfaction. Do they grieve for the blemishes of
their good works, which are so far from meriting heaven, as that they
supererogate for hell and damnation? Why! though there be a necessity of doing
good works, necessitas praecepti, and medii; yet there is no need of meriting
by them: for our Head by his infinite merits has purchased more glory then our
natures are capable of. And of this fullness of glory he is possessed now in
heaven in our behalf, as our Attorney, and in his appointed time, the times of
restitution of all things, he will derive of this his fullness of glory unto us
according unto our capacity, which he confirms and assures unto us, by his
promise in the Gospel, by the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and to be sold by Thomas Robinson in Oxford.
CHronicon Historiam Catholicam Complectens, ab exordio Mundi ad nativitatem D.
N. Jesu Christi, and exinde ad annum a Christo nato LXXI. Authore Ed. Simson
S.T.D. in folio. An Answer to M. Hoards Book, entitled Gods Love to Mankind,
by William Twisse D.D. Together with a Vindication of D. Twisse from the
Exceptions of M. John Goodwin in his Redemption Redeemed by Henry Jeanes. in
folio. A Treatise of Fruit-Tree* showing the manner of Grafting, Setting,
Pruning, and Ordering of them in all respects, according to new and easy Rules
of Experience; gathered in the space of twenty years, by Ra. Austen. in 4o.
XXII Lectiones, Tredecim Orationes, and sex Conciones, Authore Jo. Prideaux
S.T. profes. R. in folio. Fasciculus Controversiarum Theol. Authore Jo.
Prideaux S. Th. D. in 4o. Theologiae Scholasticae Syntagma Mnemonicum, and
Conciliorum Synopsis, Authore Jo. Prideaux S.T.D. in 4o. An Easy and
Compendious Introduction for Reading all sorts of Histories: Contrived in a
more facile way then heretofore has been Published, by Jo. Prideaux D.D. in
4o. The Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance examined and confirmed, by J. Owen
D.D. in folio. Socinianisme examined, in the confutation of Biddles and the
Racovian Catechism: by Jo: Owen D.D. A Review of the Annotations of H. Grotius
in reference unto the doctrine of the Deity and satisfaction of Christ, in
Answ. to Dr. Hammond. By Jo: Owen D.D. 4o. Of the Mortification of sin in
beleivers, with a Resolution of sundry cases of Conscience thereunto belonging,
by J. Owen D.D. 8o. Diatriba de Justitia Divina, seu Justitiae Vindicatricis
Vindiciae, Authore Jo. Owen D. D. in 8o. Providentiall Alterations in their
Subserviency to Christ's Exaltation, Opened in a Sermon on Ezekiel. 17. verse. 24.
by Io. Owen D. D. in 4o. A Sermon concerning the Kingdom of Christ, and power
of the Civil Magistrate about things of the Worship of God on Dan. 7.15,16. by
Io. Owen D. D. in 4o. A Guide to the Holy City, or Directions and Helps to an
Holy Life, by Io. Reading B.D. in 4o. Opera Mathematica, de Angulo Contactus
and semicirculi disquisitio Geom: de Sect: Conicis Tractat: Arithmetica
Infinitorum, Eclipseos observatio. Auct. Jo: Wallis Geom. Profes. S. T. D. 4o.
Jo. Wallis. Geom. Profes. Saviliani in Ac. Ox. Grammaticae linguae Anglicanae:
cui praefigitur, de Loquela sive sonorum formatione, tractatus
Grammatico-Physicus. in 8o. Apologia Ecclesiae Anglicanae grae. lat. Auct. Joh:
Juello. 8o. Tract. de Demonstratione Auct. Joh: Flavel. 8o. Dionysius Longinus
de grandi Loquentia gr. lat. cum not. 8o. Joh: Barclaii Poemata. 12o. Latium
and Lycaeum, Graeca cum Latinis, sive Gram: Artis in utraque lingua
lucidissima, Auct. Rob: Wickens. 8o. Conciones tres apud Acad: Oxon. and Tract.
de Jure Divino Diei Dominici. Auct. Hen: Wilkinson. S. T. D. 8o. Stratagemata
Satanae, Auct. Jacob. Acontium. 8o. Musica Incantans, sive Poema exprimens
Musicae vires. Auct. Rob. South. 4o. Diologi Gallico-Anglico-Latini. Authore
Gab. Dugress. in 8o. Jul. Lu. Florus de Rebus a Romany gestis, cum Annot. Jo.
Stadii and Claud. Salmasii. in 12o. Roberti Baronii Philosophia Theologiae
Ancillans. in 8o. Eryci Puteani Suada Attica, sive Orationum select: Syntagma.
in 8o. Eryci Puteani Historia Insubrica. in 12o. Jo. Bambrigii Astron Profes.
Saviliani in Ac. Ox. Canicularia. Quibus accesserunt, Insigniorum aliquot
Stellarum Longitudines and Latitud. Ex Astron. obser. Vlug Beigi. in 8o.
Adagialia Sacra Novi Testam. Selecta and Exposita ab And. Schotto. in 12o. Jo.
Buridani Quaestiones in december lib. Aristotelis ad Nichomachum. in 4o. Iuris and
Iudicii Fecialis, sive Iuris inter gentes, and Quaestionum de eodem explicatio.
Authore R. Zouch LL.D. in 4o. Specimen Quaestionum Iuris Civilis, cum
designatione Authorum a quibus in utramque partem discutiuntur. Authore R.
Zouch LL.D. in 4o. Cases and Questions Resolved in the Civil-Law, Collected by
R. Zouch Professor of the Civill-Law in Oxford in 4o. Pliny's Panegericke, A
Speech in Senate to the Emperor Trajan. Translated into English by S. Rob.
Stapleton. in 4o. The Royal Slave, a Tragi Comedy written by M. William
Cartwright. in 4o. A Seasonable Expostulation with the Netherlands,
Declaclaring their Ingratitude to, the Necessity of their Agreement with, the
Commonwealth of England. in 4o. A True Narration of the Miraculous Deliverance
of Anne Green, who being Executed at Oxford December. 14. 165o afterward
Revived; with diverse Poems thereon. in 4o. The Hoary Head Crowned, a Funeral
Sermon on Prove. 16.31. by Thom: Hodges B.D. The Only way to Preserve Life. A
Sermon on Amos 5.6. by Gr. Williams D.D. King David's Sanctuary. A Sermon
Preached before the King at Oxford, Psalm. 73.25. by Rich: Herwood M.A. 4o. The
Immortality of Humane Souls asserted, in Answer to a Tract, entitled Man's
Mortality. in 4o. A Treatise of the Consecration of the Son of God to his
everlasting Priesthood, being the 9th. book of Commentaries upon the Apostles
Creed. By Tho: Jackson D.D. in 4o. Good Counsel for the peace of the Church,
by B: Davenant and B: Hall. in 4o. Confessions and proofs of Protestant
Divines and Reformed Churches for Episcopacy, with the Original of Bishops and
Metropolitans, in 4o. The Doctrine of Christian Liberty by Bishop Downamt. 8o.
Horace and Persius in English, by Dr. Holliday. 8o. A defense of Tithes, by Jo:
Ley. 4o. A Buckler for the Church of England, in Ans: to Mr. Pendarvy's
Queries, by William Ley. 4o. Vindiciae Acudem. in Ans: to Websters Exam: Acad;
by S. Ward. D.D. 4o. A Treatise of Prayer, or an Apology for the use of the
Lords prayer. By Tho: Hodges. B.D. 12o. The Private Christians non ultra, or a
plea for the Lay-mans interpreting of Scriptures. 4o. A Complete Concordance of
the English Bible, composed after a new and most compendious method. By Robert
Wickens. 8o. Advice to a Son, or directions for his better Conduct through the
various and most important Encounters of this life. 12o. Political Reflections
upon the Government of the Turks, Nich: Machiavel etc. by the same Author. 12o.
The want of Church Government no warrant for a total omission of the Lords
Supper, with a reply to Mr. Fullwood. By Hen: Jeanes. 8o.
The several Treatises contained in this Volume, viz.

Of the sinful fear of Man, and Immortality of the soul, on Math. 10.28. And
fear not them, which Kill the Body, etc. Of Christ's Incarnation, on John 1.14.
And the word was made flesh. Of the Resurrection of Christ, on Colos. 1.18. Who
is the beginning, the first borne from the dead. Of the Fullness of Christ
considered according unto 1. His Relations. 2. His natures, Divine and Humane,
3. His twofold state of Humiliation, and Exaltation. On Coloss. 1.19. For it
pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. To which may be
added a Treatise formerly Published by the same Author, Of the excellency of
praise and thanksgiving, on Psalm. 92.1. It is a good thing to give thanks unto
the Lord, etc.

