THE Jesuits Ghost, WITH THE PRAYER OF THE Turkish Monarch TO CHRIST.

Through which he Obtained a Mighty Victory against the Papists, at the Field
of VARNA.

Occasioned by their wicked Perjury, in Breaking that League they had so
Solemnly Sworn to Keep.

Written by R. C.

LONDON. Printed by John Wallis, for the Author. 1689.

THE JESVIT'S GHOST.
FRom restless shades, my trembling Ghost ascends,
To visit Earth and some peculiar Friends,
Now all things are at rest and quiet found,
I only rise and walk the silent round,
In this Dark moment I Will the matter end;
For which the Bull does with the Test contend;
And Romes Religion open from the root,
Whose branches flourish with Forbiden Fruit,
And such as puts even Heaven to the Blush,
Who does their Actions with just anger crush.
Can they with great Omnipotence prevail
Who Daily Vows with Bloody Victims Seal?
Or he be President, to such as have
So many hundred back-ways to the Grave?
To Kill an Heretic, they 'count no more,
Than to Debauch, and then Absolve a Whore.
Though what is expected but a Tyburn rod.
From greedy Priests that Eat and Drink their God,
In Massacres their cruel rage out-flies
Softning tears of beauteous Virgins Eyes,
Could they proceed in their unhuman way,
They Would turn the World into a Golgotha,
Phocus, when he had by the help of Boniface Bishop of Rome, Mardered Maricius
the Emperor and all his Children, and Seated himself on the Throne, in requital
for his assistance in so Barbarous a murder, made Boniface Pope, then called
Universal Bishop.
By Murder first the Pope, assumed his Throne,
Since to what rage is Superstition grown,
On his Dark Reign, Oppressions Duly wait,
Like Pestilential Air to blast a State,
When Sword, and Powder fails, than Fire must
Lay splendid Cities level with the Dust:
Of Perjury allow, and pardon too,
So much detested by the Turk and Jew:
But Varna sure might silence this blind work,
When Christ gave that great Battle to the Turk.
The spacious field with Popish blood was died,
And Conquering Amurath did in Triumph ride,
Whilst Heaven stood Neuter, the Hungarian Sword
Victorious grew, but the high injured Lord,
Viewing the League the perjured Christians broke,
Grew pale with anger at the impious Work.
Condemned the crime and they received their doom,
From the rough Sons of the Loud Cannons Womb:
But these are meritorious Acts in them,
Yet what themselves in others do Condemn:
Their Giddy zeal consists on bits of Wood,
The Cross of Christ was carried by one Man at first, and in all the Abbys
Monasteries, and Cells etc. there are so many pieces of it, as if they were
Solid would build a Ship of a 1000 Tun. 3 Nails were only used in the
Crucifying our Blessed Savior, yet they produce as many Nails as are needful
in the Building of such a Ship.
On Crosses, Nails, and relics of the good:
In fine and costly Robes, in gaudy paint,
To deck and beautify the Idol Saint,
In Gilded Temples, Incense, rich perfume,
As if this World was the Elysium.
So Dazzling Lights delude the silly fly,
Who hovering courts the flame until it die:
But I, in vain, these fallacies deplore;
Beyond the Grave repentance has no power,
Were I to live again I Would then extol,
That part of heavenly breath the precious Soul,
And all my pious thoughts with heaven engage,
And shun the flashy Priestcraft of the age,
Which, just Like bubbles, bore up by the Air,
Look beautiful and break, then dis-appear.
This daring Nation when we'd thoughts to bring
To Romes obedience as an offr'ing,
We and the angry Dame in Council sat,
As if we would unweave the Lume of Fate,
The Cyclops when for mighty Jove they wrought,
Was not so toiled and full of various thought,
Then all our minutes busy were, and we,
To Hellish Stratagems gave Liberty,
Perfidious Petres with a Fawning smile,
Said, Heaven decrees for us this wealthy Isle,
Than for the promised Land he boldly pressed,
Cried out it is time, it is time we were possessed,
Post on he rid through fiery Zeal pretends,
Gold was his Guide, at Hell his Journey ends,
So smooth to his kind Prince he made the way:
He Little thought rank Treason in it Lay,
But Traitors, like false Coin, do fair appear
To all men's eyes but the Discoverer.
Seduced the King his Nobles to Decline,
Who are the Light by which all Monarchs shine,
None but false stones, no not one Glorious Gem,
Was left to sparkle in his Diadem.
The Test and Penal-Laws we must have down,
And not one man of Sense must ware a Gown;
Thus to our tickling Magic we gave way,
Till we raised Spirits that we could not Lay,
Just as the Devil did the project Start,
In our Cabal we had his Counterpart:
Famous for Bawling, and suspected wise,
Though one grain of Sense is worth a pound of Noise,
This precious Plant so worthy to be praised
Upon White-Chapel Dunghill first was raised:
Yet was the third great Engineer of State
Picked out to ruin the Immaculate,
And Divine Church, that like a timely Spring
Raises from Darkness every Living thing;
By Lawless power he strove to Undermine,
But Heaven did Frustrate the Damned design,
Resenting that to their Defame alone,
For what is the Casket when the Jewel's gone?
Even in the Nick of time, Heaven gave the word:
As Isaac's Angel stopped his Fathers Sword,
So the Prophetic Frost did subject bring
To its Chill Scepter every humid thing.
All bodies fast in that Cold Chain were bound,
No Spring to murmur, unless under ground;
But in a trice Dissolved this Tyrants Power
Whose Ruins flourish in his Conqueror.
And you who for Eternal Blessings call,
Look up, repent, make no Demur at all,
But to the Sacred Church obedient be,
Heavens bright Cealing is their Canopie.
In threatening storms their pious Luster showed,
Like Stars that Glitter through a Gloomy Cloud;
But Rome's blind Zeal depends on Beads and Toys,
Impious Nacks more fit for Apeish Boys,
Than means to Compass Everlasting Joys,
Hark! Pluto calls, the Stygian Furies quake.
The Guilty Howl, in that Sulphurous Lake,
I must descend to his Imperial Thron,
Yet when I Am there, he is Jealous of his Crown.
THE Breaking of the LEAGUE.
A League being made for ten Years between Amurath, Sixth King of the Turks,
and Vladislaus, King of Hungaria: one Swearing upon the Holy Evangelists, the
other upon the Alcoran. Amurath departed with his Army against Scanderbeg: not
long after the Hungarian Clergy finding an advantage in the Turks absence.
Julian the Cardinal and the rest of his Hopeful Brethren, persuades King
Vladislaus to break the League, telling him nothing could be more fond or
inconsiderate, than in their Consultation to have regard to their private
profit only, and not to the Public, without respect of Religion, Honesty, or
Consciene etc. Thus getting the consent of the King, the Cardinal absolved him,
who after Marched with a very great Army into the Turks Dominion. Huniades
being General, which Amurath hearing of, prepared to meet 'em, and the Armies
Engaged at the Field of Varna, where there was a Bloody and desperate Battle
Fought, in which the Christians had the best for the most part of the Day; so
that Amurath thought of nothing but Flight, and seeing the Christian Ensigns
Displayed with the Crucifix, plucked the Writing out of his Bosom, wherein the
Late League was Comprised, and holding it up in his hand with his eyes cast up
to Heaven, Said

Behold thou Crucified Christ, this is the League the Christians, in thy Name,
made with me: which they have, without Cause, violated: Now if thou be a God,
as they say thou art, and as we Dream, revenge the wrong done unto thy Name,
and me, and show thy Power upon thy Perjured People, who in their Deeds deny
thee their God.

No sooner had Amurath ended this Prayer, but the Battle turned, and the
Christians were totaly routed. Vladislaus killed, Huniades fled, Julian the
Cardinal, the Bishop of Veradiun, and the Bishop of Agria, with most of the
Clergy, all slain, who were the only Authors of that unjust War: And for all
the King of Hungaria broke the League, and Invaded Amurath, yet he, by reason
of his Oath, resigned his Kingdom up to his Son, of which you may see more at
Large in the Reign of Amurath Page 277.

FINIS.

