GOD and the KING: OR, THE DIVINE CONSTITUTION OF THE SVPREME MAGISTRATE;
ESPECIALLY In the Kingdom of ENGLAND: Against all popular Pretenders
whomsoever.

by Judge Jenkins

Published for the satisfaction of the weak: Being a private Discourse of a
Reverend Judge, with some Commanders of the Army, for their satisfaction, by
their desire.

DAN. 2.37. The God of heaven has given thee a Kingdom, and Power.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

TO THE READER.
IN this Argument, the best and safest Ground for thy Judgment and Conscience,
is the Word of God, with the Law of the Land. And from both these, the Divine
origin, and Supremacy of the King of England, is declared, and confirmed to
thee.

As thou art English or Christian, thou can not expect more then Scripture
and Law for thy satisfaction.

And if thou acquiesce not in these, I shall not care to satisfy thee: And
(for all thy professions of Godliness and Honesty) thou shall be to me as an
Heathen and Libertine.

GOD and the KING, etc.
GOd has a Natural Dominion over, Gods Dominion Natural and Universal.
and the Universal Government of the whole world, Zach. 4.14. Psalm.
97.1.99.1.94.1, 2.

The Supreme Magistrate (whosoever, The Supreme Magistrate has his power from
God.
and wheresoever) has his Power by way of Commission from God: I have said, ye
are Gods, Psalm. 82.6. John 10.34. And they are called Gods (says M. Perkins)
because they partake of his Power in their Authority, Psalm. 95.3. 1 Timothy 6.15.
and of his Glory in their Majesty.

The utmost of the Magistrates Power, The utmost of the Magistrates Power.
is the Power of the Sword, Romans 13.4. i. e. The Power of Life and Death; for
the more effectual suppressing of Vice, and Punishing and Restraining of
Sin. And with this power is he armed by God, say the Assembly of Divines in
their confession of Faith, Chap. of the Civil Magistrates. Nor can the People
confer this Power on him. Because,

1. The People cannot confer this power.
As Men, They have not Power over their own, much less over one another
Lives; All, and every of them, being under the Commandment, Non occides, Thou
shall not Kill.

2. As Christians, They must not resist evil, Mat. 5.39. nor revenge
themselves, Psalm. 94.1, 2.
Romans 12.39. For it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the
Lord, And he makes the Magistrate his Minister, a Revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil, Romans 13.4.

And, in this case, the People can ordain outward Forms, only of Offices and
Judicatories, without Divine Authority or Power: God constitutes the Supreme
Magistrate in every Kingdom and State.
And so their seeming Legal Proceedings, and executions of Justice, are,
indeed, nothing else but Real, and Revengfull Murders. And as God conferreth
the Power, so does he Constitute the Governor, in every Kingdom and State, He
removes Kings, and sets up Kings, Dan. 2.21. He rules in the Kingdom of
Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4.17.25.32.

God gave order to Samuel to Anoint, first, Saul, 1 Samuel 9.15. How he made Saul
and David Kings.
then David, King, 1 Samuel 16 12. And, afterward, he settled the Kingdom in
David's Family, 2 Samuel 7.11.12.

And God tells us by S. Paul, Luke 12.11.2 Chron. 9.^.
That the higher Power is his Ordinance, Romans 13.1.2. And his Minister, Ver. 4.
Ordained and Constituted his Lieftenant, to Rule and Govern by him, and for
him.

And, at this day, he Constituteth them in some places, How God makes Kings at
this day.
by the Peoples election, and with us by Hereditary succession, Jam. 1.1.

But howsoever Constituted, the Supreme Magistrate is Gods Ordinance; and he
that Resists him, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that Resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation, Romans 13.2.

Now the great Question, and only doubt to be Resolved, is, Whether the King
be the Supreme Magistrate. S. Paul's Character of the Supreme Magistrate applied
to the King.
Who, with us, is the Supreme Magistrate? Whether the King, or the Lords and
Commons Assembled in Parliament?

I answer, and prove, the King to be the Supreme Magistrate, that Character
which S. Paul gives of him, Romans 13.

The higher Power to whom ever Soul is subject, Verse 1.

And, with us, the King is that higher Power, from whom all Authority and
Jurisdiction is derived, 1 Edw. 6. c. 2.

And to whom every Subject owes Homage, and faith of Member, Life, and earthly
Honor, 6 Edw. 1. Com. Sur. Little. 85.

The Minister of God having the power of the Sword, for defense of the good,
and punishment of evil doers, Verse 3, 4.

And, with us, the King has full power in all cases to do Justice to all men,
24 Hen. 8. cap. 12.

And the punishment of all offenders belongs to the King, Mar. 1.1.

And all Judges and Ministers of Justice, have their power in this case by
Commission from him, 27 Hen. 8. c. 4.

Lastly, the sole power of pardoning Treasons, and Felonies, belongs to the
King, Ibid.

The Person to whom Tribute is due, and Customs, and Fear, and Honor, Ver. 7.
which is, the King.

Wherefore we must needs be subject (to the King) not only for wrath, but also
for Conscience sake, Romans 13.5. Secondly, The Kings Supremacy asserted by the
Laws of the Land.
the Kings Supremacy is asserted by the Laws of the Land, and by several Acts
of Parliament, whereto the Lords and Commons themselves have assented.

Bracton, Bracton.
a Learned Lawyer, living in the Time of Hen. 3. tells us, Every one is under
the King, and he under none but God alone, Lib. 4. Cap. 24. Sect. 5.

The Regality of the Crown of England is immediately subject to God, 16 Ric. 2.
c. 5.
and to none other, 16 Rich. 2. c. 5.

24 Hen. 8. c. 12. 24 Hen. 8 c. 12.
The Realm of England is an empire, and so has been accepted in the world,
Governed by one Supreme Head, and King, having the Dignity, and Royal estate
of the Imperial Crown of the same, unto whom a Body Politic compact of all
sorts, and degrees of People, been bounden, and owen, to bear next to God, a
natural and humble obedience.

25 Hen. 8. c. 21. 25 Hen. 8. c. 21.
The Commons acknowledge no Superior to the King under God.

1 Eliz. 1. 1 Eliz. 1.
The Oath of Supremacy is framed; Declaring, the King to be the one Supreme
Governor in all Causes, and over all Persons; etc.

And the said Act is but a Declaration of the Ancient Law, Cawdries Case, 5.
part fol. 1.

And no Person in any Parliament has a voice in the House of Commons unless
he take this Oath, 5 Eliz. 1.

1 Jac. 1. 1 Jac. 1.
The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament tell us, That in the High Court
of Parliament, all the Body of the Realm is either in Person, or by
Representation (upon their own free election) And they acknowledge King James
to be their only Rightful, and Lawful King, Lord, and Sovereign: And they
submit themselves, and their Posterities to His Majesty, and His Royal
Progeny; and Posterity for ever.

And in this present Parliament in their Addresses to the King do the Lords
and Commons acknowledge Him their gracious Sovereign, and themselves His
Majesty's Subjects.

Now the Law makes not the Servant greater then his Master, nor the Subject
greater then the King; for that were to subvert Order and Measure.

Lastly, the King calls, adjournes, prorogues, and dissolves the two Houses at
pleasure: therefore He is Superior to them.

Though at this time the exercise of that Kingly Power be suspended by the Act
of Continuation; whereby nevertheless, the two Houses were enlarged in Time
only, not in Power.

And whatsoever is pretended, The power of the Lords and Commons in Parliament.
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament have, in truth, no more power
then what the Kings Writ of Summons gives them.

And the Lords are summoned, To Consult, and Treat with the King upon matters
of great Concernment touching the King, the Defense of the Kingdom, and Church
of England: And the Commons, To Do, and Consent to such things as shall be
ordained by Common Counsel in Parliament.

And this is all the Power that the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, have from
the Places, for which they serve.

The Power of Magistracy, is not, cannot be, from the People, The King the
Representative of God; the Parliament of the People.
but from God: And so the King, the Representative of God, must needs be
Superior to the Parliament the Representative of the People.

Thus in the Order of Government God has the first place, The Order in
Government.
throughout the world: And next under God is the Supreme Magistrate in all
places of the world: And, in England, the KING is the supreme Governor,
inferior to none but God alone His Minister to protect, and punish; and, under
him, the Fountain of all Authority, Power, and Justice, in the Kingdom: To
whom every one owes homage, and the whole Body of the Realm a natural and
humble obedience, as to their Head; and faith and allegiance, as to their only
rightful and lawful Lord and Sovereign.

Now the means, and manner, whereby the KING of England obtaines the
Government thereof, is set forth, 1 Jac. 1. where the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, How the Crown descends to the King.
(being bounden thereunto both by the Laws of God, and Man) do recognize and
acknowledge, That immediately upon the Dissolution and Decease of Eliz. late
Queen of England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and of all the
Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights, belonging to the same, did by inherent Birth
right, and lawful, and undoubted Succession descend, and come, to His most
excellent Majesty, as being Lineally, Justly, and Lawfully, next, and sole
Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm; And that, Note.
by the goodness of God Almighty, and Lawful Right of Descent, he was King of
England, etc.

And so the saying of Sir Walter Raleigh is verified with us, Lib. Secund.
Hist. Mund.
Kings are made by God and Laws Divine; and by Humane Laws, only declared to
be Kings: Romans 14.4.
And thereupon he observes, That David thought himself accomptable only to
God, To thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51.

Object. But Parliaments have Deposed Kings; and translated the Crown from the
Heir of the Blood Royal to others.

The Deposers were Traitors, Sol.
by the Resolution of all the Judges of England, Cook. 2. part. Instit: cap. of
High Treason.

And those that came to the Crown by the Title of the Parliament were
Usurpers; and Kings only De facto, but not De jure.

Nor let us own the Practices of exorbitant Parliaments, but adhere to our
legal Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, wherein we have sworn to bear faith
and true Allegiance, as to the Kings Highness, so to His Heirs and lawful
Successors: And Him, and Them to defend to the utmost of our power, against
all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His or
Their Persons, their Crown, and Dignity.

And whereas, They (in former times) did set up Kings, and not by God, Hos. 8.4.

We have said, See Junius and Tremelius upon the places.
we have no King, what shall a King do unto us? Hos. 10.3.

Take all summed up in the Confession of the Church of Scotland, concerning the
Civil Magistrate.

WE confess, The Confession of the Ch: of Scotland.
and acknowledge, Empires, Kingdoms, Dominions, and Cities, to be distincted,
and ordained by God; The powers and Authorities in the same (be it of
Emperors, in their Empires; Kings, in their Realms; Dukes, and Princes, in
their Dominions; And of other Magistrates in their City) to be Gods holy
Ordinance, ordained for the manifestation of his glory, and for the singular
profit and community of Mankind, so that whosoever goes about to take away, or
confound the whole state of Civil policy, now long established, we affirm the
same men not only to be Enemies to Mankind, but also wickedly to fight against
Gods expressed will.

Fear GOD: Honor the KING 1 Pet. 2.17.
FINIS.

