Truths Return: In answer to a MALIGNANT PAMPHLET, PRETENDED To be written by
a most Orthodox, Moderate, and judicious Divine, a banished Minister of this
miserable Kingdom;

TO A Virtuous Lady, who (for the exercise of her Devotion) built a Closet,
wherein to secure the most sacred Book of COMMON PRAYER, from the view and
violence of the enemies thereof, Sectaries and Schismatiques of this KINGDOM.

Being printed together; that thereby the great difference may appear, between
Prayer real, and pretended: a form of Godliness, and the power thereof.

By THEO: JENNINGS, Gent.

Pray Without ceasing, quench not the spirit,

These. 5.17, 19. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God; for they are foolishness to him; neither can be know them, because they
are spiritually discerned,

1 Cor. 2.14. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good,

1 These. 5.21. LONDON, Printed by J. C. 1646.

To a virtuous and judicious Lady, who (for the exercise of her devotion) built
a Closet, wherein to secure the most Sacred Book of COMMON PRAYER, from the
view and violence of the enemies thereof, the Sectaries and Schismatiques of
this Kingdom.
Written by a most Orthodox, Moderate, and Judicious Divine, A bannished
Minister of this miserable Kingdom.
SInce it has pleased our wise and newborn State
The Common Prayer Book to excommunicate:
To turn it out of all, as if it were
Some grand Malignant, or some Cavaliere:
Since in our Churches it is by them forbid
To say such Prayers, as our Fathers did:
So that Gods House must now be called no more
The House or Prayer, so ever called before:
As if those Christians were resolved to use
That House, as bad, as ever did the Jews:
Since that of Christ, may now of Prayer be said,
It wants a place Whereon to lay its head;
I cannot choose but think, it was your care,
To build your Closet for distressed PRAYER;
Which here in mourning clad, presents it self,
Begging some little corner on your shelfe:
For since 't is bannish'd from all public view,
There be none dare it entertain, but you.
How times and men are changed! who would have thought
I'have seen the Service Book thus set at naught?
A Book worth Gold, if rightly understood;
Composed by Martyrs, sealed with their blood.
Once burnt by Papists, merely for this cause,
It was repugnant to their Popish Laws.
Now by our Zelots 't is condemned to die,
Because (forsooth) 't is full of Popery.
And thus we see the Golden mean defied,
And how ('twixt two extremes) 't is crucified.
But 't is no matter, we see stranger things,
Kings must be Subjects now, and Subjects, Kings.
The meaner sort of men have all the power;
The upper end is now beneath the lower:
The head below the feet; they will wear the Crown:
Who would not think the world's turned upside-down?
Learning must now give place to Ignorance,
So must a Statute to an Ordinance;
Religion; to Profaneness, and vainglory;
The Common Prayer Book; to the Directory.
All things are out of order, and I fear,
Are like to be, till we are as we were:
Till Bishops do return to end the stir
Twixt the Independent and the Presbyter:
Till Kings be Kings, and till we (wished) see
The Church enjoy her ancient Lyturgie:
Till Loyalty be had in more regard:
And till Rebellion has its just reward.
And that these things may be, we'll not despair:
All this, and more, may be obtained by Prayer.
THou grand Malignant Priest who seem to dare
That Precious true-borne State, whom God did spare.
When your strong forces felt his wrath and hate
Whilst he up raised this Kingdom, in our State.
And made them glorious, to reform those things
Our Fathers did amiss, as did our Kings.
When injudicious, Arrogant, Divines
In orthodox, and proud, did rule those times.
But now, the Clouds dispeld; 2 Cor. 4.2, 3, 4.
the Gospels light
Discovers truths, and makes them shine so bright.
That purblind eyes, are made stark blind, while some
Have gained their sight, and now to light are come.
What truth more clear, can any Saint inherit, Zack. 12.10.13.14.

When God does promise for to powers his spirit
Of grace and supplications on them all
That mourn, and pray, and on Gods name do call?
In bitterness, then each relations heart
In all the land shall mourn for sin apart:
King, Prophet, people, (all that grace attain)
Their wives, and Families, that do remain.
Thus God removes all tottering forms, Heb. 12.27.28.
and he
A Kingdom gives, that moved cannot be.
Believe but Jesus, forms of Prayer are none
But in the Spirit, to worship God alone. Ioh. 4.21.23.24.

God is a Spirit, true worshippers and just
In spirit and truth, the Father, worship must.
The manner how, and what to ask, Mat. 6.9. Lnk. 11.2.
alone
Is only, in the Lords Prayer clearly shown.
That form of words none used but Christ as ye
Thence to the end, o'th Revelations see. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

A form, the vil'st of men, do only use:
The power of godliness they do refuse:
Lead others Captive: Reprobate are they
(God us commands from such to turn away.)
Idnnes and Iambres like, they truth resist
Unmasked to all, To. 8.26.27.
these fools, shall not persist.
By The Spirit of Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5.
our Spirits framed are
An Habitation: Gal. 1.22.23.
We; his House of Prayer.
Saints are the Churches, Ioh 4.20.
which true Christians use,
Your Churches are a fragment of the Jews. Luke 13.32.

You Foxes are, C. 9.5.8.
as Christ of Herod said
Your holes, Luke 14.46.
afford no room, to rest his head.
You, nor your Fathers never took the care
To get your hearts, Mat. 15.8.9.
to be Christ's House of Prayer.
Dead forms in books you Idolize alone; 1 Pet. 2.4.

To Christ you come not as a living Stone.
You, and your Churches, are alike bestead:
Your hearts as stony, Heb. 12.13.14.
hard, key cold, and dead.
Your Common-Service Book if, 1 Pet. 4.19.
once a crute;
The lame once heald, would never more it touch.
That faith in prayer, 1 Samuel 13.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. C. 22.16.18.19. C.
15.9.18.19, 20, 22, 23, 30, 31, 32, 33.
the Martyrs tongues expressed
Flowed only from Gods Spirit, in their breast.
Their paths made straight; their feet went not astray:
In Peace, and Holiness they kept that way.
You lame; out of the way are turned quite
Your disobedience hat full in Gods sight.
Like Saul, you force such service on the Lord,
As makes your Prayers and Persons both abhord.
Your grand rebellions hateful in Gods sight
Ye slew the Saints, spat'd for Amalekite.
God gave our State, his wisdom, and a call
And power to hew your hopes, in pieces small.
Your golden Book, the people dejfi'd
If Papists, (Alcaron like) could not abide.
Much less, could our just State endure such things
As hurt themselves, our Kingdom, and our Kings. 2 Kin. 18.4.

Therefore they Covenant, wholly to reduce
All to Gods word, even the primary use.
And now no wonder, we see such strange things
As Kings Gods Subjects, Subjects made Gods Kings. Rev. 1.6. C. 2.26, 27, 28.
C. 21.24.26. Esa. 60.3. 2 Timothy 4.8. 2 Pet. 3.16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 14.22, 23, 24,
25. C. 2.4.5.6. 1 Cor. 14.33. Heb. 8.10.11. Ier. 31.33.34. 1 Kin. 2.44, 45, 46.
Dan. 7.16.

Such men have all, the power of Christ we know
In Heaven above, and on the earth below.
Thus all degrees, below enjoy a Crown
The world to Heaven, is turned upside down.
Gods Learning, must take place of Ignorance
The Gospel of each; Law, and Ordinance.
Religion, of Profaneness, and vain glory:
And precious faith, looks to Gods directory.
Gods order in all things shall thus appear
Gods truth, all enemies, shall quite cashire.
Kings, Pastors, People, all on God depend
And ^ayling Shime's justly brought to end.
The Churches shall enjoy their Liberty
Received from Christ, without Malignity.
Rebellion, it shall have the just reward:
And Loyalty, be had in due regard.
But ask in faith, of Christ, Mat. 21.22: John 16.23.24. Iam. 5.15.16.
and do not fear
To gain all needful things, by hearty Prayer.
November the 3. 1646. Theodore Iennings.

FINIS.

