UNIFORMITY IN Humane Doctrinall Ceremonies Ungrounded on 1 Cor. 14.40. OR, A
REPLY UNTO Dr. HAMMONDS VINDICATION OF HIS Grounds of Uniformity from the 1
Cor. 14.40.

BY HENRY JEANES, Minister of Gods Word at CHEDZOY.

OXFORD, Printed by A. Lichfield Printer to the Universitie, for Tho. Robinson,
1660.

Uniformity in Humane Doctrinall Ceremonies ungrounded on 1 Cor. 14.40.
Dr. HAMMOND.
1 Cor. 14.40. (...).
Decently, and according to appointment.

1. SInce the publishing that Answer to Mr. J. concerning the degrees of
ardency in Christ's Prayer, I am advertised of another passage in that volume,
in which I am concerned, relating to some words of mine in the view of the
Directory, page 19. on the head of Uniformity in Gods Service, and particularly
respecting my rendering of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done
(...).

2. These indeed I thus rendered [decently and according to order or
appointment] and affirmed the importance of that place to be, that all be done
in the Church according to Custom and appointment, rendering this reason of the
former, because it was employed in (...), decently (custom being the only rule
of decency, etc.) and of the latter, because the words do literally import
this, (...), i. e. according to order or appointment.

3. To the former of these he makes his first exception, thus, [he dares not
affirm that this is the immediate sense of the place, but only that it is
employed; it cannot be denied, but that decency does imply such customs, the
omission of which does necessarily infer indecency; but that the omission of
such Ceremonies as ours, does infer indecency, the Doctor and all his party can
never make good: What undecencie can the Doctor prove to be in the
administration of Baptism without the Cross; as also in public Prayers and
Preaching without a Surplice? But of this see farther in Ames in the places but
now quoted: The Doctor may perhaps look upon him as an inconsiderable
adversary. But we shall think his Arguments considerable; until the Doctor, or
some other of his party give a satisfactory answer unto them. In the mean while
let us examine the proof that the Doctor brings for this sense: and it is
because custom is the only rule of decency.

This Proposition, though very strange, is prooflesse; and therefore we might
as well reject it, as the Doctor dictates it. But I shall add a confutation of
it, from these following arguments.

1. If custom be the only rule of decency, then nothing else can be a rule
thereof besides customs, but this is false; for the light and law of Nature,
is also a rule thereof, (...) that infallible.

2. Nothing can be undecent, that is agreeable unto the only rule of decency
but diverse things are undecent, which yet can plead custom; and this is so
evident, as that I will not so much undervalue the Doctors judgment, as to
endeavor any proofs thereof. It is impossible that the only rule of decency
should be undecent; but yet it is very possible that many customs should be
undecent, and therefore I shall conclude, that custom is not the only rule of
decency.

3. Lastly, unto custom, as you may see in both Aristotle and Aquinas, the
frequent usage of a thing is required. But now there may be decency or
handsomnesse in the first usage of a thing; and of this decency custom is not
the rule, and therefore it is not the only rule of decency.

4. The first thing here charged on me, is timidity, that I dare not say what I
said not, and this attended with a concession (in a limited sense) of the truth
of what I did say; the second is the impertinence or unsufficiency of that, in
that limited sense, to prove what he conceives I would have from it, viz. that
the omission of our ceremonies does infer indecency: And the proof of this
charge twofold, 1. by way of question, founded in two instances, the Cross in
Baptism, and the Surplice in public Prayer, and Preaching: 2. By reference to
Ames, and resolving to think his arguments considerable, till a satisfactory
answer be given them. And his third charge, is my using an unsufficient proof
to prove my interpretation, viz. this, [because custom is the only rule of
decency] which he confutes by three arguments.

These three charges I shall now very briefly examine, and, if I mistake not,
clearly evacuate. The first by assuring him, 1. that I did dare to say, and
indeed said (as I then thought perspicuously) the full of what I meant; but
that it was no way incumbent on me, to say either what I did not mean, or what
Mr. J. or any other should be justly able to charge of want of truth in the
least degree. And 2. if what I said cannot, as he confesses, be denied, to have
truth in it in one sense, I demand why must it be a not daring (which is wont
to signify timidity or cowardice) that I affirmed it not in another sense,
wherein he does not consent to it.

Jeanes.
The not daring of a thing proceeds from, not only timidity, but also from
conscience and shame: When we say of men in controversal writings, that they
dare not affirm such and such errors, we do not reproach them with cowardice,
unless he be a coward that is afraid, or ashamed to deliver an untruth. That
according unto custom is the immediate sense of (...), is a very gross and
evident falsehood; and when I said that you dared not to affirm it, my meaning
plainly was, that your conscience or shame kept you from such an affirmation,
and what wrong I have herein done you I am yet to seek.

If you demand why I say that, you dare not say what you said not?

I answer, I have two reasons for it:

1. In entrance into this dispute, I did, as is usual in Controversies, premise
what I took for uncontroverted on both sides. 1. for your part, I thought you
would not deny, but that the immediate sense of (...) was not according unto
custom; and then, I propounded for my own part what I granted.

2. Though in Charity I judge, that you dare not say, that according unto
custom, is the immediate sense of (...), yet I must needs tell you, that by
your opinion it is incumbent upon you to say as much, and that I thus prove:
You say that according to custom is the importance of (...), that is, the
adequate and full importance of it, for that you should so trifle, as to say,
that you meant, it is only the partial, and inadequate importance of it, I
will not so much as imagine: But now, if it be not the express, and immediate
sense of the word, but only employed therein, as drawn therefrom, as a sequel
or inference; by way of deduction or consequence, it may only be a part or
piece of the importance thereof: to prove then, that it is the full and adequate
importance of the word, you must make good, that it is the immediate sense of
it.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 6.
To make short, and prevent all possibility of his, or any man's farther
mistaking my words, I shall hasten to tell him the full of my meaning in that
passage, that ((...) decently) implies (according to custom) viz. that in such
things as these, of which then I spoke, gestures, habits, and the like
circumstances of Gods public service, wherein the Apostle prescribes care of
decency, it is necessary to observe the custom, of the place wherein we live.

Jeanes.
1. The customs of some places in gestures, habits, and the like circumstances
of Gods worship are very undecent, and it is not necessary to observe such
customs: But you will perhaps say, that you except undecent customs, and then
you are to be understood only of decent customs; for every custom is decent
or undecent: because decency and undecency are privatively opposed, and
interprivative opposita non datur medium in subjecto capaci, between privative
opposites there is no middle either of abnegation or participation in a capable
subject: The result and upshot then of your meaning is, that, decently implies,
according unto decent customs; and then

1. The full of your meaning is but a trifling speech, that proves nothing in
the Controversy, unless you also prove the Ceremonies controverted, to be so
decent, as that the omission of them will be undecent in the service of God.

2. I would fain know, how you will suit unto it the proof of it: Custom is
the only rule of decency, for there too, by custom you understand that which
is decent, so that your argument runs thus: decent custom is the only rule of
decency; therefore (...) decently, implies decent customs. And this argument
most of your learned Readers will (to borrow your words concerning a saying of
mine) despise under the appearance of a tautologie.

2. If the full of your meaning in that passage, that (...) decently, implies
according to custom, be, that in such things as these, of which then you
spoke, gestures, habits and the like circumstances of Gods public service,
etc. it is necessary to observe the customs of the place wherein we live, why
then I must be bold to tell you, that the full of your meaning is very short of
the meaning of the Apostle; for these words of the Apostle, let all things be
done decently (...), etc. (...), prohibits al undecency, not only that
undecency against the custom of the place wherein we live, but also that
undecency which is against the dictates of the Law of Nature. By this the
Reader may see, how defective your exposition is: the Apostle says, let all
things be done decently, and your gloss is, let some things in Gods worship be
done according unto some customs, to wit, such as are decent.

3. I suppose that by gestures, habits, and the like circumstances in the
service of God, you mean such of them as are Symbolical ceremonies; for
otherwise your full meaning is nothing unto the purpose, because it will be no
ground for that uniformity you plead for. Now that the Apostles words, let all
things be done decently implies, that in humane Symbolical ceremonies it is
necessary that we observe the customs of the place wherein we live, is a thing
which I utterly deny, and shall be constant in such denial, until you drive me
from it by some convincing argument; and that I do not do this out of stomach,
will appear by the reason that I shall allege: The words of the Apostle, let
all things be done decently, are not disobeyed, unless there be some undecency
committed in the worship and service of God; for decency and undecency are
privatively opposite, and therefore there is decency in those actions where
there is no undecency; but now by the omission of Symbolical ceremonies of
humane institution, such as the Cross in Baptism, Surplice in Prayer and
Preaching, which can plead custom of the present place we live in, there is
committed no undecency in the worship and service of God, viz. in Baptism, in
Preaching and Praying, as will be apparent unto any man that will attempt to
prove syllogistically the contrary; therefore the Apostles precept is not
disobeyed by the omission of such Symbolical ceremonies, and consequently the
Apostles precept does not in any way imply such Ceremonies.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 6.
This I then thought sufficiently explicated by exemplifying in men's wearing
long hair, which the Apostle proved indecent by its being against (...), i. e.
says Suidas, (...), a custom of some continuance in that place (which yet in
women there, and men in other places, where that custom prevailed not, had
nothing indecent in it.)

Jeanes.
1. This conceit that you have out of Suidas, Salmasius de C^ma disputes
against; but his argument satisfyeth me not, and therefore I shall wave all
that he says, and confine my self unto the very words of the Apostle for
disproof of your sense of them, and my reason is taken from the joining of
(...) with (...); for suppose that (...), Nature, may sometimes signify
custom, yet that (...), nature it self should signify custom, is very
improper.

2. Women's wearing of long hair is no religious mystical ceremony, but used out
of Gods worship and service, as well as in, and therefore a most impertinent
exemplification of that which you plead for, Uniformity in religious mystical
Ceremonies, that are proper and peculiar unto the special and solemn worship of
God.

I readily grant, that in some places, custom has made the long hair of women
one badge of distinction between them and men; but being by custom made such a
badge, nature it self dictates the observation of it; and if a man wear such
long hair as women; he sins against the law of nature, if not immediately and
proxime, yet mediately ex interventu rationabilis consuetudinis.

As impertinent is your second exemplification, if Chrysostomes and others
exposition may have place; for they refer [we have no such custome] unto the
words immediately foregoing (and why we should go farther for a coherence, I
can see no reason) if any man seem to be contentious: So that the meaning of
the Apostle is, we have no custom to be contentious: Now to be contentious, is
a sin against the Moral Law, the Law of Nature, and therefore belongs not unto
your discourse of Ceremonies.

Dr. Hammond. sect 7.
But this exemplification of my meaning he thought fit to conceal from the
Reader, and supply that vacuity only with an etc. yet reciting at length, to a
word, what was immediately before, and after it. His design in so doing, I
judge not, but shall endeavor to undeceive the Reader for the future, by
farther enlarging on it.

Jeanes.
1. Women's wearing of long hair is no Symbolical ceremony, and therefore what
you said of it was an impertinency, and no exemplification of your meaning, and
therefore I had no reason to take notice of it.

But 2. suppose it were an exemplification, yet unless it were also for
confirmation of your conclusion; that custom is the only rule of decency, I
was no wise obliged to recite what you said herein; for I expressly told the
Reader, I would transcribe what was argumentative in your words; now what I
left out was not argumentative; for from it, neither you, nor any man else can
ever infer your now mentioned conclusion.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 8.
All people, I think, in the world, have some outward significations, and
expressions of Reverence; but all have not the same, but according to Topical
customs, some different, some contrary to others: We of this and all our
neighbor nations express reverence by uncovering the head, the Turks do the
contrary. Again, among Christians, it is customary for men so to express their
reverence, but for women, says the Apostle, it is not, but the contrary; and
so it is still among us. Nay it was once among some Heathens ( that worshipped
Mercury) an act of the highest reverence, even of adoration, to throw stones at
their God; among others, to cut themselves with Lances, when they were a
praying to him. And it can be no news to Mr. J. that these customs were not
observed by other Countries; the Jews that threw stones at Christ, and the
Daemoniack that cut himself with them, were neither of them interpretable to
worship him.

Jeanes.
1. Unless you can prove, that there cannot be outward significations and
expressions of reverence in Gods service, without humane Symbolical ceremonies,
all this your enlargement about the expressions of reverence will be to no
purpose. We require reverence in all parts of Gods worship as well as you; but
then we hold, that Gods worship may be performed reverently, and in a seemly
manner, without mystical ceremonies of humane invention.

2. Kneeling in Prayer is an expression of the highest degree of Reverence,
Adoration; and it has a higher rule than Custom, viz. Scripture and the light
of Nature: No Custom can render this Kneeling undecent; unless you will say
those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 95.6, do not oblige Christians: O come, let
us worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker.

3. There be some customary expressions of reverence, that are undeniably
unjustifiable, and you cannot say that they are employed in the Apostles (...).
Thus for expression of reverence, it is a custom with Papists not to touch the
bread with their hands, but to have it put into their mouths; and upon the like
pretense of reverence, it is customary amongst them, for Laymen to abstain
from the Cup altogether.

Lastly, why you bring in the Heathens throwing of stones at Mercury in a way
of worship, I cannot divine; for I cannot imagine, that you think it to be a
decent way of worship, and if it be undecent, then it serves nothing unto the
exemplification of your meaning.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 9.
This therefore was no dark, but visible foundation of what I said; In
assigning any rite or ceremony for the service of God, decency, says the
Apostle, was to be observed, the only rule to judge of that, is, say I, to
consider the Customs of that particular place, of which we consult. Where
bewing the knee, or kneeling on the ground is customarily used as a token of
reverence, where putting off, or keeping off the hat, there the choice of
Ceremonies must be made with respect to those particular customs: Here it is
evident, that I mean not the frequent usage of that ceremony, in opposition to
a first usage of it, as Mr. J. is willing to mistake me, and found one of his
arguments upon that mistake, but the standing-custome of the place, by which,
as by an argument or evidence, such a ceremony is demonstrated to be a
reverential respect, and so (for the service of God, to whom all reverence is
due) decent in that place, though in nature or in the estimation of all other
men, it be not so.

Jeanes.
1. If the Apostle had said, as you say, he says, there ought to be no farther
controversy about the lawfulness of humane ceremonies; but that clause [in
assigning any rite or ceremony for the service of God, etc. ^is an Apocryphal
addition of yours, without any color from the Text it self, or from the
coherence; and therefore all you build upon it is but fancy and fiction: That
the Apostles decency cannot be observed without assigning such Rites and
Ceremonies as you dispute for, you may dictate and boldly affirm, but can never
with all your learning solidly prove; and unless you can make proof hereof,
you and your party have just reason to be ashamed of urging this place for
ceremonies, with such an unshaken confidence as you do.

2. Whereas you tell us, it is evident that you mean not (...) the frequent
usage of that ceremony in opposition to the first usage of it: This evidence of
your meaning you have not so much as attempted to prove; and if you shall for
the future make such an attempt, it would, I am afraid, prove succesless. The
custom of a thing (unless you can fasten upon it a sense or meaning never yet
heard of) is opposed unto the first usage of that thing; for custom implies
the frequent usage of a thing, and to say that the frequent usage of a thing is
the first usage of it, is an evident repugnancy and an apparent contradiction,
contradictio in adjecto oppositum in opposito, as they say. I am therefore much
to seek for the sense and reason of that Antithesis you make in these words, I
mean, not the frequent usage of that ceremony in opposition to a first usage of
it, but the standing custom of the place, etc. for it is impossible that the
standing custom of the place in a ceremony, should be the first usage of that
ceremony; where the mistake is let the Reader judge.

3. In that which follows, there is nothing of argument, unless you can
prove every ceremony, which can plead the standing custom of a place, to be a
fitting and decent expression of that reverential respect, which is due unto
God. Bishop Morton in his Book of the Institution of the Sacrament of the
blessed Body and Blood of Christ, p. 80, 81. shows that the opinion of
reverence, has been the damme and nurse of manyfold superstitions; and after
such demonstration he quotes a saying of Chrysostom upon Joh. 13.8. Let us
therefore learn to honor and reverence Christ as he would, and not as we
think fit.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
10. Certainly this is so evident in it self, and so undeniably the importance
of my words, that there can be no need farther to enlarge on it, much less to
examine the weight, or meaning of his concession, that it cannot be dented but
that decency does imply such customs, the omission of which necessarily
inferres indecency]

11. This saying of his some Readers may look on with Reverence, as not readily
comprehending the importance of it, others may chance to despise it under the
appearance of a tautologie. But upon pondering, it will appear that the Author
had a meaning in it; which he designed should bring in some advantage to his
cause, and without which he was not likely to advance far, or succeed in it.

12. Some customs* we know there are, which are so highly decent, as that the
omission of them necessarily infers indecency: But what are they? why such as
the law of (at least lapst) nature prescribes, covering of nakedness, and the
like; of which it is evident among all that have not learnt of Carneades
industriously to raze out all natural measures of honest and dishonest, that
the omission of them infers indecency, yea and necessarily infers it, this sort
of decency being natural to all men that ever were, or shall be in the world,
born and educated in what nation, or inured to what custom soever, and this
the very first hour after our first Parents fall, before any custom had been
contracted which might recommend it to them.

13. And as of these his rule is true, that the omission of these necessarily
inferrs undecency, so it is in a manner proper to these, and belongs not to any
other sort of things* whose decency flows but from some positive command
though it be of God, or custom, or command of men. To such things whose
decency flows from any command either of God or man, this rule cannot be fully
applied; for that command might have been not given, or there might be a space
before it was given, or a people to whom it was not given, and then in any of
those cases the omission would not be indecent, to whom the law was not given;
and so it does not necessarily and absolutely, but only dependently on the
law, and conditionally, infer indecency; so in like manner the rule holds not
in those things, whose decency is introduced only by custom, for that Mr. J.
truly says, arising from frequency of actions, it must again be granted,
that there was a time when that which now is custom, was new, and so not
custom; and again, there are, or may be Nations, with whom that custom
(whatsoever can be instanced in) has not prevailed, which prejudges still the
necessity spoken of, that such omission should infer indecencie.

And so we see the Jumme of Mr. J. his liberal concession, viz. that decency
implies natural decency, or such customs, which are naturally decent, and so
the omission of them naturally indecent; and if the Doctor or his party do not
prove, or make good, that the administration of Baptism without the Cross is
against the law of nature, that the Preaching without the Surplice bears
analogy to the disclosing of nakedness, he is utterly refuted by Mr. J. in
his interpretation of (...), or notion of decency.

Jeanes.
1. That I had no design in putting in the word necessarily, is evident by my
leaving it out in the next words; but that the omission of such ceremonies as
ours does infer undecency, the Doctor and all his party can never make good.
You shall have my good leave instead of necessarily to place truly, or
convincingly. Vociferations I have heard many against the undecency of Gods
worship and service amongst Presbyterians, and when I have called for proof, I
have been told, amongst other things, that they Baptized without the Cross,
that they put up prayers unto God without a Surplice; but that God is
undecently worshipped, where such toys as these are omitted, you may stoutly
affirm, but can never prove, by so much as one convictive argument: the word
necessarily may then very well be inserted, in opposition to the groundless
surmises of the ignorant, and prooflesse dictates of some learned men. Ignorant
men may surmise, and learned men may dictate, that the omission of our
ceremonies does infer indecency, but this surmise and dictate can never be made
good by argument.

2. In Logic, a necessary inference is opposed unto that which is fallacious,
as also that which is but probable and contingent; and therefore I wonder why
you should quarrel at the word necessarily? for do you think in earnest, that
decency implies such customs, the omission of which does sophistically, or at
the best, only probably infer undecency, you cannot, I know, harbor so
senseless and irrational a thought, and therefore you must say as I do, that
decency here implies only such customs, the omission of which, necessarily
infer undecency.

3. When you say that my rule is in a manner proper to those customs, which the
Law, of at least, lapsed Nature prescribes, that limitation in a manner is a
backdoor, out of which how far you may run, I know not, and therefore until
you somewhere make a stand, I shall not run after you.

4. Whereas you fasten upon me this assertion, that decency here implies only
such customs which are naturally decent, viz. prescribed immediately by the
Law of Nature, and so the omission of them naturally indecent, you have for
this no color, but that which you take from the word necessarily, and how weak
a ground this is for such an imputation, you must needs confess, when you
remember what I now told you, that necessarily here is opposed unto
fallaciously and probably. Dr. Ames himself in the dispute about humane
ceremonies, page 58. confesses, that comeliness, in the very place of the
Apostle, contains all natural and civil handsomness; and in his Reply to
Mortons general Defense, etc. cap. 3. sect. 28. he acknowledges the women's
vailes, 1 Cor. 11. to be an instance of this decency; for by the example of it,
he concludes that other Churches may be directed so far, just as the Apostles
rule stretches, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done comely: when Bishop
Morton desired to know whether this matter were not a thing indifferent? his
answer is, it is indifferent in the general nature of it; yet at that time, and
in that place, they sinned that did otherwise, even before Paul, or any of
their overseers gave them charge about it. By this his answer it is apparent,
that he did not think it dictated by Nature unto the Corinthians, before any
custom had recommended it unto them. As for my own part you shall have here my
frank concession, that decency here implies even that decency which is
introduced by civil custom, provided,

1. That it be, consuetudo rationabilis; Suarez de legib.
for no other custom can have the force and authority of a law, and if you, or
any other can bring any arguments, that it was confuetudo rationabilis which
introduced our ceremonies, they shall have, God willing, an answer.

2. That the omission of it renders Gods worship undecent: the equity of this
limitation appears from this reason, because the Apostles command of decency
is not violated but by undecency: This is at large set down in Ames his dispute
about humane ceremonies, page 77, 78.

Lastly, your, and my learned friend Mr. Barlow, resolves and proves,
Exercit. Metaph. p. 29. every moral evil, every evil of sin, to be against
the law of Nature, if not proxime and immediate, yet mediate ex interventu
legis positivae, now the undecency here prohibited by the Apostle is a moral
evil, a sin, malum culpae, therefore it is at least mediately against the Law
of Nature. Your great and learned Hooker, page 95. of his Ecclesiastical
Polity says, that this rule of the Apostle is an edict of Nature, a Canon of
that Law which is written in all men's hearts; the Church had for ever, no less
then now, stood bound to observe it, whether the Apostle had mentioned it or
no. And hereupon I shall infer, that if you or your party do not prove or make
good, that the administration of Baptism without the Cross, that Preaching,
Praying, without the Surplice, is against the Law of nature, in some sense at
least, mediately, he is utterly refuted by Mr. Hooker his interpretation of
(...), or notion of decency; and I do not desire to live so long, as to see
such a proof as this made.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 15.
This is indeed his meaning, which (though somewhat darkened in that his
expression) will appear but consequent to the two things which he has premised
in this matter from Amesius his notion of decency. p. 64. in marg. 1. that
decency requires not that any sacred things be instituted de novo, but only
that those things which are instituted by God, be used in that manner which is
agreeable to the dignity of them. 2. That as order, so decency belongs to civil
offices, as well as sacred things, in which indecorum est vitium oppositum
debito illi modo, qui requiritur ad eorum justum finem, and usum consequendum,
indecency is a vice opposed to that due manner which is required to the
obtaining the just end, and use of those things. Now if in the former of these,
the mode he speaks of, as agreeable to the dignity of those things which are
instituted, be it self-supposed by him to be instituted by men, then must he
acknowledge humane power of instituting ceremonies, which being so contrary to
his design, I must resolve not to be intended by him; but rather, that as the
sacred things are instituted by God, so the mode which is consentaneous to
their dignity is instituted by God also, and that nothing is decent in sacris,
which is not so instituted. And so likewise on the second head, that of civil
offices. For that indecency, which is a vice or sin, must be contrary to some
Law of Gods, and so also that which is opposed to the due manner which is
required; and so is necessary either necessitate medii, or praecepti also to
obtaining a just end, this sure is more than the omission of an indifferent
custom, which may, or may not be continued without any offense against nature,
even the omission of strict universal duty, either natural decency, or somewhat
that bears proportion with it.

Jeanes.
Both Ames and my poor self confess, that God has by the Canon of the Apostle,
and by the light of Nature, appointed and commanded, that decency in his
worship and service, the neglect whereof would be undecent; but that he holds
that there is need of a special divine institution to render a thing decent, is
disclaimed by Ames in several places of his writings: Medul. Theol. lib. 2. c.
14. sect. 24, 25, 26. Hujusmodi igitur circumstantiae, quae sua natura sunt
civiles, aut communes* non sunt particulariter in scripturis praeceptae,
partim, quia in communem hominum sensum incurrunt; and partim, quia infra
dignitatem and majestatem legis divinae ess^t, ut talia figilla^im in illa
praescribantur, hac etenim ratione ridieula multa fuissent singulari lege
cavenda: Exempli gratia, ne in ecclesiastico coetu unus in alterius sinu sese
colocaret, in alterius faciem censpueret, aut ne popijmos faccret in sacris
actionibus. Habendae tamen sunt tanquam ex voluntate Dei praeceptae. 1. Quia in
genere praecipiuntur, sub lege ordinis, decori, and aedificationis. 2 Quia
pleraeque earum necessario sequuntur ex iis quae a Deo sunt express
constituta. Cum enim Deus constituit, ut fideles omnis generis convenirent, ad
ipsius nomen and cultum celebrandum, consequenter etiam instituit, ut idoneum
and commodum aliquem locum habeant, in quo possint convenire. and horam etiam
assignatam, qua simul p^ssint adesse; c^m etiam minister a Deo sit constitutus
ad alios public instituendos, simul etiam constituitur, ut sedem and situm
corporis illum habeat, qui tali actioni congruit.

25. Illa igitur quae pertinent ad ordinem and decorum, non ita relinquuntur
hominum arbitrio; ut possint, quod ipsis libet, sub illo nomine Eccles^is
obtrudere; sed partim determinantur generali^us De^ praeceptis, partim natura
ipsarum rerum, and partim circumstantiis illis, quae ex occasion sese offerunt.

26. Variae enim ord^is and decori circumstantiae tales sunt, ut nulla
institutione publica accedente, debeant tamen a singulis observari, neque
possunt ab hominibus prohiberi sine peccato.

24. Such like circumstances therefore, which of their own nature are civil or
common, are not particularly commanded in the Scriptures, partly because they
come into men's common sense, and partly because it would not stand with the
dignity and majesty of the Law of God, that such things should be severally
prescribed in it. For by this means many ridiculous things should have been
provided for by a special Law; as for example, that in the Church assembly one
should not place himself in another bosom, spit in another face, or should
not make mouths in holy actions: Yet they are to be accounted as commanded
from God: 1. Because they are commanded in general under the Law of Order,
Decency, and Edification. 2. Because most of them do necessarily follow from
those things which are expressly appointed by God. For when God appointed that
the faithful of all sorts should meet together to celebrate his name, and
worship, he did consequently ordain that they should have a fit and convenient
place, wherein they may meet together, and an hour also assigned at which they
may be present together; when also there is a Minister appointed by God to
teach others publicly, it is withal appointed that he have a seat which is
meet for such an action.

25. Those things therefore which pertain to order and decency, are not so left
to men's wills, that they may under the name of that, obtrude what they please
upon the Churches: but they are partly determined by the general precepts of
God, partly by the nature of the things themselves, and partly by those
circumstances which do offer themselves upon occasion.

26. For diverse circumstances of order and decency are such, as though there be
no public institution of them, yet they ought to be observed of every one,
neither can men forbid them without sin. Unto this add another place in his
f^esh suit against Ceremonies, disput. page 29. We never said, or thought, that
all particular rites pertaining to order and decency are punctually determined
in the Scripture. We never dreamed, that all such rites being beside the
particular determination of the Scripture, are against it, we speak of double,
or treble rites as the Rejoinder styles them, which no mere order and decency
does necessarily require, but only the mere will of man injoyne. That which is
instituted by God in his worship, Ames knew very well to be a part of Gods
worship; but that decency is no part of Gods worship, Ames in his disput. page
176. proves by a Reason quoted out of Dr. Abbot, Def of Mr. Perk. page 844 Order
and comeliness (says the Popish Bishop) is some part of Gods worship. But
(says Dr. Abbot) who taught him this deep point of Philosophy, that an
accident is a part of the subject, that the beauty or comeliness of the body
is a part of the body, order and comeliness properly and immediately respect
men, and therefore can be no parts of the worship of God. To be instituted by
God, if we speak strictly and properly, is to be enjoined by a divine positive
Law superadded unto the law of nature; and in conformity hereunto it is that
our Author Ames divides Gods worship, Med. lib. 2. cap. 5. into natural and
instituted: Now if this be your meaning, when you impute unto Ames and me, that
our opinion is, that nothing is decent in sacris, which is not instituted by
God, as the charge is false in it self, so it proves not that which you bring
it for, viz. that in our sense decency in the Apostle, is only that decency
which the law of nature prescribes; but confirms the clean contrary, because
that which is instituted by a positive law superadded to the law of nature, is
not prescribed proxime and immediate by the law of nature.

You are by this time, I hope, conscious of the great injury you have done unto
poor Dr. Ames, in affixing unto him so irrational an opinion, and hereupon I
shall be bold to give you this advertisement, that however you may despise him
as a mean Author, unworthy of your perusal, yet, if you undertake to censure
and refute him, you must read him, or else you will be very liable unto the
breach of the ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear false witness against
thy neighbbour.

But you will perhaps say in defense of your self, that if it were not the
opinion of Ames, it is the sequel of his words; and for this you have two
reasons.

The 1. because the mode or manner agreeable unto the dignity of sacred things
is instituted by God, as the sacred things are instituted by God: But this
proposition, if it be particular, proves nothing, and if it be universal, is
false, as you might have seen in the next reason of Ames, but that you cannot
see wood for trees, as the Proverb is; There is a mode or manner in the use of
sacred things agreeable unto their dignity, that is not adequate, proper, and
peculiar to them, but common unto civil matters of a grave nature together
with them; and this is a matter inculcated by Dr. Ames in many places, which if
you had weighed, you would never have troubled the Reader with this objection,
Medul. Theol. lib. cap. 14. th: 23. Quamvis igitur hujusmodi circumstantiae
vocari soleant a nonnullis ritus and ceremoniae* religiosae, aut
ecclesiasticae, nihil tamen habent in sua natura, quod proprium est religionis,
atque adeo in iis non proprie consistit cultus religiosus, quamvis ex eorum
neglectu, and contemptu violatur aliquo modo sancti^as cultus religiosi; quia
communis illa ratio ordinis and decori quae aeque convenit religiosis actibus,
atque civilibus, a religioso cultu non potest separari, quin aliquo modo
laedatur ipsius dignitas and majestas. Although these circumstances of time,
place, and other like, are wont by some to be called rites, or religious
Ecclesiastical ceremonies, yet in their nature they have nothing that is proper
to Religion, and therefore religious worship does not properly consist in them,
however by neglect and contempt of such circumstances, the sanctity of such
religious worship is in some sort violated, because the common respect of order
and decency, which do equally agree to religious and civil actions cannot be
severed from religious worship, without diminishing of the sanctity and dignity
of it.

Thus also largely in his Manuduction to the dispute about humane Ceremonies,
page 55, 56. If men and women come purposely in their best apparel to Church,
if they compose themselves to a grave posture, give the upper place to the
chiefest persons, and take such to themselves as they may hear the Preacher in,
and yet have no exception taken against them for it, if all the places and
seats be made cleanly, and fit for a meeting, to be held in a comely fashion,
all these are Ceremonies according to the Rejoinder his definition, yet no man
but out of contention will affirm, they are merely religious or
ecclesiastical: For all these in the same manner, and to the same immediate
end, the same persons would do, if the meeting were to hear the Magistrate
propound unto them a grave civil business, concerning the Commonwealth
affairs. And surely that which remaining the same may be civil, is not merely
and properly ecclesiastical, but common to both uses, and rather merely civil,
than merely ecclesiastical; because civility is supposed and included in
ecclesiastical affairs, but ecclesiastical proceedings are not supposed and
included in civil. Dr. Jackson in his original of unbelief, page 337. does well
observe, that decent behavior does change the subject only, not alter its own
nature and form, whilst it is used in matters sacred: nor is the habit of civil
complement, or good manners, such an unhallowed weed, as must be laid aside
when we come into the Sanctuary. And indeed there is no more reason to shut
civility out of the Church or sacred business, than to shut Religion out of
the Townhouse, or civil affairs.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 15.
And so likewise on the second head that of civil offices, for that indecency
which is a vice or sin must be contrary to some law of God, etc.

Jeanes.
Indecency in things civil, however it may be a vice in Ethics against
civility and good manners, yet it is not always a sin in divinity contrary to
some law of God: but undecency in things sacred in the worship and service of
God, if it be voluntary and avoydable, is against the command of the Apostle,
which is a rule of the law of nature, says Hooker; and this I believe you will
not deny in cold blood: and indeed you have no reason to deny it; for it will
not hereupon follow that the Apostle injoyneth only that decency which is
immediately prescribed by the Law of Nature, and my reason is, because as the
Apostle, so the light of Nature injoyneth as that decency the neglect whereof
would be undecent by the light of nature; so also that, the omission whereof
would be uncomely by civi^^ custom, and therefore as undecency by the light of
nature is against the light and Law of Nature immediately, so also undecency by
civil custom is against the law of nature mediately. The long hair of women
is one note by which custom has distinguished them from men; and therefore
it is undecent for men to wear such long hair as women, and this supposed, men's
wearing of such long hair is a mediate transgression of the Law of nature;
whereupon the Apostle propounds this smart interrogation unto the Corinthians,
1 Cor. 11.14 Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a man have long
hair, it is a shame to him? We may say the same of the long garments of women:
does not even nature teach you that if a man wear such garments it is a shame
unto him, and very undecent, and yet the undecency thereof arises immediately
from civil custom, and not from any immediate Law of Nature.

Dr. Hammond.
For that indecency, which is a vice, or sin must be contrary to some Law of
Gods, and so also that which is opposed to the due manner which is required,
and so is necessary either necessitate medii, or praecepti also, to obtain in a
just end, this sure is more then the omission of an indifferent custom, which
may, or may not be continued without any offense against nature, even the
omission of strict universal duty, either natural decency, or somewhat that
bears proportion with it.

Jeanes.
That decency in Gods worship and service, the neglect of which would be
undecent, is necessary both necessitate med^i and praecepti.

1. Medii is required as a means unto the acceptable celebration of Gods
worship, but then it is not a means proper and peculiar thereunto, for it has
the same immediate end both in civil and religious matters, and therefore is
common unto both.

2. That it is necessary necessitate praecepti you cannot question, unless you
will deny the title and obligation unto the Apostles injunction, for that it
binds as an edict of nature we have the testimony of your own Hooker: if this
twofold necessity of decency be chargeable with any absurdities, you are as
deeply concerned to answer them as my self: indeed that decency, from the
omission whereof we cannot infer indecency is necessary, neither necessitate
praecepti, nor medii.

But with such a decency we have nothing to do; for it comes not within the
compass of the Apostolical command, and such is the decency of your ceremonies
altogether unnecessary; neither commanded by any Law of God, nor necessary as a
means for the better service of God. But perhaps you may attempt to prove, that
God is better served with your Ceremonies, than without them; when I shall have
such proof from you, I shall return it an answer.

In the mean while let us consider the absurdity with which you charge the
assertion of the, but now mentioned, double necessity of decency in Gods
worship: If that be necessary, necessitate praecepti, or medii, then undecency,
say you, which is opposed thereunto, is more than the omission of an
indifferent custom, which may, or may not be continued without any offense
against nature.

For answer, the undecency here prohibeted by the Apostle, is either by the
light of nature, or by civil custom.

The former is more than the omission of an indifferent custom, and is an
immediate transgression against nature.

As for the latter, we must distinguish of a twofold consideration of such
customs, they may be considered either actu signato in the general, as
abstracted from all singularizing circumstances, or actu exercito hic and nunc,
as clothed with such and such circumstances, and so they are not indifferent
but necessary necessitate both praecepti and medii. I might exemplify this by
instancing in the long hair, proper apparel, viz. long garments of women, and
the like. There is a passage in Ames, already quoted, that will be here very
apposite; Bishop Morton had demanded of him whether the women's vailes, 1 Cor.
11. were not a thing indifferent, and his answer is, it is indifferent in the
general nature of it, yet at that time, and in that place, they sinned that
did otherwise, even before Paul, or any of their Overseers gave them charge
about it.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 16.
Now this being thus far explained, it is time to close with Mr: J. and mind
him, what he cannot but know, that the decency which I said, employed custom,
is certainly another thing from natural decency, and has place only in those
things, the omitting of which does not necessarily infer indecency. That
omission which necessarily infers indecency, infers it in all that ever did it,
or shall omit it: We know in Logic that no proposition is necessary, which is
not (...), true in the whole species of all, and every one, and I leave it to
his judgment, whether he think the Dr. and his party (i.e. Prelatists, I
suppose) do conceive, that Adam, (whether in, or out of Paradise) Noah in, or
out of the Ark, etc. were obliged to pray in Surplices under pain of indecency?
And so (in his other instance) that John Baptist, that Christ, or (because the
Text says that he baptized not, but his Disciples) that those Disciples, even
before the death of Christ, might not baptize any without the sign of the
Cross, but under the same penalty?

Jeanes.
Natural decency is a branch, nay the principal branch of that decency
commanded by the Apostle, and therefore I could not think it excluded by you;
but withal, I must conclude your interpretation of the Apostle, to be very
imperfect and defective, when you said the clear importance of the Apostles
words was, Let all things be done according to custom; I was so foolish to
suppose that you meant this clear importance of the Apostles words, was also
the full importance of them, neither can you assign any reason, why I should
think otherwise.

But that, I see, which so much stumbleth you, is the word necessarily,
concerning which I hope you are satisfied by what I have already said, and
therefore I shall only add this one thing, that necessarily has two
acceptions.

1. In regard of an absolute necessity.

2. In respect of an Hypothetical necessity arising from some extrinsecal
circumstance or condition. Now, I do not restrain it unto either of these
senses, but take it abstractively in such a latitude, as that it is appliable
unto either of the significations according unto the nature of the things
spoken of: the omission of natural decency infers undecency necessarily, in
regard of an absolute necessity; the omission of civil undecency, infers
undecency necessarily only ex Hypothesi: and that inference of indecency which
is only necessary ex Hypothesi, is more than an inference thereof, which is
fallacious, or at the most but probable; and if we speak of this necessity, it
is very false which you say, that that omission which thus necessarily inferres
undecency, inferres it in all that ever did, or shall omit it.

But you say that, we know in Logic, that no proposition is necessary, which
is not de omni true in the whole species of all and every one.

Unto which I answer, that he who has any tolerable knowledge in Logic,
knows that what you say is to be limited only unto that necessity which is
scientifical and demonstrative; for to say nothing of such propositions as are
necessary only hypothetically, there are diverse propositions absolutely in
themselves necessary, setting aside all outward circumstances and conditions,
which are not yet de omni.

1. I shall instance in diverse particular propositions, as, Quaedam substantia
est spiritus: quo^dam corpus est mixtum.

2. In several negative propositions, as, nullus spiritus es^ corpus: nullus
lapis est rationalis. Now these are necessary propositions, because of an
immutable truth, and they are not de omni: For,

1. A particular proposition is not de omni, but de aliquo: And then 2. a
negative proposition is not de omni; for de omni is opposed unto that which is
(...) de nullo.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 17.
Nay, it is already past question, that Mr. J. in his first argument against my
dictate (as he calls it) says, that the light and law of nature is also a rule
of decency, and so not only custom: And if so, then custom is a rule of
decency also, and not only the law and light of nature, and where custom, and
not the light of nature is the rule, there the omission of that does not
necessarily infer indecency. And of such decency alone it is evident that I
spoke, on the head of Uniformity (and could not speak sense, if I spoke, either
of any other, or of the general notion of decency, which is competible to any
other) and from thence it follows demonstratively that of that decency of which
I spoke (though not of that, of which it is certain I spoke not) still custom
is the only rule of decency.

This therefore I hope may serve in answer to his first charge, that of my
timidity, that I dared not say what I said not; together with a view of his
concession of the truth of what I did say, and the wary limitation of that
concession.

Jeanes.
1. I called your assertion, viz. Custom is the only rule of decency, a
dictate, and shall call it so still, until you can prove it, and when you
bring any solid proof of it, abstracted from your subterfuges, for limitations
I cannot call them, I shall be contented to be your vassal.

2 You seem to intimate, that in the things you speak of, custom, and not the
light of nature is the rule, but this is very false; for custom is mensura
passiva, as well as activa: When it is a rule of decency, it is first measured
and regulated by the light of nature, and without such regulation it is no rule
of decency in any matter whatsoever; for custom has not the force of a law
nisi sit rationabilis, that is agreeable unto the dictate of right reason and
the law of Nature; the law of Nature then is still the principal rule of
decency, speak of what decency you will or can, and custom is but a rule
subordinate thereunto, and to be examined thereby.

3. If you speak of such decency alone, the omission whereof does not
necessarily infer undecency, in respect either of an absolute, or
hypo^hetical necessity, you do not speak of that decency which the Apostle
commands; for that the Apostle should command such a decency, in the omission
of which, men only boldly affirm, or merely opine there is undecency, and
cannot make good such an affirmation or opinion, by any other than sophistical,
or at the best, but probable arguments, me thinks should not sink into the head
of any rational man.

Yea, but you say, that you could not speak sense, if you spoke either of any
other, or of the general notion of decency which is competible to any other.

Suppose I grant this, what then? this argument is of little prevalency with
me, who am in this particular your Antagonist; for though I acknowledge and
admire your great parts and learning, yet I think it not only possible, but
probable for you, or any other, though never so great a scholar, to speak
nonsense in opposition of the truth.

2. It is evident and certain that the Apostle spoke of the general notion of
decency, which is competible unto natural decency, and from thence it follows
demonstratively, that if it be so certain, that you speak not of this decency,
it is as certain that your gloss of the Apostles (...) is la^e and maimed;
for it leaves out what is chiefly meant by it, but of this before.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 18.
Secondly, then to his second charge, the unsufficiency of that limited truth
(which is the utmost he will yield my proposition) to prove what I would have
from it] It will soon appear of how little force it is, when 1. my meaning was
quite another thing from what he affixt to my words, or yielded me in his
limited concession, as has already been largely manifested, and 2. my
conclusion is regularly consequent to that which was alone my meaning. This
latter the addition of a few words will clear also.

Jeanes.
For answer unto this I shall refer unto what has been said already.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 19.
My conclusion designed in that Section was the justifying of Uniformity of
Ceremonies in the service of God, and one of the grounds to support that, the
decency of those ceremonies, wherein all should join, and that decency ruled,
and judged of by the custom of the place in which such and such a ceremony was
an usual indication, and expression of that reverence, which being due from all
inferiors to their superiors, is much more due from all Christians to God.

Jeanes.
1. Humane ceremonies have two acceptions. 1. They are taken largely for all
circumstances of order, decency; as also for all mere indicant signs of
reverence, and these for distinction sake may be called circumstantial
ceremonies: but these are not the ceremonies in question; for the
Non-conformists acknowledge these law full, and so also Uniformity in them; but
yet of these ceremonies, custom is neither the only or principal rule, as
shall be manifested when I come unto the examination of your Answer unto my
Objections against this your dictate.

In a second place, humane ceremonies are taken strictly, only for such as are
doctrinal* symbolical, and sacramental, and unto such neither decency nor
reverence obliges us.

Not, first, the Apostles decency; because in the omission of them there is no
undecency.

Not, secondly, that reverence which is due unto God in his worship, because in
the omission of them there is no irreverence committed; you may think my notion
of reverence to be too narrow; but it is the utmost I can grant you; and indeed
it is all that Scripture and Reason call for: reverence and irreverence are
privatively opposed, and between privative opposites, in a capable subject,
there is no medium, either of abnegation or participation, and therefore when
there is no irreverence in the external worship of God, that worship is
reverently administered: now that Baptism is unreverently administered when the
Cross is omitted, or that public Prayers and Preaching are unreverent, when
the Surplice is left off, may perhaps be very affectionately averred by you and
others, but I do not hope to live so long as to receive from you, or any man
living, for it, so much as the shadow of an argument.

In the first place then you see that reverence binds not to humane,
religious, mystical ceremonies.

Nay, in a second place, it binds to lay them quite aside, because Gods
Ordinances are treated very irreverently, when men's inventions are joined with
them, when men set their thresholds by Gods thresholds, and their posts by his
posts, Ezekiel. 43.8. that is, when humane inventions are added unto Gods precepts.

Yea, but you may perhaps say our Ceremonies are joined with Gods Ordinances
only as adjuncts, or annexaries, not as parts of Gods worship.

But unto this I reply in the words of Ames unto Morton, all external
ceremonies, whose proper use is the honoring of God, are external worship, as
all divinity shows. Reply unto genesis Def. page 19.

Thirdly, the pretense of reverence in Gods worship, has oftentimes been an
inlet unto many superstitious practices; this Ames shows in his Reply unto
Mortons particular Defense, etc page 69. Out of such conceits as this, says
he, all superstition has crept into the Sacrament. For expression of
reverence, some would not touch the bread with their hands, or the cup either,
but have both bread and wine put into their mouths. Some more agreeably to
Courtly fashion (urged by the Defendant) where meat is taken with silver forks,
instead of hands, devised a silver pipe to suck up the wine through. Some would
not have bearded Laymen taft of the wine at all: And many for m^ere reverence
(as they say) will neither touch wine nor bread, abstaining altogether from the
Sacrament. All these usages might have been, and may be customary, and yet
custom cannot legitimate them and make them decent. I shall conclude all that
I have to say unto these two last Sections with a remarkable passage in Parker
his Treatise of the ^rosse, part. 1. page 112. The second office of the Cross
is to procure reverence to aptisme, ne putetur esse communis ablutio: Which is
the office of the Salt, the Taper, and the rest of Popish signs, which how cut
we off, but with this Ax that beheadeth the Cross as well. Non existimandum,
etc. We must not think but that the Baptism of Christ, and of the Apostles was
performed with reverence enough, when these signs were wanting; neither must we
take upon us to be wiser than they. To procure right reverence to the
Sacrament, is to lay open the institution by the Preaching of the Word, and
then to deliver it in that simplicity in which we have received it. To add
signs over and above is not to honor it, but to defile it. Indeed the A^k had
been more honorably entreated, if it had been sent home again as it came into
the land and hand of the Philistines. They thought they could not honor it
sufficiently, unless they set a budget by it of certain new devised signs to
wait upon it, which did defile it. David emptyed this budget, and did well:
Howbeit, their Cart he thinks cannot well be spared, for which the Lord made
a breach in Israel, until he drove him to confess that he was not sought in
due order, as long as one Ceremony of the Philistines did remain. The Lord show
mercy to our Church, otherwise he will show, that our emptying of the Popish
budget, in banishing the salt, the oil, the spittle, with the rest, will not be
judged sufficient, unless we cease also with a Cross of theirs to cart
Baptism, which should be born up to reverence no other way than by the
shoulders of the Levites, I mean the labors of those Preachers which now
(alas) lie in the dust, because they will not defile their hands by touching of
this Philistim cart for to uphold it.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 20, 21.
In these it is certain, custom is the rule and the only rule of decency:
Neither nature nor Gods Law obliges all mankind to this, or that expression
freverence. Several nations have their several manners of doing it; only
nature tells us, that the most reverent manner of treating is best becoming
God, and that it cannot be decent, to treat God in that manner as we would not
do any Superior beside, and Gods own expostulation about the offering of
polluted bread upon his Altar, and of sacrificing the lame and the sick, Mal.
1.8. is a confirmation of that; Offer it now, says God, unto thy Go^ernour,
will he be pleased with thee?

21. Apply this to a particular case, to a Nation, where it is customary to
address to Kings kneeling, and there the Analogy will hold exactly (but not
where that is not custom) Among such I may say, Did ever any man that had his
limbs and health offer a Petition to his Prince in the gesture of sitting, or
lying along upon a table? and if he did not, then I must, I suppose, regula^ly
conclude from custom, the only rule of decency in such matters, that according
to Gods arguing it cannot be decently done in his service, which is the
tendering our petitions or requests to that infinite Majesty. And so
proportionably in other things.

Jeanes.
Your exemplification of the indications and expressions of that reverence of
which custom is the only rule, by instancing in kneeling in prayer, when we
tender our petitions or requests to the infinite majesty of God, is very
impertinent; for it is very evident, that custom is not the only rule of it,
because it is sufficiently warranted both by Scripture and the light of Nature.

Unto all this I shall add a distinction of reverence; it may be taken
sometimes largely, and so it comprehends adoration: sometimes strictly, and so
it is distinguished there from; for reverence, is due unto the Ordinances of
God, adoration, and worship only unto God: custom may be a partial and
subordinate rule of the signs of reverence, taken strictly, whereupon by
custom, uncovering of the head is a general or common gesture of reverence, to
be used with discretion in all religious exercises; but now as for the
indications and expressions of adoration, I do think the Scripture a sufficient
rule of them, where, I do not exclude the law and light of nature, for
materially considered, it is a part of Scripture.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 22.
This I did not apply to the Cross in Baptism, and the Ministers using of the
Surplice, as being not pertinent to that place. Another head was set apart for
those, and proceeded to sect. 28. the Cross expressly named, and the Surplice
employed under the title of other Ceremonies, of which it may there be seen,
what my conclusion was, not what is here deemed incumbent on me to prove, that
the omission of them infers indecen^y, but that standing on th^se grounds,
whereon they are known to stand, Conscience duly instructed, cannot think it
necessary* or tending to edification to cast them ca^s^esly out of this Church,
or the whole Liturgy for their sakes.

Jeanes.
What you said, was applyable unto the Cross in Baptism, and the Ministers
using of the Surplice* for your conclusion was, the more then lawfulness of
prescription of ceremonies in a Church, and of Uniformity therein; and here
sect. 19 you acknowledge that your conclusion, designed in that Section, was
the justifying of Uniformity of Ceremonies in the service of God: now I had
reason to think that you speak of humane, religious, mystical ceremonies,
because such only were opposed by the Non-conformists, and such the Cross and
Surplice were, eminently, though no^ exclusively.

2. If your design be to justify doctrinal ceremonies from the Apostles
command of decency, then it is incumbent on you to prove that the omission of
such ceremonies does infer undecency; for if it does not infer undecency, then
therein there is no transgression of the Apostles precept, and if the Apostles
precept be not transgressed by the omission of them, the Assembly had no cause,
upon that account, to repent of their casting such ceremonies out of the Church
of God.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 23, 24.
And yet if Mr. J. shall now desire to know what the grounds of these two
Ecclesiastical rites are, which alone he is pleased to name, on persuasion, I
suppose, that they were as fit, if not fitter than any others for the
disproving my position, of (custom being the only rule of decency) I shall
now render him a brief account of them, such as may in some degree confirm the
truth of it.

24. And first for the Cross in Baptism. 1. It Is known to all, that our
Christian course is a spiritual Warfare under Christ our great General: Now
it is, and always has been customary over the world, that in a militia there
should be some Banner, or Ensign, to which every one should resort, and fight
under it. This has custom made decent among all; and supposing that custom,
the omission of it in an Army is indecent, yet not so, as things dishonest, or
breaches of the Law of Nature are indecent.

Jeanes.
1. As our Christian course is a spiritual warfare, so unto this the Ordinances
of Christ Jesus are a more suitable Banner or Ensign, than any hu^ane invention
whatsoever: But you think that the Banner requisite in our spiritual warfare
must be of humane invention, not divine institution; for otherwise you speak
nothing to the purpose; and if the omission of such a Banner or Ensign be
undecent, you may arraign Christ and his Apostles as guilty of undency.

2. The sign of the Cross has been a long time used by Antichrist, as an
Ensign or Banner, and is it undecent to lay aside the Ensign or Banner of an
enemy?

3. How little weight there is in the customary use of a Banner for the decency
of the sign of the Cross in Baptism, will be apparent by these following
considerations.

1. It is a custom in Armies for different companies or troops to have
Banners or Ensigns; but it was never the custom of any Armies for every
several soldier to carry a Banner or Ensign: from the custom of a Banner or
Ensign then, how you can conclude for the signing of every singular Christian
with the sign of the Cross passes my in agination.

2. The customary use of a Banner is in the whole war, and not only at the
first enrolement of Soldiers, and therefore if it prove any thing for the Sign
of the Cross, it will conclude for the frequent and constant use of it all the
time of our warfare; and this I hope you will not plead for.

3. A permanent Cross has more proportion unto the Banners and Ensigns of
Armies than the transient and aerial Cross; and yet there be some of your
party, who allow of the transient Cross in Baptism, that dislike permanent
Crosses in Gods worship; because they think there is more danger of
superstition in them: Now these men, in all probability, lay no great stresse
upon this your resemblance of the sign of the Cross to a Banner or Ensign, and
my reason for this my conjecture (for I u^ge it only as a conjecture) is,
because they reject all permanent Crosses in Gods service, which do more
resemble a Banner or Ensign than a transient Cross.

4. I have done my best to sound the depth and strength of your argument, and
if I be not deceived, thus it stands: The omission of a Banner or Ensign, in
our spiritual warfare, that was used by the Primitive Christians, is undecent;
but the sign of the Cross in Baptism was thus used by the Primitive
Chrisstians, therefore omission of it is undecent.

By Primitive Christians, I suppose you do not mean the Apostles, or such
Apostolical persons as were guided by an infallible spirit, and then I deny
your Major, and for this my denial I shall give you two reasons.

1. In Christ our great General, the Captain of our salvation, were hidden all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and therefore he knew better what was
decent in his worship, than all Primitive Christians, han all the Fathers and
Councils that ever were in the world; and therefore seeing there is such a deep
silence of the Cross in his word, I shall never think it so highly decent as
you pretend, so decent, that the omission of it is undecent.

2. It is, and always has been customary over the world, at least in civil
and wel-governed Nations, that in a Militia all should be done by Commission
derived from the General. Manlius put his own Son to death for fighting with an
enemy, though he had the Conquest, because it was without order, and L.
Papyrius Cursor had, for the same reason, executed Q. Fabius Rutilianus, though
he had gained a great Victory over the Samnites, but that the general
intercession of the people of Rome pacified him. But now our Prelatists can
produce no Commission from our great General, to use any Banner or Ensign in
his worship, but such as he has already instituted, his Word, Sacraments,
Discipline, and therefore I shall condemn the usage of any such Banner or
Ensign, as a transgression against his Military discipline. After the writing
of this, I found this your objection both propounded and ansvvered by
S^ha^pius. Scharp. curs. theol. tom. 2. page 39, 40

Ob. Milites debent habere signum militare, quo ab aliis distinguantur: At
Christiani omnes sunt milites, Ephesians 6 11. ergo and sig^^m h^bere debent, and per
consequens signum crucis.

Resp. Negando illud conseq quia habent alia signa, nempe internum signum
fidei, ^xternam confessionem, and participationem verbi and S^cramentorum, etc.
What he speaks of external confession and participation of the Word and
Sacraments, will satisfy what you say.

I cannot here pass by a passage in Whitaker against Duraeus, page 191, 192. in
the Edition of his Works in Fol. Duraeus having cited many Fathers for the
Ceremonies added unto Baptism, Whitaker thus replyeth unto him: M^a vero non
interest quid Clemens, quid Leo, quid Damasus, quid quisquam alius Pontifex ad
Baptismi Sacramentum adjecerit. Christus ecclesiae nihil de istis ceremoniarum
nugis mandavit, nec in illis ^rebris, quos in scriptura legimus, baptismis,
ulla harum rerum mentio reperitur. Nam vero putemus recentiorem ecclesiam
melius perspectum habuisse, quibus in Baptismo ceremoniis uti oporteret, quam
Christum ejusque Apostolos?

Before I proceed further, I shall take notice of the limitation that you have
in the close of sect: 24. of your affection of undecency in the omission of a
Banner in an Army: It is not so undecent, say you, as things dishonest, or
breaches of the Law of Nature; Now if you apply this unto the omission of a
Banner in our spiritual Militia, I thus object against it: The public worship
of God is a chief part of our spiritual warfa^e, and the command of decency in
that is, says your Hooker, an edict or Law of Nature, and whatsoever is
therein undecent transgresses against this Law: If the omission then therein
of a Banner or Ensign of humane invention (for of such only you speak) be
undecent, it is so undecent as things dishonest, or breaches of the Law of
Nature are undecent.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 25, 26, 27, 28.
And the Cross on which Christ was crucified, the Emblem also of that state
that every Christian enters into, a constant, courageous patience for all
afflictions, was by the Primitive Christians thus used, as their Symbol or
Ensign, and every man that is enrolled in the Christian Militia, is by him
that inro^les him, signed with it; and this practice being thus founded, and
revived in the Church, Saint Augustines words are worth remembering, and cannot
be denied to have truth in them: Signum crucis nisi adhibeatur, five frontibus
eredentium, sive ipsi aquae qua regenera mur etc. nihil rite perficitur:
Unless the sign of the Cross be used either to the foreheads of the believers
(who are baptized) or to the water it self by which we are regenerate, it is
not duly performed. i. e. with such ceremonies as by custom of the Church, the
rule of decency, belong to it; and, crucis signo in front hodie tanquam in
post signandus es, omnesque Christiani signantur ( de Catechiz. rud. cap. 20.
tom. 4. p. 915.) thou must be signed now in the forehead with the sign of the
Cross, as the Israelites on their door-posts, and so must all Christians. In
the forehead particularly Tom. 10. p. 289. B.
in front figat, ubi seeds pudoris, because the seat of shame is there, which
we render, in token that the baptized shall not be ashamed.

26. The usage of this ceremony of signing with the Cross, was, we also know,
frequent in the Church (while the gifts of healing continued) in See Aug. de
Civit Dei. l. 2. c. 8.
curing diseales, and casting out Devils, to that Athanasius frequently offirms
of it, De Incarnat. Tom. 1. page 84. So page 101. D. (...). And page 102.6.
(...). And contr. Arian. Or. 1. page 285. A. (...). And Praesente signo crucis
obmutescit Paganitas. Aug. T. 4.229. B. And 832. B. Daemonia nominata cruce
Christi terrentur, si impensius fiat, fugantur. Dii Paganorum metu crucis
responsa dare non possunt.
(...); by the sign of the Cross all Magic, and Witcheraft is brought to
naught, all the Idol Temples laid waste and empty.

27. And then Baptism being the exorcising of Devils (the ancient Catechists
we know were called Exorcists) the rescuing of a person from the power of
Satan into Gods Sonship and Family, what can be more proper, or agreeable, or
exactly symbolical, than the use of this in Baptism, according to that of
Tertul. de Resurr. Carn. Caro fignatur, ut anima muniatur, the flesh or body is
signed, that the soul may be defended or fortified?

28. And if instead of the Ad omnem progressum frontem crucis signaculo.
Tertul. de Cor. Mil. c. 3.
frequent use of it among the ancients, even Vide Narrat. Hippolyti Apostolorum
(...), apud Pallad. Hist. L^us. page 1049. (...).
before the cumbersome weight of Ceremonies came in, ((...), says the Author
of the Quest. and Resp. ascribed to Justin Ma^tyr, Qu. (...). page 364. in time
of prayer we sign those that are any way ill affected) we in our Church retain
it only in our solemn entrance into Christs^ camp, in token that we mean
valiantly to fight under his banner, and in confidence that he that thus signed
to Constantine victory from Heaven ((...), in this overcome) will thus give
grace, and seal to us victory over our ghostly enemies: what question can there
ever be of the perfect decency of this us^ge among us?

Jeanes.
Here you heap up many Testimonies of the Fathers for the Sign of the Cross,
unto which it is no difficult matter to add more, but you might very well have
spared all this labor; for first, it is not unknown unto you, how your
Adversaries hold, that the Hyperbolical sayings of the Fathers, touching the
Cross, are no wales justifiable; hear what Bishop Morton quotes out of the
Abridgement, and Mr. Hy, page 237, 238. Sundry of the Fathers put holiness in
the Sign of the Cross, and wrote of it very superstitiously. Some telling us
that it was a terror against D^vils, attributed a power thereunto of working
Miracles; What shall we say? but that the Cross has been as superstitiously
abused by the Fathers, as by the ranckest Papists, saving that the Papists have
rancked it with divine worship, and so bestowed more honor upon ^t than ever
the Fathers did afford it. Bishop Morton has attempted to give an Answer
hereunto, but Dr Ames has so replied unto him, as that he has sat down, and
neither he, or his Second, have in this rejoyned any thing unto Amesius.

Unto this of the Abridgement, and Mr. Hy, let me add what Mr. Farker has
observed in the Fathers speeches concerning the Cross, Treat, of the Cross,
part. 1. page 90. Chew a little upon these speech^s, it may be they will tell
thy taste how unsavory the Fathers are, in the matter of the Cross: August.
de tempor. 181.
With the sign of the Cross it is that the Body of our Lord is consecrated,
and the Font of Baptism sanctified. With Idem Cont. Pelagium. lib. 6 c. 8.
the Sign of the Cross is the wave of Bapt^sme consecrated. Chrysostom. in Mat.
16. homil. 55.
By the Sign of the Cross is the Lords Body consecrated. The Font of Baptism
sanctified, and all things whatsoever are made holy, they are made holy with
the sign of the Lords Cross. Cypr. lib. de bapt.
we glory in the Cross of the Lord, whose virtue works throughout all
Sacraments: without which sign nothing else is holy, nor any other consecration
that comes to effect. Aug. de Sanct. Sermon. 19.
With the sign of the Cross is the Font of Regeneration made holy; and to
speak fully, all Sacraments are perfected by his virtue. Aug. in Johan tractat.
18.
Unless the sign of the Cross be applied to the foreheads of the Believers,
or to the water whereby they are regenerated, or to the sacrifice whereby they
are fed, none of these are rightly performed. Aug. de utilitat. poenitent.
The water of salvation is not the water of salvation, unless being
consecrated in Christ's name, it be signed with his Cross. Again. Ambros. de
iis qui initiatur. Mist. cap. 3,
The water is good for no use of future health, without the Preaching of the
Lords Cross. But when it is consecrated with the Mystery of the saving
Cross, then it is tempered to the use of a spiritual washing, and of a saving
Cup. As therefore Moses threw the wood into the waters of Marah, and made them
sweet, so the Priest sends the Preaching of the Lords Cross into this Font,
and the water thereof is made sweet unto grace.

By this you may see that your allegations out of the Fathers are in vain,
unless you had added a proof of their infallibility, or that they are to be a
rule of our faith in matters of this nature.

2. One Papist is found (says Parker, part. 1. page 77.) who says, the
Fathers meant not of the outward sign, but of the thing signified, which is
Christ's death: It is well, that we have this confession from him, that the
Fathers cannot be justified, in case they mean the outward sign, which they
mean undoubtedly, or else our opposites do us great wrong, who object the
Fathers against us in the Outward ceremony of the Cross, etc.

3. Those that are but tolerably versed in the Fathers, cannot but confess,
that they ascribe very strange things unto the sign of the Cross; as that it
is a necessary requisite of Baptism, that it was an Amulet against the Devil,
and an instrument of Miracles, a fence or fortification of the soul against all
spiritual adversaries; but these Hyperbolies, however you may excuse them, yet
they are so gross, as that they are utterly incapable of any just Apology to
be made for them; and this without more ado might suffice for answer unto
sect. 25, 26, 27, 28. But I shall farther give you some general exceptions
against those testimonies of the Fathers you allege, and next, say something
unto them taken severally and apart.

My general exceptions shall be six.

The first, the not using of the Cross by Christ and his Apostles, is a
greater prejudice against it, than all the countenance can be given unto it by
the Fathers of after ages; alas! what are Augustine, Athanasius, Tertullian,
etc. whom you quote, in comparison of our blessed Savior: unto them the Spirit
was given but in measure, unto him without measure, Joh. 3.34. And, it was a
spirit of wisdom and understanding, a spirit of counsel and knowledge, Isa.
11.12. and so was able to make ample and sufficient provision for any religious
Ceremonies in his Church that he thought requisite: Why should not we content
our selves with those few that he has ordained? especially seeing no mortal
men can produce a patent from him for the institution of any other: and why
should we think the omission of the Cross in Baptism undecent? seeing it was
omitted by Christ himself and his Apostles; for that it was omitted by them, is
confessed by a learned Conformist, Dr. Fulk, in answer unto the Rhemists, page*
252. Neither was the sign of the Cross, says he, in any estimation with the
Apostles, or the faithful in their time. Tertullian indeed, reckons signing
with the Cross to be an old Tradition, which yet is no more certain to have
been used by the Apostles, than other like Ceremonies which he there names, as
the tasting of Milk and Honey by them that were baptized, and the abstinence
from washing for a week after baptism, oblations for birth days, and such
other, ^long since abolished, which they should not have been, if they had been
ordained by the Apostles as necessary for Christian Religion. As a man runs
to the Fountain, says Cyprian, when the channels are defiled, so must we
repair to the practice of the first Church, which is the Fountain of all piety:
non est attendendum (says he) quid aliquis ante nos faciendum putaverit, sed
quid, qui ante omnes est, Christus fecerit, and faciendum praeceperit.
Agreeable hereunto is that which Mr. Parker part. 1. page 100. quotes out of
Sadeel against the Monks of Bordeaux. When the Monks of Bordeaux affirm the
signs which are added to Baptism, are an ornament to it, we thus reply: Are
they wiser than Christ Jesus, who has ordained his Sacrament in so great
purity and simplicity, and who knows better than all the men in the world,
what ornament was fittest for it? If it be but the covenant of a man, when it
is confirmed, no man abrogateth it, or adds any thing to it: What arrogance
is it then to add to the institution of Christ?

A second exception of the Non-conformists against the Testimonies of the
Fathers for the sign of the Cross, is, that they do not contribute so much
honor thereunto, as the suspected infamous birth and original of it does
discredit: In all probabilities, say they, that Devilish Heretic, Valentinus,
was the first Author and Father of it, the first that advanced it unto any
religious use; and this they prove out of Irenaeus. Parker part. 1. page 75
averreth, that it appears by the Text of Irenaeus, that Valentinus did use
the figure of the Cross, to express one of his Aeones by; and as Valentinus
was the Father of it, so Montanus, say they, was the Nurse of it. Dr. Fulk, as
I told you, was a Conformit^ant, and no enemy unto the sign of the Cross, so
he professes of himself in his confutation of the Rhemists page 87. As for the
sign of the Cross, so it be without superstition, we can abide well enough.
And yet this man page 252. tells us, that Valentinus the Heretic was the first
that made any great account of it; and cites for it too Irenaeus, as well as
the Non-conformists.

A third exception against the pretended antiquity of the Cross, and the
Testimonies of the Fathers in that behalf, is, that diverse Ceremonies Coeval
with the Cross are not urged, but abolished, and yet they were never
prostituted unto such superstitious and idolatrous abuses as the Cross has
been: And therefore why should the Cross be such a Favorite, as to be
retained? This exception you may see thus managed by Parker, part. 1. page 39.
If our Opposites must needs drink of this Cistern of antiquity, then let the
Beat. Rhenan. in Tertul: de Coron. milit. Magdebu^gens. centur. 3* cap. 6. tit.
rit. Baptis.
Oil it self of Baptism, be revived: Yea, Madgeburg. ex Tertulde Baptist.
Baptizing by Laymen; for these be as ancient as the Cross, and sprang about
the same time with it. Sure with far better reason may they rake out of their
graves, the ceremony Cypri lib. 3 Epis. 8.
of Kissing the Infant Baptized; the ceremony of the Tertul. de pudicit.
Ring given in Baptism, for an obsignation of Faith and Profession; the
ceremony of putting Tertul. lib. de coron. milit.
Milk and Honey into his mouth; And lastly ^he Ceremony of the Idem de Bapt. and
Beat. Rhenan. in lib. de coron. milit.
White Garment, wherewith the Baptized was wont to be clothed. These being
equal to the Cross, both for Antiquity, and for profitablenesse of
signification, and surmounting it in other respects, as that they were never so
much abused as the Cross has been, nor now import so much peril as the
Cross bring eth with it, may give wise men cause to wonder, why those should
be buried in a tomb sealed up, while the Cross not only lives, but also
domineereth.

A fourth exception againsthe ancient use of the Cross by the Fathers, is that
it is over-ballanced by the Papists abuse of it unto Idolar^y: The Brazen
Serpent was ordained by God, and yet when it was abused unto Idolatry, Hezekiah
did well to break it in pieces, 2 King. 18.4. And therefore the Cross being a
humane invention altogether unnecessary in Gods worship, is for the Idolattous
abuse of it rightly abolished. The force of this consequence may be gathered
from what two English Bishops say.

1. From what Bishop Abbot has from a translation of a passage out of the
Canon Law, Def^ of Mr. Perkins part. 1. page 168. If our Predecessors have done
some things, which at that time might be without fault, and afterward be
turned to error, and superstition, we are taught (says the Law) by Hezekiahs
breaking the Brazen Serpent, that the Posterity may abolish the same without
any delay, and with great authority. The very same words are urged in the like
manner by Dr. John Rainolds in his Conference with Heart, page 510. As also by
Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity, page 347.

2. From what Jewel says for the abolition of Images, because of their
Adoration, Repl to Hardings Answ: artic 14. page 383. The best remedy in this
behalf, and most agreeable with Gods Word, is utterly to abolish the cause of
the ill* So the godly King Hezechtas took down, and brake in pe^ces the Brazen
Serpent; notwithstanding Moses himself by Gods special commandment had erected
it; notwithstanding it were an express figure of Christ hanging upon the
Cross; notwithstanding it had continued so many years; notwithstanding God by
it had wrought so many Miracles. So the godly Bishop Epiphanius ^ent in sunder
the Image of Christ painted in a cloth; and said, It was against Gods
commandment, a thing superstitious and unmeet for the Church, and people of
God; notwithstanding it were the Image of Christ. So the godly Emperor
Theodosius made his Proclamation over all his Dominions in this sort; Signum
Servatoris nostri, quocunque l^co reperietur, toll jubemus: We straightly
command, that the Image of our Savior be taken down, in what place soever it
shall be found: notwithstanding it were the Image of our Savior. So it is
decreed in the late Council of Ments, that, when Images happen to be abused by
the people, they be either notably al^ered, or utterly abolished.

Unto these two I shall add the testimony of Augustine, De Civitate Dei lib.
10. c. 8. Aeneum sane Serpentem propter facti memoriam reservatum cum postea
populus errans tanquam Idolum colere coepisset, Ezechias Rex^eligiosa potestate
Deo serviens, cum magna p^e^atis laud contrivit. Suppose then, though not
grant, that the Ancients lawfully and laudably used the sign of the Cross, as
a commemorative sign of Christ's death, and a monitory sign of their duty, yet
seeing it has been made by the Papists such an abominable Idol, there is very
good reason for the utter casheering it out of Gods worship.

A fifth exception is, that our Cross is not the Fathers Cross, who never
annexed any word unto it, and therefore ours is the more Sacramental; for this
see Ames in his Reply to Mortons particular Def page ^7. As also Mr. Parker
part. 1. page 114.

My sixth exception I shall give you in the words of Mr. Parker, part. 1. page
133. What though the custom of the Fathers, who used the Cross for a sign of
Christ, were on all sides good, the times do differ. They lived in an age when
it was despised; we in a time when it is adored. They in a time when it
professed the Faith; we in a time when it is common to Papists. They in a time
when it was used over all the Church for the sign of Christianity; we in an
age, when out of our own Church it is no where used but for a sign of
Antichristianity. In regard whereof we may well appeal to the old Canons,
Regulae Patrum traditae sunt (says Gregory) prout res postulare videbatur,
temporis, loci, personarum, reique i^sius habita ratione. And Leo, s^cut
quaedom sunt, quae nulla possunt ratione convelli, ita multa sunt, quae pro
necessitate temporum, ac consideratione aetatum ^porteat temporari.

But I shall proceed to the examination of your testimonie^ apart.

Dr. Hammond.
Saint Augustines words are worth remembering, and cannot be denied to have
truth in them In Joh. Tr. 118.
Signum crucis nisi adhibeatur, sive f^ontibus credentium, sive ipsi aquae qua
regeneramur, etc. nihil rite pe^ficitur; unl^sse the figh of the Cross be used
either to the foreheads of the believers (who are baptized) or to the water it
self by which we are regenerate, it is not duly performed, i. e. with such
ceremonies as by custom of the Church, the rule of decency, belong to it.

Jeanes.
Saint Augustins words at large are as follows, Quod signum nisi adhibeatur,
sive frontibus credentium, sive ipsi aquae qua regeneramur, sive oleo quo
Chrismate unguntur, sive sacrific^o qu^ aluntur, nihil eorum rite perficitur.
Saint Augustine here you see approves of the Ch^ism, and of the crossing of the
Oil therein, and sets it check by joule with the water in Baptism and the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; now your friends do hope that you do not
concur with him herein; and if you do nor, why do you urge us with the
authority of his Testimony?

2. If you apply Saint Augustines words to our times, and aver, that they
cannot be denied to have truth in them, then your opinion is, that unless the
sign of the Cross be used to the water in Baptism, and to the Elements in the
Lords Supper, these Sacraments are not duly performed with such ceremonies, as
by custom of the Church, the rule of decency, belong unto them; and then what
Apology can you make for the Church of England, that never since the
Reformation used any of ^hese Crossings.

3. Suppose Baptism in Augustines time had been administered without Crossing of
either the forehead of the Baptized, or the water wherewith they were baptized,
it had then indeed been performed not with such ceremonies as by the Custom of
the then Church belonged unto it: and so Fulk, in his Confutation of the
Rhemists, expounds Augustines rite, page 693. but this concludes nothing
against us; for we hold that such Baptism has been rite, that is, duly,
lawfully, and laudably administered, because it would have been agreeable unto
Christ's institution, which alone, and not the custom of the Church, is the
rule of its administration,

4. These words of Augustine are at best, but propositio male sonans; for they
carry a palpable appearance of evil, because they plainly seem to assert the
necessity of the Sign of the Cross unto Baptism and the Lords Supper.
Bellarmine brings them to prove, that nothing can be consecrated without the
sign of the Cross, de Sacra confirm. lib. 2. c. 13 as also to justify their
Crossings, that they use in the Mass, de Missa, lib. 3. c. 13. And there is a
Popish Ballad mentioned by the Abridgement, and transcribed in Parker, wherein
I believe this is one of the places in Augustine, related unto, part. 1. p. 92.

Without the Cross Saint Augustine says,
(Read him and you may see)
1. No man is steadfast in the Faith,
Nor Christened well may be.
No Sacrifice, no holy Oil,
No washing in the Font,
2. Nor any thing can thee assoyle,
If thou the Cross do want.
Children by it have Christendom,
The water's blessed also:
3. The Holy Ghost appears to some,
And eifts of Grace bestow,
When that this Cross is made aright,
Of them that hallowed be:
4. Where it is not, there wants might,
For ought that I can see.
But the very Canons of the Convocation do disclaim all necessity of the sign
of the Cross in Baptism, The Church of England, since the abolishing of
Popery, has ever held and taught, and teaches still, that the sign of the
Cross used in Baptism is no part of the substance of that Sacrament; for when
the Minister, dipping the Infant in water, or laying water upon the face of it
(as the manner also is) has pronounced these words (I baptize thee in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost) the Infant is fully
baptized; so as the sign of the Cross being afterward used, does neither add
any thing to the virtue, or perfection of Baptism; nor being omitted, does
detract any thing from the effect and substance of it.

Dr. Hammond.
And, Crucis signo in front hodie tanquam in post signandus es, omnesque
Christiani signantur (de Catechiz. rud. c. 20. tom. 4. page 915.) thou must be
signed now in the forehead with the sign of the Cross, as the Israelites on
their door posts, and so must all Christians.

Jeanes.
Whereas you say above, that Augustines words cannot be denied to have truth in
them, you mean these last quoted, as well as the former; and if this be so,
then it will be an easy matter for you to clear up by argument this undeniable
truth that is in them. God commanded the Israelites to strike the lintel and
the two side posts of the door with the blood of the Passover; therefore all
Christians are obliged to be signed in the forehead with the sign of the
Cross, sounds with me as a very wild and loose inference; and therefore I
shall entreat you to confirm it, or else relinquish this place of Augustine, as
containing nothing of an argument in it.

Bellarmine alleges this place of Augustine to prove that the blood of the
Lamb sprinkled upon the posts of the doors was a figure of the sign of the
Cross: Tom. 2. de Eccles: triumph: lib. 2. c. 29. And unto him Chamier thus
answers; Tom. 2. page 878, 879. Nego crucem significatam in veteri
Testamento; nisi per accidens: hoc est, quatenus Christus significatus est
crucifigendus. Sed crucem direct ac per se significatam ullis figuris, nego.
Nec ignoro tamen produci posse in contrarium testimonia quaedam ex Patribus.
Sed ego quicquid Patribus in buccam venit, non censeo amplect endum, ut verbum
Dei. Potest, inquiebat Augustinus in Psalmum trigesimum sextum, nihil aliquid
videri, alteri aliud: sed neque ego, quod dixero, praescribo alteri ad meliorem
intellectum, nee ille mihi. Idem de reliquis dicendum. Itaque liceat in earum
sententias inquirere. Certe illud de sanguine agni posito super utroque post,
remotissimum est a Cruce. Hoc solum tenuissimum vestigium; positio in post,
nonnihil alludit ad positionem in front; quae in corpore supremum locum
occupat, sicut in ostio postis. Sed sanguis, quanto aptius sanguinem Christi
significaret? ut apud Gregorium homilia vigesima secunda in Evangelia. Quid sit
sanguis agni, non ja^n audiendo, sed bibendo didicistis. Qui sanguis super
utrumque postem ponitur, quando non solum ore corporis; sed etiam ore cordis
hauritur. Gretserus excipit; posse unum idemque plura significare. Ita sane,
inquam; sed primo variis rationibus. Itaque eadem ratione qua significat
sanguinem, non potest significare crucem; At unius loci unica est ratio. Quare
fi hoc uno loco significat sanguinem Christi, non significat crucem. Deinde
unum idemque potest varia significare, at non quaelibet: sed ea tantum, ad quae
habet analogiam. Quaenam est vero analogia sanguinis agni ad crucem? nam agno
significari Christum nemo inficias eat. Quomodo ergo sanguis ex agno eductus;
significabit crucem non eductam ex Christo? sanguis, inquam, effusus, crucem
compactam?

Dr. Hammond.
In the forehead particularly Tom. 10. p. 289. B.
in front figat ubi seeds pudoris) because the seat of shame is there, which
we render, in token that the baptized shall not be ashamed.

Jeanes.
This weighs little or nothing, unless withal you can prove, that the
Apostles command of decency enjoyneth, that the seat of shame in the baptized
should be marked with the sign of the Cross, in token that he should not be
ashamed. Doubtless Saint Paul's practice was suitable unto his precept, and you
do not, you cannot pretend, that ever he was signed in the forehead with the
sign of the Cross, either by himself or any other: he propounds his example
for imitation, and gives this for a reason, that his pattern was that of our
blessed Savior, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye even followers of me, as I also am of
Christ. We shall not then think that so requisite unto Baptism which he never
used; so so long as we follow so great a precedent, we shall not be much
sollicitous, though we swarve from the advice of Augustine, that has no
warrant from the Word of God. Paul makes large professions, that he was not
ashamed of the Gospel, which held forth a crucified Christ, Romans 1.16. Phil.
1.20. 2 Timothy 1.12. But no man can say that he ever expressed this his profession
by the sign of the Cross; and therefore we shall make no other account of the
Sign of the Cross, than as of a supernumerarie in Gods service; and those
Believers that want it, may have confidence when Christ shall appear, and not
be ashamed before him at his coming, 1 John 2.28.

But perhaps you think we must stoop unto the bare words of Augustine, though
not seconded with any reason; and this is more then Augustine himself would
have expected from us: for after this manner the holy Scriptures alone are to
be entertained, as Bishop Jewel proves against Harding, Def. Apol. Chur. Engl.
part. 1. p. 55. out of several places of St. August. Therefore St. Aug. says,
Alios Scriptores ita lego, ut quanta libet sanctitate doctrinaque praepolleant,
non ideo verum putem, quod ipsi ita senserint, sed quod id mihi, vel per alios
Authors Canonicos, vel probabili ratione persuadere potuerint. Other Writers
or Fathers (besides the holy Scriptures) I read in this sort, that be their
learning and holiness never so great, I will not think it true, because they
have thought so, but because they are able to persuade me so, either by other
Canonical Writers, or else by some likely reason. Likewise again he says, Hoc
genus literarum non cum credendi necessitate, sed cum judicandi liberate,
legendum est: This kind of Writings (of the holy Doctors and Fathers) must be
read, not with necessity to believe each thing, but with liberty to judge each
thing.

Likewise St. Augustine disputing against the Arians, refuses, as I have said
before, both Councils and Fathers, and appealeth only to the Scriptures: Nec
ego Nicoenam Synodum tibi, nec tu mihi Ariminensem debes objicere: Scripturarum
authoritatibus, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet.
Neither will I allege the Council of Nice against you, nor shall you allege
the Council of Ariminum against me. By the authority of the Scriptures let us
weigh matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason.

I shall conclude all that I have to say unto the foregoing Testimonies of
Augustine (and you may apply it also unto those which follow) with the Answer
of Whitaker, Tom. 1. page 293. unto a place quoted out of the 118. Epist. of
Aug. ad Januar. Respondeo, Magnum esse Augustini nomen in Ecclesia Dei, and
merito quidem: Sed meminisse debemus, hominem fuisse, ac proinde errare
potuisse. Et licet hoc loco quidem videatur favere Traditionibus, tamen in
aliis locis, scripturae perfectionem acerrime defendit, ut postea melius
patebit. Sensit enim apertissime, nullum dogma reci^iendum esse, quod non
scripturis nitatur. Aut^gitur de Traditionibus non necessariis loquitur, aut
fibi ipsi non consentit.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 26.
Secondly, the usage of this Ceremony of signing with the Gross, was, we also
know, frequent in the Church (while the gifts of healing continued) in See Aug.
de civ. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8.
curing diseases, and casting out Devils, so that Athanasius frequently
affirms, De Incarnat. Tom. 1. page 84. So page 101. D. (...). And page 102.6.
(...). And contr. Arian. Or. 1. page 285. A. (...). And, Praesente signo crucis
obmutescit Paganitas. Aug. T. 4.229. B. And, 832. B. Daemonia nominata cruce
Christi terrentur, si impensius fiat, fugantur. Dii Paganorum metu crucis
responsa dare non possunt.
(...); by the sign of the Cross all Magic and Witchcraft is brought to
naught, all the Idol Temples laid waste and empty.

Jeanes.
Bishop Morton in his particular Defense of the Ceremony of the Cross, page
231, 232. tells us. That our Church does not ascribe unto it any miraculous
power of driving out devils, or of curing diseases, etc. And what he says of
our Church he speaks by just consequence of the Primitive Church; For our
Church (says he, ibid.) professes, that she uses it only as primitively it
was used; that is, only as a token whereby there is protestation made of a
future constancy in the profession of Christianity: If it were used only thus,
then it was not used for the miraculous cure of diseases, and chasing away of
Devils; and this will be denied by none, that knows the force of the exclusive
particle only; but you have a higher opinion of the efficacy of the sign of
the Cross, than ever Bishop Morton had, or the Church of England, as he
thought; and therefore I shall address my self to give some answer unto your
miracles of the Cross.

1. I shall in general say unto them three things.

1. If there were any such Miracles, as are pretended, they were wrought only
at the sign of the Cross, and not by the sign of the Cross (as you bring in
Athanasius affirming) so much as by a Moral instrument they were done for the
sake only of the faith and prayers of those that used the sign of the Cross,
and were consequent unto the sign of the Cross, only per accidens; and for
this that I say, Bishop Morton alleges a saying out of Pe^kins: He
confesses (says he) that miracles were done of God at the sign of the
Cross, that had joined unto it a manifest, or at least a secret invocation of
the name of Christ crucified: so that the virtue was not to be imputed unto the
sign of the Cross, but unto the faith of the worker, and invocation of Christ.

2. Many Miracles were wrought by the Brazen Serpent; for it came to pass, that
if a Serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the Serpent of Brass, he
lived, Numb. 21.9. Yet Hezechias brake it in pieces, 2 King. 18.4. and the
reason is assigned why he did so; for unto those days the children of Israel
did burn incense to it. This fact of Hezechias is praise worthy; and therefore
it was no evil act to throw aside the sign of the Cross: for suppose, though
not grant, that Miracles were wrought by it, yet the Papists have burnt incense
unto it: for as Dr. Rainolds in his Conference with Heart, page 509, 510. It is
written in your Masse-book, that in solemn Masses, the Priest having made
obeisance to the Cross, does incense it thrice: The Jews gave Exodus 30.8.
the honor of God to creature, in that they burned Incense to it. And
therefore Hezechias did cala it brazen stuff; as if you should call your Roodes
wooden stuff; your Agnus^ Dei's waxen stuff, your Crucifixes and Crosses made
of Copper, Copper-stuff, because you impart the honor of God to them, by
putting trust and hope in them. And if Ephesians. 5 5.
the covetous man be called an Idolater, because he makes money his God, not as
though he thought the coin to be God, but because he trusts to live and
prosper by it, Jer. 17.7.
which confidence and hope he should repose in God only: then worship you the
sign of the Cross as an Idol, because you trust to be saved by it, as in your
Breviar. Roman: Sabat. quarta* quadrag.
Church service you profess notoriously, and Thom. Aqu^n. Sum. Theol. part. 3.
quaest. 25. art. 4. Andrad. orthod. Explicat. lib. 9.
so your selves confess, you worship it as God; wherefore if 2 Kings 18 3.5.
Hezechias be praised by God for breaking in pieces the Serpent of brass,
because the children of Israel did burn Incense to it, we who have removed the
sign of the Cross, because you put the hope of salvation in it, may content
ourselves to be dispraised by men. But if you say therefore, that we be against
the ancient Fathers in Religion, because we pluck down that which they did set
up, take heed left your speech does not touch the Holy Ghost who says that
Hezechias ver. 6.
did keep Gods commandments which he commanded Moses; and yet withal says,
that ver. 4.
he brake in pieces the Serpent of brass which Moses had made.

3. A third answer shall be that which Cartwright gives concerning those
Miracles which the Rhemists allege were done by the use of Holy Wa^e, and the
sign of the Cross: In all which, and the like Miracles (says he, page 303)
not to overthrow their credit; we yet further answer, that the good success
that these means had, prove no more the lawfulness of them, than the sacrifices
of living men amongst the Gentiles unto their Idols, accompanied with some
desired issue out of their troubles wherein they were, prove the lawfulness of
that horrible and most detestable worship of their God.

4. That the former use of the sign of the Cross in Miracles, obliges not to
a use of it (now all miraculous use thereof is by the general confession of
Protestants ceased) may be gathered, in a way of Analogy and proportion from
what the abovementioned Bishop Morton speaks, page 58. of Spittle and Oil: We
confess that spittle was used by our Savior Christ, in healing of the dumb;
and oil by the Apostles, in curing of many other diseases; yet both
miraculously: but to imitate the work of a Miracle without the miraculous
power, is but an apish (...), for to hold such a miraculous ceremony, after the
virtue be gone, is but to preserve a carcass, because it had been once
possessed of a soul.

From this general Answer proceed we to some particulars of the Crosses
efficacy.

1. You say that the usage of this Ceremony of signing with the Cross, was we
also know, frequent in the Church (while the gifts of healing continued) in
curing diseases. But now for this frequencie you only quote in the Margin Aug.
de Civ. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8. And in that place there is but one instance of
any cure wrought upon the usage of the sign of the Cross, and that in
Innocentia, a Carthaginian Matron, and the story hereof I shall give unto the
Reader, as it lies in the Book and Chapter quoted.

In eadem Carthagine, Innocentia religiosissima faemina de primariis ipsius
civitatis, in mammilla cancrum habebat, rem, sicut medici dicunt, nullis
medicamentis sanabilem. Aut ergo praescidi solet, and a corpore separari
membrum ubi nascitur, aut, ut aliquanto homo quietius vivat fomentis est pestis
mitiganda frequentibus. Nam ut inde mortem quantumlibet tardius aff^turam
confidamus, secundum Hippocratis, ut fertur, sententiam, omnis est omittenda
curatio. Hoe illa a perito medico, and suae domui familiarissimo acceperat, and
ad solum Deum se orando converterat. Admonetur in somnis appropinquante pascha,
ut in part faeminarum observanti ad baptisterium, quaecunque illi baptizata
primitus occurrisset, signaret ei locum signo crucis Christi, fecit, and
confestim sanitas secuta est.

In the same Town one Innocentia a most religious woman, and one of the
principal in the City, had a Canker on her breast, a kind of sore which the
Physicians told her is utterly uncurable: wherefore they use either to cut the
infected part away, or for the prolonging of the life a little while in some
ease, the malady is to be assuaged and mitigated with frequent plasters; for
the opinion of Hippocrates will induce us to believe, that death will thence
ensue, though somewhat slowly: for he, as they say, does advise to omit all
attempt of curing it; this a skillful Physician her familiar friend told her;
so that now she sought help of none but the Lord, who told her in a dream,
that Easter next, which then drew near, she should mark on the woman's side by
the Font, what woman she was, that, being then baptized, should first meet her,
and that she should entreat her to sign her sore with the sign of the Cross
of Christ: She did it, and was cured.

But the Miracles related in this Chapter are of a suspected credit, it seemed
unto Ludovicus Vives to be a matter without doubt, that many things in this
Chapter were added, etc. by those, who with their filthy hands have defiled all
the Writings of great and famous Authors: In hoc capite non dubium, quin multa
sint addita, velut declarandi gratia, ab iis, qui omnia magnorum autorum
scripta spurcis suis manibus contaminabant, etc. Of this annotation of
Ludovicus Vives Rivet speaks thus, Critic. sacr. page 453. Lud. Viv. ad cap. 8.
lib. 22. In quo miracula multa narrantur, quae omnia non sapiunt exactam
judicii limam, quam in aliis August. operibus lectores sagaces observant,
annotat, in hoc capite non dubium, quin multa sint addita, velut declarandi
gratia, ab iis, qui omnia magnorum autorum scripta spurcis suis manibus
contaminabant: Huic nothae non refragantur censores Belgici in indice
expurgatorio: neque Hispani inquisitores in suo: quod ideo no^andum lectori, ne
semper quae ex genuin is autorum libris afferuntur, genuina esse putet, quod
per Monachorum corruptelas non licet. Hic igitur etiam opus est sagacitate, and
judicii libra. Chamier in reference to another passage in the Notes of Lud:
Viv. passes this censure upon other miracles, alleged by Papists from that
place of Augustine to justify their Invocation of Saints, de Vigesim: Octav.
lib. de Civit. Dei: Possum ex Vive dicere, multum in eo lusisse sciolorum
lasciviam, aut potius superstitiosorum audaciam: the Divines of Rhemes in their
Annotations on John 14.12. charge Protestants, that they discredit, as other
Miracles, so in particular, those testified by St. Augustine in this place; and
unto this charge neither Fulk nor Cartwright entered any dissent, and therefore
it is probable that they acknowledged it: whereas Fisher in his Answer to the
Questions propounded by King James, goes about to justify the Oblations made
to Saints by some of the Miracles here recorded, said to be done at their Tombs
and Shrines, Dr. Francis White seems to think that a doubt of the truth of some
of these Miracles is defensible, because, says he, these things were
extraordinary; and the credit of diverse of them depends upon fame (which is
many times uncertain) Tertul. Apol. c. 7. cur malum fama? Quia velox, an quia
plurimum mendax? quae ne tunc quidem cum very aliquid adfert fine mendacii
vitio est detrahens, adjiciens, demutans de veritate.
and Saint Augustine himself says, they are not commended unto us by such
weighty authority, as that without all doubt they must needs be credited Aug.
de civit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 8. non tanta ea commendat authoritas, ut sine
difficultate vel dubitatione credantur.
they cannot be sufficient grounds or foundations of Catholic Doctrine or
Practice.

2. You say that by the sign of the Cross all Magic and Witchcraft is brought
to naught.

1. Surely, Sir, if ever the sign of the Cross had such an influence, it is
questionable, whether there was ever any word or promise of the Lord for it,
and without such word or promise, to use the sign of the Cross for such a
purpose, was virtual and interpretative Witchcraft.

Besides 2. if it were so efficacious against Magic and Witchcraft in the
Primitive times, yet, that since it has been abused unto Magic and
Witchcraft, is confessed by Bishop Abbot, a man of great piety and learning,
part. 1. page 169. But since the Harpie of Rome has had the handling of it,
and made it a matter of Magical Enchantment, and through the current of her
prophanations, it has run into the hands of Conjurers, Charmers, Witches, to
be defiled with their divellish and damnable practices, we have had a religious
care to clear the first Church in the using of it; but no further to use it our
selves than it may be washed from the soil and filth of these abominations.

3. By what you say in the Margin out of Athanasius and Augustine, you
insinuate a great efficacy of the sign of the Cross in the routing and chasing
away of Devils: unto this I answer:

1. That the whole Armor of God, the complete harness of the Spirit, dererres
not Satan from assailing the best and most perfect of Christians: Christ's
unspotted innocence, and his absolute all-fulnesse of Grace, was temptation
proof, and yet the Devil adventured upon the assault of him, and therefore it
is very strange that he should be so perillously, and terribly afraid of so
weak a shield as the sign of the Cross in the forehead: No, no, says Fulk,
in answer to the Rhemists, page 69.4. the Devil is too craf^y and strong to
yield to so weak a weapon, but when he is disposed to play with men, that they
may more easily be seduced by him.

2. It is but a sorry Sophisme, to conclude the Devils terror at the sign of
the Cross, from his running away upon then se thereof; for this might be done
out of design to get ground upon men, to return upon them with the more
advantage: It might be like the flight of an Enemy to draw into an Ambuscado,
into the superstition of the Cross, that has since so prevailed. It is to be
feared therefore, that that which the Pharisees blasphemously spoke of Christ,
may truly be objected unto the sign of the Cross, that it has cast out Devils
by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils. Hear what Whitaker says of the Devils
fear of the sign of the Cross, Tom. 1. page 390. Hoc omnium interim memoriis
infixum esse debet, Daemonem esse callidum, versutum, versipellem, fallacem,
mendacem. praestigiatorem. Fingit igitur se timere signum crucis, ut faciat nos
externo magis signo confidere, quam Christo ipsi crucifixo.

3. Some excuse the Fathers, as if they held, that the sign of the Cross
drived away Devils ex opere operantis, only by the faith and prayers of those
that used it; but others think, that they held it to be done ex opere operato,
by the Ordinance of God; and they give this reason, because they held it to be
done by aliens and unbeleevers, by Pagans and Jews, who had not the Christian
Faith. Naz^^^zene relates, how that Julian the Apostate being about some fears
of Necr^^^^, the Devils that he had conjured ran all away, when he by chance
had made the sign of the Cross, without any purpose or thought of a Miracle;
for he marvelled at the matter, as that which was more than he expected: And
Gregory reports that a Jew, as yet unconverted unto the Faith of Christ, being
benighted, and taking up hi^ lodging in a Temple of Apollo, routed a great
multitude, or Troup of Devils that were there assembled, by signing his
forehead with the ^ign of the Cross: Unto these examples Bellarmine, Eccles.
Triumph. lib. 2. cap. 30, adds the testimony of Augustine: Quare S. Augustinus
lib. 83. quaestionum, qu. 79. dicit indictum a Deo Daemonibus ut cedant cruci,
tanquam sceptro Summi Regis, quomodo populi militibus cedunt, cum ab illis
profertur signum Imperatoris: Nec mirum est, inquit, quod haec signa valent,
cum a bonis Christianis adhibentur, quando etiam cum usurpantu^ ab excraneis*
qui omnino suum nomen ad istam militiam non dederunt, propter honorem tamen
excellentissimi Imperatoris valent, Cum autem non cedunt his signis hujusmodi
potestates, Deus ipse prohibet occultis modis, cum id justum, atque utile
judicat; nam nullo modo ulli spiritus ^^^ent haec signa contemnere:
Conrimescunt haec, ubicunque illa prospexerint. By (...) you may see, how far
the Fathers went in their opinion touching the efficacy of the Cross, and I am
so charitable as that I think you do not come up unto them herein, and if you
do not, you have no reason to press me with their sayings.

3. You say out of Athanasius, that by the sign of the Cross, all the Idol
Temples were laid waste and empty: I could wish that you had exemplified this
by some instances, that we might have considered of what weight they had been:
The Papists of the Seminary of Rhemes have referred us unto a famous story in
Theodoret, which says Fulk, page 694. is a Miracle wrought by Marcellus Bishop
of Apamea in serting the Temple of Jupiter a fire, with sprinkling of water,
after he had signed it with the Cross, and prayed, when it would not burn with
fire: This is a pretty story, if true, and will serve aptly for your purpose:
But, Sir, we shall hope for so much charity from you, that you will nor brand
for Infidels, all, that have not says strong enough to swallow these Miracles
of the Cross. Theodoret might have this at the second hand, and he himself
might be deceived, though he were unwilling to deceive, and in all ages devout
and wel-meaning persons have been over-credulous in entertaining counterfeit
and fained Miracles.

As for the places quoted out of Augustine, I cannot find them in Frobenius his
Edition of Augustine, and I have no other, and therefore I think you follow
some other Edition; but the thing is not material; for I hope, that what I have
said already will be a satisfactory answer unto them.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 27.
And then Baptism being the exorcising of Devils (the ancient Catechists we
know were called Exorcists) the rescuing of a person from the power of Satan
into Gods Sonship and family, what can be more proper, or agreeable, or exactly
symbolical, than the use of this in Baptism, according to that of Tertullian,
de Resurr. Carn. Caro signatur, ut anima muniatur, the flesh or body is signed,
that the soul may be defended or fortified.

Jeanes.
Your ordinary Readers will think you Conjure, when they hear you term
Baptism an exorcising of Devils; for they never heard of any Exorcisme in
Baptism, save of the Papists, which our Divines brand for Magical; and whether
this expression might not have been forborne to avoid all appearance of evil,
in compliance with Papists in their use of Exorcisme. I shall not determine,
but leave it unto your own prudence to think of. Whereas you say, that the
ancient Catechists were called Exorcists, the reason of this may probably be,
because the Catechumeni were exorcised before Baptism, Aquin. Sum. part. 3.
quaest. 71. artic. 2. But I shall not contend about this with you, for fear I
should be thought as very a fool as the Philosopher, who read a Lecture of
War before Hannibal. There is a passage in Augustine that seems to favor
somewhat what you say, Tom. 7. page 577. Ab hac igitur potestate tenebrarum,
quarum est Diabolus princeps, id est, a potestate Diaboli, and angelorum ejus
quisquis erui, cum baptizantur, negaverit parvulos, ipsorum ecclesiae sa
cramentorum veritate convincitur, etc. In veritate itaque no^ in falsitate
potestas diabolica exor^^zatur in parvulis, eique renunciant, quia per sua non
possunt, per corda and ora gestant^m, ut eruti a potestate tenebrarum in regnum
sui Domini transferantur. Unto this testimony I believe it is easy for you to
add many more.

But yet notwithstanding all this, it is very well known, by all that know the
difference betwixt the Predicaments, that the Sacrament of Baptism cannot be
said to be the Exorcising of Devils, the rescuing of a person from the power of
Satan, the delivery of him from the tyranny, otherwise than in an improper,
tropicall, and metonymicall praedication, viz. as it is a sign and seal, and if
you will, a moral instrument of the conditional promise thereof.

But what advantage reap you unto your cause by this? why unto this Exorcising
of Devils, the rescuing a person from the power of Satan into Gods family, the
use of the Cross in Baptism is exactly symbolical? Your argument (if there be
any argument in your words) as I conceive, stands thus: That which is so
exactly symbolical unto any thing signed, sealed, conveyed, and exhibited in
Baptism, is so decent, as that the omission thereof would be undecent: but the
use of the Cross in Baptism is exactly symbolical unto that which is signed,
sealed, and conveyed, or exhibited in Baptism, viz. the Exorcising of
Devils, the rescuing a person from the power of Satan into Gods Sonship and
Family, therefore the use of it is so decent, as that the omission thereof
would be undecent; you cannot but expect that the Major will be denied, and
it is very strange that you leave it destitute of all proof; for you cannot be
ignorant if you have read the Non-conformists, whom you oppose, that their
great quarrel against our Ceremonies, was their symbolicalnesse and mystical
signification; their arguments against which you may read at large in the
Abridgement, page 41, 42, etc. usque ad 49. Ames his Reply to Mortons General
Def. page 33, 34, etc. usque ad 58. As also in his Triplication to Dr. Burges
Disp. about humane Ceremon. page 209, 210. usque ad 336. Parker. Treat. of the
Cross, part 1 page 97, 98, etc. usque ad 112. Didoclave, page 522, 523, etc.
usque ad 536.

But, Sir, you may think to blow off all the Arguments with a silent scorn
and contempt, and this indeed many do with those arguments which they cannot
answer; but if you will not vouchsafe to read these Authors, if you please to
accept of my service, I will abridge the substance of their arguments, and
attend your answer unto them.

Then, for the Minor, I have four things to say unto it.

1. Baptism it self is more proper, agreeable, or exactly Symbolical, unto the
rescuing of a person from the power of Satan into Gods Sonship and Family, than
the sign of the Cross; and therefore the sign of the Cross in Baptism is a
superfluous supernumerary, like the dim and smoakie light of a candle in the
presence of the clear and glorious light of the Sun at noonday.

2. The Popish Exorcisme and Exsufflation are as, if not more, proper,
agreeable, and exactly symbolical, unto the Exorcising of Devils as the use of
the Cross in Baptism, and they have not been so much abused as it, and may as
easily be purged from all Superstition and Idolatry, and therefore you may as
well conclude concerning them as the Cross, that they are so decent as that the
omission of them would be undecent.

3. I much question whether or no two cross motions of a finger or a thumb be
so proper, agreeable, and exactly symbolical, unto so high, dreadful and
profound a mystery, as the delivery of us from the power of Satan and
darkness, and the translation of us into the kingdom of the dear Son of God,
as you affirm; and I shall hardly believe you, unless you bring other proofs,
besides the Hyperbolies of the Fathers.

As for that which in confirmation of the Minor, you quote out of Tertullian:

1. It is urged by some, not only for the signification, but also for the
operation and efficacy of the Cross, and whether you will go so far I cannot
tell.

2. Unto it Mr. Whitaker, when urged by Papists for Traditions, gives this
answer, Tom. 1. page 390. At anima side contra Satanam munienda est, non cruce.
Veteres quidem se hoc signo adversus Daemonas munitos esse putarunt, sed hoc ex
haeresi Montani fluxit.

And of him Mr. Fuller in his History of the University of Cambridge page 125,
gives this deserved character; He was one so exactly qualified, that the
Professors Chair may seem made for him, and he for it, they mutually so fitted
each other.

3. I would desire to know, how you like the companion of the Cross in
Tertullian, the holy oil? caro ungitur, says he, in the words immediately
foregoing, ut anima consecretur: but perhaps you are for the reviving of that,
as well as for the using of the Cross; and some stick not to say, that it is as
ancient as the Cross.

One thing more I cannot but remember you of, before I leave this Section, and
it is a distinction of mystical signification by the learned and reverend
Morton, the word mystical signification has two acceptions, says he, General
Def. page 52. The one Sacramental, by signification of grace conferred by God;
the other is only Moral, by signification of man's duty and obedience toward
God. The ceremonies which we defend (says he) are only mystical Moral, not
Sacramental; and for his disclaiming these, he gives this reason, page 53, 54.
A sacramental sign (being, as sacramental, so likewise (...), a seal of Gods
promises, Romans 4.
as the Apostle calls Circumcision) is always founded upon the express
Covenant of God, therefore none but the Author of the Covenant may institute or
appoint any such sign. For whosoever shall undertake to add a seal unto the
Will and Covenant of any Testator amongst men, is forthwith held Falsarius, and
thereby made obnoxious to the Law, and liable to the grievous judgments of
man: How much more damnable an Act were it for any to affix any sign, properly
Sacramental, unto the Testament of our Lord Jesus? which whosoever shall
attempt to do, becomes guilty of sacrilegious depravation of the blessed
Mysteries of Salvation.

Now you make the sign of the Cross to be that which Morton calls a
Sacramental sign; for he describes a Sacramental sign to be that which
signifies Grace conferred by God: and is not the rescuing of a person from the
power of Satan into Gods Sonship and Family (as for your other expression:
Baptism is the Exorcising of Devils, I am not much delighted with the
repetition of it) a grace conferred by God? and unto this you say the sign of
the Cross is exactly Symbolicall, and therefore a Sacramental sign.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 28.
And if instead of the Ad omnem progressum frontem crucis signaculo terimus.
Tertul. de Cor. Mil. c. 3.
frequent use of it among the Ancients, even Vide Narrat. Hippolyti Apostolorum
(...), apud Pallad. Hist. Laus. page 1049. (...).
before the cumbersome weight of Ceremonies came in ((...), says the Author of
the Quest. and Resp. ascribed to Justin Martyr, Qu. ^in page 364. in time of
Prayer we sign those that have any need of it, those that are any way ill
affected) we in this our Church retain it only in our solemn entrance into
Christ's Camp, in token that we mean valiantly to fight under his Banner, and in
confidence that he that thus signed to Constantine Victory from heaven ((...),
in this overcome) will thus give grace, and seal to us victory over our ghostly
enemies, What question can there ever be of the perfect decency of this usage
among us?

Jeanes.
Here the argument to prove the perfect decency of the usage of the sign of
the Cross in Baptism, is the frequent religious use of it amongst the
ancients; I say the religious use, because we oppose not the civil use of it in
Coins and Banners. But

1. You know, it is generally denied by the Non-conformists, that the frequent
use of the Cross amongst the Ancients was lawful and justifiable, and until
this be cleared, your argument will be little better than Petitio principii.

2. Bellarmine uses the like argument, de Missa lib. 2. cap. 15. for their
crossings in the Mass, having quoted diverse Fathers for the antiquity of the
sign of the Cross, who teach that it is to be used in every business: he
propounds hereupon an interrogation, very like unto that of yours: Quod si in
omni negotio signum crucis adhibendum, cur non in action tremendi sacrificii?
But this perhaps startles you not.

3. I demand whether the use of the Cross amongst the Ancients was decent or
undecent? If it was decent, then why was it abrogated? If it was undecent, then
how can you infer therefrom, the perfect decency of the use of the Cross in
Baptism?

But though I do not deny the frequent use of the Cross among the Ancients,
yet I have something to observe concerning the witnesses which you allege
therefore.

The first is Tertullian de Cor. Milit. cap. 3.

But this Book was written by him when a Montanist, this is confessed on all
hands, but I shall content my self with the naming only of two Witnesses.

The first is a moderate Conformist, Doctor Whitaker, Tom. 1. page 392.
Respondeo, Tertullianum faisse Montanistam, quando hunc librum scripsit. Facit
enim mentionem novarum prophetiarum, quarum Montanum inventorem fuisse, dubium
non est. Fuit vero Montanus multarum Traditionum author, quae postea extirpari
non poterant. Dixit, se habere illum paracletum, quem promisit Christus; and
fretus hujus paracleti authoritate, multa (...) in Ecclesiam invexit. Impius
hic Montanus Tertullianum ipsum fefellit, cujus viri jacturam casumque merito
lugere possumus. Illo enim tempore nullus d^ctior, nullus sanctior, nullus pro
fidei Christianae defensione vehementior fuit Tertulliano. Sed haeresis illa
Montani omaem Tertulliano fidem detraxit. Sic enim Hilarious ait, in Comment. in
Matthew. Canon. 5. Quanquam and Tertullianus (inquit) hac de^re aptissima
volumina scripserit, consequens error homi^i^ detraxit scriptis probabilibus
authoritatem. Hieronymus vero, in lib. contra Helvidium affirmat, eum Ecclesiae
hominem non fuisse. Et in Catal. de Te^talliano idem ait, eum multa contra
Ecclesiam scripsisse; and revera scripsit. Quae cum ita fint, quam absurdum
est, Montanicas Traditiones Tertulliani nomine nobis obtrudere.

The other is a zealous and rigid pleader for humane religions Ceremonies, Mr.
Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity, page 65, when Tertullian disputed against
the Christian soldiers wearing a Crown or Garland on their heads, when they
receive their Donative; He was a Montanist, and an enemy unto the Church, for
condemning that prophetical spirit, which Montanus and his followers did boast
they had received, as if in them Christ had performed his last premise; as if
to then he had sent the Spirit, that should be their perfecter and final
instructor in the mysteries of Christian truth. Which exulceration of mind made
them apt to take all occasions of contradiction. Wherefore in honor of that
action, and to gall their minds, who did not so much commend it, he wrote his
book De Cotona Militis, not dissembling the stomach wherewith he wrote it.

2. The Crossings which Tertullian speaks of, would be a weight cumbersome
enough without any other Ceremony, and this cannot be denied by such
indifferent persons as will read his words at large; for thus they are, Ad
omnem progressum, atque promotum, ad omnem additum, and exitum, ad vestitum, ad
calceatum, ad lavaera, ad mensas, ad lumina, ad cubicula, ad sedilia,
quandocunque nos conversatio exerce^, frontem crueis signaculo terimus. Here
you see, that the Crossing in Tertullians time was at every step, at every
coming to and going out, at the apparrelling themselves, at washing, at eating,
at lighting candles, and at sitting, etc.

3. The frequent use of the Cross, mentioned by Tertullian at every step, and
in every action that we do, was not, could not be decent, because it could not
but be a great hinderance, disturbance, and distraction unto the more
necessary, and important actions of men's lives, especially seeing you will say,
it was to be accompanied with inward action of the soul suitable thereunto: now
how can that, which is not decent in it self, derive that, which it has not,
unto another: this perpetual Crossing, was so far from being decent, as that
it was ridiculous; and should we now see a man after this manner crossing of
himself, we would think either that he was out of his wits, or else that he was
transported with such delusions of Satan, as the Quakers are now, or the
Montanists were in Tertullians time.

A second witness is Palladius de Historia Lausiaca. This Author I suspected
to be fabulous by the two tales related out of him by Bellarmine, de Reliq. and
Imaginib. Sanctorum, cap. 29. and I cannot but wonder that you should allege
him, considering the character that Hierome and Epiphanius give of him; but not
having the Book in my own Study, I sent unto a friend in Oxford, to make some
search after the place, and in a short time this answer was returned unto me.

What authority is to be given to that quotation out of Palladius concerning
Hippolytus, whom he would have to be Apostolorum (...)? Quest.


None at all, or very little: For

1. Palladius, he lived in the end of the forth Century, anno 389, Answ.
says In Chronelog. Authorum praefixa Hist. vet. Patrum Paris. 1583.
Laurentius de la Bar, Bellarmine (descript. Eccles. page 156. in Palladio,
puts him ad annum 390) says he was coetaneous with Hierom and Ruffine, and a
man of no great repute. Reprehenditur (says De Scriptor. Eccles in Palladio
page 156.
Bellarmine) ut Origenista Pallactius (says Preaemio adversus Pelagianos ad
Cresiphentem.
Hierome) servus nequitiae, candem haeresim instaurare conatus est, and novam
translationi calumniam Hebraicae mihi struere, nunc quoque mysteriu^
iniquitatis operatur And at the same time Epiphanius, Epist. 60. apud Hieron.
Palladium, qui quondem nobis ^harus fuit, and nunc misericordia Dei indiget,
cave, quia nunc Originis baeresim praedidicat, etc. And though he seemed
afterward to have forsaken his Haeresies, yet (if we may believe In Apparatu
Sacro. page 60. Palladius page 207.
Possevine) Mutavit personam, non animum.

2. This Historia Lausiaca, was called so, not by Palladius himself, who
inscribes it thus Vide Palladium graece editum per Jo. Meursium page 1.
(...): Paliadii Episcopi Historia vitas sanctorum Patrum continens. But
because he dedicated that History, (...), Lauso Praeposito, to an eminent man
then in authority; so it was that from this Lausus it was called Lausiaca.

3. This Narration of Hippolytus here cited, occurs in the In Hist. Vet. Patrum
per Laurentium de la Bar, cap. 1.9. page 88. who puts these words in the
Margin, Crucis signum tempere Apostolor. (...). MS. in Bibl. Bodliana.
Palladius graece per Ioh. Meurs. Lug. Bat. 1616. 4^.
Latin Edition of Palladius by Gentianus Hervetus, thus, Quae cum sic
fecisset, and se totam signo crucis muniisset, egressa est, etc. He speaks of a
Corinthian Virgin, a Christian, damned by the Judge to the Stews, out of which
place she escaped (a pious young man giving her the clothes) in man's apparel,
(...) (that is, putting on man's apparel) (...), and signing her self all over
with the Mystery of the Cross, she escaped safe. So the story is, in the
Greek Edition by Meursius page 154. what other Greek copy the Doctor made use
of, I know not; he cites page ^049. whereas in Meursius his Edition there are
but 212. pages in all.

3. He tells us where he had this Fable, or History (for Palladius does not
affirm it to be true) (...) (i.e. in alio libello, qui inscribebatur (Hippolyti
ipsis Apostolis cogniti, seu Apostolorum coaetanei) Istiasmodi Natrationem
inveni: And then he tells this story of the Corinthian Virgin.

4. So that the Sum is: He found a Pamphlet (for so the word (...) signifies)
which was inscribed to Hippolytus, who was known to the Apostles, but that it
was not (...), a false and spurious inscription, he tells us not, only he found
a Pamphlet so inscribed.

2. It is very likely he had no great opinion of that Pamphlet, for then he
would have told us so, to give reputation to the story. For in the very next
Palladius ex Edit. Joh Meursii, page 152. (...).
story before this, which is concerning a Virgin called Juliana, he tells us, he
had it out of a most ancient book of Hymns, writ by Origens own hand, (...);
whereas he has nothing of this, but that he saw a Pamphlet so inscribed.

3. And this is more probable, because I find not any Ecclesiastical Historian
(or other Author) mention any such Hippolytus, who was Apostolorum (...).

4. Nor is there any foundation in Antiquity, in the testimony of any good
Author, that any such Crossing was used in the Apostles time, though I know in
Tertullians time, and afterward, it grew much in fashion, especially in the
fourth Century in the time of August in Evang. Joh. Tract. 118.
Chrysostom Chrysostom. demonstrat quod Christus si^ Deus.
Augustine, and this Palladius, who was Bishop of Helenopolis, and this is
confessed by In his Conference with Heart, page 504. Edit. London, Anno 1598.
Dr. Rainolds against Heart (where you have much about Crossing) who denies (and
justly too) that any such use of the Cross was used in the Apostles times, nor
do I find any affirm it, but they of Rome, who (against all reason and
antiquity) would have all their ridiculous and superstitious Ceremonies to be
Apostolical: It is observable further, that the Latin Translation by Gentianus,
differs very much from the Greek put out by Joh. Meursius (as he Jo. Meursius
in Praefat. Lectori Palladio Praepositae.
himself tells us) and both of them very much (even in this present story we now
speak of) from an ancient Greek Manuscript copy of Palladius in Bodlyes
Library. So that it is evident the book has been much interpolated; so that he
had need of a spirit of Prophecy, who would certainly tell us which is genuine,
which spurious.

For instance, in Meursius his Edition Lugd. Batav. 1616. page 152. The (...)
of the 93 Narration or Chapter is thus, (...). And then the narration begins
thus, (...), etc. And then the next Narration (Narratio 94. page 154. has this
(...).

Now in the Manuscript ancient Copy in Bodlyes Library those two Chapters are
but one, and the (...) one, thus (...). And then the Narration begins thus,
(...), etc. Difference enough, and therefore negligence or knavery enough in
the Transcribers.

Besides this University friend, I consulted another in the Country, who had, I
knew, a well furnished study, and from him I received this following Answer.

Sir,
Palladius his Historia Lausiaca I find in the seventh Tom. of Bibliotheca
Sanct. Patrum, put forth by Margarinus de la Bigne at Paris, Anno 1589. of
which Author Bellarmine himself in his Book de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis ad
annum 390. confesses (after he had first praised this History, as not a little
profitable to the Reader of it) that this Palladius is reproved by Saint
Hierome, in an Epistle of his to Ctesiphon, for an Origenist, and so accounted
also by Epiphanius in an Epistle of his to John of Jerusalem, which Epistle is
to be seen (as he says) in the second Tom. of Hieroms Works. This History of
Palladius has the name Lausiaca, from one Lausus, to whom it is dedicated both
by Palladius and Heraclides. a Bishop of Cappadocia; both which Epistles
dedicated to Lausus, are prefixed to this History. The History has more
Miracles in it than are in the New Testament, and as strange ones as are in any
Legend, and it seems the Author, (as he says at the 56. Sect. of this
History) could have reported stranger, but that they did excedere miraculi
modum; not that they were false though, but because men wanted faith to believe
them. In the first Sect one Dorotheus, cum prius signaculo crucis se
munivisset, draws, and drinks the water of a Well, wherein there were Asps:
Abbot Copres, sect. 49. went into the flames of a great fire, and staid there
half an hour, and had no hurt, but as he entered the fire he was in nomine
Christi signatus. One Abbot Be, at the entreaty of some Husbandmen of that
Country, commanded a Sea horse (Hipp-potamus) who wasted that Country to be
packing, and not to spoil the Country any more. And so forthwith this Sea
horse, as if he had been driven away by an Angel, anished, omnino evanuit.
Sect. 17. An Hyaena brings her whelpe unto Abbot Macarius and lays it down at
the Abbots feet, this whelp was blind, the Abbot spits upon the eyes of this
blind whelp, prays, and the whelp recovereth its sight; the Hyaena takes up
the whelp, and deparreth: But then the next day the same Hyaena brings a
great sheep-skin unto the Abbot, offers it unto him (belike as a token of her
thankfulness for the cure) the Abbor refuses the present, ratleth the Hyaena
for killing the sheep, advises her to kill no more sheep, the Hyaena, capite
suo annuit, ut quae sancto Macario assentiretur, Says my Author: upon the
report of St. Paphnutius in another Place, the Devil in the habit of a
Presbyter offers the Sacrament to one, but the good Presbyter discovers the
Devil, and defies him, and his Sacrament. In another place one lives many
years, and had no other sustenance, but the Sacrament once every Sabbath day.

By this time the Reader is, I hope, sufficiently satisfied, that your Author
Palladius is a Legendary writer, the Gentlemen who have made this search for
me, desire for the present, to have their names concealed, but however they
will be responsible for what they have written, when ever you shall be pleased
to call them to an account.

A third witness is the Author of the Quest. and Resp. ascribed to Justin
Martyr, but this Author is unknown, and the book a forgery, unworthy of Justin
Martyr, and as short of his former writings as Lead is of Gold, this you know a
great deal better then my self, but others may see as much demonstrated by
Rivet. Critie. sacr. lib. 2. cap. 5. Out of Possevinus, Sylburgius and
Scaltetus.

But you have perhaps another argument, hinted toward the conclusion of this
section, and it is the apparition of the sign of the Cross unto Constantine,
of which you speak in those words; he that thus signed to Constantine victory
from Heaven ((...) in this overcome etc.

But it is much questioned, whether or no that which you call the sign of the
Cross, was that which appeared unto Constantine. Bishop Abbot in his answer
unto Dr. Bishop his Epistle unto King James page 167. says, that the sign of
the Cross, unto which Constantine was so much affectioned (and that which he
was so affectionate unto, was that which appeared unto him) was indeed Eusebius.
de vit. Constable. lib. 1 c. 25.
the sign of the name of our Savior, consisting of the two Greek letters x
and p, and in the form of a (...), which are the two first letters of the name
of Christ, and did import the same whole name, by the sight whereof in the sky
Constantine was advertised, that Ib. c. 22.
by Christ be must conquer and overcome. To which name of Christ, represented
to Constantine, his most excellent majesty gives the same honor that
Constantine did, reposing therein the whole trust of his Victory, and safety,
both spiritual and corporal, and knowing that no Acts 4.7.
other name is given under heaven, by which we must be saved, but only the name
of Jesus Christ. This opinion^s embraced by many; but Dr. John Rainolds of all
others, I believe, speaks most fully of it in his conference with Heart, page
507, 508. The sign that appeared to Constantine in the Element was a sign of
the name of Christ, not his Cross: howsoever the Coiners and Martials treatise
of the Cross art. 2. Harpesfeildes Cope. dialog 4.
Crosse-maintainers of your Church do falsely paint it out. For as De vit.
Constant. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Eusebius writes, (unto whom Constantine did report the thing, and showed him
that ensign, which he had caused to be made in the likeness thereof) it was the
form of a (...). which words translated amiss by Interpreters ( erat litera p
inserta in medio literae x) have occasioned some to make the sign otherwise
then Eusebius describes it.
Spear standing strait upright, with a Crown on the top of it, and as it were a
horn, which did cross the midest of the Spear aslope. So that at represented
two of the Greek letters, x and p: which being the two first letters of the
name of Christ, the name of Christ was signified by that sign to Constantine.
Thus be describes it who saw it.

Unto this Heart thus replyeth, but out of doubt he calls it the sign or the
monument of the Cross also.

And unto this Dr. Rainolds thus rejoyneth. But 5 cap. 25.
himself shows, that he calls it so, because it resembled (...).
the sign of a Cross. For neither was it like the Cross fully, which had The
figure of the letter T. Tertull. advers. Marcion. lib. 3. Hieron. lib. 3.
Comment. in Ezec. c. 9.
another figure: and where he describes it, he says in plain terms that it
was (...).
a sign of the name of Christ. Neither were those words that you rehearsed
written by it, In this sign overcome, as your Harpsfeild in his Cope-Dialog.
4. c. 3.
Doctor says: (belike because he read it coined in the Cruseado so, or in the
Portigue) bu^ (...). Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. c. 22.
by this overcome: as if God showing him the name of Christ, should have said
unto him that Acts 4.12.
there is no other name given under Heaven whereby we must be saved. In the
which meaning it seems that Constantine did understand it also: because
Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib. c. 25.
he used afterward to carry in his Helmet, not the sign of the Cross, but
those two letters by which the name of Christ was represented to him.

But suppose it was the very sign of the Cross, which you imagine, appeared
unto Constantine, yet this will make nothing for the perfect decency of the
usage of the sign of the Cross in Baptism amongst us: and my reason is,
because apparitions in the air, though they be not illusions of Satan, the
Prince of the air, but true and real miracles, do not oblige us unto an
imitation of the like in Gods ordinances: strong and powerful motives they are
unto the worship of Christ, but were never designed to be a rule of it, and he
that uses it to such a purpose perverts it from its right end.


Dr. Hammond.
And then for the Surplice: It is no news, I hope, for several sorts of men
to have solemn Garments, for solemn actions which they do not use at other
times. The Judges upon the Bench, or the Lords at their coming to Parliament,
are a sufficient evidence of this, who wear not those Robes in common
occasions, which there they do, as betokening their quality. and the
employments they are about. And then what is thus customary in civil matters
(viz, to difference persons and employments, yea and days, by distinction of
garments) and is allowed to be decent therein, this by analogy undeniable, is
as fitly and decently from thence derived to solemn sacred actions also, such
are the public offices of the Priest: and the commands of our Superiors being
added to this decency of the matter, (...) to (...), it is, I am sure, more
than undecent for inferiors to be obstinate, and deny obedience to them. In the
choice of the garment, there has been also, as near as may be, a resemblance
observed of those garments, which in Scripture are mentioned for the like
solemnities, long, shining, i. e. white robes or garments. And if the constant
usage of other Churches besides this of ours, Eastern as well as Western, for
so many Centuries together, be considered, it will be competently able to
establish an Ecclesiastical custom also, which, in things of this nature,
external ornaments and formalities, is a more rat onal ground, and rule or
measure of decency, than any Mr. J. ( or Amesius to boot) will readily be able
to produce for the rejecting of them, or breaking and casting away those bands
which tied no harder a yoke than this upon their shoulders.

Jeanes.
The Surplice was used not only as a note of distinction, but also for its
mystical signification, to betoken sanctity of life, and until this latter use
of them be proved lawful, your four arguments will be but a begging of the
Question, as you will soon perceive, when you attempt the reducing of them into
form.

This may suffice for answer unto all your arguments; but I shall also give
unto each of them a several answer.

The first argument is taken from the Analogy betwixt civil and sacred persons
and actions: Civil persons wear solemn garments for solemn actions, which they
do not use at other times; therefore it is decent for Ministers to wear
solemn garments in their solemn sacred actions, which they do not use in
common occasions, as whilst they are walking in the streets, or the like.

To answer this, I need not trouble my self, but only refer the Reader unto
what Ames answers unto the like objection of Bishop Mortons in his Reply to
his particular Def. etc page 4. To which I answer.

1. That if all this be granted, yet it makes not for the Surplice; which is
not a Civil but an Ecclesiastical, Religious habit; there is great difference
betwixt a grave, civil habit, and a mystical garment.

2. The consequence does not follow; because in the exercising of the
Ministerial duty, nothing is requisite which the Lord himself does not impose
upon his Ministers. A Minister then has another person, than when he walks
in the street.

3. There is a great disparity betwixt Judges and Ministers, in regard of their
Functions; for Judges Functions are civil, and therefore subject unto man's
Institutions: but Ministers in their Functions are only to observe what he,
whose service they are to perform has appointed.

This answer fits your argument, as if it had been purposely made for it, and
by this the Reader may see, that it was baffled long ago, and methinkes you
should not have propounded it anew without some reinforcement.

But your second argument will strike the matter dead; The Command of our
Superiors added unto the decency of the matter. But this mends the matter
nothing at all; for our Superiors, as well as others, are prohibited to make
any additionals unto the Worship instituted by the supreme Law giver, who had
infinite Wisdom, and so could sufficiently provide whatsoever was fitting in
his own Worship and Service: All additions unto the Ceremonial Law under the
Old Testament were unlawful, Deuteronomy. 12.32. And why then should it be lawful to
add unto the Ceremonial Law in the New Testament? Christ was faithful in the
House of God, as Moses, Heb. 3.2. and therefore his provision for rituals was
as perfect and exact, though not as numerous.

Your third Argument, The resemblance of the Surplice unto those Garments which
in Scripture are mentioned for the like solemnities, long, shining, white Robes
or Garments, I suppose you mean some of the holy Garments of Aaron, that were
appointed for glory and for beauty, Levit. 16.4. and then this reason may
involve the Surplice in the guilt of Judaisme, rather than prove its decency.
Has God, think you, abrogated those mystical Garments that were of his own
institution, to make way for such as shall be of men's invention: If we must
needs have mystical apparel, what can be more fitting than that which God
himself ordained?

The Word and Sacraments do sufficiently mind a Minister of his duty, and the
light of them is so full and clear, like that of the Sun, as that it needs not
the candle of a Surplice. This instruction of the Church by humane Ceremonies,
is to teach her with a Fescue, to hide the light of the Gospel under a bushel,
and it is a vailing and shadowing of its brightness.

Some have concluded the Surplice to be decent, because the Angels appeared in
shining garments, Luke 24.4. in raiment white as snow, Mat. 28.3. because the
glorious Saints in heaven are clothed with white robes, Revel. 7.9. and the
Lambs Wife shall be arraied with fine linen, clean, white, Revel. 19.8. But
these inferences are, as they say, a baculo ad angulum, and you are wiser than
to own them, and yet the strength of your argument is little, if at all,
superior to them.

Your fourth argument is, the constant usage of other Churches, besides this of
ours, Eastern as well as Western, for many Centuries together.

But first, the not using the Surplice by Christ and his Apostles, and some
Centures immediately following their times, is a safer president to imitate,
than the usage of it in succeeding Centuries, which were not so pure and
incorrupt as the Primitive time.

2. Those which are utterly unskilled in the Ancients, may collect from the
confession of your great and learned Hooker, Ecclesiastical Polity, page 245.
That the true and Primitive antiquity of the Surplice, is a matter very
doubtful, notwithstanding, says he, I am not bent to stand stiffly upon these
probabilities, that in Hieromes and Chrysostomes times any such attire, as a
white garment, was made several unto this purpose, to wit, for Ministers to
execute their Ministry in, and it is without doubt that in the next age, the
cumbersome weight of Ceremonies, as you call it, burdened the Church; for
Augustine who lived in the times of Hierome complained hereof, Epist. 119. ad
Januar. Quamvis enim neque hoc inveniri possit, quomodo contra fidem sint,
ipsam tamen religionem, quam paucissimis and manifestissimis celebrationum
Sacrament is misericordia Dei esse liberam voluit, servilibus oneribus premunt,
ut tolerabilior sit conditis Judaeorum, qui etiam sitempus libertatis non
agnoverint, legalibus tamen sarcinis, non humanis praesumptionibus
subjiciuntur. Sed ecclesia Dei inter multam paleam multaque zizania constituta
multa tolerat.

In the next place you aver, that Ecclesiastical custom in things of this
nature, is a more rational ground and rule of decency then any Mr. J. or
Amesius to boot, will readily be able to produce, for the rejecting of them,
etc. But until Amesius his argument against things of this nature, humane
mystical ceremonies, be answered, this comparison with impartial Readers will
pass for nothing but vapouring.

In the end of the Section, you give a hint of the tolerablenesse of the
Ceremonies, they were bands which tied no harder yoke than this, upon your
shoulders.

But first, God has broken the yoke of his own Ceremonies, and our Prelates
cannot show us any commission for their pretended authority to make a new yoke
of their own, and with it to gall the necks and consciences of Christ's Members
and Ministers. Paul, though he thought all indifferent things to be lawful,
yet he professes that he would not be brought under the power of any, 1 Cor.
6.12. Now we were brought under the power of the Cross and Surplice; for as
Aquinas rightly, qui utitur eo, quod non expedit, sive licitum sive illicitum,
redigitur quedammodo sub rei illius potestate, and we were enthralled unto the
use of them, when they were not expedient, when they did not edify, but destroy
and scandalize.

2. If we may judge of the late Bishops zeal by their punishments, they showed
more zeal against the neglect of their Ceremonies, than against the omission of
the weightiest matter of both the Law and Gospel; the most scandalous and
ignorant Ministers found more favor at their Tribunals, than such of the
Nonconformists as were renowned for parts and learning, and exemplary for
personal piety and diligence in their Ministerial function.

3. Their rigor in imposing these bands was unexcusable and unsupportable; for
it was upon no less penalties than silencing and deprivation, and these were
upon the most peaceable and conscientious Dissenters: and when these arguments
satisfied them not (and they were the best arguments their Consistories
yielded) the poor men were judged obstinate and contumacious, and then the
Secular power was called upon for their perpetual imprisonment, they must not
breath in English air, unless in the close, and perhaps infected one, of a
stinking prison; and there they must rot and expire, except they conform
against their consciences: But I hope the Prelates sufferings have awakened
them unto a sight of, and sorrow for this their over severity, if not, I shall
pray unto God to open their ears, that they may hear the voice of his rod.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 30.
In this case I believe (though not in the garments themselves) there is place
for that decency, the omission of which necessarily inferres indecency, and for
such order the breaking of which must soon end in (...) (which Mr. J. says St.
Paul opposes to (...)) viz. down right confusion.

Jeanes.
Here we have a great deal of confidence in your conclusion, but upon a
diligent and most impartial search, I cannot find any premises of a
proportionable strength to bear it up; indeed you are like to meet with some
partial Readers, who will think your proofs irrefragable, because you have
poured our so many quotations out of the Fathers, whereas all the while there
is nothing in all this your discourse that looks like an Argument: If you think
my censure injurious, you may right your self, by reducing your Arguments unto
form, and then, if they be found convincing, the shame will be mine, and until
this be done, I shall satisfy my self with that which Ames speaks concerning
the pretense of decency, In his reply to Mortons particular def. etc. page 3.
As for the rule of decency, which is here made the ground of all this
affirmation; it were to be wished that the Defendant would have brought it into
a Syllogism, that we might have seen the force of it; for now I cannot devise
what Logic will conclude different Ministerial Garments, from decency; ^eeing
decency was, and is without them, in a multitude of Christian Churches and
Ministers; but as some blundering Logicians, make their rule de omni and de
nullo, serve to prove every thing: so this Defendant would make us believe that
his rule of decency will maintain any thing that it pleases our spiritual
Lords to impose upon us.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 31, 32, 33.
Having said thus much ex abundanti above what was incumbent on me, I shall
flatter myself, that I may not spare any larger pains, in survey of Amesius's
arguments, which Mr. J. is resolved to think considerable, and to speak very
magnificently of them, as proving that the text 1 Cor. 14.40 rightly
understood, does not only not authorize any humane institution of ceremonies,
but on the contrary plainly condemns them, and this, says he, was so well
managed by him, that he has quite beaten out of the field Bishop Morton and
his second, Dr. J. Burges,

32. Here is triumph indeed. And I suppose the Reader already discernes, what
are the grounds of it, viz. that Amesius acknowledges nothing decent, but that,
the omission of which necessarily inferres indecency, i.e. as has been showed,
nothing but natural decency, the omission of which is a vice contrary to that,
by consequence, that there is no such thing, as an indifferent gesture or
garment, which either civil or ecclesiastical custom, or obedience to our
lawful Superiors may render decent; that whatsoever some e^ternall law of
nature commands not the doing of that, if it be but wearing such a garment,
which the Canons of any Church prescribe, nay, by parity of reason a Cloak or a
but on'd Doublet, is absolutely unlawful by force of 1 Cor. 14.40.

33. This being the bottom of those arguments of Amesius, I may safely tell
Mr. J. that they could no otherwise beat either Bishop Morton or Dr. J. Burges
out of the field, then that they thought them utterly unworthy their making
reply's to; He that thinks the^e is nothing in different, nothing lawful, the
omission of which is not sin, does certainly use other Dictionaries then we
do, discernes no difference betwixt lawful and necessary and, as the Assertors
of Fa^all production of all things, will not allow a cause to be sufficient to
produce any effect, which it does not produce, and so produce, that it cannot
but produce it, which is to tell me that I sit, and walk at the very time, when
I stand still, it being certain that I am equally able to do both those, when
yet I really do the third only, so he will not allow any thing morally
possible, which is not morally necessary which is certainly the giving new
laws to words (making the word lawful or possible which was wont to be
interpreted that which may or may not be done, to signify only that which must
be done, and may not be omitted) and not new reasons to confirm old paradoxes.

Jeanes.
In these three Sections I shall stay upon nothing but your charge of m^ and
Amesius with this senseless and irrational position, that nothing is
indifferent; who almost that has heard of your great parts, learning and
ingenuity (and who is there such a stranger in our Jsrael unto whose ears the
same thereof has not arrived) but will upon this conclude us both guilty?
whereas we are both free. and innocent, and most untruly aspersed by you, for
which I expect and challenge satisfaction. Sir, herein I desire no favor at
your hands, but shall entreat you to put any of our words upon the ra^ke, and
if by all your Logic y^u can extort any such inference from them, I shall
confess my self worthy of all that disgrace which your pen can power upon me
To c^ea^ my self from this your impuration I have joined herewi^h a Treatise
concerning the indifferent actions of man; And as for Ames, his own writings
will sufficiently acquit him in his Modul. Theolog. lib 2. cop. 3. these. 13 he
exprefly affirms that many acts in the general a^e in their own nature
indifferent, and in his Cases of Conscience he has a whole chapter de Adiaphor
is and there too his resolution is, that var^e dontur ^ctiones quae in sua
communi ac nuda natura antequam circamstant^s v^stiantur, nullam includum
bonitatem aut ma^itiam. Taies sunt c^medere, bibere, iter facere, ambulare etc.
lib. 3. cap. 18 There be diverse actions which in their common and bare nature,
before they be as it were clothed with circumstances, do include in
themselves no goodness or badness; as to eat, to drink, to take a journey, to
walk etc. Dr. J. Burges impureth unto Bradshaw his opinion, which you father
upon Ames, and Ames his defense of Mr. B^adshaw will serve for his own apology.
Dr. Burges says that Mr. Bradsh^w h^d good reason to reverse his opinion ^f
things indifferent, for against all learning and sense, he resolves that there
is nothing indifferent, and unto this Ames thus answers T^^pli^at. cap. 2 S.
8, 9 If this were so as it is related, reason would persw de to some reca^tation,
but it is only the Bejoinder his telling again without any show or proof. The
Bejoynder raises up a report, without showing from wh^^ h^ received it, which
until it be some other way confirmed, then by an adversaries bare telling and
that in a humor of di^gracing his person, it most be accounted a mere tale. I
for my part, can find no such word: in Mr. Bradshaw his treatise, neither any
thing from whence such a raw sentence may be reasonably collected. He
concludes indeed cap. 3. that there is no absolute indifferent thing j. e.
every way, a^ well in order of nature, as of morality. He affirmed also cap. 7
there is nothing actually indifferent, which is not potentially good or evil,
and cap. 8 there is no action of man's will so indifferent, but the d^ing
thereof by some circumstances, may be evil. There is no action that a man can
do, by the power of his will, that is merely and absolutely indifferent.
Humanum act^in ind^v^duo consideratum ex ^elther at a rat^one pro cedentem vel
bonum esse vel malum necesse est.
These passages come the nearest to that which is here fathered upon the
treatise: in all which this crudity appears not: there is nothing
indifferent. Nay the ha^shest of these assertions, may be found not only in
little Pamphlets made by Ca^pent^s Boys, against learning and sense, but in
great volumes, written by those that go for very learned, and sensible in such
matters as this is. Thomas Aquinas, in the great book called his Sum, prima
secunde. q. ^8 r. 9 has this conclusion: it must needs be that every
individual act of man (proceeding from del^herate reason) is either good or
bad. And all (or almost all) those which have written upon that place, do
confi^^e and defend the same, who yet were men, that in questions of such a
nature, did not usually write against all learning and sense.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 34.
This argument of Amesins against things indifferent, that learned Bishop was
well ac^^^^ted with, by his familiar conferences with Mr. Gla^thorn, a vehement
disputer against Ceremonies, and whom the Bishop thought fitter to refute by
trifling instances, of unb^ttoning and buttoning his Cassock, than by more
serious attempts of conviction. i. e. in plain rearms to despise and smile at,
than to dread; and if Mr. J. have really read Mr. Hooker, whom he somewhere
entitles our Patron of Ceremonies, he may in him remember a discourse of Laws,
which will supersede all necessity or benefit of my farther enlarging on it.

Jeanes.
Here we have a gross mistake, and a bitter jeer.

1. A gross mistake, to say no worse, for Ames has no where any Argument
against things indifferent; it is a Conclusion which he never dream of, and
therefore you most injuriously fasten it upon him, and hereof, I hope, you will
repent, and give some public restimonial thereof.

Next we have a bitter jeere at Non conformists, as if their opinion concerning
humane, religious Ceremonies, were so filly and ridiculous, that Bishop Morton
despised it, and smiled at it, and could refute it easily, by trifling
instances by unbuttoning and buttoning his Cassock: There may be truth in this
your relation concerning Mr. Hynde and Glapthorne, but your false accusation of
Ames will render your bare word questionable, if it be not backed with farther
proofs; but suppose your relation true, yet all that you can gather hence is,
that they were weak Respondents, and knew not the state of the Question; and
unto that you seem as great a stranger as they, for you dare not say that
Bishop Mortons buttoning and unbuttoning his Cassock, was a religious Ceremony,
and if it were not, was it not a proper medium to prove the lawfulness of
humane religious Ceremonies?

The Non conformists laid down four qualifications in the Ceremonies which
they oppose: 1. Humane Institution. 2. Ordained signification. 3. Mystical
signification. 4. Appropriation unto Gods solemn Worship and Service.

1. Humane Institution, they are humane inventions, now Kneeling, Bowing,
Prostrating, lifting up of the eyes and of the hands, shouting and dancing for
joy, they absolutely deny to be humane inventions, as you may see in Ames his
dispute about Ceremonies, page 495.

2. A second thing is ordained signification, though they have an aptness to
signify, yet they do not actually signify, without special institution of
man^ those signs then that signify without institution by nature or by civil
custom a^^ shut out of this controversy.

1. By nature, natural Ceremonies as they are called, such as to look up to
Heaven, to lift up our heads, to bow our knees in prayer; for these Nature ^t
self, says Ames, does teach all nations to observe without any institution,
though not without some government of counsel, nor without such varle^^y, as
Nature it self is subject unto. Manuduct unto disp about humane Ceremon. page
27.

2. By civil custom, and of this nature was the woman's vail, 1 Cor. 11. By
received use and ancient custom, it showed the subjection of a woman unto the
husband, and so was an indicant sign thereof without any new institution of
man.

3. They are of mystical signification, they signify either some grace or
duty, they teach some spiritual and religious thing by their instituted
signification, and therefore are termed by some, doctrinal Ceremonies.

4. They are appropriated unto the acts of Religion in Gods service, and so are
religious in state, and have, as Parker phraseth it, a kind of immobility in
Gods worship, and hereupon they are termed rel^gious Ceremonies, and by this
all circumstances, or if you will call them circumstantial Ceremonies, all
Ceremonies of mere order and decency are excluded out of the controversy,
because they are common to things civil as well as sacred, and used as well out
of Gods worship, as in it.

Whereas Doctor Morton objecteth, that a Pulpit-cloath, Communion cup, the
Church and place of Gods service it self, may be appropriated and assigned
only unto Gods Worship: Ames for answer distinguishes betwixt appropriation
of this or that individual, and of the kind; Individuals (says he) may be
extrinsecally and accidentally appropriated, the kind remaining intrinsecally
common and indifferent, and the individuals that are thus extrinsecally
appropriated, are of the same use out of Gods service that they are in it;
this, says Ames, is occasion of admiration unto Dr. Burges the Rejoinder, but
he might have considered, that the immediate end of a Cloth, is to cover; of
a Cup, to drink out of; of Meeting places to meet in; and then where is the
strangeness of this assertion? Is there nor the same immediate use of a man's
eyes, in reading one book, as another, of a man's ears, in hearing one voice,
as another, however the subject seen, or heard, may differ in nature or kind?

This is a true state of the Question, made, not by me, but by Parker, Ames,
Didoclave, and other learned Non-conformists long ago: And now I hope you are
sensible that Bishop Morton his buttoning and unbuttoning his Cassock, came not
within many leagues of it; there is no doubt, but that either you have, or may
easily procure a Cassock of the like stuff and fashion, as that of the
Bishops; and why should not this fear be as feasible unto you as unto him?
P^ay, Sir, try the utmost of your skill, and let all the Bishops in the Land
be your assistants; nay, take in what help you can from Mr. Hooker his
discourse of Laws that you refer me unto, and if from the buttoning and
unbuttoning of your Cassock, you can with all your united forces, prove the
lawfulness of humane religious Ceremonies, symbolical signs; that is, those
which teach some things spiritual by their mystical instituted signification,
and are appropriated unto Gods worship, I will then confess that there is as
miraculous a virtue in your Cassock, as you ascribe unto the sign of the Cross
in the Primitive times, and shall be ready publicly to terract whatsoever I
have written, or spoken against these Ceremonies; but until such proof be
made, it will be no act of imprudence in you to forbear for the future, such
unsavory girds; for however they bewray a passionate, high, and scornful
contempt of your poor Antagonists, yet upon examination they will be found to
be saplesse and irrational, to have in them nothing of truth, and as little of
charity and humility.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 35.
Mean while, to the reproach of my great stupidity, I willingly acknowledge,
that it cannot enter into my understanding, what sense that text is capable of,
which with the best (possible) managery can be taught plainly to condemn all
institution of Ceremonies in the Church, i.e. by what Prosyllogismes or
supplies, or advantages of art this Enthymeme shall be rendered concludent. The
Apostle commands that all things be done decently, and in order: ergo, he
condemns all institution of Ceremonies for Gods worship. He that can maintain
this consequence not only to be true but (as Mr. J. affirms it) plain and
evident, will be a formidable adversary indeed, much better deserving that
title, than one whom he knows not, and therefore honors with it.

Jeanes.
Nothing has more betrayed men to shameful overthrows than contempt of
Adversaries: what opened the King of Sweden so speedy a way unto his Victories,
as the Emperors slighting of him? And I am confident that your despising of
Ames, will add nothing unto your conquests; it appears by your mistake of him,
that as yet, you never read him, and yet you have undertaken to censure and
refute him, and in order hereunto have adventured upon uncharitable conjectures
or surmises that have proved ground less and to have no footing in his
Writings; and now as for his Argument from the 1 Cor. 14. you elevate and
deride it, before you know what it is, and thus you triumph over on enemy that
you never yet looked in the face; but for your conviction, and the Readers
satisfaction, I have prevailed with the Stationer for the Printing of the
passages quoted in Ames, and unto them shall only prefix this Preface; Let not
him that girdeth on his harness boast himself, as he that puts it off, 1
King. 20.11.

Concerning an Argument against our Ceremonies, 1 Cor. 14. which is
acknowledged to be the only place in all the New Testament, that can be
alleged for their imposing. In Ames his Repl. to Mortons general Def. etc.
page 9, 10, 11, 12.

This Scripture, 1 Cor. 14.26.40. being rightly understood, does not only not
justify such Ceremonies as ours, but plainly condemns them. For the
manifesting of which assertion, because it may seem strange to those ears that
are accustomed to other sounds, I will here distinctly set down an Argument
drawn out of these words, against such Ceremonies as ours are.

All that is left unto the Churches liberty in things pertaining unto Gods
Worship, is to order them in comely manner. This is manifestly collected one of
that place in question. So the Defendant seems to grant, so P. Martyr
understands it, as is to be seen in his Commentary upon 1 Samuel 14. which
judgment of his is cited and approved by Dr. Whitaker de Font. page 841. and
844. confirmed also by Junius against Bellarmine, Cont. 3. l. 4. c. 16. n. 86,
87. and c, 17. n. 9, 10, 12, 13. where he shows that Christ is the only Law
giver, that appoints things in his Church; and that he has appointed all
that are requisite; and that the Church makes no Laws (properly so called) to
appoint any new things to be used, but only Canons, Orders, Directions,
ordering in seemly manner those things which Christ has appointed; and that if
she adds any thing of her own, she does de^line. The reason is because unto
her is committed no authority of appointing new things, but a Ministry to
observe and do such things which Christ has appointed. Vide etiam Jun. de
transl. imper. lib. 1. cap. 2. n. 26, 27.31. This is also confirmed by sound
reason, both in respect of the wisdom required; and in all Lawmakers, and
perfectly found in Christ, and also in regard of the nature of such
Institutions. For the former reason teaches (as Aristotle shows Rhet: 1.3)
that all, which possibly may, should be appointed in the law, by the giver of
it, and nothing left unto the ministerial judges, but that which must needs be
left, as matters of fact, etc. Now in the worship of God, all but particular
circumstances of order, may easily be appointed (as in very deed they were) by
our Lawgiver Christ. As for the nature of such institutions, that does also
require so much: for whatsoever is above civility therein, if it be not a
circumstance of order, it is worship, and therefore invented by man, unlawful
will worship. For whatsoever is used, or acted by him that worshipeth God, in
that act, it must needs be either grounded on civil humane considerations, and
therefore civility: or an act and mean^s of worship, and therefore worship: or
the ordering and manner of disposing those acts and means, and therefore
lawful, if lawfully and fitly applied: or else, at the least, idle and vain,
and therefore to be avoided, according to that of Basil, (...): A ^ift cannot
be given. By all this it may appear, that the authority of the Church is not to
appoint what she will, no not of things in their own nature indifferent, and
say they be in order, or for order: But only to ^order those things which God
has appointed.

Thus far the proposition, or first part of my Syllogism: the assumption
follows.

But to appoint and use the Ceremonies as we do, is not to order in comely
manner any thing pertaining to Gods worship. The reason is, because order
requires not the institution or usage of any new thing, but only the right
placing and disposing of things which are formerly instituted. This appears

1. By the notation, which is given of the word it self, which both in Greek
and Latin is taken from the ranking of Soldiers in certain bounds and limits
of time and place. Dicebant enim militibus tribuni, hactenus tibi licet, hic
consistes, eo progrediere, huc revertere, (...) inde ordo, Scalig and

2. By the definitions which are given thereof by Philosophers and Divines
Tull. Off. lib. 1. Eadem vis videtur ordinis and collocationis. Ordinem
definiunt compositionem rerum aptis and accommodatis locis. Locum autem
actionis, opportunitatem dicunt esse temporis. Aug. de civit. lib. 15. cap. 13.
Order is the disposition which fit places to things equal and unequal, id
est, when things are handsomely ranked, some to go before, and some to follow,
as P. Martyr expounds it, loc. com. cl. 4. cap. 5.

3. The same also is confirmed by our Divines, who usually giving instances of
order, do insist in time, place, and suchlike circumstances, making a
difference betwixt mystical ceremonies and order, many times condemning the
one, and allowing the other: as the Divines of France and the Low Countries in
their observations on the Harmony of Confession. Sect. 17. Beza Ep. 8. Jun. in
Bell. Append. tract. de cultu imaginum. c 7. n. 12, 13, 14.

4. By the Context of the Chap. viz. 1 Cor. 14. it plainly appears, that
order is opposed unto that confusion spoken of verse. 33. and therefore
imports thing but that peaceable proceeding, whereby they should speak one by
one. (...) and the rest attend, etc. v. 30, 31. So Basil expounds it, showing
order to consist in sorting of Persons, some to this, and some to that,
according to their office, and in determining of time and place, (...). p. 459.
(...). and p. 530. (...). Lastly neither Luke 1.8. neither in any place of
Scripture does ^he word order import any more then has been said.

As for Comeliness, that is nothing but the seemliness of order. For as P.
Martyr says in 1 Cor. 11 it is such a tempering of actions as whereby they may
more fitly attain their end Other where it may contain that natural, or
civil hand somenesse, which is spoken of chap. 11.13. as it does chap. 12, 23
and so includes all that which is grounded on civility, as a fair cloth and
Cup for the Communion, a fair and firm vessel for Baptism; but not the
appointing of n^w mystical ceremony, f^r then such ceremonies were here
commanded to all Churches, which the Defend I think will not say: and then the
Apostolic Ass^m^lies should have worsh^ped God uncomeli^y.

Thus we have both proposition and assumption of our argument, against the
ceremonies, confirmed out of this place, which the Defendant choose as the only
p^ace that could be brought for them. Now I hope we may add the conclusion.

Therefore to appoint and use the ceremonies as we do, is not left to the
liberty of the Church, i.e. it is unlawful.

Concerning an argument against our Ceremonies, out of 1 Cor. 14. Which is
acknowledged to be the only place in all the new Testament that can be alleged
for their imposing. Ames in his dispute about humane Ceremonies page 57 usque
page 81.

1. The Replyer, seeing that all the cause (on the imposers part) depends on
this pla^e of Scripture, and finding nothing by any Logic could be drawn from
it for our Ceremonies, thought good to try if there may no^, from the same
pla^e be formed a better argument against them. This the Rej. calls beating
up of a new Hare, and loosing the way, as if all the Def. his Retortions, and
all the Rejoinder his paper sh^^ which he makes after the Repl. when he
imagines him to fly, ^^ run away, were new Hares and exorbi^ations. I know
not else wha^ pr^^ledge he has, to use a weight, and a weight, one for the
Defend, with himself, and another for the Replyer.

2. The argument i^ thus put together by the Rej page 77 All that is left unto
the Churches liberty, in things pertaining to Gods worship, is to order them in
comely ^anner: But to appoint and use the Ceremonies, as we do, is not to
order in comely manner any things pertaining to Gods worship^ Therefore, to
appoint and use the Ceremonies, as we do, is not left to the liberty of the
Church, i. e. it is unlawful. The Rejoinder answers first to the
proposition, and then to the assumption, but so as he mingleth both together,
in many words: Yet I will follow his order.

3. First of all he denies the proposition to be sound in the Repl his
meaning. But I can see no reason of his denial.

1. He says, that the order, and ordering is taken sometimes largely, for all
discipline or policy; sometimes strictly, for ranking of persons, and actions
handsomely, one before, and another after, and so is opposed only to confusion,
as in this place, 1 Cor. 14.40. Now this is far from overthrowing the
proposition, in the Repl. his meaning: for the Repl. meant order in the strict
se se, which makes also for his purpose; And this the Rej. grants to be the
meaning of the Apostle in this place, 1 Cor. 14.40. Which place the same Rej.
page 57. confesses to be the only place (in the New Test) by which power is
given to the Church to constitute Ceremonies: from both which said together, it
necessarily follows, that all which is left to the Churches power under the
title of order is ordaining in the strict sense, i. e. ranking of Persons and
Actions handsomely, as the Rejoind. expounds it. Yet immediately after he
accuse^h the Repl, for saying order to be the right placing and disposing of
things, in tituted for time, place, etc, not showing why he disliketh him, or
wherein differs from his own expectation. Only he says that etc often by the
Rep. put to time and place, is a blind. Which is not so, for by etc. is meant
all circumstances of like nature with time and place, as Number, Measure,
vicissitude etc. How many Psalms shall be sung, or Chapters read, what and how
much Scripture shall be at this or that Assembly expounded, how one part of
worship shall succeed another etc. without a blind.

4. In the next place, the Rejoynd finds a wrong meaning in the Repl. his use
of the phrase (in comely manne^) because afterward, in the end of he
Assumption, he says that, Comeliness is the Seemliness of order. For (says
the Rej.) beside that Comeliness of order, there is other Comeliness. Now this
the Replier p^ofesseth immediately after the words quoted; otherwhere
Comeliness may contain all natural and civil handsomeness etc. Neither will I
contend about this, but it implies so much in this very place; so that the
Rejoynd has not given any reason, why the Proposition or first part of the
argument should not be admitted. Yet after that he has fathered it upon Mr.
Jac^b, and made the Repl. his disciple, he comes to examine the proofs of
i^, though he himself (as is now showed) has given sufficient assent unto all
contained therein.

5. The First proof is, that it is manifestly collected out of the place in
question, 1 Cor 14. and the Defend. seems to grant as much. To which the
Rejoynd, answer^th.

1. That in that place three distinct things are propounded, Edification,
Decency, Order: And these three cannot be one. But Edification being the end,
Decency and Order the means, they may well be contained in one: decent order
tending to Edification, or (which is as much to our purpose) in two; Decency
and Order for Edification. A holy Sacrament decently, and orderly admi^istred,
for Edification, is not four distinct things, but one.

His Second is, that these words are the conclusion of the whole Tract:
beginning at the Eleventh Chapt. wherein are handled some things only
concerning decency, some more properly pertaining to Edification, and some
which belong more peculiarly to Order, Ergo more is commanded in th^se words,
than the comely placing of one thing after another. Let this be granted, yet I
follows not that more is left unto the Churches liberty, than order and
dec^nc^ unto Edification; for all things that are commanded, are not left unto
^he Chu^ches liberty.

But that speaking in unknown tongues, which the Rejoynd. does refer to
Edification, is distinct from order and decency is by good Divines accounted to
offend against the order, and decency, spoken of chap. 11. and 40. So Dr.
Whitaker, de Script. q. 2. c. 18. disputes against the use of an unknown
tongue in Gods service, out of the very pl^ce: pugnat hoc vero cum (...) quam
maxim, 1 Cor. 14.40. i. e. this mightily overthrows that good order which h^
so much stands for. His 3. is, the Defend. does no way seem to g^ant the
proposition; because the Repl. undertaketh by argument to rescue this place out
of the Def. his hands, But this nothing at all argues, that the Def. and the
Repl. do not agree about the proposition, though they diffent about the place,
as it is handled in the assumption. The Papists grant us this Proposi^^^n: No
Ph^as^ is used by Christ in these words, This is my body, but a Sac^amental
one: Yet because they deny the assumption; transubstantiating words are not a
Sacramental phrase, we undertake by argument to rescue this place out of their
hands. So the Def requiring no more, than order and decency unto Edification,
to be left unto the Churches liberty, for the establishing of our Ceremonies,
does seem at least to grant, that all which is left to the Churches liberty is
order and decency unto Edification, though he deny these to contain no more
then mere circumstances, which is the assumption: Of Edification there is not
mention made in the proposition, because tha^, as an end, is out of question,
and always included.

6. Peter Martyr is cited out of D. Whitaker De Pontif. page 841. 844. As
agreeing with that which the Repl. would have, Here the Rej. inlargeth himself
much for the sake (as he says) of those that are unlatined.

He tells us P. M. does distinguish, though not divide, comeliness from
order, which we do also, for take the Repl. his words in the most rigorous
sense you can, yet comeliness of order, does distinguish comeliness from
order, no less than comeliness of a man does distinguish it from a man.

2. He adds, that P. Mart. does there instance in the Ceremony of thrice
dipping, and in the observation or institution of Feasts. But let the Reader
know, that those words, Ceremony, Observation, Institution of Feasts, which the
Rej. has set down in a differing letter, to be noted as P. M. his words, are
not to be found in the place of P. M. but are added by the Rej. for advantage.
P. M expounds the meaning he had in all his instances, by what place, what
time, what manner. If therefore the Repl. did not look upon that place, but
took it on trust, from the trusty hand of D. Whitaker (as the ^ej objected to
him) yet it proves good and fitting. So that ^he Re^ forgets himself much,
when upon this uncertain, and momentlesse conject^re, he compares the Repl. to
a hungry creature (or dog) that run^e^h away with a bare bone. D. Morton once
(at the least) alleged some testimonies on trust; and therefore, being
challenged for them, he confessed, that he^ had them from Mr. Stock Yet the
Popish adversary (author of the sober reckoning) did not compare him to dog,
but only said, that he sent to stock and stones for satisfaction about them.
Which I do not allege to the disparagement of either D. M. o^ M. St. but
only to show by comparison how the ^ej. does sometime over flow in his terms.

3. For D Whitaker, he tells ^s, that he only says, that Ecclesiastica.
Laws belong only to order, or ordering, but not as it is distinct from
comeliness. As if any of us did so. The Repl his words; ordering in comely
manner, do not (I hope) refer all to order, considered apart from all
comeliness.

This is the full sum of all that the Rejoind, had to except against the
first allegation. And yet here upon this nothing, it pleases him to accuse,
not only the Repl. but these men, of haughty and magistral fashions, gulling,
and deceiving, great and shameful sin, and the poor Repl. at the least, for
a man destitute of common honesty. It seems he was very angry at something.
Let the understanding Reader guess, at what? 6. For more manifestation of the
Repl. his vacuity of common honesty, the Rej. refers us to the second
testimony out of Junius against Bell. Cont. 3. l. 4. c. 16. n. 86, 87. and cap.
17. n. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Omitting therefore unnecessary repetition, let us hear the reasons of
extraordinary dishonesty.

1. Junius cap 16 n. 86, 87. says only first, that those humane Laws are only
necessary in the Church, which tend to this, that all things may be done
decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40.

2. That these are improperly called Laws in the Church, being more properly
Constitutions., or Canons.

Now out of the first saying, the Repl. concluded, that Junius did judge the
Apostle left no more to the Churches liberty, than to order Gods Ordinances in
decent manner: And out of the second he inferred the same conclusion; because
any constitution, above ordering in decent manner that which before was
enjoined, is properly a Law. What extraordinary dishonesty is here?

2. Junius c. 17. n. 9. says only, that to make new Laws in divine things, is
to decline, i. e. in points of Faith, or necessary rules of Sanctimony. But
Iunius makes no mention at all, either of Faith or Sanctimony, or Necessity,
nor Bell. himself in that place. Neither is the question there handled of
points of Faith, or things absolutely necessary to Sanctimony. All double,
treble Ceremonies reductively Sacramental, and Worship, are by the Rej. his
own dictates double sacred; and that is it which Iunius means by divine.

3. Bell. says that the addition forbidden Deuteronomy. 4. is of Laws contrary to the
Law of God: Whereunto Junius, n. 10. answers, that any Laws at all, added to
Gods Laws, are contrary to the Law of God, speaking of proper Laws, without any
backing of Gods Law, binding the conscience, as he shows, cap. 16. n. 86.8.

Here 1. the Rejoind. left out those words of Iunius, neither contrary nor
beside the word; which if he had transtated, then the Readers memory might have
recalled, how this place cited before for defense of that phrase, was but
shifted by the Rejoind. page 42.

2. It is to be marked that the Def. and Rej. their answer unto Deuteronomy 4. is the
same with Bell. page 134.

3. That exposition of Laws without backing, is of the Rej. his own forging. No
such thing is found in the places quoted, nor yet did Bell. profess to defend
any such thing. Of binding the conscience, enough has been said in the head of
difference betwixt our Ceremonies and Popish.

4. Iunius n. 12. answering to Bellarmine his saying, that God (in the N.T.)
gave only the common Laws of Faith and Sacram. leaving the specials to the
Church, etc. affirms Gods Laws to be perfect re, ratione and modo, and those
of the Church to be but Canons and disposings of convenience, for better
observing of divine Laws.

Where note 1. an example of an etc. for a blind, or blinding, which the
Rejoynd. formerly told of, for in that etc. is cortained, pro locor^m, and
temporum diversitate: quia non possunt diver sissimi populi convenire in iisd^m
legibus and ritibus. i. e. for this cause, special laws of rituall things,
are left to the Churches liberty, because of variety, which falls out now by
occasion of times and places, which is the very thing that the Rejoynd. pawned
his credit, Bell. never said, page 15, 16. Note also, Secondly, that Junius
does not in this place mention Canons, as the Rejoynd, pleases to alter his
words in reciting of them; But cautions and dispositions. Now a caution about
the performance of any thing, is not an institution of a new thing. 3. Jun. is
found to say as much as he was alleged for, and to the contrary we have from
the Rejoynd. an hill di^it.

5. Junius n. 13. says only that Christ is the only Law giver, that is, to
give laws, that in themselves and by the very authority of the law maker, do
bind the conscience. As if Junius in confuting of Bell. did only say the very
same thing with him, that he goes about to consute; for Bellarmine, in that
very place says: Christ is the che^fe law giver, who by his own authority can
judge and make laws.

Now out of all these allegations, the Rejoynd. makes his interrogatories.

1. Where be these words, all that is requisite as spoken of Rites and
Ceremonies? Answer, the sense of these words, as spoken of all Ceremonies above
mere order and decency, is cap. 16, 28.

2. Where find you in Junius that the Church may constitute no new thing? Ans.
cap. 17. n. 9. this in things divine is to turn aside: for the Rejoynd. his
interpretation of those words, that they mean points of faith, and necessary
rules of Sanctimony, is confuted by conference of Bellarmines words there
opposed, who in that place instanceth in Ceremonial and Judicial laws, and
speaks not at all of faith and necessary Sanctimony?

3. Where are these words, Ordering in seemly manner. Ans. cap. 16. n. 86.
those only humane laws are necessary in the Church, which make that all things
be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40.

4. If the Church may appoint no new things, but only see to decency and order,
then says the Rejoynd. what Patent has she to make particular ordinances for
time and place? unless they be no new things. I ans.

1. Time and place considered as mere occasional circumstances, are no more new
things in Gods service, then concreated time and place, were new things in
creation, distinct from the created world. And Calvin ins^it. l. 4. cap. 10.
Sect. 22. severely censureth those, that call such times of determinations new
laws: Quis nisi ^a^umniator, sic novam fer^i ab iis legem dicat, quos constant
duntaxat scandalis occurrere, quae sunt a domino satis diserte prohibita? if
procuring that scandals be avoided, be no new thing, then neither is procuring
that disorder, and undecency, for time, place, etc. be avoided, any new thing.

As for a Patent to appoint double, treble, sacred ceremonies, it is a vain
thing for them to plead it, that cannot show it under the great Seal. I do not
think that any earthly King would have his subjects submit themselves to that
power, which is fetched out of a patent, invisible and only avouched by
conjectures.

7. A reason was given of the foresaid proposition, out of Jan. de Transl. Imp.
l. 1. c 2. n. 26, 27, 31, viz. that the Church has only a ministry, to observe
such things as Christ has appointed, not authority of appointing new things.
Here the Rej. 1. observes, that those words (new things) have no footsteps in
Junius; As if new things could be appointed lawfully without authority of
appointing; and leaves only ministerial performance of things appointed, he
denies appointing of new things. 2 He argeeth thus, if the Church have a
ministry to appoint and do such things as Christ has commanded, then must
she needs have a commission legative, to appoint and use rites, serving to
order and decency. Add to this only, and then it is not only that, but all
that which we require. 3. He c^yeth out of miserable perversion, either by
gross negligence, or mistaking. And why so I pray? because forsooth all that
Junius says is good to prove, that no Ecclesiastical person has any power by
his calling over temporal Princes. But this is nothing against their delegated
dependant power, by commission: But First, these are very strange distinctions:
they have not any power by their calling, but some by commi^^ion. They have not
any power over temporal Princes (though they be members of the Church) but
over the Church they have.

2. The Rejoynd* makes Junius only to deny that, which Bellarmine never
affirmed, viz. absolute independent power of Ecclesiastical persons, as
supreme Lords. Nay Bellarmine answers to Calvin in ^he very same manner that
the Rejoynd. does: The Pope is not the chei^ law giver but the Vicar of Christ,
and by Christ's authority makes laws.

3. He add^th, that Junius d^^p. de trad. distinguishes betwixt decency, and
the seemliness of order alone.

As if this were the main question, or any part of the Proposition, or denied
by the Repl* at all. The Rejoynd, having little to say that was to purpose,
catches hold of one word in the end of the Assumption used by the Repl.
seem^inesse of order (which yet is immediately there differenced from other
decency, as well commanded as this) and that he makes the main matter of the
proposition: whereas the meaning is, that nothing is left unto liberty in Gods
worship, above decency and order, for which these testimonies are brought, and
not for the other.

8. For more full support of the foresaid proposition, a reason is added, from
the f^llnes of a perfect law, which leaves no more unto ministerial judges,
then needs must. For answer, the Rejoynd. 1. Observes that some cases are of
necessity variable, and so left. So the occasions of different ri^es, and
Ceremonies are so various, that if ou^ Lord had fixed any one certain fashion,
he should have made rather snares then laws for his Church. As if he had
appointed sitting at the table in a communion: or kneel^ng in prayer. This is
strange stufle. 1. So much is granted, as is desired, viz. that God ha^h left
nothing (about his worship) undetermined in his word, i.e. uncommanded, and
unforbidden particulary, save only that which he could not command or forbid:
Now let any man think, and judge, whether it had not been possible for God in
his word, either to have commanded, or forbidden the signing of those that are
baptized with the sign of the Cross as well, as baptizing of them with water?
^ How can that too too bold and inconsiderate assertion be excused: if our Lord
had fixed (or Commanded) any one certain fashion of Ceremonies, he had made
rather snares then laws for his Church. If it had pleased God to command, or
forbid the sign of the Cross in par^icular, what snare had it been? When God
appointed all the Ceremonies of the Old Testament, he did not I hope make
snares for his Church, though he did lay a burden upon it, 3. Whereas the
Rejoynd, makes sitting at a table, in the Lord's Supper, and kneeling at
Prayer, to be such things as the Lord could not command, but as snares, because
sometime a Table may be wanting, or something to si^ on, or ability to sit;
and so of Kneeling: this is as poor a snare to catch any man of understanding
in, as one shall lightly see made. For 1. many affirmative Commandments of God
there are, which in extraordinary cases cannot be fulfilled, and cease to
bind, as praying unto, and praising of God with our voice; which is no snare to
him that cannot speak.

The appointing of Wine for the Supper, is no snare, though some Countries have
it not, and some men cannot well drink it. See Beza Ep. 2. Pareus and Symb.
Sacram. lib. 1. cap. 9.2. I would know, whether it had been a snare if God had
appointed sitting at the Table with exception of such extraordinary cases? if
yea, then much more when men appoint kneeling, surplicing, and crossing; if no,
then our argument may proceed.

Kneeling in public prayer might have been appointed without snaring, as
appearing before the Lord thrice in the year, was appointed to every Male in
Israel, Deuteronomy. 16.16. For (without doubt) many men in Israel, were, by accident
more unable to travel up to Jerusalem, then any Christian that has knees, is
to kneel.

After this observation, of which the Rej* says it may be as we will, he
answers, that our Lord has left nothing absolute to the will of his
Officers; but has left even ambulatory Rites, under general rules, which will
tie them as perfectly, as if every one had been named and with less cumber.

1. But this is nothing to the purpose; because so the imperfectest Law that is
in any Nation upon the earth, if it be worthy the name of Law, leaves nothing
so absolute to the will of inferior Officers, as that it should be without the
general rules of Justice, common good, etc. nay not without the rules of order
and decency.

2. Concerning the comparison of perfection, betwixt general and particular
rules, though enough has been said before, upon like occasion, yet this I will
add.

If he means, that a general rule, if it be perfectly understood and applied,
does as perfectly tie as particulars* I grant it to be a truth. And so was the
Old Testament as perfect a rule of Christian Faith as the New, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor, as perfect as the six of the second Table. But if he mean,
that a general rule is as fit and full for the direction of us imperfect men,
as particulars are, then I think no man conscious of humane frailty, will
believe him.

Neither do I believe, that he himself is so fully persuaded in crossing the
baptized, by any rule which he has out of Gods word for that, as he is for
baptizing by the rule of that.

The ^epl. having (as he thought) sufficiently grounded the general, that a
perfect Law leaves nothing more then needs must unto inseriour officers, goes
on to assume, that in the worship of God, all, but particular circumstances of
order, might easily be (as indeed they were) appointed by Christ, and therefore
need not be left to the Churches wisdom. Upon this it pleases the Rej. to say
little to the purpose, in many words.

1. He says, that circumstances of order were not harder to determine than
those of decency. Now it is plain enough that the Repl, here, naming order,
did also understand decency, though he named order only.

2. He asks, what School of Divinity has taught the Repl. to say, that our
Lord forbore the determining of such circumstances, because all else was easy?
I answer, no rule of Divinity did ever teach the Repl. to say so, nor yet the
Rejoinder to impute unto him, what he never said.

But if he means (as it seems he does) because it was not so easy to
determine circumstances of time and place, as real worship.

I then answer, that this (as I think) the Replyer learned out of that Divinity
School, out of which the Def. and Rejoinder learned. That which they cite out
of Calvin, page 15, 16. Junius is cited to the contrary out of Cont. 3. l. 4.
cap. 17. n. 12. (which place the Rejoinder looked upon by occasion of the
Replyer his former citation of it) But he in that very place, distinguishes
betwixt Laws, properly so called, and cautions, leaving only cautions to the
Churches liberty, which is the very same that the Repl. means. The plain
truth is, that supposing Gods will to be, we should worship him in any place,
and at any time fitting, it was necessary, that the particular choice of
fitting time and place, should be left undetermined to any particular time, or
place, exclusively. Calvin also is cited, as more comely, expressing the cause
to be, that Christ would not, than that he could not determine such matters.

Now though Calvin, being so excellent in his expressions may easily be granted
to have expressed the same meaning in more comely manner than the Repl. Yet
here was no cause of noting disparity: For the Repl in saying, all things but
particular order and decency may be easily appointed, did not say what Christ
could do, but what might be easily for us appointed, or with our ease, or with
the ease which we do conceive of in Law giving, or of an ordinary Lawgiver,
having such authority as Christ had. And who does not see, that it is not so
easy, to appoint every particular place, and time, wherein God shall be
worshipped, throughout all the world, as with that worship he shall be served?
For that particular description, a thousand books, so great as our own Bible,
would not have sufficed.

The world (as John says) would not be capable of the volumes that must have
been written. The Rej. himself, page 89. ^elleth us of cumber, and much ado,
that would have been, in naming every particular, and is not this as much as
less easy? yet it pleased him to seek matter of altercation about this
phrase, and that (which agrees not) in mediately after he had, without reason,
accused the Repl. of picking quarrels, page 88.

10. A second reason of the Repl. his proposition, was, that whatsoever in
worship is above order and decency, is worship: Because whatsoever is acted by
him that worshippeth, in that act. beside ordinary civility, must either ^ee an
act or means of worship, or an orderly decent disposing of those acts, or else
at the least idle, and so unlawful. The Rej. answers 1. that a significant
Ceremony for Edification is lawful; yet comes not under any of those heads.
But he himself confesses a significant Ceremony instituted of God, to be
essential worship, and instituted of man to be worship, though not in it
self: of which distinction enough has been said in the head of Worship: Yet
this by the way: A significant ceremony for edification is the same in it
self, by whomsoever it be instituted, because institution is extrinsecal to
the thing instituted, and alters it not in it self, internally. If therefore it
be essential lawful worship, in it self, when it is instituted by God, it is
also essential (though not lawful) worship, in it self, when it is instituted
by man. Beside that Ceremony whose proper sole end is edification toward God,
is properly done to the honor of God, and so properly divine worship.

2. His answer is, that comeliness grounded on civil humane considerations, is
not mere civility, in sacred actions and use, but sacred by application. Which
is very true, if civil application be meant by mere civil; but then it is
nothing to the purpose. For sacred by application is seemly clothing, put on
for to go to Church in, and yet is in it self mere civil. The Question is not
of application, but of internal nature. Sacred things applid to civil business,
do not therefore become civil; for who will say, that prayer, at the
beginning of a Parliament, is a civil act, though it were used in the upper and
lower house, and applied to that civil meeting, as it ought to be? And why then
shall the application of civil decency unto sacred business, make it alter the
nature or name of it?

3. His answer is that all means of worship are not worship. But he knew well
enough, that this was meant of proper means of worship.

His fourth is, that ordering and manner of disposing is ill divided from
comeliness. Neither did the Repl. intend so to divide, but rather to conjoyne
them, understanding by that manner of disposing, comeliness. But if the Rej.
had not catched up some show of confounding comeliness with order, which was
not intended by the Repl. he had been in this argument wholly at a loss.

His fifth and last answer is, that by Basils leave somethings in themselves,
may, and sometimes must be tolerated. But he should have remembered, that the
question here is not of tolerating, but of appointing and using.

Now if it be lawful, to appoint and use empty and unprofitable Ceremonies in
Gods worship, let those worshipers judge, that tremble at the majest^ of God*
and are afraid in any manner to appear empty, and unprofitably before hi^ Nay
(to pass by our Divines) let the Papists themselves judge. Bellar. de Pontif.
l. 4. c. 17. ad 4. Confesses those Ceremonies to be forbiden, which are
unprofitable altogether, and vain precepts, unprofitable and f^ivolous
Ceremonies, only by humane spirit invented. And de Effect. Sacrament. l. 2. c.
32. empty and good for nothing, more then needs, and not a jot tending to any
Godliness, and who not?

11. Thus far concerning the proposition of our argument: the assumption
follows, which is this: To appoint and use the Ceremonies as we do, is not to
order in comely manner any thing pertaining to Gods worship. The reason is,
because order requires not the institution or usage of any new thing, but only
the right placing and disposing of things formerly instituted.

The Rejoynd, answers 1. That order requires new time, place and measure:
which is a Sophistry in the proposition before abused, and confuted.

2 His second is, that ordering in comely manner, or comeliness, requires the
institution of such formalities, as shall be suitable to the dignity, and
variety of divine actions. Where the term formalities is not so formal, that
a man may spy in it the difference it has from other things: the Rejoinder in
his Manuduc. page 36. appropriateth it to Bishops Rochets, etc. even as they
are distinct from Surplices: the Bishops went before the hearse in their
formalities, the Clerks in their Surplices. So that it seems to mean some
Ceremonies of State, and dignity: of which kind neither Cross, not surplice is
any. Howsoever the ordering of one thing, does not require another new thing,
but only disposing of that one. For if it did, then that new thing (because
that also must be ordered) would require another new thing, and that also for
order sake another, so that no one thing could be ordered without an infinite
heap of new things.

As for the dignity of divine actions, that is best suited with man's reverent
and humble simplicity, not with outward shows of dignity, invented by man. The
woman's ordinary vail was mo^e suitable to the dignity of Gods worship, then if
she had adorned her self with Gold, and precious Stones. Paul's plain Cloak was
more suitable, then the chiefest Cope in all Rome. If order requires outward
shows of dignity, then Rome, which is a confused Babel, may be to all Churches
a mirable example of religious order; for the Council of Tient Sess. 22.
professes their Mass Ceremonies to be invented, that the majesty of such a
Sacrifice might be set out.

12. To show further that order requires not such Ceremonies as ours, the
notation of the word was brought in, signifying no such thing. Now the Rejoynd,
grants, that originally the word does not contain within the compass of it,
such kind of Ceremonies, though by usage it may. Which is very true; but
helps not, Except the Def. or Rejoynd. whose princi^all argument is taken
from this place, and only retorted by us, can prove, that in this place the
word order is extended beyond his original signification. He will not
therefore stand with us, about the signification of the word in this place: let
order says he, in this place signify no more then placing. But he makes his
retreat to the word Comeliness; asking if comeliness be nothing? I answer
yes, it is something; but the Repl. did not insist on that word, because he
took the force of the Def. his argument from this place, principally to lie
upon order.

But seeing the Rejoinder has given up Order, I will add a word or two
concerning Comeliness.

I take this for granted, that seeing the Rejoinder confesses order here to be
taken in strict signification, as opposed only to confusion, page 78. he will
also consent with us, that decency, in the same place and sentence, is to be
taken in strict signification, as opposed only to the vice of undecency. Now
hence it follows that decency requires nothing, but that which is hecessary
to the avoiding of undecency.

I ask therefore if undecency in Gods worship cannot be avoided, without
double, treble, sacred, significant Ceremonies, of man's inventing? If nor, then
the Apostles did much forget themselves, in their public worshipping of God,
before men had invented such Ceremonies; for that is no answer which the
Rejoynd. after gives; all Churches are not bound to this or that particular
way of comeliness. All Churches are bound to avoid undecency and to do that
which decency requires, or binds them unto. If yea, then Decency does not
require such kind of Ceremonies.

Neither does it indeed, any more then order. So Mr. Perkins, lat. to. 2. p.
888. Decency is when the service of God is performed with convenient and fit
circumstances of time, place, person, and gesture: and here of the Apostle
speaks 1 Cor. 14.40. The plain simple truth, without Cere^oniall affectation,
is, that decency is (in this place) nothing but good civil fash^^n, agreeable
not only to worship, but also to any grave assembly. Decency (says Pareus upon
the place) is opposed to vanity, sports, riot: it stands not in hoods, Caps, or
vizards of fond Ceremonies. etc.

I dare appeal to D. B. his conscience, if Baptism be not as decently
administered without the Cross, as with it,? and public prayers made as
decently without a Surplice, as with it? Let conscience here speak, and the
Rejoynde: harkening unto it, will (without all doubt) confess, that decency in
this place does no more require either Cross or Surplice, then order, and that
both of them together does no more require those Ceremonies, then a hundred
other, which in England (though not at Rome) are denied unto them.

To this purpose Mr. Attersall, in his second book of the Sacrament, chap. 5.
says well: if they refer all this trash and trumpery (of hamane Ceremontes
in Baptism) to order and comeliness, as Hosius does, do they not thereby
blasphemously accuse the Baptism of John, and of the Apostles of uncomelinesse
and disorder? whereas the comeliness and dignity of the Sacraments is to be
esteemed by the word of God, by the institution of Christ, by the simplicity of
the Gospel, and by the practice of the Apostles: Nothing is more comely,
decent, and orderly, then that which Christ commands and allows: nothing is
more uncomely and unseemly then that which man inventeth in the service of God,
and in the celebration of the Sacraments; thereby inverting and perverting the
holy Ordinances of God.

12. The received definitions of order, are brought in to the same purpose, by
the Replier. And the Rejoinder yeildeth so much as they import, viz. that order
in strict signification does not imply such Ceremonies as ours.

He must therefore either prove, that in this place, 1 Cor. 14.40. that word is
not taken strictly, which he himself formerly granted, or give up the place,
which is (by his own confession) the only place of all the New Testament, for
warran^ing of such Ceremonies, or fly to decency, upon which he cannot any
more fasten then upon order, as ha^h been showed.

Nothing material is added in the rest of the Rejoynd. his answer unto this
argument (where our divines are observed, to distinguish order and decency,
from mystical Ceremonies, the context of the Chapter, 1 Cor. 14. is declared
to respect n^ mystical Ceremonies, the Phrase of Scripture is showed to
consent) nothing (I say and the Reader may see) is added; but only the same
things are ^epeated about order, and decency which are now sufficiently
discussed.

So the Rejoinder has nothing to say to the contrary, but that we may safely
conclude, Ergo, to appoint and use the Ceremonies as we do, is not left to the
liberty of the Church, i. e. it is unlawful.

If there were nothing else against them, in all the Scripture, then this
place, besides which the Defend, and Rejoynd can find none in all the New
Testament for them, any indifferent man would say they are not allowed.

Those that are devoted to the Ceremonies may shuffle up and down, first to
O^der, and when they are beaten thence, to Decency, and from decency, when they
can defend that no longer, to Edification, as the Rejoynd. does: But all will
not help. Let them pitch or insist upon one of these grounds, without starting,
I will pawn my Head, their A^^hor will come home to them again, as finding noe
fast ground either in Order, Decency, or Edification, for double significant
Ceremonies (such as o^rs) to ride at. The Defend, could frame no consequence
out of any of these words, the Rejoynd, says there is one, but he cannot show
it. To the contrary consequence, nothing is answered of any moment.

And is not this a miserable cause, which has no place in all the N.
Testament* which the best Advocates can allege for it, but only that, out of
which it is utterly confounded? To the Defend, and Rejoynders maintaining such
a cause, this testimony may be given that they would willingly, so far as
they can, favor things which the times favor, and therefore strive to make
something of that which makes nothing for them. In the former section, when
Order, Decency, and Edification, should have been handled as rules, according
to the title of the digression, the Rejoinder suddenly breaks off, referring
them to a fitter place. Now here in this place, he was constrained to touch
upon them, but so softly, and sparingly, that it appears he found this no
fitter place then the former, for those reserved Considerations. When shall we
come to the fitter place?

By this I hope the Reader is satisfied, that there is more in Ames his
Argument than you imagined, and thinks that you had no reason to slight it
before you had seen it. I will readily acknowledge that you are fa^e his
superior for your incomparable skill in Critical learning and Antiquity, and
all the world would account me a fool to say or think otherwise, but I hope it
is no blas^hemy to say, that he was not much your inferior for Logic,
Philosophy, and Scholastical Divinity; in which latter, he was n^ore versed
than most of our Protestant Writers: Comparisons I know are odious, bu^^
Apologize for a dead man, and therefore I hope I shall be held excused: Indeed
his memory ^^ght to be precious with me; for though I dissent from him in some
things, yet I must needs confess, that in my first study of Divinity, I most
profited by him: I have often found in a few words of his that satisfaction,
which I in vain searched for in more voluminous discourses. I know that he
has been contemned by many, but it has been by Learned men that never read
him, or by ignorant Readers that never understood him; and indeed unto those
that have not made some tolerable progress in Philosophy, he will be in many
places unintelligible; for he studied brevity, and for that p^rpose, frequently
made choice of scholastical expressions: He lived and dyed an exile for his
dislike, and opposition of our Ceremonies; and the Bishops were not contented
to have hunted him from his Native soil, but pursued him beyond the Seas; for
they engaged King James to command the then English Ambassador at the Hague to
solicit against his employment in the Netherland Universities, and he
prevailed with the States General to exclude him from Leyden, where otherwise
he had been received as a Professor; but making the like attempt at Franeker,
the motion was rejected as unchristian and uncharitable, with some tart
reflections upon the Bishops malice. This I have received from a very good hand,
one of his Scholars, that heard it from his own mouth: But I return from this
digression.

Upon the review of this Section I find, what you say of Ames his Argument for
condemning of the Ceremonies from 1 Cor. 14. may with better reason be applied
unto Bishop Mortons medium for justifying of them, and with your leave, Mutatis
mutandis, I shall apply it thereunto: To the reproach of my great stupidity, I
willingly acknowledge, that it cannot-enter into my understanding what sense his
buttoning and unbuttoning of* his Cassock is ca^able of* which with the best
possible managery can be taught plainly to justify humane institution of
religious mystical Ceremonies in the Church appropriated unto Gods worship, ^e.
by what Prosyllogismes or supplies, or advantages of art, this Enthymeme shall
be rendered concludent. Bishop Morton buttoned and unbuttoned his Cassock,
therefore it is lawful for Church governors to invent and devise Symbolical
Ceremonies, that is, those which teach things spiritual by their mystical
signification, and appropriate them unto Gods worship. He that can maintain
this consequence to be not only true, but plain and evident, will be a
formidable adversary indeed, as formidable an adversary as ever put pen to
paper; and if you cannot maintain this Consequence, the terror of your name will
with me in great part vanish, as touching argumentation; When the Spaniards
came first into America, the inhabitants thought them to be immortal, but when
they had once taken some of them, they put their heads under water, and there
kept them until they had drowned them, and this soon altered their opinion:
knowing your vast abilities, I looked upon you as a very formidable adversary,
and expected from you very terrible arguments; but your arguments for the
Ceremonies I have taken, and I think ch^ked them with sa^isfying answers, and
therefore you are not in this controversy so formidable an adversary as at
first I thought you; but I impute this to the b^dnesse of your cause, and not
to any defect in your abilities.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 36.
His third and last impression now remains, wherein he undertakes to prove by
three arguments, that custom is not the only rule of decency; and his first
argument is, because the light and law of nature is also a rule of decency. To
this I answer, that in those things, whereof alone he knows I there speak in
the Sect: concerning uniformity, i.e. in things indifferent, gestures, and
other Ceremonies in Gods service, the law of nature is no rule at all: and I
suppose he cannot think, I am sure he pretends not to prove, or so much as
affirm it is, and therefore though not simply in all sorts of things, of
which I speak not, nor can by any rules of discourse be supposed to have
spoken, yet as to the matters then before me, wherein Ecclesiastic conformity
consisted, custom, and only custom was the rule of decency.

Jeanes.
1. I had no reason to imagine that your words were to be restrained unto
things indifferent, gestures and other Ceremonies in Gods service, for you
undertook to give us the importance of the Apostles words: Let all things be
done decently, and the Apostles words reach unto even natural decency, now of
that the light of nature is a rule.

2. There be, as Bel^armine rightly lib. 2. de effectu sacramentor. cap. 29.
some Ceremonies, which receive their institution as it were from nature it
self, which may be called natural Ceremonies, as to look up to Heaven, to
lift up our hands, to bow our knees, and knock our breasts when we pray unto
God: Quaedam Caerem^niae sunt ab ipsa natura quodammodo institutae, quae
naturales dici possunt, quale est respicere in coelum, tollere manu^, flectere
genua, tundere pectus, eum Deum oramus; i^^ a enim natura ipsa docet, unde
et^am communes sunt Gentilibus and quibuscunque sectis.

3. Those Ceremonies which we oppose, symbolicall Ceremonies, such as the
Cross and Surplice, are not things indifferent, because they are imposed and
used as parts of Gods worship, and no worship of God is indifferent.

4. Suppose that I concurred with you in holding the questioned Ceremonies to
be lawful, yet I should deny Custom to be the only rule of their Decency,
and that because the light and Law of Nature, right Reason is a rule thereof
too. My argument I shall thus re^enforce; If Custom be in the Ceremonies of
Gods service, the only rule of Decency, then nothing else can be a rule thereof
besides Custom; but this is false; for the light and law of Nature is also a
rule thereof: therefore in the Ceremonies of Gods service Custom is not the
only rule of Decency.

The sequel of the Major is evident from what Logicians say concerning, first,
the exposition, secondly, conversion, and thirdly, consecution of exclusive
propositions.

1. Concerning the exposition of them, Propositio exclusiva subjecti
affirmativae exponitur per duas exponentes, quarum prima est affirmata, and
appellatur praejacens, estque nihil alind quam propositio exclusiva, dempto
signo exclusivo: and secunda est negativa de subjecto exclusive infinitato, vel
negato. This exclusive proposition then in the Ceremonies of Gods service,
Custom is the only rule of Decency, must be expounded by these two.

1. By an Affirmative: in the Ceremonies of Gods service, Custom is a rule of
Decency: And then

2. Negative: whatsoever is not Custom, that is not in the Ceremonies of Gods
service a rule of Decency.

2. Concerning the conversion of them, Propositio exelusivae subjecti
affirmativa convertitur in universalem affirmativam de transpositis terminis.
The Doctors proposition then, Custom in the Ceremonies of Gods service, is the
only rule of Decency, is converted into this Universal Affirmative, every
rule of Decency is Custom.

Well, upon this premised concerning the exposition and conversion of exclusive
propositions, Logicians lay down concerning the consecution of them this rule:
Ab exclusiva ad exponentes propositiones itemque ad universalem conversam bona
est consequentia: By this rule then it will follow, that if Custom in the
Ceremonies of Gods service be the only rule of Decency, that then in them
nothing but Custom is the rule of Decency, and that every rule of Decency is
Custom. The Major then is fortified beyond all exception.

The Min^r I shall confirm by instancing in the light or law of Nature, right
reason, this to join issue with you, would be in the controverted Ceremonies
of Gods service, if they were lawful, a rule of Decency.

For first, what is the end of a rule but to regu^ate and direct? now the light
and law of Nature regulates all gestures and Ceremonies in Gods worship, as
touching their Decency.

2. It is in these particulars not only a rule, but a principal rule of
Decency, by which all Customs are to be tried, examined, and regulated.

For the confirmation of this I shall add three reasons.

1. Gestures, Ceremonies agreeable unto Custom may be found to be dissonant
unto the light and law of Nature, and to be rejected as undecent.

2. Custom is not the rule of decency unless it have the force of a Law, and
that it cannot have, say the Schoolmen, rightly, unless it be rationabilis,
and such it cannot be, unless it be agreeable unto right reason, which is all
I mean by the light and law of nature; though the light of nature do not
dictate the necessity of it, yet it must give allowance and approbation of it;
without its warrant it is not to be received as Decent.

A 3. Argument shall be ad hominem: by nature you say, out of Suldas, is meant
1 Cor. 11.14, Custom of some continuance in that place, and what more probable
reason can be assigned for terming of a Custom Nature, then its conformity unto
its allowance and approbation by the Law of Nature?

It being thus proved, that even in the Vestures, Gestures, and Ceremonies of
Gods service, upon supposition of their lawfulness, the law and light of
nature is a principal rule, it will follow that we may with far better
reason say of it, than of custom, that it is, in the matters spoken of, the
only rule of Decency: For

1. We may truly say of the law and light of Nature, that it is in Ceremonies
the only rule of Decency, though Custom be a rule thereof also; because the
exclusive particle only does not exclude things subordinate: Now Custom is a
rule of Decency subordinate unto the light of Nature, and therefore is not
excluded, when I say, the light and law of nature is the only rule of Decency.

2. We cannot say of Custom, with any truth at all, that it is the only rule
of Decency in the matters before you, wherein Ecclesiastical conformity
consists, because the only things excepted from being excluded by the
particle only, are things subordinate, and things necessarily contomitant; but
now the light and law of Nature as it is not subordinate unto custom, so
neither is it necessarily concomitant therewith; for diverse customs in
Ceremonies may be, and have been irrational against the light and law of
Nature: The law and light of Nature then is excluded from being a rule of
Decency, by saying Custom is the only rule of Decency.

Add hereunto, that the particle solum, only, does not always exclude a tota
specie, but sometimes only a summitate speciei, as may be seen in Scheibl.
topic. c. 2. n. 29. Now Custom is a less principal rule, that must undergo
trial and examination by the light and law of Nature, as a superior rule.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 37, 38.
His second argument is wholly deceitful, and must be discovered to be so, by
reducing it to rules of art. It Is by him variously formed in two several
Syllogismes. The first is this.

Nothing can be undecent which is agreeable to the only rule of Decency.

But diverse things are undecent, which yet can plead custom. The conclusion
now must be, Therefore Custom is not the only rule of Decency.

38. But this is no regular Syllogism, it is in no mood or figure, not readily
reducible to any; and therefore 'twas his only way to presume it evident, and
never to endeavor any proof thereof.

Jeanes.
I never said that it was an exact and regular Syllogism.

But first, here is matter for a Categorical Syllogism, and it is easily
reducible

1. Unto a Hypothetical Syllogism.

2. Ad Syllogismum ducentem ad impossible.

1. Here is matter for a Categoric al Syllogism: The only rule of Decency has
not any thing undecent agreeable unto it: Custom has many undecent things
agreeable unto it: Therefore Custom is not the only rule of Decency.

2. It Is easily reducible,

1. Unto a Hypotheticall Syllogism.

2. Ad Syllogisinum ducentem ad impossible.

1. It may be reduced unto an Hypotheticall Syllogism thus: If Custom be the
only rule of Decency, then nothing can be undecent, that is agreeable unto
Custom: But diverse things are undecent which are agreeable unto Custom;
Therefore Custom is not the only rule of Decency.

The sequel of the Major is evident, because nothing can be undecent that is
agreeable to the only rule of Decency.

And the Minor cannot be denied: In the Syllogism then there is only a
Crypsis, the Major is concealed, and the proof thereof placed in its room, and
Cryptical Syllogismes are in all discourses justifiable, when they may be
reduced: If you call upon me to reduce the hypothetical Syllogism, unto which
it is reduced, unto a Categorical, you will herein be unreasonable; for those
hypothetical Syllogismes that have four terms in the Major, are hardly capable
of reduction unto a Categorical Syllogism; So Scheibler has instructed me, de
Propos. etc. cap. 12, n. 24.

2. It is reduced unto that Syllogism which is (...), which does ducere ad
impossible, as it is taken largly for that argumentation which does reduce an
adversary unto an absurdity upon his own principles; for from this your
principle, that Custom is the only ^ule of Decency, this Syllogism will ine,
vitably follow,

Nothing that is agreeable to the only rule of decency can be undecent.

All things customary are agreeable to the only rule of decency: Therefore
nothing customary can be undecent.

But now this conclusion is apparently false, therefore one of the premises is
also false; for ex vero nil nisi verum sequitur: It is not the Major, for the
only rule of decency makes and denominates every thing conformable unto it to
be decent, therefore it is the Minor, which is, that all things customary are
agreeable unto the only rule of decency; and if this proposition be false, then
your position is false too, that custom is the only rule of decency, because
all things customary are agreeable unto custom.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 39, 40^
But he has thought fit to vary this Syllogism, and give it in other terms,
and the^ one might hope it would be exactly formed, 'Tis-thus,

It is impossible that the only rule of decency should be undecent. But yet it
is very possible that many customs should be indecent. Therefore he shall
conclude, that custom is not the only rule of decency.

40. But this is no Syllogism neither, being far removed from the measure that
Logicians exact, and such as by which I will prove any thing true, that is the
most distant from it. For example, it is granted truth, that Law is the only
rule of Justice, yet this I shall disprove by a Syllogism exactly formed by
Mr. J. his model. Thus,

It is impossible, that the only rule of Justice should be unjust. But yet it
is very possible that many Laws should be unjust, Therefore I shall conclude
that Law is not the only rule of Justice,

Jeanes.
This is a modall Syllogism, framed exactly according to the rules of Logic
touching modall Syllogismes; as for that Syllogism which you parallel unto it,
it has no alliance with it; for both the premises of mine are true, and the
Minor of yours is grossly and palpably false; for unjust laws are not, in
propriety of speech, laws, but are so termed only equivocally, as a painted, a
dead man, is said to be a man: turpe praeceptum non est lex, sed in^quitas, for
obligation is essential unto a law; now every law obliges in the name of God,
by authority derived from him, and the glorious name of God cannot oblige unto
any thing that is unjust: the Fathers, Schoolmen and ancient Philosophers are
all so unanimous in asserting of this, and have for this their assertion such
pregnant and convincing reasons, as that I cannot but wonder, that a man of
your learning should be of an other opinion; but in your next we shall hear
what arguments you have for your dissent: In the mean while, I shall desire the
Reader to take notice of the witnesses, and reasons produced, amongst many
others, by Suarez, and Gregory de Valentia, for what I affirm,

1. Suarez de legib. lib. 1. cap. 9. De ratione, and essentia legis, est,
inquit, ut praecipiat justa: Assertio est non solum certa secundum fidem, sed
etiam clara secundum naturalem rationem. Et ita eam tradunt non solum Theologi,
and Patres inferius allegandi, sed etiam passim Philosophi etc. Verum tamen
haec ipsa conditio dupliciter explicari potest, scilicet vel negative, ut
scilicet quod praecipitur, nec injustum, nec turpe sit; vel positive, ut sit
justum and honestum.

Conditio ergo hae^ praecipue intelligitur priori modo, and sic est evidens,
alia vero ratione invenitur in legibus divinis, and aliter in humanis. In
divinis enim ratio est recti^udo per essentiam divinae voluntatis. Est enim
Deus sum bonus, and ideo non potest aliquid pravum praecipere. etc.

De legibus autem humanis, hoc fundatur in alio principio. Nam legislator
humanus men habet voluntatem perfect^m, sicut Deus, and ideo quantum est ex se,
and quoad factum, potest interdum iniqua praecipere, ut constat: non tamen
habet potestatem ad obligandum per iniquas leges, and ideo licet iniqua
praecipiat, tale praeceptum non est lex, quia vim, aut valorem ad obligandum
non habet. etc.

Et ita est clara ratio assertion is, tum quia illa potestas, scilicet
obligandi, est a Deo, quae tem a Deo sunt, ordinata sunt: Ergo est data in
honum, and in aedificationem, non in malum, se^ in destructionem: Tum etiam
quia nullus inferior potest obligare contra legem, and veluntatem superioris;
sed lex praecipiens pravum actum est contra legem Dei prohibentis illum: Ergo
non potest obligare, quia impossible est, homines simul obligari ad agendum,
and non agendum aliquid: s^ autem opus pravam est prohibitum lege d^vina, non
potest lex inferioris tollere illam superioris obligationem: Ergo nee potest
inducere saam: Ergo ejus lex tali opere non potest esse valida. Et de hac
justitia legis loquebatur August, lib. 1. de libero arbit. cap. 5. cum dixit,
mihi lex esse non videtur, quae justa non fuerit. Et de eadem intelligi potest,
quod dicit lib. de vera relig. cap. 31. Conditor legum temporalium, si vir
bonus est and sapiens, legem consulit aeternam, ut secundum ejus incommutabiles
regulas, quid sit pro tempore vitandum, jubendumque discernat. Vnde sicut lex
aeterna solum justa praecipit, quia est i^sa justitia per essentiam, ita vero
lex humanae esse debet participatio ejus, and ideo non potest valide
praecipere, nis^ justa, and homesta, juxta illud Prove. 8. Per me Reges regnant,
and legum conditores justa decernunt.

Atque hinc ulterius concluditur, hanc conditionem, etiam positive intellectam
esse de ^^tione legis.; quamvis non uno and eodem modo singulis applicanda sit,
etc.

Ex h^c assertione sic declarata duo infer possumus. Vnum est ad illam maxim
pertinere primam conditionem positam ab Isidoro, ^cilicet, ut lex sit honesta,
quod ex ipsa vocis proprietate* satis pate^. etc.

Secundo infertur ex dictis, legem non habentem hanc justitiam, seu honestatem,
non esse legem, neque obligare, ve^um etiam nec servari posse etc.

Unto this of Suarez I shall add what Gregory de Valentia has to the same
purpose, tom. 2. disp. 7. quaest. 1 punct. 3. Nomen legis mag^ prop^re
significat rectam aliquam regulam praescribentem communitati alicui perfectae
modum necessarium ad bonum ejusdem communitatis etc.

Atque hoe mod^ accipit D. Thomas legem, cum infra quaest. 96. art. 4, inquit
leges iniquas magis esse violentias, quam leges. Item quaest. 90. art. 2 and 3.
Vbi defin^t, legem ad bonum commune ordinari, and ab eo, qui curam gerit
communitatis ferri.

Sic etiam D. Augustinus lib. 1. de libero arbitrio cap. 5. leg^m accepit, cum
dixit, legem non videri, quae justa non sit. In quam sententiam lib, 19. de
civitate Dei, cap. 21. inquit etiam, non esse jura dicenda, vel putanda, iniqua
hominum constituta, Atque etiam legem esse regulam aliquam rectam censuit
Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 1. Stromatum, cum dixit: legem esse opinionens
bonam, and regulam justorum, and injustorum. Item Plato in Dialogo primo de
legibus, and in Epinome, ubi asseruit, finem legis esse Deum and cultum ejus.
Item Philosophus lib. 5. Ethi^or. cap. 1. inquiens, legalia justa esse factiva
and conservativa falicitatis, omniumque elarissime Cicero lib. 2. de legitus:
Constat, inquit, profecto adsalutem civium ^ivitatumque incolumitatem, vitamque
quietam, and beatam, conditas esse leges. Et post, cum dixisset eos, qui
pernicio^a, and injusta populis jara descripsissent, quidvis aliud potius
tulisse, quam leges, concludit, perspicuum esse in ipso no mine leges
interpretando, inesse vim, atque sententiam justi, and juris colendi.

By this you may see, that in your Syllogism there are four terms, for laws
in the Minor are taken improperly and equ^vocally, in the conclusion properly
and univocally; But custom in my Syllogism, both in Minor and Conclusion, is
taken properly and univocally, for custom is predicated univocally of the most
undecent customs.

For farther justification of my Syllogism I shall reduce it in like manner
that Logicians reduce Syllogismes made in Baroco and Bocardo, to wit, with that
reduction which is ad impossible or per deductionem ad absurdum: I suppose,
that you will grant my premises, for the minor you confess in terminis in the
next Section; And the Major cannot be denied with any color of reason; for the
rule of decency is, in some so^t, an exemplary cause of decency, and it is
impossible for the exemplary cause of decency to be undecent. Well then, I
suppose, that you grant the premises, and only deny, that the inference of the
conclusion from these premises is legitimate; if you grant the premises to be
true, then you grant the Propositions, that are contradictory unto them, to be
false, and hereupon it will follow, that if I take the contradictory of my
Conclusion, and can thence, joined with one of my premises conclude, that one
of the premises which I suppose, you grant, is false, hereby I shall convince
you, that the principal conclusion, which is contradictory unto this, was
true: The contradictory of my conclusion is, custom is the only rule of
decency (I take contradictory largely, as some opposite propositions are said
by Logicians, to be contradictory de lege) Now this I take and subjoyn unto my
Major, and here hence I infer the contradictory of my Minor, all which will
make up this following Syllogism.

It is impossible for the only rule of Decency to be undecent.

But Custom is the only rule of Decency.

Therefore it is impossible that any custom should be undecent.

But the conclusion is false, and, I suppose, that you grant the contradictory
thereof. Now if ^he conclusion be false, one of the premises must needs be
false; for, ex vero ^il nisi verum sequitur. Now it is not the Major, for I
suppose, and that with very good reason, that it is granted by you, therefore
'^^s the Minor: now the Minor is contradictory unto the conclusion which you
deny, and therefore the conclusion, which you denied, is true, viz. that
Custom is not the only rule of decency: for of contradictory propositions both
cannot be true, Contradictio semper dividit verum a falso.

Thus you see my Syllogism is demonstrated to be true, demonstratione ducente
ad impossi^ile vel absurdum.

But for the fuller clearing of it, I shall propound and answer two objections,
that I foresee may be made against it, by such as are not well skilled in Modal
Syllogismes.

The first is, that the duo modi impossible and possibile are repeated but
once a piece in my Syllogism, and in a good Syllogism every term is to be put
twice.

The answer unto this in brief is, that in a Modal Syllogism, the modus is
none of the terms, but only a Syncategorematical word, so Vallius Introduct.
Log. par. 3. cap. 12. In terminis, inquit, non numera tur modus sicut; enim in
conversione propositionum modus non numeratur inter praedicata vel subjecta,
sed est quid additum ill is, sie in Syllogismis modalibus, modus non numeratur
inter terminos, unde etiam saepe in Syllogismo modali non potest inferri
conclusio '^um modo, sed sine illo. The very same thing is taken notice of by
Scheibl. concerning such Modal Syllogisms as consist of Modal compounded
propofitions, Ihi enim inquit, quod modalis particula non habeat vel rationem
subjecti, vel rationem praedicati; sed simpliciter habeat se ex part copulae:
inde clarum est, quod in istis modalibus Syllogismis, particula modalis ter
poni potest, nempe in singulis taelium Syllogismorum partibus, veluti: Necesse
est hominem esse animal. Necesse est Petrum esse hominem. Ergo necesse est
Petrum esse animal. Hic aio, particulam necesse, nec habere rationem
praedicati, nec subjecti, sed esse ex part copulae, quia in propositione,
assumptione, and conclusione reperitur. At nullus terminus in Syllogismo ter
poni^potest.

A second objection is, that in the Modal Syllogismes mentioned by Aristotle,
this mixture or combination of impossible and possibile is not at all
mentioned.

For answer, Aristotle instanceth in Modal Syllogismes, wherein there is a
mixture of necesse and contingens, and Logicians generally hold that
impossible is reduced unto necessarium and possibile unto contingens. Let two
speak for all.

1. The but now quoted Vallius in lib. 1. prior page 38. Impossible. (inquit
Philopenus) comprehenditur sub necessario, quia quod est necessarium, est
impossible ut non sit, sicut quia homo est necessario animal, impossible est
ut non sit animal: and eadem ratione quod est impossible, est necessarium ut
non sit. Similiter possibile comprehenditur sub contingenti, quod enim
contingit esse, hoe fieri potest, ^eu est possibile, and quod potest non esse,
contingit non esse: adeoque id, quod proprie vocatur possibile, concurrit cum
contingenti. He quotes also for it, if my memory fail not, Burana affirming as
much ex Alexandro.

The second Author is a late one read by every Fresh-man, Burgersdicius
institut. Log. lib. 2. c. 14. Propositiones modi impossible annumerantur
propositionibus modi necesse; and propositiones modi possibile, iis quae sunt
modi contingit.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 41.
To discover this deceit then, the Syllogism, which is now no Syllogism, must
he^ somewhat better formed, according to the rules of Logic, and reduced, as
near as it can, into a true Syllogism. Thus,

Whatsoever is it self undecent, cannot be the only rule of Decency.

But custom is it self undecent.

Therefore Custom cannot be the only rule of Decency.

Here before it can be defined, whether this be a regular Syllogism, or no? It
must be demanded, quanta est minor, is the assumption universal or particular?
If it be particular, then either the conclusion must be particular also, or
else it is a false Syllogism. And if the conclusion be particular, then it
inferres no more, than that some undecent custom cannot be the only rule of
decency, which is willingly granted by me, who do not at all affirm it of
undecent customs. But if the Minor be universal, then it is a false
proposition; for certainly all customs are not indecent. The short is, Nature
may be the rule of one sort of decency, and Custom the only rule of another;
yet if the custom be in it self indecent, then of such indecent custom it is
not pretended, that it is either only, or at all the rule of decency. And so
still my proposition may stand good, which as it belonged not to natural
decency, so much less to what is by nature, or in it self undecent, never
imagining it reasonable, that what gestures were against those Laws of Nature,
or Scripture, or any other Law of decency, or rather of natural comeliness
and honesty, should by pretense of any custom whatever, be introduced into
Gods worship: It Is sufficient that some customs may be decent, or in
themselves not indecent, and that all decency in the service of God, is to be
regulated and judged of by conformity with them: For I said not, that all
customs were the rule of decency, but that some were, and that there was no
other rule, but custom: This, I hope, has discovered the invalidity of his
second Argument.

Jeanes.
My Syllogism is, as I have demonstrated, a true Syllogism; you might the^
very well have spared the pains you have taken to reduce it, as near as you
could, to a true Syllogism; for there was no need of it: You deserve then no
thanks for your labor, but I have reason to expect reparation from you for
defamation of my Syllogism: This Section therefore I might wholly pass over,
but yet I shall stay a while upon the examination of a second restriction that
you put upon your dictate: you have already told us, that it is not to be
understood of all decency. Now you give us to understand, that it is not meant
of all customs, but only of some such as are not undecent; when you say
custom is the only rule of decency, your meaning is some customs are the
only rule of some kind of decency in the Ceremonies of Gods worship.

But whether this liberty which you assume in thus limiting your position be
justifiable, is very questionable; for after this rate, what gross absurdities
may any man maintain? If I should say, that solum brutum est animal: that a
spirit only is substance: that number only is quantity: that Baptism is the
only Sacrament of the New Testament: would not every one cry out against these
propositions as untrue, as well they might? and do you think they would pass
for current? though I should come with an after game, and go about to limit
them, in such a manner as you have done, by your assertion, and say, my meaning
was, that solum brutum est animal irrationale: that a spirit only is an
incorporeal substance: that number only is discrete quantity: that Baptism is
the only Sacrament of the New Testament of initiation; and yet these
restrictions are altogether as fair and allowable as yours.

2. I did not think your proposition capable of having an universal sign
affixed unto it; and my reason was, because as Aquinas p. 1. q. 31. art. 3.
observes out of the Summularii, dictio exclusiva immobilitat terminum cui
adjungitur, ut non possit fieri sub eo descensus pro aliquo suppositerum, non
enim sequitur, solus homo is animal rationale mortale: Ergo solus Socrates.

But yet notwithstanding this, I thought your proposition might be propositio
de Idaea, as they say; and so, though it were not formally, it would be
equivalently universal.

But now I shall lay aside this conjecture, because you inform us, that your
indefinite proposition, was intended by you for a particular proposition, only
I shall propound some objections against your making it a particular
proposition.

1. When you say Custom is the only rule of Decency, you speak of Custom
either formally or materially; if you speak of Custom formally and
reduplicative as Custom, why then every Custom is a rule of Decency, because
a quatenus ad de omni valet consequentia, that which does agree to a thing as
such, does agree to every singular contained under it: but if you speak of
Custom only materially, and your meaning be, that Custom sub tali formali
under such a consideration or qualification, is the only rule of Decency, why
then this formale, this consideration or qualification of Custom, may, with
far better reason, be said to be the importance of the Aposiles (...), then
according unto Custom, because Custom will be but the materiale in the rule
of Decency.

2. Until you express how those some Customs may be qualified, that you make
to be the only rule of Decency, your interpretation of the Apostles words, Let
all things be done decently, will be very obscure, explicatio ignoti, if not
per ignotius, yet per aeque ignotum, and your proof that you bring for your
Exposition will be as dark and doubtsome: Thus both will run, Let all things
be done according to some customs, because some customs are the only rule in
some things of some decency, whether that which you call the clear importance
of the place, do not leave the Reader in an uncertainty, be you your self judge.

3. The quantity of indefinite propositions may be gathered from their matter;
in a necessary matter they are universal, in a contingent, particular: Now I
demand whether to be the rule of decency be predicated of custom necessarily
or contingently? if necessarily, then custom cannot but be the rule of
decency, and then all custom is a rule of decency: A necessary proposition
that is affirmative, direct, natural, where superius praedicatur de inferiori,
or aequale de inaequali, is also de omni: if it be predicated of it
contingently, then custom may be, and may not be a rule of decency, and then
I desire you to evidence unto us how customs being thus a rule of decency,
viz. contingently, will be a solid proof, that the clear importance of the
Apostles words, Let all things be done decently, is, let all things be done
according unto custom? and your best and speediest way to clear this unto us,
will be by reducing your argument into a Syllogism.

4. If to be a rule of decency be predicated contingently of custom, then
custom is only a fallible rule of decency, and therefore it needs regulation
by a higher rule; and if there be in the Ceremonies of Gods worship a higher
rule then custom, it will hereupon inevitably follow, that custom is not in
them the only rule of decency.

5. You implyedly give us the Character of those Customs which you affirm to
be the only rule of decency, when you say, that of such undecent customs it is
not pretended, that it is either only, or at all the rule of decency: Now all
customs, in the Ceremonies of Gods service, are either decent or undecent: the
Custom that is undecent is not at all a rule of decency, and therefore your
position is to be understood of that Custom which is decent: for betwixt
decent and undecent customs in the Ceremonies of Gods service there is no
medium, as I have showed already: the upshot of your meaning then is, that some
Customs, viz. such as are decent, are the only rule of decency, etc. What
sobriety is in this limitation will appear, if we will consider that herein
we have a twofold decency: one in the rule, decent customs; another in the
thing, regulated decency: The former is different from, and antecedent unto the
latter: now of the former decency, in the rule, in custom it self, I demand,
What is the rule of that decency, whether custom it self, or some other thing?
I presume you will not say Custom it self; for then it would be an underived,
unsubordinate, and independent rule, a rule of it self: and if you should say
that some other thing besides custom is the rule of the decency which is in
custom, th^^ by conformity unto this, we must judge of the decency of Customs
in the Ceremonies of Gods worship, whether they be decent or undecent? and from
this it is obvious to infer, that in Ceremonies there is a rule of decency
antecedent unto Custom, by which Custom it self is to be regulated and
measured; and therefore Custom is not the only rule of Decency. Your
limitation then is so far from being any support unto your position, as that
it gives unto it a plain overthrow.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 42.
His last argument [because there is decency in the first usage of some things]
falls upon that mistake of my words which I discoursed of, and cleared at the
beginning; for I never said that a thing must be castomary, before it is decent
in any kind: (knowing unquestionably that there is a natural decency) but that
the decency of any Ceremony in Gods service, wherein God and Nature have
prescribed nothing particularly, must be regulated according to those measures,
which the customs of any place do allow to be reverentiall among them; or, in
yet plainer words, the civil customs of any nation, by which this or that sort
of gesture is rendered a token of reverence, are the only rule, by which the
decency of indifferent gestures, etc. is to be judged of, in order to Gods
service. And so much for the last argument also, and consequently for the first
part of his exception, that against my interpretation of (...) decently.

Jeanes.
You talk indeed, Section the ninth, of such a mistake of your words, but
prove it not. Now to prevent all mistakes, I shall come up unto your
limitation: Custom is not the only rule of all decency in the Ceremonies of
Gods service, wherein God and Nature have prescribed nothing particularly:
Verbi gratia, in the Surplice and Cross: For your Principles I suppose will
lead you to assert the decency of the first usage of the Cross in Baptism,
and of the Surplice in Preaching and Praying; and indeed if the first usage of
these Ceremonies was undecent, it was sinful: and besides, this decency was
not a natural decency, dictated by the Law of Nature, as you your self will
confess; but now if there were a decency in the first usage of these
Ceremonies, Custom was not, could not be rule thereof, because, as I declared
out of Aristotle and Aquinas, the frequent usage of a thing is required unto
Custom.

For conclusion of this first part of mine exception, I shall entreat the
Reader to take notice of the definition of Custom, usually quoted out of
Isiodore: Consuetudo est jus quoddam moribus institutum quod pro lege
suscipitur cum lex deficit. By this definition, Custom has not the force of a
Law, but where the Law is defective, and the Word, the Law of God is not
defective in appointing religious mystical Ceremonies, for it is so sufficiently
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in
righteousness, as that the man of God may thereby be perfected, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. I shall the efore conclude that
Custom does not, cannot oblige unto any religious, mystical Ceremonies,
besides those which God has instituted in his Word.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
But there is yet a second charge behind against my rendering (...), according
to appointment] which he has managed in these words.

44. As for the other part of the words, Let all things be done in order; Ames
in the place forementioned shows, that order requires not such Ceremonies as
ours, and he gives this reason, because order requires not the institution of
any new thing, but only the right placing, and disposing of things, which are
formerly instituted: and this he makes good from the notation of the word, from
the definitions of order, which are given by Philosophers and Divines, etc.
from the context of the Chapter, and from the usage of the word elsewhere, But
the Doctor, that the words, may give some countenance unto our Ceremonies,
adventureth upon a new interpretation of them.

The words (...) (says he) literally import, according unto appointment, (...)
sometimes signifies to appoint, as Match. 28.16. Acts 22.10, and 28.23. And we
may hereupon argue a conjugatis, that (...) may be sometimes rendered
appointment. But because it may sometimes be rendered appointmen^, will it
therefore follow that it must be so rendered in this place?

We may say as well as the Doctor, that the words (...) literally import
according unto order, as order is taken strictiy for the right placing, and
ordering of things one before, another after, and this we have confessed even
by Doctor John Burgess in his Rejoinder unto Ames, page 78. a book published
by the special command of the late King. Moreover this sense is favored by
the coherence; for v. 31, we have a particular instance of order in this
acception of the word, ye may all prophesy one by one etc. and not all or many
speak at once. 2. We have the opposite of order taken in this sense. 1. v. 33.
confusion. Let all things be done in order, then, is as much, as, let all
things be done without confusion. And I hope confusion may be avoided in the
worship of God without such Ceremonies as ours.

But we will for once suppose, though not grant, that the clear importance of
the words, is that all be done in the Church according to custom and
appointment. Yet the D. has a hard task to perform, before he can come nigh
his conclusion, that the words of Paul, are a proof of the more than lawfulnes
of prescription of such Ceremonies as ours, in a Church. For he must prove that
custom and order here, are taken in such a latitude, as that they include not
only the customs and appointments of the Apostolical Churches, but also of
all the Churches of God in succeeding ages: and the performance of this he will
find not to be so easy, as he may imagine.

I am sensible that I have by this discourse provoked a very learned and
formidable adversary, but it is only love of the truth that engaged me in so
unequal an encounter, and therefore I hope the D. will pardon and excuse my
boldness. If he can by dint of argument prove the truth to be on his side, I
shall not be sorry or ashamed to be overcome by him.

45. To this, my answer will be very brief, 1. By giving the reason of my
rendering, 2. By evidencing, that if the vulgar were acknowledged the righter
rendering, yet my cenclusion would very regularly follow thence, and that
therefore I have no need to contend with any gainsayer, about my rendering. 46.
For the first it is manifest to any that knows but the elements of Greek, that
(...) literaly and properly signifies (according to ordination or appointment)
(...) [according to] not (in) and (...) [an ordinance or constitution] millions
of times in authors, and (...) [ord^rly, or in order] lying more consonant with
(...), ^^reason can be rendered, why if that had been the designed meaning, that
word should not have been used there.

47. That it may so signify M. J. acknowledges, and so I have obtained all I
seek in my first proposal, which was not that it must necessarily thus signify,
but that this being the literal regular rendering of it, I had sufficient reason
to tender it thus.

48. I proceed then to the second thing, that if what he prepends to be
possible also, were indeed the only possible, or (by way of supposition, but
not concession) if (...)] did really inport no more than [in order] as that is
opposed to disorder or confusion, yet-I-say, it will soon appear, that that
Apostles commanding such order or orderliness, and forbidding all confusion in
Ecclefiostical affairs, must by consequence be interpreted to command the
instituting and observing uniformity of Ceremonies in a Church.

Jeanes.
1. Our last translators of the Bible surely knew something more then the
Elements of Greek, or else King James was ill advised to make such a choice of
them, and yet they thought fit to translate (...) in order. 2. Few mortals
perhaps, besides your self, have read (...) millions of times in Authors; but
to know the meaning of that word, there is no need of such great reading, one
that knows but the Elements of Greek may by the help of a Greek Concordance
and Stephanus his Thesaurus Linguae Graecae, make it manifest, that (...)
signifies literally and properly order in opposition to confusion.

But (...) you say signifies according to, not in. But Stephanus in the book,
but now mentioned, will furnish the Reader with store of instances, wherein,
(...) signifies [in] and a school boy may be able to do as much, for the Latin
word, Secundum, out of Cicero and Suetonius.

But suppose that (...) were translated here, according, yet this will no ways
disadvantage our sense, for, according, applied to actions, signifies,
usually, the manner of such actions; so that both it, and the no^ne unto which
it is joined, may be paraphrased, by an adverb, and so (...) may be as much as,
orderly.

Add unto all this, that (...) signifies many times, with, and so it is
translated in the Dutch Bible; and let all things be done with order is
equivalent unto, let all things be done in order.

Dr. Hammond sect. 47.
That it may so signify Mr. J^acknowledges, and so, I have obtained all I seek
in my first proposal, which was not, that it must necessarily thus signify, but
that this being the literal regular rendering of it, I had sufficient reason to
render it thus.

Jeanes.
Indeed I acknowledged that (...) may sometimes be rendered appointment; but I
added, that it does not therefore follow that it must be so rendered in this
place, and unless you can prove that it must be so rendered in this very place,
I am to seek, what sufficient reason you had to render it thus: for if a word
has several acceptions, that is to be embraced that has most countenance from
the context, now I gave you for the vulgar sense a reason from the Coherence,
unto which you say nothing, and you say as little from the coherence for the
justification of your own reading, and therefore I am not to be blamed for
adhering unto the vulgar reading, especially seeing it is favored by the
general consent of both Translators, and Commentators, though, as you observe
in the foregoing section, (...) lie more consonunt in sound with (...), for I
do not think that the Apostle was bound always to observe Paronomasies.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 48, 49.
I proceed then to the second thing, that if what he pretends to be possible
also, were indeed the only possible, or (by way of supposition, but not
concession) if (...) did really import no more than in Order, as that is
opposed to disorder or confusion, yet, I say, it will soon appear, that the
Apostles commanding such order, or orderlinesse, and forbidding all confusion
in Ecclesiastical affairs, must by consequence be interpreted to command the
instituting and observing Uniformity of Ceremonies in a Church. This I thus
deduce.

First there is no possibility of worshipping God externally and publicly,
without use of some Ceremonies, or circumstances of time, place, and gestare,
etc.

2. There is no possibility of order in a multitude, without uniformity in the
same circumstances.

3. There is as little possibility of uniformity among many, without either
agreement one with another, or direction of some superior to them all, what
shall by all be uniformely performed.

4. The agreement one with another, if it be only voluntary, and such, as by
which none are obliged, no way secures the end; but if it be such an agreement,
that every single person is obliged to observe, then still is that a law of
that body, as of a council, etc. and as truly so, as the constitution of a
single Prelate can be thought to be. And so the conclusion regularly follows,
that to the preserving but of order, or orderlinesse in a Church, it is
necessary, there be appointment, what shall by all be uniformity performed;
confusion anavoidably coming in, where no certain rules are preseribed for
uniformity. What can be denied in this process I foresee not.

Here it shall suffice to note, that time, place, and such like circumstances,
are so manifestly necessary in their kind, that the particulars may be deduced
from them, by particular considerations, without any institution; but no man
can deduce our Ceremonies from those kinds named. Man's will is the only reason,
of them, as Gods will is the only reason of Ceremonies truly divine by
institution. No man can conclude thus: we must every where have some garment,
and therefore in England a Surplice. We must always in Baptism, have some
admonition to profess the faith, and iherefore in England, a Cross. We must
use reverent gestures in receiving the holy communion; and therefore in England
we must kneel in the act of receiving. But we may conclude thus; we must have a
fit place to meet in, and this place is generally fittest for our Congregation,
therefore we must have this. We must have a convenient time to meet in, and
this hour is generally most convenient for our Congregation: therefore this.
The Monks may as well conclude: we must have some garments; therefore we must
in one order have black; in another white; in a third, black over white, or
white over black; in a fourth, gray; a fifth, party colored; in some, all
woollen; in some, all linen; etc. ad infinitum, as well (I say) every whit, as
the Rejoinder can conclude from a garment, to a Surplice; from admonition, to
the sign of the Cross, or from reverence in a table gesture; ^o kneeling.

Jeanes.
Though you cannot see what can be denied in this process, yet he that runs may
read what is constantly denied by the Non-conformists, if he ever read their
books: they deny over and over, over and over etc. Your two first conclusions
if applied unto the Ceremonies in question: Indeed they grant, that
circumstances of time, place, order and decency, and the like, are necessary
genere in their kind, but these, I will tell you, are not the Ceremonies in
controversy; the Ceremonies which they oppose are not circumstantial, but
doctrinal, of moral signification, and the mere divises of men, such as the
surplice, Cross, etc. And you may affirm, but can never prove, that there is no
possibility of worshipping God externally, and publicly without such
ceremonies, for it is manifest, that such Ceremonies are not necessary in their
kind. In hoc vertitur cardo controversiae: therefore if you can prove this, we
shall yield you the cause, and ly prostrate at your feet to be trampled upon
and triumphed oven: and until this proof be made, you can never regularly
infer, that to the preserving but of order or orderlyness in a Church, it is
necessary there be appointment, what humane religious Ceremonies shall by all
be uniformely performed.

If you shall say that by Ceremonies you understand only circumstances of
time, place, decency, order, and the like, I shall confess my-selfe to be
mistaken, but must withal for my own discharge aver, that you alone are
guilty of this my mistake, for who could reasonablely imagine that in a
controversy with the opposers of Ceremonies, you should exclude from the
Ceremonies mentioned by you, all such Ceremonies as they oppose.

Your second conclusion call's for confirmation, and until you shall bethink
your self of some reason to confirm it, I shall offer against it these
following instances, unto which it is no difficult matter to add many more;
suppose the members of Churches in a City meet at nine of the clock for Gods
worship, and in the Country Parishes adjoining, where many people live at a
great distance from their Churches, they meet at ten or half an hour after
nine, nay in the same Church at one and the same time, whilst the word of God
is read or preached, those that sit in seats may have their heads uncovered,
and those that stand in allies may keep on their hats the whole Sermon time,
because the crowd or throng may render it in convenient to keep them off* Now
in both these instances there is not uniformity in the same circumstances, and
yet there may be order observed, and confusion may very well, notwithstanding,
be avoided in all the parts of Gods worship and service.

But to give an instance ad hominem out of Parker, some of our Churches in
England had Organs, some not; some discant and broken singing, some plain;
here was no uniformity, but you will not, I believe, say, that there was
confusion. This point of uniformity in rites and Ceremonies, the Reader may
find at large debated in the now mentioned Mr. Parker Treat. of the Cross part
2. page 91. usque ad 99. These two conclusions being thus overthrown, I need
not stay upon the following, which will be useless and impertinent, without
the two former be presupposed as true.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 50. 51, 52, 53, 54.
What can be denied in this process, I foresee not, yet when it is granted, one
reserve Mr. J. has still left him. For says he, if it were granted that (...)
signifies appointment or ordination, yet still it will be incumbent on the Dr.
to prove that this extends not only to the customs and appointments of the
Apostolic Churches, but also to the Churches of the succeeding ages. And my
answer to this will conclude this whole debate.

51. First then I acknowledge, that it is not here necessarily ordained by the
Apostle, that all the Churches of succeeding ages should institute Ceremonies
in worship, for, provided those Ceremonies were once instituted, all that this
text inforces, is uniforme obedience to them.

52. But then Secondly, When for many circumstances of Gods worship, there is
n^ order particularly taken by Christ and his Apostles, as in what gesture
public supplication shall be addressed, in what, lauds and hymns, and
confession of the faith, etc. And yet the rule is given by them, that all shall
be done according to appointment, and more over in other places, that obedience
be paid to those superiors, which watch over our souls; and when those rules
are not given only to the persons that then lived in the Church of Corinth,
etc. But to all that should ever live in that, and in all other Churches, it
can not then be deemed, either that there were no superiors designed to succeed
Christ, and his Apostles in the ordering of his Church, or that they should not
(...), set in order the things that were wanting, such as the Ap^stles had left
undisposed of, or that inferiors should not be bound to obey them Uniformly,
when they thus gave order to them.

53. When we are commanded to obey our parents, civil as well as natural, by a
Law given by God to Moses, or by Christ to his Disciples, can it be strange,
that we that lived not in either of those ages should thereby be obliged, when
God in his providence has given Fathers of both kinds (as well as them)
regularly presiding over us, and making use of that liberty that is presumed in
all parents, viz. to give Commands, and expect obedience from their children?
Certainly it cannot: and as little can it be doubted, either whether our
ecclesiastical parents have power to institute in things omitted, and thereby
remitted to their care by the Apostles, or whether we their obedient children,
that are commanded to act (...) according to appointment, should from time to
time be disobliged, and free to disobey them in whatsoever they appoint us.

54. It Is granted him, if he please, that what Christ, and his Apostles have
already prescribed, should not be repealed by those, that thus succeed them;
should they rashly assume that power, they would not in so doing act (...),
whether regularly, or according to appointment; but for the (...) in which they
have made no rules, but left order to Titus, etc. (i e. by parity of reason, to
the Bishop in every Island) to make them, here what power is left them, may
certainly with perfect safety be exercised by them, and that necessarily
inferres our obligation to yield obedience to their exercises of them.

Jeanes.
Here you explicate your meaning by first a concession. 2. by instances, and
then you produce pretended arguments for the proof of the proposition which I
say is incumbent on you to confirm.

1. You lay down a concession, I acknowledge, that it is not here necessarily
ordained by the Apostle, that all the Churches of God in succeeding ages should
institute Ceremonies in worship etc,

1. I cannot imagine to what purpose you lay down the grant, for
notwithstanding it, you still hold, that uniforme obedience is to be yielded by
the members of each respective Church unto such Ceremonies in Gods worship as
have been, are, or shall be appointed or commanded by any Churches in the ages
succeeding the Apostles, and so still it will be incumbent upon you to prove,
that custom and order are here taken in such a latitude, as that they include
the customs and appointments of all the Churches of God in succeeding ages.

2. There is a difference betwixt institution and commandment or appointment of
Ceremonies, for though every institution be a commandment or appointment, yet
every commandment or appointment is not an institution, and hence a Church in a
place may command and appoint the uniforme observance of Ceremonies instituted
unto its hand by the Church in a former age.

This pre supposed, I demand, whether you hold it here necessarily ordained by
the Apostle, that all the Church of God in succeeding Ages, should either
institute Ceremonies in Gods worship, or else appoint and command such as have
been already instituted? If you think them all free, and disobliged from both
institution and appointment of Ceremonies in worship, why then all Churches
might lawfully have abstained from such both institution and commandment, and
if such abstinence were lawful, I may, I believe, presume that it will be a
very hard matter to prove such an abstinence to be inexpedient and against
edification.

If you should say, that some, though not all, the Churches of God are obliged
either to institute Ceremonies in Gods worship, or to appoint and command such
as are already instituted, by precedent Churches succeeding the Apostles time,
why then we shall justly expect that you should specify or nominate such
Churches, and give some reason for the appropriation of such an obligation unto
such Churches, rather than unto others.

3. In your view of the Directory, page 19. you affirm that in the command of
St. Paul, there is a proof of the more than lawfulness of (...), prescription
of Ceremonies in a Church, and of Uniformity therein: Now I thought that you
were to be understood of all Churches, and then by more than lawfulness, I
suppose, you had meant necessity: You say that (...), the prescription of
Ceremonies in a Church is more than lawful, and hereupon I imagined that you
affirmed it to be necessary; but it seems I was mistaken in your meaning: I
shall therefore wait for a further explication of it, and therein I shall
desire to know what you understand by the more than lawfulness of (...), or
prescription of Ceremonies in a Church? As also to be informed, whether you
extend what you say of the prescription of Ceremonies in a Church unto all
Churches? and if not, what reason you have for the restriction of it unto some
Churches? and what these Churches are?

In the beginning of the 52 Sect. you perplex the state of the Question, by
instancing in the circumstances of Gods worship, which are by the
Non-conformists expressly excluded from the Question, for they limit it only
unto humane religious Ceremonies. Now betwixt these and the circumstances of
Gods worship, there is a great, and very wide difference.

1. Circumstances of time, place, order, and decency, etc. are necessary, and
appointed in general; but humane religious Ceremonies are not necessary in
general, as will soon appear when you go about to prove such a necessity of
them. It is impossible for Gods worship to be performed without some
circumstances, but it is very possible for Gods worship to be celebrated
without any humane religious Ceremonies.

2. Circumstances of Gods worship, viz. a fitting time and place, a decent Pew
and Pulpit, a fair and handsome cloth for the Communion Table, are not
Worship; but humane religious Ceremonies are in their nature Worship, as being
instituted to lift up Gods honor immediately in their use and end.

3. Things of mere order require no ordering: Time and place require not other
time and place to circumstance them aright; but now humane sacred Ceremonies
are capable of time and place, and of being ordered.

4. Circumstances of time, place, order, and decency are common to religious,
with civil actions; but religious Ceremonies are appropriated unto Gods wor^
ship and service.

But to come unto your own instances.

Your first instance is in the gesture, in which public prayer is to be
addressed.

But this instance is very impertinent: for

1. This is in the general necessary, so that it is utterly impossible for
Prayer to be put up, but in some gesture or other; but the Ceremonies which
Non-conformists oppose, are mere humane inventions, and so unnecessary in the
general.

2. We have, for the particular gesture in Prayer, sufficient warrant and
direction from the light of Nature and Scripture, without any humane
institution: But we have no direction in Scripture for particular humane
Ceremonies: This is very well set down in Ames disp. about Ceremon. page 139.
page 151. No such thing can with any color be averred of Surplice, Cross and
the like. I do not quote Ames, as if I thought you any thing valued what he
said, but that the Reader might know the true state of the question, and that
in the laying of it down you have not so much as consulted your adversaries.

But now to prevent as much as may be the multiplying of needless
Controversies betwixt us, I shall acknowledge that a Church may enjoyne the
usage of any reverent, lowly, submissive gesture in public supplications,
when there is conveniencie for the usage thereof.

But yet it will not hereupon follow, that all things are to be done in the
gestures of public Prayer according unto the Churches appointment; for
suppose the Church should prohibit in public Prayers the gestures of
kneeling, lifting up the eyes and the hands to heaven, I should conclude such
an appointment of any Church whatsoever to be unlawful, because contrary unto
the express direction of Scripture.

Your second instance is impertinent too, for the gestures of Lauds, Hymns and
Confessions of the Faith, etc. is a matter of mere decency, and how remote
matters of mere decency are from the Ceremonies in question, I have declared a
little before, I shall therefore now only add these three things.

1. That a rational man may by mere light of Nature, without any institution,
easily gather, what gesture is fitting, decent and agreeable unto these actions.

2. That notwithstanding this, the Governors or Officers of a Church may
appoint in these actions any decent gesture or posture of the body, provided
that by special institution they do not put upon it any mystical
signification, and thereby make it a Worship.

3. That from this grant it can never be inferred, that in those gestures which
are to be used in Lauds, Hymns, Confessions of the Faith, all things are to
be done according to the appointment of Church Governors: and my reason is,
because it is possible, that Church Governors may be so irrational, as to
appoint here undecent gestures, as that the people should lie along on their
faces in singing of Psalms of Praise, and in Confession of the Faith. Now an
undecent gesture would be finfull, because against the Apostles prescription,
Let all things be done decently.

In the last place proceed we unto those arguments, if I may so call them,
which you have for confirmation of the proposition, which I say is incumbent on
you to prove: If you have for this any arguments in this your discourse, they
are, as I conceive, these three.

1. Because obedience must be paid to those Superiors, which watch over our
souls*

2. Because the Apostle left order to Titus to set in order the things that
were wanting.

3. Because we are commanded to obey our Ecclesiastical as well as natural and
civil parents: Now let the Reader apply unto each of these arguments the
proposition that is to be proved, therefore (...) in the 1 Cor. 14.40. is taken
in such a latitude, as that it includes the appointments of all the Churches of
God in succeeding ages, and the consequence will be of an imperceptible
validity.

The Reader may farther, if he please, make another experiment touching these
arguments, he may try what they will conduce unto the principal conclusion,
that the words of Paul are a proof of the more than lawfulness of prescription
of such Ceremonies as ours in a Church; if by the help of them he can come nigh
this conclusion of the Doctors, I will confess that I have been grossly
mistaken.

And this might suffice for answer unto these three arguments; but yet I shall
for the further satisfaction of the Reader say something unto each of them
apart.

The first is, because obedience must be paid to those Superiors which watch
over our souls; the place is Heb. 13.17. but this place will prove nothing for
the humane institution of religious Ceremonies, because our Guides may rule
over us without institution of such Ceremonies, and consequently we may pay
obedience to them without practice of such Ceremonies: The place is urged by
Bellarmine for the Popes Coactive power to make Laws binding the conscience,
and in Whitakers Answer thereunto, Tom. 2. page. 722. you may take notice of
this passage; Non constituit haee Jententia regnum Episcopis extra, aut supra
Evangelium: non debent Episcopi suas traditiones aut leges, aut contra, aut
extra, aut praeter Evangelium obtrudere. Obediendum ergo est, sed cum cautione,
si praeeant illi in Domino, and nil suum tradunt: nam si hoc fecerit omittendi
sunt, juxta illud, etiamsi nos, aut Angelus e Coelo, evangelizet vobis praeter
id quod vobis evangelizavimus, anathemae esto. Gal. 1.8. Let the Reader
consider whether our Ceremonies were not instituted, praeter Evangelium,
besides the Gospel:

A second argument which you prosecute, Sect. 53, 54. is because Paul left
order to Titus, to set in order the things that were wanting; such as the
Apostle had left undisposed of, in which they have made no rules, and the same
power you think is left, by parity of reason, to the Bishops in every Island:

For answer, (...) the things that were wanting were wanting in Crete, left
undone, as it is in the Margin of our English Bible, and not in the commission
or rules which Paul gave to Titus: for that Titus was to keep unto the
instructions that he had received from Paul, you might have seen, if you had
had the patience to have read unto the end of the verse; for there the Apostle
points to him the rule he should walk by, he was to set in order the things
that were wanting in Crete, not of his own head, but according to the
appointment of Paul; as I had appointed thee.

I might farther allege, that Bishops (by whom you mean our Prelates) have not
the same power delegated unto them, which Paul committed unto Titus: But I
shall for the present wave this, because it may occasion a long digression, and
the former answer is abundantly satisfactory, and from it we may conclude; that
suppose Bishops had power left them to set in order things that are wanting,
yet we may not thence collect, that they have power for institution of new
doctrinal Ceremonies, besides those instituted by Christ and his Apostles,
because however there may be many things wanting in their Churches, which may
need reformation, yet there is nothing wanting in the Scriptures, which needs
to be supplied by humane additions.

Your third Argument is drawn from the power of our Ecclesiastical parents and
the obedience we owe unto them. It cannot be doubted, say you, either whether
our Ecclesiastical parents have power to institute in things omitted, and
thereby remitted to their care by the Apostles, or whether we their obedient
Children, that are commanded to act (...) according to appointment, should from
time to time, be disobliged and free to disobey them in whatsoever they appoint
us? Here we have no argument, but only a begging of the thing in question: It
is not denied but that Ecclesiastical parents have power to appoint and dispose
of such Circumstances of time, place, order, decency etc. as in their kind are
necessary, but in particular determination do vary: But that they have any
power to institute new Religious Ceremonies, of mystical signification, is a
thing which you cannot but know to be constantly denied by your Antagonists,
and therefore why you should presume the contrary evident, and never attempt
the proof of it, I cannot sufficiently wonder.

But perhaps you have an argument couched in these words, it cannot be dou^ted
etc. whether our Ecclesiostical parents have power to institute in things
omitted, and thereby remitted to their care by the Apostles.

But pray, Sir, do you in earnest think, that if things be omitted by the
Apostles, they are by them hereby remitted unto the care of Ecclesiastical
parents in succeeding ages? Every one will confess that it sounds like a very
strange proposition: however, you cannot expect that I should swallow it, until
you bring some confirmation of it.

By this the Reader is, I hope, satisfied, that though your reading of (...),
according unto appointment, were to take place, yet you have brought nothing to
prove that, which you were justly called upon for proof of, viz. that
appointment, was to be taken here in this place of the Apostle in such a
latitude, as to comprehend humane, as well as divine appointment.

But though you fail in your proofs, your adversaries the non-conformists are
before hand with you, for they have proved that men's institution of religious
Ceremonies omitted by Christ and his Apostles is a most plain detraction and
palpable derogation, from 1. The all sufficiency of the Scripture. 2.
Perfection of Gods ordinances. 3. Fidelity of Christ in his prophetical office.
And lastly from the all-fulnes of his Kingly office.


I foresee that it will be alleged, that all these arguments are long ago
answered, and unto this I shall at present only give this short Reply, that
they have been vindicated from all answers, as by others, so especially by
Ames, and that this vindication of them remains unto this day unanswered.

However, I shall stay a while upon two places in Deuteronomy, which the
Non-conformists usually urge against our Ceremonies, and examine an answer
which the conformists gives thereunto, because this examination will conduce
very much unto the learning of the truth in the controversy of Ceremonies: the
places are Deu^. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you,
neither shall you diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the Commandments of
the Lord your God which I command you. And cap. 12.32. What thing soever* I
command you, observe to do it: Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from
it,

Unto these two places, the conformists answer by distinguishing of the parts,
and the Ceremonies of Gods worship; it is unlawful, say they, to add unto the
parts of Gods worship instituted by God, but it is lawful to add unto these
Ceremonies of worship that are instituted by God.

Unto this answer I thus reply.

1. Moses sealed up with this prohibition not only the moral, but also the
Ceremonial Law; it was unlawful then, to add unto the Ceremonial Law of Moses;
and why should it not be as unlawful now, to add unto the Ceremonial Law of
Christ? vis hujus consequentiae, inq^it Didoclavius, patet ex eo, quod non
minus nunc quam tune rationem humanam coerceri certis septis. and quasi
cancellis circumscribi opus sit, ne in rebus divinis lasciviat, aut in
superstitiones delabatur.

2. The Scripture is a rule of even Ceremonies in Gods worship, for it gives
prescriptions and directions in the new Testament concerning the Sacraments of
Baptis^^e and the Lords Supper; now if it does not prescribe all Ceremonies
requisite and convenient, then it is only a partial and imperfect rule of
Ceremonies in Gods worship; but we, for our part, think so honorably of
Scripture, as that we cannot but hold it to be a perfect adequate and total
rule of Ceremonial as well as moral worship, it is able to perfect the man of
God, and thoroughly to furnish him unto all good works, and so unto all
Ceremonies, that are good works.

A third reply is, that the members of this distinction are not opposite, as
the members of every good distinction should be, for Ceremonies of worship
though they be not parts of that worship of which they are Ceremonies, yet they
are parts of worship in general, for

1. Worship is divided into moral and Ceremonial, so that Ceremonial worship is
a subjective part of worship, a sort and kind of worship.

2. Mosaical Ceremonies under the Law were, and the Sacraments under the Gospel
are parts of worship: the distinction then betwixt the parts, and religious
Ceremonies of worship, is an artless and false distinction. To make this yet
more evident, I shall propound some arguments, by which the Non-conformists
prove our Ceremonies to be external worship, for then it will follow, that they
are parts of Gods worship.

1. Those external Ceremonies whose proper use is the honoring of God, are
external worship: But our Ceremonies are such, and therefore they are external
worship.

2. All external Ceremonies in their nature, formally elicited from religion,
are external worship: But our Ceremonies are such, and therefore they are
external worship.

This argument I find thus varied in a nameless author that has collected
twelve arguments against our Ceremonies.

All mere and immediate actions of religion are parts of divine worship.

But all religious Ceremonies, such as ours, are mere and immediate actions of
religion.

Therefore they are parts of divine worship.

And these arguments might serve to evidence, that our Ceremonies, the
surplice. Cross etc. Are imposed and used as parts of Gods worship, though for
want of a due and right author or efficient, they are false and unacceptable
worship: But to return unto the Doctor, from whom I may seem to have digressed.

Dr. Hammond.
This is all the observance M. J. seems to expect of me at this time, unless
his intimation to all admirers of M. Hooker, that they should vindicate their
great patron of Ceremonies, may pass for an admonition to me, who acknowledge
my self a thankful adorer of Gods graces in that godly learned man, and so
exact a few lines more above the regular account.

56. This will detain me no longer, then whilst I mind the Reader, that in a
discourse of the benefits which we receive from Christ in the Saerament, and
otherwise, M. Hooker undertakes to set down how Christ in his humane nature is
communicated to us, and so present with us; To this end three things he shows
at large. 1. That as nothing created can be unlimited, or receive any such
accident from any as may really make it infinite, so neither the soul nor body
of Christ, nor Christ as man, nor according to his humane nature, can possibly
be every where present, no nor the substance of the body of Christ, which
neither has or can have any presence but only local. 2. That this cannot be
rendered possible, either by the grace of union with the Diety, nor by any other
possible means, as he at large excellently deduceth it, page 300, 301, 302, 3.
That it may peradventure be well enough granted in some sense, and after a
sort, that Christ is every where present, as man, viz. 1. In respect of the
conjunction of the humane nature with the Deity, which conjunction is extended
as far as the Deity, the actual position being restrained, and tied to a
certain place, and 2. By cooperation with the Deity, and that in all things.

57. Now on this third head, (without reflecting on the two former, which
assure us of the authors meaning in it) two passages M. J. takes hold of, which
if he know any thing in either Philosophy, or scholastical divinity, are both
guilty of a gross mistake, and cannot be sufficiently wondered at by him, that
they should fall from so a learned a pen.

58. But I suppose there is no great skill in either of those learned faculties
required, to distinguish betwixt that which truly and properly is, and that
which may in some sense, and after a sort, and in two respects only (neither
of which belong to the propriety of being) be well enough granted, and that
with a (peradventure) also to have influence on all these.

59. And what severity is this, to require of every learned man, that has most
largely refuted an adversary, to be so averse from all thoughts of peace, and
reconciliation with him, that he may not allow him to speak truth, or but
perhaps to speak truth in a sort, and in some sense, and in two only respects?
All which are still more than intimations, that he thinks him to be absolutely,
and in simplicity and propriety of speaking, in a gross error, impossible even
to the power of God to have truth in it.

60. If any should chance to say of an eloquent man, that you might hear an
Angel speak in him, and I should reply, that it might peradventure be well
enough granted in a sort, or in some sense, that when he spoke you might hear
an Angel, assuring you at large of my opinion, that no bare man can truly be an
Angel, nay that it was impossible for God himself to bring to pass, that at the
same time he should be an Angel, and not an Angel, a man, and not a man, or
which is all one, a bare man, and yet an Angel, or (in fewer words) when Christ
says he is a door, and a vine, if I should say that in a sort, and in some
sense, and that in two respects, each of these had truth in them, would M. J.
think fit to leave his subject, and let loose for three leaves toge^^^r, and
pawn all his philosophy, and scholastical (not considering what the
consequence also may be to his practical) divinity, to accuse and wonder at,
and never to give over wondering, and withal solemnly to refute this or that
improper figurative speech, so perfectly acknowledged by the Speakers to be
such?

61. If he have that great leisure, and any prevalent temptation thus to lay it
out, I shall only assure him, that I have not so much of either, as to attend
these his motions, nor any other lover or admirer of Mr. Hooker, that I know
of, and therefore beseech him contentedly to rest in this general return to his
charge of that learned man, without expecting any more explicit, or particular
survey of it: And so much for Mr. Hooker also.

Jeanes.
I believe that most ordinary Readers will think me guilty of this disingenuous
carriage toward Mr. Hooker, which the Doctor accuses me of; but if they would
have but the patience to read me in the passage related unto, they would soon
acquit me, and find the Doctor guilty of a great deal of injury toward me.
Indeed Mr. Hooker says, that it may well enough be granted in some sense, and
after a sort, that Christ is every where present as man, viz. in two respects;
but whether this were liable to exception, I meddle not, it is the first of the
respects which he mentions, that I question, and the words that I challenge,
the Reader may find page 141, of my Treat. of the Fullness of Christ thus
summed up. Then for the great Hooker, whereas he says, That the conjunction of
the Manhood with Deity, is extended as far as Deity, that the Body of Christ
is joined unto Deity, wheresoever Deity is, that his Bodily substance has
every where a presence of true conjunction with Deity This also is easily
refuted, etc. Now this he affirms absolutely and simply without any
limitation, and not in a sort, or in some sense, and in two respects; and this
any man that has his eyes in his head may see, that will compare Mr. Hooker
and me together; and if any learned and impartial Reader will but make this
comparison, I shall be very well contented that he shall judge betwixt us, who
of us has most trespassed against practical Divinity, I in my charge of Mr.
Hooker, or the learned Doctor in his gross and undeniable falsification of my
said charge? But I shall in charity hope, that this falsification was but a
mistake, proceeding from his hasty and over passionate zeal toward the memory
of Mr. Hooker: Whereas he is pleased to talk his pleasure of my pawning all my
Philosophy and scholastical Divinity, I shall only humbly assume the boldness
to intimate thus much unto the Reader, that though I have no great store of
either, yet I hope I have enough to attend (that I may borrow the Doctors
phrase) the motions of him, and all other admirers of Mr. Hooker in the Defense
of the matter questioned: but if he shall decline all future further debate of
it, I shall with a great deal of probability conclude, that what Mr. Hooker
says is incapable of any tolerable vindication: for if he were defensible, Dr.
Hammond is so able as that he could, and withal so zealous a lover and admirer
of him, as that he would continue the justification of him: Now from the
undefensiblenesse of Mr. Hooker in this one point, I shall only take occasion
to admonish his followers, that seeing he has erred in so weighty a point,
therefore he might err in matters of a far inferior nature, especially
seeing the times were such, as that they transported with prejudice many men,
that were unquestionably otherwise very learned and godly.

Dr. Hammond. sect. 62.
I have thus without any other obligation, than what my desire to undeceive the
Author and his Readers laid upon me, paid him now this my second observance:
And may be allowed to think it time, that he who has been so liberal of his
uses of public refutation of others words, should find some vacancy for one
use of more private (if not reprehension, yet) examination of his own actions:
And then I shall offer to his consideration, how much more agreeable to the
Laws of brotherly kindness or candor it has been, to have proposed his
exceptions in such a manner, or friendly address, as might have brought him
home the same satisfaction, and saved others the importunity of these useless,
because personal debates: When he has sincerely observed in himself the motive
of his other distant choice, I have obtained the end of my charity in
mentioning it to him, and have no more to return to him at this time.

Jeanes.
We poor ignorant men, that use the trite, but not illogical Method of Doctrine
and Use in Preaching, do usually first confirm our Doctrine, before we
infer any Uses therefrom. Now Sir, if you will be pleased. first to prove,
that it is much more agreeable to the Laws of Brotherly kindness or candor,
to propose a man's exceptions against a printed Book in a way of private Letter
(for that I conceive is the manner of friendly address that you speak of)
than in a public way from the Press, especially when the said exceptions are
propounded, not for any personal satisfaction, but for the undeceiving of
others, unto which end the private way is no apportionare means; I shall then
proceed unto the use of, not only examination, but also reprehension of this
mine action; but in the mean while I shall stand upon my justification, and
maintain that I am guiltless of any unbrotherly, uncandid, and disrespective
carriage toward you in the proposal of my objections, which was in as civil
and friendly a manner, I am confident, as ever you received any from any
Antagonist whatsoever.

The most considerable Escapes of the Printer in the Letters, etc. And in the
Reply to Dr. Hammond.
First in the Letters.
Page 2. l. 13. r. in all. p. 7. l. 6. r. papers. p. 8. l. 20. r. (...). p. 18.
l. 30. r. essential to the nature of man. l. 34. r. subjectivis. p. 29. l. 13.
r. much less. p. 23. l. ult. r. or of their nature. l. 42. r. continuet. p.
34. l. 12. dele a. l. 14. r. natural body shall. l. 30. r. a spiritual body.
P. 36. l. 6. r. scomme. p. 37. l. 19 r. consecutive. p. 42. l. penult. r. yet
you think p. 47. l 10. r. in my absence. l. 34. r. indifferent and rational
Reader.

Secondly in the Reply unto Dr. Hammonds Vindication, etc.
p. 5. l. 41. r. prohibit, p. 6 l. 33 r. improbable, p. 8 l. 42. r. apposito. p
9. l. 1. r. a place. p. 15. l. 26. r. it is p. 22. l. penult. r. then all* p.
25. Marg. two last lines r. initiantur. p. 26. l. 17. r. alas. p. 28. l. 41. r.
tem^erari. p. 39. l. 22. r. had been. p. 38. l 2. r. from his. p. 39. l. 4. r.
demones. p. 41. l. 13. r. aditum. p. 42. l. 36. r. (...). p. 47. l. ult. r.
arguments. p. 50. l. 12. r. variae. p. 54. l. 48. r. (...) p. 55. l. 16. r.
those. p, 56. l. antepenult, r. as distinct. p. 59. l 37. r. such kind of. p.
61. l. 21, 23. r. try. l. 35. r. six Gommandements. p. 62. l 27, r. as with
what. p. 71. l. 32. r. autem. p. 72. l. 24. r. legis, p. 78. l. 15. r.
uniformly. ibid from l. 18. usque ad l. 36. there is made a part of Dr.
Hammonds Vindication, which is a quotation out of Ames his Disp. about Hum.
Ceremon. p. 481, 482, and should be placed in the Marg. against l. 39.] l. 41.
r. they will. p. 80. l. ult. r. Churches. p. 83. l. 28. r. fecerint.

Some Advertisements to the Reader.
I Shall in a word acquaint thee with the relation and pertinency of these two
foregoing Debates unto the rest of the Book. The Letters have an apt connection
with the Tract of Original Righteousness. And the Reply unto Dr. Hammond may
be referred unto the Treatile concerning the indifferency of humane actions;
and indeed it was the Doctors unjust charge of me, and Ames, with the denial of
things Indifferent, that occasioned that Treatise. These two pieces have layne
a long time by me (as can be attested by diverse Gentlemen, and Ministers, unto
whom they have long since been communicated) But I was persuaded by the
Bookseller to defer the publication of them, until a Second Part of the
Mixture of Scholastical and Practical Divinity was ready: And that had been
long since extant, if Sickness, with other private crosses, together with the
public troubles and distractions of the times, had not hindered: He has also
prevailed with me, to reserve for a Third Part, all my future Replies, unto all
such as have, or shall write against me. Only I shall in part alter this
resolution touching the Namelesse Author of the Defense of Doctor Hammonds
(...), not that I think it meritorious of any serious consideration; for it is
fraught, all along, with such reviling, boasting, and insulting language, as is
every way unsuitable unto the gravity of a Divine, the ingenuity of a Scholar,
the charity, meekness, and humility of a Christian; nay the morality of a man.
An ingenuous and good natured Pagan, would highly scorn to treat an Adversary
with such incivilities, as he does me. But because some, who are of the same
persuasion with the Author in other particulars, have triumphed, and insulted
in this his doughty work, as unanswerable; I shall therefore, as soon as that
which is now under my hands (viz. An Exposition upon the 7th. of the Romans) is
finished, address my self unto the examination thereof. I am so charitable as
to think, that Dr. Hammond has so much of Christianity, so much of a Minister,
of a Scholar, of a Gentleman in him, as not to accept, or approve of this
Thrasonical and Vainglorious Second. And if the Doctor disowne him, I might
pass him by with silence, and a just neglect. But if the Doctor shall judge,
that it is but justice, to chastise with scoffs, calumnies, and reproaches, so
contemptible a person, as my self, for daring to dissent from him, and to
represent the reasons of my said dissent, though in a calm and modest way: I
shall then appeal unto all the world, how unagreeable this is unto that
humility and moderation, for which the Doctor is generally famed. To irritate
the Doctor against me, this Libeller tells him, that I have publicly bragged,
that I have made him a Dunce. But I profess, that this is a gross, and most
unworthy untruth; and he can bring no witnesses for it, but Knights of the
Post. With the like falsehood, disingenuity, and malice, he pretends, page 96.
etc. that I contumeliously undervalue the Doctors Critical Learning, and make
him to be but a petty Grammaticaster, etc. And hereupon he spends near five
pages, in an Apology for Critics in general, and the Doctor in particular. And
what I pray is the ground of this terrible accusation? Why (forsooth) I said, I
am very loath to enter into a contest with so great a Critic, about the
meaning of a word. Hereupon he inferres, that I make the Doctor to be but a
whifling Grammarian; that I account a Critic but a Grammarian, and a
Gramma^ian, but an empty Paedagogue: But that for these odious inferences there
is no color, or shadow in my words, will be quickly discerned by every
Freshman. But such loose sequels as these, are very rife, and thick in his
Book. And of this, I do not doubt, but I shall shortly, make so perfect a
discovery, as shall give full satisfaction, touching the vast abilities of this
our Mr. Thraso, unto all impartial Readers, save such whose understandings
reach no further than Romances and Plays. His numerous Quotations out of the
Schoolmen, have induced some to admire him for his deep insight into
Scholastical Divinity. But let such his Admirers confider, whether he be
likely to be such a profound School-man, as they suppose him, who talks of the
Author of Collegium Complutense, as of a single person, page 30. and questions
whether Capreolus quote Aquinas only to refute him, as the latter Schoolmen
do the former, page 341. whereas Capreolus was the professed Champion of
Aquinas: And his Book on the Sentences consists chiefly of collections out of
Aquinas; and hereupon he is termed, Thomistarum princeps. Notwithstanding then
this Gentleman makes such frequent Musters of the Names of the Schoolmen, as
if he were Nomenclator to them, it is unto me very probable, that this is his
first considerable voyage that he ever made into them; and that now too he has
traveled in them but by the Index. Three great advantages this our Libeller
has against me: First, his Billings-gate Rhetoric, by which, it is not
improbable, he hoped to tempt me into such an outrageous fury, as his zeal for
Doctor Hammond has transported him with. But unto this I shall return nothing,
but my pity and prayers, that God would pardon, and heal this his distemper.
The second is, the concealment of his Name, for by this he hazards no credit;
his pretense for it is, that I might not run into personal declamation. How
liable he is to personal defamation, I know not: But let him be never so
obnoxious, he may be secure, and need not fear any such usage from me: For it is
that which I shall studiously decline in all contests whatsoever, though my
Antagonist should be a Papist, a Turk, a Pelagian, or a Socinian; for I know
that personal invectives will betray the best cause unto jealousies and
suspicions. And besides, a man cannot throw dirt and dung in another man's
face, but some of it will stick to his own fingers. A third artifice that he
has, is the swelling of his Book into so large a volume, as that may either
wholly prevent, or much delay all Replication. My Refutation was printed about
three years since in 40. pages, and his Defense is now come forth in 644.
pages. Unto this tediousness I shall apply what Bishop Hall speaks of his
Popish Opponent; Should I follow him in this proportion, He might expect an
Answer in Tostatus hides, whose first words should be, Quis legit haec? Or if
my patience would delay my Reply to the just paces of his Answer, this Volume
of his would perhaps be vanished into Grocers shops, for waste paper, in thuris
piperise cucullos, and would no more need answer, than now it deserves one.
Against this his voluminousnesse I shall make use of this expedient; I shall
consult some learned and judicious friends, and desire them faithfully and
impartially to select such passages as they think material, and them only I
shall examine. But I shall detain thee, Reader, no longer. All that I have to
desire further of thee, is thy patience, that thou will suspend a while thy
censure, until thou can hear what I can say for my self.

An Explication of a passage in the Treatise of Things Indifferent, etc.
WHereas in the Treatise concerning the Indifferency of humane actions, page
54. as also in my Reply to Dr. Hammonds Vindication, etc. page 5. I laid down
this for a Rule out of some School^men, viz. That betwixt things privatively
opposite there is no medium, no middle, either of abnegation, or of
participation, in capable subjects; I find some to make a doubt concerning the
latter, the middle of participation; for such a medium (say they) is the
dawning and twilight betwixt light and darkness; to have one eye betwixt
sight and blindness; such a medium is a disposition unto a disease, betwixt
health and that disease. But this doubt would soon vanish, if men would heed
the limitations that are usually given of it.

The first is, that there is not such a medium of participation betwixt
privative opposites, as there is in adversis, in contrary qualities; for here,
each of the extremes is positive and affirmative, vere ens, whereas in
privative opposites, one of them is more non ens than ens.

A second you have in Scheibler in his Topics, c. 20. n. 72. having quoted a
saying out of Plutarch, that non datur (...), he refers, for limitation,
unto what he had said concerning the intension and remission of privation, n.
43, 44, 45. There he lays down this Canon, privatio non suscipit magis and
minus. Privations have no degrees, are not intended nor remitted. But this he
tells us is to be understood of not partial privations, such as those now
instanced in: for such are privations only secundum quid; but of total
privations, such as blindness, dumbness, deafness, death. These are
incapable of degrees, and so likewise there can be no mixture, or cohesion of
them. The same for substance we have in Aquinas, 1.2 ae q. 18. a. 8. ad 1 um.
Duplex est privatio, quaedam quae consistit in privatum esse: and haec nihil
relinquit, sed totum aufert: ut caecitas totaliter aufert visum, and tenebrae
luncem, and mors vitam; and inter hanc privationem, and habitum oppositum non
potest esse aliquod medium circa proprium susceptibile, Est autem alia
privatio, quae consistit in privari, sicut aegritudo est privatio sanitatis,
non quod tota sanitas sit sublata, sed quod est quasi quaedam via ad totalem
ablationem sanitatis, quae f^^^er mortem. Et ideo talis privatio, cum aliquid
relinquat, non semper est immediate cum opposito habitu. The sum and sense of
this is, that privations and their habits are immediately opposite, if we speak
of privations in facto esse, not in fieri. Now that Aquinas here speaks of
medium participationis, is the Comment of Gregory de Valentia, Tom. 2 dis. 2.
q. 13. punct. 5. This advertisement I thought fit to insert, for the prevention
of unnecessary cavils: But yet I must confess, that medium participationis was
put into the rule ex abundanti, and contributes nothing to the matter in hand:
So that the Reader, if he please may leave it out; for the stresse of the
proof lies only upon this, viz. that betwixt things privatively opposite,
there is no medium of abnegation in capable subjects. And this is affirmed so
unanimously by all, as that I know not so much as one Dissentient.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and Sold by THO: ROBINSON.
CHronicon Historiam Catholicam complectens ab exordio Mundi ad Nativitatem D.
N. Jesu Christi, and exinde ad annum a Christo nato LXXI. Authore Ed. Simson,
S. T. D. in Folio.

An Answer to Mr. Hoard's Book, entitled Gods Love to Mankind, by W. Twisse,
D.D. in Fol.

Books written by Dr. Prideaux.
XXII Lectiones, Tredecim Orationes, and Sex Conciones. in Fol.

Fasciculus Controversiarum Theol. 4o.

Theologiae Scholasticae Syntagma Mnemonicum, and Conciliorum Synopsis. 4o.

Manuductio ad Theol. Polemicam. 8o.

An Easy and Compendious Introduction for reading all sorts of History;
contrived in a more facile way than heretofore has been published. 4o.

Books written by Dr. Owen.
The Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance examined and confirmed. in Folio.

Socinianism examined, in the confutation of Biddle's, and the Racovian
Catechism. 4o.

A Review of the Annotations of H. Grotius, in reference to the Doctrine of the
Deity, and Satisfaction of Christ, in Answer to Dr. Hammond. 4o.

Of the Mortification of Sin in Pelievers, with a resolution of sundry cases of
Conscience thereunto belonging. 8o.

Of Temptation, the nature and power of it, the danger of entering into it, and
the means preventing the danger; with a Resolution of sundry Cases thereunto
belonging. 8o.

Providentiall Alterations in their subserviency to Christ's Exaltation, opened
in a Sermon on Ezech. 17. ver. 24. 4o.

A Sermon concerning the Kingdom of Christ and Power of the Civil Magistrate
about things of the Worship of God, on Dan. 7.16. 4o.

Gods work in Founding Zion, and his peoples duty thereupon, on Isaiah 14.32.
4o.

Of Schism, in reference to the present differences in Religion 8o.

A Review of the true Nature of Schism, in Answer to Mr. Cawdrey. 8o.

A Defense of Mr. Jo. Cotton, and a Reply to Mr. Cawdrey about the Nature of
Schism. 8o.

Diatriba de Justitia divina. 8o.

Of Communion with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each person distinctly
in Love, Grace, and Consolation. 4o.

Of the Divine original, Authority, self-evidencing Light, and power of the
Scriptures. Also a Vindication of the Purity and Integrity of the Hebrew and
Greek Texts, in some considerations on the Prolegomena, and Appendix to the
late Biblia Polyglotta. 8o.

Pro Sacris Scripturis adversus hujus temporis Fanati^os, Exercitationes
Apologeticae quatuor. 8o.

Books written by Mr. Hodges.
A Treatise of Prayer, or an Apology for the use of the Lords Prayer. 12o.

A Scripture Catechism, toward the Confutation of sundry Errors; some of them
of the present times. 8o.

The Hoary Head Crowned, a Funeral Sermon on Proverbs 16.31. 4o.

A Cordial against the fear of death, a Sermon on Heb. 2.15. 4o.

Books written by Dr. Wallis.
Mathesis Vniversalis, sive Arithmeticum opus integrum. 4o.

Adversus Meibomii, de proportionibus. 4o.

De Angulo Contactus and Semicirculis. 4o.

De Sectionibus Conicis Tractatus. 4o.

Arithmetica Infinitorum. 4o.

Eclipseos Solaris observatio. 4o.

Commercium Epistolicum de quaestionibus quibusdam Mathematicis nuper habitum.
4o.

Men's sobria serio commendata: Concio lat: and Expositio Epistolae ad Titum. 8o.

Grammatica Linguae Anglicanae. 8o.

Due Correction for Mr. Hobbs. 8o.

Hobbiani Puncti dispunctio. 8o.

Books written by Dr. Zouch.
Cases and Questions resolved in the Civil Law. 8o.

Juris and Judicii Fecialis, sive Juris inter Gentes. 4o.

Specimen Quaestionum Juris Civilis cum designatione Authorum a quibus in
utramque partem disseruntur. 4o.

De Legati delinquentis Judice competente dissertatio. 12o.

Eruditionis Ingenuae specimina, scil. Artium Logicae, Dialect. Rhetor. and
Moralis Philosoph. 12o.

Quaestionum Juris Civilis Centuria. Non minus ad Legum Generalium Cognitionem,
quam ad studiosorum Exercitationem, accommoda. 12o. newly published.

Conciones Octo ad Academicos Oxon. Latin habitae. Epistolarum Decas, Auth.
Hen. Wilkinson, S.Th. D. 8o.

Rob. Baronii, Philos. Theologiae Ancillans. 12o.

Rob. Baronii, Metaphysica Generalis and Special: omnia ad usum Theologiae
accomodata. 12o.

Latium and Lyceu^, Graeca cum latinis, sive Gram. Artis in utraque lingua
lucidissima, Auth. Rob. Wickens. 8o.

Exercitatio Theolog. de Insipientia rationis humanae, Gratia Christi
destitutae, in rebus fidei. Aut. R. Cross, Col. Linc. 4o.

Fur pro Tribunali, Examen Dialog. cui inscribitur Fur Praedestinatus. Auth.
Geo. Kendal. S.Th.D. 8o.

Miscellanea, sive Meditat: and Orationes, etc. Auth. Ed. Ellis. 12o.

Homerus (...): sive Comparatio Homeri cum Scriptoribus Sacris quoad normam
loquendi. Auth. Zach. Bogan. 8o.

Exercitationes aliquot Metaphysicae. Aut. Tho. Barlow. Col. Regin. 4o.

Juelli Apologia Ecclesiae Anglicanae, graec. lat. 8o.

Tract. de Demonstratione. Aut. Jo. Flavel. 8o.

Dionysius Longinus de Grandi-loquentiae graec. lat. cum Notis. 8o.

Stratagemata Satanae. Aut. Jacob. Acontium. 8o.

Jul. Lu. Florus de Rebus a Romany gestis, cum Annot. Jo. Stadii and Claud.
Salmasii. 12o.

Eryci Puteani Suada Attica, sive Orationum select: Syntagma. 8o.

Eryci Puteani Historia Insubrica. 12o.

Jo. Bambrigii, Astronom. Profes. Saviliani in Acad. Ox. Canicularia. Quibus
access^runt, Insigniorum aliquot Stellarum Longitudines and latitud. ex Astron.
obser. Vlugbeigi. 8o.

Adagialia sacra Novi Testam. selecta and exposita ab And. Schotto. 12o.

Musica Incantans, sive Poema exprimens Musicae vires. Aut. R. South. 4o.

A Guide to the holy City, or Directions and Helps to an holy Life, by Jo.
Reading B.D. 4o.

The Royal Slave, a Tragi-Comedy, by W. Cartwright. 4o.

Pliny's Panegyrike, A speech in Senate to the Emperor Trajan. Translated into
English by Sir R. Stapleton. 4o.

Good Counsel for the Peace of the Church, by Bishop Davenant. 4o.

The Doctrine of Christian Liberty, by Bishop Downame. 8o.

A Defense of Tithes, by Jo. Ley. 4o.

A Buckler for the Church of England, in Answer to Mr. Pendarvi's Queries, by
Will: Ley. 4o.

Vindieiae Academiarum, in Answ. to Websters Exam. Acad. by S. Ward, D.D. 4o.

The private Christians Non ultra, or a Plea for the Lay-mans Interpreting of
Scriptures. 4o.

The only way to preserve life. A Sermon on Amos 5.6. by Gr. Williams. D.D. 4o.

King David's Sanctuary. A Sermon preached before the King at Oxford on Psalm.
73.25. by Rich. Herwood. 4o.

The Vanity of Self-boasters. A Funeral Sermon on Psalm. 52.1. by Ed. Hinton.
D.D. 4o.

The quiet Soul, or the peace and tranquillity of a Christians estate; in two
Sermons on Mat. 11.29. by Ed. Ellis. 4o.

Concio Oxoniae habita postridie Comitiorum Jul. 13. 1658. pro Gradu^ Doct. a
Guliel. Burt. Col. Wint. Custod. 12o.

A Practical Discourse concerning Gods Decrees; by Ed. Bagshaw, Stud. of Chapterchapter
4o.

De Monarchia Absoluta, and Mixta Dissertatio Politica. Aut. Ed. Bagshaw. 4o.

Susannas Apology against the Elders, or a Vindication of Susanna Parr, one of
those two women lately Excommunicated by Mr. Stuckley and his Church in Exeter.
8o.

The young Divines Apology for his continuance in the University, with his
serious Meditation on the sacred Calling of the Ministry. 8o.

Tears shed in behalf of the Church of England, and her sad Distractions, by D.
Getsius. 8o.

The Abuse of Gods Grace discovered in the Kinds, Causes, Punishments,
Symptoms, Cures, Differences, Cautions, and other Practical Improvements
thereof. Proposed as a seasonable check to the wanton Libertinism of the
Present Age. By Nich. Claget. 4o.

A Treatise of Fruit Trees, showing the manner of Grafting, Setting, Pruning,
and ordering them in all respects, by Ra: Austin. 4o.

The Spiritual Use of an Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees, set forth in diverse
similitudes, according to Scripture and Experience, by Ra: Austin. 4o.

Observations on some part of Sir Francis Bacons Natural History, as it
concerns Fruit Trees, Fruits and Flowers, by Ra: Austin. 4o.

The History of the Propagation of Vegetables by the concurrence of Art and
Nature: Showing the several ways for the Propagation of Plants usually
cultivated in England, as likewise the Method for Improvement and best Culture
of Field, Orchard, and Garden Plants, written according to Observation made
from Experience, and Practice, by R. Sharrock, Fellow of New Col. 8o.

Hypothesis de Officiis secundum humanae rationis dictata seu Naturae Jus, unde
Casus omnes Conscientiae quatenus notiones a Natura suppecunt dijudicari
possint. Ethnicorum simul and Jureperitorum consensus ostenditur, Principia and
Rations Hobbesii Malmes: ad Ethicam and Politicam spectantes in examen
veniunt. Aut. R. Sharrock. 8o.

A complete Concordance of the English Bible, by Rob. Wickens. 8o.

Immortality of Humane Souls asserted, in Answer to a Tract entitled, Man's
Mortality. 4o.

The Entrance of Mazzarini: or some Memorials of the State of France, between
the Death of the Cardinal of Richelieu and the beginning of the late Regency.
12o.

Books written by Mr. Hen. Jeanes.
The want of Church Government, no warrant for a total omission of the Lords
Supper. 8o.

A Treatise of the Excellency of Praise and Thanksgiving. 4o.

A Mixture of Scholastical and Practical Divinity; in two Parts. 4o.

Doctor Hammonds (...), or a greater Ardency in Christ's love of God at one time
than another, proved to be Irreconcilable with his Fullness of Habitual
Grace, the perpetual Happiness, and the Impeccability of his soul. 4o.

Saintship no ground of Sovereignty, or a Treatise tending to prove, that the
Saints, barely considered as such, ought not to govern. By Edw. Bagshaw, M.A.
Stud. of Chapter Chapter 8o.

Three Decads of Sermons preached to the University at St. Mary's Church in
Oxon: By Henry Wilkinson, D.D. Principal of Magdalen Hall, Oxon. 4o.


