A Looking-glass FOR THE PARLIAMENT.

Wherein they may see the Face of their UNJUST, ILLEGAL, TREASONOUS and
REBELLIOUS PRACTICES,

1 Against Almighty GOD.

2 Against their KING.

3 Against the Fundamental LAWS of the Kingdom.

4 Against their own Oaths and Covenants.

Argued betwixt Two Learned JUDGES, the one remaining an exile beyond the Seas,
the other a Prisoner for his Allegiance and Fidelity to his KING and COUNTRY.



Printed in the Eighth year of the Parliaments Tyranny and Oppression. 1648.

To the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
WHosoever thou art, that shall peruse this ensuing Discourse, we desire thee
to do it with Candor, and without prejudice of opinion; before thou have
warily read it, seriously consider it, and advisedly weighed it; and when thou
have so done, if thou shall approve of it, practice it, if thon do not, let
us receive thy modest reproof in writing, and inform us better by more learned
and infallible Arguments of the truth in those grounds we have laid down to our
selves, and we shall hold our selves much obliged unto thee, and remain,

Studious to do thee good, D. I. R. H.
Dated Feb. 7. An. D. 1648.
A LOOKING GLASS for the PARLIAMENT.
IVDGE. SIR,
I Must confess to you, that I do apprehend that there is a Legislative Power
in the Parliament, but I take it to be in sensu conjuncto, not in sensu diviso,
in a sense when the KING is joined to both Houses of Parliament, not when he is
divided from them either in his Will or Person: For neither House by it self,
or both Houses together have Power to make a Law to bind the Subject without
the Royal assent; now the Legislative Power is nothing else but a Power to
repeal old Laws, or to make new ones that shall bind the Subject: neither can
the KING by himself repeal any established, or make any Law binding to the
subject without the preparation or assent of both Houses, not joining with any
one House, make a Law or Ordinance to bind the other, nor repeal any Law
whatsoever; and I am very confident, you cannot show me an authority in our
Laws to the contaary; But you will peradventure say, That the KING will fully
absent himself from both his Houses of Parliament, and that thereupon his Power
is inherent in, and devolved to the Parliament. If you should make this
objection, besides what you will find hereafter expressed as touching this
question, the practice of all times show the contrary: for as on the one part,
if he be personally present with his Parl. yet he may be wilfully absent, or
absent in his will, as if he answer to any bill promoted to him, Le Roy
s^avisera, or the King will advise upon it, it stands at present for a negation
of the bill, and thereby it is made incapable that Session to be an Act: so on
the contrary part, if the King be absent from both Houses of Parliament in
person, he may be present in his will; that is, if his person were at York,
and both Houses sitting at Westminster, and they should send him Bills to sign
which he should accept of, and indorse this upon them ( Le Roy le Veut) or the
King wills, this is an affirmation of those bills, and makes them Acts of
Parliament; which not only proves that one or both Houses by themselves have
not legislative power without the King; (for as to the making of Laws they
have but a preparatory power to frame and present bills for the Royal
signature and approbation) but also that if the King be absent in person from
them either willingly or by occasion of necessity, his legislative power is not
representatively lodged in, or devolved unto one or both Houses of Parliament.
I will agree with that great lover of Parliaments, and learned Father of the
Law, Sir Edward Cook, in the fourth part of his Institutes p. 6. That a
Parliament cannot begin or be held but either in the Kings person or by
representation: By representation two ways, either by a Guardian of England by
Letterspatents under the Great Seal, when the King is in remotis out of the
Realm, or by commission under the Great Seal to certain Lords of Parliament
representing the Kings person, he being within the Realm, by reason of some
infirmity; so that we hereby conclude that the King is not represented in
Parliament of common course, but only by special Commission, in one of these
two causes: in the first of which cases, Edward Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of
Chester held a Parliament in 24. E. 3. for King Edw. the third: And John Duke
of Bedford brother and Lieutenant to the King and Guardian of England held a
Parliament as Guardian of England in the fifth year of King H. the fifth; and
in the second case in 3. E. 4. a Parliament was begun in the presence of the
King, and prorogued until a further day; And when William Archbishop of York
the Kings Commissary by Letters Patent held the same Parliament and adjourned
the same, the cause of the said prorogation being because the King was enforced
to go into Glocestershire to repress a Rebellion there; so in 28. Eli. Queen
Elizabeth by her Commission did by her Letters Patent authorize John Whit gift
Archbishop of Canterbury, William Baron of Burleigh Lord Treasurer, and Henry
Earl of Darby, to begin, hold, and prorogue a Parliament, and this Commission
is entered in the Journall book of the Lords house, over which is written,
Domina Regina representatur per comissionarios viz. That our Lady the Queen is
represented by her Commissioners: which precedents in both cases plainly prove
that the King is not of course representatively in Parliament, nor his power
lodged there, but by his special Commissions, or Letters Patents, which may
suffice as to this point; but for those parts of your motives, that the power
of both Houses is above the Kings, you shall find answered unto hereafter.

And whereas you write that the Scots have delivered up the King, and that he
is a Prisoner, and his Person at their disposition, that the City and
Parliament are united, that the whole strength of the Kingdom is in their
hands, that Bishops will be rooted out, their Lands sold, and Presbyterian
government settled; which I conceive you allege as arguments to persuade me to
compound, and take the Oaths you mention; these are rather arguments of force
and fraud, by all zealous lovers of honor, Justice and Piety to be resisted
and withstood, then of truth and reason tobe submittd unto, and look more like
arguments of Suitors Hill, then Westminster Hall; but if you lay them before me,
as persuasions of fear and terror, I answer you in the words of King David,
that you may see how vain these conceits are, Psalm. 2. The Princes of the
earth stand up, and take council against the Lord, and against his Anointed,
saying, Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us,
he that dwells in Heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them
in derision: he shall bruise them with a Rod of Iron, and break them in pieces
like a Potters Vessel. Be wise now therefore O ye Princes, be learned O ye
that are Judges of the Earth. What though many Ox^n are come about the King,
and fat Bulls of Rasan have closed him in on every side, that gape upon him
with their mouths as if they were ramping and roaring Lions? was not this good
King David's case, Psalm. 22. 12. was not he hunted after by Saul to destroy his
life, as a man hunteth after a Partridge in the Mountains? 1 Samuel 26. 20. did
not his enemies lie waiting in his way on every side, turning their eyes down
to the ground, Like as a Lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a
Lions Whelpe lucking in secret places, Psalm. 17. 11. 12. They spoke against him
with false tongues, and compassed him about with words of hatred, and fought
against him without a cause, Psalm. 109. 3. And David's enemies kept him Prisoner
too as out King is, for they compassed him about, Psalm. 140. 9. Nay he
complains more heavily; they that hate me without a cause are more then the
hairs of mine head, they that are mine enemies, and would destroy me
guiltless are mighty, Psalm. 69. 4. Yet what of all this? Are not there many
promises held forth in the holy Scriptures to us, that may assure a man of the
smallest faith, that the King shall be reestablished in his Throne, and his
enemies confounded, for David assures us there is verily a reward for the
righteous, Doubtless there is a God in Heaven that judges in the earth, Psalm.
58. 11. and Psalm. 9. The Lord is known by executing judgment, the wicked
shall be shared in the works of their own hands, for the poor shall not be
always forgotten, the hope of the afflicted shall not perish for ever: and to
prove this he affirms by way of evidence, Psa. 27. 2. When the wicked even
mine enemies, and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and
fell, and Psalm. 30. He shows his deliverance by his thanksgiving in these
words, I will magnify thee O Lord, for thou have set me up, and not made my
foes to triumph over me, thou have turned my heaviness into joy, thou have put
off my sackcloth, and gi^ded me with gladness. How then can I despair of our
Kings deliverance and victory? I hope I may without offense say, that I believe
our King is a parallel to David in his virtues, and the justice of his Cause,
and therefore shall with David Psalm. 21. conclude this point, The King shall
rejoice in thy strength O Lord, exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation,
thou shall give him his hearts desire, and wilt not deny him the request of his
lips, and why? Because the King puts his trust in the Lord, and in the mercy
of the most highest he shall not miscarry: And for the latter part of your
Argument, which is, that either the King will sign the Propositions, and so
mine estate will be confiscated, or if he do not, the Parliament will do it
by their Ordinances without him: I answer, that I fear not his Majesty's
consent to give away the estates of his Loyal Subjects, but if he be a
Prisoner as you signify unto me by your letters that he is, I fear not much
that his assent to the Propositions can take away mine estate; neither do I
hold it a piece of wisdom to press his consent per dures to such
Propositions, for you that are learned in the Laws know that such consent is
not any way binding at all amongst common persons, a fortiori in the Kings
cause. And for their disposing of mine estate by Ordinance without the Kings
consent, I must deal plainly with you, it terrifieth me not at all, for I am
clearly of opinion that no Ordinance without the Kings consent is binding to
the people, or can alter any property that I have in mine estate, by the
Fundamental Laws of the Land: And if the King should consent to such an
Ordinance it were only binding till the first Sessions of the next Parliament,
and then to dye of it self, if not again revived; which if I thought you
doubted of, I would take the pains to clear it by citing you authorities
sufficient in the point, whereupon I doubt not but you will infer that there can
be no good assurance or sale made of the Bishops lands by Ordinance without the
Kings Royal and personal assent, nor that both or either House of Parliament
can dispose of his Royal person by any Law of the Land (and I hope God will
never permit them to dispose of him) otherwise then to re-establish him in his
Throne again, and invest him with all his Royal powers and interests, which
by the known Laws of the Land are due unto him, and to make him a glorious
King according to their several Declarations, Protestations, oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, and according to their solemn League and Covenant;
all which Protestations, Oaths, and Covenants, every Member of both Houses,
either by the Laws, or by their own Orders, has or ought to take. Now as
concerning the Covenant, if I understand it aright, the principal ends of it
are the settling of Presbyterian government in the Church, the extirpation of
Episcopacy, the right and privileges of Parliament, the preservation of the
Kings Majesty's person and authority, which is qualified with a clause of
equivocation; viz. in the maintenance of the true Religion and liberties of the
Kingdom, to bring Incendiaries and malignants, or evil instruments to
condign punishment; and lastly, to assist and defend all those that join in
that League and Covenant, to the ends and purposes aforesaid. These being the
ends of the Covenant, it is expedient that I should consider whether it be
lawful to take any Covenant tending to these ends: for I will not dispute the
legality or illegality of taking of Covenants in general, but whether without
my King and his confirmation, I may make any Covenant at all with any sort of
people in this Land, especially to abrogate any known and established Law of
the Land: Now to pull down that government of Episcopacy which is established
by diverse acts of Parliament in this Kingdom, to set up Presbyterian by force
of Arms, which is inconsistent with the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and
without the Kings consent (who by his office of divine appointment, is the
nursing father of the Church, as Isaiah 49. 22. and by the Statutes of this
Land acknowledged to be supreme Moderator and governor of the Church and
Kingdom, as hereafter is more at large declared.) I very much doubt and
scruple, whether I may do it, and the rather for this cause for fear lest
joining in an unlawful Covenant, happily I be found to fight against God, as it
was said in the case of the Apostles, Act. 5. 30. for if I enter into this
Covenant to eradicate Episcopacy which has been approved in the Church for the
first 1500 years after Christ's ascension by all men that have professed the
name of Christ, and was doubtless of Apostolical institution (if we may give
credit unto the ancient Fathers, and Chronologies of the Primitive times) and
make a League to set up Presbyterian government, which was never so much as
heard of in the Church under that notion (for ought I can read) till the revolt
of the Town of Genevah from their obedience unto the Duke of Savoy in the year
of our Lord 1535. at which time they took occasion to change their old
Religion, and to expel their Bishops for countenance to their rebellion, and
called in Calvin a learned man of France bred up in the Civil Laws, to be
their Moderator in Divinity, whom they after through their inconstancy
banished, and would have had a Bishop of the reformed Religion if they could
have procured consecration, for want whereof they recalled him again upon
second thoughts to perfect their new model of Church Government, which he
there established as it happened in the year of our Lord 1541. as partly by
his own Epistles, and more plainly by Mr. Hookers works, and by Franciscus
Boninardus his writings to a Sebastian Minister, and elsewhere appears; which
kind of Government, as many learned men are of opinion, is neither of
Apostolical institution, nor example, nor agreeable either to the primitive
verity or regiment in the Church, nor the true Christian liberty which the
Saints of God do challenge; though I will not deny that there were both Elders
and Presbyters in the Church of Christ in the Apostles times, yet I take them
rather to be a subordinate, then a distinct degree from the Regiment of
Episcopacy. And therefore for me that am not better satisfied in the
discipline of Presbytery, and more persuaded of the divine right of Episcopacy,
to take this Covenant, were to act a sin of presumption against the persuasion
of my conscience, wherein I may be said to fight against God. As for the
preservation of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, God forbid, that I
should not both swear and covenant to maintain them, so long as the Houses
move within their Sphere, and steer their course by the known Channels of the
Laws of England, and launch not out into the maine of Arbitrary Government
without scale or compass, so long I hold my self obliged with my life and
fortune to mainetain them. But whether all those things are privileges of
Parliament which are now pretended to be so, or whether the Houses move in
their proper Orb, without irregularity or deviation, it being a matter of
state, which I being abroad cannot take so perfect notice of, I leave it to
you, and other learned men who are in England to judge of, it being more proper
for you, and those that are upon the place to give a determination of it, then
my self.

And as touching the preservation of the Kings Majesty's person, I hold it my
duty to lay down my life and fortune for it, either in Active or Passive
Obedience, without any reservation or such restriction as is aforesaid
whatsoever. And I could wish for the worlds better satisfaction, that the
Houses would please to explain themselves, what the Religion and Liberties of
the Kingdom are they mean by these words (in the preservation and defense of
the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom) And as touching Incendiaries,
Malignants, and evil instruments of all sorts, I could wish they might be
tried by indifferent Judges lawfully constituted, and by the known
established, Laws of the Land, and by those Laws to be brought to condign
punishment: But to enter into a Covenant or solemn League to defend the
persons of those that shall take it in any other sense, then what I have before
expressed; I doubt I may not lawfully do it. Another scruple I make, whether
this Covenant is not already broken by those that have taken it, in the very
Act of restraining the Kings Person, and by taking away of his Authority from
him, and in other points, I will not now insist upon; if it so fall out in
truth, that it be already broken, I ought not then to join in League and
Covenant with those that lifting up their hands to the high God, have sworn to
maintain and keep the same, and notwithstanding this their Oath, have
falsified their faith to him: with whom if I should join my self, I should
say with the rebellious Jews, Hosea 10. 3. We have no King, because we
feared not the Lord, and what should a King do to us? And I should not only
do the same which they have done, but should also favor them that do them,
making my self worthy of eternal death, with those Covenant breakers which
Saint Paul makes mention of, Romans 1. 30. 31. And thus much concerning the
Covenant. But truly Sir though I take not upon me to dispute the lawfulness
of the power of both Houses to impose Oaths or Covenants upon the Kings
people; yet if I were in England, and this Covenant, or the negative Oath, or
any other Oath or Covenant were offered to me by way of imposition or
constraint, I do confess I should make these two objections against it: the
one is that which a wise and great Peer of this Realm now sitting in this
present Parliament objected against that Oath which was offered to be imposed
upon all the Members of the great Counsel at York, to wit, that I may
lawfully refuse to take or submit my se fe to any Oath that is not lawfully
enjoined me by Act of Parliament, that is enacted and made a Law, with full
consent of the King, Lords, and Commons assembled in Parliament. And the other
objection I should make is this, That if the King, Lords, and Commons, with
full consent in Parliament, should enact a thing contrary to the Law and word
of God, and enjoyne all the Subjects of the Realm to take an oath to observe
it, I might lawfully, and would refuse to take that Oath, rather submitting my
self to the punishment inflicted for not taking that Oath, then committing so
high a sin of presumption against God and mine own conscience, as to swear
to observe a Law which is against his Law, and his most holy Word and
Commandment. For we ought rather to obey God then man, Act. 4. 19. 5. 29. And
I am fully of this opinion that there ought not to be any other oath imposed
upon the Subjects of this Realm then what is imposed and enjoined by act of
Parliament, and that only concerning lawful and indifferent things. And when
an oath is offered unto us, so conditioned, I am likewise of opinion that both
my self, and all other his Majesty's subjects are bound to take it and observe
it.

Now as concerning the Oath in question, which is the Negative Oath, which
runs in these words ( viz.) I. A. B. do swear from my heart that I will not
directly nor indirectly adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this
war, or in this cause against the Parliament, nor any forces raised against
the two Houses of Parliament in this cause or war. And I do likewise swear
that my coming and submitting my self under the power and protection of the
Parliament is without any manner of design whatsoever to the prejudice or
proceeding of this present Parliament, and without the direction, privity, and
advice of the King, or any of his Council or Officers, other then what I have
now made known: So help me God and the Contents of this book.

I am much scrupled in my judgment and conscience whether it be not both
against the Law and word of God, against the Law of Nature, against the settled,
known, established, and unrepealed Laws of this Kingdom; against the Law of
reason, and against all reason, conscience, honor, and policy, either to take
it or require it.

First, this Negative Oath seems to me to be opposite to the word Negative Oath
against the Law of God
of God in restraining me from the performance and execution of a du^y to my
King, which by the Law and Word of God I am enjoined to discharge toward him,
By me Kings reign, says God, Prove. 8. 15. therefore I cannot doubt of the
lawfulness of their calling, and that they are of divine right and
institution, the blessed Spirit of God speaking in Solomon, Prove. 24. 2.
Solomon exhorts his son, that is, every child of God in these words, My
son fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change; or as some Translations have it, that are seditious: Here the Holy
Ghost joins God and the King under one fear, or under one precept, as if he
should say, to fear the King, is to fear God; and unless thou fear the
King, thou can not fear God, this is no unsound or improper inference; for
it is the will of God that thou should fear the King, which will, if thou
perform not, thou can not be said to fear God. Now fear in this place is
only taken for subjection and obedience, and this duty of thy obedience and
subjection, is as properly belonging unto the King, as thy fear is to God,
which our most blessed Savior Jesus Christ expressly declares, Matthew. 22. 23.
in these words, Give unto Caesar those things that are Caesar's, and to God
those things that are Gods; and though the question were there only concerning
Tribute, and asked of the Pharisees and Herodians which were not natural
subjects to Caesar, but only brought under by conquest and force, yet our
Savior exhorts the Jews and Herodians to perform subjection to Caesar in
paying the tribute due to him, as well as to perform their duties toward God:
which saying of his, (though the wicked Jews thought to entrap him by the
question) yet could they not reprove it before the people, because they were
convinced of the truth of it by the light of nature, having not faith to
perceive the divine right, that was couched in it, and therefore they marvelled
at his answer, and held their peace, as it is recorded, Luke 20. 26. And though
our blessed Savior might have challenged an exemption from the payment of
tribute, as being free, yet because he would not offend Caesar, he caused Peter
to pay tribute for them both, as we may read Math. 7. 26. 27. St. Peter writing
unto the strangers that dwelt in Pontus, Gallatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia, who were at that time under the dominion of the Roman Empire only by
reason of their abode, and so owed but local allegiance to Caesar, exhorts
them that they should submit themselves unto all manner of ordinance of man,
for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as unto the superior, or unto
governors, as unto those that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well, for so is the will of God that
by weldoing ye may put to silence the ignorance of the foolish men. 1 Pet. 2.
15. where we are to understand by the way, that according to the Geneva notes
upon that place, by this word, ordinance, is meant the framing and ordering of
the Civil government, which the Apostle calls the ordinance of men, not
because men invented it, but because it is proper to men to exercise, upon
which place of the Apostle, there are these things observable. First, that we
ought to submit to the King as superior. Secondly, that where a government is
Monarchical, as in England, governors are sent by him, and by him only: for
if governors had been to have been sent by any other, the Apostle writing by
the Spirit of God, if their calling had been lawful, would not have omitted to
have instructed those strangers to perform subjection and obedience to them.
Thirdly, that it is the will of God that we should submit our selves to the
King as superior. Fourthly, That in so doing we do well. And fifthly, That
in doing this well, we shall put to silence the ignorance of the foolish men;
that is to say, of such, who hold that subjection and obedience belongs not to
Kings, or such that seek to withdraw us from ours; wherefore as St. Paul
says, Romans 13. 5. we must be subject, not because of wrath only, (or for fear
of punishment) but also for conscience sake; for this cause we ought to pay
tribute to whom we owe our tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor is due; in which words St. Paul coupleth together
the whole duty of subjection and obedience which we owe to our King, tribute,
fear, and honor; where, in the first place, we are to consider that St. Paul
wrote those precepts to men as free in Christ as our selves, and to Romans, men
of as much learning, courage, and warlike employments, as were any at that
time, or since in the world, and men who not long before were brought from the
subjection of a popular state, to the obedience of a sole and sovereigne
Monarchy: neither must we forget that these percepts were written in the time
of that heathen Emperor Nero, which then ruled over the Romans, and the most
bloody tyrannous and persecuting Tyrant and enemy to the Church of Christ that
ever was before or since his time: And yet St. Paul tells those Christian
Romans, they must be subject for conscience sake, and his doctrine was true,
and not without warrant from Gods own mouth; for let a King be never so
wicked, yet he is Gods ordinance upon us, and being Gods Ordinance we are to
obey him, by his especial commandment; Jeroboam was a wicked Prince and an
Idolater, and caused Israel to fall away from God, and to sacrifice to Idols,
yet we find that God sent Ahijab the Prophet unto him with this message, 1
King. 14. 7. Go tell Jeroboam, for as much as I have exalted thee from among
the people, and made thee Prince over my people Israel; and God sent Jehu with
the like message unto Baasha, as we read 1 of Kings 26. 2. And we read of Syrus
the Assyrian heathen Emperor, Isaiah 44. 28. where God says of Cyrus, He is
my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, and the 45 1. Thus says the
Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden to subdue
Nations before him; and verse the 5. of the same Chapter, I am the Lord, and
there is none else, there is no God besides me, I guided thee, though thou have
not known me. God also calls Nabuchaduezar that wicked, Idolatrons
persecuting heathen King of Babylon, his servant no less then three times in
holy writ, as we read Ier. 25. 9. 27. 16. and 43. 10. which several places of
Scripture do clearly evidence to me, that be the Prince or King never so
wicked or Idolatrous, be he never so unjust; nay be he Pagan or Infidel, God
acknowledged them to be his own ordinance upon his people; nay, and more,
commands his people to yield obedience to them as his ordinance, upon pain not
only of temporal destruction, but of everlasting condemnation, and this is
proved unto us by that command of God given to his chosen people the Jews,
Jer. 27. 12. Bring your neck under the yoke of the King of Babylon, and serve
him and live, why will you dye thou and thy people by the sword, by the famine,
and by the pestilence, as the Lord has spoken against the Nation that will not
serve the King of Babylon, therefore hearken not to the words of the Prophets
that speak unto you saying, Ye shall not serve the King of Babylon, for they
prophecy a lie unto you, for I have not sent them, yet they prophecy a lie in
my name that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish, ye and the
Prophets that prophecy unto you. Nay, God by the mouth of the Apostle St. Paul
Romans 13. 1. commands us upon pain of damnation to obey his ordinance in these
words, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power
but of God, whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation: who these high powers
are, St. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto
governors, as unto those that are sent by him: The King then is the highest
power under God in his Realm, and governors are sent but by him, and
therefore only to be obeyed, because sent by him: thus we see, were our King an
heathen, an Idolater, an unjust, or perjured person, yet he is Gods ordinance
upon his people; God so acknowledges wicked Princes to be, nay commands
obedience to them, lest we be temporally destroyed: Nay, more then that, lest
we receive to our selves damnation: What then? shall I swear not to serve,
honor, submit unto, and obey my most Gracious Sovereigne Lord King Charles, a
Christian King, and anointed, crowned; nay my natural King, as religious, just
pious, virtuous, merciful, and wise a King as ever reigned over this Realm of
England, or at this time lives in the world, without disparagement to any
Prince, or Potentate now living upon the face of the whole earth: Marry God
forbid, for fear I receive unto my self damnation: No, I will with St. Peter,
1 Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, honor the King; which words import a most holy
ordinance, eternal, and indispensable, and by us for no ordinance of man
whatsoever to be omitted, or by any Law to be discharged: thus much in general
touching the duty that every Subject owes to his King by the Laws of God.

But if it be objected, that these general precepts enforce nothing in this
particular case of the Negative Oath.

I answer, they do very pregnantly, for the words of the Negative Oath are
these, I. A. B. do swear from mine heart that I will not directly, nor
indirectly adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this
Cause against the Parliament: In which words there is an inhibition of that
duty to my King, which by Gods Law and his holy Word I am enjoined to perform
toward him: and if I swear this oath, I restrain my self thereby in part of
that subjection and obedience which is due from me to my Sovereigne; for it
does not appear by the Scriptures before mentioned, nor by any other that I
know, that there is any case whatsoever excepted, wherein I ought not to pay
tribute, custom, fear, or honor to my King; But in this case I engage my
self by mine oath not to adhere, or willingly assist the King in this War,
or in this Cause against the Parliament; which is as much to say, as I shall
not pay him that is due to him by the Law of God and injunction of the
Scriptures: If it be objected that the Scripture binds me not to assist the
King, or adhere unto him in matter of War: I answer, it does, though not in
direct words, yet in full effect and substance: for within the precept of Peter
2. 17. Fear God, honor the King, And by the first Commandment of the second
Table, honor thy father and thy mother is included all manner of aid and
assistance due to a King both in war and peace, which I prove thus: The
Geneva notes, which I follow in the interpretation of Scriptures being most
authentical of any in these times of Reformation, commenting upon the 20 Ezekiel.
12. on these words, Honor thy father and thy mother, express that by the
parents also is meant all that have authority over us, wherein the King is
included: and upon the 5 Chapt. of Deuteronomy. 16. verse upon the same words, gloss
thus; not for show, but with true obedience, and with due reverence; and upon
the 15. Chap. of Matthew. and 4. verse, where our blessed Savior reproves the
Jews for not observing this Commandment by offering their Corban, which in
their case was much like this Negative Oath in ours, says thus unto them:
Honor thy father and thy mother, and he that curses father or mother, let him
dye the death; but ye say, whosoever shall say to father or mother by the gift
that is offered by me, thou may have profit, though he honor not his father
or mother shall be free, thus have you made the Commandment of God of none
effect by your traditions: O hypocrites, Esaiah well prophesied of you saying,
This people draws near unto me with their mouth, and honor me with their
lips, but their heart is far from me, but in vain they worship me, teaching
for doctrine men's precepts. The Geneva notes say, that by honor is meant all
kind of duty which children owe to their parents, and what that is, both Arias
Mountanus and Vatablus upon the same place interpret, that, Honarare est omni
in memento supportare vel sustentare, to honor is to support and help with
all manner of aid or assistance whatsoever; by which places of Scripture, and
the approved interpretations thereupon, it is manifest, that both by the first
Commandment of the second Table, and by the precepts of our blessed Savior,
and his Apostles, we ought to aid and help the King with all manner of aid and
assistance whatsoever, such as we ought to yield to our parents, if they were
assaulted, or in distress, unless as the hypocritical Jews did make the
Commandment of God of none effect, by offering a gift to the Temple, which
they called Corban, and by taking an oath that they were not bound by that gift
to help, honor, or aid their father and mother, but that they might have profit
by that gift, so shall we make the Law of God, and precepts of our blessed
Savior and his Apostles of none effect, by this tradition of men. This
Negative Oath, which would absolve us from our duty of subjection and obedience
to our King, as if this oath were to his profit. If we should not aid him or
assist him, where is our fear, where is our honor, where is our tribute,
where is our subjection? shall we take upon us where the Scriptures enjoynes us
duties in general? to say, the Scriptures requires not this or that particular
at our hands, where those particulars included are in the general.

But here it may be objected, that the Kings war against the Parliament is
unlawful, and the Scriptures bind me not to the performance of any unlawful
thing, therefore I may safely take this oath: To this I answer, I will not take
upon me to determine the question of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the
War, but leave that to the judgment of God Almighty, who will one day
determine on which side the justice of this War does remain: but this I know,
that it is lawful for the King being invaded, to defend himself, and that his
subjects in such a ease are bound to assist him: And if I be persuaded in my
conscience, that the right of this war is on the Kings side, I am bound to
assist him in it, whether the right be with him or not: And this also I know,
that the head is over the members, and not the members over the head; and that
I also, and all his other subjects ought to perform, if not active, yet
passive obedience to him in all causes, at all times, and in all places
whatsoever. Furthermore, the Prophet Jer. says, Jerem, 4. 2. Thou shall swear
in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, Every oath ought to have these
three special quallities, it ought to be made in truth, in judgment, and in
justice, whereunto is opposed falsehood, rashness, and unlawfulness; so that
if the Negative Oath have any defect in any of these three particulars, we are
to lay it aside, and not to take it as being unlawful: The nature of an oath
is as a bond, for God himself declares, Numb. 30. 3. He that swears an oath,
and by it binds his soul, with a bond shall not violate his word, but do
according to all that proceeds out of his mouth, which is as much to say that
he shall not take the name of God in vain; so that hereby I am bound if I take
this Oath to perform it according to the letter, and not to evade it by
saying, I take it in mine own sense with a mental reservation, but I must do
it according to all that proceeds out of my mouth, and if so, then do I
absolutely swear against that duty that I am enjoined to by the Scriptures, for
I swear not to adhere to, or assist the K. in this War or this Cause, directly
or indirectly, so that I may neither aid him in word or deed, nay not so much
as pray for his health or success, nor for the safety of his person, that
under him we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty;
though the Apostle S. Paul exhorts us in 1 Timothy 2. 2. to pray for Kings to that
purpose: Nay, by mine oath I am obliged, if I mean to keep it, to stand by,
and see any soldier in the Parliaments Army to kill him, and may not assist
him to rescue his life; wherefore if I do observe this Oath, I take it not in
truth, but to an unjust and unlawful end, and therefore take it not in justice
and righteousness. Secondly, if I understand not what use may be made of this
oath, or what I shall be enforced to by it, I take it not in judgment but
rashly and unadvisedly, and therein commit a grievous sin. Now I know not, as
this Oath is penned, what interpretation may be made of it, for if I take it, I
swear that I will not directly nor indirectly adhere unto, or willingly assist
the King in this War or in this Cause against the Parliament, nor any forces
raised against that woe Houses of Parliament in this Cause or War. First, I know
what will be interpreted an indirect adhering to the King, or assisting of him.
Secondly, I know not what is meant by this Cause, or how far it may be
extended. Thirdly, I know not in what sense they take these words against the
Parliament, whether they include the person of the King within the word
Parliament, or his power only excluding his person: neither do I understand
what is meant by any forces raised against the two Houses of Parliament, there
being now no such forces in the Kingdom, and the War at an end; therefore
understanding not the extent of these particulers, I swear rashly, and therein
commit a sin of presumption if I take it: And lastly, if I take this oath, I
swear to an unjust and unlawful end; for I swear to withdraw mine obedience,
subjection and allegiance from him, which is an unjust and unlawful thing, and
to an ill end, the same being due unto him by the Law of God, as before is
declared by the Law of nature, the Law of the land, and the law of reason, as
hereafter shall be proved.

To conclude this point, in taking of Oaths we ought to take heed, that we
observe these rules of the learned Fathers, that is, as to Oaths which we take
voluntarily, and not by coertion, or by any impulsive necessity: Ita jurare, ut
sacramentum pietatis, ne sit vinculum iniquitatis: so to swear that the Oath
or Sacrament of godliness which we take, become not a bond of iniquity to our
souls, thereby to engage us in things unjust and unlawful, both against the
Laws of God and men: And if we take rash Oaths, to do an evil thing,
penitenda promissio non perficienda presumptio, we must repent of our oath, and
not commit the evil, and if we are enforced to swear that which is unjust and
unlawful, and against the Laws of God and men, we conceive our selves not
bound thereby, for Injusta vincula rumpit justitia, Justice and equity breaks
the bonds of such an Oath from our consciences: It being a certain Axiom in
Divinity, Quod per sacramentum non tenemur nisi ad bonum, aut legale: By Oaths
men are bound to the performance of nothing but what is good and lawful: Now
to manifest that this Oath is against the Law of nature, we are to Negative
Oath against the Law of nature.
consider what the Law of nature is, which we find among the learned to be
distinguished into two kinds, general and special: This general by Vlpian
de Justitia and Jure L. 1. tit. 1. is thus defined, Jus natural est, Quod
natura omnia Animalia docuit: Natural Law is that which nature has taught all
creatures living, which he distinguishes thus from the special: Jus istud non
humani generis proprium sed omnium animalium, Quae terra marique nascuntur,
avium quoque commune est, The Law of Nature (says he) is not proper to man
alone, but the same is common to all living creatures, as well to birds as to
those which the Land and the Sea produces; and agreeable to this is the
description of the Law of Nature, set down by learned and reverend Hooker, in
his first book of Ecclesiastical policy, whereby he calls it, That manner
of working which God has set for each created thing to keep, he being a
director of infinite knowledge, to guide nature in her ways: But I mean not
that this Negative Oath is against this general Law of nature, but there is a
more special Law of nature proper to mankind only, which will steer us to
the question in hand: which special Law of nature proper to men, St. Augustine
in his Epistle ad Hill. 89. and in Evangelium Johanes Tract. 49. defines thus,
Lex naturalis est impressio divini luminis, in nobis and participatio legis
aternae in rationali Creatura: The Law natural, says he, is the impression of
divine light in us, and a participation of the eternal Law in the reasonable
creatures, which distinction is strengthened by that expostulation which Moses
makes in the person of God with Cain, before any Law written, Genesis 4. 7. If
thou do well shall thou not be accepted, and if thou do not well, sin lies
at the door? for so is the Law of nature imparted unto us by illumination of
the Law eternal: that this is most clear, St. Paul witnesses unto us, Rom 2.
15. 14. For when the Gentiles (says he) which have not the Law, do by nature
the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a law unto
themselves; which show the works of the Law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts mean while excusing or
accusing them; what other thing was this, but the Law of nature, or the
impression of divine light in the hearts of the Gentiles? which doctrine of St.
Paul reproves the opinion of those, who think that whatsoever proceeds of
nature is sin, for if so it were, that whatsoever proceeds of nature is
sinful, how could the consciences of the Gentiles bear witness for them, or
excuse them of the breach of the Law? Therefore St. Augustine in his third
book de doctrina Christiana, Cap. 14 says, Omne vitium naturae nocet, ac per
hoc contra naturam est, every vice does wrong to nature, and is therefore
contrary to it; and in his 12. book de Civitate Dei, Cap. 1. he says, Omnia
peccata sunt in universum contra naturam and legem naturae: All sins are
generally against reason, and the Law of nature: And Damascene, L. 2. fidei
Orthodox: Cap. 30. agrees in this with him; for says he, Homines facti sunt
mali declinando in id quod contra naturam est, Men are made evil by declining
to that which is contrary to nature: Nature therefore is Gods instrument, and
none other is her guide, but only the God of nature: for as S. Paul said in his
Sermon at* Athens when he found an altar directed to the unknown God, Act. 17.
28. in him we live, and move, and have our being, being also of his offspring
as he told them: their own Poets said, whereby it is clearly proved, that
though the Athenians being Gentiles, and ascribing the being of all things to
the Law and course of nature; yet St. Paul could find out another hand in
those works besides nature, to whom nature was only subservient, and an
handmaid to obey his eternal Law, decree, and purpose according to that order
he has set down for the sons of men for ever to be observed. This short
digression I have made only to take away this objection that many make, That we
are not bound to observe the Laws of nature, and also to let them know that
the Law of nature is to be observed, and that as being a participation of the
eternal Law, it is both perpetual and unalterable, and not presumptuously to
be violated: The consideration whereof moved Pythagoras the heathen Philosopher
to publish amongst his golden precepts, this one, nil turpe committas, neque
coram aliis, neque tecum maxim omnium, verere teipsum, commit nothing foul or
dishonest, says he, neither to be known to others, nor to thine own heart, but
above all things, reverence thine own conscience: but to draw somewhat nearer
to the thing in purpose, and to prove that this Negative Oath, is against the
Law of nature, I must observe with Hooker, that as there is a Law natural
belonging to men, as they are men in their kind, which Law directs them in
the means whereby they are to steer their actions as to their own particular
preservations, so there is a Law natural which touches them as sociable parts
united into one body, a Law which binds them to serve unto each others good,
and all to preserve the good of the whole, before whatsoever their own
particular, and from both those roots or branches of the Law of nature, springs
the allegiance, subjection and loyal obedience, which is due from a subject
unto his King, from this special Law of nature? Man by the impression of
divine light is bound to observe the Law natural, as it is written in his
heart, and is part of the Law eternal by which we are bound to obey, and
succor, and assist our Parents, whether our natural parents, or the parents
of our Country; and from this relative Law of nature, as I may so call it, or
the Covenant of nature whereby we are bound as sociable parts by the Law of
nature united into one body for the preservation of the whole, the subject to
obedience, faith, and allegiance, the King to protection, and to maintain the
Laws, bodies, and goods of his subjects, and both together to maintain the
peace of all; as Fortescue in his book of the praise of the Laws of England,
Cap. 13. observes; and therefore Glanvil who wrote in Hen. 2. time. L. 9. Cap.
4. says, Mutua debes esse domini and fidelitatis connexio, ita quod quantum
debet quisque domino ex homagio, tantum debet illi dominus ex domino praeter
solam ex reverentiam the knot of faith ought to be mutual between the Lord and
his subject or tenant; for look how much subjection or obedience the tenant or
subject owes to his Lord, so much does the Lord owe to his tenant by way of
protection, reverence excepted; which knot Aristotle in his first book of
Politics proves to be the duty of nature; for says he, To command and obey is
of nature, for whatsoever is necessary and profitable for the preservation of
the society of man is due by the Law of nature. Now Tully lib. 3. de legibus
tells us, that sine imperio nec domus ulla, nec civitas, nec gens, nec hominum
universum, genus stare, nec ipse denique mundus potest; which is, That without
command or government, neither any house, nor City, nor Nation, nor mankind,
nor to conclude, the world cannot stand: but peradventure that will be
confessed, and yet it will be denied that the world cannot stand without
Monarchy, and objected that Monarchy is not that government that ought to be by
the Law of nature: to which I answer with Aristotle, in his first book of
Ethics, That Jus natural est quod apud omnes homines eandem, habet potentiam,
That is, the Law of nature which with all men has the same power: Now as
Aristotle in his first book of his Politics, Cap. 3. and Plato in his third
book of Laws, jump in this opinion that in the first beginning of time, the
chiefest person in every house was always as it were a King; so when numbers
of households joined themselves together, in civil societies, Kings were the
first kind of governors among them, which is also (as it seems) the reason
why Kings have always been, and are to this day called, patres patriae or
fathers of their Country: and it is not unknown to any man learned in
Antiquity, History, or Chronology that it was 3198 years after the creation
before any Law was written or given in the world, according to the computation
of Joseph Scaliger by the Julian account; The Law being given in that year, and
delivered by God unto Moses on Mount Sinai, and whether the old world before
the flood were governed by Kings, it is disputable; but sure I am that Nimrod
the son of C^sh, the son of Cham, the son of Noah, was a King; for I find
Genesis 10. 10. that the beginning of his Kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and
Accad, and Calneh in the Land of Shinar, and according to the computation
aforesaid, began his reign in the 2479 year of the world, which was 720
years before the Law was given, and 149 years after the flood; in all which
time it is more then probable that all the Nations of the world (except the
Jews) were governed by Monarchies or Kings, and long after the Law was given
to the Jews, which is proved unto us by that demand of the Jews made unto
Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 5. And they said unto him, behold thou art old, and thy sons
walk not in thy ways, make us now a King to judge us like all Nations: And we
see it yet continued to this day among all the Gentiles and heathens upon the
earth; by which sort of people, above twenty parts of thirty of the known
world are now inhabited: That the only government of each several Nation among
them is Monarchy, and much more subjection and allegiance performed by the
heathen subjects to their Gentile Kings, then is amongst us toward ours; which
is a full argument to me that Monarchy is not only a divine ordinance or
institution of God Almighty from the beginning, and a branch of the Law of
nature, but also the best of governments too, because those Gentile Nations
which guide their actions only by the Law of nature, embrace this form of
government and none other, making good that maxim of their heathen Philosopher
before remembered, Jus natural est quod apud omnes homines eandem habet
potentia, which induces me to affect the opinion the more, because I see the
Gentiles ever submitted to Monarchy call regiment; for with Monarchy I say, non
potest error contingere ubi omnes idem opinantur: And with Teles^ non licet
natural universaleque hominum judicium falsum vanumque existimare, an error of
judgment cannot be where all men are of the same opinion, and we ought not to
esteem the universal judgment of natural men to be false and vain. But I
will dwell no longer upon the fringe of this particular, but make this point
evident by the Laws of this Kingdom, which are a part of natures Law, That
this Oath is against the Law of nature, and for that Cause only, that if I take
it, I am thereby withheld from the execution of mine allegiance, whereby I make
violation of natures Law; To make this clear and evident, it appears unto us
by Calvin's Cas, recorded in the seventh part of Sir Edwards C^^ks Reports, that
there are in our Law four kinds of allegiance; the first (...)all, which is
due from every subject bo^^e within his Majesty's dominions, to his Majesty as
to his Sovereigne Lord and King. The second is ligeantia legalis, or legal
Allegiance, which is due by every subject to the King by reason of his suit
Royal, and this is not natural, but created by King Arthur for expulsion of
the Sarazens, and continued after by others for the Danes exile, and is proper
for the suppressing of insurrections, and expelling invaders. The third is,
Ligeantia acquisitia, or purchased allegiance, which comes by indenization. The
fourth and last, is local allegiance and that is due from strangers, friends
to Kings, whilst they are in their dominions. I meddle not with the two last,
and omit for brevity sake, and because I shall not need to draw any argument
from it, to help my self withal, to speak any thing of legal allegiance:
But for natural allegiance, it is absolute pure and indefinite, that such an
allegiance there is as natural, if you read the indictment of the Lord Dacres,
26. H. 8. you shall find it run thus, Quod praedictus Dominus Dacre debitum
fidei and ligeantiae suae quod prefato Domini Regi naturaliter and de jure
impendere debuit minime, etc. which in English is thus, That the aforesaid Lord
Dacre not regarding the duty of his faith and Allegiance, which he did
naturally and of right owe to, and ought to pay to King Henry the 8. etc. And
Cardinal Poole 30. H. 8. being likewise indicted of Treason, Contra dominum
Regem supremum and naturalem Dominum suum, that is against the King his
natural and supreme Lord; which indictments prove a natural Allegiance to be
not only due, but of right due from every subject to his sovereigne King, and
as this allegiances is natural, so is it absolute, so is it pure, and
indefinite, Quia nullis claustris coercetur nullis metis refraenatur, nullis
finibus premitur, it ought not to be constrained or bridled with any bonds,
nor restrained to any place; for a man though he may abjure his Country, or his
Kingdom, yet he cannot abjure his Allegiance, nay he cannot alien, give a way,
or withdraw his allegiance from his King by the Law of nature, to his Kings
prejudice, though he should gain his liberty, freedom of estate and honor or
advancement unto the bargain; for St. Augustine says, nemo jure naturae cum
alterius detrimento locupletior fieri debet, no man by the Law of nature ought
to be made richer by the loss of another; but if I withdraw mine allegiance,
the King has lost a subject, therefore I may not do it, neither can the King
release it to any of his subjects, it being an inseparable accident adherent in
the person of a King, and is due, omni soli and semper, to every King under
heaven from his own natural subjects: It is due to every King, and always to
Kings, and only to Kings by the Law of nature: And it is only due to his
person, and not to his office, which is only imaginary and invisible, and no
where formally to be found but in his person, as by the said case of Calvin
more fully appears: Hereupon I conclude, that allegiance being due by the Law
of nature to the Kings person, and that I neither can abjure it, nor alien it,
or withdraw it from him, nor he release it to me, and that it is only due to
him, and to no other: I cannot take this oath and keep it, without violation of
the Law of nature, and manifest injury both to my self and Sovereigne King,
Quia jura natura sunt immutabilia, the Laws of nature are immutable, as before
is observed, and is plainly held forth by Bracton, L. 1. cap. 6. and Docter and
Stud. cap. 5. 6. And so from this point of the Law of nature, Negative Oath is
against the Law of England.
I come to show that this Negative Oath is absolutely against the known,
settled, and established Laws of the Land: the reason is, because if I take it
and keep it, it withholds me from the performance of my duty of allegiance
which is due to my King from me by the Law of the land; and so I am informed by
the books of Law: this term or word allegiance is rendered unto us under diverse
names in our Law books, as sometimes it is called fides or faith, as Bracton
l. 5. Tract. de exceptionibus cap. 24. fol. 427. And so Fleta l. 6. cap. 47.
Alienigena repelli debet in Anglia ab agendo donec fuerint ad fidem Regis
Angliae, Aliens ought to be kept from acting in England till they shall be of
the allegiance of the King, that is by endenization: so Glanvil l. 9. cap. 1.
Salva side debita domino Regi and heredibus suis, That is, saving our faith or
allegiance due to the King and his heirs: so Littleton l. 2. in chap. Homage,
where I do my homage to my Lord, Salve le foy du a nostre senior le Roy,
saving the faith which I owe to our Lord the King; and in the Statute of 25. E.
3. De natis ultra mare, these words (faith and allegiance) are coupled together
as signifying one thing; sometimes it is called obedientia Regis, our obedience
to the King, as in the books of 9. E. 4. 6. 7. 2 R. 3. 2. And in the Statutes
of H. 8. 14. cap. 2. and 22. H. 8. 8. and in the book of 22. Ass. pl. 25. it
is called ligealty, but by what name soever it be called, whether faith,
obedience, ligealty, or allegiance, all is one, it is due still from us
subjects to our sovereigne Lord the King: by the Statute of 10 R. 2. cap. 5.
and 11. R* 2. cap. 1. 14. H. 8 cap. 2. and many other, the people are called
liege people; and by the Statute of 34. H. 8. cap. 1 and 35. H. 8 cap. 3. and
diverse other, the King is styled liege Lord of his subjects, and these that are
bound under the Kings power are called his natural leige-men, as in the 4. H.
3. Fitz. title Dower, and 11. E. 3. cap. 2. So that I may conclude upon these
authorities, that Ligeantia est vinculum fidei domin^ Regi, our allegiance is
the bond of our faith to the King; which being so, we may well say of it as
Sir Edward Cook does, that ligeantia est legis essentia, our allegiance is the
essence of the Law, and so it has been often and sundry times declared by many
and sundry, wise, temperate and well advised Parliaments of England. The
government of Kings in this Isle of Britain, has been very ancient, even as
ancient as History it self; for those who deny the story of Brutus to be true,
do find out a more ancient plantation here under Kings, namely under Samothes
grandchilde to Japhet the son of Noah, from whom the ancient Britains that
inhabited this Land, are according to their conceits descended: Kings or
Monarchs of great Britain had and did exercise far more large and ample power,
and did claim greater Prerogatives over the people under their government and
jurisdiction, then the Kings of England have done since the Norman conquest, as
it is to be seen at large both in the British Chronicles and records of these
times, and in our English histories, and may also be gathered out of the
writings of the Romans who invaded this Island, and lived here upon the place:
and I do not find that ever the people of Britain made any of their Kings
by election of voices, or put them out at pleasure, but that the Kingly
government and right of the Crown, descended always by hereditary descent and
succession, though in that infancy of Law and right it may be suspected that
there was not so much regularity of justice or observation of right, as in
these latter and more refined ages has or ought to be: I may boldly affirm,
and it cannot be denied by any ^^at has read all the Chronicles and Statutes
of this Realm, that there has been any King of England since the conquest,
that has not been acknowledged by both houses of Parliament, of their
several times, to be sovereign Lords of this Realm, and their sovereign
Lords too, although that some of those Kings were only Reges de facto, and not
de jure, Kings only in fact and not of right, and such as by the Laws of
England had no right to the Crown; and all the Parliaments since the conquest,
have acknowledged that the Crown of England, and the government of the Realm
has belonged to the Kings, of hereditary right, and not by election; some of
these Parliaments, in more express and particular manner then the rest: and
they of later times, more amply then the ancient. By the statute called Dictum
de Kenilworth, made 51. H. 3. King Hen. 3. is acknowledged to be Lord of the
Realm, in the statutes made at Gloucester, in the sixth year of the reign of
King E. 1. King Edw. 1* is acknowledged by the Parliament, to be their
sovereign Lord, and so was King Edw. 2. King Edw. 3. King Rich. 2. and all the
Kings since, by all Parliaments held in their several reigns; as to the
studious Reader of the Acts of Parliament, made in their several times will
appear: by a Parliament held at Westminster, Anno 7. Edw. 1. It is
acknowledged to belong to the King through his royal signiory, straightly to
defend force of armor and all other force against the peace of the kingdom,
at all times when it shall please him, and to punish them which shall do
contrary, according to the laws and usages of this Realm, and that thereunto
they were bound to aid him, as their sovereign Lord, at all seasons when need
should be: In the reign of King Edw. 2. The two Spencers, Hugh the father, and
Hugh the son, to cover the treason hatched in their hearts, invented this
damnable and damned opinion, as it i^ styled in Calvines case: That homage and
oath of legeance, was more by reason of the Kings Crown (that is his politic
capacity) then by reason of the person of the King, upon which opinion, they
enforced execrable and detestable conseque^^s. First, that if the King do not
demean himself by reason, in the right of his Crown, the Peers are boundly
oath to remove the King. Secondly, seeing the King could not be removed by suit
of law, that ought to be done by Aspertee, which is as much as to say, by
force, and war. Thirdly, that his Lieges were bound to govern in aid of him,
and in default of him: All which opinions were condemned by two Parliaments;
one held in the reign of King Edward the second; the other in the first year
of King Edward the third, cap. 1. as by the old printed statutes appears: by
the statutes of 25. Edw. 3. cap. 2, It is ordained, that if a man shall
compass or imagine the death of our sovereign Lord the King, or of my Lady
his Queen, or of his eldest son; or if any man levy war against the King
in his Realm, or be adhered to the Kings enemies, giving to them aid or
comfort in the Realm or elsewhere, etc. It shall be judged Treason. It is
reported to us by Sir Edward Coke, in the fourth part of his Institut. called
The jurisdiction of Courts, page 52. That Rot^l^ Parliament. Anno* 17. Edw. 3.
number. 23. It was then agreed in Parliament, that the statute made, 15. Edw. 3.
should be repealed, and lose the name of a statute, as contrary to the Laws
and prerogative of the King. It appears, Rot. Parlia. 42. number. 7. called Lex
^^ consuetudo Parliamenti, cited by Sir Edward Coke, in the fourth part of his
Institutes, page 13. and 14. That the Lords and Commons in full Parliament, did
declare, that they could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to
the disherison of the King and his Crown, whereunto they were sworn; By the
statute of 16. Rich. 2. cap. 5. King Richard the second, is by the Parliament
called their Redoubted sovereign Lord, and the people his liege people; and by
Parliament in the body of that Act; It is acknowledged, that the Crown of
England has been so free at all times; that it has been in subjection to no
Realm, but immediately subject to God, and to none other in all things
touching the regall^ty of the same Crownel; notwithstanding, that afterward
wars was lovyed against him by his subjects, and he was against all Law and
right, deposed, or enforced to make a surrender of his Crown, or at least they
pretended he did so, though some Hystorians doubt whether he ever consented to
it, being murdered, to make way for King Hen. 4. who had very small pretents
to the Crown, as men learned in the laws of this Realm have in all time
since held; which kind of disposing of the Kings person, I hope and believe is
not meant by them, and which horrid act* though it gave some present security,
to some particular persons that were then active* in his destruction: yet it
cost this kingdom in general very dear, in the expense of blood and treasure
in the succeeding times, by bloody civil wars, wherein the decay of men by
those wars was so great, that many judicious Historians are of opinion, that
the number of men lost in those wars, was not recruited or made up by a
following progeny, till the beginning of King James his reign; and it is to be
feared that this blood is not expiated and dried up in this land: The gates of
Janus Temple being opened, both without the kingdom and within, for the space
of an hundred years and upwards, till by Gods great goodness there came to be
an union of the rights of the two houses of York and Lancaster to the Crown of
England, in King Hen. 7. and Queen Elizabeth his wife, though that till near
the middle of his reign, the sword was not altogether sheathed; but there were
some counterfeit pretenders to the Crown, which stirred the unconstant
multitude to sundry rebellions, which after some time of rest from those civil
broils, The King, Lords, and Commons in Parliament, upon full experience and
consideration of the troubles past, for the prevention of the like in future
times, thought fit to revive the ancient laws of the Realm, and to declare
that by act of Parliament, which was and had been a fundamental law of the
Land, and was before part of the common law, thereof to enact and declare in
the eleventh year of the said Kings reign, in the first chapter of the
statutes made in Parliament in the said year, in these words.

Anno Vndecimo Henrici septimi. The King our sovereigne Lord, calling to his
remembrance the duty of allegiance of his subjects of this Realm, and that
they by reason of the same, are bound to serve their prince, and sovereigne
Lord for the time being in his wars, for the defense of him and the land,
against every rebellion, power, and might, raised against him, and with him to
enter and abide in service, in battle, if case so require, and that for the
same service, what fortune ever fall by chance in the same battle, against
the mind and will of the Prince, as in this land sometimes passed, has been
seen, that it is not reasonable but against all laws, reason, and a good
conscience, that the said subjects going with their sovereigne Lord in Wars,
attending upon him in his person, or being in other places by his commandment,
within this Land or without, any thing should lose or forfeit for doing their
true duty and service of allegiance: It is therefore ordained, enacted, and
established, by the King our sovereigne Lord, by the advice and assent of the
Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by authority of the same, that from henceforth no manner of
person or persons whatsoever he or they be, that attend upon the King and
sovereigne Lord of this land for the time being, in his person, and do him
true and faithful service of allegiance in the same, or be in other places by
his commandment in his Wars, within this Land or without, that for the said
deed and true duty of allegiance, he or they be in no wise convict, or attaint
of high Treason, ne of other offenses for that cause, by act of Parliament or
otherwise by any process of Law, whereby he or any of them shall forfeit life,
lands, tenements, rents, possessions, hereditaments, goods, chattels, or any
other things, but to be for that deed and service, utterly discharged of any
reparation, trouble, or loss: And if any act or acts, or other process of the
Law hereafter thereupon for the same happen to be made contrary to this
Ordinance, that then the act or acts or other process of Law whatsoever they
shall be, stand and be utterly void: provided always, that no person or persons
shall take any benefit or advantage by this act, which shall hereafter decline
from his or their allegiance.

And Sir, here I desire to know your opinion in your indifferent judgment upon
this Law, whether I need to sue out any pardon, or compound for mine estate,
having done nothing but the duty of mine allegiance to my natural King.

By the statute of 24. Hen. 8. cap. 12. It is expressed that by diverse sundry
old authentic Histories, and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared that this
Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the World,
governed by one supreme head, and King, having the dignity and royal estate
of the imperial Crown of the same, unto whom a body politic, compact of all
sorts and degrees of people, divided in terms and by names of spiritualty and
temporalty been bounden, and given, to bear next to God a natural and humble
obedience, he being also instituted and furnished by Gods goodness, with
plenary, whole, and entire power, preheminencie, authority, prerogative, and
jurisdiction, to render and yield justice, and final determination to all
manner of folks, resiants, or subjects within this Realm, in all causes,
matters, debates, and contentions, happening or accruing, within the lymits
thereof: By the statute of 26. Hen. 8. cap 1. It is declared in ^u^l
Parliament, that King Henry 8. was justly, and rightfully ought, to be supreme
head of the Church of England, and that he being their Sovereigne Lord, his
heirs and successors Kings of this Realm should be so accepted and taken, and
should have and enjoy, as united and annexed to the imperial Crown of this
Realm, as well the title and style thereof, as all honors, dignities,
preheminencies, jurisdictions, privileges, authorities, immunities, profits,
and commodities, to the said dignity of the same supreme head of the said
Church belonging or in any wise appertaining: Which statute was confirmed and
enlarged in some perticulars, by the Acts of Parliament of 28. Hen. 8. cap. 10.
and 35. Hen 8. cap. 1. By the Statute of 25. Hen. 8. cap. 22. the Parliament
moved King Hen. 8. to foresee and provide for the profit and surety both of
himself and of his most lawful succession, and heirs, upon which depended
all their joy and wealth; and in whom they acknowledged was united and knit the
only mere true inheritance, and title of this* Realm, without any
contradiction: (wherefore we say they) your said most humble and obedient
subjects in this present Parliament assembled, calling to remembrance the great
divisions which in times past have been in this Realm, by reason of several
titles pretended to the imperial Crown of the same, which sometimes, and for
the most part ensued by occasion of ambiguity and doubts, then not so perfectly
declared, but that men might upon froward intents expound them to every man's
sinister appetite and affection after their sense, contrary to the right
legallity of succession, and posterity of the lawful Kings and Emperors of
this Realm, whereof has ensued great effusion of man's blood, as well of a
great number of the Nobles, as other of the subjects of the Realm, etc. By the
statute of 27. Hen. 8. cap. 24. entitled, an act for recontinuing of certain
liberties and franchises heretofore taken from the Crown, it is thus enacted,
27. Hen. 8. where diverse of the most ancient prerogatives and authorities of
justice appertaining to the imperial Crown of this Realm, have been severed
and taken from the same by sundry gifts of the Kings most noble progenitors,
Kings of this Realm, to the great diminution and detriment of the Royal
estate of the same, and to the hinderance and great delay of justice: For
reformation whereof, be it enacted by authority of this present Parliament,
that no person or persons of what estate or degree soever they be of, from the
first day of July which shall be in the year of our Lord God, 1536. shall have
any power or authority to pardon or remit any treasons, murders, manslaughters,
or any kind of follonies, whatsoever they be. Not any accessaries to any
treasons, murders, manslaughters, or fellonies, or any utlayers, for any such
offenses aforesaid, committed, perpetrated, done, or divulged, or hereafter to
be committed, done, or divulged, by or against any person and persons, in any
part of this Realm, Wales, or the Marches of the same, but that the Kings
highness, his heirs and successors, Kings of this Realm, shall have the
whole and sole power and authority thereof, united and knit to the imperial
Crown of this Realm, as of good right and equity it appertains; any grants,
usages, prescription, act or acts of Parliament, or any other thing to the
contrary hereof notwithstanding.

Out of which statute I collect that no pardon whatsoever, but the Kings, can
free me from his punishment, if I have offended him against my allegiance; by
the reading of which Statute, I doubt not but you will be satisfied, that I
need not take a pardon from both houses of Parliament; and if I should I can
do my self no good by it, but I should thereby make my self a traitor upon
Record, to mine own perpetual shame and ruin: for every pardon (you know) if
it be sued out before conviction, is a confession of the fault, and if pardon
be not good in law, ye^ it being a matter of record, the treason thereby stands
confessed, and the Kings Attourny may in after times take advantage of it,
because I have confessed it by suing out the pardon. And it is also enacted by
the authority of the said Parliament, that no person or persons, of what
estate, degree, or condition soever they be, from the said first day of July,
shall have any power or authority to make any Justices of Oyre, Justices of
Assise, Justices of Peace, or Justices of Gaole-delivery, but that all such
officers and ministers shall be made by Letters patents under the Kings great
Seal, in the name, and by authority of the Kings highness, and his heirs
Kings of this Realm, in all Shires, Counties, Counties palatine, and other
places of this Realm, Wales, and Marches of the same, or in any other his
dominions, at their pleasure and wills, in such manner and form as Justices of
Eire, justices of Assise, justices of Peace, and justices of Goale-delivery, be
commonly made in every shire of this Realm, any grants, usages, prescription,
allowance, act, or acts of Parliament, or any other thing or things to the
contrary thereof, notwithstanding.

By the Statute of 1. Edw. 6. cap. 2. It is acknowledged that all authority of
jurisdiction spiritual and temporal, is derived and deducted from the Kings
Majesty, as supreme head of the Realm; and that no Ecclesiastical Court can
be held within the Realm, but by authority from his Majesty. By the statute
of 5. and 6. Edw. 6 cap. 11. It is recited, Forasmuch as it is most necessary
both for common policy and duty of the Subjects, above all things, to
prohibit, restrain, and extinct all manner of shameful slanders, which might
grow, happen, or arise to their sovereigne Lord the Kings Majesty, which when
they be heard, seen or understood, cannot but be odible and abhorred of all
those sorts that be true and loving Subjects, if in any point they may do, or
shall touch his Majesty, upon whom depends the whole unity and universal
wealth of this his Realm, etc. By the Statute made in the second Parliament,
of the first year of Queen Mary cap. 1. It is acknowledged that the imperial
Crown of this Realm, with all dignities, honors, prerogatives, authorities,
jurisdictions, and preheminences whatsoever, to the same united or annexed,
were descended unto Queen Mary, and that by force and virtue of the same, all
regal power, dignity, honor, prerogative, preheminency and jurisdiction, did
appertain, and of right ought to appertain unto her, as to the sovereign
supreme governor and Queen of this Realm: By the statute of primo Eliz.
cap. 1. The Queens right, as belonging to the Crown of England, and are
restored to her, and the Oath of supremacy enacted and then made; and by
another Act made the same Parliament cap. 3. Entitled an Act of Recognition of
the Queens highness title to the imperial Crown of this Realm, the whole
Parliament acknowledges the Queens right to the Crown by lawful descent and
succession, both by the laws of God, and the laws and statutes of this
Realm, with all the rights, prerogatives, preheminencies, and jurisdictions
whatsoever, belonging or appertaining to the same, binding themselves therein
by solemn oath, to maintain "the title of her and her heirs thereunto:
Neither can I omit to remember that famous and never to be forgotten Act of
Recognition of his right to the Crown of England, made to King James our Kings
Father in full Parliament, in the first year of his reign, which that it may
the more clearly appear what it is, I have here transcribed at large, without
addition or diminution of word or syllable, as an Act to the observance
whereof, I am obliged, and was bound in the loins of mine Ancestors, who were
then representatively present in the same Parliament, which act of Parliament
is thus entitled, A most joyful and just Recognition of the immediate lawful
and undoubted succession, descent and right to the Crown: The act it self is
printed in the statutes at large, in these words.

Anno primo. Iacobi Regis.
Great and manifold were the benefits (most dear and most gracious Sovereigne)
wherewith Almighty God blessed this Kingdom and Nation, by the happy union and
conjunction of the two noble houses of York and Lancaster, thereby preserving
this noble Realm, formerly torn and almost wasted, with long and miserable
dissension and bloody civil wars. But more inestimable and unspeakable
blessings are thereby powered upon us, because there is derived and grown from
and out of that union of those two princely Families, a more famous and greater
union (or rather a reuniting) of two mighty famous and ancient Kingdoms (yet
anciently but one) of England and Scotland, under one imperial Crown, in your
most royal person, who is lineally, rightfully, and lawfully descended of the
body of the most excellent Lady Margaret, eldest daughter of the most renowned
King, Henry the seventh, and the high and noble Princess Queen Elizabeth his
Wife, eldest daughter of King Edward the fourth: The said Lady Margaret, being
eldest sister of King Henry the eight, Father of the high and mighty Princess,
of famous memory, Elizabeth late Queen of England.

In consideration whereof, albeit we your Majesty's most loyal and faithful
subjects of all estates and degrees, with all possible and public joy and
acclamation by open Proclamations, within few hours after the decease of our
late Sovereigns Queen, acknowledging thereby, with one full voice of tongue
and heart, that your Majesty was our only lawful and rightful liege Lord
and Sovereigne, by our unspeakable and general rejoicing, and applause at your
Majesty's most happy Inauguration, and Coronation: by the affectionate desire
of infinite numbers of us of all degrees, to see your Royal Person, and by all
possible outward means have endeavored to make demonstration of our inward
love, zeal, and devotion to your excellent Majesty, our undoubted rightful
liege Sovereigne Lord and King: Yet as we cannot do it too often or enough, so
can there be no means or way so fit, both to sacrifice our unfeigned and hearty
thanks to Almighty God, for blessing us with a Sovereigne, adorned with the
rarest gifts of mind and body, in such admirable peace and quietness, and
upon the knees of our hearts, to Agnize our most constant faith, obedience, and
loyalty to your Majesty, and you royal Progeny, as in this high Court of
Parliament, where all the whole body of the Realm, and every particular member
thereof, either by person, or by representation (upon their own free
elections) are by the laws of this Realm, deemed to be personally present.

To the acknowledgment whereof to your Majesty, we are the more deeply
bounden and obliged, as well in regard of the extraordinary care and pains,
which with so great wisdom, knowledge, experience, and dexterity, your
Majesty (fithence the imperial Crown of this Realm descended to you) have
taken for the continuance and establishment of the blessed peace, both of the
Church of England in the true and sincere Religion, and of the Commonwealth,
by due and speedy administration of Justice, as in respect of the gracious
care, and inward affection, which it pleased you on the first day of this
Parliament, so lively to express by your own words, so full of high wisdom,
learning, and virtue, and so repleate with Royal and thankful acceptance of
all our faithful and constant endeavors, which is and ever will be to our
inestimable consolation and comfort.

We therefore your most humble and loyal subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do from the
bottom of our hearts yield to the divine Majesty all humble thanks and
praise, not only for the said unspeakable and inestimable, benefits and
blessings above mentioned, but also that he has further enriched your
highness with a most royal progeny of most rare and excellent gifts, and
forwardness, and in his goodness is like to increase the happy number of
them: And in most humble and lowly manner do beseech your most excellent
Majesty, that (as a memorial to all posterities, amongst the Records of your
high Court of Parliament, for ever to endure) of our loyal obedience, and
hearty and humble affection; It may be published and declared in this high
Court of Parliament, and enacted by authority of the same.

That we (being bounden thereunto both by the laws of God and man) do
Recognize and acknowledge, (and thereby express our unspeakable joys) That
immediately upon the dissolution and decease of Elizabeth late Queen of
England; the imperial Crown of this Realm of England, and of all the
Kingdoms, dominions and rights belonging to the same, did by inherent
birthright, and lawful and undoubted succession, descend and come to your
most excellent Majesty, as being lyneally, justly, and lawfully, next and sole
Heir of the blood-royall of this Realm, as is aforesaid: and that by the
goodness of God Almighty, and lawful right of descent under one imperial
Crown, your Majesty is of the Realms and Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, the most potent and mighty King, and by Gods goodness,
more able to protect and govern us your loving subjects, in all peace and
plenty, then any of your noble progenitors; and thereunto we most humbly and
faithfully do submit and oblige our selves, our heirs and posterities for
ever, until the last drop of our bloods be spent: And do beseech your
Majesty, to accept the same as the first fruits in this high Court of
Parliament, of our loyalty and faith to your Majesty, and your royal progeny
and posterity for ever: which if your Majesty shall be pleased, (as an argument
of your gracious acceptance) to adorn with your Majesty's royal assent
(without which, it can neither be complete and perfect, nor remain to all
posterity, according to our most humble desires, as a memorial of your
princely and tender affection toward us) we shall add this also to the rest
of your Majesty's unspeakable and inestimable benefits.

And by the statute of 3. Jaco. cap. 4. by which statute the oath of allegiance
is enjoined: It is declared, that if any person shall put in practice to
absolve, persuade, or withdraw, any of his Majesty's subjects from their
obedience to his Majesty, his heirs, or successors, or to move them, or any of
them, to promise obedience to any other Prince, State, or Potentate, that then
every such person, their procurers, counselors, ayders, and maintainers, shall
be adjudged Traitors: And do not the Parliament, both in the first, and third
year of this King, acknowledge King Charles; nay even in the petition of
Right, and in every Parliament since to be their sovereigne Lord? Can it then
be doubted (upon due consideration had of the forementioned Acts of
Parliament, and the several declarations made by the Parliaments of all ages)
that the right of the Crown, is an hereditary right, and that King Charles is
our lawful Sovereigne Lord, and supreme governor of the Realms, or that
allegiance is not due to him from all states of this kingdom, and from every
one of his subjects within the same? Surely no, if you think that there can be
any, I desire you will please to return me the legal reasous of your opinion
therein, upon consideration had of these Statutes, and why the power of both
Houses of Parliament, is above the Kings; neither are the prerogatives before
cited due to him by the acknowledgment, recogniscions, and declarations of
Parliament only, but these are due unto him by the common fundamental and
municipall Laws of this Realm, according to the testimony of the learned
Writers of the Law in all ages, and by the continual language and judgments
of the Sages of the law in all preceding Kings Reigns, since we have had
Books and reports of the law published: For first it appears by the ancient
Treatise, called Modus tenend^ Parliamentum, which is a part of the Common law
of the Land: and as Sir Edward Coke, 4. part of his Institutes, page 12.
observes, was made before the Conquest, and rehearsed unto King William at his
Conquest, who approved of the same; and according to the form of it, held a
Parliament, (as ti is reported to us in the year book of 21. Ed. 3. fol. 60)
that the King is Caput principium and finis Parliamenti, The King is the head,
the beginning and the end of the Parliament; and by the book of 21. Hen. 7,
fol. 20. it is held, that it is no statute, if the King assent not to it: and
that the King may disassent; and by Andrew Horns Book, called the Mirror of
Justices, which was written in the time of King Edward the second* it is said
that they are guilty of perjury, that incroach any jurisdictions belonging to
the King, or ^alsifie their faith due to him: Bracton who wrote in the time of
King Henry the third, (a learned Author of the Laws of England) lib. 4. cap.
24, sect. 1. has these words, Rex habet potestatem and jurisdictionem super
^mnes qui in Regnosuo sunt, ea que sunt jurisdictionis and pacis ad nullum
pertinent, nisi ad Regiam dignitatem, habet etiam coertion^m ^t delinquentes
puniat and coerceat; The King, says he, has power and jurisdiction over all
men which are in his kingdom; those things which are either of jurisdiction or
peace, belong to none but to the Kingly dignity, he has like wise a
constraining power to punish delinquents; and lib. 3. cap 7. he says, that
Treasons, felonies, and other pleas of the Crown, are propriae causae Regis,
are causes belonging to the Kings punishment only; and in his fifth Sect. of
the same fourth book, says thus, Omnis sub Rege and ipse sub nullo,
nisitantum Deo, non est inferior sibi subjectis, non parem habet in regno: in
English thus, Every man is under the King, and he under none but God alone, he
is not inferior to his subjects, he has no peer in his Realm: And in his
fifth book, in his third Treatise of default, cap. 3. he says thus, Rex non
habet Superiorem nisi Deum, sat is habet ad penam quod expectat Deum ultorem,
The King has no Superior but God alone, and it is sufficient punishment for
him because he must expect God to be the revenger, if he do commit wrong: It
is said in Plowdens Commentaries, fol. 234. That the King has the sole
government of his Subjects, and fol. 213. as also in Calvin's case* That
allegiance is due to the natural body of the King; and fol. 242. it is said,
That the natural body of the King, and his politic, make but one body; for
as long as the natural body lives, the politic is inherent, being merely
imaginary and invisible as it is said in Calvin's case; whereupon I infer,
that the Kings politic capacity (his body being absent) is not in the
Parliament. And in 10. Eliz. Plowdens 316. it is affirmed, That the law makes
not the servant greater then the Master, nor the subject greater then the King,
for that were to subject order and measure; since therefore the King has so
undoubted a right to the Crown, and is my lawful Sovereigne, and mine
allegiance is due unto the Kings person, by the Law of the Land, Recognized and
acknowledged in so many several Parliaments in all ages, and confirmed by so
many undeniable authorities in Law, reported in our Books, and since it stands
proved, that mine Allegiance is due unto his natural person, both by the Law
of God, nature, and the law of the Land, and can neither be abjured, released,
or renounced, being inseparable from the person of the King, and indispensably
due from me to him; I conclude that the Oath which binds me, if I take it, and
keep it, to withdraw mine Allegiance from my Liege Lord the King, is against
the law of the Land, and in taking it, I not only make an absolute breach upon
the law of the Land, but also in my judgment I do thereby incur the crime
of perjury by the law, in falsifying my faith and Allegiance to his Majesty
King Charles, Gods anointed, and crowned my natural liege Lord, sovereigne,
and my lawful King, both by descent, Coronation, investure, and undoubted
right, which is not only due to him by the Law of the Land from every of his
subjects, but every one of them is to take this following Oath for performance
of it.

Viz. You shall swear that from this day forwards you shall be true and
faithful to our Sovereigne Lord King Charles, and his heirs, and faith and
truth shall bear to him of life and member and terrene honor, and you shall
neither know nor hear of any ill or damage intended unto him, that you shall
not defend, so help me Almighty God. Which form of Oath every Subject by the
Common Law is bound to take, as appears by Britton 5. Edw. 1. cap. 24. And by
Andrew Horn in the Mirror of Justices, page 226. and in Calvin's case as by
perusal of their Books will appear, and by diverse others which for
brevities sake I omit.

And now Sir, I desire to know your opinion likewise, whether that by the
Common Law, both houses of Parliament are in power above the King, or where
their legal power to dispose of his Majesty's person, other then to his honor
and good, according to their duty, Oaths, Protestations, Covenants, and
Declarations, and obedience is to be found.

I come now to prove that this Oath is against the Law of reason, the Law of
reason says Doctor and Student, cap. 2. is written in the hearts of every man,
teaching him what is to be done, and what is to be fled: And because it is
written in the heart, therefore it may not be put away, nor is it ever
changable by any diversity of place or time; and therefore against this Law,
prescription, statutes, or customs may not prevail; and if any be brought in
against it, they be no prescriptions, statutes, nor customs, but things done
against justice and void; and in this it differs from the Law of God, for
that the Law of God is given by Revelation from God* Almighty, and this Law is
given by a natural light of understanding, and is given principally to direct
our actions by, for the obtaining of felicity in this life, so us we guide them
only by the rule of Justice: This Law instract^th us, says the same Author,
that good is to be done, and evil is to be avoided, that thou should do^ to
another, that which thou would another should do to thee: That justice is
to be done to every man and not wrong: that a trespass is to be punished and
such like: Is it so then, that the law of reason directs me that good is to be
done, and evil is to be avoided? I then conclude that this oath is against
this Law; for if I by this Oath shall withdraw mine Allegiance and subjection
to my King from him, I lose the benefit or good I should have by his
protection: for the rule in Law is, Quod Subjectio trahit protectionem, quia
Rex ad tutelam Legis corporum and bonorum erectus est as Fortescue lib. de
laudibus legum Angliae, c. 13. Obedience of the Subject draws protection from
the King, the King being ordained for the defense of the Law, and the bodies,
and goods of his Subjects.

The holy Scriptures inform me, that I must obey my King for conscience sake,
and this Law teaches me, I must avoid evil; but it is evil for me to obey
men in taking this Negative Oath which enjoynes me not to obey my King, rather
then God, who enjoynes that duty of obedience, therefore I conclude that this
Oath is against the Law of reason. This Law teaches me to do as I would men
should do unto me, but if I were a King I would not be dispoyled of the duty
and service of my Subjects; therefore this Oath enjoynes me to a thing against
the Law of reason: It is injustice and wrong to take away the Kings right by
this Law; but this Oath binds me to take away his right and do him wrong,
therefore in this particular also this Oath is against the Law of reason. And
lastly this Law of reason teaches me, a Trespasser is to be punished, it
teaches me also to understand that to take this Oath is to trespass upon my
Kings interest in me as I am his Subject; to trespass upon his Laws as I am
de jure under his government, and to trespass upon his patience and goodness,
if he do not hereafter punish me for it: Therefore I conclude this Oath is
against the Law of reason. The Law of reason generally taken, is a directive
Rule unto goodness of operation, says Hooker: so that by this Law we ought
to direct all our actions to a a good end, but by taking this Oath I direct not
my actions to a good end; therefore I am not to take this Oath by this Law: the
Law of reason says Sophocles is such that being proposed, no man can reject it
as unjust and unreasonable, but the King may reject this manner of imposing of
Oaths upon his Subjects whereby he isdeprived of their aid and assistance
without his assent: And the Subjects may reject this Oath as unreasonable and
unjust; because if they take it, they are thereby bound either to break their
Oath, which is a grievous sin, or to lose the benefit of protection, which by
the Laws they may claim, and ought to have from their natural lawful and
sovereigne Liege Lord, and King; Therefore this Oath is against the Law of
Reason.

Lastly, whereas the Law of Reason is never changeable by any diversity of
place or time, and whereas mine Allegiance is due to my Sovereigne in all
places, in all cases, and at all times, I am forbidden by this unchangeable
Law, to change so unchangeable and unalterable a duty by such an unwarrantable
Oath in these changeable times. To conclude all in this point, as it is against
reason to take this Oath; so it is against reason to require it of me, for it
is most unreasonable to offer any Christian man such an Oath as that by taking
of it, he must by perjury, and sin of presumption (as he is persuaded) destroy
his soul, or by refusing of it, because it is against his conscience to take
it, either by perpetual imprisonment or starving, destroy his body and estate.
And it is likewise most unreasonable for any men to offer this Oath to another
that have not taken it themselves: for by the rule of the civil Law, l. in
Aren. Quod quisque, which is a branch of the Law of reason, Quod quisque juris
in alium statuerit ipsum quoque uti debere: No man ought to impose a Law upon
another, which he himself has not submitted unto.

I come now in the next place to make it appear that I cannot take this
Negative Oath with a good conscience. Conscience, as Doctor and Student well
observes, l. 1. cap. 15. It Is the direct applying of any science or knowledge to
some particular act of a man, and of the most perfect and most true applying of
the same to a man's particular actions, follow the most perfect, the most pure,
and the best conscience; which enabled St. Paul by his right applying of the
Law of God to the Actions of his life, with confidence to plead his cause
before the Counsel, and to cry out, men and brethren, I have in all good
conscience served God unto this day, Acts 23. 1. And in the 24 14. being
accused before Felix by the Jews, says, But this I confess unto thee, that
after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers,
believing all things which are writ in the Law and the Prophets. And herein I
endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward
men: whereby it is clearly proved that the applying of the Scriptures, and the
knowledge of divine truth to the actions of ourlives, is, and ought to be, the
only direction to our consciences; It is expedient then for the clearing of
this point, that I should set forth and consider the actions of my (...) to
this particular which concerns some Allegiance: ^^^^ then I do well remember
that when I was matriculated in the University, I was sworn to be a faithful
and true Subject ^o the King, and to bear him ^^ue Allegiance: Secondly, I
have taken the of Oath, which I have particularly s^^ down before, th^^ I w^
and ^^^^ bear^ to him of life and m^, and terre^. Thirdly, I have four times
taken the Oath (...) enjoined by the Statute of 1. Eh^. cap. 1. and three (...)
Oath of Allegiance enjoined by the Statute 3 Iac. cap. 4.

It rests now that I should apply that divine knowledge and science, which I
have obtained ^y reading of the Scriptures, to th^se actions: First* then an
Oath is to be carefully weighed before we take it, ^ch as (...) duty toward
our King, and (...) E^^les. 8 ^ Ec^ Pre^c^e^, advises me thus, (...) of the
^^o^^h of the King, and to the Oath of (...), upon which plac^ thus gl^sse,
that is, ^ King, ^^^ keep the Oath that thou have made for that cause. (...)
Zachary gives us this commandment from God, Zach 8 17* ^^t none of you imagine
evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and love no false Oath, for all
these are the things that I hate, says the Lord: And our blessed Savior in
his Sermon in the Mount, Matthew. 5. 33. Delivers me this prec^p* Thou shall not
for swear thy self, but shall perform thy Oaths to the Lord: By applying of
these Scriptures to my former Oaths, I find I cannot take this Negative Oath
without a great sin against God, and trespass against my conscience: for
having bound my self by so many several former oaths made to my King, to pay
unto him mine Allegiance, faith* and truth to him, of life and member, and
terre^^^ honor, and acknowledged him to be supreme Governor of this Realm;
how can I now withdraw mine Allegiance from him, or swear that I will not aid
or assist him, o^ adhere unto him by this latter? without manifest perjury,
breach of mine Oath to the King, and by taking of a false Oath, or the name of
God in vain by a questionable authority imposed upon me, contradictory to
those Oaths which by undoubted and lawful power agreeable to the Laws of God
and the Realm, I have already bound my conscience to the observance of: It
fares not with us in Oaths, as it does in cases of Laws, Quod Leges
posteriores priores contrarias abrogant, That the latter Laws repeal the
former that are contrary unto them: for in the case of Laws, the rule is
admitted to be true, where both are constituted and made by the same power,
but it is clean contrary in the case of Oaths: for when a man has taken a
lawful Oath, by and from a lawful authority, though it be grounded upon
humane or positive law only, as upon a Statute or the like, that Oath is
binding to his conscience until the Statute that injoynes that Oath be
repealed by the same power that made it; and if he afterward take a
contradictory Oath to that former Oath before, such repeal, and a lawful
authority to take the same; that Oath which he so takes, is both unlawful and
false; unlawful in that it is against the law that warrants the Oath, he has
before taken; and false in regard that he ingages himself by that Oath to
perform that thing which by the Law of God and conscience he is not enabled
lawfully to perform; so that till the laws that impose upon me the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance which I have taken, be lawfully by the same power as
they were made, that is to say, by the King, Lords, and Commons, by Act of
Parliament repealed: And this Negative Oath by the same power of Act of
Parliament imposed upon me, I cannot submit my conscience to take that Oath,
without perjury and falsehood. Again, when a man has taken an Oath to perform
that which by the law of God and nature he is bound to perform, as to obey his
King, or to honor his Father and Mother, this Oath can never be abrogated or
dispensed withal, nor a man absolved from the duty of observance of it by any
power under heaven, and therefore if I shall take any Oath contradictory to the
former Oaths of Allegiance and duty to my King, which duty and allegiance
belongs to him from me, by the law of God and nature, as before is made
manifest, that Oath were utterly unlawful and false, by the laws of God and
nature and against conscience; I conclude then that in conscience I cannot take
this Negative Oath. I learn likewise by Saint Paul, Heb. 6. 16. That men
verily swear by him that is greater then themselves, and an Oath for
confirmation is an end of all strife: and therefore Joshua* when he had made a
league with the Gibeonites, though it were grounded upon a fraud on their
parts, did omit to question them for it, and forbore to break the league with
them to avoyde strife having confirmed that league with an Oath, saying in that
case, Thus will we do to them and let them live, least the wrath be upon us,
because of the Oath which we swear to them, Joshua 9. 20. And by that law of an
O^h was Sh^mei put to death by Solomon for walking out of the City contrary to
his Oath, because he had sworn he would not go out of it, which he ought to
have observed as a confirmation of his undertaking to Solomon, and as an end of
their strife, as we find^, 1 Kings 2. 43. etc. and we find a notable instance
of the punishment of the breaking of the oath of Allegiance or subj^ction made
by the King of Jerusalem to the King of Babel, reported unto us by the Prophet
Ezekiel, Eze. 17 16. 18. in these words, As I live says the Lord, he that is
King (of Jerusalem) shall dye in the midst of Babel, in the place of the King,
whose Oath he despised, and whose covenant made with him he broke: Neither
shall Pharaoh with his mighty host and great multitude of people maintain him
in the War, when they have cast up Mounts, and builded Rampires to destroy
many persons, for he has despised the Oath, and broken the Covenant, yet he
had given him his hand because he has done these things he shall not escape.
The application of these Scriptures to my present purpose I make thus, Is it so
then that an Oath is taken for confirmation? Is it so then that an Oath is and
ought to be the end of strife? Is it so that God punishes the violation of
Oaths, and that the greatest power on earth cannot protect a man against him,
I learn then by the rule of a well informed conscience to discern, that I
ought not to break my Oaths lawfully taken upon any grounds or pretense
whatsoever: Nay by this Oath I find that if I take it I should in stead of an
end of strife in my conscience, incur great vexation, through the horror of
the sin, as being an act unlawful, and because by it, I have offended God in
the breaking my former Oaths lawfully taken, I should raise strife and trouble
in my soul and conscience, and great strife and perturbation of mind for
fear of punishment. I conclude therefore that I cannot take this Oath by the
rule of Gods law, with a sound and good conscience, against the light whereof,
if I should take it, I should declare my self either to be an Athoist, in
thinking there were no God to punish for s^ great a wickedness, or else to
imagine that he were either unjust and would not punish, or unable and could
not, or so careless of the actions of men, that he either not sees or not
regards their wicked acts; which opinion even the very heathens confuted and
rejected, as you may find at large in Tullys first book, De natura Deorum:
But if I were minded to be so wicked* as to lay aside all the former
considerations of Religion, nature, law, reason, and conscience, to gain my
estate, which God forbid; yet in honor, neither my self, nor any that have
served his Majesty in this late War, can take it, as I conceive: when I speak
of honor I mean not that Membranall or Parchment honor of dignities, and
titles conferred upon men sometimes for money, sometimes for affection,
sometimes for alliance to favorits, sometimes for flattery, ^u^ most commonly
more for some sinister respects, then proper (...), by letters patents of Kings
and free Princes, but I mean that ^^^^^all honor that is inherent, in every
truly noble mind* and direct* it ends always to that which is Lundabile and
honestum, la^daol^, just, and honest, of which honor the Poet Juvenall ^^i^h
thus, Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus, virtue is the only ^^ue nobility;
and in another place describing this kind of honor in the person of a Father
to his Son, says thus,

Malo pater ibi sit, Thersites dummodo tu sis,
Aeacidae similis vulcaniaque arma capessas,
Quam tibi Thersiti similem producat Achilles.
That is, that he had rather his son were the son of Thersites (a base and ill
conditioned fellow) and were like Aeacides a person of great valor, honor,
and justice, then that he were descended of Achilles the noblest house of the
Grecians, and should be such a base fellow as Thersites; the application is
easy, It is an honorable mind, which makes a man honorable* and it are his
honorable actions, which are the proper effects of virtue, that render a man
truly honorable; and gain him esteem: The Ethicke Philosophers say that
Honor est plus in honorante quam in he^, there is more honor in him that gives
the honor, then in him that receives it, or is honored; and it is true every
way: for as there is more honor in a King that bestows it, then in the
subject that receives it from his Prince; so is there more honor proceeds from
him that bestows it in report or esteem upon him that deserves it for his
noble and virtuous actions, then there is in the party deserving it himself:
and the reason is plain; for let a man do never so many honorable actions yet
if they are not esteemed ^y others, he reaps not the fruit of his labors, his
honor is less (though the actions in themselves be honorable) then if they
were esteemed: This honor and esteem is the life of every Soldier and
Gentleman, which if he once lose by any voluntary act of his own, he had as
good lose his life. Now for any man that has served the King in his Wars, for
him to swear that he will no more aid nor assist the King in the War wherein
he engaged himself by his oath, and upon his honor to serve him with his life
and to his uttermost power, it would lose that Soldier his honor and esteem
amongst all sorts of men, amongst his own party for deserting a cause they
hold just amongst the adverse party for lightness and inconstancy, as one
that would not stand to his principles, he should amongst all men get the
opinion of a Coward, or a base fellow, that for fear of death, punishment, or
perpetual imprisonment, would be starved into an oath, or ^ut of his
allegiance, or of a K^^ve that to redeem his liber^y would swear any thing;
therefore least I should gain such an opinion and lose my esteem in the world
(being now brought into that condition that I must be a Soldier) I cannot take
this Oath by the rules of honor, and as it is not honorable in me to take it
for the reasons aforesaid, so is it against honor that an oath that would
bring so much inconveniency of loss of honor and esteem amongst all men
should be offered to any man, Quia in juramentis administrandis dantis and
recipient is eadem est ratio and idem jus, In administering of Oaths the same
reason and law ought to bind the giver as well as the receiver: It is also
against policy either to take or require this oath, the life of a Soldier is
his honor, when that is lost, his life is as good as lost; by taking this
oath, a Soldier loses his honor, what King, Prince, or State, will
entertain that Soldier in his pay that has abjured his natural Sovereigne
Liege Lord, or Masters service and allegiance: his own King will never trust
him more, the adverse party will not trust him, nor any other Prince or State
whatsoever, and therefore in policy a Soldier ought not to take this oath.
And lastly, there is no policy in pressing this oath upon any, for the
Parliament gains no security by taking it, for I think very few of the Kings
party hold that Oath lawful, and then what security to the Parliament in it,
since no other thing can be expected from him of the performance of an oath
given unto him, that either doubts the power unlawful that administered it, or
that holds the matter or thing he is bound to perform by his oath unlawful,
that then he will keep such an oath no longer then till the first time he has
occasion or oppertunity to break it; Nay the same Religion or new light that
has taught him to break the Kings Oath will or may teach him to break the
Parliaments.

Having now made my doubts according to my conscience, if I come over and be
made a prisoner, because I will not take these oaths and covenants, or suffer
any other prejudice either in mine estate or person, for declaring my
conscience herein, I would, and in the case I am, I will with holy Job content
my self saying, Naked came I out of my mothers womb and naked shall I return
thither, the Lord gave and the Lord has taken away* blessed be the name of the
Lord, Job 1. 21. Comforting my self with this of the P^almist, Who shall
ascend into the hill of the Lord, or who shall rise up in his holy place? even
he that has clean hands and a pure heart, and that has not lift up his mind
unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbor, he shall receive the blessing
of the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation, Psalm. 24. 3* 4,
5. And according to the instructions of St. Paul 1. Rom 12. 12. Shall rejoice
in hope, be patient in tribulation, and continue in prayers, strengthened with
all might according to Gods glorious power, unto all patience and long
suffering* with joyfulnesse, Colos. 1. 11. Knowing that all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 2. 12. Taking the
Prophets who have spoken in the name of the Lord for ensamples, of suffering
affliction and patience, Jomes 5. 10. And accompting it always thank-worthy,
if for conscience toward God, I endure grief, suffering wrongfully, for even
hereunto are we called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 19. 20. And in this resolution
by Gods gracious assistance, in peace of a good conscience, and in all patience
will I abide till my dissolution shall come, looking for that blessed hope and
appearing of that glory of that mighty God and of our Savior Jesus Christ,
Tit. 2. 13. Choosing rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11. 25. For what shall it profit
a man if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul, Mar. S. 36.
In this opinion therefore will I abide putting my whole trust and confidence in
God my Lord which executes justice for the oppressed, which gives bread to the
hungry, and loses the prisoners, for the Lord hears the poor, and dispiseth
not his prisoners, Psalm 66. 33. and 146. 7.

To conclude Sir, whereas you signify unto me that you will return me a
satisfactory answer to my doubts, from godly and learned Devines, and men of
judgment in the Laws of the Land, ^ desire you that you will please to take
advice only from such Devines, as neither have renounced their Orders, or
obedience to their Ordinaries, and such that are without partiallity or
hypocrisy in this public cause, and from such Judges and learned Lawyers as
serve not the times, so much as the truth, and such as have not men's persons in
admiration because of advantage; for I must deal plainly with you, that there
is great scandal in th^se foreign parts upon the men of these professions,
it being reported of the first, that they go about to profane and blespheme
the Church their Mother with stigmaticall imputations of Antichristian
impieties, and th^^ the latter have adulterated the Laws, the Nurses that have
fed them; applying them to the humors and ends of those that have put them in
authority, and as the Proph^^ Mich. 3 9. says, abhorring judgment, and
p^v^rting all equity, in that they take upon them to give sentence of death
upon ^^ose that have served his Majesty, according to their duty of Allegiance
in these ^at Wa^s, as fellons, when they have but taken an horse or arms for
the Kings service, though they took them from those that were actually in
arms against the Kings Majesty* with an intention only to aid his Majesty
against those that had risen up against him, and not animo furan^i, or with a
fellonious intent: Nay, we hear that some of the Judges lately put into
Commission by both Houses of Parliament have delivered it for Law, that such a
one as has served the King in these late wars (or any such that they call
Malignants) may not sue for their rights, and are incapable to receive justice,
though they be neither outlawed or committed, that whatsoever they recover or
purchase before they have made their Compositions ought to be seized on, and
sequestered to the use of the State; I pray you Sir, where, or in what books of
the Laws of England do you read of such definition of felony or inhabilities
or incapacities of the Kings Loyal Subjects? Mr. Littleton who reckons up all
the inhabilities of the Subjects of England, mentions none such, neither are
any such else where to be found: but these men put the Kings Liege, and loyal
people into a worse condition then slaves, villains, or aliens. And yet they
account it Lawful taking, and no depredation when any man that has served
both Houses of Parliament in this late war has plundered or taken any man's
goods or estate from him, that they did but imagine bare good affection to the
King, and give their judgments that it is lawful to seize, sequester, nay to
^ell away men's estates that have served the King before they have legally
convicted them of any offense. O horrible perverting of judgment and justice
if this be true, I pray you sir may it not be said of these men as the Prophet
Amos 3. 10. says, They know not to do right says the Lord, who store up
violence and robbery in their Palaces, that turn judgment into Wormwood,
and lea^^ of righteousness in the earth, Amos 5 7. and are not they such as
Solomon speaks of, Prove* 4. 16. That they sleep not except they have done
mischief, and their sleep is taken away un^^sse they cause some to fall, for
they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence, or as David
says, Ps. 58. 2. that weigh the violence of their hands in the earth. But Sin,
I speak not this with referrence to you, for I know you to be a man of
learning, and I hear that you are a man of moderation, and I desire you since
that you have taken that employment upon you to continue so: Remember your Oath
that thereby you are to dispense justice indifferently to the Kings people,
according to the known and established Laws of the Land, not by arbitrament
o^ fancy; consider the infirmity of your Commission upon what has been said
before, set before your eyes the mortallity of the 44 Judges remooved and put
to death by King ^^s^^^^ for violence, injustice, and c^rr^p^^^^ ac^^d upon the
people of this Land ^^ his ^^me, of whose offenses and ^a^a^^^^^s you may read
in H^^e his mirror of Justices, behold and weigh the punishment and d^^^^ny of
Sir Thomas Weyland, Sir R^^ph Heng^a^, Sir John L^^^^o^, Sir William B^^mpt^^,
Sir Solomon R^c^^ster, Sir ^ic^a^^ B^^^^nd, and their fellows, ^^flected upon
them for their injustice by King Edw. the (...) Consider the instability of all
^umane estates, think not that you are in a sure and unque^^io^able (...); but
remember that Job tells you, Job 1^. 18. That the Lord loo^^^^ the bonds of
King^, and guirdeth their loins wi^^ a g^^d^e, and I prove you take the
counsel of the w^sem^^, P. o. ^7. 1. Boast not thy ^^^fe ^^ to morrow, for
thou know not what a day may ^^ng ^o^th: he ^^k ^ to St. James, J^. 4 13 Go^
to now y^e that say to day or to morrow we will g^e into such a City, and
continue there a year, and buy, and sell* and get ga^e? whereas y^^ know not
when shall be on the morrow for what is ^^^^ life, it is even a valor that
appears for a little time, and then v^^^sh ^^ ^way? do^ just^^^ therefore and
execute^ g^^^* us judgments, rejoice not in your (...), for all such (...)
young i^ ^v^ll; and remember with the same Apostle, that to him that knows ^^
^^^ good, and does it not, to him it is sin: I know you are learned in the
L^w^^, and a great Student in the holy Scriptures, I therefore sum up all
with these exhortations but of Gods holy Writ, not only to you, but to all the
Judges of the

^ no, beginning it with the charge given by Moses to the Judges of Israel.
Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man
and his brother, and the stranger that is with him; ye shall not respect
persons in judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the great, you
shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is Gods. Deuteronomy. 1. 16.
17 and with the good King Iehosaphat to his Judges, 2 Cron 19 6. Take ^eed what
you do for ye Judge not for man, out for the Lord who is with you in the
judgment: take likewise the Prophets instruction, Es^y* 1. 17. Learn to do
well, seek* judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for
the widow; and if these serve no^ to persuade you, hear Gods own words,
Levit. 19. 15. you shall not do unrighteousness in judgment, thou shall not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty* But in
righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor* and ^x^d. 23 6 thou shall not
wrest the judgment of the poor in his cause* nay more, follow our blessed
Saviors Precept, Jo^. 24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge
righteous judgment, that is according to your Oaths, and the known and
established Laws of the Land; if ye do otherwise, you have our Saviors
promise that you shall ^e are of it, Mat. 7. 2. For with what judgment ye
judge, ye shall be judged, and with what measure ye m^a^e, it shall be
measured to you again. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces,
out of heaven shall ^e thunder upon them, the Lord shall judge the ends of the
earth, and shall give strength unto the King, and exa^t the ho^^^^ of his
Anointed, for God himself is Judge, Psalm. 50 6. and he shall judge the world
in righteousness, Psalm. 9. 8. to whose protection I commit you, and to whom
with our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, and the blessed Spirit be all honor,
and glory, world without end.

Amen.
FINIS.

