TEN ARTICLES Already proved upon OATH against An Evil MEMBER now in the
PARLIAMENT CONTAINED In three Letters lately directed unto Col. George Cook and
the rest of the Committee of the Army for discovery of Criminal Offenders, in
relation to the late Wars (viz.)
1 THat the said Evil Member did release three of the Queens Priests, and
Jesuits out of Newgate by his Warrant.

2. That the said Evil Member did maintain and protect several Spies and
Agents for the late King within the line of Communication during the late War.

3. That the said Evil Member did convey diverse remarkable Prisoners at War,
out of the line of Communication, unto the late King.

4 That the said Evil Member did assist, and protect several Plotters (on
behalf of the late King) to destroy the City of London.

5. That the said Evil Member did wittingly and wilfully suffer above 30000 l.
to be conveyed out of the Line of Communication unto the late King.

6. That the said Evil Member did send Horses for War, with Men and Arms, unto
the late King.

7. That the said Evil Member did hold an Intercourse of Letters with the late
King.

8. That the said Evil Member did maintain and keep an Agent in the Garrison of
Oxford to expedite the foregoing Treacheries.

9. That the said Evil Member did corrupt many Members of the Parliament (some
lately excluded, some now in the House) to conceal and smother the foregoing
Treacheries.

10. That the said Evil Member did endeavor to take away the lives of several
of the prosecutors and witnesses unto the foregoing Treacheries.

Motives unto the prosecution of the foregoing Articles, contained in the
aforesaid three Letters.
1 THe foregoing Articles are proved upon Oath before ^^^onel Cook and the said
Committee of the Army, and the Depositions are in writing in the hands of
Colonel Cook.

2. The said Depositions do declare that whatsoever the said Evil Member has
acted with the Parliament, or Army, has been merely out of design.

3. All godly and honest Members of the Parliament and Army would become
odious, if by any policy or power the said Evil Member should be protected
from a legal Trial.

4. The Spirit of God has declared, that because Justice is not speedily
executed upon evil doers, therefore their hearts are fully set in them to work
mischief, Eccles. 8. 11. and accordingly the said Evil Member (as it is
probable) does employ his Agents to make factions and parties to retard the
relief of Ireland, and to exasperate the spirits of brethren against each
other, that during such divisions his foregoing Treacheries may never be called
in question.

5. The speedy Execution of Justice upon the said Evil Member, and such like,
would turn away the sierce wrath of the Lord from this Land, as it did from
Israel, Prove. 14. 34. Isai. 32. 17. Josh. 7. 24, 26. Numb. 25. 7, 8, 9. 11.

Therefore, the foregoing Articles being proved upon Oath, it is not only the
duty of Colonel George Cook, the rest of the said Committee, the Officers and
Soldiers of the Army, but also of all the Free Common-wealths-men of England
upon sight hereof, to join together as one man to move his Excellency forthwith
to call a general Council, wherein the said Depositions may be openly read,
debated, and transmitted to the Council of State, for them, thereupon to
prepare the form of an Act to be speedily presented and passed, for appointment
of Commissioners to bring the said Evil Member, and such others, to exemplary
Justice, before the Adjournment, and before any Act for a General Pardon be
concluded.

PROVE. 25. 11. Words spoken in season are like apples of gold in pictures of
silver. EPHESIANS. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful Work of Darkness;
but reproove them rather.
London, July, 3. 1649. This Evil member is Wm: Lenthall Esquire speaker of ye
house of Com^ons. July.16. 1649. (...)

